American political party
Democratic Party ChairpersonJaime HarrisonGoverning bodyDemocratic National Committee[1][2]Founders
Andrew Jackson
Martin Van Buren
FoundedJanuary 8, 1828; 195 years ago (1828-01-08)[3]Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.Preceded byDemocratic-Republican PartyHeadquarters430 South Capitol St. SE,Washington, D.C., U.S.Student wingHigh School Democrats of AmericaCollege Democrats of AmericaYouth wingYoung Democrats of AmericaWomen's wingNational Federation of Democratic WomenOverseas wingDemocrats AbroadLGBT wingStonewall Democrats[4]Membership (2022) 47,130,651[5]IdeologyMajority: Modern liberalism[6][7]
Factions:Centrism[8][9]Progressivism[10]Social democracy[11]Libertarianism[12]Colors  BlueSeats in the Senate48 / 100[a]Seats in the House of Representatives213 / 435State governorships24 / 50[b]Seats in state upper chambers854 / 1,973Seats in state lower chambers2,429 / 5,413Territorial governorships4 / 5Seats in territorial upper chambers31 / 97Seats in territorial lower chambers9 / 91Election symbolWebsitedemocrats.org Politics of the United StatesPolitical partiesElections
The Democratic Party is one of two major contemporary political parties in the United States. Founded in 1828, it was predominantly built by Martin Van Buren, who assembled politicians in every state behind war hero Andrew Jackson, making it the world's oldest active political party.[13][14][15] The party is a big tent of competing and often opposing viewpoints,[16][17] but modern American liberalism, a variant of social liberalism, is the party's majority ideology.[6][18] The party also has notable centrist,[19] social democratic,[11] and libertarian[20] factions. Its main political rival has been the Republican Party since the 1850s.
The historical predecessor of the Democratic Party is considered to be the Democratic-Republican Party.[21][22] Before 1860, the Democratic Party supported expansive presidential power,[23] the interests of slave states,[24] agrarianism,[25] and expansionism,[25] while opposing a national bank and high tariffs.[25] It split in 1860 over slavery and won the presidency only twice[c] between 1860 and 1910, although it won the popular vote a total of four times in that period. In the late 19th century, it continued to oppose high tariffs and had fierce internal debates on the gold standard. In the early 20th century, it supported progressive reforms and opposed imperialism, with Woodrow Wilson winning the White House in 1912 and 1916. Since Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal coalition after 1932, the Democratic Party has promoted a social liberal platform, including Social Security and unemployment insurance.[26][6][27] The New Deal attracted strong support for the party from recent European immigrants but caused a decline of the party's conservative pro-business wing.[28][29][30] Following the Great Society era of progressive legislation under Lyndon B. Johnson, the core bases of the parties shifted, with the Southern states becoming more reliably Republican and the Northeastern states becoming more reliably Democratic.[31][32] The party's labor union element has become smaller since the 1970s,[33][34] and as the American electorate shifted in a more conservative direction following Ronald Reagan's presidency, the election of Bill Clinton marked a move for the party toward the Third Way, shifting the party's economic stance towards market-based economic policy.[35][36][37] Elected as the nation's first non-white president in 2008, Barack Obama oversaw the party's passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010. After Dobbs v. Jackson, which led to abortion bans in much of the country, the Democratic Party rallied behind abortion rights.[38]
The party's philosophy of modern American liberalism blends civil liberty and social equality with support for a mixed capitalist economy.[39] On social issues, it advocates for abortion rights,[38] the legalization of marijuana,[40] stricter gun laws,[41] criminal justice[42] and immigration reform.[43] Expansion of social programs, including enacting universal healthcare coverage,[44] equal opportunity, and consumer protection form the core of the party's economic agenda.[45][46][47] Since the early 2010s, the Democratic Party has shifted significantly to the left on social, cultural, and religious issues.[48] Like the Republican Party, it has taken widely variant and often opposing positions on abortion, trade, immigration, and foreign policy throughout its history.[49][50][51]
As of the 2020s, the party does best among voters who are female or a sexual minority;[52][53] college graduates;[54] live in urban areas;[55] or a religious or racial minority.[56][57][58][59] In recent years, the party has increased support among affluent, college-educated whites and lost support among voters with lower incomes or lacking a college degree, including from working-class Asian Americans[60][61][62] and Hispanics.[63][57][58] As of 2023, the party holds the presidency and a majority in the U.S. Senate, as well as 24 state governorships, 19 state legislatures, and 17 state government "trifectas" (control of the governorship and both houses of the legislature). Three of the nine sitting U.S. Supreme Court justices were appointed by Democratic presidents. By registered members (in those states which permit or require registration by party affiliation), the Democratic Party is the largest party in the United States and the third largest in the world. Including the incumbent, Joe Biden, 16 Democrats have served as president of the United States.[6]
History
Main article: History of the Democratic Party (United States) Political parties derivation. Dotted line means unofficially.Democratic Party officials often trace its origins to the Democratic-Republican Party, founded by Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and other influential opponents of the conservative Federalists in 1792.[22][64] That party died out before the modern Democratic Party was organized;[65] the Jeffersonian party also inspired the Whigs and modern Republicans.[66] Historians argue that the modern Democratic Party was first organized in the late 1820s with the election of Andrew Jackson.[15] It was  predominately built by Martin Van Buren, who assembled a wide cadre of politicians in every state behind war hero Andrew Jackson of Tennessee, making it the world's oldest active political party.[13][14][15]
Since the nomination of William Jennings Bryan in 1896, the party has generally positioned itself to the left of the Republican Party on economic issues. Democrats have been more liberal on civil rights since 1948, although conservative factions within the Democratic Party that opposed them persisted in the South until the 1960s. On foreign policy, both parties have changed positions several times.[67]
Background
 Andrew Jackson was the seventh president of the United States (1829 1837) and the first Democratic president.
The Democratic Party evolved from the Jeffersonian Republican or Democratic-Republican Party organized by Jefferson and Madison in opposition to the Federalist Party.[68] The Democratic-Republican Party favored republicanism; a weak federal government; states' rights; agrarian interests (especially Southern planters); and strict adherence to the Constitution. The party opposed a national bank and Great Britain.[69] After the War of 1812, the Federalists virtually disappeared and the only national political party left was the Democratic-Republicans, which was prone to splinter along regional lines.[70] The era of one-party rule in the United States, known as the Era of Good Feelings, lasted from 1816 until 1828, when Andrew Jackson became president. Jackson and Martin Van Buren worked with allies in each state to form a new Democratic Party on a national basis. In the 1830s, the Whig Party coalesced into the main rival to the Democrats.
Before 1860, the Democratic Party supported expansive presidential power,[23] the interests of slave states,[24] agrarianism,[25] and expansionism,[25] while opposing a national bank and high tariffs.[25]
19th century
Further information: Second Party System and Third Party System
 Martin Van Buren was the eighth president of the United States (1837 1841) and the second Democratic president.
The Democratic-Republican Party split over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe.[71] The faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the modern Democratic Party.[72] Historian Mary Beth Norton explains the transformation in 1828: Jacksonians believed the people's will had finally prevailed. Through a lavishly financed coalition of state parties, political leaders, and newspaper editors, a popular movement had elected the president. The Democrats became the nation's first well-organized national party ... and tight party organization became the hallmark of nineteenth-century American politics.[73]
 11th United States president James K. Polk (1845-1849), who significantly extended the territory of the United States
Behind the platforms issued by state and national parties stood a widely shared political outlook that characterized the Democrats: The Democrats represented a wide range of views but shared a fundamental commitment to the Jeffersonian concept of an agrarian society. They viewed the central government as the enemy of individual liberty. The 1824 "corrupt bargain" had strengthened their suspicion of Washington politics. ... Jacksonians feared the concentration of economic and political power. They believed that government intervention in the economy benefited special-interest groups and created corporate monopolies that favored the rich. They sought to restore the independence of the individual the artisan and the ordinary farmer by ending federal support of banks and corporations and restricting the use of paper currency, which they distrusted. Their definition of the proper role of government tended to be negative, and Jackson's political power was largely expressed in negative acts. He exercised the veto more than all previous presidents combined. ... Nor did Jackson share reformers' humanitarian concerns. He had no sympathy for American Indians, initiating the removal of the Cherokees along the Trail of Tears.[74]
Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small yet decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery. In 1854, angry with the Kansas Nebraska Act, anti-slavery Democrats left the party and joined Northern Whigs to form the Republican Party.[75][76]
 Senator Stephen A. Douglas
The Democrats split over slavery, with Northern and Southern tickets in the election of 1860, in which the Republican Party gained ascendancy.[77] The radical pro-slavery Fire-Eaters led walkouts at the two conventions when the delegates would not adopt a resolution supporting the extension of slavery into territories even if the voters of those territories did not want it. These Southern Democrats nominated the pro-slavery incumbent vice president, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, for president and General Joseph Lane, of Oregon, for vice president. The Northern Democrats nominated Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois for president and former Georgia Governor Herschel V. Johnson for vice president. This fracturing of the Democrats led to a Republican victory and Abraham Lincoln was elected the 16th president of the United States.[78]
 The 1885 inauguration of Grover Cleveland, the only president with non-consecutive terms
As the American Civil War broke out, Northern Democrats were divided into War Democrats and Peace Democrats. The Confederate States of America deliberately avoided organized political parties. Most War Democrats rallied to Republican President Abraham Lincoln and the Republicans' National Union Party in the election of 1864, which featured Andrew Johnson on the Union ticket to attract fellow Democrats. Johnson replaced Lincoln in 1865, but he stayed independent of both parties.[79]
The Democrats benefited from white Southerners' resentment of Reconstruction after the war and consequent hostility to the Republican Party. After Redeemers ended Reconstruction in the 1870s and following the often extremely violent disenfranchisement of African Americans led by such white supremacist Democratic politicians as Benjamin Tillman of South Carolina in the 1880s and 1890s, the South, voting Democratic, became known as the "Solid South". Although Republicans won all but two presidential elections, the Democrats remained competitive. The party was dominated by pro-business Bourbon Democrats led by Samuel J. Tilden and Grover Cleveland, who represented mercantile, banking, and railroad interests; opposed imperialism and overseas expansion; fought for the gold standard; opposed bimetallism; and crusaded against corruption, high taxes and tariffs. Cleveland was elected to non-consecutive presidential terms in 1884 and 1892.[80]
20th century
Further information: Fourth Party System, Fifth Party System, and Sixth Party System
 Leaders of the Democratic Party during the first half of the 20th century on 14 June 1913: Secretary of State William J. Bryan, Josephus Daniels, President Woodrow Wilson, Breckinridge Long, William Phillips, and Franklin D. Roosevelt
Early 20th century
Agrarian Democrats demanding free silver, drawing on Populist ideas, overthrew the Bourbon Democrats in 1896 and nominated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency (a nomination repeated by Democrats in 1900 and 1908). Bryan waged a vigorous campaign attacking Eastern moneyed interests, but he lost to Republican William McKinley.[81]
The Democrats took control of the House in 1910, and Woodrow Wilson won election as president in 1912 (when the Republicans split) and 1916. Wilson effectively led Congress to put to rest the issues of tariffs, money, and antitrust, which had dominated politics for 40 years, with new progressive laws. He failed to secure Senate passage of the Versailles Treaty (ending the war with Germany and joining the League of Nations).[82] The weak party was deeply divided by issues such as the KKK and prohibition in the 1920s. However, it did organize new ethnic voters in Northern cities.[83]
 Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, 32nd and 33rd presidents of the United States (1933 1945; 1945 1953), featured on a campaign poster for the 1944 presidential election
Rise of New Deal Coalition (1930s 1960s)
The Great Depression in 1929 that began under Republican President Herbert Hoover and the Republican Congress set the stage for a more liberal government as the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives nearly uninterrupted from 1930 until 1994, the Senate for 44 of 48 years from 1930, and won most presidential elections until 1968. Franklin D. Roosevelt, elected to the presidency in 1932, came forth with federal government programs called the New Deal. New Deal liberalism meant the regulation of business (especially finance and banking) and the promotion of labor unions as well as federal spending to aid the unemployed, help distressed farmers and undertake large-scale public works projects. It marked the start of the American welfare state.[84] The opponents, who stressed opposition to unions, support for business and low taxes, started calling themselves "conservatives".[85]
Until the 1980s, the Democratic Party was a coalition of two parties divided by the Mason Dixon line: liberal Democrats in the North and culturally conservative voters in the South, who though benefitting from many of the New Deal public works projects, opposed increasing civil rights initiatives advocated by northeastern liberals. The polarization grew stronger after Roosevelt died. Southern Democrats formed a key part of the bipartisan conservative coalition in an alliance with most of the Midwestern Republicans. The economically activist philosophy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, which has strongly influenced American liberalism, shaped much of the party's economic agenda after 1932.[86] From the 1930s to the mid-1960s, the liberal New Deal coalition usually controlled the presidency while the conservative coalition usually controlled Congress.[87]
1960s 1980s and the Collapse of the New Deal Coalition
See also: Civil Rights Movement
Issues facing parties and the United States after World War II included the Cold War and the civil rights movement. Republicans attracted conservatives and, after the 1960s, white Southerners from the Democratic coalition with their use of the Southern strategy and resistance to New Deal and Great Society liberalism. Until the 1950s, African Americans had traditionally supported the Republican Party because of its anti-slavery civil rights policies. Following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965, the Southern states became more reliably Republican in presidential politics, while Northeastern states became more reliably Democratic.[88][89][90][91][92][93][94][95] Studies show that Southern whites, which were a core constituency in the Democratic Party, shifted to the Republican Party due to racial backlash.[94][96][97] John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, 35th and 36th presidents of the United States (1961 1963, 1963 1969)
The election of President John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts in 1960 partially reflected this shift. In the campaign, Kennedy attracted a new generation of younger voters. In his agenda dubbed the New Frontier, Kennedy introduced a host of social programs and public works projects, along with enhanced support of the space program, proposing a crewed spacecraft trip to the moon by the end of the decade. He pushed for civil rights initiatives and proposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but with his assassination in November 1963, he was not able to see its passage.[98]
Kennedy's successor Lyndon B. Johnson was able to persuade the largely conservative Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and with a more progressive Congress in 1965 passed much of the Great Society, including Medicare, which consisted of an array of social programs designed to help the poor, sick, and elderly. Kennedy and Johnson's advocacy of civil rights further solidified black support for the Democrats but had the effect of alienating Southern whites who would eventually gravitate toward the Republican Party, particularly after the election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency in 1980.
 Official Portrait of President Jimmy Carter in 1978
The United States' involvement in the Vietnam War in the 1960s was another divisive issue that further fractured the fault lines of the Democrats' coalition. After the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, President Johnson committed a large contingency of combat troops to Vietnam, but the escalation failed to drive the Viet Cong from South Vietnam, resulting in an increasing quagmire, which by 1968 had become the subject of widespread anti-war protests in the United States and elsewhere. With increasing casualties and nightly news reports bringing home troubling images from Vietnam, the costly military engagement became increasingly unpopular, alienating many of the kinds of young voters that the Democrats had attracted in the early 1960s. The protests that year along with assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Democratic presidential candidate Senator Robert F. Kennedy (younger brother of John F. Kennedy) climaxed in turbulence at the hotly-contested Democratic National Convention that summer in Chicago (which amongst the ensuing turmoil inside and outside of the convention hall nominated Vice President Hubert Humphrey) in a series of events that proved to mark a significant turning point in the decline of the Democratic Party's broad coalition.[99]
Republican presidential nominee Richard Nixon was able to capitalize on the confusion of the Democrats that year, and won the 1968 election to become the 37th president. He won re-election in a landslide in 1972 against Democratic nominee George McGovern, who like Robert F. Kennedy, reached out to the younger anti-war and counterculture voters, but unlike Kennedy, was not able to appeal to the party's more traditional white working-class constituencies. During Nixon's second term, his presidency was rocked by the Watergate scandal, which forced him to resign in 1974. He was succeeded by vice president Gerald Ford, who served a brief tenure.
Watergate offered the Democrats an opportunity to recoup, and their nominee Jimmy Carter won the 1976 presidential election. With the initial support of evangelical Christian voters in the South, Carter was temporarily able to reunite the disparate factions within the party, but inflation and the Iran Hostage Crisis of 1979 1980 took their toll, resulting in a landslide victory for Republican presidential nominee Ronald Reagan in 1980, which shifted the political landscape in favor of the Republicans for years to come.[100][101]
1990s and Third Way centrism
 Clinton and Vice President Al Gore on the South Lawn, August 10, 1993
With the ascendancy of the Republicans under Ronald Reagan, the Democrats searched for ways to respond yet were unable to succeed by running traditional candidates, such as former vice president and Democratic presidential nominee Walter Mondale and Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis, who lost to Reagan and George H.W. Bush in the 1984 and 1988 presidential elections, respectively. Many Democrats attached their hopes to the future star of Gary Hart, who had challenged Mondale in the 1984 primaries running on a theme of "New Ideas"; and in the subsequent 1988 primaries became the de facto front-runner and virtual "shoo-in" for the Democratic presidential nomination before a sex scandal ended his campaign. The party nevertheless began to seek out a younger generation of leaders, who like Hart had been inspired by the pragmatic idealism of John F. Kennedy.[102]
Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was one such figure, who was elected president in 1992 as the Democratic nominee. The Democratic Leadership Council was a campaign organization connected to Clinton that advocated a realignment and triangulation under the re-branded "New Democrat" label.[103][35][36] The party adopted a synthesis of neoliberal economic policies with cultural liberalism, with the voter base after Reagan having shifted considerably to the right.[103] In an effort to appeal both to liberals and to fiscal conservatives, Democrats began to advocate for a balanced budget and market economy tempered by government intervention (mixed economy), along with a continued emphasis on social justice and affirmative action. The economic policy adopted by the Democratic Party, including the former Clinton administration, has been referred to as "Third Way".
The Democrats lost control of Congress in the election of 1994 to the Republican Party. Re-elected in 1996, Clinton was the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected to two terms.[104] Al Gore won the popular vote, but after a controversial election dispute over a Florida recount settled by the U.S. Supreme Court (which ruled 5 4 in favor of Bush) he lost the 2000 United States Presidential Election to Republican opponent George W. Bush in the Electoral College.[105]
21st century
2000s
Barack Obama (left) and Joe Biden (right), 44th and 46th presidents of the United States (2009 2017, 2021 present)
In the wake of the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon as well as the growing concern over global warming, some of the party's key issues in the early 21st century have included combating terrorism while preserving human rights, expanding access to health care, labor rights, and environmental protection. Democrats regained majority control of both the House and the Senate in the 2006 elections. Barack Obama won the Democratic Party's nomination and was elected as the first African American president in 2008. Under the Obama presidency, the party moved forward reforms including an economic stimulus package, the Dodd Frank financial reform act, and the Affordable Care Act.[106]
2010s
In the 2010 midterm elections, the Democratic Party lost control of the House and lost its majority in state legislatures and state governorships. In the 2012 elections, President Obama was re-elected, but the party remained in the minority in the House of Representatives and lost control of the Senate in the 2014 midterm elections. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, who lost the popular vote, the Democratic Party transitioned into the role of an opposition party and held neither the presidency nor Congress for two years. However, the Democratic Party won back a majority in the House in the 2018 midterm elections under the leadership of Nancy Pelosi.
Democrats were extremely critical of President Trump, particularly his policies on immigration, healthcare, and abortion, as well as his response to the COVID-19 pandemic.[107][108][109] Before the pandemic, Democrats in the House of Representatives impeached Trump for the first time although Trump was acquitted in the Republican-controlled Senate.[110]
2020s
Since the early 2010s, the party has shifted significantly to the left on social, cultural, and religious issues and attracted support from college-educated white Americans.[48][111]
In November 2020, Democrat Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election.[112] He began his term with extremely narrow Democratic majorities in the House and the Senate.[113][114] The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 was negotiated by Biden, Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, Joe Manchin, Kyrsten Sinema and other Democrats and is the largest allocation of funds for climate to date.[115][116]
In 2022, Biden appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson, the first Black woman on the Supreme Court. In the 2022 midterm elections Democrats dramatically outperformed historical trends, and a widely anticipated red wave did not materialize.[117][118] Democrats only narrowly lost their majority in the House and gained a seat in the Senate, along with some gains at the state level.[119][120][121]
After Dobbs v. Jackson, which led to abortion bans in much of the country, the Democratic Party rallied behind abortion rights.[38]
Name and symbols
"A Live Jackass Kicking a Dead Lion" by Thomas Nast, Harper's Weekly, January 19, 1870The donkey party logo remains a well-known symbol for the Democratic Party despite not being the official logo of the party.
The Democratic-Republican Party splintered in 1824 into the short-lived National Republican Party and the Jacksonian movement which in 1828 became the Democratic Party. Under the Jacksonian era, the term "The Democracy" was in use by the party, but the name "Democratic Party" was eventually settled upon[122] and became the official name in 1844.[123] Members of the party are called "Democrats" or "Dems".
The term "Democrat Party" has also been in local use but has usually been used by opponents since 1952 as a disparaging term. However, the use of the term "Democrat" as an adjective is not generally considered offensive in other contexts, such as "Democrat President", "Democrat Voters", "Democrat Senators", "Democrat Candidate", "Democrat Governor", etc. Nonetheless, its usage is still incorrect.
The most common mascot symbol for the party has been the donkey, or jackass.[124] Andrew Jackson's enemies twisted his name to "jackass" as a term of ridicule regarding a stupid and stubborn animal. However, the Democrats liked the common-man implications and picked it up too, therefore the image persisted and evolved.[125] Its most lasting impression came from the cartoons of Thomas Nast from 1870 in Harper's Weekly. Cartoonists followed Nast and used the donkey to represent the Democrats and the elephant to represent the Republicans.
In the early 20th century, the traditional symbol of the Democratic Party in Indiana, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Ohio was the rooster, as opposed to the Republican eagle. This symbol still appears on Oklahoma, Kentucky, Indiana, and West Virginia ballots.[126] The rooster was adopted as the official symbol of the national Democratic Party.[127] In New York, the Democratic ballot symbol is a five-pointed star.[128]
Although both major political parties (and many minor ones) use the traditional American colors of red, white, and blue in their marketing and representations, since election night 2000 blue has become the identifying color for the Democratic Party while red has become the identifying color for the Republican Party. That night, for the first time all major broadcast television networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: blue states for Al Gore (Democratic nominee) and red states for George W. Bush (Republican nominee). Since then, the color blue has been widely used by the media to represent the party. This is contrary to common practice outside of the United States where blue is the traditional color of the right and red the color of the left.[129] For example, in Canada red represents the Liberals while blue represents the Conservatives. In the United Kingdom, red denotes the Labour Party and blue symbolizes the Conservative Party. Any use of the color blue to denote the Democratic Party prior to 2000 would be historically inaccurate and misleading. Since 2000, blue has also been used both by party supporters for promotional efforts ActBlue, BuyBlue and BlueFund as examples and by the party itself in 2006 both for its "Red to Blue Program", created to support Democratic candidates running against Republican incumbents in the midterm elections that year and on its official website.
In September 2010, the Democratic Party unveiled its new logo, which featured a blue D inside a blue circle. It was the party's first official logo; the donkey logo had been only semi-official.
Jefferson-Jackson Day is the annual fundraising event (dinner) held by Democratic Party organizations across the United States.[130] It is named after Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, whom the party regards as its distinguished early leaders.
The song "Happy Days Are Here Again" is the unofficial song of the Democratic Party. It was used prominently when Franklin D. Roosevelt was nominated for president at the 1932 Democratic National Convention and remains a sentimental favorite for Democrats today. For example, Paul Shaffer played the theme on the Late Show with David Letterman after the Democrats won Congress in 2006. "Don't Stop" by Fleetwood Mac was adopted by Bill Clinton's presidential campaign in 1992 and has endured as a popular Democratic song. The emotionally similar song "Beautiful Day" by the band U2 has also become a favorite theme song for Democratic candidates. John Kerry used the song during his 2004 presidential campaign and several Democratic Congressional candidates used it as a celebratory tune in 2006.[131][132]
As a traditional anthem for its presidential nominating convention, Aaron Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" is traditionally performed at the beginning of the Democratic National Convention.
Current structure and composition
National committee
The Democratic National Committee (DNC) is responsible for promoting Democratic campaign activities. While the DNC is responsible for overseeing the process of writing the Democratic Platform, the DNC is more focused on campaign and organizational strategy than public policy. In presidential elections, it supervises the Democratic National Convention. The national convention is subject to the charter of the party and the ultimate authority within the Democratic Party when it is in session, with the DNC running the party's organization at other times. The DNC is chaired by Jaime Harrison.[133]
State parties
Main article: List of state parties of the Democratic Party (United States)
Each state also has a state committee, made up of elected committee members as well as ex officio committee members (usually elected officials and representatives of major constituencies), which in turn elects a chair. County, town, city, and ward committees generally are composed of individuals elected at the local level. State and local committees often coordinate campaign activities within their jurisdiction, oversee local conventions, and in some cases primaries or caucuses, and may have a role in nominating candidates for elected office under state law. Rarely do they have much funding, but in 2005 DNC Chairman Dean began a program (called the "50 State Strategy") of using DNC national funds to assist all state parties and pay for full-time professional staffers.[134]
Major Party Committees and Groups
 Barack Obama speaking to College Democrats of America in 2007
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) assists party candidates in House races and its current chairman (selected by the party caucus) is Representative Suzan DelBene of Washington. Similarly, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC), headed by Senator Gary Peters of Michigan, raises funds for Senate races. The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee (DLCC), chaired by Majority Leader of the New York State Senate Andrea Stewart-Cousins, is a smaller organization that focuses on state legislative races. The Democratic Governors Association (DGA) is an organization supporting the candidacies of Democratic gubernatorial nominees and incumbents. Likewise, the mayors of the largest cities and urban centers convene as the National Conference of Democratic Mayors.[135]
The DNC sponsors the College Democrats of America (CDA), a student-outreach organization with the goal of training and engaging a new generation of Democratic activists. Democrats Abroad is the organization for Americans living outside the United States. They work to advance the party's goals and encourage Americans living abroad to support the Democrats. The Young Democrats of America (YDA) and the High School Democrats of America (HSDA) are young adult and youth-led organizations respectively that attempt to draw in and mobilize young people for Democratic candidates but operates outside of the DNC.
Ideology
Part of a series onLiberalismin the United States
Schools
Classical
Conservative
Economic
Laissez-faire
Modern
Progressive
Social
Third Way
Principles
Civil rights
Due process
Economic freedom
Economic progressivism
Egalitarianism
Equal opportunity
Environmentalism
Fiscal conservatism
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Free market
Harm Principle
Individualism
Internationalism
Legal egalitarianism
Mixed economy
Republicanism
Rule of law
Separation of church and state
Social Democracy
Social equality
Social justice
Social welfare
Unalienable rights
Welfare state
History
American Revolutionary War
Civil rights movement
Fair Deal
Gilded Age
Great Society
Liberal Republicans
New Deal
New Deal coalition
Progressive Era
Third Way
Intellectuals
Abbott
Addams
Carson
Commager
Dewey
Douglass
Dworkin
Emerson
Frank
Franklin
Friedan
Friedman
Galbraith
Garrison
Hofstadter
Ireland
Jefferson
King (Coretta)
King Jr.
Maddow
McCarthy
McGovern
Mott
Murray
Nozick
Nussbaum
Paine
Pinker
Rawls
Rorty
Rush
Schlesinger
Sharpton
Skinner
Smith
Sontag
Stanton
Steinem
Sumner
Trilling
Trotter
Thoreau
Truth
Vidal
Ward
Warren
Wells
Wellstone
Politicians
Abzug
Abrams
Anthony
Baker
Biden
Bryan
Buttigieg
Carter
Chavez
Chisholm
Clay
Clinton (Bill)
Clinton (Hillary)
Clyburn
Cuomo (Andrew)
Cuomo (Mario)
Dean
Dukakis
Farmer
Feinstein
Frank
Glasser
Gompers
Gore
Hamer
Harlan
Harris
Hays
Huerta
Humphrey
Jackson (Andrew)
Jackson (Jesse)
Javits
Jefferson
Johnson
Jordan
Kaine
Kefauver
Kennedy (John)
Kennedy (Joseph)
Kennedy (Robert)
Kennedy (Ted)
Kerry
King (Coretta)
King Jr.
La Follette
La Guardia
Lewis
Lincoln
Lindsay
Madison
Markey
McCarthy
McGovern
Milk
Mondale
Murphy
Nelson
Newsom
O'Neill
Obama
Pelosi
Powell
Randolph
Reid
Reuther
Rockefeller
Roosevelt (Eleanor)
Roosevelt (Franklin)
Roosevelt (Theodore)
Rush
Schumer
Sharpton
Shriver
Smith
Stevenson
Truman
Wallace
Warren
Wellstone
Yarborough
Jurists
Blackmun
Brandeis
Brennan
Breyer
Darrow
Douglas
Dworkin
Ginsburg
Harlan
Houston
Jackson
Kagan
Marshall
Sotomayor
Souter
Stevens
Warren
Parties
Anti-Federalist Party
Democratic Party
Democratic-Republican Party
National Democratic Party
Progressive Party (1912)
Progressive Party (1924)
Progressive Party (1948)
Rockefeller Republicans (until the 1970s)
Think tanks
Center for American Progress
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities
Roosevelt Institute
Organizations
AFL CIO
American Civil Liberties Union
American Constitution Society
American Humanist Association
Americans United for Separation of Church and State
Brennan Center For Justice
Equal Justice Works
NAACP
National Organization for Women
People for the American Way
NARAL
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
Southern Center for Human Rights
SNCC
National Urban League
Media
The American Prospect
The Atlantic
CNN
HuffPost
Mother Jones
MSNBC
The Nation
The New Republic
The New York Times
Rolling Stone
Sojourners
Talking Points Memo
ThinkProgress
Salon
The Washington Post
See also
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal bias in the media
Liberal theorists
Modern liberalism in the United States
 Liberalism portal United States portalvte
Further information: Factions in the Democratic Party (United States)
Upon foundation, the Democratic Party supported agrarianism and the Jacksonian democracy movement of President Andrew Jackson, representing farmers and rural interests and traditional Jeffersonian democrats.[136] Since the 1890s, especially in northern states, the party began to favor more liberal positions (the term "liberal" in this sense describes modern liberalism, rather than classical liberalism or economic liberalism). In recent exit polls, the Democratic Party has had broad appeal across most socioeconomic and ethnic demographics.[137][138][139]
Historically, the party has represented farmers, laborers, and religious and ethnic minorities as it has opposed unregulated business and finance and favored progressive income taxes. In foreign policy, internationalism (including interventionism) was a dominant theme from 1913 to the mid-1960s. In the 1930s, the party began advocating social programs targeted at the poor. The party had a fiscally conservative, pro-business wing, typified by Grover Cleveland and Al Smith, and a Southern conservative wing that shrank after President Lyndon B. Johnson supported the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The major influences for liberalism were labor unions (which peaked in the 1936 1952 era) and African Americans. Environmentalism has been a major component since the 1970s. The 21st century Democratic Party is predominantly a coalition of centrists, liberals, and progressives, with significant overlap between the three groups.[140] Political scientists characterize the Democratic Party as less ideologically cohesive than the Republican Party due to the broader diversity of coalitions that compose the Democratic Party.[141][142][143]
The Democratic Party, once dominant in the Southeastern United States, is now strongest in the Northeastern United States, the Great Lakes region, parts of the Southwestern United States, and the West Coast (including Hawaii). The party is also very strong in major cities (regardless of region).[144]
Centrists
See also: New Democrats
Centrist Democrats, or New Democrats, are an ideologically centrist faction within the Democratic Party that emerged after the victory of Republican George H. W. Bush in the 1988 presidential election. They are an economically liberal and "Third Way" faction which dominated the party for around 20 years starting in the late 1980s after the United States populace turned much further to the political right. They are represented by organizations such as the New Democrat Network and the New Democrat Coalition. The New Democrat Coalition is a pro-growth and fiscally moderate congressional coalition.[145]
One of the most influential centrist groups was the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), a nonprofit organization that advocated centrist positions for the party. The DLC hailed President Bill Clinton as proof of the viability of "Third Way" politicians and a DLC success story. The DLC disbanded in 2011 and much of the former DLC is now represented in the think tank Third Way.[146]
Some Democratic elected officials have self-declared as being centrists, including former President Bill Clinton, former Vice President Al Gore, Senator Mark Warner, former Pennsylvania governor Ed Rendell, former Senator Jim Webb, President Joe Biden, congresswoman Ann Kirkpatrick, and former congressman Dave McCurdy.[147][148]
The New Democrat Network supports socially liberal and fiscally moderate Democratic politicians and is associated with the congressional New Democrat Coalition in the House.[149] Annie Kuster is the chair of the coalition,[147] and former senator and President Barack Obama was self-described as a New Democrat.[150]
Conservatives
A conservative Democrat is a member of the Democratic Party with conservative political views, or with views relatively conservative with respect to those of the national party. While such members of the Democratic Party can be found throughout the nation, actual elected officials are disproportionately found within rural regions of the United States, more commonly in the South and the West. Historically, Southern Democrats were generally much more ideologically conservative than conservative Democrats are now.[151]
 President Barack Obama meeting with the Blue Dog Coalition in the State Dining Room of the White House in 2009
Many conservative Southern Democrats defected to the Republican Party, beginning with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the general leftward shift of the party. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, Billy Tauzin of Louisiana, Kent Hance and Ralph Hall of Texas and Richard Shelby of Alabama are examples of this. The influx of conservative Democrats into the Republican Party is often cited as a reason for the Republican Party's shift further to the right during the late 20th century as well as the shift of its base from the Northeast and Midwest to the South.[152][153][154] Studies show that White Southerners shifted to the Republican Party due to white backlash and social conservatism.[94][155][156]
Split-ticket voting was common among conservative Southern Democrats in the 1970s and 1980s. These voters supported conservative Democrats for local and statewide office while simultaneously voting for Republican presidential candidates.[157] They were sometimes humorously called "Yellow dog Democrats", or "boll weevils" and "Dixiecrats". In the House after the 1994 Republican Revolution, they formed the Blue Dog Coalition, a caucus of conservatives and centrists willing to broker compromises with the Republican leadership who acted as a unified voting bloc in the past, giving its members some ability to change legislation, depending on their numbers in Congress. Until the 2010s, the Democratic Party had a conservative element, mostly from the South and Border regions. Their numbers declined sharply as the Republican Party built up its Southern base.[158]
Liberals
See also: Modern liberalism in the United States
 Eleanor Roosevelt at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago
Social liberals (modern liberals) are a large portion of the Democratic base. According to 2018 exit polls, liberals constituted 27% of the electorate, and 91% of American liberals favored the candidate of the Democratic Party.[159] White-collar college-educated professionals were mostly Republican until the 1950s, but they now compose a vital component of the Democratic Party.[160]
A large majority of liberals favor moving toward universal health care, with many supporting an eventual gradual transition to a single-payer system in particular. A majority also favor diplomacy over military action; stem cell research, same-sex marriage, stricter gun control, environmental protection laws, as well as the preservation of abortion rights. Immigration and cultural diversity are deemed positive as liberals favor cultural pluralism, a system in which immigrants retain their native culture in addition to adopting their new culture. Most liberals oppose increased military spending and the mixing of church and state.[161] They tend to be divided on free trade agreements such as the USMCA and PNTR with China, with some seeing them as more favorable to corporations than workers.[162]
This ideological group differs from the traditional organized labor base. According to the Pew Research Center, a plurality of 41% resided in mass affluent households and 49% were college graduates, the highest figure of any typographical group. It was also the fastest growing typological group since the late 1990s to the present.[161] Liberals include most of academia[163] and large portions of the professional class.[57]
Progressives
Progressives are the most left-leaning faction in the party and support strong business regulations, social programs, and workers' rights.[164][165] Many progressive Democrats are descendants of the New Left of Democratic presidential candidate Senator George McGovern of South Dakota whereas others were involved in the 2016 presidential candidacy of Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders. Progressives are often considered to have ideas similar to social democracy due to heavy inspiration from the Nordic Model, believing in federal top marginal income taxes ranging from 52% to 70%,[166] rent control,[167] increased collective bargaining power, a $15-an-hour minimum wage, as well as free tuition and Universal Healthcare (typically Medicare for All).[168]
In 2014, progressive Senator Elizabeth Warren set out "Eleven Commandments of Progressivism": tougher regulation on corporations; affordable education; scientific investment and environmentalism; net neutrality; increased wages; equal pay for women; collective bargaining rights; defending social programs; same-sex marriage; immigration reform; and unabridged access to reproductive healthcare.[169] In addition, progressives strongly oppose political corruption and seek to advance electoral reforms such as campaign finance rules and voting rights protections in the For the People Act.
Recently, many progressives have made combating economic inequality their top priority. The Congressional Progressive Caucus (CPC) is a caucus of progressive Democrats chaired by Pramila Jayapal of Washington.[170] Its members have included Representatives Dennis Kucinich of Ohio, John Conyers of Michigan, Jim McDermott of Washington, Barbara Lee of California, and Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota. Senators Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, and Ed Markey of Massachusetts were members of the caucus when in the House of Representatives. While no Democratic senators currently belong to the CPC, independent Senator Bernie Sanders is a member.[171]
Political positions
Main article: Political positions of the Democratic Party
Economic policy
Expand Social Security and safety-net programs.[172]
Increase the capital gains tax rate to 39.6% for taxpayers with annual income above $1 million.[173]
Cut taxes for the working and middle classes as well as small businesses.[174]
Change tax rules to discourage shipping jobs overseas.[174]
Increase federal and state minimum wages.[175]
Modernize and expand access to public education and provide universal preschool education.[176]
Support the goal of universal health care through a public health insurance option or expanding Medicare/Medicaid.[177]
Increase investments in infrastructure development[178] as well as scientific and technological research.[179]
Offer tax credits to make clean energy more accessible for consumers and increase domestic production of clean energy.[180]
Uphold labor protections and the right to unionize.[181][182]
Reform the student loan system and allow for refinancing student loans.[183]
Make college more affordable.[175][184]
Mandate equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, race, or ethnicity.[185]
Social policy
Decriminalize or legalize marijuana.[175]
Uphold network neutrality.[186]
Implement campaign finance reform.[187]
Uphold voting rights and easy access to voting.[188][189]
Support same-sex marriage and ban conversion therapy.[175]
Allow legal access to abortions and women's reproductive health care.[178]
Reform the immigration system and allow for a pathway to citizenship.[178]
Expand background checks and reduce access to assault weapons to address gun violence.[178]
Improve privacy laws and curtail government surveillance.[178]
Oppose torture.[190][191]
Abolish capital punishment.[192]
Recognize and defend Internet freedom worldwide.[174]
Economic issues
Equal economic opportunity, a social safety net, and strong labor unions have historically been at the heart of Democratic economic policy.[39] The Democratic Party's economic policy positions, as measured by votes in Congress, tend to align with those of middle class.[193][194][195][196][197] Democrats support a progressive tax system, higher minimum wages, Social Security, universal health care, public education, and subsidized housing.[39] They also support infrastructure development and clean energy investments to achieve economic development and job creation.[198] Since the 1990s, the party has at times supported centrist economic reforms that cut the size of government and reduced market regulations.[199] The party has generally rejected both laissez-faire economics and market socialism, instead favoring Keynesian economics within a capitalist market-based system.[200]
Fiscal policy
Democrats support a more progressive tax structure to provide more services and reduce economic inequality by making sure that the wealthiest Americans pay more in taxes.[201] They oppose the cutting of social services, such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid,[202] believing it to be harmful to efficiency and social justice. Democrats believe the benefits of social services in monetary and non-monetary terms are a more productive labor force and cultured population and believe that the benefits of this are greater than any benefits that could be derived from lower taxes, especially on top earners, or cuts to social services. Furthermore, Democrats see social services as essential toward providing positive freedom, freedom derived from economic opportunity. The Democratic-led House of Representatives reinstated the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) budget rule at the start of the 110th Congress.[203]
Minimum wage
See also: Minimum wage in the United States
The Democratic Party favors raising the minimum wage. The Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007 was an early component of the Democrats' agenda during the 110th Congress. In 2006, the Democrats supported six state-ballot initiatives to increase the minimum wage and all six initiatives passed.[204]
In 2017, Senate Democrats introduced the Raise the Wage Act which would raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2024.[205] In 2021, Democratic president Joe Biden proposed increasing the minimum wage to $15 by 2025.[206] In many states controlled by Democrats, the state minimum wage has been increased to a rate above the federal minimum wage.[207]
Health care
 President Barack Obama signing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law at the White House on March 23, 2010
Democrats call for "affordable and quality health care" and favor moving toward universal health care in a variety of forms to address rising healthcare costs. Progressive Democrats politicians favor a single-payer program or Medicare for All, while liberals prefer creating a public health insurance option.[208]
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010, has been one of the most significant pushes for universal health care. As of December 2019, more than 20 million Americans have gained health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.[209]
According to a 2023 YouGov poll, Democrats are significantly more likely to find intersex medical interventions "acceptable" than Republicans or Independents.[210]
Education
Democrats favor improving public education by raising school standards and reforming the Head Start program. They also support universal preschool, expanding access to primary education, including through charter schools, and are generally opposed to school voucher programs. They call for addressing student loan debt and reforms to reduce college tuition.[211] Other proposals have included tuition-free public universities and reform of standardized testing. Democrats have the long-term aim of having publicly funded college education with low tuition fees (like in much of Europe and Canada), which would be available to every eligible American student. Alternatively, they encourage expanding access to post-secondary education by increasing state funding for student financial aid such as Pell Grants and college tuition tax deductions.[212]
Environment
Main article: Environmental policy of the United States
In the United States, Democrats (blue) and Republicans (red) have long differed in views of the importance of addressing climate change, with the gap widening in the late 2010s mainly through Democrats' share increasing by more than 30 points.[213]The sharp divide over the existence of and responsibility for global warming and climate change falls largely along political lines. Overall, 60% of those surveyed said oil and gas companies were "completely or mostly responsible" for climate change.[214]
Opinion about human causation of climate change increased substantially with education among Democrats, but not among Republicans.[215] Conversely, opinions favoring becoming carbon neutral declined substantially with age among Republicans, but not among Democrats.[215]A broad range of policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions has been proposed. Democrats' support for such policies consistently exceeds that of Republicans.[216]
Democrats believe that the government should protect the environment and have a history of environmentalism. In more recent years, this stance has emphasized renewable energy generation as the basis for an improved economy, greater national security, and general environmental benefits.[217] The Democratic Party is substantially more likely than the Republican Party to support environmental regulation and policies that are supportive of renewable energy.[218][219]
The Democratic Party also favors expansion of conservation lands and encourages open space and rail travel to relieve highway and airport congestion and improve air quality and the economy as it "believe[s] that communities, environmental interests, and the government should work together to protect resources while ensuring the vitality of local economies. Once Americans were led to believe they had to make a choice between the economy and the environment. They now know this is a false choice".[220]
The foremost environmental concern of the Democratic Party is climate change. Democrats, most notably former Vice President Al Gore, have pressed for stern regulation of greenhouse gases. On October 15, 2007, Gore won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to build greater knowledge about man-made climate change and laying the foundations for the measures needed to counteract it.[221]
Renewable energy and fossil fuels
Democrats have supported increased domestic renewable energy development, including wind and solar power farms, in an effort to reduce carbon pollution. The party's platform calls for an "all of the above" energy policy including clean energy, natural gas and domestic oil, with the desire of becoming energy independent.[204] The party has supported higher taxes on oil companies and increased regulations on coal power plants, favoring a policy of reducing long-term reliance on fossil fuels.[222][223] Additionally, the party supports stricter fuel emissions standards to prevent air pollution.
Trade agreements
Many Democrats support fair trade policies when it comes to the issue of international trade agreements and some in the party have started supporting free trade in recent decades.[224] In the 1990s, the Clinton administration and a number of prominent Democrats pushed through a number of agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Since then, the party's shift away from free trade became evident in the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) vote, with 15 House Democrats voting for the agreement and 187 voting against.[225][226]
Social issues
 Shirley Chisholm was the first major-party African American candidate to run nationwide primary campaigns.
The modern Democratic Party emphasizes social equality and equal opportunity. Democrats support voting rights and minority rights, including LGBT rights. The party championed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which for the first time outlawed segregation. Carmines and Stimson wrote "the Democratic Party appropriated racial liberalism and assumed federal responsibility for ending racial discrimination."[227][228][229]
Ideological social elements in the party include cultural liberalism, civil libertarianism, and feminism. Some Democratic social policies are immigration reform, electoral reform, and women's reproductive rights.
Equal opportunity
The Democratic Party supports equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of sex, age, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, creed, or national origin. Many Democrats support affirmative action programs to further this goal. Democrats also strongly support the Americans with Disabilities Act to prohibit discrimination against people based on physical or mental disability. As such, the Democrats pushed as well the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, a disability rights expansion that became law.[230]
Voting rights
The party is very supportive of improving voting rights as well as election accuracy and accessibility.[231] They support extensions of voting time, including making election day a holiday. They support reforming the electoral system to eliminate gerrymandering, abolishing the electoral college, as well as passing comprehensive campaign finance reform.[187]
Abortion and reproductive rights
See also: Abortion law in the United States
The Democratic position on abortion has changed significantly over time.[232][51] During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Republicans generally favored legalized abortion more than Democrats,[233] although significant heterogeneity could be found within both parties.[234] During this time, opposition to abortion tended to be concentrated among the political left in the United States. Liberal Protestants and Catholics   both of which tended to vote for the Democratic Party   opposed while most conservative Protestants supported legal access to abortion services.[50]
The present platform states that all women should have access to birth control and supports public funding of contraception for poor women. In its national platforms from 1992 to 2004, the Democratic Party has called for abortion to be "safe, legal and rare" namely, keeping it legal by rejecting laws that allow governmental interference in abortion decisions and reducing the number of abortions by promoting both knowledge of reproduction and contraception and incentives for adoption. The wording changed in the 2008 platform. When Congress voted on the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003, Congressional Democrats were split, with a minority (including former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid) supporting the ban and the majority of Democrats opposing the legislation.[235]
The Democratic Party opposes attempts to reverse the 1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade, which declared abortion covered by the constitutionally protected individual right to privacy under the Ninth Amendment; and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which lays out the legal framework in which government action alleged to violate that right is assessed by courts. As a matter of the right to privacy and of gender equality, many Democrats believe all women should have the ability to choose to abort without governmental interference. They believe that each woman, conferring with her conscience, has the right to choose for herself whether abortion is morally correct.
Former Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid was anti-abortion,[citation needed] while former President Barack Obama and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi favor abortion rights. Groups such as Democrats for Life of America represent the anti-abortion faction of the party while groups such as EMILY's List represent the abortion rights faction. A Newsweek poll from October 2006 found that 25% of Democrats were anti-abortion while a 69% majority was in favor of abortion rights.[236]
According to the 2020 Democratic Party platform, "Democrats believe every woman should be able to access high-quality reproductive health care services, including safe and legal abortion."[237]
Immigration
See also: Immigration to the United States and Illegal immigration to the United States
 President Lyndon B. Johnson signing the Immigration Act of 1965 as Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Senators Edward M. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy and others look on
Many Democratic politicians have called for systematic reform of the immigration system such that residents that have come into the United States illegally have a pathway to legal citizenship. President Obama remarked in November 2013 that he felt it was "long past time to fix our broken immigration system," particularly to allow "incredibly bright young people" that came over as students to become full citizens. The Public Religion Research Institute found in a late 2013 study that 73% of Democrats supported the pathway concept, compared to 63% of Americans as a whole.[238]
In 2013, Democrats in the Senate passed S. 744, which would reform immigration policy to allow citizenship for illegal immigrants in the United States and improve the lives of all immigrants currently living in the United States.[239]
LGBT rights
The Democratic position on LGBT rights has changed significantly over time, but it has typically been more supportive than the Republican position.[240][241] Before the 2000s, like the Republicans, the Democratic Party often took positions hostile to LGBT rights. Today, both voters and elected representatives within the Democratic Party are overwhelmingly supportive of LGBT rights.[240]
Support for same-sex marriage has increased in the past decade according to ABC News. An April 2009 ABC News/Washington Post public opinion poll put support among Democrats at 62%[242] whereas a June 2008 Newsweek poll found that 42% of Democrats support same-sex marriage while 23% support civil unions or domestic partnership laws and 28% oppose any legal recognition at all.[243] A broad majority of Democrats have supported other LGBT-related laws such as extending hate crime statutes, legally preventing discrimination against LGBT people in the workforce and repealing the "don't ask, don't tell" military policy. A 2006 Pew Research Center poll of Democrats found that 55% supported gays adopting children with 40% opposed while 70% support gays in the military, with only 23% opposed.[244] Gallup polling from May 2009 stated that 82% of Democrats support open enlistment.[245]
The 2004 Democratic National Platform stated that marriage should be defined at the state level and it repudiated the Federal Marriage Amendment.[246] While not stating support of same-sex marriage, the 2008 platform called for repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act, which banned federal recognition of same-sex marriage and removed the need for interstate recognition, supported antidiscrimination laws and the extension of hate crime laws to LGBT people and opposed "don't ask, don't tell".[247] The 2012 platform included support for same-sex marriage and for the repeal of DOMA.[248]
On May 9, 2012, Barack Obama became the first sitting president to say he supports same-sex marriage.[249][250] Previously, he had opposed restrictions on same-sex marriage such as the Defense of Marriage Act, which he promised to repeal,[251] California's Prop 8,[252] and a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage (which he opposed saying that "decisions about marriage should be left to the states as they always have been"),[253] but also stated that he personally believed marriage to be between a man and a woman and that he favored civil unions that would "give same-sex couples equal legal rights and privileges as married couples".[251] Earlier, when running for the Illinois Senate in 1996 he said, "I favor legalizing same-sex marriages, and would fight efforts to prohibit such marriages".[254] John Kerry, Democratic presidential candidate in 2004, did not support same-sex marriage. Former presidents Bill Clinton[255] and Jimmy Carter[256] and former vice presidents Al Gore[257] and Walter Mondale[258] also support gay marriage. President Joe Biden has been in favor of same-sex marriage since 2012 when he became the highest-ranking government official to support it.[259]
Status of Puerto Rico and D.C.
The 2016 Democratic Party platform declares, regarding the status of Puerto Rico: "We are committed to addressing the extraordinary challenges faced by our fellow citizens in Puerto Rico. Many stem from the fundamental question of Puerto Rico's political status. Democrats believe that the people of Puerto Rico should determine their ultimate political status from permanent options that do not conflict with the Constitution, laws, and policies of the United States. Democrats are committed to promoting economic opportunity and good-paying jobs for the hardworking people of Puerto Rico. We also believe that Puerto Ricans must be treated equally by Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs that benefit families. Puerto Ricans should be able to vote for the people who make their laws, just as they should be treated equally. All American citizens, no matter where they reside, should have the right to vote for the president of the United States. Finally, we believe that federal officials must respect Puerto Rico's local self-government as laws are implemented and Puerto Rico's budget and debt are restructured so that it can get on a path towards stability and prosperity".[178]
Also, it declares that regarding the status of the District of Columbia: "Restoring our democracy also means finally passing statehood for the District of Columbia, so that the American citizens who reside in the nation s capital have full and equal congressional rights as well as the right to have the laws and budget of their local government respected without Congressional interference."[178]
Legal issues
Gun control
 U.S. opinion on gun control issues is deeply divided along political lines, as shown in this 2021 survey.[260]
With a stated goal of reducing crime and homicide, the Democratic Party has introduced various gun control measures, most notably the Gun Control Act of 1968, the Brady Bill of 1993 and Crime Control Act of 1994. However, some Democrats, especially rural, Southern, and Western Democrats, favor fewer restrictions on firearm possession and warned the party was defeated in the 2000 presidential election in rural areas because of the issue.[261] In the national platform for 2008, the only statement explicitly favoring gun control was a plan calling for renewal of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban.[262] In 2022, Democratic president Joe Biden signed the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, which among other things expanded background checks and provided incentives for states to pass red flag laws.[263]
Death penalty
The Democratic Party currently opposes the death penalty.[192] Although most Democrats in Congress have never seriously moved to overturn the rarely used federal death penalty, both Russ Feingold and Dennis Kucinich have introduced such bills with little success. Democrats have led efforts to overturn state death penalty laws, particularly in New Jersey and in New Mexico. They have also sought to prevent the reinstatement of the death penalty in those states which prohibit it, including Massachusetts, New York, and Delaware. During the Clinton administration, Democrats led the expansion of the federal death penalty. These efforts resulted in the passage of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, signed into law by President Clinton, which heavily limited appeals in death penalty cases.
In 1972, the Democratic Party platform called for the abolition of capital punishment.[264]
In 1992, 1993 and 1995, Democratic Texas Congressman Henry Gonz lez unsuccessfully introduced the Death Penalty Abolition Amendment which prohibited the use of capital punishment in the United States. Democratic Missouri Congressman William Lacy Clay, Sr. cosponsored the amendment in 1993.
During his Illinois Senate career, former President Barack Obama successfully introduced legislation intended to reduce the likelihood of wrongful convictions in capital cases, requiring videotaping of confessions. When campaigning for the presidency, Obama stated that he supports the limited use of the death penalty, including for people who have been convicted of raping a minor under the age of 12, having opposed the Supreme Court's ruling in Kennedy v. Louisiana that the death penalty was unconstitutional in which the victim of a crime was not killed.[265] Obama has stated that he thinks the "death penalty does little to deter crime" and that it is used too frequently and too inconsistently.[266]
In June 2016, the Democratic Platform Drafting Committee unanimously adopted an amendment to abolish the death penalty.[267]
Torture
Many Democrats are opposed to the use of torture against individuals apprehended and held prisoner by the United States military and hold that categorizing such prisoners as unlawful combatants does not release the United States from its obligations under the Geneva Conventions. Democrats contend that torture is inhumane, damages the United States' moral standing in the world, and produces questionable results. Democrats are largely against waterboarding.[268]
Torture became a divisive issue in the party after Barack Obama was elected president.[269]
Patriot Act
Many Democrats are opposed to the Patriot Act, but when the law was passed most Democrats were supportive of it and all but two Democrats in the Senate voted for the original Patriot Act legislation in 2001. The lone nay vote was from Russ Feingold of Wisconsin as Mary Landrieu of Louisiana did not vote.[270] In the House, the Democrats voted for the Act by 145 yea and 62 nay. Democrats were split on the renewal in 2006. In the Senate, Democrats voted 34 for the 2006 renewal and nine against. In the House, Democrats voted 66 voted for the renewal and 124 against.[271]
Privacy
The Democratic Party believes that individuals should have a right to privacy. For example, many Democrats have opposed the NSA warrantless surveillance of American citizens.
Some Democratic officeholders have championed consumer protection laws that limit the sharing of consumer data between corporations. Democrats have opposed sodomy laws since the 1972 platform which stated that "Americans should be free to make their own choice of life-styles and private habits without being subject to discrimination or prosecution",[272] and believe that government should not regulate consensual noncommercial sexual conduct among adults as a matter of personal privacy.[273]
Foreign policy issues
The foreign policy of the voters of the two major parties has largely overlapped since the 1990s. A Gallup poll in early 2013 showed broad agreement on the top issues, albeit with some divergence regarding human rights and international cooperation through agencies such as the United Nations.[274]
In June 2014, the Quinnipiac Poll asked Americans which foreign policy they preferred:
A) The United States is doing too much in other countries around the world, and it is time to do less around the world and focus more on our own problems here at home.
B) The United States must continue to push forward to promote democracy and freedom in other countries worldwide because these efforts make our own country more secure.
Democrats chose A over B by 65% to 32%; Republicans chose A over B by 56% to 39%; and independents chose A over B by 67% to 29%.[275]
Iraq War
See also: Iraq War
 Then-Senator Barack Obama shaking hands with an American soldier in Basra, Iraq, in 2008
In 2002, Congressional Democrats were divided on the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq: 147 voted against it (21 in the Senate and 126 in the House) and 110 voted for it (29 in the Senate and 81 in the House). Since then, many prominent Democrats, such as former senator John Edwards, have expressed regret about this decision and have called it a mistake while others, such as Senator Hillary Clinton, have criticized the conduct of the war yet not repudiated their initial vote for it (though Clinton later went on to repudiate her stance during the 2008 primaries). Referring to Iraq, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid declared in April 2007 the war to be "lost" while other Democrats (especially during the 2004 presidential election cycle) accused the President of lying to the public about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Among lawmakers, Democrats are the most vocal opponents of Operation Iraqi Freedom and campaigned on a platform of withdrawal ahead of the 2006 midterm elections.
A March 2003 CBS News poll taken a few days before the invasion of Iraq found that 34% of Democrats nationwide would support it without United Nations backing, 51% would support it only with its backing and 14% would not support it at all.[276] The Los Angeles Times stated in early April 2003 that 70% of Democrats supported the decision to invade while 27% opposed it.[277] The Pew Research Center stated in August 2007 that opposition increased from 37% during the initial invasion to 74%.[278] In April 2008, a CBS News poll found that about 90% of Democrats disapprove of the Bush administration's conduct and want to end the war within the next year.[279]
Democrats in the House of Representatives near-unanimously supported a non-binding resolution disapproving of President Bush's decision to send additional troops into Iraq in 2007. Congressional Democrats overwhelmingly supported military funding legislation that included a provision that set "a timeline for the withdrawal of all US combat troops from Iraq" by March 31, 2008, but also would leave combat forces in Iraq for purposes such as targeted counter-terrorism operations.[280][281] After a veto from the President and a failed attempt in Congress to override the veto,[282] the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 was passed by Congress and signed by the President after the timetable was dropped. Criticism of the Iraq War subsided after the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 led to a dramatic decrease in Iraqi violence. The Democratic-controlled 110th Congress continued to fund efforts in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Presidential candidate Barack Obama advocated a withdrawal of combat troops within Iraq by late 2010 with a residual force of peacekeeping troops left in place.[283] He stated that both the speed of withdrawal and the number of troops left over would be "entirely conditions-based".[283]
On February 27, 2009, President Obama announced: "As a candidate for president, I made clear my support for a timeline of 16 months to carry out this drawdown, while pledging to consult closely with our military commanders upon taking office to ensure that we preserve the gains we've made and protect our troops ... Those consultations are now complete, and I have chosen a timeline that will remove our combat brigades over the next 18 months".[284] Around 50,000 non-combat-related forces would remain.[284] Obama's plan drew wide bipartisan support, including that of defeated Republican presidential candidate Senator John McCain.[284][needs update]
Iran sanctions
See also: United States sanctions against Iran
The Democratic Party has been critical of the Iran's nuclear weapon program and supported economic sanctions against the Iranian government. In 2013, the Democratic-led administration worked to reach a diplomatic agreement with the government of Iran to halt the Iranian nuclear weapon program in exchange for international economic sanction relief.[285] As of 2014[update], negotiations had been successful and the party called for more cooperation with Iran in the future.[286] In 2015, the Obama administration agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which provides sanction relief in exchange for international oversight of the Iranian nuclear program. In February 2019, the Democratic National Committee passed a resolution calling on the United States to re-enter the JCPOA, which President Trump withdrew from in 2018.[287]
Invasion of Afghanistan
See also: Afghanistan United States relations and International public opinion on the war in Afghanistan
Democrats in the House of Representatives and in the Senate near-unanimously voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists against "those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the United States" in Afghanistan in 2001, supporting the NATO coalition invasion of the nation. Most elected Democrats continued to support the Afghanistan conflict for its duration, with some, such as a Democratic National Committee spokesperson, voicing concerns that the Iraq War shifted too many resources away from the presence in Afghanistan.[288][289] During the 2008 Presidential Election, then-candidate Barack Obama called for a "surge" of troops into Afghanistan.[289] After winning the presidency, Obama followed through, sending a "surge" force of additional troops to Afghanistan. Troop levels were 94,000 in December 2011 and kept falling, with a target of 68,000 by fall 2012. Obama originally planned to bring all the troops home by 2014, but while the number of troops in the country did decline, several thousand remained at the end of his presidency.[290]
Support for the war among the American people diminished over time. Many Democrats changed their opinion over the course of the war, coming to oppose continuation of the conflict.[291][292] In July 2008, Gallup found that 41% of Democrats called the invasion a "mistake" while a 55% majority disagreed. In contrast, Republicans were more supportive of the war. The survey described Democrats as evenly divided about whether or not more troops should be sent 56% support it if it would mean removing troops from Iraq and only 47% support it otherwise.[292] A CNN survey in August 2009 stated that a majority of Democrats opposed the war. CNN polling director Keating Holland said: "Nearly two thirds of Republicans support the war in Afghanistan. Three quarters of Democrats oppose the war".[291] An August 2009 Washington Post poll found similar results, and the paper stated that Obama's policies would anger his closest supporters.[293]
During the 2020 Presidential Election, then-candidate Joe Biden promised to "end the forever wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East."[294] Biden went on to win the election, and in April 2021, he announced he would withdraw all US troops from Afghanistan by September 11 of that year.[295] The last troops left in August, bringing America's 20-year-long military campaign in the country to a close.[296]
Israel
See also: Israel United States relations
 President Jimmy Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin in 1978
The Democratic Party has both recently and historically supported Israel.[297][298] A 2008 Gallup poll found that 64% of Americans have a favorable image of Israel while only 16% say that they have a favorable image of the Palestinian Authority.[297] A pro-Israel view is held by the party leadership although some Democrats, including former President Jimmy Carter, have criticized Israel.[298]
A January 2009 Pew Research Center study found that when asked "which side do you sympathize with more", 42% of Democrats and 33% of liberals (a plurality in both groups) sympathize most with the Israelis. Around half of all political moderates or independents sided with Israel.[299] The years leading up to the 2016 election have brought more discussion of the party's stance on Israel as polls reported declining support for Israel among the party faithful.[300] Gallup suggested that the decline in support might be due to tensions between Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Barack Obama.[300]
The 2020 Democratic Party platform acknowledges a "commitment to Israel s security, its qualitative military edge, its right to defend itself, and the 2016 Memorandum of Understanding is ironclad." It also included:
Democrats believe a strong, secure, and democratic Israel is vital to the interests of the United States. Our commitment to Israel s security, its qualitative military edge, its right to defend itself, and the 2016 Memorandum of Understanding is ironclad. Democrats recognize the worth of every Israeli and every Palestinian. That s why we will work to help bring to an end a conflict that has brought so much pain to so many. We support a negotiated two-state solution that ensures Israel s future as a Jewish and democratic state with recognized borders and upholds the right of Palestinians to live in freedom and security in a viable state of their own.
Democrats oppose any unilateral steps by either side including annexation that undermine prospects for two states. Democrats will continue to stand against incitement and terror. We oppose settlement expansion.   We believe that while Jerusalem is a matter for final status negotiations, it should remain the capital of Israel, an undivided city accessible to people of all faiths. Democrats will restore U.S.-Palestinian diplomatic ties and critical assistance to the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza, consistent with U.S. law. We oppose any effort to unfairly single out and delegitimize Israel, including at the United Nations or through the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement, while protecting the Constitutional right of our citizens to free speech.[301]
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu meeting with President Barack Obama at Ben Gurion Airport in 2013
The rise of the progressive Bernie Sanders-aligned faction of the party, which tends to trend more pro-Palestine, is also likely responsible for the decline in support for Israel. A 2016 Pew Research poll found that while Clinton supporters sympathized more with Israel than Palestinians by a 20-point margin, Sanders supporters sympathized more with Palestinians than with Israel by a 6-point margin.[302] In June 2016, DNC members voted against an amendment to the party platform proposed by Sanders supporter James Zogby calling for an "end to occupation and illegal settlements".[303] In August 2018, Rashida Tlaib, who supports a one-state solution,[304] and Ilhan Omar, who has referred to Israel as an "apartheid regime"[305] won Democratic primaries in Michigan and Minnesota. In November 2018, shortly after being elected to Congress, Omar came out in support of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaign against Israel.[306]
Composition
Main article: Demographics of the Democratic Party (United States)
Upper class and higher-income voters
Further information: Social class in the United States
Since the mid-2010s, affluent voters have been more likely to vote for the Democrats.[63][57][307] As of 2023, by income, "the top 33%, top 20%, top 10% 15%, top 5% 10%, and top 1%", in addition to those in "stock-owning and high-income occupation[s]" are more likely to vote the Democratic Party.[63]
The relationship between income, class, and partisan support has changed significantly in recent years.[308] Beginning in the 1980s[309] to 1990s,[63] there has been a significant decline in support for the Democratic Party among white working class voters.[310][311][312][313] Since the 2010s, similar trends have been observed among working class minority groups, particularly among those who are Hispanic and Latino.[314][315][316][59][317][307]  This political realignment meant that in the 2020 presidential election, Democratic-plurality voting counties composed 70% of United States GDP.[318]
According to The New Yorker, by 2022 "the most affluent congressional districts in the country [were] largely represented by Democrats".[308] Upper class voters are more likely to be in favor of culturally liberal policies.[63][319] Working class Democrats are more likely to have socially conservative views. They also tend to be more religious and more likely to belong to an ethnic minority.[55][316][307][308]
College graduates and professionals
 Proportion of Americans with a bachelor's degree or higher in each U.S. state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico as of the 2021 American Community Survey
Main article: List of U.S. states and territories by educational attainment
See also: Higher education in the United States
Professionals, those who have a college education and those whose work revolves around the conception of ideas, have tended to support the Democratic Party since 2000. While the professional class was once a stronghold of the Republican Party, it has become increasingly in favor of the Democratic Party. Support for Democratic candidates among professionals may be traced to the prevalence of liberal cultural values among this group:[320]
Professionals, who are, roughly speaking, college-educated producers of services and ideas, used to be the most staunchly Republican of all occupational groups ... now chiefly working for large corporations and bureaucracies rather than on their own, and heavily influenced by the environmental, civil-rights, and feminist movements began to vote Democratic. In the four elections from 1988 to 2000, they backed Democrats by an average of 52 percent to 40 percent. John B. Judis and Ruy Teixeira, The American Prospect, June 19, 2007
The highly educated constitute an important part of the Democratic voter base. The party has strong support among scientists, with 55% identifying as Democrats, 32% as independents, and 6% as Republicans in a 2009 study.[321] In exit polls for the 2018 elections, 65% of those with a graduate degree said they voted Democratic, and Democrats won college graduates overall by a 20-point margin.[159] Those with a college education have become increasingly Democratic in the 1992,[322] 1996,[322] 2000,[323] 2004,[138] and 2008[324] elections.
Labor
See also: Labor Unions in the United States
 Higher percentages of Democrats than Republicans are members of union households.
Since the 1930s, a critical component of the Democratic Party coalition has been organized labor. Labor unions supply a great deal of the money, grass roots political organization, and voters for the party. Democrats are far more likely to be represented by unions, although union membership has declined in general during the last few decades. This trend is depicted in the following graph from the book Democrats and Republicans Rhetoric and Reality.[325] It is based on surveys conducted by the National Election Studies (NES).
The three most significant labor groupings in the Democratic coalition today are the AFL CIO and Change to Win labor federations as well as the National Education Association, a large, unaffiliated teachers' union. Important issues for labor unions include supporting industrial policy that sustains unionized manufacturing jobs, raising the minimum wage, and promoting broad social programs such as Social Security and Medicare.
In the 2020 presidential election, 57% of union households voted for Joe Biden.[33]
Younger Americans
See also: Young Democrats of America
 Elected at age 33, Jon Ossoff is currently the youngest member of the U.S. Senate.[326][327]
Younger Americans, including millennials and Generation Z, tend to vote mostly for Democratic candidates in recent years.[328]
The young have voted in favor of the Democratic presidential candidate in every election since Bill Clinton in 1992 and are more likely to identify as liberals than the general population.[329] In the 2004 presidential election, Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry received 54% of the vote from voters of the age group 18 29 while Republican George W. Bush received 45%. In the 2006 midterm elections, the Democrats received 60% of the vote from the same age group.[138][139]
Polls suggested that younger Americans have more liberal views than the general public on issues such as same-sex marriage and universal health care, helping Barack Obama carry 66% of their votes in 2008.[330] In the 2018 midterm elections and 2020 presidential election, 67% and 60% of those in the 18 29 age range voted for Democratic candidates, respectively.[159][331]
Women
 Hillary Clinton was the first woman to be nominated for president by a major party.
Although the gender gap has varied over the years, women of all ages as a whole are more likely than men to identify as Democrats.
Since the 1990s, women have supported Democratic Party candidates to various offices at higher rates than men.[332] Polls in 2009 indicated that 41% of women identify as Democrats while only 25% of women identify as Republicans and 26% as independents whereas 32% of men identify as Democrats, 28% as Republicans and 34% as independents. Among ethnic minorities, women also are more likely than men to identify as Democrats.
However, according to a December 2019 study, "White women are the only group of female voters who support Republican Party candidates for president. They have done so by a majority in all but 2 of the last 18 elections".[333][334]
The National Federation of Democratic Women is an affiliated organization meant to advocate for women's issues. National women's organizations that support Democratic candidates include EMILY's List, which aims to help elect pro-choice female Democratic candidates to office.
Of the 124 women in the United States House of Representatives and 25 women in the United States Senate at the start of the 118th Congress, 91 were Democrats in the House of Representatives and 16 were members of the Senate Democratic Caucus.[d]
 Associate Justice Elena Kagan has never married.
Marital status and parenthood
Americans that identify as single, living with a domestic partner, divorced, separated, or widowed are more likely to vote Democratic in contrast to married Americans who split about equally between Democrats and Republicans.[32]
General Social Surveys of more than 11,000 Democrats and Republicans conducted between 1996 and 2006 came to the result that the differences in fertility rates are not statistically significant between these parties, with the average Democrat having 1.94 children and the average Republican having 1.91 children.[335] However, there is a significant difference in fertility rates between the two related groups, liberals and conservatives, with liberals reproducing at a much lower rate than conservatives.[335]
LGBT Americans
 Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg
According to exit polling, LGBT Americans typically vote Democratic in national elections within the 70 80% range. In heavily gay precincts in large cities across the nation, the average was higher, ranging from 85% to 94%. This trend has continued since 1996 when Bill Clinton won 71% of the LGBT vote compared to Bob Dole's 16%. In 2000 Al Gore won 70% to George W. Bush's 25%; in 2004 John Kerry won 77% to George W. Bush's 23%; in 2008 Barack Obama won 70% to John McCain's 27%;[336] in 2012 Barack Obama won 76% to Mitt Romney's 22%;[337] in 2016 Hillary Clinton won 78% to Donald Trump's 14%; and in 2020 Joe Biden won 73% to Donald Trump's 25%.[338] Patrick Egan, a professor at New York University specializing in LGBT voting patterns, calls this a "remarkable continuity", saying that "about three-fourths vote Democratic and one-fourth Republican from year to year".[336]
Notable LGBT Democrats include Senator Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, Representative Becca Balint of Vermont, Representative David Cicilline of Rhode Island, Governor Tina Kotek of Oregon, and Governor Jared Polis of Colorado. The late activist and San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk was a Democrat, as is former Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts. As of the 118th Congress, there are 10 Democrats in the House and 2 members of the Senate Democratic Caucus[e] who identify as LGBT.
The Stonewall Democrats is an LGBT advocacy group associated with the Democratic Party. The Congressional Equality Caucus is a congressional caucus of 192 Democrats (as of 2023) that advocates for LGBT rights within the House of Representatives.
By winning the 2020 Iowa Democratic presidential caucuses, former Mayor of South Bend, Indiana, Pete Buttigieg became the first openly gay candidate to win a presidential primary or caucus. In December 2020, Buttigieg was selected to serve as United States Secretary of Transportation, and he became the first openly gay cabinet secretary to be confirmed by the U.S. Senate in February 2021.[339][340]
African Americans
 Vice President Kamala Harris
From the end of the Civil War to the early 20th century, African Americans primarily favored the Republican Party due to its role in achieving the abolition of slavery, particularly through President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation.[341] The South had long been a Democratic stronghold, favoring a state's right to legal slavery. In addition, the ranks of the fledgling Ku Klux Klan were composed almost entirely of white Democrats who were angry over the treatment they had received at the hands of Northerners and who were also bent on reversing the policies of Reconstruction.[342]
African Americans began drifting to the Democratic Party when Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president.[341] Support for the civil rights movement in the 1960s by Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson helped give the Democrats even greater support in the African American community, which has consistently voted between 85% and 95% Democratic from the 1960s to the present day, making African Americans one of the biggest support groups in any US party.[341]
Prominent modern-day African American Democratic politicians include Jim Clyburn, Maxine Waters, Barbara Lee, Raphael Warnock, John Conyers, Karen Bass, Ayanna Pressley, Ilhan Omar, Senator Cory Booker, Vice President Kamala Harris, and former President Barack Obama, who managed to win over 95% of the African-American vote in the 2008 election.[343] Despite not having a partisan affiliation, the NAACP often participates in organizing voter turnout drives and advocates for progressive causes, especially, those that affect people of color.[344]
Within the 118th United States Congress, the Congressional Black Caucus, consisting of 56 Black Democrats, serves to represent the interests of African Americans and advocate on issues that affect them.[345]
Hispanic and Latino Americans
 Juli n Castro served as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
The Latino population, particularly the large Mexican American population in the Southwest and the large Puerto Rican and Dominican populations in the Northeast, have been strong supporters of the Democratic Party. In the 1996 presidential election, Democratic President Bill Clinton received 72% of the Latino vote.[346] In following years, the Republican Party gained increasing support from the Latino community, especially among Latino Protestants and Pentecostals. With his much more liberal views on immigration, President Bush was the first Republican president to gain 40% of the Latino vote in the 2004 presidential election. But the Republican Party's support among Hispanics eroded in the 2006 midterm elections, dropping from 44% to 30%, with the Democrats gaining in the Latino vote from 55% in 2004 to 69% in 2006.[138][139] Democrats increased their share of the Latino vote in the 2008 presidential election, with Barack Obama receiving 67%. According to exit polls by Edison Research, Obama increased his support again in 2012, winning 71% of Latino voters.[347]
Cuban Americans still tend to vote Republican, though there was a notable change during the 2008 elections. During the 2008 elections, Barack Obama received 47% of the Cuban American vote in Florida.[348] According to Bendixen's exit polls, 84% of Miami-Dade Cuban American voters 65 or older backed McCain, while 55% of those 29 or younger backed Obama,[349] showing that the younger Cuban American generation has become more liberal.
Unaffiliated Latino advocacy groups that often support progressive candidates and causes include the National Council of La Raza and the League of United Latin American Citizens. In the House of Representatives, the Democratic caucus of Latino Americans is the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.
In the 2018 elections, 69% of Hispanic and Latino Americans voted for Democratic House candidates. In the 2020 presidential election, Joe Biden received 65% of the Hispanic and Latino vote. However, in the 2022 elections, only 60% of Hispanic and Latino Americans voted for Democratic House candidates.[159][350][351] Since the 2020s, the party's advantage among Hispanic voters has declined.[59][314][315][352][317]
Asian Americans
 U.S. Senator Tammy Duckworth
The Democratic Party has majority support from the Asian American population. Asian Americans had been a stronghold of the Republican Party up to and including the 1992 presidential election, in which George H. W. Bush won 55% of the Asian-American vote. Originally, the vast majority of Asian Americans were strongly anti-communist Vietnamese refugees, Chinese Americans, Taiwanese Americans, Korean Americans, and Filipino Americans, and the Republican Party's positions resonated with this demographic.
The Democratic Party made gains among Asian Americans starting in 1996 and in 2006 won 62% of the Asian American vote. Exit polls after the 2008 presidential election indicated that Democratic candidate, Barack Obama, won 62% of the Asian American vote.[353] In the 2012 presidential election, 73% of the Asian American electorate voted for Obama's re-election.[354] Barack Obama had the support of 85% of Indian Americans, 68% of Chinese Americans, and 57% of Filipino Americans.[355] The Asian American community's increasing number of young voters has also helped to erode traditionally reliably Republican voting blocs such as Vietnamese and Filipino Americans, leading to an increase in support for Democrats.
Prominent past and present Asian American Democrats include Vice President Kamala Harris, U.S. Senators Tammy Duckworth, Daniel Inouye, Daniel Akaka, and Mazie Hirono, former Governor and Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke, and U.S. Representatives Mike Honda, Judy Chu, Doris Matsui, Ro Khanna, Pramila Jayapal, Norman Mineta, and Dalip Singh Saund. Saund was the first Asian American U.S. Representative.
In the 2018 midterm elections, 77% of Asian Americans voted for the Democratic candidates.[159]  However, in the 2022 midterm elections, only 58% of Asian Americans voted for Democratic candidates.[356] Since 2012, Democrats have lost support from Asian Americans, with Hillary Clinton and Joe Biden receiving 65% and 63% of the Asian American vote in 2016 and 2020, respectively.[60][357][62][358][359]
Native Americans
 Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland
The Democratic Party also has strong support among the Native American population, particularly in Arizona, New Mexico, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Washington, Alaska, Idaho, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oklahoma,[360] and North Carolina. Although now a small percentage of the population (virtually non-existent in some regions), most Native American precincts tend to vote for Democratic candidates.[361]
Modern-day Democratic Native American politicians include former Congressman Brad Carson of Oklahoma as well as Principal Chief Bill John Baker of the Cherokee Nation, Governor Bill Anoatubby of the Chickasaw Nation, and Chief Gary Batton of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma.
In 2018, Democrats Deb Haaland of New Mexico and Sharice Davids of Kansas became the first Native American women to be elected to Congress.[362] Democrat Peggy Flanagan was also elected in 2018 and currently serves as Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota. Flanagan is the second Native American woman to be elected to statewide executive office in U.S. history and the highest-ranking Native woman to be elected to executive office.[363]
In December 2020, Joe Biden chose Deb Haaland to serve as United States Secretary of the Interior; she became the first Native American Cabinet secretary in March 2021.
Catholics and Mainline Protestants
See also: Christianity in the United States and Catholic Church and politics in the United States
 House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries is a Baptist.
Black churches, mainline Protestants, evangelicals, and Catholics contributed to Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal coalition.[364] During the New Deal era, President Roosevelt appealed to notions of Christian charity.[365] In explaining his philosophy, he said: "I am a Christian and a Democrat".[365]
Catholic Americans were once a stronghold for the Democratic Party, but in recent years they have become more divided between the two major parties. Both Catholics elected to be president, John F. Kennedy and Joe Biden, have been Democrats.[366] The most recent Democratic Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, is also Catholic and was the first female Speaker.[367] A slight majority of Catholics voted in favor of Joe Biden over Donald Trump in the 2020 presidential election, whereas a large majority of Protestants and other Christians (including over three-quarters of White evangelical or born-again Christians) voted in favor of Trump over Biden.[368][369] However, all six Republican-appointed Supreme Court Justices except possibly Neil Gorsuch are Catholics,[370] while of the 3 Democratic-appointees only Justice Sonia Sotomayor identifies as Catholic.[371]
During the 2020 primaries, Christians were more likely to support Joe Biden than Bernie Sanders, who was favored among religiously unaffiliated Democrats.[372] As of 2021[update], every Democratic president, Democratic vice president, and Democratic presidential nominee has been a Christian. According to the Pew Research Center, 78.4% of Democrats in the 116th United States Congress were Christian.[373]  1,600 faith leaders (mostly mainline Protestants, evangelicals, and Catholics) supported Joe Biden's 2020 presidential bid.[374] Robb Ryerse, political director at Vote Common Good, a religiously motivated anti-Trump organization, estimated that there were roughly a dozen evangelical Christians running for political office as Democrats in 2020, as opposed to two or three in 2018.[375]
Religious minorities
The Democratic Party receives majority support from most religious minorities, including nonreligious Americans. In the 2020 presidential election, voters who practiced a religion other than Christianity or Judaism accounted for 8% of the electorate and voted for Biden by a 69 29% margin.[376][377]
One notable exception is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, whose members mainly live in Utah and some neighboring states and primarily vote for Republican Party candidates.[378]
Secular Americans
See also: Irreligion in the United States
The Democratic Party receives support from secular organizations such as the Secular Coalition for America[379] and many agnostic and atheist Americans. Exit polls from the 2008 election showed that voters with a religious affiliation of "none" accounted for the 12% of the electorate and voted for Democratic candidate Barack Obama by a 75 25% margin.[380] In his first inaugural address, Obama acknowledged atheists by saying that the United States is not just "Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus but non-believers as well".[381] In the 2012 election cycle, Democratic president Barack Obama, who was running for re-election, had moderate to high ratings with the Secular Coalition for America while the majority of the Republican candidates had ratings in the low-to-failing range.[382]
In the 2020 United States presidential election, exit polls show that voters with no religious affiliation accounted for 22% of the electorate and voted for Biden by a 65 31% margin.[383]
Jewish Americans
See also: National Jewish Democratic Council
 Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer
Jewish American communities tend to be a stronghold for the Democratic Party. Al Gore received 79% of the Jewish votes in 2000, and Barack Obama won about 77% of the Jewish vote in 2008.[384] In the 2018 House of Representatives elections, 79% of Jewish Americans voted for the Democratic candidate.[159]
Jewish Americans as an important Democratic constituency are especially politically active and influential in large cities such as New York City, Los Angeles, Boston, and Chicago and play critical roles in large cities within presidential swing states, such as Philadelphia, Miami, and Las Vegas. Many prominent national Democrats in recent decades have been Jewish, including Chuck Schumer, Carl Levin, Abraham Ribicoff, Ben Cardin, Henry Waxman, Joseph Lieberman, Bernie Sanders, Dianne Feinstein, Barney Frank, Barbara Boxer, Paul Wellstone, Rahm Emanuel, Russ Feingold, Herb Kohl, and Howard Metzenbaum.[385]
Arab and Muslim Americans
Arab Americans and Muslim Americans have leaned Democratic since the 2003 invasion of Iraq.[386] Zogby found in June 2007 that 39% of Arab Americans identify as Democrats, 26% as Republicans, and 28% as independents.[386] Arab Americans, who are in general socially conservative but have more diverse economic views, historically voted Republican until recent years, having supported Republican presidential candidate George W. Bush over Democrat Al Gore in 2000.[387] A 2012 poll found that 68% of Muslim Americans surveyed supported Democratic president Barack Obama.[388] A 2017 Pew Research Center report found that a majority (66%) of American Muslims identify with or lean toward the Democratic Party, receiving consistent support from 63% in 2007 to 70% in 2011.[389]
The first Arab American in the U.S. House of Representatives, Californian George A. Kasem, and the first Arab American in the U.S. Senate, South Dakotan James Abourezk, were both Democrats.[390]
Democratic presidents
See also: List of presidents of the United States and Republican Party (United States)  Republican presidents
As of 2021[update], there have been a total of 16 Democratic Party presidents.
#
Name
Portrait
State
Presidencystart date
Presidencyend date
Time in office
7
Andrew Jackson (1767 1845)
Tennessee
March 4, 1829
March 4, 1837
8 years, 0 days
8
Martin Van Buren (1782 1862)
New York
March 4, 1837
March 4, 1841
4 years, 0 days
11
James K. Polk (1795 1849)
Tennessee
March 4, 1845
March 4, 1849
4 years, 0 days
14
Franklin Pierce (1804 1869)
New Hampshire
March 4, 1853
March 4, 1857
4 years, 0 days
15
James Buchanan (1791 1868)
Pennsylvania
March 4, 1857
March 4, 1861
4 years, 0 days
17
Andrew Johnson (1808 1875)
Tennessee
April 15, 1865[f]
March 4, 1869
3 years, 323 days
22
Grover Cleveland (1837 1908)
New York
March 4, 1885
March 4, 1889
8 years, 0 days
24
March 4, 1893
March 4, 1897
28
Woodrow Wilson (1856 1924)
New Jersey
March 4, 1913
March 4, 1921
8 years, 0 days
32
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882 1945)
New York
March 4, 1933
April 12, 1945[g]
12 years, 39 days
33
Harry S. Truman (1884 1972)
Missouri
April 12, 1945
January 20, 1953
7 years, 283 days
35
John F. Kennedy (1917 1963)
Massachusetts
January 20, 1961
November 22, 1963[g]
2 years, 306 days
36
Lyndon B. Johnson (1908 1973)
Texas
November 22, 1963
January 20, 1969
5 years, 59 days
39
Jimmy Carter (born 1924)
Georgia
January 20, 1977
January 20, 1981
4 years, 0 days
42
Bill Clinton (born 1946)
Arkansas
January 20, 1993
January 20, 2001
8 years, 0 days
44
Barack Obama (born 1961)
Illinois
January 20, 2009
January 20, 2017
8 years, 0 days
46
Joe Biden (born 1942)
Delaware
January 20, 2021
Incumbent
2 years, 84 days
Current Supreme Court justices appointed by Democratic presidents
As of July 2022[update], three of the nine seats on the Supreme Court of the United States are filled by Justices appointed by Democratic Presidents Barack Obama and Joe Biden.
Portrait
Justice
Senate Vote
Since
President
Sonia Sotomayor
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States
68 31
August 8, 2009
Barack Obama
Elena Kagan
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States
63 37
August 7, 2010
Ketanji Brown Jackson
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States
53 47
June 30, 2022
Joe Biden
Recent electoral history
In congressional elections: 1950 present
See also: Party divisions of United States Congresses
House of Representatives
President
Senate
Election
year
No. of
seats won
+/ 
No. of
seats won
+/ 
Election
year
1950
235 / 435
 28
Harry S. Truman
49 / 96
 5
1950
1952
213 / 435
 22
Dwight D. Eisenhower
47 / 96
 2
1952
1954
232 / 435
 19
49 / 96
 2
1954
1956
234 / 435
 2
49 / 96
 0
1956
1958
283 / 437
 49
64 / 98
 15
1958
1960
262 / 437
 21
John F. Kennedy
64 / 100
 1
1960
1962
258 / 435
 4
66 / 100
 3
1962
1964
295 / 435
 37
Lyndon B. Johnson
68 / 100
 2
1964
1966
248 / 435
 47
64 / 100
 3
1966
1968
243 / 435
 5
Richard Nixon
57 / 100
 5
1968
1970
255 / 435
 12
54 / 100
 3
1970
1972
242 / 435
 13
56 / 100
 2
1972
1974
291 / 435
 49
Gerald Ford
60 / 100
 4
1974
1976
292 / 435
 1
Jimmy Carter
61 / 100
 0
1976
1978
277 / 435
 15
58 / 100
 3
1978
1980
243 / 435
 34
Ronald Reagan
46 / 100
 12
1980
1982
269 / 435
 26
46 / 100
 1
1982
1984
253 / 435
 16
47 / 100
 2
1984
1986
258 / 435
 5
55 / 100
 8
1986
1988
260 / 435
 2
George H. W. Bush
55 / 100
 1
1988
1990
267 / 435
 7
56 / 100
 1
1990
1992
258 / 435
 9
Bill Clinton
57 / 100
 1
1992
1994
204 / 435
 54
47 / 100
 10
1994
1996
206 / 435
 2
45 / 100
 2
1996
1998
211 / 435
 5
45 / 100
 0
1998
2000
212 / 435
 1
George W. Bush
50 / 100
 5
2000[h]
2002
204 / 435
 7
49 / 100
 2
2002
2004
202 / 435
 2
45 / 100
 4
2004
2006
233 / 435
 31
51 / 100
 6[i]
2006
2008
257 / 435
 21
Barack Obama
59 / 100
 8[i]
2008
2010
193 / 435
 63
53 / 100
 6[i]
2010
2012
201 / 435
 8
55 / 100
 2[i]
2012
2014
188 / 435
 13
46 / 100
 9[i]
2014
2016
194 / 435
 6
Donald Trump
48 / 100
 2[i]
2016
2018
235 / 435
 41
47 / 100
 1[i]
2018
2020
222 / 435
 13
Joe Biden
50 / 100
 3[i]
2020[j]
2022
213 / 435
 9
51 / 100
 1[i]
2022
In presidential elections: 1828 present
See also: List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets
Electionyear
Presidential ticket
Votes
Vote %
Electoral votes
+/ 
Result
1828
Andrew Jackson/John C. Calhoun
642,553
56.0
178 / 261
178
Won
1832
Andrew Jackson/Martin Van Buren
701,780
54.2
219 / 286
41
Won
1836
Martin Van Buren/Richard Mentor Johnson
764,176
50.8
170 / 294
49
Won
1840
Martin Van Buren/None[k]
1,128,854
46.8
60 / 294
110
Lost
1844
James K. Polk/George M. Dallas
1,339,494
49.5
170 / 275
110
Won
1848
Lewis Cass/William O. Butler
1,223,460
42.5
127 / 290
43
Lost
1852
Franklin Pierce/William R. King
1,607,510
50.8
254 / 296
127
Won
1856
James Buchanan/John C. Breckinridge
1,836,072
45.3
174 / 296
80
Won
1860
Stephen A. Douglas/Herschel V. Johnson
1,380,202
29.5
12 / 303
162
Lost
1864
George B. McClellan/George H. Pendleton
1,812,807
45.0
21 / 233
9
Lost
1868
Horatio Seymour/Francis Preston Blair Jr.
2,706,829
47.3
80 / 294
59
Lost
1872
Horace Greeley/Benjamin G. Brown (Liberal Republican)
2,834,761
43.8
69 / 352
11
Lost
1876
Samuel J. Tilden/Thomas A. Hendricks
4,288,546
50.9
184 / 369
115
Lost[A]
1880
Winfield Scott Hancock/William H. English
4,444,260
48.2
155 / 369
29
Lost
1884
Grover Cleveland/Thomas A. Hendricks
4,914,482
48.9
219 / 401
64
Won
1888
Grover Cleveland/Allen G. Thurman
5,534,488
48.6
168 / 401
51
Lost[B]
1892
Grover Cleveland/Adlai Stevenson I
5,556,918
46.0
277 / 444
109
Won
1896
William Jennings Bryan/Arthur Sewall
6,509,052
46.7
176 / 447
101
Lost
1900
William Jennings Bryan/Adlai Stevenson I
6,370,932
45.5
155 / 447
21
Lost
1904
Alton B. Parker/Henry G. Davis
5,083,880
37.6
140 / 476
15
Lost
1908
William Jennings Bryan/John W. Kern
6,408,984
43.0
162 / 483
22
Lost
1912
Woodrow Wilson/Thomas R. Marshall
6,296,284
41.8
435 / 531
273
Won
1916
Woodrow Wilson/Thomas R. Marshall
9,126,868
49.2
277 / 531
158
Won
1920
James M. Cox/Franklin D. Roosevelt
9,139,661
34.2
127 / 531
150
Lost
1924
John W. Davis/Charles W. Bryan
8,386,242
28.8
136 / 531
9
Lost
1928
Al Smith/Joseph T. Robinson
15,015,464
40.8
87 / 531
49
Lost
1932
Franklin D. Roosevelt/John Nance Garner
22,821,277
57.4
472 / 531
385
Won
1936
Franklin D. Roosevelt/John Nance Garner
27,747,636
60.8
523 / 531
51
Won
1940
Franklin D. Roosevelt/Henry A. Wallace
27,313,945
54.7
449 / 531
74
Won
1944
Franklin D. Roosevelt/Harry S. Truman
25,612,916
53.4
432 / 531
17
Won
1948
Harry S. Truman/Alben W. Barkley
24,179,347
49.6
303 / 531
129
Won
1952
Adlai Stevenson II/John Sparkman
27,375,090
44.3
89 / 531
214
Lost
1956
Adlai Stevenson II/Estes Kefauver
26,028,028
42.0
73 / 531
16
Lost
1960
John F. Kennedy/Lyndon B. Johnson
34,220,984
49.7
303 / 537
230
Won
1964
Lyndon B. Johnson/Hubert Humphrey
43,127,041
61.1
486 / 538
183
Won
1968
Hubert Humphrey/Edmund Muskie
31,271,839
42.7
191 / 538
295
Lost
1972
George McGovern/Sargent Shriver
29,173,222
37.5
17 / 538
174
Lost
1976
Jimmy Carter/Walter Mondale
40,831,881
50.1
297 / 538
280
Won
1980
Jimmy Carter/Walter Mondale
35,480,115
41.0
49 / 538
248
Lost
1984
Walter Mondale/Geraldine Ferraro
37,577,352
40.6
13 / 538
36
Lost
1988
Michael Dukakis/Lloyd Bentsen
41,809,074
45.6
111 / 538
98
Lost
1992
Bill Clinton/Al Gore
44,909,806
43.0
370 / 538
259
Won
1996
Bill Clinton/Al Gore
47,401,185
49.2
379 / 538
9
Won
2000
Al Gore/Joe Lieberman
50,999,897
48.4
266 / 538
113
Lost[C]
2004
John Kerry/John Edwards
59,028,444
48.3
251 / 538
15
Lost
2008
Barack Obama/Joe Biden
69,498,516
52.9
365 / 538
114
Won
2012
Barack Obama/Joe Biden
65,915,795
51.1
332 / 538
33
Won
2016
Hillary Clinton/Tim Kaine
65,853,514
48.2
227 / 538
105
Lost[D]
2020
Joe Biden/Kamala Harris
81,268,924
51.3
306 / 538
79
Won
See also
Liberalism portalPolitics portalUnited States portal
Democratic Party (United States) organizations
List of political parties in the United States
List of United States Democratic Party presidential candidates
List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets
Political party strength in U.S. states
Politics of the United States
Notes
^ There are 48 senators who are members of the party; however, three independent senators, Angus King, Bernie Sanders, and Kyrsten Sinema, caucus with the Democrats, effectively giving the Democrats a 51 49 majority.
^ The mayor of the District of Columbia is also a member of the Democratic party, but is not counted as a State governor.
^ Grover Cleveland in 1884 and 1892
^ Senator Kyrsten Sinema is an Independent as of 2023 but caucuses with the Democrats, while 15 female United States Senators both identify as Democrats and are members of the Senate Democratic Caucus.
^ The two Senators are Tammy Baldwin and Kyrsten Sinema. Sinema is a former Democrat who currently identifies as an Independent but is still a member of the Senate Democratic Caucus.
^ Elected as Vice President with the National Union Party ticket in the 1864 presidential election. Ascended to the presidency after the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln in 1865. Rejoined the Democratic Party in 1868.
^ a b Died in office.
^ Republican Vice President Dick Cheney provided a tie-breaking vote, giving Republicans a majority until June 6, 2001, when Jim Jeffords left Republicans to join the Democratic Caucus.
^ a b c d e f g h i Includes Independents caucusing with the Democrats.
^ Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris provided a tie-breaking vote, giving Democrats a majority throughout the 117th Congress.
^ While there was no official Democratic nominee, the majority of the Democratic electors still cast their electoral votes for incumbent Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson.
^ Although Tilden won a majority of the popular vote, Republican Rutherford B. Hayes won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
^ Although Cleveland won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican Benjamin Harrison won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
^ Although Gore won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican George W. Bush won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
^ Although Clinton won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican Donald Trump won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.
References
^ "About the Democratic Party". Democratic Party. Retrieved April 15, 2022. For 171 years, [the Democratic National Committee] has been responsible for governing the Democratic Party
^ Democratic Party (March 12, 2022). "The Charter & The Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States" (PDF). p. 3. Retrieved April 15, 2022. The Democratic National Committee shall have general responsibility for the affairs of the Democratic Party between National Conventions
^ Cole, Donald B. (1970). Jacksonian Democracy in New Hampshire, 1800 1851. Harvard University Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-67-428368-8.
^ "Stonewall Democratic Club". Stonewall Democratic Club. Retrieved February 27, 2023.
^ Winger, Richard. "December 2022 Ballot Access News Print Edition". Ballot Access News. Retrieved December 31, 2022.
^ a b c d Arnold, N. Scott (2009). Imposing values: an essay on liberalism and regulation. Oxford University Press. p. 3. ISBN 9780495501121. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Modern liberalism occupies the left-of-center in the traditional political spectrum and is represented by the Democratic Party in the United States.
^ "President Obama, the Democratic Party, and Socialism: A Political Science Perspective". The Huffington Post. June 29, 2012. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2015.
^ Hale, John (1995). The Making of the New Democrats. New York: Political Science Quarterly. p. 229.
^ Dewan, Shaila; Kornblut, Anne E. (October 30, 2006). "In Key House Races, Democrats Run to the Right". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ Stein, Letita; Cornwell, Susan; Tanfani, Joseph (August 23, 2018). "Inside the progressive movement roiling the Democratic Party". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022.
^ a b Ball, Molly. "The Battle Within the Democratic Party". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved January 28, 2017.Chotiner, Isaac (March 2, 2020). "How Socialist Is Bernie Sanders?". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 14, 2021.Bacon, Perry Jr. (March 11, 2019). "The Six Wings Of The Democratic Party". FiveThirtyEight.
^ Blake, Aaron (August 1, 2013). ""Libertarian Democrats: A movement in search of a leader"". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 9, 2023.
^ a b M. Philip Lucas,  "Martin Van Buren as Party Leader and at Andrew Jackson's Right Hand." in A Companion to the Antebellum Presidents 1837 1861 (2014): 107 129.
^ a b "The Democratic Party, founded in 1828, is the world's oldest political party" states Janda, Kenneth; Berry, Jeffrey M.; Goldman, Jerry (2010). The Challenge of Democracy: American Government in Global Politics. Cengage Learning. p. 276. ISBN 9780495906186.
^ a b c Michael Kazin, What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party (2022) pp 5, 12.
^ Adams, Ian (2001). Political Ideology Today (reprinted, revised ed.). Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 32 33. ISBN 9780719060205. Ideologically, all US parties are liberal and always have been. Essentially they espouse classical liberalism, that is a form of democratised Whig constitutionalism plus the free market. The point of difference comes with the influence of social liberalism" and the proper role of government... ...the American right has nothing to do with maintaining the traditional social order, as in Europe. What it believes in is... individualism... The American right has tended towards... classical liberalism...
^ Herndon, Astead W. (February 21, 2021). "Democrats' Big Tent Helped Them Win. Now It Threatens Biden's Agenda". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
^ Knoll, Benjamin (June 29, 2012). "President Obama, the Democratic Party, and Socialism: A Political Science Perspective". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2015.
^ Linskey, Annie; McGoogan, Cara; Itkowitz, Colby (November 6, 2022). "Democrats look to centrists in final hours while GOP amps up its base". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved February 27, 2023.
^ Cronin, James; Ross, George; Shoch, James (2011). What's Left of the Left: Democrats and Social Democrats in Challenging Times. Duke University Press. p. 75. ISBN 978-0822350798.
^ "Major American Political Parties of the 19th Century". Norwich University Online. October 2, 2017. Retrieved July 4, 2022. ...The Democratic-Republican and Whig parties are considered the predecessors of today's Democratic and Republican parties, respectively.
^ a b The party has claimed a founding date of 1792 as noted in S.2047 which passed in the United States Senate in 1991. 102nd Congress (1991), S.2047   A bill to establish a commission to commemorate the bicentennial of the establishment of the Democratic Party of the United States.  [I]n 1992, the Democratic Party of the United States will celebrate the 200th anniversary of its establishment on May 13, 1792. 
^ a b Holt, Michael F. (1992). Political Parties and American Political Development: From the Age of Jackson to the Age of Lincoln. Louisiana State University Press. pp. 27 28. ISBN 978-0807126097.
^ a b Bates, Christopher (2015). The Early Republic and Antebellum America: An Encyclopedia of Social, Political, Cultural, and Economic History. Taylor & Francis. p. 293. ISBN 9781317457404. The expansion engineered by Polk rendered the Democratic Party increasingly beholden to Southern slave interests, which dominated the party from 1848 to the Civil War.
^ a b c d e f Staff. "Jacksonian Democracy: The Democratization of Politics". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved October 6, 2022. By the 1840s, Whig and Democratic congressmen voted as rival blocs. Whigs supported and Democrats opposed a weak executive, a new Bank of the United States, a high tariff, distribution of land revenues to the states, relief legislation to mitigate the effects of the depression, and federal reapportionment of House seats. Whigs voted against and Democrats approved an independent treasury, an aggressive foreign policy, and expansionism. These were important issues, capable of dividing the electorate just as they divided the major parties in Congress.
^ Geer, John G. (1992). "New Deal Issues and the American Electorate, 1952-1988". Political Behavior. 14 (1): 45 65. doi:10.1007/BF00993508. ISSN 0190-9320. JSTOR 586295. S2CID 144817362.
^ Grigsby, Ellen (2008). Analyzing Politics: An Introduction to Political Science. Cengage Learning. pp. 106 107. ISBN 9780495501121. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. In the United States, the Democratic Party represents itself as the liberal alternative to the Republicans, but its liberalism is for the most part the later version of liberalism modern liberalism.
^ Prendergast, William B. (1999). The Catholic Voter in American Politics: The Passing of the Democratic Monolith. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University. ISBN 978-0-87840-724-8.
^ Marlin, George J. (2004). The American Catholic Voter: 200 Years of Political Impact. South Bend, Indiana: St. Augustine. ISBN 978-1-58731-029-4. Retrieved April 28, 2020.
^ Michael Corbett et al. Politics and Religion in the United States (2nd ed. 2013).
^ Zelizer, Julian E. (February 15, 2015). "How Medicare Was Made". The New Yorker. Retrieved August 23, 2022.
^ a b "Women More Likely to Be Democrats, Regardless of Age". Gallup.com. June 12, 2009. Archived from the original on June 14, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ a b Kullgren, Ian (November 10, 2020). "Union Workers Weren't a Lock for Biden. Here's Why That Matters". Bloomberg Law. Retrieved November 3, 2022.
^ Frank, Thomas (2016). Listen, liberal, or, What ever happened to the party of the people? (First ed.). New York. ISBN 978-1-62779-539-5. OCLC 908628802.
^ a b Hale, Jon F. (1995). "The Making of the New Democrats". Political Science Quarterly. 110 (2): 207 232. doi:10.2307/2152360. ISSN 0032-3195. JSTOR 2152360.
^ a b Wills, Garry (January 19, 1997). "The Clinton Principle". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 24, 2022.
^ Edsall, Thomas B. (June 28, 1998). "Clinton and Blair envision a 'Third Way' international movement". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 1, 2022.
^ a b c Traister, Rebecca (March 27, 2023). "Abortion Wins Elections". The Cut. Retrieved April 7, 2023.
^ a b c Larry E. Sullivan. The SAGE glossary of the social and behavioral sciences (2009). p. 291: "This liberalism favors a generous welfare state and a greater measure of social and economic equality. Liberty thus exists when all citizens have access to basic necessities such as education, healthcare, and economic opportunities."
^ Gurley, Gabrielle (November 23, 2020). "Biden at the Cannabis Crossroads". The American Prospect. Retrieved August 24, 2022.
^ "Preventing Gun Violence". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on November 4, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2019.
^ "Protecting Communities And Building Trust By Reforming Our Criminal Justice System". Democratic Party. Retrieved November 30, 2021.
^ Chammah, Maurice (July 18, 2016). "Two Parties, Two Platforms on Criminal Justice". The Marshall Project. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2019.
^ Miranda Ollstein, Alice (August 12, 2022). "A bittersweet health care win for Democrats". POLITICO. Retrieved April 7, 2023.
^ Goodnough, Abby; Kaplan, Thomas (June 28, 2019). "Democrat vs. Democrat: How Health Care Is Dividing the Party". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2020.
^ Levy, Jonah (2006). The State after Statism: New State Activities in the Age of Liberalization. Harvard University Press. p. 198. ISBN 9780495501121. In the corporate governance area, the center-left repositioned itself to press for reform. The Democratic Party in the United States used the postbubble scandals and the collapse of share prices to attack the Republican Party ... Corporate governance reform fit surprisingly well within the contours of the center-left ideology. The Democratic Party and the SPD have both been committed to the development of the regulatory state as a counterweight to managerial authority, corporate power, and market failure.
^ U.S. Department of State. "A Mixed Economy: The Role of the Market". About.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017.
^ a b Zengerle, Jason; Metz, Justin (June 29, 2022). "The Vanishing Moderate Democrat". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Over the last decade, the Democratic Party has moved significantly to the left on almost every salient political issue ... on social, cultural and religious issues, particularly those related to criminal justice, race, abortion and gender identity, the Democrats have taken up ideological stances that many of the college-educated voters who now make up a sizable portion of the party's base cheer ... .
^ Peters, Margaret (2017). Trading Barriers. Princeton University Press. pp. 154 155. ISBN 978-0691174471. Archived from the original on March 3, 2018.
^ a b Williams, Daniel K. (June 2015). "The Partisan Trajectory of the American Pro-Life Movement: How a Liberal Catholic Campaign Became a Conservative Evangelical Cause". Religions. 6 (2): 451 475. doi:10.3390/rel6020451. ISSN 2077-1444.
^ a b Williams, Daniel K. (May 9, 2022). "This Really Is a Different Pro-Life Movement". The Atlantic. Retrieved February 2, 2023. This was not merely a geographic shift, trading one region for another, but a more fundamental transformation of the anti-abortion movement's political ideology. In 1973 many of the most vocal opponents of abortion were northern Democrats who believed in an expanded social-welfare state and who wanted to reduce abortion rates through prenatal insurance and federally funded day care. In 2022, most anti-abortion politicians are conservative Republicans who are skeptical of such measures. What happened was a seismic religious and political shift in opposition to abortion that has not occurred in any other Western country.
^ Igielnik, Ruth. "Men and women in the U.S. continue to differ in voter turnout rate, party identification". Pew Research Center. Retrieved August 18, 2022.
^ "Lesbian, gay and bisexual voters remain a solidly Democratic bloc". Pew Research Center. Retrieved October 25, 2022.
^ Goldberg, Zach (January 31, 2023). "The Rise of College-Educated Democrats". Manhattan Institute. Retrieved February 8, 2023.
^ a b Munis, Kal; Jacobs, Nicholas (October 20, 2022). "Why Resentful Rural Americans Vote Republican". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 21, 2022. ...that the disproportionately White, older, more religious, less affluent and less highly educated voters who live in rural areas are more likely to hold socially conservative views generally championed by Republicans. Meanwhile, urban areas are filled with younger, more racially diverse, more highly educated and more affluent people who hold the more socially liberal views generally championed by Democrats.
^ Edsall, Thomas (February 1, 2023). "How Much Longer Can 'Vote Blue No Matter Who!' Last?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 8, 2023.
^ a b c d Levitz, Eric (October 19, 2022). "How the Diploma Divide Is Remaking American Politics". New York. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Blue America is an increasingly wealthy and well-educated place. Throughout the second half of the 20th century, Americans without college degrees were more likely than university graduates to vote Democratic. But that gap began narrowing in the late 1960s before finally flipping in 2004... A more educated Democratic coalition is, naturally, a more affluent one... In every presidential election from 1948 to 2012, white voters in the top 5 percent of America's income distribution were more Republican than those in the bottom 95 percent. Now, the opposite is true: Among America's white majority, the rich voted to the left of the middle class and the poor in 2016 and 2020, while the poor voted to the right of the middle class and the rich.
^ a b Teixeira, Ruy (November 6, 2022). "Democrats' Long Goodbye to the Working Class". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 8, 2022. As we move into the endgame of the 2022 election, the Democrats face a familiar problem. America's historical party of the working class keeps losing working-class support. And not just among white voters. Not only has the emerging Democratic majority I once predicted failed to materialize, but many of the nonwhite voters who were supposed to deliver it are instead voting for Republicans... From 2012 to 2020, the Democrats not only saw their support among white working-class voters   those without college degrees   crater, they also saw their advantage among nonwhite working-class voters fall by 18 points. And between 2016 and 2020 alone, the Democratic advantage among Hispanic voters declined by 16 points, overwhelmingly driven by the defection of working-class voters. In contrast, Democrats' advantage among white college-educated voters improved by 16 points from 2012 to 2020, an edge that delivered Joe Biden the White House.
^ a b c Alberta, Tim (November 3, 2022). "Why Democrats Are Losing Hispanic Voters". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Indeed, this is what makes the implications of a Hispanic partisan realignment so profound: At a moment when Democrats have begun to dominate the affluent, college-educated vote that for decades formed the cornerstone of the Republican coalition, perhaps the only thing that can keep the GOP competitive is an infusion of support from the very middle- and working-class Hispanics who were, at this moment in history, supposed to deliver the Democrats a foolproof majority.
^ a b Leonhardt, David (March 6, 2023). "Asian Americans, Shifting Right". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2023.
^ Kao, Jason (March 6, 2023). "Where New York's Asian Neighborhoods Shifted to the Right". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2023.
^ a b Poonia, Gitanjali (March 7, 2023). "Democrats are losing the Asian American vote. Will Republicans be able to capitalize?". Deseret News. Retrieved March 8, 2023.
^ a b c d e Zacher, Sam (February 8, 2023). "Polarization of the Rich: The New Democratic Allegiance of Affluent Americans and the Politics of Redistribution". Perspectives on Politics: 1 19. doi:10.1017/S1537592722003310. ISSN 1537-5927. S2CID 256719240. Affluent Americans used to vote for Republican politicians. Now they vote for Democrats... Beginning in the 1990s, the Democratic Party started winning increasing shares of rich, upper-middle income, high-income occupation, and stock-owning voters. This appears true across voters of all races and ethnicities, is concentrated among (but not exclusive to) college-educated voters... In the 2010s, Democratic candidates' electoral appeal among affluent voters reached above-majority levels. I echo other scholars in maintaining that this trend is partially driven by the increasingly "culturally liberal" views of educated voters and party elite polarization on those issues
^ Larson, Edward (2007). A Magnificent Catastrophe: The Tumultuous Election of 1800, America's First Presidential Campaign. Free Press. p. 21. ISBN 9780743293167. The divisions between Adams and Jefferson were exasperated by the more extreme views expressed by some of their partisans, particularly the High Federalists led by Hamilton on what was becoming known as the political right, and the democratic wing of the Republican Party on the left, associated with New York Governor George Clinton and Pennsylvania legislator Albert Gallatin, among others.
^ Ericson, David F. (1964). "The Evolution of the Democratic Party". The American Historical Review. 70 (1): 22 43.
^ Banning, Lance (1978). The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology. Cornell University Press. p. 208.
^ Arthur Paulson, Realignment and Party Revival: Understanding American Electoral Politics at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century (2000) pp. 46 72.
^ Berman, Jay (2012). The Democratic Party: Evolution and America's Longing for a Lasting Majority. Taylor & Francis. p. 8.
^ James Roger Sharp, American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis (1993).
^ The American Republic Since 1877, Student Edition. McGraw-Hill Education. 2006. p. 193.
^ Banning, Lance (1978). The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology. Cornell University Press. p. 253.
^ Traub, James. "The Ugly Election That Birthed Modern American Politics". National Geographic. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018.
^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (Houghton Mifflin, 2007) p. 287.
^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (2007) pp. 287 288.
^ Galbraith Schlisinger, Of the People: The 200 Year History of the Democratic Party (1992) ch. 1 3.
^ Robert Allen Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (U. of Missouri Press, 1995) ch. 1 4.
^ Jean H. Baker, Affairs of Party: Political Culture of Northern Democrats in the Mid-nineteenth Century (1983)
^ David M. Potter. The Impending Crisis, 1848 1861 (1976). ch. 16.
^ Mark E. Neely. Lincoln and the Democrats: The Politics of Opposition in the Civil War (2017).
^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch. 5 6.
^ Robert W. Cherny, A Righteous Cause: The Life of William Jennings Bryan (1994)
^ H.W. Brands, Woodrow Wilson (2003).
^ Douglas B. Craig, After Wilson: The Struggle for the Democratic Party, 1920 1934 (1993)
^ Ellen Russell (2007). New Deal Banking Reforms and Keynesian Welfare State Capitalism. Routledge. pp. 3 4. ISBN 9781135910655. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020.
^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch. 7.
^ David M. Kennedy, Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929 1945 (2001).
^ Paul Finkelman and Peter Wallenstein, eds. The Encyclopedia Of American Political History (CQ Press, 2001) pp. 124 126.
^ "Race, Campaign Politics, and the Realignment in the South". yalebooks.yale.edu. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2018.
^ Bullock, Charles S.; Hoffman, Donna R.; Gaddie, Ronald Keith (2006). "Regional Variations in the Realignment of American Politics, 1944 2004". Social Science Quarterly. 87 (3): 494 518. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2006.00393.x. ISSN 0038-4941. The events of 1964 laid open the divisions between the South and national Democrats and elicited distinctly different voter behavior in the two regions. The agitation for civil rights by southern blacks continued white violence toward the civil rights movement, and President Lyndon Johnson's aggressive leadership all facilitated passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. ... In the South, 1964 should be associated with GOP growth while in the Northeast this election contributed to the eradication of Republicans.
^ Gaddie, Ronald Keith (February 17, 2012). "Realignment". Oxford Handbooks Online. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195381948.013.0013. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018.
^ Stanley, Harold W. (1988). "Southern Partisan Changes: Dealignment, Realignment or Both?". The Journal of Politics. 50 (1): 64 88. doi:10.2307/2131041. ISSN 0022-3816. JSTOR 2131041. S2CID 154860857. Events surrounding the presidential election of 1964 marked a watershed in terms of the parties and the South (Pomper, 1972). The Solid South was built around the identification of the Democratic party with the cause of white supremacy. Events before 1964 gave white southerners pause about the linkage between the Democratic Party and white supremacy, but the 1964 election, passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 altered in the minds of most the positions of the national parties on racial issues.
^ Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2008). "The Transformation of the Republican and Democratic Party Coalitions in the U.S.". Perspectives on Politics. 6 (3): 433 50. doi:10.1017/S1537592708081218. ISSN 1541-0986. S2CID 145321253. 1964 was the last presidential election in which the Democrats earned more than 50 percent of the white vote in the United States.
^ "The Rise of Southern Republicans   Earl Black, Merle Black". hup.harvard.edu. Harvard University Press. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018. When the Republican party nominated Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater one of the few senators who had opposed the Civil Rights Act as their presidential candidate in 1964, the party attracted many southern whites but permanently alienated African-American voters. Beginning with the Goldwater-versus-Johnson campaign more southern whites voted Republican than Democratic, a pattern that has recurred in every subsequent presidential election. ... Before the 1964 presidential election the Republican party had not carried any Deep South state for eighty-eight years. Yet shortly after Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, hundreds of Deep South counties gave Barry Goldwater landslide majorities.
^ a b c Issue Evolution. Princeton University Press. September 6, 1990. ISBN 9780691023311. Archived from the original on May 16, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018.
^ Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2003). "Activists and Partisan Realignment in the United States". American Political Science Review. 97 (2): 245 60. doi:10.1017/S0003055403000650. ISSN 1537-5943. S2CID 12885628. By 2000, however, the New Deal party alignment no longer captured patterns of partisan voting. In the intervening 40 years, the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts had triggered an increasingly race-driven distinction between the parties. ... Goldwater won the electoral votes of five states of the Deep South in 1964, four of the states that had voted Democratic for 84 years (Califano 1991, 55). He forged a new identification of the Republican party with racial conservatism, reversing a century-long association of the GOP with racial liberalism. This, in turn, opened the door for Nixon's "Southern strategy" and the Reagan victories of the eighties.
^ Valentino, Nicholas A.; Sears, David O. (2005). "Old Times There Are Not Forgotten: Race and Partisan Realignment in the Contemporary South". American Journal of Political Science. 49 (3): 672 88. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5907.2005.00136.x. ISSN 0092-5853.
^ Kuziemko, Ilyana; Washington, Ebonya (2018). "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South? Bringing New Data to an Old Debate". American Economic Review. 108 (10): 2830 2867. doi:10.1257/aer.20161413. ISSN 0002-8282.
^ James T. Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945 1974 (1997).
^ Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945 1974 (1997).
^ Smyth, David J.; Taylor, Susan Washburn (1992). "Why Do the Republicans Win the White House More Often than the Democrats?". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 22 (3): 481 491. ISSN 0360-4918. JSTOR 27550992.
^ Jr, R. W. Apple (July 12, 1992). "Donkey's Years; Is There Room At the Top For Democrats?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 19, 2023.
^ James T. Patterson, Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush v. Gore (2011).
^ a b Geismer, Lily (June 11, 2019). "Democrats and neoliberalism". Vox. Retrieved November 5, 2022. The version of neoliberalism embedded in these policies understood a distinct role for government to stimulate market-oriented solutions to address social ills such as unemployment and poverty. It thereby aimed not to eradicate the welfare state but rather to reformulate it. It extended the importance of poverty alleviation, which had long served as a benchmark of liberal policy, and had many similarities with the basic ideas of the war on poverty.
^ Patterson. Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush v. Gore (2011).
^ Supreme Court of the US (December 12, 2000). "George W. Bush, et al., Petitioners v. Albert Gore, Jr., et al., 531 U.S. 98 (2000)". Cornell Law School. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved June 26, 2010.
^ Lerer, Lisa (December 22, 2010). "No Congress Since 1960s Has Impact on Public as 111th". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved April 20, 2016.
^ York, David Smith Molly Redden in New (April 1, 2016). "Donald Trump's abortion remarks provoke biggest crisis of his campaign". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
^ McCormick, Stephanie Armour and John (March 14, 2020). "Democrats Sharpen Criticism of Trump's Health-Care Policy in Coronavirus Pandemic". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
^ "Trump WHO decision draws criticism from Democrats in US Congress". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
^ Ewing, Philip (February 5, 2020). "'Not Guilty': Trump Acquitted On 2 Articles Of Impeachment As Historic Trial Closes". NPR. Retrieved February 8, 2021.
^ Elwood-Dieu, Kai; Jin; Piper, Jessica (November 13, 2022). "Elections 2022: The educational divide that helps explain the midterms". Politico. Retrieved December 2, 2022.
^ "Biden defeats Trump for White House, says 'time to heal'". AP NEWS. November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020.
^ Martin, Jonathan; Fausset, Richard; Epstein, Reid J. (January 6, 2021). "Georgia Highlights: Democrats Win the Senate as Ossoff Defeats Perdue". The New York Times. Retrieved January 11, 2021.
^ "U.S. House Election Results". The New York Times. November 3, 2020. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 8, 2021.
^ Wells, Joey Garrison and Dylan. "Sen. Kyrsten Sinema backs Inflation Reduction Act, giving Biden the votes for Senate passage". USA TODAY. Retrieved August 24, 2022.
^ "What The Climate Package Means For A Warming Planet : Consider This from NPR". NPR.org. Retrieved August 24, 2022.
^ Tumulty, Karen (November 9, 2022). "The expected red wave looks more like a puddle". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 10, 2022.
^ Blake, Aaron (November 10, 2022). "How bad the 2022 election was for the GOP, historically speaking". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 13, 2022.
^ Kinery, Emma (November 9, 2022). "Midterm results are looking increasingly sunny for Biden as he touts 'strong night' for Democrats". CNBC. Retrieved November 10, 2022.
^ Enten, Harry (November 13, 2022). "How Joe Biden and the Democratic Party defied midterm history". CNN. Retrieved November 28, 2022.
^ Crampton, Liz (November 9, 2022). "Democrats take legislatures in Michigan, Minnesota and eye Pennsylvania". Politico. Retrieved November 10, 2022.
^ Appleby, Joyce (2003). Thomas Jefferson. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-521-64841-7. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020.
^ "Democratic Party". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ see "History of the Democratic Donkey"
^ John William Ward (1962). Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age. Oxford Up. pp. 87 88. ISBN 9780199923205.
^ "Barbour County, West Virginia General Election Ballot" (PDF). November 4, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 24, 2008.
^ Seidman, Steven (June 12, 2010). "The Rooster as the Symbol of the U.S. Democratic Party". Ithaca College. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017.
^ Lopez, Tomas (October 23, 2014). "Poor Ballot Design Hurts New York's Minor Parties ... Again". Brennan Center for Justice. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.
^ Farhi, Paul (November 2, 2004). "Elephants Are Red, Donkeys Are Blue". Washington Post. p. C01. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved October 11, 2016.
^ Trotter, Bill (February 11, 2008). "Obama sets sights on November battle". Bangor Daily News. Archived from the original on February 28, 2008. Retrieved February 12, 2008.
^ Gruss, Michael (November 21, 2006). "Local roast becomes political pep rally for Democrats". The Virginian-Pilot. Archived from the original on February 25, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2007.
^ Scherer, Michael (November 8, 2006). "The Democrats are ready to lead". Salon.com. Archived from the original on August 11, 2009. Retrieved March 18, 2007.
^ Schneider, Avie (January 22, 2021). "DNC Chairman Jaime Harrison Wants To Build The 'Next Generation' Of Democratic Talent". NPR. Retrieved January 22, 2021.
^ Gilgoff, Dan (July 16, 2006). "Dean's List". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
^ "Home". National Conference of Democratic Mayors. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
^ John Ashworth, "Agrarians" & "aristocrats": Party political ideology in the United States, 1837 1846(1983)
^ "Inside Obama's Sweeping Victory". Pew Research Center. Retrieved July 11, 2017.
^ a b c d "CNN. (2004). Exit Poll". Archived from the original on May 14, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
^ a b c "CNN. (2006). Exit Poll". Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
^ Brownstein, Ronald (May 9, 2019). "The Democrats' Coalition Could Fundamentally Change by 2020". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020.
^ Gidron, Noam; Ziblatt, Daniel (May 11, 2019). "Center-Right Political Parties in Advanced Democracies". Annual Review of Political Science. 22 (1): 17 35. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-090717-092750. ISSN 1094-2939. S2CID 182421002.
^ Grossman, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (2016). Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190626594.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-062659-4.
^ Lelkes, Yphtach; Sniderman, Paul M. (2016). "The Ideological Asymmetry of the American Party System". British Journal of Political Science. 46 (4): 825 844. doi:10.1017/S0007123414000404. ISSN 0007-1234.
^ Thompson, Derek (September 13, 2019). "How Democrats Conquered the City". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020.
^ "About Us   New Democrat Coalition". Retrieved February 18, 2023.
^ "Democratic Leadership Council will fold". Politico. Retrieved September 18, 2011.
^ a b "Members   New Democrat Coalition". Archived from the original on September 7, 2016.
^ Hale, Jon F. (January 1, 1995). "The Making of the New Democrats". Political Science Quarterly. 110 (2): 207 232. doi:10.2307/2152360. JSTOR 2152360.
^ "New Democrat Coalition". Retrieved March 11, 2022.
^ "Obama: 'I am a New Democrat'". Politico.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
^ Mendoza, Jessica (June 4, 2019). "Centrist Democrats are back. But these are not your father's Blue Dogs". Christian Science Monitor.
^ Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2008). "The Transformation of the Republican and Democratic Party Coalitions in the U.S.". Perspectives on Politics. 6 (3): 433 450. doi:10.1017/S1537592708081218. ISSN 1541-0986. S2CID 145321253. 1964 was the last presidential election in which the Democrats earned more than 50 percent of the white vote in the United States.
^ Black, Earl; Black, Merle (2003). "The Rise of Southern Republicans". Harvard University Press. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018. When the Republican party nominated Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater one of the few northern senators who had opposed the Civil Rights Act as their presidential candidate in 1964, the party attracted many racist southern whites but permanently alienated African-American voters. Beginning with the Goldwater-versus-Johnson campaign more southern whites voted Republican than Democratic, a pattern that has recurred in every subsequent presidential election. ... Before the 1964 presidential election the Republican party had not carried any Deep South state for eighty-eight years. Yet shortly after Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, hundreds of Deep South counties gave Barry Goldwater landslide majorities.
^ Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2003). "Activists and Partisan Realignment in the United States". American Political Science Review. 97 (2): 245 260. doi:10.1017/S0003055403000650. ISSN 1537-5943. S2CID 12885628. By 2000, however, the New Deal party alignment no longer captured patterns of partisan voting. In the intervening 40 years, the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts had triggered an increasingly race-driven distinction between the parties. ... Goldwater won the electoral votes of five states of the Deep South in 1964, four of them states that had voted Democratic for 84 years (Califano 1991, 55). He forged a new identification of the Republican party with racial conservatism, reversing a century-long association of the GOP with racial liberalism. This in turn opened the door for Nixon's "Southern strategy" and the Reagan victories of the eighties.
^ Valentino, Nicholas A.; Sears, David O. (2005). "Old Times There Are Not Forgotten: Race and Partisan Realignment in the Contemporary South". American Journal of Political Science. 49 (3): 672 688. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5907.2005.00136.x. ISSN 0092-5853.
^ Ilyana, Kuziemko; Ebonya, Washington (2018). "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South? Bringing New Data to an Old Debate". American Economic Review. 108 (10): 2830 2867. doi:10.1257/aer.20161413. ISSN 0002-8282.
^ Roger Chapman, Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia (2010) vol 1 Page 136
^ "The Long Goodbye". The Economist. Retrieved November 11, 2018.
^ a b c d e f "Exit Polls". CNN Politics. Archived from the original on November 14, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2020.
^ Judis, John B. (July 11, 2003). "The trouble with Howard Dean". Salon. Salon.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2007.
^ a b "Pew Research Center. (May 10, 2005). Beyond Red vs. Blue, p. 1 of 8". May 10, 2005. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2007.
^ "The big divide among 2020 Democrats over trade   and why it matters". Vox. Vox.com. Retrieved May 10, 2019.
^ Kurtz, Howard (March 29, 2005). "College Faculties A Most Liberal Lot, Study Finds". The Washington Post. Washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2007.
^ "Progressivism". Columbia Encyclopaedia. 2007. Archived from the original on June 29, 2008. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ "Important Examples of Progressive Reforms". University of Michigan. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2014.
^ "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is floating a 70 percent top tax rate   here's the research that backs her up". Mathew Yglesias. January 4, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021.
^ "Rent control in San Francisco: Everything you need to know". Bungalow team. Retrieved November 5, 2021.
^ "Everybody wants to be him in 2020, but there's only one Bernie Sanders". Brenden Gallagher. February 24, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021.
^ "Elizabeth Warren's 11 Commandments of Progressivism". National Journal. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2014.
^ McPherson, Lindsey (November 29, 2018). "Jayapal Joins Pocan As Co-Chair of Congressional Progressive Caucus". rollcall.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019.
^ "Caucus Members". Congressional Progressive Caucus. Retrieved March 21, 2023.
^ Sargent, Greg (March 13, 2014). "Push to expand Social Security (not cut it) gets another boost". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
^ Iacurci, Greg. "Biden's top tax rate on capital gains, dividends would be among highest in developed world". CNBC. Retrieved November 23, 2022.
^ a b c "On The Issues : Every Issue   Every Politician". Ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ a b c d Bacon, Perry Jr. (May 28, 2019). "What Republicans And Democrats Are Doing In The States Where They Have Total Power". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved June 5, 2019.
^ "Education". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
^ "Health Care". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
^ a b c d e f g "Democratic Party Platform 2016" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 10, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2016.
^ "Science & Technology". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on June 26, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
^ Isaac-Thomas, Bella (August 11, 2022). "What the Inflation Reduction Act does for green energy". PBS. Retrieved November 23, 2022.
^ "THE ALLIANCE OF U.S. LABOR UNIONS AND THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY" (PDF). Scholarsstrategynetwork.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ "Worker Rights". Archived from the original on August 21, 2014.
^ Asma Khalid (June 9, 2014). "Obama Endorses Sen. Warren's Student Loan Refinancing Bill". wbur. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved June 11, 2014.
^ Green, Erica (October 15, 2019). "House Democrats Unveil Plan to Make College More Affordable". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
^ "Democrats highlight equal pay in political push". CNN. April 7, 2014. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2014.
^ Wyatt, Edward (November 10, 2014). "Obama Net Neutrality". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ a b "Democratic Party on Government Reform". Ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ "A Call for Election Reform, Beginning with New York". The Huffington Post. June 15, 2013. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2019.
^ "Voting Rights". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2014.
^ "For Torture and Surveillance Commission via H.R. 104, Target The Congressional Progressive Caucus". Irregular Times. Archived from the original on May 29, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014.
^ "Democratic Party on Crime". Ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ a b "Protecting Communities and Building Trust by Reforming Our Criminal Justice System". Democrats.
^ Grossmann, Matt; Mahmood, Zuhaib; Isaac, William (2021). "Political Parties, Interest Groups, and Unequal Class Influence in American Policy". The Journal of Politics. 83 (4): 1706 1720. doi:10.1086/711900. ISSN 0022-3816. S2CID 224851520.
^ Bartels, Larry M. (2016). Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age - Second Edition. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-8336-3.
^ Rhodes, Jesse H.; Schaffner, Brian F. (2017). "Testing Models of Unequal Representation: Democratic Populists and Republican Oligarchs?". Quarterly Journal of Political Science. 12 (2): 185 204. doi:10.1561/100.00016077.
^ Lax, Jeffrey R.; Phillips, Justin H.; Zelizer, Adam (2019). "The Party or the Purse? Unequal Representation in the US Senate". American Political Science Review. 113 (4): 917 940. doi:10.1017/S0003055419000315. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 21669533.
^ Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2020). Let them Eat Tweets: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme Inequality. Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-1-63149-685-1.
^ "Jobs and the Economy". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2014.
^ Dan Roberts (April 19, 2014). "Wall Street deregulation pushed by Clinton advisers, documents reveal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2016.
^ Mudge, Stephanie (2018). Leftism Reinvented: Western Parties from Socialism to Neoliberalism. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 167 213.
^ "How High Should Taxes Be?". Economics.about.com. June 12, 2010. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ "The Social Safety Net". usinfo.state.gov. Archived from the original on April 10, 2008.
^ "Day Two: House passes new budget rules". Associated Press. January 5, 2007. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2007.
^ a b "The Democratic Party Platform". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
^ Kulwin, Noah (May 25, 2017). "Democrats just united on a $15-an-hour minimum wage". Vice. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
^ Freking, Kevin. "Biden, Democrats hit gas on push for $15 minimum wage". The Associated Press. Retrieved February 6, 2021.
^ Marr, Chris. "Blue State Minimum Wages Inch Upward, Widening Gap With South". Bloomberg Law. Retrieved July 24, 2022.
^ Goodnough, Abby; Kaplan, Thomas (June 28, 2019). "Democrat vs. Democrat: How Health Care Is Dividing the Party". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020.
^ Nova, Annie (December 29, 2019). "How the Affordable Care Act transformed our health-care system". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020.
^ Orth, Taylor (February 14, 2023). "Which childhood body modification procedures do Americans think are unacceptable?". YouGov. Retrieved March 6, 2023.
^ "Moving America Forward 2012 Democratic National Platform" (PDF). presidency.ucsb.edu. September 14, 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2018.
^ "Clinton Joins Key Senate Democrats to Release Report on "The College Cost Crunch"". clinton.senate.gov. June 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved November 25, 2006.
^ "As Economic Concerns Recede, Environmental Protection Rises on the Public's Policy Agenda / Partisan gap on dealing with climate change gets even wider". PewResearch.org. Pew Research Center. February 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. (Discontinuity resulted from survey changing in 2015 from reciting "global warming" to "climate change".)
^ McGreal, Chris (October 26, 2021). "Revealed: 60% of Americans say oil firms are to blame for the climate crisis". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Source: Guardian/Vice/CCN/YouGov poll. Note:  4% margin of error.
^ a b Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (March 1, 2022). "Americans Largely Favor U.S. Taking Steps To Become Carbon Neutral by 2050 / Appendix (Detailed charts and tables)". Pew Research. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022.
^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (April 11, 2022). "Climate Change Proposals Favored by Solid Majorities in U.S. / Support for Policies Designed to Limit Greenhouse Gases, by Political Party". Gallup. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022.
^ "Agenda  Environment". Archived from the original on March 15, 2007. Retrieved March 18, 2007.
^ Coley, Jonathan S.; Hess, David J. (2012). "Green energy laws and Republican legislators in the United States". Energy Policy. 48: 576 583. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.05.062. ISSN 0301-4215.
^ Bergquist, Parrish; Warshaw, Christopher (2020). "Elections and parties in environmental politics". Handbook of U.S. Environmental Policy: 126 141. doi:10.4337/9781788972840.00017. ISBN 9781788972840. S2CID 219077951.
^ "Democratic Party on Environment". Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2007.
^ John Nicols (October 12, 2007). "Al Gore Wins Nobel Peace Prize". The Nation.
^ "Energy Independence". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on September 20, 2010.
^ Sullivan, Sean (June 2, 2014). "Coal state Democrats to Obama: Curb emissions? Um, no thanks". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 13, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
^ Rorty, R. (1997). Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought In Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00312-8
^ Weisman, Jonathan (July 6, 2005). "CAFTA Reflects Democrats' Shift From Trade Bills". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2006.
^ Nichols, John (July 28, 2005). "CAFTA Vote Outs "Bush Democrats"". The Nation. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved December 15, 2006.
^ Carmines, Edward G.; Stimson, James A. "Racial Issues and The Structure of Mass Belief Systems," Journal of Politics (1982) 44#1 pp 2 20 in JSTOR
^ Talmadge Anderson & James Benjamin Stewart (2007). Introduction to African American Studies: Transdisciplinary Approaches and Implications. Black Classic Press. p. 205. ISBN 9781580730396.
^ Jeffrey M. Stonecash (2010). New Directions in American Political Parties. Routledge. p. 131. ISBN 9781135282059.
^ "Civil Rights". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2014.
^ Deborah White. "Liberalism 101: Democratic Party Agenda on Electoral Reform". About. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2014.
^ Williams, Daniel K. (June 2015). "The Partisan Trajectory of the American Pro-Life Movement: How a Liberal Catholic Campaign Became a Conservative Evangelical Cause". Religions. 6 (2): 451 475. doi:10.3390/rel6020451. ISSN 2077-1444.
^ Halpern, Sue (November 8, 2018). "How Republicans Became Anti-Choice". The New York Review of Books. ISSN 0028-7504. Retrieved February 4, 2023.
^ Taylor, Justin (May 9, 2018). "How the Christian Right Became Prolife on Abortion and Transformed the Culture Wars". The Gospel Coalition. Retrieved February 4, 2023.
^ "House Votes on 2003-530". Ontheissues.org. October 2, 2003. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
^ "Abortion". Pollingreport.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ "2020 Democratic Party Platform" (PDF). 2020 Democratic National Convention. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 16, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021.
^ Frumin, Aliyah (November 25, 2013). "Obama: 'Long past time' for immigration reform". MSNBC.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved January 26, 2014.
^ "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home > Votes > Roll Call Vote". Senate.gov. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
^ a b Igielnik, Ruth (November 16, 2022). "Backdrop for Vote on Same-Sex Marriage Rights: A Big Shift in Public Opinion". The New York Times. Retrieved November 17, 2022.
^ Lindberg, Tim (August 2, 2022). "Congress is considering making same-sex marriage federal law   a political scientist explains how this issue became less polarized over time". Kansas Reflector. Retrieved August 14, 2022.
^ "Changing Views on Social Issues" (PDF). April 30, 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 10, 2010. Retrieved May 14, 2009.
^ "Civil Rights". pollingreport.com. Archived from the original on April 28, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
^ Less Opposition to Gay Marriage, Adoption and Military Service Archived March 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pew Research Center. March 22, 2006.
^ Morales, Lymari (June 5, 2009). "Conservatives Shift in Favor of Openly Gay Service Members". Gallup.com. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2010.
^ "The 2004 Democratic National Platform for America" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 13, 2004. (111 KB)
^ Garcia, Michelle (April 22, 2012). "Is This the Year Democrats Embrace Marriage Equality?". Advocate.com. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ "Democratic Platform Endorses Gay Marriage". All Things Considered. Npr.org. September 4, 2012. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ "Obama backs same-sex marriage". CBS News. May 9, 2012. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 9, 2012.
^ Sam Stein (May 9, 2012). "Obama Backs Gay Marriage". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2019.
^ a b "Same-sex Marriage - Issues - Election Center 2008 - CNN.com". Cnn.com. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
^ Obama Opposes Gay Marriage Ban Archived September 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. By Perry Bacon Jr. July 2, 2008.
^ Obama Statement on Vote Against Constitutional Amendment to Ban Gay Marriage Archived December 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. United States Senate Official Website Archived December 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. June 7, 2006.
^ Linkins, Jason (January 13, 2009). "Obama Once Supported Same-Sex Marriage 'Unequivocally'". Huffingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ "Video: Clinton shifts on gay marriage". CNN. September 25, 2009. Archived from the original on December 26, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2010.
^ Raushenbush, Paul (March 19, 2012). "President Jimmy Carter Authors New Bible Book, Answers Hard Biblical Questions". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012.
^ "Gay men and women should have the same rights // Current". Current.com. January 17, 2008. Archived from the original on November 29, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ Israel, Josh (May 16, 2013). "Mondale and Dukakis Back Marriage Equality". ThinkProgress. Archived from the original on November 4, 2019. Retrieved November 4, 2019.
^ Cournoyer, Caroline (May 7, 2012). "Joe Biden Endorses Gay Marriage". Governing. Retrieved February 9, 2021.
^ "Amid a Series of Mass Shootings in the U.S., Gun Policy Remains Deeply Divisive". PewResearch.org. April 20, 2021. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022.
^ Abramsky, Sasha (April 18, 2005). "Democrat Killer?". The Nation. Archived from the original on September 30, 2005. Retrieved October 10, 2006.
^ "THE DRAFT 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL PLATFORM: RENEWING AMERICA'S PROMISE" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2012. Retrieved February 4, 2014.
^ Clyde, Don; Miranda, Shauneen (June 25, 2022). "Biden signs gun safety bill into law". NPR. Retrieved September 20, 2022.
^ "1972 Democratic Party Platform". July 11, 1972. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022   via American Presidency Project.
^ "Obama Backs Death Penalty for Child Rapists" Archived May 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Newser, June 26, 2008. Retrieved June 10, 2009.
^ "The Candidates on the Death Penalty". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on July 4, 2008. Retrieved July 26, 2009.
^ "Democratic Platform Drafting Meeting Concludes". DNCC. June 25, 2016. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016.
^ Tyson, Alec (January 26, 2017). "Americans divided in views of use of torture in U.S. anti-terror efforts". Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
^ Kenneth T. Walsh. "Obama and Democrats' Torture Problem". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2017.
^ "Senate roll call on passage of the PATRIOT Act". Senate.gov. April 25, 2017. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2018.
^ "House approves Patriot Act renewal". CNN.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
^ "1972 Democratic Party Platform". The American Presidency Project.
^ Ashtari, Shadee (November 6, 2013). "Here's The Medieval-Sounding Sodomy Law That Helped Ken Cuccinelli Lose In Virginia". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2019.
^ "Republicans, Democrats Agree on Top Foreign Policy Goals". Gallup.com. February 20, 2013. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
^ See "July 3, 2014   Iraq   Getting In Was Wrong; Getting Out Was Right, U.S. Voters Tell Quinnipiac University National Poll" Quinnipiac University Poll Archived April 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine item #51
^ "Archive page #16 of polls". Pollingreport.com. June 1, 2003. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ "Archive page #15 of polls". Pollingreport.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ Pew Research Center: Along the Iraq-Vietnam Parallel Archived October 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Pew Research Center. August 28, 2007.
^ Recent polls from Archived December 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Pollingreport Archived December 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Flaherty, Anne (April 26, 2007). "Congress passes Iraq bill, veto awaits". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 29, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
^ "US Democrats push for 2008 Iraq exit". Reuters. April 26, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
^ "Democrats fail to override Bush on war funding". International Herald Tribune. May 2, 2007. Archived from the original on May 4, 2007. Retrieved May 2, 2007.
^ a b Obama says conditions to dictate final Iraq force Archived January 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Reuters. July 27, 2008.
^ a b c Top Republicans embrace Iraq plan Archived October 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The Politico. February 27, 2009.
^ Gordon, Michael R. (November 23, 2013). "Accord Reached With Iran to Halt Nuclear Program". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2017.
^ "Jewish Democratic donors urge Congress: Back off Iran sanctions". Haaretz.com. February 28, 2014. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 26, 2014.
^ Cortellessa, Eric. "Democratic Party passes resolution calling for US to re-enter Iran nuke deal". www.timesofisrael.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2019.
^ "Democrats say McCain forgot Afghanistan". Boston Globe. July 24, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Archived August 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ a b "John McCain & Barack Obama urge Afghanistan surge" Archived November 13, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. New York Daily News. July 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
^ "U.S. plans major shift to advisory role in Afghanistan", Los Angeles Times, December 13, 2011 Archived August 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Most Americans oppose Afghanistan war: poll Archived August 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. The Australian. August 7, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ a b "Afghan War Edges Out Iraq as Most Important for U.S." Archived December 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine by Frank Newport. Gallup. July 30, 2008. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ Public Opinion in U.S. Turns Against Afghan War Archived October 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. By Jennifer Agiesta and Jon Cohen. Washington Post. August 20, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ "Joe Biden: I Promise To 'End The Forever Wars In Afghanistan And Middle East' As President". www.cbsnews.com. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ "Biden to pull US troops from Afghanistan, end 'forever war'". AP NEWS. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ Liebermann, Nicole Gaouette, Jennifer Hansler, Barbara Starr, Oren (August 30, 2021). "The last US military planes have left Afghanistan, marking the end of the United States' longest war | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved November 19, 2022.
^ a b Americans' Most and Least Favored Nations Archived September 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. By Lydia Saad. Gallup. March 3, 2008.
^ a b Left could push pro-Israel voters to GOP Archived December 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. By Jennifer Rubin. Politico. July 18, 2007.
^ "Ideological Gaps Over Israel on Both Sides of Atlantic". PewGlobal.org. January 29, 2009. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
^ a b Kendall Breitman (February 23, 2015). "Gallup poll: Democrats losing sympathy for Israel". POLITICO. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015.
^ "PARTY PLATFORM". Democrats.org. Retrieved June 17, 2022.
^ "Clinton, Sanders supporters differ sharply on U.S. global role". Pew Research Center. May 17, 2016. Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
^ "Democrats Reject Platform Proposal Calling for 'End to Occupation and Illegal Settlements'". Haaretz. June 25, 2016. Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
^ "Michigan candidate backs 1-state solution, slashing military aid to Israel". Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
^ "Ilhan Omar, who once called Israel an 'apartheid regime,' wins congressional primary in Minnesota | Jewish Telegraphic Agency". www.jta.org. August 15, 2018. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
^ "Muslim Trailblazer Ilhan Omar Admits She Backs BDS   Now That Election Is Over". The Forward. Archived from the original on March 12, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2018.
^ a b c Levitz, Eric (September 29, 2021). "Is America Too Rich for Class Politics?". New York. Retrieved November 3, 2022. In every presidential election from 1948 to 2012, white voters in the top 5 percent of America's income distribution were more Republican than those in the bottom 95 percent. Now, the opposite is true: Among white Americans, the rich voted to the left of the middle class and the poor in 2016 and 2020, while the poor voted to the right of the middle class and the rich... The erosion of traditional class allegiances in voting   a phenomenon some have dubbed "class dealignment"   has been most stark among white voters. But in 2020, the phenomenon crossed racial lines. According to the Pew Research Center, Joe Biden won college-educated Hispanic voters by 25 points more than he did non-college-educated ones.
^ a b c Lemann, Nicholas (October 24, 2022). "The Democrats' Midterm Challenge". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 4, 2022. It's no longer accurate to say that the Republicans are the clear preference for people who have more money. Today, the most affluent congressional districts in the country are largely represented by Democrats, including, for example, the district in Connecticut where the Bush family's political dynasty began. The problem for the Democrats is that what attracts these people often repels the Party's traditional working-class base including the older, churchgoing Black voters who gave Biden his victories in the Democratic primaries in the South in 2020.
^ Tyson, Alec; Maniam, Shiva (November 9, 2016). "Behind Trump's victory: Divisions by race, gender and education". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.
^ Abramowitz, Alan (September 23, 2021). "Can Democrats Win Back the White Working Class?". Sabato's Crystal Ball. Retrieved November 3, 2022.
^ Cohn, Nate (June 11, 2012). "Obama's Problem With White, Non-College Educated Voters is Getting Worse". The New Republic. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved February 13, 2017.
^ Teixeira, Ruy (January 2, 2015). "Democrats' Problem: White, Working-Class Voters" (Interview). Interviewed by Steve Inskeep. NPR. Archived from the original on May 13, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
^ Judis, John B. (January 31, 2015). "The Emerging Republican Advantage". National Journal. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
^ a b Ackley, Kate (November 2, 2022). "Midterms' final stretch marked by fights in unexpected places". Roll Call. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Democrats have gained support among more college-educated and affluent voters, as Republicans have made inroads with working-class voters, including minority voters. And House Republicans may expand their number of members who are Black, Hispanic, and Asian American, as the party has more minority House candidates... than in any previous cycle.
^ a b Teixeira, Ruy (November 6, 2022). "Democrats' Long Goodbye to the Working Class". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 8, 2022. From 2012 to 2020, the Democrats not only saw their support among white working-class voters   those without college degrees   crater, they also saw their advantage among nonwhite working-class voters fall by 18 points. And between 2016 and 2020 alone, the Democratic advantage among Hispanic voters declined by 16 points, overwhelmingly driven by the defection of working-class voters. In contrast, Democrats' advantage among white college-educated voters improved by 16 points from 2012 to 2020, an edge that delivered Joe Biden the White House.
^ a b Cohn, Nate (July 13, 2022). "Poll Shows Tight Race for Control of Congress as Class Divide Widens". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 27, 2022. But the cofluence of economic problems and resurgent cultural issues has helped turn the emerging class divide in the Democratic coalition into a chasm, as Republicans appear to be making new inroads among nonwhite and working class voters... For the first time in a Times/Siena national survey, Democrats had a larger share of support among white college graduates than among nonwhite voters - a striking indication of the shifting balance of political energy...
^ a b Zitner, Aaron; Mena, Bryan (September 14, 2022). "Latino Voters, Once Solidly Democratic, Split Along Economic Lines". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
^ Franck, Thomas (November 10, 2020). "Democratic counties represent 70% of U.S. GDP, 2020 election shows". CNBC. Retrieved October 21, 2022.
^ Wilkinson, Francis (March 1, 2023). "Poor Voters Are Losing Out in the Culture Wars". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 4, 2023.
^ Judis, J. B.; Teixeira, R. (June 19, 2007). "Back to the Future". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on July 12, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007.
^ "Public Praises Science; Scientists Fault Public, Media Section 4: Scientists, Politics and Religion" Archived March 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Exit Polls   Election Results 2008". The New York Times. November 5, 2008. Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ "CNN. (2000). Exit Poll". Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007.
^ "Local Exit Polls - Election Center 2008 - Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Archived from the original on April 22, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2010.
^ Fried, Joseph, Democrats and Republicans: Rhetoric and Reality (New York: Algora Publishing, 2008), 126.
^ O'Kane, Caitlin. "Jon Ossoff becomes the youngest Democrat elected to the Senate since Joe Biden in 1973". CBS News. Retrieved January 12, 2021.
^ Wise, Alana (January 6, 2021). "Jon Ossoff Wins Georgia Runoff, Handing Democrats Senate Control". NPR. Retrieved January 12, 2021.
^ "1. Trends in party affiliation among demographic groups". Pew Research Center. March 20, 2018. Archived from the original on June 5, 2020. Retrieved December 29, 2018.
^ "Nagourney, A. (June 27, 2007). Young Americans are leaning left, new poll finds. The New York Times". Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved April 5, 2007.
^ "Inside Obama's Sweeping Victory". Pew Research Center. Retrieved December 29, 2018.
^ "National Results 2020 President exit polls". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2020.
^ "The future is female: How the growing political power of women will remake American politics". February 19, 2020. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020.
^ Junn, Jane; Masuoka, Natalie (2020). "The Gender Gap Is a Race Gap: Women Voters in US Presidential Elections". Perspectives on Politics. 18 (4): 1135 1145. doi:10.1017/S1537592719003876. ISSN 1537-5927.
^ "White Female Voters Continue to Support the Republican Party". The Atlantic. November 14, 2016. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Hard-core partisans don't switch teams over the personal shortcomings of their champion.
^ a b Fried, Joseph. (2008). Democrats and Republicans rhetoric and reality : comparing the voters in statistics and anecdote. New York: Algora Pub. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-87586-603-1. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020.
^ a b "Gay Support for Obama Similar to Dems in Past Elections". Law.ucla.edu. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on December 9, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ Cohen, Micah (November 15, 2012). "Gay Vote Proved a Boon for Obama". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 26, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2012.
^ "National Voter Surveys: How Different Groups Voted". The New York Times. November 3, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2021.
^ Bennett, Geoff; Golden, Amanda; Talbot, Haley; Smith, Allan. "Biden to nominate Pete Buttigieg for transportation secretary". NBC News. Retrieved January 12, 2021.
^ Shephardson, David (February 2, 2021). "Pete Buttigieg becomes first openly gay cabinet secretary confirmed by U.S. Senate". Reuters. Retrieved February 15, 2021.
^ a b c Jackson, Brooks (April 18, 2008). "Blacks and the Democratic Party". FactCheck.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
^ "Ku Klux Klan   History". Anti-Defamation League. Archived from the original on February 12, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2011.
^ Teixeira, Ruy (November 11, 2008). "Digging into the 2008 Exit Polls". Taking Note. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
^ "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People". encyclopedia.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved October 31, 2011.
^ "Membership". Congressional Black Caucus. United States House of Representatives. Retrieved February 22, 2023.
^ Cillizza, Chris (September 18, 2011). "With Hispanic support for Obama waning, could Latino vote be up for grabs in 2012?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
^ "Latino vote key to Obama's re-election". CNN. November 9, 2012. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
^ Cave, Damien (April 21, 2009). "U.S. Overtures Find Support Among Cuban-Americans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2017.
^ Woods, Casey (November 6, 2008). "Presidential and Congressional Candidate Cuba Watch: Analysis of Cuban American vote" Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Candidatecubawatch.blogspot.com. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ "National Results 2020 President exit polls". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2020.
^ "Exit polls for Midterm Election Results 2022". CNN. November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022.
^ Jamerson, Joshua; Zitner, Aaron (November 7, 2022). "GOP Gaining Support Among Black and Latino Voters". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved November 8, 2022.
^ "Dissecting the 2008 Electorate: Most Diverse in U.S. History Archived June 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine". Pew Research Center. April 30, 2009
^ "Presidential Race   2012 Election Center   President: Full Results   Exit Polls". CNN. November 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 17, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2012.
^ "85% Indian-Americans support Obama for second term: Survey Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine". The Times Of India. May 6, 2012.
^ "Exit polls for Midterm Election Results 2022". CNN. November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022.
^ Kao, Jason (March 6, 2023). "Where New York's Asian Neighborhoods Shifted to the Right". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2023.
^ Andre, Michael;  et al. (November 3, 2020). "National Exit Polls: How Different Groups Voted". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 5, 2020.
^ "How Groups Voted in 2016". Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, Cornell University. Retrieved December 9, 2016.
^ "Paying Attention to the Native American Vote". www.pbs.org. Archived from the original on December 30, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
^ "Native Americans support Democrats over Republicans across House and Senate races". November 15, 2022..
^ Watkins, Eli (November 7, 2018). "First Native American women elected to Congress: Sharice Davids and Deb Haaland". CNN. Archived from the original on July 8, 2020. Retrieved June 10, 2020.
^ Taylor, Rory (December 3, 2018). "Lieutenant Governor-Elect of Minnesota Peggy Flanagan Becomes the Highest-Ranking Native Woman Elected to Executive Office in the United States". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2020.
^ Walsh, Andrew D. (2000). Religion, Economics, and Public Policy: Ironies, Tragedies, and Absurdities of the Contemporary Culture Wars. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 81 83. ISBN 978-0-275-96611-9.
^ a b Lawson, Alan (July 24, 2006). A Commonwealth of Hope: The New Deal Response to Crisis. JHU Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-8018-8872-4. Retrieved November 15, 2020.
^ O'Kane, Caitlin. "Joe Biden to become the second Catholic president ever, following JFK". CBS News. Retrieved November 17, 2020.
^ "Speakers of the House by Congress". Retrieved March 1, 2023.
^ Steinhauer, Jennifer (September 21, 2015). "In Pelosi, Strong Catholic Faith and Abortion Rights Coexist". The New York Times. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "National Results 2020 President exit polls". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2020.
^ Daniel Burke (March 22, 2017). "What is Neil Gorsuch's religion? It's complicated". CNN.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2017. Springer said she doesn't know whether Gorsuch considers himself a Catholic or an Episcopalian. "I have no evidence that Judge Gorsuch considers himself an Episcopalian, and likewise no evidence that he does not." Gorsuch's younger brother, J.J., said he too has "no idea how he would fill out a form. He was raised in the Catholic Church and confirmed in the Catholic Church as an adolescent, but he has been attending Episcopal services for the past 15 or so years."
^ Smith, Peter (2022). "Anti-Roe justices a part of Catholicism's conservative wing". AP News.
^ Lipka, Michael; Smith, Gregory A. (January 31, 2020). "Among Democrats, Christians lean toward Biden, while 'nones' prefer Sanders". Pew Research Center. Retrieved November 16, 2020.
^ "Faith on the Hill: The religious composition of the 116th Congress". Pew Research Center. January 3, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2020.
^ Sherwood, Harriet (October 9, 2020). "Faith leaders back Biden in sign that evangelical support for Trump is waning". The Guardian. Retrieved November 16, 2020.
^ Rani, Rikha Sharma (August 3, 2020). "Could These Evangelical Democrats Change the Party?". POLITICO. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2020.
^ Newport, Frank. "Religious Identity and the 2020 Presidential Election". Gallup. Retrieved April 12, 2022.
^ Andre, Michael;  et al. (November 3, 2020). "National Exit Polls: How Different Groups Voted". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 5, 2020.
^ Fingerhut, Hannah; McCombs, Brady (November 29, 2018). "Most Mormons voted Republican in the midterms but their Trump approval rating continues to decline, study finds". The Salt Lake Tribune. Retrieved May 7, 2020.
^ "Secular Coalition Flunks U.S. House on Religious Freedom Issues". secular.org. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014.
^ "Local Exit Polls - Election Center 2008 - Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Archived from the original on December 23, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.
^ "An inaugural first: Obama acknowledges 'non-believers'". USA Today. January 22, 2009. Archived from the original on April 1, 2010. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
^ "2012 Presidential Primary Candidate Scorecard". secular.org. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2015.
^ "National Results 2020 President exit polls". www.cnn.com. Retrieved November 27, 2020.
^ "Barack Obama wins 77 percent of Jewish vote, exit polls show Archived May 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine". Haaretz Daily. November 5, 2008.
^ Survey. American Jewish Committee September 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2009.
^ a b Arab-American Voters Say Iraq Top Issue in 2008 Campaign. By Mohamed Elshinnawi. Voice of America. July 23, 2007, Archived March 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ Mideast, Civil Liberties Concern Arab-Americans Archived August 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. By James Q. Lynch. The Gazette (Cedar Rapids-Iowa City). Reprinted by the Arab-American Institute . July 19, 2003
^ "American Muslims supported Obama: poll Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine". Business Standard. October 25, 2012.
^ "American Muslims' political and social views". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. July 26, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2021.
^ "12 of the First Arab Americans". Arab America. January 29, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021.
Further reading
The Almanac of American Politics 2022 (2022) details on members of Congress, and the governors: their records and election results; also state and district politics; revised every two years since 1975. details; see The Almanac of American Politics
American National Biography (20 volumes, 1999) covers all politicians no longer alive; online at many academic libraries and at Wikipedia Library.
Andelic, Patrick. Donkey Work: Congressional Democrats in Conservative America, 1974 1994 (2019) excerpt
Baker, Jean H. Affairs of party: The political culture of northern Democrats in the mid-nineteenth century (Fordham UP, 1998).
Bass Jr, Harold F. Historical dictionary of United States political parties (Scarecrow Press, 2009).
Black, Merle (2004). "The transformation of the southern Democratic Party". Journal of Politics. 66 (4): 1001 1017. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2508.2004.00287.x. S2CID 154506701.
Burner, David. The Politics of Provincialism: The Democratic Party in Transition, 1918 1932 (Knopf, 1968).
Congressional Quarterly. National Party Conventions, 1831 2000 (2001).
Congressional Quarterly. Presidential Elections 1789 2008 (10th edition, 2009)
Craig, Douglas. "Newton D. Baker and the Democratic Malaise, 1920 1937." Australasian Journal of American Studies (2006): 49 64. in JSTOR Archived August 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine
Dowe, Pearl K. Ford, et al. Remaking the Democratic Party: Lyndon B. Johnson as a Native-Son Presidential Candidate (University of Michigan Press, 2016).
Feller, David. "Politics and Society: Toward a Jacksonian Synthesis" Journal of the Early Republic 10#2 (1990), pp. 135 161 in JSTOR Archived August 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine
Frymer, Paul. Black and blue: African Americans, the labor movement, and the decline of the Democratic party (Princeton UP, 2008).
Gerring, John. "A chapter in the history of American party ideology: The nineteenth-century Democratic Party (1828 1892)." Polity 26.4 (1994): 729 768. online Archived February 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
Gillon, Steven M. (1992). The Democrats' Dilemma: Walter F. Mondale and the Liberal Legacy. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231076302. online
Hilton, Adam. True Blues: The Contentious Transformation of the Democratic Party (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2021), since 1972.
Kazin, Michael. What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party  (2022) excerpt
Landis, Michael Todd. Northern Men with Southern Loyalties: The Democratic Party and the Sectional Crisis. (Cornell UP, 2014).
Lawrence, David G. The collapse of the democratic presidential majority: Realignment, dealignment, and electoral change from Franklin Roosevelt to Bill Clinton. (Westview Press, 1997).
McGuire, John Thomas (2014). "Beginning an 'Extraordinary Opportunity': Eleanor Roosevelt, Molly Dewson, and the expansion of women's boundaries in the Democratic Party, 1924 1934". Women's History Review. 23 (6): 922 937. doi:10.1080/09612025.2014.906841. S2CID 146773549.
Maisel, L. Sandy, and Jeffrey M. Berry, eds. The Oxford handbook of American political parties and interest groups (Oxford UP, 2010).
Mieczkowski, Yanek, and Mark C Carnes. The Routledge historical atlas of presidential elections (2001).
Neal, Steven. Happy Days are Here Again: The 1932 Democratic Convention, the Emergence of FDR and how America was Changed Forever (Harper Collins, 2010).
Remini, Robert V. Martin Van Buren and the making of the Democratic Party (Columbia UP, 1961).
Savage, Sean J. Roosevelt: The Party Leader, 1932 1945 (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).
Savage, Sean J. JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party (SUNY Press, 2012).
Savage, Sean J. Truman and the Democratic Party (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).
Woods, Randall B. Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (Basic Books, 2016).
External links
Democratic Party  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksData from Wikidata
Official website 
Democratic Party at Curlie.
vteDemocratic Party
History
Second Party System
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Nationalconventionsandpresidentialtickets
1828 (None): Jackson/Calhoun
1832 (Baltimore): Jackson/Van Buren
1835 (Baltimore): Van Buren/R. Johnson
1840 (Baltimore): Van Buren/None
1844 (Baltimore): Polk/Dallas
1848 (Baltimore): Cass/Butler
1852 (Baltimore): Pierce/King
1856 (Cincinnati): Buchanan/Breckinridge
1860 (Charleston/Baltimore): Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
1864 (Chicago): McClellan/Pendleton
1868 (New York): Seymour/Blair
1872 (Baltimore): Greeley/Brown
1876 (Saint Louis): Tilden/Hendricks
1880 (Cincinnati): Hancock/English
1884 (Chicago): Cleveland/Hendricks
1888 (Saint Louis): Cleveland/Thurman
1892 (Chicago): Cleveland/Stevenson I
1896 (Chicago): W. Bryan/Sewall
1900 (Kansas City): W. Bryan/Stevenson I
1904 (Saint Louis): Parker/H. Davis
1908 (Denver): W. Bryan/Kern
1912 (Baltimore): Wilson/Marshall
1916 (Saint Louis): Wilson/Marshall
1920 (San Francisco): Cox/Roosevelt
1924 (New York): J. Davis/C. Bryan
1928 (Houston): Smith/Robinson
1932 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Garner
1936 (Philadelphia): Roosevelt/Garner
1940 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Wallace
1944 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Truman
1948 (Philadelphia): Truman/Barkley
1952 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Sparkman
1956 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Kefauver
1960 (Los Angeles): Kennedy/L. Johnson
1964 (Atlantic City): L. Johnson/Humphrey
1968 (Chicago): Humphrey/Muskie
1972 (Miami Beach): McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
1976 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1980 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1984 (San Francisco): Mondale/Ferraro
1988 (Atlanta): Dukakis/Bentsen
1992 (New York): B. Clinton/Gore
1996 (Chicago): B. Clinton/Gore
2000 (Los Angeles): Gore/Lieberman
2004 (Boston): Kerry/Edwards
2008 (Denver): Obama/Biden
2012 (Charlotte): Obama/Biden
2016 (Philadelphia): H. Clinton/Kaine
2020 (Milwaukee/other locations): Biden/Harris
2024 (Chicago)
Presidentialadministrations
Jackson (1829 1837)
Van Buren (1837 1841)
Polk (1845 1849)
Pierce (1853 1857)
Buchanan (1857 1861)
A. Johnson (1868 1869)
Cleveland (1885 1889; 1893 1897)
Wilson (1913 1921)
Roosevelt (1933 1941; 1941 1945)
Truman (1945 1953)
Kennedy (1961 1963)
L. B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Carter (1977 1981)
Clinton (1993 2001)
Obama (2009 2017)
Biden (2021 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andCaucuschairs
A. Stevenson (1827 1834)
Bell (1834 1835)
Polk (1835 1839)
J. W. Jones (1843 1845)
Davis (1845 1847)
Cobb (1849 1851)
Boyd (1851 1855)
G. W. Jones (1855 1857)
Orr (1857 1859)
Houston (1859 1861)
Niblack/Randall (1869 1871)
Niblack (1873 1875)
Kerr (1875 1876)
Randall (1876 1881)
Carlisle (1883 1889)
Holman (1889 1891)
Crisp (1891 1895)
D. B. Culberson (1895 1897)
Richardson (1897 1903)
Williams (1903 1909)
Clark (1909 1921)
Kitchin (1921 1923)
Garrett (1923 1929)
Garner (1929 1933)
Rainey (1933 1934)
Byrns (1935 1936)
Bankhead (1936 1940)
Rayburn (1940 1961)
McCormack (1962 1971)
Albert (1971 1977)
O'Neill (1977 1987)
Wright (1987 1989)
Foley (1989 1995)
Gephardt (1995 2003)
Pelosi (2003 2023)
Jeffries (2023 )
U.S. SenateleadersandCaucuschairs
J. W. Stevenson (1873 1877)
Wallace (1877 1881)
Pendleton (1881 1885)
Beck (1885 1890)
Gorman (1890 1898)
Turpie (1898 1899)
J. K. Jones (1899 1903)
Gorman (1903 1906)
Blackburn (1906 1907)
C. A. Culberson (1907 1909)
Money (1909 1911)
Martin (1911 1913)
Kern (1913 1917)
Martin (1917 1919)
Hitchcock (1919 1920)
Underwood (1920 1923)
Robinson (1923 1937)
Barkley (1937 1949)
Lucas (1949 1951)
McFarland (1951 1953)
Johnson (1953 1961)
Mansfield (1961 1977)
Byrd (1977 1989)
Mitchell (1989 1995)
Daschle (1995 2005)
Reid (2005 2017)
Schumer (2017 )
Chairs ofthe DNC
Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez
Harrison
State andterritorialparties
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Democrats Abroad
AffiliatedgroupsCongress
Senate Caucus
Policy Committee
Steering and Outreach Committee
United States Senate Democratic Conference Secretary
House Caucus
Fundraising
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Democratic Redistricting Committee
Sectional
College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Stonewall Young Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America
Related
Primaries
Presidential candidates
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
2006 House Caucus leadership election
2018 House Caucus leadership election
2022 House Caucus leadership election
Weekly Democratic Address
vteNational political parties in the United StatesList of political parties in the United StatesMajor parties
Democratic
Republican
Third partiesLarger
Green
Libertarian
Smaller
African People's Socialist
Alliance
American Freedom
American Solidarity
Christian Liberty
Citizens
Communist
Constitution
Freedom Socialist
Forward
Justice
Labor (2008)
Legal Marijuana Now
Marijuana
Pirate
People's
Prohibition
Reform
Socialism and Liberation
Socialist (1973)
Socialist Action
Socialist Alternative
Socialist Equality
Socialist Workers
Transhumanist
Unity
Working Class
Working Families
Workers World
Defunct partiesMajor parties
Democratic-Republican
Federalist
National Republican
Whig
National Union
Third parties
American (Know Nothing)
American (1924)
American (1969)
American Nazi
American Vegetarian
Americans Elect
Anti-Masonic
Black Panther
Boston Tea
Citizens
Communist Workers'
Constitution (1952)
Constitutional Union
Democratic-Republican (1844)
Farmer Labor
Free Soil
Gold Democrats
Greenback
Independence (1906)
Independence (2007)
Labor (1919)
Labor (1996)
Liberal Republican
Liberty (1840)
 National (1917)
National Renaissance
National Socialist
National States' Rights
Natural Law
New Alliance
New Union
Nullifier
Opposition
Populist (People's)
Personal Choice
Populist
Progressive (1912)
Progressive (1924)
Progressive (1948)
Radical Democracy
Raza Unida
Readjuster
Red Guard
Silver
Silver Republican
Social Democratic
Socialist Labor
Socialist (1901)
States Rights (Dixiecrat)
Traditionalist Worker
Unconditional Union
Union (1936)
Unionist (1850s/60s)
U.S. Labor
White Patriot
Workers
Youth International
 State and local political parties (without national body)Presidential nominating convention (List)Politics of the United StatesPolitics portal
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteMartin Van Buren
8th President of the United States (1837 1841)
8th Vice President of the United States (1833 1837)
U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1831 1832)
10th United States Secretary of State (1829 1831)
9th Governor of New York (1829)
U.S. Senator from New York (1821 1828)
Attorney General of New York (1815 1819)
Life
Bucktails
Albany Regency
Tammany Hall
1821 United States Senate election in New York
United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary
Tariff of Abominations
Democratic Party
1828 New York gubernatorial election
Petticoat affair
Kitchen Cabinet
1832 Democratic National Convention
1832 United States presidential election
1836 United States presidential election
1835 Democratic National Convention
Second Party System
Martin Van Buren National Historic Site
1844 Democratic National Convention
Barnburners and Hunkers
1848 Democratic National Convention
Free Soil Party
1848 United States presidential election
Reformed Dutch Church
Presidency
Inauguration of Martin Van Buren
Panic of 1837
Specie Circular
Independent Treasury
Treaty of New Echota
Emerson's letter to Martin Van Buren
United States v. The Amistad
List of federal judges appointed by Martin Van Buren
Gold Spoon Oration
1840 United States presidential election
1840 Democratic National Convention
Writings
Papers of Martin Van Buren
Public image
Recarving Rushmore
List of memorials to Martin Van Buren
Mount Van Buren
USS Van Buren (1839)
Burr
Amistad
"The Van Buren Boys"
Family
Family of Martin Van Buren
Abraham Van Buren (father)
James I. Van Alen (maternal half-brother)
Abraham Van Buren (son)
Angelica Singleton Van Buren (daughter-in-law)
John Van Buren (son)
  Andrew Jackson
William Henry Harrison  
  John C. Calhoun
Richard Mentor Johnson  
 Category
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
2
WorldCat
National
Spain
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
People
Trove
Other
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_Party_(United_States)&oldid=1149818219"