Molecular moiety or the drug class that uses itFor chemistry of the functional group, see Sulfonamide.
This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (November 2020)
 Sulfonamide functional group
 Hydrochlorothiazide is a sulfonamide and a thiazide.
 Furosemide is a sulfonamide, but not a thiazide.
 Sulfamethoxazole is an antibacterial sulfonamide
Sulfonamide is a functional group (a part of a molecule) that is the basis of several groups of drugs, which are called sulphonamides, sulfa drugs or sulpha drugs. The original antibacterial sulfonamides  are synthetic (nonantibiotic) antimicrobial agents that contain the sulfonamide group. Some sulfonamides are also devoid of antibacterial activity, e.g., the anticonvulsant sultiame. The sulfonylureas and thiazide diuretics are newer drug groups based upon the antibacterial sulfonamides.[1][2]
Allergies to sulfonamides are common. The overall incidence of adverse drug reactions to sulfa antibiotics is approximately 3%, close to penicillin;[3] hence medications containing sulfonamides are prescribed carefully.
Sulfonamide drugs were the first broadly effective antibacterials to be used systemically, and paved the way for the antibiotic revolution in medicine.
Function[edit]
Main article: Dihydropteroate synthase inhibitor
In bacteria, antibacterial sulfonamides act as competitive inhibitors of the enzyme dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS), an enzyme involved in folate synthesis. Sulfonamides are therefore bacteriostatic and inhibit growth and multiplication of bacteria, but do not kill them. Humans, in contrast to bacteria, acquire folate (vitamin B9) through the diet.[4]
 Structural similarity between sulfanilamide (left) and PABA (center) is the basis for the inhibitory activity of sulfa drugs on tetrahydrofolate (right) biosynthesis.
Sulfonamides are used to treat allergies and coughs, as well as having antifungal and antimalarial functions. The moiety is also present in other medications that are not antimicrobials, including thiazide diuretics (including hydrochlorothiazide, metolazone, and indapamide, among others), loop diuretics (including furosemide, bumetanide, and torsemide), acetazolamide, sulfonylureas (including glipizide, glyburide, among others), and some COX-2 inhibitors (e.g., celecoxib).
Sulfasalazine, in addition to its use as an antibiotic, is also used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.[5]
History[edit]
Sulfonamide drugs were the first broadly effective antibacterials to be used systemically, and paved the way for the antibiotic revolution in medicine. The first sulfonamide, trade-named Prontosil, was a prodrug. Experiments with Prontosil began in 1932 in the laboratories of Bayer AG, at that time a component of the huge German chemical trust IG Farben. The Bayer team believed that coal-tar dyes which are able to bind preferentially to bacteria and parasites might be used to attack harmful organisms in the body. After years of fruitless trial-and-error work on hundreds of dyes, a team led by physician/researcher Gerhard Domagk[6] (working under the general direction of IG Farben executive Heinrich H rlein) finally found one that worked: a red dye synthesized by Bayer chemist Josef Klarer that had remarkable effects on stopping some bacterial infections in mice.[7] The first official communication about the breakthrough discovery was not published until 1935, more than two years after the drug was patented by Klarer and his research partner Fritz Mietzsch.[citation needed]
Prontosil, as Bayer named the new drug, was the first medicine ever discovered that could effectively treat a range of bacterial infections inside the body. It had a strong protective action against infections caused by streptococci, including blood infections, childbed fever, and erysipelas, and a lesser effect on infections caused by other cocci. However, it had no effect at all in the test tube, exerting its antibacterial action only in live animals. Later, it was discovered by Daniel Bovet,[8] Federico Nitti, and Jacques and Th r se Tr fou l, a French research team led by Ernest Fourneau at the Pasteur Institute, that the drug was metabolized into two parts inside the body, releasing from the inactive dye portion a smaller, colorless, active compound called sulfanilamide.[9] The discovery helped establish the concept of "bioactivation" and dashed the German corporation's dreams of enormous profit; the active molecule sulfanilamide (or sulfa) had first been synthesized in 1906 and was widely used in the dye-making industry; its patent had since expired and the drug was available to anyone.[10]
The result was a sulfa craze.[11] For several years in the late 1930s, hundreds of manufacturers produced myriad forms of sulfa. This and the lack of testing requirements led to the elixir sulfanilamide disaster in the fall of 1937, during which at least 100 people were poisoned with diethylene glycol. This led to the passage of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act in 1938 in the United States. As the first and only effective broad-spectrum antibiotic available in the years before penicillin, heavy use of sulfa drugs continued into the early years of World War II.[12] They are credited with saving the lives of tens of thousands of patients, including Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr. (son of US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt) and Winston Churchill.[13][14] Sulfa had a central role in preventing wound infections during the war. American soldiers were issued a first-aid kit containing sulfa pills and powder and were told to sprinkle it on any open wound.[15]
The sulfanilamide compound is more active in the protonated form. The drug has very low solubility and sometimes can crystallize in the kidneys, due to its first pKa of around 10[clarification needed]. This is a very painful experience, so patients are told to take the medication with copious amounts of water. Newer analogous compounds prevent this complication because they have a lower pKa, around 5 6,[citation needed] making them more likely to remain in a soluble form.
Many thousands of molecules containing the sulfanilamide structure have been created since its discovery (by one account, over 5,400 permutations by 1945), yielding improved formulations with greater effectiveness and less toxicity. Sulfa drugs are still widely used for conditions such as acne and urinary tract infections, and are receiving renewed interest for the treatment of infections caused by bacteria resistant to other antibiotics.[citation needed]
Preparation[edit]
Sulfonamides are prepared by the reaction of a sulfonyl chloride with ammonia or an amine. Certain sulfonamides (sulfadiazine or sulfamethoxazole) are sometimes mixed with the drug trimethoprim, which acts against dihydrofolate reductase. As of 2013, the Republic of Ireland is the largest exporter worldwide of sulfonamides, accounting for approximately 32% of total exports.[16]
Varieties[edit]
Main article: List of sulfonamides
Side effects[edit]
Person with Stevens Johnson syndromeAllergic urticaria on the skin induced by an antibiotic
Sulfonamides have the potential to cause a variety of adverse effects, including urinary tract disorders, haemopoietic disorders, porphyria and hypersensitivity reactions. When used in large doses, they may cause a strong allergic reaction. The most serious of these are classified as severe cutaneous adverse reactions (i.e. SCARs) and include the Stevens Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis (also known as Lyell syndrome), the DRESS syndrome, and a not quite as serious SCARs reaction, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. Any one of these SCARs may be triggered by certain sulfonamides.[3]
Approximately 3% of the general population have adverse reactions when treated with sulfonamide antimicrobials. Of note is the observation that patients with HIV have a much higher prevalence, at about 60%.[17]
Hypersensitivity reactions are less common in nonantibiotic sulfonamides, and, though controversial, the available evidence suggests those with hypersensitivity to sulfonamide antibiotics do not have an increased risk of hypersensitivity reaction to the nonantibiotic agents.[18] A key component to the allergic response to sulfonamide antibiotics is the arylamine group at N4, found in sulfamethoxazole, sulfasalazine, sulfadiazine, and the anti-retrovirals amprenavir and fosamprenavir. Other sulfonamide drugs do not contain this arylamine group; available evidence suggests that patients who are allergic to arylamine sulfonamides do not cross-react to sulfonamides that lack the arylamine group, and may therefore safely take non-arylamine sulfonamides.[19] It has therefore been argued that the terms "sulfonamide allergy" or "sulfa allergy" are misleading and should be replaced by a reference to a specific drug (e.g., "cotrimoxazole allergy").[20]
Two regions of the sulfonamide antibiotic chemical structure are implicated in the hypersensitivity reactions associated with the class.
The first is the N1 heterocyclic ring, which causes a type I hypersensitivity reaction.
The second is the N4 amino nitrogen that, in a stereospecific process, forms reactive metabolites that cause either direct cytotoxicity or immunologic response.
The nonantibiotic sulfonamides lack both of these structures.[21]
The most common manifestations of a hypersensitivity reaction to sulfa drugs are rash and hives. However, there are several life-threatening manifestations of hypersensitivity to sulfa drugs, including Stevens Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, agranulocytosis, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, fulminant hepatic necrosis, and acute pancreatitis, among others.[22]
See also[edit]
Dihydropteroate synthase
Elixir sulfanilamide
Hellmuth Kleinsorge (1920-2001) German medical doctor
PABA
Timeline of antibiotics
References[edit]
^ Henry RJ (1943). "The Mode of Action of Sulfonamides". Bacteriological Reviews. 7 (4): 175 262. doi:10.1128/MMBR.7.4.175-262.1943. PMC 440870. PMID 16350088.
^ "SULFONAMIDE CLASS ANTIBIOTICS". chemicalland21.com. Retrieved 17 January 2014.
^ a b "Sulfa Drugs Allergy -- Sulfa Bactrim Drug Allergies". allergies.about.com. Retrieved 17 January 2014.
^ M. Madigan, J. Martinko, D. Stahl, D. Clark, Brock Biology of Microorganisms (13th ed.), Pearson Education, 2012, p. 797 ISBN 9780321735515
^ Lackie, John (2010). A Dictionary of Biomedicine. Oxford University Press. p. 543. ISBN 978-0199549351.
^ Otten H (1986). "Domagk and the development of the sulphonamides". Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. 17 (6): 689 696. doi:10.1093/jac/17.6.689. PMID 3525495.
^ Hager, Thomas (1 September 2006). The Demon Under the Microscope: From Battlefield Hospitals to Nazi Labs, One Doctor's Heroic Search for the World's First Miracle Drug. ISBN 978-0-307-35228-6.
^ Cf. Daniel Bovet, Une chimie qui gu rit : Histoire de la d couverte des sulfamides, Paris, Payot, coll.  M decine et soci t s , 1988 (ISBN 2-228-88108-2).
^ Tr fou l, J.; Tr fou l, Th.; Nitti, F.; Bovet, D. (23 November 1935). "Activit  du p. aminoph nylsulfamide sur l'infection streptococcique exp rimentale de la souris et du lapin". C. R. Soc. Biol. 120: 756.
^ "History of medicine". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved 17 January 2014.
^ "Bad Health Elixir Sulfanilamide". The Blog of Bad. 9 February 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2014.
^ "History of WWII Medicine". Archived from the original on 14 October 1999. Retrieved 4 April 2014.
^ "Medicine: Prontosil". Time. 28 December 1936. Retrieved 28 March 2014.
^ Kadenczki, Lajos; Szopk , Henrietta Stef nn  (2012). "Adaptation and extension of sulfonamide and other antibiotics determination by solid-phase extraction followed by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry" (PDF). Geosciences and Engineering. 1 (1): 147. ISSN 2063-6997. OCLC 1066656753.
^ Medical Innovations: Antibiotics The National WWII Museum. Accessed 29 July 2021.
^ "Trade of Sulfonamides". Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Retrieved 26 October 2013.
^ Tilles SA (August 2001). "Practical issues in the management of hypersensitivity reactions: sulfonamides". Southern Medical Journal. 94 (8): 817 24. doi:10.1097/00007611-200108000-00013. PMID 11549195. S2CID 8493824.
^ Slatore CG, Tilles SA (2004). "Sulfonamide hypersensitivity". Immunology and Allergy Clinics of North America. 24 (3): 477 490, vii. doi:10.1016/j.iac.2004.03.011. PMID 15242722.
^ Knowles S, Shapiro L, Shear NH (2001). "Should Celecoxib Be Contraindicated in Patients Who Are Allergic to Sulfonamides?". Drug Safety. 24 (4): 239 247. doi:10.2165/00002018-200124040-00001. PMID 11330653. S2CID 20386434.
^ Veroni M. "ALLERGIES TO SULFONAMIDE ANTIBIOTICS AND CROSS-REACTIVITIES" (PDF). Western Australian Therapeutic Advisory Group. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2014.
^ Brackett CC, Singh H, Block JH (July 2004). "Likelihood and mechanisms of cross-allergenicity between sulfonamide antibiotics and other drugs containing a sulfonamide functional group". Pharmacotherapy. 24 (7): 856 70. doi:10.1592/phco.24.9.856.36106. PMID 15303450. S2CID 25623592.
^ Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 13th Ed. McGraw-Hill Inc. 1994. p. 604.
External links[edit]
List of sulfonamides
Author of The Demon Under the Microscope, a history of the discovery of the sulfa drugs
A History of the Fight Against Tuberculosis in Canada (Chemotherapy)
Presentation speech, Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine, 1939
The History of WW II Medicine
"Five Medical Miracles of the Sulfa Drugs". Popular Science, June 1942, pp. 73 78.
A history of antibiotics
vteAntibacterials that inhibit nucleic acid (J01E, J01M)Antifolates(inhibit bacterialpurine metabolism,thereby inhibitingDNA and RNAsynthesis)DHFR inhibitor
2,4-Diaminopyrimidine
Brodimoprim
Iclaprim 
Ormetoprim
Pyrimethamine#
Tetroxoprim
Trimethoprim#
Sulfonamides(DHPS inhibitor)Short-acting
Sulfaisodimidine
Sulfamethizole
Sulfadimidine
Sulfapyridine (Sulfasalazine)
Sulfafurazole (Acetyl sulfisoxazole)
Sulfanilamide
Prontosil
Sulfathiazole (Phthalylsulfathiazole, Succinylsulfathiazole)
Sulfathiourea
Intermediate-acting
Sulfamethoxazole
Sulfadiazine#
Sulfamoxole
Long-acting
Sulfadimethoxine
Sulfadoxine
Sulfalene
Sulfametomidine
Sulfametoxydiazine
Sulfamethoxypyridazine
Sulfaperin
Sulfamerazine
Sulfaphenazole
Sulfamazone
Other/ungrouped
Mafenide
Sulfacetamide
Sulfaclozine
Sulfadicramide
Sulfaguanidine
Sulfametrole
Sulfanitran
Combinations
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole#
Ormetoprim/sulfadimethoxine
Pyrimethamine/dapsone
Pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine
Other DHPS inhibitors
Acediasulfone
Dapsone
Solasulfone
Sulfoxone
Quinolones(inhibit bacterialtopoisomeraseand/or DNA gyrase,thereby inhibitingDNA replication)1st generation
Cinoxacin 
Flumequine 
Nalidixic acid 
Oxolinic acid 
Pipemidic acid 
Piromidic acid 
Rosoxacin 
Fluoroquinolones2nd generation
Ciprofloxacin#
Ofloxacin
Enoxacin 
Fleroxacin 
Lomefloxacin 
Nadifloxacin 
Norfloxacin 
Pefloxacin 
Rufloxacin 
3rd generation
Levofloxacin#
Balofloxacin 
Grepafloxacin 
Pazufloxacin 
Sparfloxacin 
Temafloxacin 
Tosufloxacin 
4th generation
Besifloxacin
Delafloxacin
Gatifloxacin
Finafloxacin
Gemifloxacin
Moxifloxacin#
Clinafloxacin 
Garenoxacin 
Prulifloxacin 
Sitafloxacin 
Trovafloxacin /Alatrofloxacin 
Veterinary
Danofloxacin
Difloxacin
Enrofloxacin
Ibafloxacin
Marbofloxacin
Orbifloxacin
Pradofloxacin
Sarafloxacin 
Newer non-fluorinated
Nemonoxacin
Related (DG)
Aminocoumarins: Novobiocin
Anaerobic DNAinhibitorsNitroimidazole derivatives
Metronidazole#
Ornidazole
Secnidazole
Tinidazole
Nitrofuran derivatives
Furazolidone 
Nifuroxazide
Nifurtoinol
Nifurzide
Nitrofurantoin#
Nitrofurazone
RNA synthesisRifamycins/RNA polymerase
Rifampicin#
Rifabutin#
Rifapentine#
Rifaximin
Rifalazil 
Lipiarmycins
Fidaxomicin
#WHO-EM
 Withdrawn from market
Clinical trials:
 Phase III
 Never to phase III
vteAnticonvulsants (N03)GABAergicsGABAAR PAMs
Barbiturates: Barbexaclone
Metharbital
Methylphenobarbital
Pentobarbital
Phenobarbital#
Primidone; Carbamates: Cenobamate
Felbamate; Benzodiazepines: Clobazam
Clonazepam
Clorazepate
Diazepam#
Lorazepam#
Midazolam
Nimetazepam
Nitrazepam
Temazepam; Others: Bromide (potassium bromide, sodium bromide)
Imepitoin
Paraldehyde
Stiripentol
GABA-T inhibitors
Fatty acids (and related): Valproate
Valpromide
Valproate pivoxil
Vigabatrin
Others
GABAR agonists: Progabide; GAT-1 inhibitors: Tiagabine
ChannelmodulatorsSodium blockers
Hydantoins: Ethotoin
Fosphenytoin
Mephenytoin
Phenytoin#; Ureides: Acetylpheneturide
Chlorphenacemide
Phenacemide 
Pheneturide; Fatty acids: Valproate
Valpromide
Valproate pivoxil; Carboxamides:
Carbamazepine#
Eslicarbazepine acetate
Oxcarbazepine; Others: Lacosamide
Lamotrigine#
Rufinamide
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Calcium blockers
Oxazolidinediones: Ethadione
Paramethadione
Trimethadione; Succinimides: Ethosuximide#
Mesuximide
Phensuximide; Gabapentinoids: Gabapentin
Pregabalin; Others: Imepitoin
Lamotrigine#
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Potassium openers
Retigabine
OthersCA inhibitors
Sulfonamides: Acetazolamide
Ethoxzolamide
Sultiame
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Others
Albutoin
Beclamide
Brivaracetam
Cannabidiol
Carisbamate
Etiracetam
Fenfluramine
Ganaxolone
Levetiracetam
Perampanel
#WHO-EM
 Withdrawn from market
Clinical trials:
 Phase III
 Never to phase III
vteAntibiotics and chemotherapeutics for dermatological use (D06)AntibioticsTetracycline and derivatives
Demeclocycline
Chlortetracycline
Oxytetracycline
Tetracycline
Others
Amphenicol: Chloramphenicol
Aminoglycosides: Neomycin
Gentamicin
Amikacin
Quinolones: Nadifloxacin
Streptogramin: Virginiamycin
Rifamycin: Rifaximin
other: Fusidic acid
Bacitracin
Tyrothricin
Mupirocin
ChemotherapeuticsSulfonamides
Silver sulfadiazine
Sulfathiazole
Mafenide
Sulfamethizole
Sulfanilamide
Sulfamerazine
Antivirals
Aciclovir
Penciclovir
Idoxuridine
Edoxudine
Imiquimod
Resiquimod
Podophyllotoxin
Docosanol
Tromantadine
Inosine
Lysozyme
Ibacitabine
Lysine
Other
Ingenol mebutate
Metronidazole
Tirbanibulin
vteDiuretics (C03)Sulfonamides(and etacrynic acid)CA inhibitors (at PT)
Acetazolamide
Loop (Na-K-Cl at AL)
Furosemide#
Azosemide
Bumetanide
Etacrynic acid
Etozolin
Indacrinone
Muzolimine
Ozolinone
Piretanide
Tienilic acid 
Torasemide
Thiazides (Na-Cl at DCT,Calcium-sparing)
Altizide
Bendroflumethiazide
Butizide
Chlorothiazide
Cyclopenthiazide
Cyclothiazide
Epitizide
Hydrochlorothiazide#
Hydroflumethiazide
Mebutizide
Methyclothiazide
Polythiazide
Trichlormethiazide
Thiazide-likes (primarily DCT)
Chlortalidone
Clofenamide
Clopamide
Clorexolone
Fenquizone
Indapamide
Mefruside
Meticrane
Metolazone
Quinethazone
Xipamide
Potassium-sparing (at CD)ESC blockers
Amiloride#
Benzamil
Triamterene
Aldosterone antagonists
Spirolactones
Spironolactone#
Canrenone
Eplerenone
Potassium canrenoate
Nonsteroidal
Finerenone
Osmotic diuretics (PT, DL)
Mannitol#
Glycerol
Urea
Vasopressin receptor inhibitors(DCT and CD)
Vaptans
Conivaptan
Mozavaptan
Satavaptan
Tolvaptan
Others
Demeclocycline
Lithium carbonate
Other
Ethanol, Isopropanol, 2M2B
mercurial diuretics (Chlormerodrin, Mersalyl, Meralluride)
Theobromine
Cicletanine
Combination products
Hydrochlorothiazide/triamterene
#WHO-EM
 Withdrawn from market
Clinical trials:
 Phase III
 Never to phase III
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sulfonamide_(medicine)&oldid=1138055856"