Type of salt-cured pork
This article is about the meat. For other uses, see Bacon (disambiguation).
BaconA strip of cooked side (streaky) baconTypeCured porkMain ingredientsSalt-cured pork belly Cookbook: Bacon  Media: Bacon
Bacon is a type of salt-cured pork[1] made from various cuts, typically the belly or less fatty parts of the back. It is eaten as a side dish (particularly in breakfasts), used as a central ingredient (e.g., the bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich (BLT)), or as a flavouring or accent (as in bacon bits in a salad).
Bacon is also used for barding and larding roasts, especially game, including venison and pheasant, and may also be used to insulate or flavour roast joints by being layered onto the meat. The word is derived from the Proto-Germanic *bakkon, meaning "back meat".[2]
Uncooked cured and smoked side baconAfter being pan-fried
Meat from other animals, such as beef, lamb, chicken, goat, or turkey, may also be cut, cured, or otherwise prepared to resemble bacon, and may even be referred to as, for example, "turkey bacon".[3] Such use is common in areas with significant Jewish and Muslim populations as both religions prohibit the consumption of pork.[4] Vegetarian bacons such as "soy bacon" also exist.
Curing and smoking
 Uncured pork belly
Before the advent of cheap and widespread artificial refrigeration in the modern era, the curing of meat was necessary for its safe long-term preservation. However, both the flavour imparted to the meat in doing so and the extended shelf life it offered had become much prized, and although curing is in general no longer necessary in the developed world, it continues in wide use.
Bacon is cured through either a process of injecting it with or soaking it in brine, known as wet curing, or rubbed with salt, known as dry curing.[1][5] Bacon brine has added curing ingredients, most notably nitrites or nitrates, which speed the curing and stabilize colour. Cured bacon may then be dried for weeks or months in cold air, or it may be smoked or boiled.[1] Fresh and dried bacon are typically cooked before eating, often by pan frying. Boiled bacon is ready to eat, as is some smoked bacon, but they may be cooked further before eating. Differing flavours can be achieved by using various types of wood, or less common fuels such as corn cobs or peat. This process can take up to eighteen hours, depending on the intensity of the flavour desired. The Virginia Housewife (1824), thought to be one of the earliest American cookbooks, gives no indication that bacon is ever not smoked, though it gives no advice on flavouring, noting only that care should be taken lest the fire get too hot.[6]
Bacon is distinguished from other salt-cured pork by differences in the cuts of meat used and in the brine or dry packing. Historically, the terms "ham" and "bacon" referred to different cuts of meat that were brined or packed identically, often together in the same barrel. Today, ham is defined as coming from the hind portion of the pig and brine specifically for curing ham includes a greater amount of sugar, while bacon is less sweet, though ingredients such as brown sugar or maple syrup are used for flavour. Bacon is similar to salt pork, which in modern times is often prepared from similar cuts, but salt pork is never smoked, and has a much higher salt content.[7]
For safety, bacon may be treated to prevent trichinosis,[8] caused by Trichinella, a parasitic roundworm which can be destroyed by heating, freezing, drying, or smoking.[9] Sodium polyphosphates, such as sodium triphosphate, may also be added to make the product easier to slice and to reduce spattering when the bacon is pan-fried.
Cuts
 Uncooked strips of side bacon
 Uncooked back bacon
 Sliced jowl bacon
Bacon type differs depending on the primal cut of pork from which it is prepared,[7][1] which reflects local preference.
Side bacon, sometimes known as "streaky bacon", comes from the pork belly.[7][1] It has long alternating layers of fat and muscle running parallel to the rind.[7][10] This is the most common form of bacon in the United States.[7]
Pancetta is an Italian form of side bacon, sold smoked or unsmoked (aqua). It is generally rolled up into cylinders after curing, and is known for having a strong flavour.[7][1]
Back bacon contains meat from the loin in the middle of the back of the pig.[7][11] It is a leaner cut, with less fat compared to side bacon.[1] Most bacon consumed in the United Kingdom and Ireland is back bacon.[7][12]
Collar bacon is taken from the back of a pig near the head.[7][13]
Cottage bacon is made from the lean meat from a boneless pork shoulder that is typically tied into an oval shape.[7]
Jowl bacon is cured and smoked cheeks of pork.[14] Guanciale is an Italian jowl bacon that is seasoned and dry cured but not smoked.
The inclusion of skin with a cut of bacon, known as the 'bacon rind',[15] varies, though is less common in the English-speaking world.
Around the world
Australia and New Zealand
The most common form sold is middle bacon, which includes some of the streaky, fatty section of side bacon along with a portion of the loin of back bacon. In response to increasing consumer diet-consciousness, some supermarkets also offer the loin section only. This is sold as short cut bacon and is usually priced slightly higher than middle bacon. Both varieties are usually available with the rind removed.[16]
Canada
 Roasted peameal bacon with a maple glaze at the St. Lawrence Market in Toronto, Ontario, Canada
In Canada, the term bacon on its own typically refers to side bacon.[17] Canadian-style back bacon is a lean cut from the eye of the pork loin with little surrounding fat.[17] Peameal bacon is an unsmoked back bacon, wet-cured and coated in fine-ground cornmeal (historically, it was rolled in ground, dried peas);[17] it is popular in southern Ontario. Bacon is often eaten in breakfasts, such as with cooked eggs or pancakes. Maple syrup is often used as a flavouring while curing bacon in Canada.
Germany
 German Speck, a salted, smoked, and roasted pork fatback or belly cut used as a cold cut
Some of the meanings of bacon overlap with the German-language term Speck. Germans use the term bacon explicitly for Fr hst cksspeck ('breakfast Speck') which are cured or smoked pork slices. Traditional German cold cuts favor ham over bacon, however Wammerl (grilled pork belly) remains popular in Bavaria.
Small bacon cubes (called Grieben or Grammerln in Austria and southern Germany) have been a rather important ingredient of various southern German dishes. They are used for adding flavour to soups and salads and for Speck dumplings and various noodle and potato dishes. Instead of preparing them at home from larger slices, they have been sold ready made as convenience foods recently as Baconw rfel ("bacon cubes") in German retail stores.
Japan
In Japan, bacon ( )[18] is pronounced "b kon". It is cured and smoked belly meat as in the US, and is sold in either regular or half-length sizes. Bacon in Japan is different from that in the US in that the meat is not sold raw, but is processed, precooked and has a ham-like consistency when cooked.[19] Uncured, sliced pork belly, known as bara ( ), is very popular in Japan and is used in a variety of dishes (e.g. yakitori and yakiniku).
United Kingdom and Ireland
Back bacon is the most common form in the UK and Ireland, and is the usual meaning of the plain term "bacon". A thin slice of bacon is known as a rasher; about 70% of bacon is sold as rashers.[20] Heavily trimmed back cuts which consist of just the eye of meat, known as a medallion, are also available. All types may be unsmoked or smoked. The side cut normal in America is known as "streaky bacon",[21] and there is also a long cut, curving round on itself, known as "middle bacon", which is back bacon at one end, and streaky at the other, as well as less common cuts.[22] Bacon is also sold and served as joints, usually boiled, broiled or roast,[23] or in thicker slices called chops or steaks. These are usually eaten as part of other meals.[5]
Bacon may be cured in several ways, and may be smoked or unsmoked; unsmoked bacon is known as "green bacon".[5] Fried or grilled bacon rashers are included in the "traditional" full breakfast. Hot bacon sandwiches are a popular cafe dish in the UK and Ireland,[24] and are anecdotally recommended as a hangover cure.[25]
Bacon is often served with eggs and sausages as part of a full English breakfast.[26]
United States
The term bacon on its own generally refers to side bacon, which is the most popular type of bacon sold in the US. Back bacon is known as "Canadian bacon" or "Canadian-style bacon", and is usually sold pre-cooked and thick-sliced.[27] American bacons include varieties smoked with hickory, mesquite or applewood and flavourings such as maple, brown sugar, honey, or molasses.[28] A side of unsliced bacon is known as "slab bacon".[29]
USDA regulations only recognized bacon as "cured" if it has been treated with synthetic nitrites or nitrates (e.g. sodium nitrate or potassium nitrate). This means that bacon cured with nitrites derived from celery or beets (which has the same chemical outcome) must be labelled "uncured" and include a notice such as "no nitrates or nitrites added except for that naturally occurring in celery". There is also bacon for sale uncured with any nitrites from any sources.[30]
History
Salted pork belly first appeared in China. In Middle English the term bacon or bacoun referred to all pork in general.[31]  Before the Industrial Revolution, bacon was generally produced on local farms and in domestic kitchens. The world's first commercial bacon processing plant was opened in Wiltshire in the 1770s by John Harris.[32]
Bacon mania
Main article: Bacon mania
 Chocolate-covered bacon on a stick
The United States and Canada have seen an increase in the popularity of bacon and bacon-related recipes, dubbed "bacon mania". The sale of bacon in the US has increased significantly since 2011. Sales climbed 9.5% in 2013, making it an all-time high of nearly $4 billion in US. In a survey conducted by Smithfield, 65% of Americans would support bacon as their "national food".[33] Dishes such as bacon explosion, chicken fried bacon, and chocolate-covered bacon have been popularised over the Internet,[34] as has the use of candied bacon. Recipes spread quickly through both countries' national media, culinary blogs, and YouTube.[35][36] Restaurants have organised and are organising bacon and beer tasting nights,[37] The New York Times reported on bacon infused with Irish whiskey used for Saint Patrick's Day cocktails,[38] and celebrity chef Bobby Flay has endorsed a "Bacon of the Month" club online, in print,[39] and on national television.[40] Everything Tastes Better with Bacon, a 2002 book by Sara Perry, is a cookbook in which all dishes contain bacon.[41]
Commentators explain this surging interest in bacon by reference to what they deem American cultural characteristics. Sarah Hepola, in a 2008 article in Salon.com, suggests a number of reasons, one of them being that eating bacon in the modern, health-conscious world is an act of rebellion: "Loving bacon is like shoving a middle finger in the face of all that is healthy and holy while an unfiltered cigarette smoulders between your lips."[42] She also suggests bacon is sexy (with a reference to Sarah Katherine Lewis' book Sex and Bacon), kitsch, and funny. Hepola concludes by saying that "Bacon is American".
Alison Cook, writing in the Houston Chronicle, argues the case of bacon's American citizenship by referring to historical and geographical uses of bacon.[35] Early American literature echoes the sentiment in Ebenezer Cooke's 1708 poem The Sot-Weed Factor, a satire of life in early colonial America, the narrator already complains that practically all the food in America was bacon-infused.[43]
As of December 2016, the U.S. national frozen pork belly inventory totaled 17.8 million lb (8.1 million kg), the lowest level in 50 years.[44]
Bacon dishes
Main article: List of bacon dishes
 A bacon, lettuce, and tomato (BLT) sandwich
Bacon dishes include bacon and eggs, bacon, lettuce, and tomato (BLT) sandwiches, Cobb salad, and various bacon-wrapped foods, such as scallops, shrimp,[45][46][47] and asparagus. Recently invented bacon dishes include chicken fried bacon, chocolate covered bacon, bacon jerky, bacon ice cream and the bacon explosion. Tatws Pum Munud is a traditional Welsh stew, made with sliced potatoes, vegetables and smoked bacon. Bacon jam and bacon marmalade are also commercially available.
Streaky bacon is more commonly used as a topping in the US on such items as pizza, salads, sandwiches, hamburgers, baked potatoes, hot dogs, and soups. In the US, sliced smoked back bacon is used less frequently than the streaky variety, but can sometimes be found on pizza, salads, and omelettes.
Bacon is also used as an accent in dishes, such as bacon-topped meatloaf,[48] saut ed crisp and crumbled into green beans,[49] or as a crumble in a salad.
Bacon bits are crumbled bacon in condiment form, typically commercially prepared and preserved for long shelf life.
Bacon fat
 Bacon frying in its own grease
Bacon fat liquefies and becomes drippings when it is heated. Once cool, it firms into a form of lard. Bacon fat is flavourful and is used for various cooking purposes. Traditionally, bacon grease is saved in British and southern US cuisine, and used as a base for cooking and as an all-purpose flavouring, for everything from gravy to cornbread[50] to salad dressing.[51]
 German Griebenschmalz used as spread
In Germany, Griebenschmalz is a popular spread made from bacon lard.
Bacon is often used for a cooking technique called barding consisting of laying or wrapping strips of bacon or other fats over a roast to provide additional fat to a lean piece of meat. It is often used for roast game birds, and is a traditional method of preparing beef filet mignon, which is wrapped in strips of bacon before cooking. The bacon itself may afterwards be discarded or served to eat, like cracklings. It may also be cut into lardons.
One teaspoon (4 g or 0.14 oz) of bacon grease has 38 calories (40 kJ/g).[52] It is composed almost completely of fat, with very little additional nutritional value. Bacon fat is roughly 40% saturated.[52] Despite the disputed health risks of excessive bacon grease consumption, it remains popular in the cuisine of the American South.[53]
Nutrients
One 10-g slice of cooked side bacon contains 4.5 g of fat, 3.0 g of protein, and 205 mg of sodium.[54] The fat, protein, and sodium content varies depending on the cut and cooking method.
68% of the food energy of bacon comes from fat, almost half of which is saturated.[55] A serving of three slices of bacon contains 30 milligrams of cholesterol (0.1%).[55][56]
Health concerns
See also: Dietary recommendations for saturated fat and Health effects of salt
Studies have consistently found the consumption of processed meat to be linked to increased mortality, and to an increased risk of developing a number of serious health conditions including cancer, cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.[57][58] Although as of 2017[update] these links have not been definitely established as causal, they are likely to be.[58]
Bacon can contain nitrites, which can form carcinogenic nitroso-compounds such as S-Nitrosothiols , nitrosyl-heme and nitrosamines. In the United States, sodium nitrite cannot exceed certain levels in bacon. Vitamin C (ascorbate) or sodium erythorbate can be added to bacon, which greatly reduces the formation of nitrosamines but has no effect on S-Nitrosothiols and nitrosyl-heme.[59] Vitamin E (tocopherol) also reduces nitrosamine levels. Bacon fried at higher temperatures potentially has more nitrosamines than bacon fried at lower temperatures.[60]
According to the World Health Organization in 2015, regular consumption of processed meats such as bacon increases the likelihood of developing colorectal cancers by 18%.[61]
Alternatives
Several alternatives to and substitutes for bacon have been developed for those who cannot or prefer not to eat standard pork bacon, including beef, chicken, turkey, bison, soy, and coconut bacon.
Turkey bacon
Main article: Turkey bacon
 Chopped, formed, colored, and flavored turkey bacon strips
Turkey bacon is consumed by some as an alternative to pork bacon for health benefits, religious laws, or other concerns.[1][62] It is lower in fat and food energy than bacon,[1][62] but is used similarly.[62]
The meat for turkey bacon comes from the whole turkey, which is chopped and reformed into strips to resemble bacon, and can be cured or uncured, or smoked.[1] Turkey bacon is cooked by pan-frying.[62] Cured turkey bacon made from dark meat can be less than 10% fat.[63] The low fat content of turkey bacon means it does not shrink while being cooked and has a tendency to stick to the pan.[63]
Macon
Main article: Macon (food)
"Macon" is produced by curing cuts of mutton in a manner similar to the production of pork bacon.[64] Historically produced in Scotland, it was introduced across Britain during World War II as a consequence of rationing.[65][66] It is today available as an alternative to bacon, produced for the Muslim market and sold at halal butchers; it is largely similar in appearance to pork bacon except for the darker colour.[67]
Vegetarian bacon
Main article: Vegetarian bacon
Vegetarian bacon, also referred to as facon, veggie bacon, or vacon, is a vegetarian "bacon" made from plant matter.[68] It has no cholesterol, is low in fat, and contains large amounts of protein and fibre.[68] Two slices contain about 310 kilojoules (74 kcal).[68] Vegetarian bacon is usually made from marinated strips of textured soy protein or tempeh (fermented soybeans).
Bacon-flavoured products
The popularity of bacon in the United States has given rise to a number of commercial products that promise to add bacon flavouring without the labour involved in cooking it.
Bacon bits
 Bacon bits in a bowl
Bacon bits are a frequently used topping on salad or potatoes, and a common element of salad bars.[1] They are usually salted. Bacon bits are made from small, crumbled pieces of bacon;[1] in commercial plants they are cooked in continuous microwave ovens. Similar products are made from ham or turkey, and analogues are made from textured vegetable protein, artificially flavoured to resemble bacon.[69]
Other bacon-flavoured products
There is also a wide range of other bacon-flavoured products, including a bacon-flavoured salt (Bacon Salt),[1][70] Baconnaise (a bacon-flavoured mayonnaise),[1][71] Bacon Grill (a tinned meat, similar to Spam) and bacon ice cream.
See also
Related articles
List of smoked foods
Salo (food)  Slavic traditional cured pork   Eastern European salt-cured fatback
Samgyeopsal  Korean grilled pork belly dish
Zeeuws spek
Books
Food portal
Seduced by Bacon  Cookbook by Joanna Pruess
Everything Tastes Better with Bacon  2002 cookbook by Sara Perry
Bacon and Hams  1917 book by George J. Nicholls
Bacon: A Love Story  Book by Heather Lauer
The Bacon Cookbook  Cookbook by James Villas
The BLT Cookbook  Cookbook by Michele Anna Jordan
I Love Bacon!  Cookbook by Ben Fink
References
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Filippone, Peggy. "What is bacon". thespruce.com. Retrieved 30 April 2017.
^ Online Etymological Dictionary: bacon (n.)
^ "Eat cheap but well! Make a tasty beef in beer". Today. NBC News. 30 April 2009. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2009.
^ "Health and You". New Straits Times. 12 May 2009. Archived from the original on 27 June 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2009.
^ a b c "Bacon Cuts". James Whelan Butchers. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ Randolph, Mary; Karen Hess (1984). The Virginia Housewife. University of South Carolina Press. pp. 18 19. ISBN 978-0-87249-423-7.
^ a b c d e f g h i j "Bacon Varieties". The Bacon Page. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2014.
^ "USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service: Glossary B". Food Safety and Inspection Service. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ Hui, Yiu H.; Bruinsma, L. Bernard; Gorham, J. Richard (2002). Food Plant Sanitation. CRC Press. p. 605. ISBN 978-0-8247-0793-4. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ "Kiwi Bacon   All about bacon". Kiwi Bacon. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ "A Guide To Traditional British Back Bacon". The English Breakfast Society. 4 January 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ "Information and Statistics 2005" (PDF). Danish Bacon Company. 30 March 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 January 2006. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ "Food   Glossary   'C'   'Collar'". BBC. Archived from the original on 23 May 2006. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ "Jowl Bacon". Zingerman's. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ "bacon rind   definition of bacon rind by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia". Farlex, Inc. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ "Food Service   Bacon". KR Castlemaine. Archived from the original on 1 October 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ a b c Canadian Oxford Dictionary, 2nd ed. (2004).
^ "Japanese Meaning or Translation of   'bacon'". Bdword. Retrieved 9 February 2014.
^ "  |   |". Itoham.co.jp. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ "How to make the perfect full English breakfast". 25 June 2015. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.
^ "The Full English Breakfast Hops the Pond". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 21 February 2018
^ "What's the difference between the different bacon cuts?", 14 July 2017, www.puddledub.co.uk/blog.
^ "What are Bacon Joints?", Wiltshire Bacon Co.
^ Cloake, Felicity (7 March 2012). "How to cook the perfect bacon sandwich". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
^ "Bacon sandwich really does cure a hangover". The Daily Telegraph. 7 April 2009. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2019.
^ "The Full English Breakfast". 4 January 2014. English Breakfast Society. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ Christensen, Emma (7 October 2020). "What's the Difference Between Canadian Bacon (or Irish, or English) and American?". thekitchen.com. Retrieved 14 September 2021.
^ R. W. Apple Jr. The Smoky Trail To a Great Bacon 16 February 2000 The New York Times
^ Hog, Boss (19 April 2013). "Whiskey Maple Glazed Slab Bacon". Bacon Today. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2014.
^ The 'uncured' bacon illusion: It's actually cured, and it's not better for you.
^ "A Short History of Bacon". The Spruce Eats. Retrieved 16 January 2022.
^ "The History of Bacon". English Breakfast Society. Retrieved 16 January 2022.
^ Passy, Charles (11 February 2014). "Bacon sales sizzle to all-time high". Market Watch. Retrieved 11 February 2014.
^ "Get Your BBQ On: Bacon-Infused Webinar Sheds Light on Social Media Marketing Viral Marketing Sensation BBQ Addicts Join Marketbright for a Free Webinar on Marketing 2.0". Marketwire. 24 March 2009. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ a b Cook, Alison (5 March 2009). "It's a 'we love bacon' world: We're just lucky to be living and dining in it". Houston Chronicle.
^ "Candied Bacon Martini". Los Angeles Times.
^ "Bacon and Beer Tasting at Jimmy's No. 43". New York Barfly. 4 November 2008. Archived from the original on 20 April 2009. Retrieved 15 March 2009.
^ Miles, Jonathan (13 March 2009). "Wear the Green but Don't Drink It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009.
^ "Bacon of the Month Club". The Grateful Palate. Archived from the original on 22 March 2009. Retrieved 15 March 2009.
^ "Food Gifts That Keep on Giving: From Utensils To Treats, Bobby Flay Likes To Give (Or Receive) These Presents". CBS News. 13 December 2007. Archived from the original on 8 May 2009.
^ Crooks, Laura (7 August 2002). "Let bacon add a little sizzle to your meal". The Spokesman-Review. Cowles Publishing Company. p. D1. Archived from the original on 6 September 2002.
^ Hepola, Sarah (7 July 2008). "Bacon mania: Why are Americans so batty for bacon? It's delicious, it's decadent   and it's also a fashion statement". Salon.com.
^ Kay, Arthur (1998). "Ebenezer Cooke: The Sot-Weed Factor". Renascence editions. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008.
^ "Nation's bacon reserves hit 50-year low as prices rise". USA Today. Retrieved 1 February 2017.
^ Siegel, Helene (1997). Totally Shrimp Cookbook. Celestial Arts. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-89087-823-1.
^ Wise, Jane E. (2005). The Culinary Guide for MSPI. Milk Soy Protein Intolerance. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-9764023-0-5.
^ Daley, Bill (11 March 2001). "Chengdu Cuisine of China". Hartford Courant. p. 10. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2017.
^ "Recipe Bacon wrapped meatloaf". WKRG Mobile, Alabama. 10 April 2008. Archived from the original on 10 June 2008. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ "Recipe Green Beans with Bacon". WKRG Mobile, Alabama. 28 July 2008. Archived from the original on 10 July 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ Rombauer, Irma; Rombauer Becker, Marion (1964). "Pan Gravy". The Joy of Cooking. Bobbs-Merrill Company. p. 322. ISBN 978-0-02-604570-4.
^ Brown, Alton. "Bacon Vinaigrette with Grilled Radicchio". Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Retrieved 13 January 2008.
^ a b "Nutritional Summary for Animal fat, bacon grease". nutritiondata.com. Retrieved 5 May 2009.
^ McDaniel, Rob. "From the Chef: Balance Essential to Southern Food, not just Bacon Drippings". SpringHouse at Crossroads. Archived from the original on 25 December 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2014.
^ "USDA Branded Food Products Database   Thick Cut Bacon". United States Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 29 March 2019.[dead link]
^ a b Magee, Elaine. "Can Bacon Be Part of a Healthy Diet?". WebMD. Retrieved 5 January 2014.
^ Jacques, Renee (12 November 2013). "9 Unfortunate Truths About Juicy, Scrumptious Bacon". The Huffington Post.
^ Rohrmann S, Linseisen J (August 2016). "Processed meat: the real villain?" (PDF). Proc Nutr Soc (Review). 75 (3): 233 41. doi:10.1017/S0029665115004255. PMID 26621069.
^ a b Wolk A (February 2017). "Potential health hazards of eating red meat". J. Intern. Med. (Review). 281 (2): 106 122. doi:10.1111/joim.12543. PMID 27597529. S2CID 24130100.
^ Nitrosamines and RelatedN-Nitroso Compounds. ACS Symposium Series. Vol. 553. American Chemical Society. 1994. doi:10.1021/bk-1994-0553. ISBN 0-8412-2856-6.
^ "Bacon and Food Safety". usda.gov. Retrieved 18 October 2020.
^ Gallagher, James (26 October 2015). "Processed meats do cause cancer   WHO". BBC News. Retrieved 27 October 2015.[unreliable medical source?]
^ a b c d Gold, Amanda (22 October 2008). "One turkey bacon stands out in the flock". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 13 May 2009.
^ a b "Turkey Bacon Wins Support as Good Meat at Breakfast". Deseret News. 23 January 1991.
^ Shephard, Sue (2006). Pickled, Potted, and Canned: How the Art and Science of Food Preserving Changed the World. Simon and Schuster. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-7432-5553-0.
^ "Grand Strategy: Half-Year Mark". Time. 11 March 1940. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Footnote in Time magazine mentions wartime use.
^ "23.1.40". 23 January 2010.
^ Booley, Ashraf. "Macon: Bacon's Underrated Cousin". Woolworth's Taste. Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 2 March 2015.
^ a b c "Vegetarian Bacon". Archived from the original on 25 March 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "Textured Vegetable Protein". Diversified Foods Inc. Archived from the original on 23 July 2008. Retrieved 15 March 2009.
^ Neal Karlinsky (21 April 2009). "'Bacontrepreneurs' Building Bacon Empire". ABC News. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016.
^ "J & D's   Everything Should Taste Like Bacon". J & D's. Archived from the original on 2 March 2009. Retrieved 15 March 2009.
Further reading
Anderson, H. J., "Bacon Production" in Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences, Editors M. Dikeman, Carrick Devine, 2004, Academic Press, ISBN 0080924441, 9780080924441, google books
Coudray, Guillaume. Who poisoned your bacon? The dangerous history of meat additives. London: Icon Books, 2021. [1][2]
External links
Look up bacon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bacon.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Bacon.
Links to related articles
vtePigs
Kingdom Animalia
Phylum Chordata
Class Mammalia
Order Artiodactyla
Suborder Suina
Family Suidae
Subfamily Suinae
Genus Sus
Species Sus domesticus
Domestic
Breeding
Shows
Farming
Intensive farming
Sty
Pannage
Toilet
Hog oiler
Gestation crate
Cross-fostering
Swineherd
As food
Bacon
Bondiola
Capocollo
Ham
Lard
Pork
Chitterlings
Scalder
Slaughter
Suckling
Blood
Religious restrictions
Scottish pork taboo
Cuts
Back bacon
Boston butt
Fatback
Ham hock
Pig's trotters
Pork belly
Pork chop
Pork jowl
Loin
Tenderloin
Ribs
Spare ribs
Pork rind
Pork steak
Ear
Tail
Other uses
Bladder
Racing
War
Wrestling
Truffling
Wild and feral
Wild boar
Heraldry
Hunting
Razorback
Boar pig hybrid
In culture
Freddy the Pig
Flitch of bacon custom
Floyd of Rosedale
Miss Piggy
"Pigs in Space"
Porky Pig
Piglet
"The Three Little Pigs"
Animal Farm
Old Major
Napoleon
Snowball
Squealer
Babe
Babe: Pig in the City
Bad Piggies
Blandings Castle
Empress of Blandings
My Brother the Pig
Charlotte's Web
The Sheep-Pig
Peppa Pig
Super Pig
Fair, then Partly Piggy
Heat the Pig Liver
Jakers! The Adventures of Piggley Winks
Kazoops!
Olivia (character)
TV series
Pink Floyd pigs
Pinky and Perky
Preston Pig
Rasher
Porco Rosso
Spider-Ham
Spider pig
The Tale of Little Pig Robinson
The Tale of Pigling Bland
"This Little Piggy"
Toot & Puddle
Huxley Pig
Wibbly Pig
Zhu Bajie
Hamilton Hocks
Pig City
Other
List of individual pigs
List of fictional pigs
Piganino
Pigasus (politics)
 Category: Pigs
vteBaconCuts, varieties andsimilar products
Back bacon
Bacon bits
Bacon Grill
Fatback
Guanciale
Lardo
Vall e d'Aoste Lard d'Arnad
Lardon
Macon
Pancetta
Peameal bacon
Petit Sal 
Pork belly
Pork jowl
Salo
Salt pork
Speck
Szalonna
Tocino
Turkey bacon
Vegetarian bacon
Wiltshire cure
Zeeuws spek
Dishes
Angels on horseback
Bacon and cabbage
Bacon and egg pie
Bacon cake
Bacon ice cream
Bacon, egg and cheese sandwich
Bacon Explosion
Baconnaise
Bacon sandwich
Bacon soup
Baconator
BLT
Br ndende k rlighed
Carniolan sausage
Chicken fried bacon
Chivito
Chocolate-covered bacon
Clams casino
Cobb salad
Coddle
 varci
Devils on horseback
Fool's Gold Loaf
Full breakfast
Garbure
Hangtown fry
Hoppin' John
Hot Brown
Jambonette
Kugelis
Luther Burger
Maple bacon donut
Oysters en brochette
Peanut butter, banana and bacon sandwich
Pig candy
Pigs in blankets
Rinderroulade
Rumaki
Samgyeopsal
Se'i
Seven-layer salad
Slavink
Spe rau i
Stegt fl sk
Tatws Pum Munud
T r s csusza
Drinks
Bacon martini
Bacon soda
Bacon vodka
BLT cocktail
Mitch Morgan
Topics
Bacon Bowl
Bacon mania
Blue Ribbon Bacon Festival
Danger dog
Flitch of bacon custom
Heather Lauer
J&D's Down Home Enterprises
T. A. Denny
Books
Bacon: A Love Story
The Bacon Cookbook
Bacon and Hams
The BLT Cookbook
Don't Forget the Bacon!
Everything Tastes Better with Bacon
I Love Bacon!
Seduced by Bacon
 Category
vteMeatPoultry
Cassowary
Chicken
Duck
Emu
Goose
Ostrich
Pigeon
Quail
Rhea
Turkey
Livestock
Alpaca
Beef
Beefalo
Bison
Buffalo
Camel
Cat
Goat
Dog
Donkey
Elephant
Snails
Frog
Guinea pig
Horse
Lamb and mutton
Llama
Pork
Veal
Yak
 ubro 
Game
Alligator
Bat
Bear
Boar
Crocodile
Iguana
Kangaroo
Monkey
Pangolin
Rat
Hare
Rabbit
Snake
Turtle
Venison
Dog
Wolf
Fish
Anchovy
Basa
Bass
Carp
Catfish
Cod
Crappie
Eel
Flounder
Grouper
Haddock
Halibut
Herring
Kingfish
Mackerel
Mahi Mahi
Marlin
Milkfish
Orange roughy
Pacific saury
Perch
Pike
Pollock
Salmon
Sardine
Shark
Sole
Swai
Swordfish
Tilapia
Trout
Tuna
Walleye
Shellfish andother seafood
Abalone
Calamari
Chiton
Clam
Crab
Crayfish
Dolphin
Lobster
Mussel
Octopus
Oyster
Scallop
Seal
Shrimp/prawn
Sea urchin
Whale
Insects
Ants
Black soldier fly maggots
Cicada
Crickets
Flour
Grasshoppers (locust)
Mealworm
Mezcal worm
Silkworm
Mopane worm
Palm grub
Cuts andpreparation
Aged
Bacon
Barbecued
Biltong
Braised
Burger
Charcuterie
Chop
Corned
Cured
Cutlet
Dried
Dum
Fillet/supreme
Fried
Ground
Ham
Jerky
Kebab
Liver
Luncheon meat
Marinated
Meatball
Meatloaf
Offal
Pickled
Poached
Roasted
Salt-cured
Salumi
Sausage
Smoked
Steak
Stewed
Tandoor
Tartare
List articlesMeat dishes
Beef
Chicken
Fish
Goat
Lamb
Pork
Ham
Seafood
Veal
Steaks
Meatball
Smoked foods
Sausage
Other
Countries by meat consumption
Food and drink prohibitions
Meat substitutes
Ethics andpsychology
Ethics of eating meat
Carnism
Animal rights
Psychology of eating meat
Meat paradox
Alternatives
Vegetarianism
Semi-vegetarianism
Pescetarianism
Pollotarianism
Plant-based diet
Meat analogue
Veganism
Relatedsubjects
Arachnophagy
Bushmeat
Butcher
Cannibalism
Case-ready meat
Cultured meat
Entomophagy
Factory farming
Feed conversion ratio
Environmental impact
Marbled
Meat cutter
Meat science
Meat tenderness
Non-vegetarian
Pink slime
Preservation
Raw meat
Red meat
Slaughter
Slaughterhouse
White meat
 Food portal
 Category: Meat
vteEdible fats and oilsFatsPork fats
Fatback
Lardo
Salo
Szalonna
Lard
Lardon
Pork belly
Bacon
Pancetta
Salt pork
Tocino
Speck
Beef/mutton fats
Dripping
Suet
Tallow
Tail fat
Dairy fats
Butter
Clarified butter
Ghee
Niter kibbeh
Smen
Poultry fats
Chicken fat
Duck fat
Schmaltz
Other animal fats
Blubber
Muktuk
Whale oil
Vegetable fats
Borneo tallow
Cocoa butter
Mango butter
Margarine
Shea butter
Vegetable shortening
OilsFish oils
Cod liver oil
Shark liver oil
Vegetable oilsMajor oils
Coconut oil
Corn oil
Cottonseed oil
Olive oil
Palm oil
palm kernel oil
Peanut oil
Rapeseed oil
Safflower oil
Soybean oil
Sunflower oil
Nut oils
Almond oil
Argan oil
Cashew oil
Hazelnut oil
Macadamia oil
Marula oil
Mongongo nut oil
Pecan oil
Pine nut oil
Pistachio oil
Walnut oil
Fruit and seed oils
Ambadi seed oil
Apple seed oil
Avocado oil
Castor oil
Grape seed oil
Hemp oil
Linseed oil (flaxseed oil)
Mustard oil
Olive oil
Perilla oil
Poppyseed oil
Pumpkin seed oil
Rice bran oil
Sesame oil
Tea seed oil
Watermelon seed oil
See also
List of vegetable oils
Cooking oil
Essential oil
Authority control National
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bacon&oldid=1146092277"