Major branch of Protestantism
"Lutheran church" redirects here. For a list of church buildings, see List of Lutheran churches.
Part of a series onLutheranismLuther's rose
Background
Christianity
Start of the Reformation
Reformation
Protestantism
Doctrine and theology
Bible
Old Testament
New Testament
Creeds
Apostles' Creed
Nicene Creed
Athanasian Creed
Book of Concord
Augsburg Confession
Apology of the Augsburg Confession
Luther's Small / Large Catechism
Smalcald Articles
Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope
Formula of Concord
Distinctive theological concepts
Theology of Martin Luther
Justification
Law and Gospel
Sola gratia
Sola scriptura
Christology
Sanctification
Two kingdoms
catholicity
Two states of the Church
Priesthood of all believers
Divine Providence
Marian theology
Theology of the Cross
Sacramental Union
Other relevant topics
Homosexuality
Sacraments and worship
Baptism
Eucharist
Confession
Confirmation
Matrimony
Anointing of the Sick
Holy Orders
Divine Service
Matins
Vespers
Liturgical calendar
Calendar of saints
Lutheran hymn
Lutheran hymnwriters
Normative principle
Lutheran art
Organization
Confessional EvangelicalLutheran Conference
Global Confessional &Missional Lutheran Forum
International Lutheran Council
Lutheran World Federation
Denominations
Lutheranism by region
Movements
History of Lutheranism
Crypto-Lutherans
Gnesio-Lutherans
Lutheran orthodoxy
Pietists
Radical Pietism
Haugeans
Laestadians
Finnish Awakening
Old Lutherans
Neo-Lutherans
High church Lutherans
Confessional Lutheranism
Missionaries
John Campanius
Bartholom us Ziegenbalg
Hans Egede
Johann Heinrich Callenberg
Johann Phillip Fabricius
Paul Henkel
John Christian Frederick Heyer
Karl Graul
Martti Rautanen
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken
Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Lars Olsen Skrefsrud
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
Onesimos Nesib
Paul Olaf Bodding
Johann Flierl
Christian Keyser
Jens Christensen
Bible translators
Martin Luther
Casiodoro de Reina
Kjell Magne Yri
Onesimos Nesib
Aster Ganno
Kristian Osvald Vider 
J kup Dahl
Bartholom us Ziegenbalg
Johann Phillip Fabricius
William Tyndale
John Rogers
George Constantine
Jozef Roh ek
Johannes Avetaranian
Gu brandur  orl ksson
Ludvig Olsen Fossum
Hans Egede / Paul Egede
Otto Fabricius
Nils Vibe Stockfleth
Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri
Martti Rautanen
Primo  Trubar
Jurij Dalmatin
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
Sebastian Krelj
Mikael Agricola
Norwegian Bible Society
Swedish Bible Society
Samuel Ludwik Zasadius
Stanislovas Rapolionis
Laurentius Andreae
Hans Tausen
Olaf M. Norlie
Jonas Bretk nas
Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Antonio Brucioli
Miko aj Jakubica
Matthias Bel
Johann Ernst Gl ck
William F. Beck
Theologians
Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen
Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas
Hans Tausen
Laurentius Petri
Olaus Petri
Mikael Agricola
Matthias Flacius
Martin Chemnitz
Johann Gerhard
Abraham Calovius
Johannes Andreas Quenstedt
Johann Wilhelm Baier
Philipp Spener
David Hollaz
August Hermann Francke
Henry Muhlenberg
Friedrich Schleiermacher
Lars Levi Laestadius
Charles Porterfield Krauth
C. F. W. Walther
F. W. Stellhorn
S ren Kierkegaard
Rudolf Otto
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Bultmann
Paul Tillich
Hermann Sasse
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Wolfhart Pannenberg
vte
Part of a series onProtestantism
Theologies
Topics
Criticism
Culture
Demographics
Ecclesiology
Great Awakenings
History
Persecution
Reformation
Major branches
Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Minor branches
Bible students
Eastern Protestant
Holiness movement
Irvingism
Plymouth Brethren
Proto-Protestantism
(Hussites and Waldensians)
Quakers
Schwarzenau Brethren
Schwenkfelders
Others
Broad-based movements
Charismatic movement
Evangelicalism
Neo-charismatic movement
Other developments
Arminianism
Christian fundamentalism
Crypto-Protestantism
Evangelical Catholicism
Modernism and liberalism
Neo-orthodoxy
Paleo-orthodoxy
Pietism
Puritanism
Related movements
House churches
Nondenominational Christianity
Spiritual Christianity
 Christianity portalvteLutheranism is a major branch of Protestantism, identifying primarily with the theology of Martin Luther, the 16th-century German monk and reformer whose efforts to reform the theology and practice of the Catholic Church launched the Protestant Reformation.[1]
The split between the Lutherans and the Roman Catholics was made public and clear with the 1521 Edict of Worms: the edicts of the Diet condemned Luther and officially banned citizens of the Holy Roman Empire from defending or propagating his ideas, subjecting advocates of Lutheranism to forfeiture of all property, half of the seized property to be forfeited to the imperial government and the remaining half forfeit to the party who brought the accusation.[2]
The divide centered primarily on two points: the proper source of authority in the church, often called the formal principle of the Reformation, and the doctrine of justification, often called the material principle of Lutheran theology.[a] Lutheranism advocates a doctrine of justification "by Grace alone through faith alone on the basis of Scripture alone", the doctrine that scripture is the final authority on all matters of faith. This is in contrast to the belief of the Roman Catholic Church, defined at the Council of Trent, concerning authority coming from both the Scriptures and Tradition.[3]
Unlike Calvinism, Lutheranism retains many of the liturgical practices and sacramental teachings of the pre-Reformation Western Church, with a particular emphasis on the Eucharist, or Lord's Supper, though Eastern Lutheranism uses the Byzantine Rite.[4] Lutheran theology differs from Reformed theology in Christology, divine grace, the purpose of God's Law, the concept of perseverance of the saints, and predestination.
Etymology[edit]
The name Lutheran originated as a derogatory term used against Luther by German Scholastic theologian Dr. Johann Maier von Eck during the Leipzig Debate in July 1519.[5] Eck and other Roman Catholics followed the traditional practice of naming a heresy after its leader, thus labeling all who identified with the theology of Martin Luther as Lutherans.[2]
Martin Luther always disliked the term Lutheran, preferring the term evangelical, which was derived from   euangelion, a Greek word meaning "good news", i.e. "Gospel".[5] The followers of John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli, and other theologians linked to the Reformed tradition also used that term. To distinguish the two evangelical groups, others began to refer to the two groups as Evangelical Lutheran and Evangelical Reformed. As time passed by, the word Evangelical was dropped. Lutherans themselves began to use the term Lutheran in the middle of the 16th century, in order to distinguish themselves from other groups such as the Anabaptists and Calvinists.
In 1597, theologians in Wittenberg defined the title Lutheran as referring to the true church.[2]
History[edit]
 Martin Luther (1529) by Lucas Cranach the Elder
Main article: History of Lutheranism
Further information: Reformation
Lutheranism has its roots in the work of Martin Luther, who sought to reform the Western Church to what he considered a more biblical foundation.[6][7] The reaction of the government and church authorities to the international spread of his writings, beginning with the Ninety-five Theses, divided Western Christianity.[8] During the Reformation, Lutheranism became the state religion of numerous states of northern Europe, especially in northern Germany, Scandinavia and the then-Livonian Order. Lutheran clergy became civil servants and the Lutheran churches became part of the state.[1]
Spread into northern Europe[edit]
Lutheranism spread through all of Scandinavia during the 16th century, as the monarch of Denmark Norway (also ruling Iceland and the Faroe Islands) and the monarch of Sweden (also ruling Finland) adopted Lutheranism. Through Baltic-German and Swedish rule, Lutheranism also spread into Estonia and Latvia.
Since 1520, regular[9] Lutheran services have been held in Copenhagen. Under the reign of Frederick I (1523 33), Denmark Norway remained officially Catholic. Although Frederick initially pledged to persecute Lutherans, he soon adopted a policy of protecting Lutheran preachers and reformers, the most significant of which was Hans Tausen.[10]
During Frederick's reign, Lutheranism made significant inroads in Denmark. At an open meeting in Copenhagen attended by King Christian III in 1536, the people shouted; "We will stand by the holy Gospel, and do not want such bishops anymore".[11] Frederick's son, the later Christian III, was openly Lutheran, which prevented his election to the throne upon his father's death in 1533. However, following his victory in the civil war that followed, in 1536 he became Christian III and advanced the Reformation in Denmark Norway.
The constitution upon which the Danish Norwegian Church, according to the Church Ordinance, should rest was "The pure word of God, which is the Law and the Gospel".[12] It does not mention the[9] Augsburg Confession. The priests had to[9] understand the Holy Scripture well enough to preach and explain the Gospel and the Epistles to their congregations.
The youths were taught[13] from Luther's Small Catechism, available in Danish since 1532. They were taught to expect at the end of life:[9] "forgiving of their sins", "to be counted as just", and "the eternal life". Instruction is still similar.[14]
 Title page of the Swedish Gustav Vasa Bible, translated by the Petri brothers, along with Laurentius Andreae
The first complete Bible in Danish was based on Martin Luther's translation into German. It was published in 1550 with 3,000 copies printed in the first edition; a second edition was published in 1589.[15] Unlike Catholicism, the Lutheran Church does not believe that tradition is a carrier of the "Word of God", or that only the communion of the Bishop of Rome has been entrusted to interpret the "Word of God".[9][16]
The Reformation in Sweden began with Olaus and Laurentius Petri, brothers who took the Reformation to Sweden after studying in Germany. They led Gustav Vasa, elected king in 1523, to Lutheranism. The pope's refusal to allow the replacement of an archbishop who had supported the invading forces opposing Gustav Vasa during the Stockholm Bloodbath led to the severing of any official connection between Sweden and the papacy in 1523.[10]
Four years later, at the Diet of V ster s [sv], the king succeeded in forcing the diet to accept his dominion over the national church. The king was given possession of all church properties, as well as the church appointments and approval of the clergy. While this effectively granted official sanction to Lutheran ideas,[10] Lutheranism did not become official until 1593. At that time the Uppsala Synod declared Holy Scripture the sole guideline for faith, with four documents accepted as faithful and authoritative explanations of it: the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Athanasian Creed, and the unaltered Augsburg Confession of 1530.[17] Mikael Agricola's translation of the first Finnish New Testament was published in 1548.[18]
Counter-Reformation and controversies[edit]
After the death of Martin Luther in 1546, the Schmalkaldic War started out as a conflict between two German Lutheran rulers in 1547. Soon, Holy Roman Imperial forces joined the battle and conquered the members of the Schmalkaldic League, oppressing and exiling many German Lutherans as they enforced the terms of the Augsburg Interim. Religious freedom in some areas was secured for Lutherans through the Peace of Passau in 1552, and under the legal principle of Cuius regio, eius religio (the religion of the ruler was to dictate the religion of those ruled) and the Declaratio Ferdinandei (limited religious tolerance) clauses of the Peace of Augsburg in 1555.[19]
 A Hundskirche replica
Religious disputes between the Crypto-Calvinists, Philippists, Sacramentarians, Ubiquitarians and Gnesio-Lutherans raged within Lutheranism during the middle of the 16th century. This finally ended with the resolution of the issues in the Formula of Concord. Large numbers of politically and religiously influential leaders met together, debated, and resolved these topics on the basis of Scripture, resulting in the Formula, which over 8,000 leaders signed. The Book of Concord replaced earlier, incomplete collections of doctrine, unifying all German Lutherans with identical doctrine and beginning the period of Lutheran Orthodoxy.
In lands where Catholicism was the state religion, Lutheranism was officially illegal, although enforcement varied. Until the end of the Counter-Reformation, some Lutherans worshipped secretly, such as at the Hundskirke (which translates as dog church or dog altar), a triangle-shaped Communion rock in a ditch between crosses in Paternion, Austria. The crowned serpent is possibly an allusion to Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor, while the dog possibly refers to Peter Canisius. Another figure interpreted as a snail carrying a church tower is possibly a metaphor for the Protestant church. Also on the rock is the number 1599 and a phrase translating as "thus gets in the world".[20]
Lutheran orthodoxy[edit]
Main article: Lutheran orthodoxy
 The University of Jena around 1600. Jena was the center of Gnesio-Lutheran activity during the controversies leading up to the Formula of Concord and afterwards was a center of Lutheran Orthodoxy.
The historical period of Lutheran Orthodoxy is divided into three sections: Early Orthodoxy (1580 1600), High Orthodoxy (1600 1685), and Late Orthodoxy (1685 1730). Lutheran scholasticism developed gradually, especially for the purpose of arguing with the Jesuits, and it was finally established by Johann Gerhard. Abraham Calovius represents the climax of the scholastic paradigm in orthodox Lutheranism. Other orthodox Lutheran theologians include Martin Chemnitz, Aegidius Hunnius, Leonhard Hutter, Nicolaus Hunnius, Jesper Rasmussen Brochmand, Salomo Glassius, Johann H lsemann, Johann Conrad Dannhauer, Johannes Andreas Quenstedt, Johann Friedrich K nig, and Johann Wilhelm Baier.
Near the end of the Thirty Years' War, the compromising spirit seen in Philip Melanchthon rose up again in Helmstedt School and especially in theology of Georgius Calixtus, causing the syncretistic controversy. Another theological issue that arose was the Crypto-Kenotic controversy.[21]
 Danish Queen Sophie Magdalene expressed her Pietist sentiment in 1737 by founding a Lutheran convent.
Late orthodoxy was torn by influences from rationalism, philosophy based on reason, and Pietism, a revival movement in Lutheranism. After a century of vitality, the Pietist theologians Philipp Jakob Spener and August Hermann Francke warned that orthodoxy had degenerated into meaningless intellectualism and formalism, while orthodox theologians found the emotional and subjective focuses of Pietism to be vulnerable to Rationalist propaganda.[22] In 1688, the Finnish Radical Pietist Lars Ulstadius ran down the main aisle of Turku Cathedral naked while screaming that the disgrace of Finnish clergymen would be revealed like his current disgrace.
The last famous orthodox Lutheran theologian before the rationalist Aufkl rung, or Enlightenment, was David Hollatz. Late orthodox theologian Valentin Ernst L scher took part in the controversy against Pietism. Medieval mystical traditions continued in the works of Martin Moller, Johann Arndt, and Joachim L tkemann. Pietism became a rival of orthodoxy but adopted some devotional literature by orthodox theologians, including Arndt, Christian Scriver and Stephan Pr torius.
Rationalism[edit]
Rationalist philosophers from France and England had an enormous impact during the 18th century, along with the German Rationalists Christian Wolff, Gottfried Leibniz, and Immanuel Kant. Their work led to an increase in rationalist beliefs, "at the expense of faith in God and agreement with the Bible".[22]
In 1709, Valentin Ernst L scher warned that this new Rationalist view of the world fundamentally changed society by drawing into question every aspect of theology. Instead of considering the authority of divine revelation, he explained, Rationalists relied solely on their personal understanding when searching for truth.[23]
Johann Melchior Goeze (1717 1786), pastor of St. Catherine's Church, Hamburg, wrote apologetical works against Rationalists, including a theological and historical defence against the historical criticism of the Bible.[24]
Dissenting Lutheran pastors were often reprimanded by the government bureaucracy overseeing them, for example, when they tried to correct Rationalist influences in the parish school.[25] As a result of the impact of a local form of rationalism, termed Neology, by the latter half of the 18th century, genuine piety was found almost solely in small Pietist conventicles.[22] However, some of the laity preserved Lutheran orthodoxy from both Pietism and rationalism through reusing old catechisms, hymnbooks, postils, and devotional writings, including those written by Johann Gerhard, Heinrich M ller and Christian Scriver.[26]
Revivals[edit]
 A nineteenth-century Haugean conventicle
A layman, Luther scholar Johann Georg Hamann (1730 1788), became famous for countering Rationalism and striving to advance a revival known as the Erweckung, or Awakening.[27] In 1806, Napoleon's invasion of Germany promoted Rationalism and angered German Lutherans, stirring up a desire among the people to preserve Luther's theology from the Rationalist threat. Those associated with this Awakening held that reason was insufficient and pointed out the importance of emotional religious experiences.[28][29]
Small groups sprang up, often in universities, which devoted themselves to Bible study, reading devotional writings, and revival meetings. Although the beginning of this Awakening tended heavily toward Romanticism, patriotism, and experience, the emphasis of the Awakening shifted around 1830 to restoring the traditional liturgy, doctrine, and confessions of the Lutheran church in the Neo-Lutheran movement.[28][29]
This Awakening swept through all of Scandinavia though not Iceland.[30] It developed from both German Neo-Lutheranism and Pietism. Danish pastor and philosopher N. F. S. Grundtvig reshaped church life throughout Denmark through a reform movement beginning in 1830. He also wrote about 1,500 hymns, including God's Word Is Our Great Heritage.[31]
In Norway, Hans Nielsen Hauge, a lay street preacher, emphasized spiritual discipline and sparked the Haugean movement,[32] which was followed by the Johnsonian Awakening within the state-church.[33] The Awakening drove the growth of foreign missions in Norway to non-Christians to a new height, which has never been reached since.[30] In Sweden, Lars Levi L stadius began the Laestadian movement that emphasized moral reform.[32] In Finland, a farmer, Paavo Ruotsalainen, began the Finnish Awakening when he took to preaching about repentance and prayer.[32]
 The Olbers, one of the ships that carried Old Lutherans to the Western Hemisphere
In 1817, Frederick William III of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches in his territory to unite, forming the Prussian Union of Churches. The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of the Old Lutherans. Many Lutherans, called "Old Lutherans", chose to leave the state churches despite imprisonment and military force.[27] Some formed independent church bodies, or "free churches", at home while others left for the United States, Canada and Australia. A similar legislated merger in Silesia prompted thousands to join the Old Lutheran movement. The dispute over ecumenism overshadowed other controversies within German Lutheranism.[34]
Despite political meddling in church life, local and national leaders sought to restore and renew Christianity. Neo-Lutheran Johann Konrad Wilhelm L he and Old Lutheran free church leader Friedrich August Br nn[35] both sent young men overseas to serve as pastors to German Americans, while the Inner Mission focused on renewing the situation home.[36] Johann Gottfried Herder, superintendent at Weimar and part of the Inner Mission movement, joined with the Romantic movement with his quest to preserve human emotion and experience from Rationalism.[37]
Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg, though raised Reformed, became convinced of the truth of historic Lutheranism as a young man.[38] He led the Neo-Lutheran Repristination School of theology, which advocated a return to the orthodox theologians of the 17th century and opposed modern Bible scholarship.[39][better source needed] As editor of the periodical Evangelische Kirchenzeitung, he developed it into a major support of Neo-Lutheran revival and used it to attack all forms of theological liberalism and rationalism. Although he received a large amount of slander and ridicule during his forty years at the head of revival, he never gave up his positions.[38]
The theological faculty at the University of Erlangen in Bavaria became another force for reform.[38] There, professor Adolf von Harless, though previously an adherent of rationalism and German idealism, made Erlangen a magnet for revival oriented theologians.[40] Termed the Erlangen School of theology, they developed a new version of the Incarnation,[40] which they felt emphasized the humanity of Jesus better than the ecumenical creeds.[41] As theologians, they used both modern historical critical and Hegelian philosophical methods instead of attempting to revive the orthodoxy of the 17th century.[42]
Friedrich Julius Stahl led the High Church Lutherans. Though raised Jewish, he was baptized as a Christian at the age of 19 through the influence of the Lutheran school he attended. As the leader of a neofeudal Prussian political party, he campaigned for the divine right of kings, the power of the nobility, and episcopal polity for the church. Along with Theodor Kliefoth and August Friedrich Christian Vilmar, he promoted agreement with the Roman Catholic Church with regard to the authority of the institutional church, ex opere operato effectiveness of the sacraments, and the divine authority of clergy. Unlike Catholics, however, they also urged complete agreement with the Book of Concord.[41]
 Representing the continuation of the Finnish Awakening to the present, youth are confirmed at the site of Paavo Ruotsalainen's homestead.
The Neo-Lutheran movement managed to slow secularism and counter atheistic Marxism, but it did not fully succeed in Europe.[36] It partly succeeded in continuing the Pietist movement's drive to right social wrongs and focus on individual conversion. The Neo-Lutheran call to renewal failed to achieve widespread popular acceptance because it both began and continued with a lofty, idealistic Romanticism that did not connect with an increasingly industrialized and secularized Europe.[43] At best, the work of local leaders resulted in specific areas with vibrant spiritual renewal, but people in Lutheran areas overall continued to become increasingly distant from church life.[36] Additionally, the revival movements were divided by philosophical traditions. The Repristination school and Old Lutherans tended towards Kantianism, while the Erlangen school promoted a conservative Hegelian perspective. By 1969, Manfried Kober complained that "unbelief is rampant" even within German Lutheran parishes.[44]
Doctrine[edit]
Bible[edit]
 Luther's translation of the Bible, from 1534
 Moses and Elijah point the sinner looking for God's salvation to the cross to find it (Theology of the Cross).
Traditionally, Lutherans hold the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments to be the only divinely inspired books, the only presently available sources of divinely revealed knowledge, and the only infallible source of Christian doctrine.[45] Scripture alone is the formal principle of the faith, the final authority for all matters of faith and morals because of its inspiration, authority, clarity, efficacy, and sufficiency.[46]
The authority of the Scriptures has been challenged during the history of Lutheranism. Martin Luther taught that the Bible was the written Word of God, and the only infallible guide for faith and practice. He held that every passage of Scripture has one straightforward meaning, the literal sense as interpreted by other Scripture.[47] These teachings were accepted during the orthodox Lutheranism of the 17th century.[48] During the 18th century, Rationalism advocated reason rather than the authority of the Bible as the final source of knowledge, but most of the laity did not accept this Rationalist position.[49] In the 19th century, a confessional revival re-emphasized the authority of the Scriptures and agreement with the Lutheran Confessions.
Today, Lutherans disagree about the inspiration and authority of the Bible. Theological conservatives use the historical-grammatical method of Biblical interpretation, while theological liberals use the higher critical method. The 2008 U.S. Religious Landscape Survey conducted by the Pew Research Center surveyed 1,926 adults in the United States that self-identified as Lutheran. The study found that 30% believed that the Bible was the Word of God and was to be taken literally word for word. 40% held that the Bible was the Word of God, but was not literally true word for word or were unsure. 23% said the Bible was written by men and not the Word of God. 7% did not know, were not sure, or had other positions.[50]
Inspiration[edit]
Although many Lutherans today hold less specific views of inspiration, historically, Lutherans affirm that the Bible does not merely contain the Word of God, but every word of it is, because of plenary, verbal inspiration, the direct, immediate word of God.[51] The Apology of the Augsburg Confession identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God[52] and calls the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible.[53] Because of this, Lutherans confess in the Formula of Concord, "we receive and embrace with our whole heart the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure, clear fountain of Israel".[54] The prophetic and apostolic Scriptures are confessed as authentic and written by the prophets and apostles. A correct translation of their writings is seen as God's Word because it has the same meaning as the original Hebrew and Greek.[55] A mistranslation is not God's word, and no human authority can invest it with divine authority.[55]
Clarity[edit]
Historically, Lutherans understand the Bible to present all doctrines and commands of the Christian faith clearly.[56] In addition, Lutherans believe that God's Word is freely accessible to every reader or hearer of ordinary intelligence, without requiring any special education.[57] A Lutheran must understand the language that scriptures are presented in, and should not be so preoccupied by error so as to prevent understanding.[58] As a result of this, Lutherans do not believe there is a need to wait for any clergy, pope, scholar, or ecumenical council to explain the real meaning of any part of the Bible.[59]
Efficacy[edit]
Lutherans confess that Scripture is united with the power of the Holy Spirit and with it, not only demands, but also creates the acceptance of its teaching.[60] This teaching produces faith and obedience. Holy Scripture is not a dead letter, but rather, the power of the Holy Spirit is inherent in it.[61] Scripture does not compel a mere intellectual assent to its doctrine, resting on logical argumentation, but rather it creates the living agreement of faith.[62] As the Smalcald Articles affirm, "in those things which concern the spoken, outward Word, we must firmly hold that God grants His Spirit or grace to no one, except through or with the preceding outward Word".[63]
Sufficiency[edit]
 Law and Grace, by Lucas Cranach the Elder. The left side shows humans' condemnation under God's law, while the right side presents God's grace in Christ.
Lutherans are confident that the Bible contains everything that one needs to know in order to obtain salvation and to live a Christian life.[64] There are no deficiencies in Scripture that need to be filled with by tradition, pronouncements of the Pope, new revelations, or present-day development of doctrine.[65]
Law and Gospel[edit]
Lutherans understand the Bible as containing two distinct types of content, termed Law and Gospel (or Law and Promises).[66] Properly distinguishing between Law and Gospel prevents the obscuring of the Gospel teaching of justification by grace through faith alone.[67]
Lutheran confessions[edit]
The Book of Concord, published in 1580, contains 10 documents which some Lutherans believe are faithful and authoritative explanations of Holy Scripture. Besides the three Ecumenical Creeds, which date to Roman times, the Book of Concord contains seven credal documents articulating Lutheran theology in the Reformation era.
 Title page from the 1580 Dresden Book of Concord
The doctrinal positions of Lutheran churches are not uniform because the Book of Concord does not hold the same position in all Lutheran churches. For example, the state churches in Scandinavia consider only the Augsburg Confession as a "summary of the faith" in addition to the three ecumenical creeds.[68] Lutheran pastors, congregations, and church bodies in Germany and the Americas usually agree to teach in harmony with the entire Lutheran confessions. Some Lutheran church bodies require this pledge to be unconditional because they believe the confessions correctly state what the Bible teaches. Others allow their congregations to do so "insofar as" the confessions are in agreement with the Bible. In addition, Lutherans accept the teachings of the first seven ecumenical councils of the Christian Church.[69][70]
The Lutheran Church traditionally sees itself as the "main trunk of the historical Christian Tree" founded by Christ and the Apostles, holding that during the Reformation, the Church of Rome fell away.[71][72] As such, the Augsburg Confession teaches that "the faith as confessed by Luther and his followers is nothing new, but the true catholic faith, and that their churches represent the true catholic or universal church".[73] When the Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, they explained "that each article of faith and practice was true first of all to Holy Scripture, and then also to the teaching of the church fathers and the councils".[73]
Justification[edit]
 Lutherans believe that whoever has faith in Jesus alone will receive salvation from the grace of God and will enter eternity in heaven instead of eternity in hell after death or at the second coming of Jesus.
The key doctrine, or material principle, of Lutheranism is the doctrine of justification. Lutherans believe that humans are saved from their sins by God's grace alone (Sola Gratia), through faith alone (Sola Fide), on the basis of Scripture alone (Sola Scriptura). Orthodox Lutheran theology holds that God made the world, including humanity, perfect, holy and sinless. However, Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, trusting in their own strength, knowledge, and wisdom.[74][75] Consequently, people are saddled with original sin, born sinful and unable to avoid committing sinful acts.[76] For Lutherans, original sin is the "chief sin, a root and fountainhead of all actual sins".[77]
Lutherans teach that sinners, while capable of doing works that are outwardly "good", are not capable of doing works that satisfy God's justice.[78] Every human thought and deed is infected with sin and sinful motives.[79] Because of this, all humanity deserves eternal damnation in hell.[80] God in eternity has turned His Fatherly heart to this world and planned for its redemption because he loves all people and does not want anyone to be eternally damned.[81]
To this end, "God sent his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, into the world to redeem and deliver us from the power of the devil, and to bring us to Himself, and to govern us as a King of righteousness, life, and salvation against sin, death, and an evil conscience", as Luther's Large Catechism explains.[82] Because of this, Lutherans teach that salvation is possible only because of the grace of God made manifest in the birth, life, suffering, death, resurrection, and continuing presence by the power of the Holy Spirit, of Jesus Christ.[83] By God's grace, made known and effective in the person and work of Jesus Christ, a person is forgiven, adopted as a child and heir of God, and given eternal salvation.[84] Christ, because he was entirely obedient to the law with respect to both his human and divine natures, "is a perfect satisfaction and reconciliation of the human race", as the Formula of Concord asserts, and proceeds to summarize:[85]
[Christ] submitted to the law for us, bore our sin, and in going to his Father performed complete and perfect obedience for us poor sinners, from his holy birth to his death. Thereby he covered all our disobedience, which is embedded in our nature and in its thoughts, words, and deeds, so that this disobedience is not reckoned to us as condemnation but is pardoned and forgiven by sheer grace, because of Christ alone.
Lutherans believe that individuals receive this gift of salvation through faith alone.[86] Saving faith is the knowledge of,[87] acceptance of,[88] and trust[89] in the promise of the Gospel.[90] Even faith itself is seen as a gift of God, created in the hearts of Christians[91] by the work of the Holy Spirit through the Word[92] and Baptism.[93] Faith receives the gift of salvation rather than causes salvation.[94] Thus, Lutherans reject the "decision theology" which is common among modern evangelicals.
Since the term grace has been defined differently by other Christian church bodies (e.g. Roman Catholicism[95]) it is important to note that Lutheranism defines grace as entirely limited to God's gifts to us. Justification comes as a pure gift, not something we merit by changed behavior or in which we cooperate. Grace is not about our response to God's gifts, but only His gifts.
Trinity[edit]
 Lutherans believe in the Trinity.
Lutherans are Trinitarian. Lutherans reject the idea that the Father and God the Son are merely faces of the same person, stating that both the Old Testament and the New Testament show them to be two distinct persons.[96] Lutherans believe the Holy Spirit proceeds from both the Father and the Son.[97] In the words of the Athanasian Creed: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternal."[98]
Two natures of Christ[edit]
Main article: Scholastic Lutheran Christology
Lutherans believe Jesus is the Christ, the savior promised in the Old Testament. They believe he is both by nature God and by nature man in one person, as they confess in Luther's Small Catechism that he is "true God begotten of the Father from eternity and also true man born of the Virgin Mary".[99]
The Augsburg Confession explains:[100]
[T]he Son of God, did assume the human nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, so that there are two natures, the divine and the human, inseparably enjoined in one Person, one Christ, true God and true man, who was born of the Virgin Mary, truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, that He might reconcile the Father unto us, and be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men.
Sacraments[edit]
Main article: Lutheran sacraments
 A.C. Article IX: Of Confession[101]
Lutherans hold that sacraments are sacred acts of divine institution.[102] Whenever they are properly administered by the use of the physical component commanded by God[103] along with the divine words of institution,[104] God is, in a way specific to each sacrament, present with the Word and physical component.[105] He earnestly offers to all who receive the sacrament[106] forgiveness of sins[107] and eternal salvation.[108] He also works in the recipients to get them to accept these blessings and to increase the assurance of their possession.[109]
Lutherans are not dogmatic about the number of the sacraments.[110] In line with Luther's initial statement in his Large Catechism some speak of only two sacraments,[111] Baptism and Holy Communion, although later in the same work he calls Confession and Absolution[112] "the third sacrament".[113] The definition of sacrament in the Apology of the Augsburg Confession lists Absolution as one of them.[114] With the exception of Laestadian Lutherans, Private Confession is not practiced among Lutherans as often as in the Catholic Church. Rather, it is expected before receiving the Eucharist for the first time.[115][116] Some churches also allow for individual absolution on Saturdays before the Eucharistic service.[117] A general confession and absolution (known as the Penitential Rite) is proclaimed in the Eucharistic liturgy.
Baptism[edit]
 Lutherans practice infant baptism.
Lutherans hold that Baptism is a saving work of God,[118] mandated and instituted by Jesus Christ.[119] Baptism is a "means of grace" through which God creates and strengthens "saving faith" as the "washing of regeneration"[120] in which infants and adults are reborn.[121] Since the creation of faith is exclusively God's work, it does not depend on the actions of the one baptized, whether infant or adult. Even though baptized infants cannot articulate that faith, Lutherans believe that it is present all the same.[122]
It is faith alone that receives these divine gifts, so Lutherans confess that baptism "works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of God declare".[123] Lutherans hold fast to the Scripture cited in 1 Peter 3:21, "Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ."[124] Therefore, Lutherans administer Baptism to both infants[125] and adults.[126] In the special section on infant baptism in his Large Catechism, Luther argues that infant baptism is God-pleasing because persons so baptized were reborn and sanctified by the Holy Spirit.[127][128]
Eucharist[edit]
Main article: Eucharist in the Lutheran Church
 Luther communing John the Steadfast
Lutherans hold that within the Eucharist, also referred to as the Sacrament of the Altar or the Lord's Supper, the true body and blood of Christ are truly present "in, with, and under the forms" of the consecrated bread and wine for all those who eat and drink it,[129] a doctrine that the Formula of Concord calls the sacramental union.[130]
Confession[edit]
Main article: Confession (Lutheran Church)
Many Lutherans receive the sacrament of penance before receiving the Eucharist.[131][117] Prior to going to Confessing and receiving Absolution, the faithful are expected to examine their lives in light of the Ten Commandments.[116] An order of Confession and Absolution is contained in the Small Catechism, as well as in liturgical books.[116] Lutherans typically kneel at the communion rails to confess their sins, while the confessor listens and then offers absolution while laying their stole on the penitent's head.[116] Clergy are prohibited from revealing anything said during private Confession and Absolution per the Seal of the Confessional, and face excommunication if it is violated. Apart from this, Laestadian Lutherans have a practice of lay confession.[132]
Conversion[edit]
In Lutheranism, conversion or regeneration in the strict sense of the term is the work of divine grace and power by which man, born of the flesh, and void of all power to think, to will, or to do any good thing, and dead in sin is, through the gospel and holy baptism, taken from a state of sin and spiritual death under God's wrath into a state of spiritual life of faith and grace, rendered able to will and to do what is spiritually good and, especially, made to trust in the benefits of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus.[133]
During conversion, one is moved from impenitence to repentance. The Augsburg Confession divides repentance into two parts: "One is contrition, that is, terrors smiting the conscience through the knowledge of sin; the other is faith, which is born of the Gospel, or of absolution, and believes that for Christ's sake, sins are forgiven, comforts the conscience, and delivers it from terrors."[134]
Predestination[edit]
 A.C. Article 18: Of Free Will
Lutherans adhere to divine monergism, the teaching that salvation is by God's act alone, and therefore reject the idea that humans in their fallen state have a free will concerning spiritual matters.[135] Lutherans believe that although humans have free will concerning civil righteousness, they cannot work spiritual righteousness in the heart without the presence and aid of the Holy Spirit.[136][137] Lutherans believe Christians are "saved";[138] that all who trust in Christ alone and his promises can be certain of their salvation.[139]
According to Lutheranism, the central final hope of the Christian is "the resurrection of the body and the life everlasting" as confessed in the Apostles' Creed rather than predestination. Lutherans disagree with those who make predestination rather than Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection the source of salvation. Unlike some Calvinists, Lutherans do not believe in a predestination to damnation,[140] usually referencing "God our Savior, who desires all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth"[141] as contrary evidence to such a claim. Instead, Lutherans teach eternal damnation is a result of the unbeliever's sins, rejection of the forgiveness of sins, and unbelief.[142]
Divine providence[edit]
According to Lutherans, God preserves his creation, cooperates with everything that happens, and guides the universe.[143] While God cooperates with both good and evil deeds, with evil deeds he does so only inasmuch as they are deeds, but not with the evil in them. God concurs with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption of an act or the evil of its effect.[144] Lutherans believe everything exists for the sake of the Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its welfare and growth.[145]
The explanation of the Apostles' Creed given in the Small Catechism declares that everything good that people have is given and preserved by God, either directly or through other people or things.[146] Of the services others provide us through family, government, and work, "we receive these blessings not from them, but, through them, from God".[147] Since God uses everyone's useful tasks for good, people should not look down upon some useful vocations as being less worthy than others. Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as being the means God uses to work in the world.[147]
 The Broad and the Narrow Way, a popular German Pietist painting, 1866
Good works[edit]
Lutherans believe that good works are the fruit of faith,[148] always and in every instance.[149] Good works have their origin in God,[150] not in the fallen human heart or in human striving;[151] their absence would demonstrate that faith, too, is absent.[152] Lutherans do not believe that good works are a factor in obtaining salvation; they believe that we are saved by the grace of God based on the merit of Christ in his suffering and death and faith in the Triune God. Good works are the natural result of faith, not the cause of salvation. Although Christians are no longer compelled to keep God's law, they freely and willingly serve God and their neighbors.[153]
 "Even though I am a sinner and deserving of death and hell, this shall nonetheless be my consolation and my victory that my Lord Jesus lives and has risen so that He, in the end, might rescue me from sin, death, and hell." Luther[154]
Judgment and eternal life[edit]
Lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom of Christ either before or after his second coming on the last day.[155] Lutherans teach that, at death, the souls of Christians are immediately taken into the presence of Jesus,[156] where they await the second coming of Jesus on the last day.[157] On the last day,[158] all the bodies of the dead will be resurrected.[159]
Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying.[160] The bodies will then be changed, those of the wicked to a state of everlasting shame and torment,[161] those of the righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory.[162] After the resurrection of all the dead,[163] and the change of those still living,[164] all nations shall be gathered before Christ,[165] and he will separate the righteous from the wicked.[166]
Christ will publicly judge[167] all people by the testimony of their deeds,[168] the good works[169] of the righteous in evidence of their faith,[170] and the evil works of the wicked in evidence of their unbelief.[171] He will judge in righteousness[172] in the presence of all people and angels,[173] and his final judgment will be just damnation to everlasting punishment for the wicked and a gracious gift of life everlasting to the righteous.[174]
Protestant beliefs about salvation
This table summarizes the classical views of three Protestant beliefs about salvation.[175]
Topic
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Arminianism
Human will
Total depravity:[176] Humanity possesses "free will",[177] but it is in bondage to sin,[178] until it is "transformed".[179]
Original Sin:[176] Humanity possesses free will in regard to "goods and possessions", but is sinful by nature and unable to contribute to its own salvation.[180][181][182]
Total depravity: Humanity possesses freedom from necessity, but not "freedom from sin" unless enabled by "prevenient grace".[183]
Election
Unconditional election.
Unconditional election.[176][184]
Conditional election in view of foreseen faith or unbelief.[185]
Justification and atonement
Justification by faith alone. Various views regarding the extent of the atonement.[186]
Justification for all men,[187] completed at Christ's death and effective through faith alone.[188][189][190][191]
Justification made possible for all through Christ's death, but only completed upon choosing faith in Jesus.[192]
Conversion
Monergistic,[193] through the means of grace, irresistible.
Monergistic,[194][195] through the means of grace, resistible.[196]
Synergistic, resistible due to the common grace of free will.[197][198]
Perseverance and apostasy
Perseverance of the saints: the eternally elect in Christ will certainly persevere in faith.[199]
Falling away is possible,[200] but God gives gospel assurance.[201][202]
Preservation is conditional upon continued faith in Christ; with the possibility of a final apostasy.[203]
Practices[edit]
 Luther composed hymns and hymn tunes, including "Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott" ("A Mighty Fortress Is Our God").
Liturgy[edit]
Further information: Lutheran art, Lutheran hymn, Lutheran chorale, and Hymnody of continental Europe  Reformation
Lutherans place great emphasis on a liturgical approach to worship services;[204] although there are substantial non-liturgical minorities, for example, the Haugean Lutherans from Norway. Martin Luther was a great proponent of music, and this is why music forms a central part of Lutheran services to this day. In particular, Luther admired the composers Josquin des Prez and Ludwig Senfl, and wanted singing in the church to move away from the ars perfecta (Catholic Sacred Music of the late Renaissance) and towards singing as a Gemeinschaft (community).[205] Lutheran hymns are sometimes known as chorales. Lutheran hymnody is well known for its doctrinal, didactic, and musical richness. Most Lutheran churches are active musically with choirs, handbell choirs, children's choirs, and occasionally change ringing groups that ring bells in a bell tower. Johann Sebastian Bach, a devout Lutheran, composed a huge body of sacred music for the Lutheran church.
 Divine Service at the St. Nicholas church in Luckau, Germany
Lutherans also preserve a liturgical approach to the celebration of the Holy Eucharist/Communion, emphasizing the Sacrament as the central act of Christian worship. Lutherans believe that the actual body and blood of Jesus Christ are present in, with and under the bread and the wine. This belief is called Real Presence or sacramental union and is different from consubstantiation and transubstantiation. Additionally Lutherans reject the idea that communion is a mere symbol or memorial. They confess in the Apology of the Augsburg Confession:
[W]e do not abolish the Mass but religiously keep and defend it. Among us the Mass is celebrated every Lord's Day and on other festivals, when the Sacrament is made available to those who wish to partake of it, after they have been examined and absolved. We also keep traditional liturgical forms, such as the order of readings, prayers, vestments, and other similar things.[206]In addition to the Holy Communion (Divine Service), congregations frequently also hold offices, which are worship services without communion. They may include Matins, Vespers, Compline, or other observances of the Daily Office. Private or family offices include the Morning and Evening Prayers from Luther's Small Catechism.[207] Meals are blessed with the Common table prayer, Psalm 145:15 16, or other prayers, and after eating the Lord is thanked, for example, with Psalm 136:1. Luther himself encouraged the use of Psalm verses, such as those already mentioned, along with the Lord's Prayer and another short prayer before and after each meal: Blessing and Thanks at Meals from Luther's Small Catechism.[207] In addition, Lutherans use devotional books, from small daily devotionals, for example, Portals of Prayer, to large breviaries, including the Breviarium Lipsiensae and Treasury of Daily Prayer. Ukrainian Lutheran Church of the Cross of the Lord in Kremenets, which uses the Byzantine Rite
The predominant rite used by the Lutheran Churches is a Western one based on the Formula missae ("Form of the Mass") although other Lutheran liturgies are also in use, such as those used in the Byzantine Rite Lutheran Churches, such as the Ukrainian Lutheran Church and Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Slovenia.[208] Although Luther's Deutsche Messe was completely chanted except for the sermon, this is less common today.
In the 1970s, many Lutheran churches began holding contemporary worship services for the purpose of evangelistic outreach. These services were in a variety of styles, depending on the preferences of the congregation. Often they were held alongside a traditional service in order to cater to those who preferred contemporary worship music. Today, a few Lutheran congregations have contemporary worship as their sole form of worship. Outreach is no longer given as the primary motivation; rather this form of worship is seen as more in keeping with the desires of individual congregations.[209] In Finland, Lutherans have experimented with the St Thomas Mass [fi] and Metal Mass in which traditional hymns are adapted to heavy metal. Some Laestadians enter a heavily emotional and ecstatic state during worship. The Lutheran World Federation, in its Nairobi Statement on Worship and Culture, recommended every effort be made to bring church services into a more sensitive position with regard to cultural context.[210]
In 2006, both the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod (LCMS), in cooperation with certain international English speaking church bodies within their respective fellowships, released new hymnals: Evangelical Lutheran Worship (ELCA) and Lutheran Service Book (LCMS). Along with these, the most widely used among English speaking congregations include: Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996, Evangelical Lutheran Synod), The Lutheran Book of Worship (1978, Lutheran Council in the United States of America), Lutheran Worship (1982, LCMS), Christian Worship (1993, Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod), and The Lutheran Hymnal (1941, Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Conference of North America). In the Lutheran Church of Australia, the official hymnal is the Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement of 1986, which includes a supplement to the Lutheran Hymnal of 1973, itself a replacement for the Australian Lutheran Hymn Book of 1921. Prior to this time, the two Lutheran church bodies in Australia (which merged in 1966) used a bewildering variety of hymnals, usually in the German language. Spanish-speaking ELCA churches frequently use Libro de Liturgia y C ntico (1998, Augsburg Fortress) for services and hymns. For a more complete list, see List of English language Lutheran hymnals.
Missions[edit]
 Christ Lutheran Church, Narsapur in India
Sizable Lutheran missions arose for the first time during the 19th century. Early missionary attempts during the century after the Reformation did not succeed. However, European traders brought Lutheranism to Africa beginning in the 17th century as they settled along the coasts. During the first half of the 19th century, missionary activity in Africa expanded, including preaching by missionaries, translation of the Bible, and education.[211]
Lutheranism came to India beginning with the work of Bartholom us Ziegenbalg, where a community totaling several thousand developed, complete with their own translation of the Bible, catechism, their own hymnal, and system of Lutheran schools. In the 1840s, this church experienced a revival through the work of the Leipzig Mission, including Karl Graul.[212] After German missionaries were expelled in 1914, Lutherans in India became entirely autonomous, yet preserved their Lutheran character. In recent years India has relaxed its anti-religious conversion laws, allowing a resurgence in missionary work.
In Latin America, missions began to serve European immigrants of Lutheran background, both those who spoke German and those who no longer did. These churches in turn began to evangelize those in their areas who were not of European background, including indigenous peoples.[213]
In 1892, the first Lutheran missionaries reached Japan. Although work began slowly and a major setback occurred during the hardships of WWII.[214] Lutheranism there has survived and become self-sustaining.[215] After missionaries to China, including those of the Lutheran Church of China, were expelled, they began ministry in Taiwan and Hong Kong, the latter which became a center of Lutheranism in Asia.[215]
The Lutheran Mission in New Guinea, though founded only in 1953, became the largest Lutheran mission in the world in only several decades. Through the work of native lay evangelists, many tribes of diverse languages were reached with the Gospel.[215]
Today the Lutheran World Federation operates Lutheran World Relief, a relief and development agency active in more than 50 countries.
Education[edit]
 Resurrection Lutheran School is a parochial school of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS) in Rochester, Minnesota. The WELS school system is the fourth largest private school system in the United States.[216]Catechism instruction is considered foundational in most Lutheran churches. Almost all maintain Sunday Schools, and some host or maintain Lutheran schools, at the preschool, elementary, middle, high school, folk high school, or university level. Lifelong study of the catechism is intended for all ages so that the abuses of the pre-Reformation Church will not recur.[217] Lutheran schools have always been a core aspect of Lutheran mission work, starting with Bartholomew Ziegenbalg and Heinrich Putschasu, who began work in India in year 1706.[218] During the Counter-Reformation era in German speaking areas, backstreet Lutheran schools were the main Lutheran institution among crypto-Lutherans.[219]
Pastors almost always have substantial theological educations, including Koine Greek and Biblical Hebrew so that they can refer to the Christian scriptures in the original language. Pastors usually teach in the common language of the local congregation. In the U.S., some congregations and synods historically taught in German, Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, or Swedish, but retention of immigrant languages has been in significant decline since the early and middle 20th century.
Church fellowship[edit]
Lutherans were divided about the issue of church fellowship for the first thirty years after Luther's death. Philipp Melanchthon and his Philippist party felt that Christians of different beliefs should join in union with each other without completely agreeing on doctrine. Against them stood the Gnesio-Lutherans, led by Matthias Flacius and the faculty at the University of Jena. They condemned the Philippist position for indifferentism, describing it as a "unionistic compromise" of precious Reformation theology. Instead, they held that genuine unity between Christians and real theological peace was only possible with an honest agreement about every subject of doctrinal controversy.[220]
 Georg Calixtus taught at the University of Helmstedt during the Syncretistic controversy.
Complete agreement finally came about in 1577, after the death of both Melanchthon and Flacius, when a new generation of theologians resolved the doctrinal controversies on the basis of Scripture in the Formula of Concord of 1577.[221] Although they decried the visible division of Christians on earth, orthodox Lutherans avoided ecumenical fellowship with other churches, believing that Christians should not, for example, join together for the Lord's Supper or exchange pastors if they do not completely agree about what the Bible teaches. In the 17th century, Georgius Calixtus began a rebellion against this practice, sparking the Syncretistic Controversy with Abraham Calovius as his main opponent.[222]
In the 18th century, there was some ecumenical interest between the Church of Sweden and the Church of England. John Robinson, Bishop of London, planned for a union of the English and Swedish churches in 1718. The plan failed because most Swedish bishops rejected the Calvinism of the Church of England, although Jesper Swedberg and Johannes Gezelius the younger, bishops of Skara, Sweden and Turku, Finland, were in favor.[223] With the encouragement of Swedberg, church fellowship was established between Swedish Lutherans and Anglicans in the Middle Colonies. Over the course of the 1700s and the early 1800s, Swedish Lutherans were absorbed into Anglican churches, with the last original Swedish congregation completing merger into the Episcopal Church in 1846.[224]
In the 19th century, Samuel Simon Schmucker attempted to lead the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of the United States toward unification with other American Protestants. His attempt to get the synod to reject the Augsburg Confession in favor of his compromising Definite Platform failed. Instead, it sparked a Neo-Lutheran revival, prompting many to form the General Council, including Charles Porterfield Krauth. Their alternative approach was "Lutheran pulpits for Lutheran ministers only and Lutheran altars...for Lutheran communicants only."[225]
 Stormtroopers holding German Christian propaganda during the church council elections on 23 July 1933 at St. Mary's Church, Berlin. After that, internal struggles, controversies, reorganization, and splits struck the German Evangelical Church, resulting in the creation of the Confessing Church.
Beginning in 1867, confessional and liberal minded Lutherans in Germany joined to form the Common Evangelical Lutheran Conference against the ever looming prospect of a state-mandated union with the Reformed.[226] However, they failed to reach consensus on the degree of shared doctrine necessary for church union.[36] Eventually, the fascist German Christians movement pushed the final national merger of Lutheran, Union, and Reformed church bodies into a single Reich Church in 1933, doing away with the previous umbrella German Evangelical Church Confederation (DEK). As part of denazification the Reich Church was formally done away with in 1945, and certain clergy were removed from their positions. However, the merger between the Lutheran, United, and Reformed state churches was retained under the name Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD). In 1948 the Lutheran church bodies within the EKD founded the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany (VELKD), but it has since been reduced from being an independent legal entity to an administrative unit within the EKD.
Presently, Lutherans are divided over how to interact with other Christian denominations. Some Lutherans assert that everyone must share the "whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27) in complete unity (1 Cor. 1:10)[227] before pastors can share each other's pulpits, and before communicants commune at each other's altars, a practice termed closed (or close) communion. On the other hand, other Lutherans practice varying degrees of open communion and allow preachers from other Christian denominations in their pulpits.
While not an issue in the majority of Lutheran church bodies, some of them forbid membership in Freemasonry. Partly, this is because the lodge is viewed as spreading Unitarianism, as the Brief Statement of the LCMS reads, "Hence we warn against Unitarianism, which in our country has to a great extent impenetrated the sects and is being spread particularly also through the influence of the lodges."[228] A 1958 report from the publishing house of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod states that, "Masonry is guilty of idolatry. Its worship and prayers are idol worship. The Masons may not with their hands have made an idol out of gold, silver, wood or stone, but they created one with their own mind and reason out of purely human thoughts and ideas. The latter is an idol no less than the former."[229]
 LCMS pastor wearing a chasuble during communion
The largest organizations of Lutheran churches around the world are the Lutheran World Federation (LWF), the Global Confessional and Missional Lutheran Forum, the International Lutheran Council (ILC), and the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference (CELC). These organizations together account for the great majority of Lutheran denominations. The LCMS and the Lutheran Church Canada are members of the ILC. The WELS and ELS are members of the CELC. Many Lutheran churches are not affiliated with the LWF, the ILC or the CELC: The congregations of the Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC) are affiliated with their mission organizations in Canada, India, Nepal, Myanmar, and many African nations; and those affiliated with the Church of the Lutheran Brethren are especially active doing mission work in Africa and East Asia.
The Lutheran World Federation-aligned churches do not believe that one church is singularly true in its teachings. According to this belief, Lutheranism is a reform movement rather than a movement into doctrinal correctness. As part of this, in 1999 the LWF and the Roman Catholic Church jointly issued a statement, the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification, that stated that the LWF and the Catholics both agreed about certain basics of Justification and lifted certain Catholic anathemas formerly applying to the LWF member churches.The LCMS has participated in most of the official dialogues with the Roman Catholic Church since shortly after the Second Vatican Council, though not the one which produced the Joint Declaration and to which they were not invited. While some Lutheran theologians saw the Joint Declaration as a sign that the Catholics were essentially adopting the Lutheran position, other Lutheran theologians disagreed, claiming that, considering the public documentation of the Catholic position, this assertion does not hold up.[citation needed]
 Church of Norway confirmation in Lunder Church, Ringerike, Norway, 2012.
Besides their intra-Lutheran arrangements, some member churches of the LWF have also declared full communion with non-Lutheran Protestant churches. The Porvoo Communion is a communion of episcopally led Lutheran and Anglican churches in Europe. Beside its membership in the Porvoo Communion, Church of Sweden also has declared full communion with the Philippine Independent Church and the United Methodist Church.[citation needed] The state Protestant churches in Germany many other European countries have signed the Leuenberg Agreement to form the Community of Protestant Churches in Europe. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America has been involved in ecumenical dialogues with several denominations. The ELCA has declared full communion with multiple American Protestant churches.[230]
Although on paper the LWF churches have all declared have full communion with each other, in practice some churches within the LWF have renounced ties with specific other churches.[231] One development in this ongoing schism is the Global Confessional and Missional Lutheran Forum, which consists of churches and church related organizations tracing their heritage back to mainline American Lutheranism in North America, European state churches, as well as certain African churches. As of 2019, the Forum is not a full communion organization. Similar in this structure is the International Lutheran Council, where issues of communion are left to the individual denominations. Not all ILC churches have declared church-fellowship with each other. In contrast, mutual church-fellowship is part of the CELC member churches, and unlike in the LWF, this is not contradicted by individual statements from any particular member church body.
 L stadian lay preacher from Finnmark, Norway, 1898
Laestadians within certain European state churches maintain close ties to other Laestadians, often called Apostolic Lutherans. Altogether, Laestadians are found in 23 countries across five continents, but there is no single organization which represents them. Laestadians operate Peace Associations to coordinate their churchly efforts. Nearly all are located in Europe, although they there are 15 combined in North America, Ecuador, Togo, and Kenya.
By contrast, the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference and International Lutheran Council as well as some unaffiliated denominations such as the Church of the Lutheran Confession and North American Laestadians maintain that the orthodox confessional Lutheran churches are the only churches with completely correct doctrine. They teach that while other Christian churches teach partially orthodox doctrine and have true Christians as members, the doctrines of those churches contain significant errors. More conservative Lutherans strive to maintain historical distinctiveness while emphasizing doctrinal purity alongside Gospel-motivated outreach. They claim that LWF Lutherans are practicing "fake ecumenism" by desiring church fellowship outside of actual unity of teaching.[232]
Although not an "ecumenical" movement in the formal sense, in the 1990s influences from the megachurches of American evangelicalism have become somewhat common. Many of the largest Lutheran congregations in the United States have been heavily influenced by these "progressive Evangelicals". These influences are sharply criticized by some Lutherans as being foreign to orthodox Lutheran beliefs.[233]
Polity[edit]
 Hallowed be Thy Name by Lucas Cranach the Elder illustrates a Lutheran pastor preaching Christ crucified. During the Reformation and afterwards, many churches did not have pews, so people would stand or sit on the floor. The elderly might be given a chair or stool.
Lutheran polity varies depending on influences. Although Article XIV of the Augsburg Confession mandates that one must be "properly called" to preach or administer the Sacraments, some Lutherans have a broad view of on what constitutes this and thus allow lay preaching or students still studying to be pastors someday to consecrate the Lord's Supper.[234] Despite considerable diversity, Lutheran polity trends in a geographically predictable manner in Europe, with episcopal governance to the north and east but blended and consistorial-presbyterian type synodical governance in Germany.
Scandinavia[edit]
 Nathan S derblom is ordained as archbishop of the Church of Sweden, 1914. Although the Swedish Lutherans boast of an unbroken line of ordinations going back prior to the Reformation, the bishops of Rome do not recognize such ordinations as valid.
To the north in Scandinavia, the population was more insulated from the influence and politics of the Reformation and thus the Church of Sweden (which at the time included Finland) retained the Apostolic succession,[235] although they did not consider it essential for valid sacraments as the Donatists did in the fourth and fifth centuries and the Roman Catholics do today. Recently, the Swedish succession was introduced into all of the Porvoo Communion churches, all of which have an episcopal polity. Although the Lutheran churches did not require this or change their doctrine, this was important in order for more strictly high church Anglican individuals to feel comfortable recognizing their sacraments as valid. The occasional ordination of a bishop by a priest was not necessarily considered an invalid ordination in the Middle Ages, so the alleged break in the line of succession in the other Nordic Churches would have been considered a violation of canon law rather than an invalid ordination at the time. Moreover, there are no consistent records detailing pre-Reformation ordinations prior to the 12th century.[236]
In the far north of the Scandinavian peninsula are the S mi people, some of which practice a form of Lutheranism called Apostolic Lutheranism, or Laestadianism due to the efforts of Lars Levi Laestadius. However, others are Orthodox in religion. Some Apostolic Lutherans consider their movement as part of an unbroken line down from the Apostles. In areas where Apostolic Lutherans have their own bishops apart from other Lutheran church organizations, the bishops wield more practical authority than Lutheran clergy typically do. In Russia, Laestadians of Lutheran background cooperate with the Ingrian church, but since Laestadianism is an interdenominational movement, some are Eastern Orthodox. Eastern Orthodox Laestadians are known as Ushkovayzet (article is in Russian).[237]
Eastern Europe and Asian Russia[edit]
 Lutheran Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in St. Petersburg
Although historically Pietism had a significant influence on the understanding of the ministry among Lutherans in the Russian Empire,[b] today nearly all Russian and Ukrainian Lutherans are influenced by Eastern Orthodox polity. In their culture, giving a high degree of respect and authority to their bishops is necessary for their faith to be seen as legitimate and not sectarian.[238] In Russia, lines of succession between bishops and the canonical authority between their present-day hierarchy is also carefully maintained in order to legitimize the existing Lutheran churches as present day successors of the former Lutheran Church of the Russian Empire originally authorized by Catherine the Great. This allows for the post-Soviet repatriation of Lutheran church buildings to local congregations on the basis of this historical connection.[239]
Germany[edit]
In Germany, several dynamics encouraged Lutherans to maintain a different form of polity. First, due to de facto practice during the Nuremberg Religious Peace the subsequent legal principal of Cuius regio, eius religio in the 1555 Peace of Augsburg, German states were officially either Catholic or "Evangelical" (that is, Lutheran under the Augsburg Confession). In some areas both Catholic and Lutheran churches were permitted to co-exist. Because German-speaking Catholic areas were nearby, Catholic-leaning Christians were able to emigrate and there was less of an issue with Catholics choosing to live as "crypto-papists" in Lutheran areas. Although Reformed-leaning Christians were not allowed to have churches, Melancthon wrote Augsburg Confession Variata which some used to claim legal protection as "Evangelical" churches. Many chose to live as crypto-Calvinists either with or without the protection offered by the Variata, but this did not make their influence go away, and as a result the Protestant church in Germany as of 2017 was only about ~40% Lutheran, with most of the rest being United Protestant, a combination of Lutheran and Reformed beliefs and practices.[240]
 Schw bisch Hall Church Order, 1543
In terms of polity, over the 17th and 18th centuries the carefully negotiated and highly prescriptive church orders of the Reformation era gave way to a joint cooperation between state control and a Reformed-style blend of consistorial and presbyterian type synodical governance. Just as negotiations over the details in the church orders involved the laity, so did the new synodical governance. Synodical governance had already been practiced in the Reformed Netherlands prior to its adoption by Lutherans. During the formation of the modern German state, ideas about the nature of authority and the best design for governments and organizations came from the philosophies of Kant and Hegel, further modifying the polity. When the monarchy and the sovereign governance of the church were ended in 1918, the synods took over the governance of the state churches.
Western Hemisphere and Australia[edit]
 The Pennsylvania Ministerium published this 1803 hymnal.[241]
During the period of the emigration, Lutherans took their existing ideas about polity with them across the ocean,[242][243] though with the exception of the early Swedish Lutherans immigrants of the New Sweden colony who accepted the rule of the Anglican bishops and became part of the established church, they now had to fund churches on their own. This increased the congregationalist dynamic in the blended consistorial and presbyterian type synodical governance. The first organized church body of Lutherans in America was the Pennsylvania Ministerium, which used Reformed style synodical governance over the 18th and 19th centuries. Their contribution to the development of polity was that smaller synods could in turn form a larger body, also with synodical governance, but without losing their lower level of governance. As a result, the smaller synods gained unprecedented flexibility to join, leave, merge, or stay separate, all without the hand of the state as had been the case in Europe.
During their 19th-century persecution, "Old Lutheran" (scholastic, orthodox) believers were left in a conundrum. Resistance to authority was traditionally considered disobedience, but, under the circumstances, upholding orthodox doctrine and historical practice was considered by the government disobedience. However, the doctrine of the lesser magistrate allowed clergy to legitimately resist the state and even leave. Illegal free churches were set up in Germany and mass emigration occurred. For decades the new churches were mostly dependent on the free churches to send them new ministerial candidates for ordination. These new church bodies also employed synodical governance, but tended to exclude Hegelianism in their constitutions, due to its incompatibility with the doctrine of the lesser magistrates. In contrast to Hegelianism where authority flows in from all levels, Kantianism presents authority proceeding only from the top down, hence the need for a lesser magistrate to become the new top magistrate.
 Lighthouse Lutheran Church, an LCMC congregation in Freedom, Pennsylvania
Over the 20th and 21st centuries, some Lutheran bodies have adopted a more congregationalist approach, such as the Protes'tant Conference and the Lutheran Congregations in Mission for Christ, or LCMC. The LCMC formed due to a church split after the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America signed an agreement with the Episcopal Church to start ordaining all of their new bishops into the Episcopalian apostolic succession. In other words, this meant that new ELCA bishops, at least at first, would be jointly ordained by Anglican bishops as well as Lutheran bishops so that the more strict Episcopalians (i.e., Anglo-Catholics) would recognize their sacraments as valid. This was offensive to some in the ELCA at the time because of the implications this practice would have on the teachings of the priesthood of all believers and the nature of ordination.
Today, some churches allow dual-rostering.[244] Situations like this one where a church or church body belongs to multiple larger organizations that do not have ties are termed "triangular fellowship". Another variant is independent Lutheran churches, although for some independent churches the clergy are members of a larger denomination. In other cases, a congregation may belong to a synod, but the pastor may be unaffiliated. In the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Lutheran Church of Australia,[245] the Wisconsin Synod, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod, the Church of the Lutheran Confession, and the Missouri Synod, teachers at parochial schools are considered to be ministers of religion, with the latter defending this before the Supreme Court in 2012. However, differences remain in the precise status of their teachers.[246]
Throughout the world[edit]
Further information: Lutheranism by region and Protestantism by country
 The building of a congregation in Sigumpar, Toba [id], North Sumatra, Indonesia, belonging to the Batak Christian Protestant Church, a merged denomination that includes a Lutheran element
Today, millions belong to Lutheran churches, which are present on all populated continents.[247] The Lutheran World Federation estimates the total membership of its churches over 74 million.[248] This figure miscounts Lutherans worldwide as not all Lutheran churches belong to this organization, and many members of merged LWF church bodies do not self-identify as Lutheran or attend congregations that self-identify as Lutheran.[249] Lutheran churches in North America, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean regions are experiencing decreases and no growth in membership, while those in Africa and Asia continue to grow. Lutheranism is the largest religious group in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Namibia, Norway, Sweden, and North Dakota and South Dakota in the United States. 
 View of the altar and the pulpit in the Church of the Ascension in Jerusalem
Lutheranism is also the dominant form of Christianity in the White Mountain and San Carlos Apache nations. In addition, Lutheranism is a main Protestant denomination in Germany (behind United Protestant (Lutheran & Reformed) churches; EKD Protestants form about 24.3% of the country's total population),[250] Estonia, Poland, Austria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Papua New Guinea, and Tanzania.[251] Although some convents and monasteries voluntarily closed during the Reformation, and many of the remaining damenstift were shuttered by communist authorities following World War II, the L ne abbeys are still open. Nearly all active Lutheran orders are located in Europe.
 Faith Lutheran School in Hong Kong
Although Namibia is the only country outside Europe to have a Lutheran majority, there are sizable Lutheran bodies in other African countries. In the following African countries, the total number of Lutherans exceeds 100,000: Nigeria, Central African Republic, Chad, Kenya, Malawi, Congo, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, and Madagascar. In addition, the following nations also have sizable Lutheran populations: Canada, France, the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, Malaysia, India, Indonesia, the Netherlands (as a synod within the PKN and two strictly Lutheran denominations), South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States, especially in the heavily German and Scandinavian Upper Midwest.[252][253]
 The coat of arms of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland
Lutheranism is also a state religion in Denmark, Iceland, and Norway. Lutheranism was also the state church in Finland and Sweden, but its status (in Sweden) was changed to that of a national church in 2000.[254]
Brazil[edit]
The Evangelical Church of the Lutheran Confession in Brazil (Igreja Evang lica de Confiss o Luterana no Brasil) is the largest Lutheran denomination in Brazil. It is a member of the Lutheran World Federation, which it joined in 1952. It is a member of the Latin American Council of Churches, the National Council of Christian Churches and the World Council of Churches. The denomination has 1.02 million adherents and 643,693 registered members. The church ordains women as ministers. In 2011, the denomination released a pastoral letter supporting and accepting the Supreme Court's decision to allow same-sex marriage.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Brazil (Portuguese: Igreja Evang lica Luterana do Brasil, IELB) is a Lutheran church founded in 1904 in Rio Grande do Sul, a southern state in Brazil. The IELB is a conservative, confessional Lutheran synod which holds to the Book of Concord. It started as a mission of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod and operated as the Brazilian District of that body. The IELB became an independent church body in 1980. It has about 243,093 members. The IELB is a member of the International Lutheran Council.
The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS) started a Brazilian mission, the first for WELS in the Portuguese language, in the early 1980s. Its first work was done in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, in the south of Brazil, alongside some small independent Lutheran churches which had asked for help from WELS. Today, the Brazilian WELS Lutheran Churches are self-supporting and an independent mission partner of the Latin America WELS missions team.
Distribution[edit]
This map shows where members of LWF member churches were located in 2013.[255][c]
 Lutheran World Federation membership by country in 2013.
 More than 10 million
 More than 5 million
 More than 1 million
 More than 500 thousand
 More than 100 thousand
This map shows where members of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference (CELC) are located in 2013:
 Countries with a member of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference as of 2013
See also[edit]
List of Lutheran churches
List of Lutheran clergy
List of Lutheran colleges and universities
List of Lutheran denominations
List of Lutheran denominations in North America
List of Lutheran dioceses and archdioceses
List of Lutheran schools in Australia
Lutheran orders (both loose social organizations and physical communities such as convents)
Notes[edit]
^ Cf. material and formal principles in theology
^ See Edward Wust and Wustism in the Russian Wikipedia for more on this.
^ One of the countries with a higher number of Lutherans is the United States. The LWF does not include the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod and several other Lutheran bodies which together have over 2.5 million members
References[edit]
^ a b Markkola, P (2015). "The Long History of Lutheranism in Scandinavia. From State Religion to the People's Church". Perichoresis. 13 (2): 3 15. doi:10.1515/perc-2015-0007.
^ a b c Fahlbusch, Erwin, and Bromiley, Geoffrey William, The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 3. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 2003. p. 362.
^ Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, Fourth Session, Decree on Sacred Scripture (Denzinger 783 [1501]; Schaff 2:79 81). For a history of the discussion of various interpretations of the Tridentine decree, see Selby, Matthew L., The Relationship Between Scripture and Tradition according to the Council of Trent, unpublished Master's thesis, University of St Thomas, July 2013.
^ Webber, David Jay (1992). "Why is the Lutheran Church a Liturgical Church?". Bethany Lutheran College. Retrieved 18 September 2018. In the Byzantine world, however, this pattern of worship would not be informed by the liturgical history of the Latin church, as with the Reformation-era church orders, but by the liturgical history of the Byzantine church. (This was in fact what occurred with the Ukrainian Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession, which published in its 1933 Ukrainian Evangelical Service Book the first ever Lutheran liturgical order derived from the historic Eastern Rite.)
^ a b Esp n, Orlando O. and Nickoloff, James B. An introductory dictionary of theology and religious studies. Collegeville, Minnesota: Liturgical Press, p. 796.
^ "Bethany Lutheran Ministries   Home". Bethany Lutheran Ministries. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Lutherans, Biblehistory.com
^ MSN Encarta, s.v. "Lutheranism Archived 31 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine" by George Wolfgang Forell; Christian Cyclopedia, s.v. "Reformation, Lutheran" by Lueker, E. et al. Archived 2009-10-31. Lutherans believe that the Roman Catholic Church is not the same as the original Christian church.
^ a b c d e Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indf relse i Danmark. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ a b c Chapter 12: The Reformation In Germany And Scandinavia, Renaissance and Reformation by William Gilbert.
^ Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indf relse i Danmark. Kjobenhavn. p. 195. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ J. L. Rohmann (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indf relse i Danmark. Kjobenhavn. p. 202. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Rohmann, J. L (1836). Historisk fremstilling af reformationens indf relse i Danmark. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ "Danmarks og Norges Kirke-Ritual (Kirkeritualet)". retsinformation.dk. 25 July 1685. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Hastings, James (October 2004). A Dictionary of the Bible. ISBN 9781410217301. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ "Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church". Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ N.F. Lutheran Cyclopedia, article, "Upsala, Diet of", New York: Schrivner, 1899. pp. 528 529.
^ Lutheran Cyclopedia, article, "Agricola, Michael", New York: Schrivner, 1899. p. 5.
^ Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 425
^ This photograph is of a replica of the original Hundskirche stone. Zeitschrift f r Oesterreichische Volkskunde, (Google Books) by Theodor Vernaleken, 1896
^ Lutheran Theology after 1580 article in Christian Cyclopedia
^ a b c Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 426
^ Kleinig, Vernon P. "Confessional Lutheranism in Eighteenth-Century Germany." Concordia Theological Quarterly 60(1 2) Jan April 1996: Part I, Valentin Ernst Loescher p. 102.
^ Kleinig, Vernon P. "Confessional Lutheranism in Eighteenth-Century Germany." Concordia Theological Quarterly 60(1 2) Jan April 1996: Part II, Melchior Goeze pp. 109 112.
^ Rietschel, William C. An Introduction to the Foundations of Lutheran Education. St. Louis: Concordia, 2000. p. 25 (Although this reference specifically mentions Saxony, government promoted rationalism was a trend across Germany)
^ "Untitled Document". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ a b Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 180.
^ a b Armin Sierszyn: 2000 Jahre Kirchengeschichte, Book.4, Die Neuzeit, p. 155
^ a b Suelflow, Roy A. Walking With Wise Men. Milwaukee: South Wisconsin District (LCMS), 1967. p. 10
^ a b Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 165.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 182.
^ a b c Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 183.
^ Building God's Kingdom: Norwegian Missionaries in Highland Madagascar 1866 1903 by Karina Hestad Skeie, p. 22
^ Benton, William, ed. (1974). "Lutheran Churches". Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 11 (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-85229-290-7.
^ Christian Cyclopedia article on Br nn
^ a b c d Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 184.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 187.
^ a b c Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1959, p. 21.
^ "Repristination Theology". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved 6 April 2010.
^ a b Latourette, Kenneth Scott. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, Volume II, The Nineteenth Century in Europe. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 22.
^ a b Nichols, James Hastings. History of Christianity 1650 1950: Secularization of the West. New York, Ronald Press, 1956, p. 175.
^ Gassmann, G nther, et al. Historical dictionary of Lutheranism. Augsburg Fortress, Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press, 2001. p. 32.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 188.
^ Detzler, Wayne A. The Changing Church in Europe. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1979. p. 17. Quotation from Manfred Kober, Theology in Germany, from the Reformation Review, April 1969.
^ For the traditional Lutheran view of the Bible, see Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 3ff. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006.. For an overview of the doctrine of verbal inspiration in Lutheranism, see Inspiration, Doctrine of in the Christian Cyclopedia.
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 7ff. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 29.
^ Braaten, Carl E. (1983). Principles of Lutheran Theology. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, p. 9
^ Preus, Robert. The Inspiration of Scripture: A Study of the Theology of the 17th Century Lutheran Dogmaticians. London: Oliver and Boyd, 1957. p. 39.
^ Benton, William, ed. (1978). "Lutheran Churches". Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 11 (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. pp. 197 98. ISBN 978-0-85229-290-7.
^ U.S. Religious Landscape Survey: Religious Beliefs and Practices, Diverse and Politically Relevant. Washington D.C.: Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. June 2008. p. 127. Accessed online on 27 September 2009 at http://religions.pewforum.org/pdf/report2-religious-landscape-study-full.pdf.
^ Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 26.
^ "God's Word, or Holy Scripture" from the Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article II, of Original Sin Archived 22 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine
^ "the Scripture of the Holy Ghost." Apology to the Augsburg Confession, Preface, 9 Archived 31 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine
^ "The Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord". Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ a b Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 27.
^ Psalm 19:8, Psalm 119:105, Psalm 119:130, 2 Timothy 3:15, Deuteronomy 30:11, 2 Peter 1:19, Ephesians 3:3 4, John 8:31 32, 2 Corinthians 4:3 4, John 8:43 47, 2 Peter 3:15 16, Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 29., Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 11 12. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006.
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006.
^ Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ Romans 1:16, 1 Thessalonians 2:13, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 27.
^ Romans 1:16, 1 Thessalonians 1:5, Psalm 119:105, 2 Peter 1:19, 2 Timothy 1:16 17,Ephesians 3:3 4, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 11 12. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ John 6:63, Revelation 1:3, Ephesians 3:3 4, John 7:17, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ "Smalcald Articles   Book of Concord". Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ 
2 Timothy 3:15 17, John 5:39, John 17:20, Psalm 19:7 8, Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ Isaiah 8:20, Luke 16:29 31, 2 Timothy 3:16 17, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007., Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 28.
^ "Defense of the Augsburg Confession   Book of Concord". Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Walther, C. F. W. The Proper Distinction Between Law and Gospel. W. H. T. Dau, trans. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1929.
^ F.E. Mayer, The Religious Bodies of America. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1954, p. 184. For further information, see The Formula of Concord in the History of Swedish Lutheranism Archived 7 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine by Seth Erlandsson
^ The Ecumenical Councils and Authority in and of the Church (PDF). The Lutheran World Federation. 10 July 1993. The seven ecumenical councils of the early Church were assemblies of the bishops of the Church from all parts of the Roman Empire to clarify and express the apostolic faith. These councils are Nicaea (325 AD), Constantinople I (381), Ephesus (431), Chalcedon (451), Constantinople II (553), Constantinople III (680/81), and Nicaea II (787)... As Lutherans and Orthodox we affirm that the teachings of the ecumenical councils are authoritative for our churches ... The Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second Council of Nicaea in 787, which rejected iconoclasm and restored the veneration of icons in the churches, was not part of the tradition received by the Reformation. Lutherans, however, rejected the iconoclasm of the 16th century, and affirmed the distinction between adoration due to the Triune God alone and all other forms of veneration (CA 21). Through historical research this council has become better known.  Nevertheless it does not have the same significance for Lutherans as it does for the Orthodox. Yet, Lutherans and Orthodox are in agreement that the Second Council of Nicaea confirms the christological teaching of the earlier councils and in setting forth the role of images (icons) in the lives of the faithful reaffirms the reality of the incarnation of the eternal Word of God, when it states: "The more frequently, Christ, Mary, the mother of God, and the saints are seen, the more are those who see them drawn to remember and long for those who serve as models, and to pay these icons the tribute of salutation and respectful veneration. Certainly this is not the full adoration in accordance with our faith, which is properly paid only to the divine nature, but it resembles that given to the figure of the honored and life-giving cross, and also to the holy books of the gospels and to other sacred objects" (Definition of the Second Council of Nicaea).
^ Ecumenical Council. Titi Tudorancea Encyclopedia. 1991 2016. The Lutheran World Federation, in ecumenical dialogues with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople has affirmed all of the first seven councils as ecumenical and authoritative.
^ Junius Benjamin Remensnyder (1893). The Lutheran Manual. Boschen & Wefer Company. p. 12.
^ Frey, H. (1918). Is One Church as Good as Another?. Vol. 37. The Lutheran Witness. pp. 82 83.
^ a b Ludwig, Alan (12 September 2016). "Luther's Catholic Reformation". The Lutheran Witness. When the Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession before Emperor Charles V in 1530, they carefully showed that each article of faith and practice was true first of all to Holy Scripture, and then also to the teaching of the church fathers and the councils and even the canon law of the Church of Rome. They boldly claim, "This is about the Sum of our Doctrine, in which, as can be seen, there is nothing that varies from the Scriptures, or from the Church Catholic, or from the Church of Rome as known from its writers" (AC XXI Conclusion 1). The underlying thesis of the Augsburg Confession is that the faith as confessed by Luther and his followers is nothing new, but the true catholic faith, and that their churches represent the true catholic or universal church. In fact, it is actually the Church of Rome that has departed from the ancient faith and practice of the catholic church (see AC XXIII 13, XXVIII 72 and other places).
^ Paul R. Sponheim, "The Origin of Sin", in Christian Dogmatics, Carl E. Braaten and Robert W. Jenson, eds. (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984), 385 407.
^ Francis Pieper, "Definition of Original Sin", in Christian Dogmatics (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1953), 1:538.
^ Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 335 455, Part IX The Specific Doctrines Of The Conservative Reformation: Original Sin.
^ Formula of Concord, Original Sin Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Rom. 7:18, 8:7 1 Cor. 2:14, Martin Chemnitz, Examination of the Council of Trent: Vol. I. Trans. Fred Kramer, St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1971, pp. 639 652, "The Third Question: Whether the Good Works of the Regenerate in This Life Are So Perfect that They Fully, Abundantly, and Perfectly Satisfy the Divine Law".
^ Gen. 6:5, 8:21, Mat. 7:17, Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 388 390, Part IX The Specific Doctrines Of The Conservative Reformation: Original Sin, Thesis VII The Results, Section ii Positive.
^ Dt. 27:26,Rom. 5:12,2 Th. 1:9 Rom. 6:23, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 38 41, Part VIII. "Sin"
^ 1 Tim. 2:4, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 43 44, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 55.
^ Triglot Concordia: The Symbolical Books of the Ev. Lutheran Church. St. Louis: Concordia, 1921. Large Catechism Archived 14 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine, The Lord's Prayer, The Second Petition, Par. 51.
^ Gal. 3:13, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 43, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 54.
^ Rom. 10:4, Gal. 4:4 5, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 42, Part X. "Saving Grace", paragraph 52.
^ Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Article III, "Concerning the Righteousness of Faith before God". par. 57 58. trans. Kolb, R., Wengert, T., and Arand, C. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2000.
^ "Augsburg Confession   Book of Concord". Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ John 17:3, Luke 1:77,Galatians 4:9, Philippians 3:8, and 1 Timothy 2:4 refer to faith in terms of knowledge.
^ John 5:46 refers to acceptance of the truth of Christ's teaching, while John 3:36 notes the rejection of his teaching.
^ John 3:16,36, Galatians 2:16, Romans 4:20 25, 2 Timothy 1:12 speak of trust, confidence, and belief in Christ. John 3:18 notes belief in the name of Christ, and Mark 1:15 notes belief in the gospel.
^ Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 54 55, Part XIV. "Sin"
^ Ps. 51:10, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 57 Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 78.
^ John 17:20, Rom. 10:17, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 101 Part XXV. "The Church", paragraph 141.
^ Titus 3:5, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 87 Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 118.
^ Eph. 2:8, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934, p. 57 Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 78.
^ The Roman Catholic Catechism, part 3, section 1, chapter 3, article 2, II, paragraphs 2000 and 2001; downloaded February 18, 2017; defines grace as something which brings about a change in us, such that we cooperate in justification and act without sin (i.e. sanctified).
^ Is. 63:8 9, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 158 160, section "The Doctrine of God", part 5. "The Holy Trinity Revealed in the Old Testament",Heb. 1:5, see Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 33 36, Part VI. "The Trinity".
^ The Nicene Creed and the Filioque: A Lutheran Approach by Rev. David Webber for more information
^ Athanasian Creed   for an older Trinitarian Creed used by Lutherans, see the Nicene Creed: the version in Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006) of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC) is the 1988 ecumenical (ELLC) version. But the version in both "Lutheran Service Book" (2006) of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Lutheran Church Canada (LCC) is that of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer with modernized spelling of the words "catholic" and "apostolic", with changes in capitalization of these and other words, and with "Holy Spirit" in place of "Holy Ghost".[citation needed]
^ Luther's Small Catechism, The Apostles' Creed, Second Article Archived 28 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine,
Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 100ff. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006.
^ Augsburg confession, Article III. Retrieved 17 April 2010.
^ "Private Absolution ought to be retained in the churches, although in confession an enumeration of all sins is not necessary." Article XI: Of Confession
^ Matthew 28:19, 1 Corinthians 11:23 25, Matthew 26:26 28, Mark 14:22 24, Luke 22:19 20, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Ephesians 5:27, John 3:5, John 3:23, 1 Corinthians 10:16, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Ephesians 5:26, 1 Corinthians 10:16, 1 Corinthians 11:24 25, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Matthew 3:16 17, John 3:5, 1 Corinthians 11:19, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Luke 7:30, Luke 22:19 20, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Acts 21:16, Acts 2:38, Luke 3:3, Ephesians 5:26, 1 Peter 3:21, Galatians 3:26 27, Matthew 26:28, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ 1 Peter 3:21, Titus 3:5, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Titus 3:5, John 3:5, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ The Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIII, 2: "We believe we have the duty not to neglect any of the rites and ceremonies instituted in Scripture, whatever their number. We do not think it makes much difference if, for purposes of teaching, the enumeration varies, provided what is handed down in Scripture is preserved" (cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 211).
^ Luther's Large Catechism IV, 1: "We have now finished the three chief parts of the common Christian doctrine. Besides these we have yet to speak of our two Sacraments instituted by Christ, of which also every Christian ought to have at least an ordinary, brief instruction, because without them there can be no Christian; although, alas! hitherto no instruction concerning them has been given" (emphasis added; cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 733).
^ John 20:23, and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 112 113, Part XXVI "The Ministry", paragraph 156.
^ Luther's Large Catechism IV, 74 75: "And here you see that Baptism, both in its power and signification, comprehends also the third Sacrament, which has been called repentance, as it is really nothing else than Baptism" (emphasis added; cf. Theodore G. Tappert, trans. and ed., The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1959), 751).
^ The Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIII, 3, 4: "If we define the sacraments as rites, which have the command of God and to which the promise of grace has been added, it is easy to determine what the sacraments are, properly speaking. For humanly instituted rites are not sacraments, properly speaking, because human beings do not have the authority to promise grace. Therefore signs instituted without the command of God are not sure signs of grace, even though they perhaps serve to teach or admonish the common folk. Therefore, the sacraments are actually baptism, the Lord's Supper, and absolution (the sacrament of repentance)" (cf. Tappert, 211). Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article 13, Of the Number and Use of the Sacraments
^ Apology of the Augsburg Confession, article 24, paragraph 1. Retrieved 16 April 2010.
^ a b c d Wendel, David M. (1997). Manual for the Recovery of a Parish Practice of Individual Confession and Absolution (PDF). The Society of the Holy Trinity. pp. 2, 7, 8, 11.
^ a b Kolb, Robert (2008). Lutheran Ecclesiastical Culture: 1550   1675. Brill Publishers. p. 282. ISBN 9789004166417. The North German church ordinances of the late 16th century all include a description of private confession and absolution, which normally took place at the conclusion of Saturday afternoon vespers, and was a requirement for all who desired to commune the following day.
^ 1 Pet. 3:21, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 491 496, section "The Doctrine of Baptism", part 4. "Baptism a True Means of Grace", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 87, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 118.
^ Martin Luther, Small Catechism 4
^ Titus 3:5
^ John 3:3 7
^ "Baptism and Its Purpose". Lutheran Church Missouri Synod. Archived from the original on 6 February 2009. Retrieved 24 February 2009.
^ Luther, Martin (2009) [1529]. "The Sacrament of Holy Baptism". Luther's Small Catechism. ISBN 978-0-89279-043-2. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2009.
^ 1 Peter 3:21
^ Mat. 19:14, Acts 2:38 39, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 90, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 122.
^ 1 Cor. 1:14, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 90, Part XXIII. "Baptism", paragraph 122.
^ Luther, Martin (2009) [1529]. "Of Infant Baptism". Luther's Large Catechism. ISBN 978-1-4264-3861-5.Luther's Large Catechism   Holy Baptism Archived 23 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Augsburg Confession   Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ 1 Cor. 10:16, 11:20, 27, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 95, Part XXIV. "The Lord's Supper", paragraph 131.
^ "The Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Article 8, The Holy Supper". Archived from the original on 21 November 2008. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ Richard, James William (1909). The Confessional History of the Lutheran Church. Lutheran Publication Society. p. 113. In the Luthearn Church, private confession was at first voluntary. Later, in portions of the Lutheran Church, it was made obligatory, as a test of orthodoxy, and as a preparation of the Lord's Supper.
^ Granquist, Mark A. (2015). Scandinavian Pietists: Spiritual Writings from 19th-Century Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland. Paulist Press. p. 34. ISBN 9781587684982. Initially, Laestadius exercised his ministry mainly among the indigenous Sami (Lapp) people, but his influence soon spread into areasa of northern Finland, and the Laestadian (or Apostolic Lutheran) movement became predominantly Finnish. Even though he was a university-trained pastor and scientist (he was a renowned botanist), his powerful preaching and spiritual example ignited a lay-awakening movement in the north, a movement that is known for its distinctive religious practices, including lay confession and absolution.
^ Augustus Lawrence Graebner, Lutheran Cyclopedia p. 136, "Conversion"
^ "Augsburg Confession   Book of Concord". Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ 1 Cor. 2:14, 12:3, Rom. 8:7, Martin Chemnitz, Examination of the Council of Trent: Vol. I. Trans. Fred Kramer, St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1971, pp. 409 453, "Seventh Topic, Concerning Free Will: From the Decree of the Sixth Session of the Council of Trent".
^ Augsburg Confession, Article 18, Of Free Will Archived 15 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Acts 13:48, Eph. 1:4 11, Epitome of the Formula of Concord, Article 11, Election Archived 10 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 585 589, section "The Doctrine of Eternal Election: 1. The Definition of the Term", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 124 128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 176.
^ 2 Thess. 2:13, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 589 93, section "The Doctrine of Eternal Election: 2. How Believers are to Consider Their Election, and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 127 128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 180.
^ Rom. 8:33, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 127 128, Part XXXI. "The Election of Grace", paragraph 179., Engelder, T.E.W., The Certainty of Final Salvation. The Lutheran Witness 2(6). English Evangelical Missouri Synod: Baltimore. 1891, pp. 41ff.
^ 1 Tim. 2:4, 2 Pet. 3:9, Epitome of the Formula of Concord, Article 11, Election Archived 10 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine, and Engelder's Popular Symbolics, Part XXXI. The Election of Grace, pp. 124 128.
^ 1 Timothy 2:3 4
^ Hos. 13:9, Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 637, section "The Doctrine of the Last Things (Eschatology), part 7. "Eternal Damnation", and Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 135 136, Part XXXIX. "Eternal Death", paragraph 196.
^ Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. Concordia Publishing House. 1934. pp. 189 195 and Fuerbringer, L., Concordia Cyclopedia Concordia Publishing House. 1927. p. 635 and Christian Cyclopedia article on Divine Providence. For further reading, see The Proof Texts of the Catechism with a Practical Commentary, section Divine Providence, p. 212, Wessel, Louis, published in Theological Quarterly, Vol. 11, 1909.
^ Mueller, Steven P.,Called to Believe, Teach, and Confess. Wipf and Stock. 2005. pp. 122 123.
^ Mueller, J.T., Christian Dogmatics. Concordia Publishing House: 1934. pp. 190 and Edward. W. A.,A Short Explanation of Dr. Martin Luther's Small Catechism. Concordia Publishing House. 1946. p. 165. and Divine Providence and Human Adversity Archived 7 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine by Markus O. Koepsell
^ "The Small Catechism". Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ a b "Luther's Large Catechism, First Commandment". Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 9 March 2009.
^ John 15:5, Tit. 2:14, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 62 63, Part XV. "Conversion", paragraph 88 The New Obedience Is The Fruit Of Conversion, The Product Of Faith.
^ 2 Cor. 9:8, Krauth, C.P.,The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Literature of the Evangelical Lutheran Church . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. 1875. pp. 313 314, Part D Confession of the Conservative Reformation: II, Secondary Confessions: Book of Concord, Formula of Concord, Part IV The Doctrinal Result, 2, Section iv, Of Good Works.
^ Phil 2:13, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 74, Part XIX. "Preservation in Faith", paragraph 102.
^ Rom. 7:18 Heb 11:6, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. pp. 39 40, Part VIII. "Sin", paragraph 46 "Original Sin".
^ "Mat. 7:15 16; NIV   True and False Prophets". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Albrecht Beutel, "Luther's Life", tr. Katharina Gustavs, in The Cambridge Companion to Martin Luther, ed. Donald K. McKim (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 11.
^ quoted in Scaer, David. Luther's Concept of the Resurrection Concordia Theological Quarterly 47(3)Archived 4 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine p. 219
^ "Joh 18:36; ESV   Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of..." Bible Gateway. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ Luke 23:42 43, 2 Cor. 5:8, Engelder, T.E.W., Popular Symbolics. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1934. p. 130, Part XXXIV. "The State of the Soul in the Interval Between Death and the Resurrection", paragraph 185.
^ 1 Cor. 15:22 24, Francis Pieper, Christian Dogmatics, 505 515; Heinrich Schmid, The Doctrinal Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, 624 32; John Mueller, Christian Dogmatics, 616 619
^ John 6:40, John 6:54
^ John 5:21, John 5:28 29, Matthew 25:32, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Acts 24:15
^ Romans 8:11, Philippians 3:21, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Job 19:26, 1 Corinthians 15:44, 1 Corinthians 15:53, John 5:28, Revelation 20:12
^ Daniel 12:2, Matthew 25:41 46, John 5:29
^ Daniel 12:1 2, John 5:29, 1 Corinthians 15:52, 1 Corinthians 15:42 44, 1 Corinthians 15:49 53, Philippians 3:21, Matthew 13:43, Revelation 7:16
^ John 6:40, John 6:44, John 11:24
^ 1 Corinthians 15:51 52, 1 Thessalonians 4:15 17
^ Matthew 25:32, Romans 14:10, John 5:22, Acts 17:31, Revelation 1:7
^ Matthew 25:32, Mark 16:16
^ 2 Corinthians 5:10, 1 Corinthians 4:5, Romans 2:5, Romans 2:16
^ Romans 2:6, 2 Corinthians 5:10, Matthew 25:35 36, Matthew 25:42 43
^ Isaiah 43:25, Ezekiel 18:22, 1 John 2:28
^ Matthew 25:34 35, John 3:16 18, John 3:36, Revelation 14:13, Galatians 5:6, John 13:35
^ Matthew 25:42, Matthew 7:17 18, John 3:18, John 3:36
^ Romans 2:5, Acts 17:31, Romans 2:16
^ Luke 9:26, Matthew 25:31 32
^ Matthew 25:41, Matthew 25:34, Matthew 25:46, Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. pp. 233 8. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7.
^ Table drawn from, though not copied, from Lange, Lyle W. God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing House, 2006. p. 448.
^ a b c "Calvinism and Lutheranism Compared". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2015. Both (Lutherans and Calvinists) agree on the devastating nature of the fall and that man by nature has no power to aid in his conversions...and that election to salvation is by grace. In Lutheranism the German term for election is Gnadenwahl, election by grace--there is no other kind.
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.23.2.
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, II.3.5.
^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.3.6.
^ "WELS vs Assembly of God". WELS Topical Q&A. [P]eople by nature are dead in their transgressions and sin and therefore have no ability to decide of Christ (Ephesians 2:1, 5). We do not choose Christ, rather he chose us (John 15:16) We believe that human beings are purely passive in conversion.
^ Augsburg Confessional, Article XVIII, Of Free Will, saying: "(M)an's will has some liberty to choose civil righteousness, and to work things subject to reason. But it has no power, without the Holy Ghost, to work the righteousness of God, that is, spiritual righteousness; since the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God (1 Cor. 2:14); but this righteousness is wrought in the heart when the Holy Ghost is received through the Word."
^ Henry Cole, trans., Martin Luther on the Bondage of the Will (London, T. Bensley, 1823),  66. The controversial term liberum arbitrium was translated "free-will" by Cole. However Ernest Gordon Rupp and Philip Saville Watson, Luther and Erasmus: Free Will and Salvation (Westminster, 1969) chose "free choice" as their translation.
^ Stanglin, Keith D.; McCall, Thomas H. (15 November 2012). Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace. New York: OUP USA. pp. 157 158.
^ The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Lutheran Church, XI. Election. "Predestination" means "God's ordination to salvation".
^ Olson, Roger E. (2009). Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press. p. 63. Arminians accepts divine election, [but] they believe it is conditional.
^ The Westminster Confession, III:6, says that only the "elect" are "effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved." However in his Calvin and the Reformed Tradition (Baker, 2012), 45, Richard A. Muller observes that "a sizeable body of literature has interpreted Calvin as teaching "limited atonement", but "an equally sizeable body . . . [interprets] Calvin as teaching "unlimited atonement".
^ "Justification / Salvation". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2015. Romans 3:23-24, 5:9, 18 are other passages that lead us to say that it is most appropriate and accurate to say that universal justification is a finished fact. God has forgiven the sins of the whole world whether people believe it or not. He has done more than "made forgiveness possible." All this is for the sake of the perfect substitutionary work of Jesus Christ.
^ "IV. Justification by Grace through Faith". This We Believe. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Retrieved 5 February 2015. We believe that God has justified all sinners, that is, he has declared them righteous for the sake of Christ. This is the central message of Scripture upon which the very existence of the church depends. It is a message relevant to people of all times and places, of all races and social levels, for "the result of one trespass was condemnation for all men" (Romans 5:18]). All need forgiveness of sins before God, and Scripture proclaims that all have been justified, for "the result of one act of righteousness was justification that brings life for all men" (Romans 5:18). We believe that individuals receive this free gift of forgiveness not on the basis of their own works, but only through faith (Ephesians 2:8 9). ... On the other hand, although Jesus died for all, Scripture says that "whoever does not believe will be condemned" (Mark 16:16). Unbelievers forfeit the forgiveness won for them by Christ (John 8:24).
^ Becker, Siegbert W. "Objective Justification" (PDF). Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. p. 1. Retrieved 26 January 2015.
^ "Universal Justification". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Christ paid for all our sins. God the Father has therefore forgiven them. But to benefit from this verdict we need to hear about it and trust in it. If I deposit money in the bank for you, to benefit from it you need to hear about it and use it. Christ has paid for your sins, but to benefit from it you need to hear about it and believe in it. We need to have faith but we should not think of faith as our contribution. It is a gift of God which the Holy Spirit works in us.
^ Augsburg Confession, Article V, Of Justification. People "cannot be justified before God by their own strength, merits, or works, but are freely justified for Christ's sake, through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor, and that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake. ..."
^ Stanglin, Keith D.; McCall, Thomas H. (15 November 2012). Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace. New York: OUP USA. p. 136. Faith is a condition of justification
^ Paul ChulHong Kang, Justification: The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness from Reformation Theology to the American Great Awakening and the Korean Revivals (Peter Lang, 2006), 70, note 171. Calvin generally defends Augustine's "monergistic view".
^ Diehl, Walter A. "The Age of Accountability". Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. Retrieved 10 February 2015. In full accord with Scripture the Lutheran Confessions teach monergism. "In this manner, too, the Holy Scriptures ascribe conversion, faith in Christ, regeneration, renewal and all the belongs to their efficacious beginning and completion, not to the human powers of the natural free will, neither entirely, nor half, nor in any, even the least or most inconsiderable part, but in solidum, that is, entirely, solely, to the divine working and the Holy Ghost" (Trigl. 891, F.C., Sol. Decl., II, 25).
^ Monergism; thefreedictionary.com
^ "Calvinism and Lutheranism Compared". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 9 February 2015.
^ Olson, Roger E. (2009). Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press. p. 18. Arminian synergism" refers to "evangelical synergism, which affirms the prevenience of grace.
^ Olson, Roger E. (2009). Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press. p. 165. [Arminius]' evangelical synergism reserves all the power, ability and efficacy in salvation to grace, but allows humans the God-granted ability to resist or not resist it. The only "contribution" humans make is nonresistance to grace.
^ The Westminster Confession of Faith, Ch XVII, "Of the Perseverance of the Saints".
^ "Once saved always saved". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. People can fall from faith. The Bible warns, "If you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall" (1 Corinthians 10:12). Some among the Galatians had believed for a while, but had fallen into soul-destroying error. Paul warned them, "You who are trying to be justified by law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace" (Galatians 5:4). In his explanation of the parable of the sower, Jesus says, "Those on the rock are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. They believe for a while, but in time of testing they fall away" (Luke 8:13). According to Jesus a person can believe for a while and then fall away. While they believed they possessed eternal salvation, but when they fell from faith they lost God's gracious gift.
^ "Perseverence of the Saints (Once Saved Always Saved)". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. We cannot contribute one speck to our salvation, but by our own arrogance or carelessness we can throw it away. Therefore, Scripture urges us repeatedly to fight the good fight of faith (Ephesians 6 and 2 Timothy 4 for example). My sins threaten and weaken my faith, but the Spirit through the gospel in word and sacraments strengthens and preserves my faith. That's why Lutherans typically speak of God's preservation of faith and not the perseverance of the saints. The key is not our perseverance but the Spirit's preservation.
^ Demarest, Bruce A. (1997). The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation. Crossway Books. pp. 437 438.
^ Demarest, Bruce A. (1997). The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation. Crossway Books. p. 35. Many Arminians deny the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints.
^ McGrath, Alister, E. Christianity: An Introduction. 2nd ed. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 2006. p. 272.
^ Taruskin, Richard. The Oxford History of Western Music   Volume I (Music in the Earliest Notations to the sixteenth century), pp. 753 758 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010)
^ Apology of the Augsburg Confession, Article XXIV.1
^ a b See Luther's Small Catechism, Daily Prayers Archived 1 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine
^ H mmerli, Maria; Mayer, Jean-Fran ois (23 May 2016). Orthodox Identities in Western Europe: Migration, Settlement and Innovation. Routledge. p. 13. ISBN 9781317084914.
^ Principle examples of this in the ELCA include Family of God, Cape Coral FL. Archived 16 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The Well, Charlotte NC, Hosanna! of Lakeville, Minnesota, and Church of the Apostles, Seattle WA. Archived 20 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "A given culture's values and patterns, insofar as they are consonant with the values of the Gospel, can be used to express the meaning and purpose of Christian worship. Contextualization is a necessary task for the Church's mission in the world, so that the Gospel can be ever more deeply rooted in diverse local cultures."
NAIROBI STATEMENT ON WORSHIP AND CULTURE: Contemporary Challenges and Opportunities Archived 22 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ Piepkorn, A.C. Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 31.
^ Piepkorn, A.C., Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 32.
^ Piepkorn, A.C., Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 35.
^ Piepkorn, A.C., Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 33.
^ a b c Piepkorn, A.C., Profiles in Belief: Volume II, Protestant Denominations. San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978. p. 34.
^ Hunt, T.; Carper, J. (2012). The Praeger Handbook of Faith-Based Schools in the United States, K-12, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. p. 177. ISBN 978-0313391392.
^ Preface Archived 21 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine to Luther's Large and preface Archived 28 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine to Luther's Small Catechism.
^ Fahlbusch, Erwin, and Bromiley, Geoffrey William, The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 3. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 2003. p. 367.
^ Absolutism and the Eighteenth-Century Origins of Compulsory Schooling in Prussia and Austria (Google Books) by James van Horn Melton, Cambridge University Press, 1988.
^ Klug, Eugene F. and Stahlke, Otto F. Getting into the Formula of Concord. St. Louis: Concordia, 1977. p. 16
^ Klug, Eugene F. and Stahlke, Otto F. Getting into the Formula of Concord. St. Louis: Concordia. p. 18
^ See Lutheran Orthodoxy Under Fire: An Exploratory Study of the Syncretistic Controversy And The Consensus Repetitus Fidei Vere Lutheranae Archived 15 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine and Strenuus Christi Athleta Abraham Calov (1612 1686): Sainted Doctor And Defender of the Church Archived 15 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine, both by Timothy R. Schmeling
^ (in Swedish)Svenskakyrkan.se Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ Bente, Friedrich, 1858 1930. American Lutheranism Volume 1: Early History of American Lutheranism: Lutheran Swedes in Delaware. St. Louis: Concordia, 1919, pp. 13 16.
^ Eklund, Emmet E. (1988). His Name Was Jonas: A Biography of Jonas Swenson. Rock Island, Ill.: Augustana Historical Society. p. 99. ISBN 978-0910184366. Retrieved 21 September 2017.
^ Gritsch, Eric W. A History of Lutheranism. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002. p. 185.
^ For a historical example, see Robert Preus, To Join or Not To Join. North Dakota District of The Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, 1968.
^ See Brief Statement was adopted as LCMS doctrine in 1932, and from time to time has been adopted by other Lutherans Archived 14 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ Report of the Lutheran Church, The Northwestern Lutheran, p. 281, 31 August 1988.
^ These include, but are not limited to the following: the American Provinces of the Moravian Church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Reformed Church in America, the United Methodist Church, and the United Church of Christ.
^ For a similar phenomenon also currently developing, see Anglican realignment.
^ see Ecumenism: Facts and Illusions by Kurt E. Marquart for a short explanation of the modern ecumenism movement from a Confessional Lutheran perspective
^ See scholarly articles on the Church Growth Movement Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine from the Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library and Implications of the Church Growth Movement for Lutherans: Possibilities and Concerns Archived 14 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine by Harold L. Senkbeil as examples of criticism from confessional Lutherans
^ For some opinions and historical discussion from someone who takes a broader view, see What is a call?: or, When is a call a call, and who makes it such? Archived 12 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine By Alfred H. Maaske
^ Gassman, G nther; Larson, Duane H.; Olderburg, Mark W. (2011). Historical Dictionary of Lutheranism (2nd ed.). The Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 9780810874824.
^ Das kirchliche Amt in apostolischer Nachfolge. In: Dorothea Sattler, Gunther Wenz: Das kirchliche Amt in apostolischer Nachfolge. Volume 3: Verst ndigungen und Differenzen. Herder/ Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Freiburg and G ttingen 2008. ISBN 3-451-29943-7, p. 167 267, and p. 266.
^ Karelian religious movement Uskhovayzet
^ Kirche weltweit Ukraine: "Ihre Gemeinde ist annulliert" 18.09.2016 by Von Helmut Frank]
^ A New "Old" Lutheran Church in Asian Russia by Alexei Streltsov, in Logia, Epiphany 2006: Volume 15, Number 1
^ Zahlen und Fakte zum kirchlichen Leben 2019 Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland
^ This website has text and midi files for the 1865 Pennsylvania Ministerium hymnal.
^ Abdel Ross Wentz (1954), A Basic History of Lutheranism in America, Philadelphia, Pa., p. 41
^ Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United States, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., pp. 6, 140
^ For example, the single Lutheran church on the island of Guam is a member of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod and the Lutheran Congregations in Mission for Christ. See Lutheran Church of Guam History
^ Legitimacy, authority and transition in the public office of the ministry in the Lutheran Church of Australia by Grulke, David. 2 vols. (2007), thesis, Australian Catholic University
^ One example of these differences are those between the Missouri and Wisconsin Synods.
^ "About Us". Lutheran Church of New Zealand. Retrieved 5 March 2015. However, some Lutherans disagree with the way the Lutheran World Federation arrives at this number, as millions of them actually come from bodies that are largely Reformed, but include some Lutherans. For more information on this, see: Schumacher, William (April 2005). "Theological Observer: How Many Lutherans?" (PDF). Concordia Journal. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007.
^ "Member Churches". The Lutheran World Federation. 19 May 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ "Survey Shows 70.5 Million Members in LWF-Affiliated Churches". The Lutheran World Federation. 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012.
^ "Gez hlt 2021 - Zahlen und Fakten zum kirchlichen Leben" (PDF). ekd.de. Retrieved 2 January 2022.
^ Encyclop dia Britannica, Dominant Protestant Denomination Per Country, 1995.
^ Lutherans as a Percentage of All Residents, 2000 Archived 30 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine (Map by county). Also see comparable maps of other religions along with specific denominations of Lutheran at the main American Ethnic Geography Archived 9 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine site
^ 2011 World Lutheran Membership Details Archived 24 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Sweden Ends Designation of Lutheranism as Official Religion". Los Angeles Times. January 2000. Retrieved 5 March 2015.
^ The Lutheran World Federation 2013 Membership Figures
Further reading[edit]
ALC Historical Perspective: Nervig, Casper B. Christian Truth and Religious Delusions, Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing House, 1941.
Arand, Charles P, and Robert Kolb, eds. The Lutheran Confessions: History and Theology of the Book of Concord (2012)
Bodensieck, Julius, ed. The encyclopedia of the Lutheran Church (3 vol 1965) vol 1 and 3 online free
Brauer, James Leonard and Fred L. Precht, eds. Lutheran Worship: History and Practice (1993)
CLC Perspective: Concerning Church Fellowship: A Statement of Principle. Eau Claire, WI: CLC Book House. 1996.
Confessional & Historical Perspective: G nther Gassmann & Scott Hendrix. Fortress Introduction to the Lutheran Confessions. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8006-3162-5.
European Lutheran perspective: Elert, Werner. The Structure of Lutheranism: the Theology and Philosophy of Life of Lutheranism, Especially in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, trans. by Walter A. Hansen. Saint Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House, 1962. N.B.: Trans. of Morphologie des Luthertums, vol. 1 of which was published in 1931 at Munich by C.H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1931, vol. 2 in German appearing in 1932; the t.p. of this English-language ed. states "Volume One", but there has been no publication, as part of this English ed., of vol. 2.
Fellowship of Lutheran Congregations Perspective: What True Lutherans Teach. Oak Parks, Ill.: E.L.C. Tract Center, [199?]. 11 p. N.B.: There is no personal author or specific committee credited with this brochure.
General Council Historical Perspective: Krauth, Charles Porterfield (1875). The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology: As Represented in the Augsburg Confession, and in the History and Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: J. P. Lippincott. p. 840. ISBN 978-0-7586-0994-6.
Granquist, Mark. Lutherans in America: A New History (2015)
LCA Historical Perspective: Braaten, Carl E. (1983). Principles of Lutheran Theology. Philadelphia: Fortress Press. ISBN 978-0-8006-1689-2.
LCA Historical Worship Perspective: Reed, Luther D. The Lutheran Liturgy: a Study [especially] of the Common Service of the Lutheran Church in America. Philadelphia, Penn.: Muhlenberg Press, 1947. N.B.: This study also includes some coverage of other Lutheran liturgical services, especially of Matins and Vespers.
LCMS Perspective: Pieper, Franz (1950 1957). Christian Dogmatics. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 3 Volumes. ISBN 978-0-570-06714-6.
LCMS Perspective: Engelder, Theodore E.W. (1934). Popular Symbolics: The Doctrines of the Churches of Christendom and Of Other Religious Bodies Examined in the Light of Scripture. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 526.
LCMS Perspective: Brief Statement of the Doctrinal Position of the Missouri Synod (1932). Saint Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House.
LCMS Perspective: Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910). Outlines of Doctrinal Theology. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-524-04891-7. Archived from the original on 9 July 2006.
LCMS Perspective: Kretzschmar, Karl (198?). What Lutherans Teach. St. Louis, Mo.: Concordia Tract Mission.
LCMS Perspective: Neuhaus, Richard John (1969). The Lutherans (in "Ecumenical Series"). New York: Paulist Press. N.B.: At the time of the publication of this document, Neuhaus was still a Lutheran pastor, of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod.
LCR Perspective: McLaughlin, Wallace H. (1963). We All Believe in One True God: A Summary of Biblical Doctrine. Midland, Michigan: Cross of Christ Press.
Meyer, Carl S. Moving Frontiers: Readings in the History of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod (1986)
Neo-Lutheran Historical Perspective: Schmid, Heinrich Friedrich Ferdinand (1876). The Doctrinal Theology of the Evangelical Lutheran Church. Philadelphia: Lutheran Publication Society. ISBN 978-0-7905-8877-3.
Norwegian Synod Historical Perspective: Monson, Ingvar Gr the (1915). The Difference: A Popular Guide to Denominational History and Doctrine. Saint Louis, MO: Concordia Publishing House.
Richard, James William (1909) The Confessional History of the Lutheran Church. Philadelphia: Lutheran Publication Society, 1909
Roeber, A. G. Palatines, Liberty, and Property: German Lutherans in Colonial British America (1998)
Slovak Synod Historical Perspective: Richter, V. W. (1913). Why Should a Lutheran Not Join Any Sectarian Church?. Streator, Illinois: Svedok Publishing House.
WELS Perspective: Lange, Lyle W. (2006). God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Northwestern Publishing House. ISBN 978-0-8100-1744-3.
Comparison of about 50 Lutheran church bodies in America: Brug, John F. (2009). WELS & Other Lutherans (2nd ed.). Northwestern Publishing House. ISBN 978-0-8100-0543-3.
Comparison of Catholic, Lutheran, and Protestant doctrine: Jackson, Gregory L. (2007). Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: A Doctrinal Comparison of Three Christian Confessions (PDF). Glendale, Arizona: Martin Chemnitz Press.[permanent dead link]
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lutheranism.
Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclop dia Britannica article "Lutherans".
Moldehnke, Edward F. "Was ist denn eigentlich ein Lutheraner?" Evangelish-Lutherisches Gemeinde-Blatt. Vol. 1, nos. 8 10 (1866). Trans. Nathaniel J. Biebert. "So What Actually Is a Lutheran?" Studium Excitare. Issue No. 12 (2010).
"Lutherans" . Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.
A historical study of the Laestadian Lutheran Church, the SRK, and Conservative Laestadianism
vteLutheranismLuther's Small Catechism
The Ten Commandments
Apostle's Creed
Lord's Prayer
Sacrament of Holy Baptism
Confession
Sacrament of the Eucharist
Chief articles of faithin the Augsburg Confession
I. God
II. Original Sin
III. The Son of God
IV. Justification By Faith
V. The Office of Preaching
VI. Of The New Obedience
VII. Of The Church
VIII. What the Church Is
IX. Of Baptism
X. Of the Lord's Supper
XI. Of Confession
XII. Of Repentance
XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments
XIV.
XV. Ecclesiastical Usages
XVI. Of Civil Affairs
XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment
XVIII. Of Free Will
XIX. Of the Cause of Sin
XX. Of Good Works
XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints
Practices
Divine Service
Confirmation
Common table prayer
Sign of The Cross
Matins
Vespers
Easter Vigil
Liturgical Calendar
Wreath of Christ
Movements
Gnesio-Lutherans
Crypto-Calvinism
Philippists
Sacramentarians
Ubiquitarians
Lutheran orthodoxy
Pietism
Laestadianism
Old Lutherans
Neo-Lutheranism
High Church Lutheranism
Evangelical Catholicism
Confessional Lutherans
Links to related articles
vteMartin Luther
Bibliography
Resources about Martin Luther
Works
Ninety-five Theses (1517)
Sermon on Indulgences and Grace (1518)
To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (1520)
On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church (1520)
On the Freedom of a Christian (1520)
Against Henry, King of the English (1522)
Luther Bible (1522, 1534)
The Adoration of the Sacrament (1523)
Formula missae (1523)
Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants (1525)
On the Bondage of the Will (1525)
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ Against the Fanatics (1526)
Deutsche Messe (1526)
Confession Concerning Christ's Supper (1528)
On War Against the Turk (1529)
Small Catechism (1529)
Articles of Schwabach (1529)
Large Catechism (1529)
Smalcald Articles (1537)
On the Councils and the Church (1539)
On the Jews and Their Lies (1543)
Vom Schem Hamphoras (1543)
Luther's Table Talk (1566)
Weimar edition of Luther's works
List of hymns
First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
"A Mighty Fortress Is Our God" (1529)
"Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam" (1543)
Topicsand events
Reformation
Lutheranism
Heidelberg Disputation, 1518
Leipzig Debate, 1519
Exsurge Domine, 1520
Diet of Worms, 1521
Decet Romanum Pontificem, 1521
Marburg Colloquy, 1529
Augsburg Confession, 1530
Luther's canon
Theology of Martin Luther
Theology of the Cross
Priesthood of all believers
Sola fide
Sola scriptura
Two kingdoms
Beerwolf (1539)
Law and Gospel
Marian theology
Eucharist in Lutheranism
Sacramental union
Words of Institution
Antisemitism
Propaganda during the Reformation
Die L gend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo (1537 edition)
People
Hans and Margarethe Luther (parents)
Katharina von Bora (wife)
Magdalena Luther (daughter)
Paul Luther (son)
Albert of Brandenburg
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi
Erasmus
Georg R rer
Johann Cochlaeus
Johann Reuchlin
Johann von Staupitz
Justus Jonas
Karl von Miltitz
Andreas Karlstadt
Philip Melanchthon
Pope Leo X
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
Frederick the Wise
Albrecht VII. von Mansfeld
Luther sites
All Saints' Church, Wittenberg
Stadtkirche Wittenberg
Lutherhaus
Lutherst dte
Martin Luther's Birth House
Martin Luther's Death House
Melanchthonhaus (Wittenberg)
St. Augustine's Monastery
Veste Coburg (Fortress)
Wartburg Castle
Film and theatre
Martin Luther (1923 film)
Luther (1928 film)
Martin Luther (1953 film)
Luther (1961 play)
Luther (1964 film)
Luther (1974 film)
Martin Luther, Heretic (1983 film)
Luther (2003 film)
Luther and I (2017 film)
Luther Monuments
Luther Monument, Washington D.C.
Luther Monument, Worms
Related
Luther rose
Theologia Germanica
vteEarly Lutheran controversies
 Date Controversy Resolution a) Issues / people / publications involved 1527 56 Antinomian VVI
Johannes Agricola
Andreas Poach
Anton Otto
Matthias Flacius
Philippists 1533 53 Descent into Hell IX
Descent into Hell
Johannes Aepinus 1548 55 Adiaphoristic X
Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans 1549 66 Osiandrian III
Andreas Osiander
Johann Funck
Francesco Stancaro
Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Andreas Musculus
Victorinus Strigel 1551 62 Majoristic VI
Georg Major
Justus Menius
Nicolaus von Amsdorf
Nicolaus Gallus
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans 1555 60 Synergistic II
Philip Melanchthon
Johann Pfeffinger
Victorinus Strigel
Matthias Flacius
Philippists
Gnesio-Lutherans
On the Bondage of the Will 1560 75 Flacian I
Matthias Flacius
Simon Musaeus
Victorinus Strigel 1560 75 Crypto-Calvinistand Saligerian VII
Philip Melanchthon
Augsburg Confession Variata
Albert Hardenberg
Joachim Westphal
Martin Chemnitz
Maximilian M rlin
Johannes Saliger
Philippists
Sacramentarians
Ubiquitarians
Gnesio-Lutherans
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ 1561 63 Predestination XI
Predestination
Johann Marbach
Girolamo Zanchi
a) Articles identified (I XII) according to the Formula of Concord.
vteHistory of LutheranismStart of theReformationEvents
Ninety-five Theses
Heidelberg Disputation
Leipzig Debate
Marburg Colloquy
Diet of Speyer (1529)
Protestation at Speyer
Articles of Schwabach
Presentation of the Augsburg Confession
Nuremberg Religious Peace
Reformation in
Denmark Norway and Holstein
Finland
Germany
Iceland
Sweden
Reformers
Martin Luther
Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen
Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas
Argula von Grumbach
Petrus S rkilahti
Mikael Agricola
Stephan Agricola
Nicolaus von Amsdorf
Laurentius Andreae
Olaus Petri
Laurentius Petri
Stephan Praetorius
Johann Pfeffinger
Frederick the Wise
Early turmoilEvents
Dissemination of the Augsburg Confession Variata
Colloquy of Worms (1540 1541)
Diet of Regensburg
Regensburg Interim
Schmalkaldic War
Augsburg Interim
Leipzig Interim
Peace of Passau
Peace of Augsburg
Colloquy of Worms (1557)
Counter-Reformation
Council of Trent   Protestant response
Publication of the Magdeburg Centuries
Adiaphoristic controversies (first
second)
Controversy on the Descent into Hell
Presentation of the Greek Augsburg Confession
Signing of the Formula of Concord
Liturgical struggle
Uppsala Synod
People
Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Nicolaus Gallus
Cyriacus Spangenberg
Joachim Westphal
Andreas Musculus
Victorinus Strigel
Johannes Agricola
Andreas Osiander
John the Magnanimous
Factions
Crypto-Calvinism
Sacramentarians
Philippists
Ubiquitarians
Gnesio-Lutherans
Crypto-Lutherans
Orthodox andScholasticperiodsEarly
Acceptance of the Book of Concord
Martin Chemnitz
Colloquy of Mumpelgart
Jakob Andreae
Nikolaus Selnecker
David Chytraeus
Matthias Hafenreffer
Leonhard Hutter
Aegidius Hunnius
Stephan Praetorius
High
Johann Gerhard
J. A. Quenstedt
Abraham Calovius
Georg Calixtus
Nicolaus Hunnius
Jesper Brochmand
Salomo Glassius
Johann H lsemann
J. C. Dannhauer
J. F. K nig
Johannes Musaeus
J. W. Baier
Thirty Years' War
Late
David Hollatz
Christian Scriver
V. E. L scher
J. M. Goeze
Salzburg Protestants
Landlers
Speculative 
or critical 
theologiesWolffian
Johann Salomo Semler
Johann David Michaelis
Johann Christoph D derlein
Old T bingen school
Gottlob Christian Storr
Friedrich Gottlieb S skind
Johann Friedrich Flatt
Kantian
Christoph Friedrich von Ammon
Julius Wegscheider
Wilhelm Gesenius
Albrecht Ritschl
Adolf von Harnack
Wilhelm Herrmann
Hegelian
Karl Daub
Philip Marheineke
David Strauss
Ferdinand Christian Baur
Richard Adelbert Lipsius
Otto Pfleiderer
Moderate
Franz Volkmar Reinhard
Karl Gottlieb Bretschneider
Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette
Transitional
Johann Gottfried Herder
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
Friedrich Schleiermacher
RevivalsPietist
Martin Moller
Johann Arndt
Jakob B hme
J. V. Andreae
P. J. Spener
J. W. Petersen
A. H. Francke
J. F. Buddeus
J. A. Bengel
G. C. Knapp
Awakening
J. G. Hamann
Hans Nielsen Hauge
Haugeanism
Paavo Ruotsalainen
Finnish Awakening
Claus Harms
Lars Levi Laestadius
Laestadianism
Carl Olof Rosenius
N. F. S. Grundtvig
August Tholuck
Zillertal Valley expulsion
Neo-LutheranRepristination
E. W. Hengstenberg
F. A. Philippi
F. G. Hedberg
Carl Paul Caspari
C. P. Krauth
L .A. Gotwald
Erlangen
G. C. A. von Harless
J. W. F. H fling
Gottfried Thomasius
J. C. K. von Hofmann
Franz Delitzsch
K. F. A. Kahnis
Theodosius Harnack
C. E. Luthardt
F. H. R. von Frank
Paul Althaus
Werner Elert
High Church
A. F. C. Vilmar
F. J. Stahl
A. F. O. M nchmeyer
J. K. W. L he
Theodor Kliefoth
Heinrich Hansen
Old LutheranGermany
Old Lutheran schism
Background
J. G. Scheibel
Eduard Huschke
Henrik Steffens
H. E. F. Guericke
G. P. E. Huschke
Free churches
Australia / New Guinea
August Kavel
Gotthard Fritzsche
Johann Flierl
Lutheran Church of Australia
United States
Martin Stephan
J. A. A. Grabau
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken
C. F. W. Walther
H. A. Preus
F. W. Stellhorn
Synodical Conference of North America
Present
Confessional Lutheranism
Homosexuality
vteOrder of the Divine Service in LutheranismPreparatory Service
Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation)
Penitential Act including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter)
The Service of the Word
Introit
Gloria Patri
K rie
Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Oremus
Collect
Old Testament reading
gradual (or Responsorial Psalm)
Epistle
Alleluia (tract during Lent)
Gospel
Hymn of the day
Homily or Postil (Sermon)
Nicene Creed (Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday)
Offertory
Prayers of the Faithful
The Service of the Eucharist
Preface (Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna)
Eucharistic Prayer (Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation)
Lord's Prayer
Sign of peace / pax (elevation)
Agnus Dei
Distribution
Nunc dimittis
Postcommunion
Benedicamus Domino
Benediction
Dismissal
Ite, missa est
Participants
Acolyte
bishop
cantor
choir
crucifer
deacon
elder
laity
lector
Pastor (or Priest)
usher
Parts of the Sanctuary
altar
altar bell
altar crucifix
altar rails
kneeler
piscina
processional cross
tabernacle
Candles
altar candle
paschal candle
sanctuary lamp
votive candle
Liturgical vessels
ciborium
chalice
cruet
Liturgical objects
collection basket
holy water
incense (use)
paten
sacramental bread (wafer)
sacramental wine
thurible
Vestments
alb
chasuble
dalmatic
geneva gown
humeral veil
stole
surplice
tunicle
Liturgical books and hymnals
Christian Worship (1993)
Common Service Book (1917)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996)
Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006)
Lutheran Book of Worship (1978)
The Lutheran Hymnal (1941)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989)
Lutheran Service Book (2006)
Lutheran Worship (1982)
ReClaim Hymnal (2006)
Service Book and Hymnal (1958)
vteLutheran hymnodyEnglish hymnals
Christian Worship (1993)
Common Service Book (1917)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996)
Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006)
Lutheran Book of Worship (1978)
The Lutheran Hymnal (1941)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989)
Lutheran Service Book (2006)
Lutheran Worship (1982)
ReClaim Hymnal (2006)
Service Book and Hymnal (1958)
German hymnals
First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
Praxis pietatis melica (1640/47)
Becker Psalter (1602)
Evangelisches Gesangbuch (1993)
In other languagesDanish
Den Danske Salmebog
Guldberg's hymnal
Kingo's hymnal
Thomiss n's hymnal
Faroese
S lmab k F roya kirkju
Finnish
Siionin Virret
Virsikirja
Icelandic
Passion Hymns
Norwegian
Nokre salmar (1869)
Landstads kirkesalmebog (1870)
Psalmebog for Kirke og Hus (1873)
Landstads reviderte salmebok (1924)
Nynorsk salmebok (1925)
Salmer 1973
Norsk Salmebok (1985)
Salmer 1997
Norsk salmebok 2013
Spanish
Culto Cristiano
Swedish
Swenske songer (1536)
Een liten Songbook (in Swedish, 1553)
Den svenska psalmboken 1695
Den svenska psalmboken 1819
Hemlandss nger (in Swedish, 1891)
Hymnodistsandhymnologists
Mikael Agricola
Johann Georg Albinus
Albert von Brandenburg
Michael Altenburg
Anna Sophia II
Johann Sebastian Bach
Emilie Juliane of Barby-M hlingen
Martin Behm
Sigmund von Birken
Carl Boberg
Birgitte Cathrine Boye
Hans Adolph Brorson
Johan Nordahl Brun
Joachim a Burck
Dieterich Buxtehude
Christian Cappelen
Elisabeth Cruciger
Johann Cr ger
Simon Dach
Wolfgang Dachstein
Nikolaus Decius
Paul Eber
Ludmilla Elisabeth
Princess Eug nie
Jacobus Finno
Paul Fleming
Johann Franck
Michael Franck
Melchior Franck
Salomon Franck
Frans Michael Franz n
Erik Gustaf Geijer
Paul Gerhardt
Bartholom us Gesius
Johannes Gigas
N. F. S. Grundtvig
Britt G. Hallqvist
Andreas Hammerschmidt
Claus Harms
Fredrik Gabriel Hedberg
Christian F rchtegott Gellert
Johann Heermann
Ludwig Helmbold
Valerius Herberger
Nikolaus Herman
Johannes Hermann
Sebald Heyden
Anders Hovden
Konrad Hubert
Bernhard Severin Ingemann
Justus Jonas
Sigfrid Karg-Elert
Christian Keymann
Balthasar Kindermann
Thomas Kingo
B rre Knudsen
Johann Kolross
Johann Balthasar K nig
Julius Krohn
Magnus Brostrup Landstad
Ludvig Mathias Lindeman
Elias L nnrot
Matth us Apelles von L wenstern
Matthias Loy
Sigurd Lunde
Martin Luther
Wilhelmi Malmivaara
Hemminki of Masku
Felix Mendelssohn
Johann Matth us Meyfart
Georg Neumark
Erdmann Neumeister
Philipp Nicolai
Johann Pachelbel
Hallgr mur P tursson
Michael Praetorius
Christian Heinrich Postel
Adam Reusner
Bartholom us Ringwaldt
Martin Rinkart
Johann Rist
Christian Knorr von Rosenroth
Daniel Rumpius
Johan Runeberg
Gottfried Wilhelm Sacer
Lina Sandell
Carl Schalk
Martin Schalling
Heinrich Scheidemann
Johann Hermann Schein
Benjamin Schmolck
Cyriakus Schneegass
Johann Schop
Johann Balthasar Schupp
Heinrich Sch tz
Nikolaus Selnecker
Eyvind Skeie
Haquin Spegel
Lazarus Spengler
Paul Speratus
Philipp Spitta
Paul Stockmann
Jesper Swedberg
Ji  T anovsk 
Melchior Teschner
N. Samuel of Tranquebar
Zachris Topelius
Leonard Typp 
Jaroslav Vajda
Gottfried Vopelius
Philipp Wackernagel
Johan Olof Wallin
Johann Walter
Michael Wei e
Georg Weissel
Olle Widestrand
Carl David af Wirs n
Catherine Winkworth
Johannes Zahn
Luther   Hymnodist
Hymns by Luther
Lutheran hymn
In continental Europe
Lutheran chorale
Chorale setting
Chorale cantata
vteBeliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church
See also: Heresy in the Catholic ChurchAntiquity
Adoptionism
Apollinarism
Arianism
Anomoeanism
Semi-Arianism
Antidicomarianites
Audianism
Docetism
Donatism
Circumcellions
Dualism
Ebionites
Euchites
Gnosticism
Manichaeism
Paulicianism
Priscillianism
Naassenes
Ophites
Sethianism
Valentinianism
Iconoclasm
Luciferianism
Macedonianism
Marcionism
Melchisedechians
Modalism
Monarchianism
Athinganoi
Modalistic
Monophysitism
Monothelitism
Montanism
Nestorianism
Novatianism
Patripassianism
Pelagianism
Semipelagianism
Pneumatomachians
Psilanthropism
Sabellianism
Subordinationism
Valentinianism
Middle Ages
Arnoldism
Bogomilism
Bosnian Church
Catharism
Conciliarism
Dulcinians
Fraticelli
Free Spirits
Henricians
Humiliati
Hussites
Impanation
Josephines
Lollardy
Migetians
Pasagians
Spanish Adoptionism
Taborites
Waldensians
Early modernity
Antinomianism
Consubstantiation
Febronianism
Gallicanism
Jansenism
Josephinism
Pantheism
Protestantism
Anabaptism
Arminianism
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Quietism
Modernity
Americanism
Community of the Lady of All Nations
Feeneyism
Indifferentism
Jehovah's Witnesses
Modernism
Mormonism
Positive Christianity
Reincarnationism
Santa Muerte
 Catholic Church portal
vteChristianity
Index
Outline
Glossary
Prophets
People
Lists of Christians
By country
Bible(Scriptures)
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament
Foundations
Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant
Christian tradition
Worship
History(timeline)(spread)EarlyChristianity
Jesus
in Christianity
Nativity
Baptism
Ministry
Sermon on the Mount
Parables
Miracles
Great Commandment
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Apostles
Church fathers
Apostolic fathers
Great Church
Ante-Nicene period
Late antiquity
Constantine
First seven ecumenical councils
Nicaea I
Chalcedon
State church of the Roman Empire
Biblical canon
Middle Ages
Monasticism
Papal States
East West Schism
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Age of Discovery
Modern era
Protestant Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Thirty Years' War
Enlightenment
French Revolution
Persecution:
Communism
Islam
Influences
Denominations(list, members)Western
Catholic
Protestant
Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Quakers
Western Rite Orthodoxy
Eastern
Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Church of the East (Nestorian)
Eastern Catholic
Restorationist
Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Iglesia ni Cristo
Theology
God
Trinity
Father
Son
Holy Spirit
Christology
Nicene Creed
Tradition
Original sin
Salvation
Born again
Liturgy
Catholic
Eastern Catholic
Eastern Orthodox
Protestant
Worship
Mariology
Theotokos
Saints
Angel
Ecclesiology
Four marks
Body of Christ
One true church
People of God
Canon law
Sacraments
Baptism
Eucharist
Marriage
Confirmation
Penance
Anointing of the Sick
Holy orders
Mission
Ablution
Hygiene
Philosophy
Natural law
Ethics
Science
Evolution
Politics
Views on poverty and wealth
OtherFeaturesCulture
Architecture
Architecture of cathedrals and great churches
Art
Jesus
Mary
Education
Catechism
Flag
Literature
Music
Mythology
Pilgrimage
Popular piety
Church buildings
Cathedrals
Role in civilization
See also:
Other religions
Cultural Christians
Criticism
Persecution
Movements
Crusading movement
Anarchism
Charismatic
Democracy
Environmentalism
Existentialism
Fundamentalism
Liberation
Left/Right
Mysticism
Pacifism
Prosperity
Cooperation
Christendom
Ecumenism
Charta Oecumenica
World Council of Churches
World Evangelical Alliance
Nondenominationalism
 Christianity portal
 Category
Authority control International
FAST
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lutheranism&oldid=1147804647"