American folk hero and lawman (1837 1876)
For the American football player and industrialist, see Bill Hickok (American football). For other uses of "Wild Bill", see Wild Bill (disambiguation).
Wild Bill HickokBornJames Butler Hickok(1837-05-27)May 27, 1837Homer, Illinois, U.S.(now Troy Grove, Illinois, U.S.)DiedAugust 2, 1876(1876-08-02) (aged 39)Deadwood, Dakota Territory, U.S.Cause of deathGunshot woundResting placeMount Moriah Cemetery, Deadwood, Dakota TerritoryOther namesJames B. Hickok, J.B. Hickok, Shanghai Bill, William Hickok, William HaycockOccupations
Farmer
drover
lawman
soldier
scout
actor
SpouseAgnes Thatcher Lake  (m. 1876) Parent(s)William Alonzo Hickok and Polly Butler
James Butler Hickok (May 27, 1837  August 2, 1876), better known as "Wild Bill" Hickok, was a folk hero of the American Old West known for his life on the frontier as a soldier, scout, lawman, cattle rustler, gunslinger, gambler, showman, and actor, and for his involvement in many famous gunfights. He earned a great deal of notoriety in his own time, much of it bolstered by the many outlandish and often fabricated tales he told about himself. Some contemporaneous reports of his exploits are known to be fictitious, but they remain the basis of much of his fame and reputation.
Hickok was born and raised on a farm in northern Illinois at a time when lawlessness and vigilante activity were rampant because of the influence of the "Banditti of the Prairie". Drawn to this ruffian lifestyle, he headed west at age 18 as a fugitive from justice, working as a stagecoach driver and later as a lawman in the frontier territories of Kansas and Nebraska. He fought and spied for the Union Army during the American Civil War and gained publicity after the war as a scout, marksman, actor, and professional gambler. He was involved in several notable shootouts during the course of his life.
In 1876, Hickok was shot and killed while playing poker in a saloon in Deadwood, Dakota Territory (present-day South Dakota) by Jack McCall, an unsuccessful gambler. The hand of cards which he supposedly held at the time of his death has become known as the dead man's hand: two pairs; black aces and eights.
Hickok remains a popular figure of frontier history. Many historic sites and monuments commemorate his life, and he has been depicted numerous times in literature, film, and television. He is chiefly portrayed as a protagonist, although historical accounts of his actions are often controversial, and much of his career is known to have been exaggerated both by himself and by contemporary mythmakers. While Hickok claimed to have killed numerous named and unnamed gunmen in his lifetime, his career as a gunfighter only lasted from 1861 to 1871. According to Joseph G. Rosa, Hickok's biographer and the foremost authority on Wild Bill, Hickok killed only six or seven men in gunfights.[1][2]
Early life[edit]
James Butler Hickok was born May 27, 1837, in Homer, Illinois, (present-day Troy Grove, Illinois) to William Alonzo Hickok, a farmer and abolitionist, and his wife, Polly Butler. Hickok was of English ancestry.[3][4] James was the fourth of six children. His father was said to have used the family house, now demolished, as a station on the Underground Railroad.[5] William Hickok died in 1852, when James was 15.[6]
Hickok was a good shot from a young age, and was recognized locally as an outstanding marksman with a pistol.[7] Photographs of Hickok appear to depict dark hair, but all contemporaneous descriptions affirm that it was red.[a][8]
In 1855, at age 18, James Hickok fled Illinois following a fight with Charles Hudson, during which both fell into a canal; each thought, mistakenly, that he had killed the other. Hickok moved to Leavenworth in the Kansas Territory, where he joined Jim Lane's Free State Army (also known as the Jayhawkers), an antislavery vigilante group active in the new territory during the Bleeding Kansas era. While a Jayhawker, he met 12-year-old William Cody (later known as "Buffalo Bill"), who, despite his youth, served as a scout just two years later for the U.S. Army during the Utah War.[9]
Nicknames[edit]
 James B. Hickok in the 1860s, during his pre-gunfighter days
Hickok used his late father's name, William Hickok, from 1858, and the name William Haycock during the American Civil War. Most newspapers referred to him as William Haycock until 1869. He was arrested while using the name Haycock in 1865. He afterward resumed using his given name, James Hickok. Military records after 1865 list him as Hickok, but note that he was also known as Haycock.[10][page needed][11] In an 1867 article about his shootout with Davis Tutt, his surname was misspelled as Hitchcock.[12]
While in Nebraska, Hickok was derisively referred to by one man as "Duck Bill" for his long nose and protruding lips.[13][14] He was also known before 1861 among Jayhawkers as "Shanghai Bill" because of his height and slim build.[15] He grew a moustache following the McCanles incident, and in 1861 began calling himself "Wild Bill".[16][17]
Early career[edit]
In 1857, Hickok claimed a 160-acre (65 ha) tract in Johnson County, Kansas, near present-day Lenexa.[18] On March 22, 1858, he was elected one of the first four constables of Monticello Township. In 1859, he joined the Russell, Majors and Waddell freight company, the parent company of the Pony Express.
In 1860, Hickok was badly injured by a bear, while driving a freight team from Independence, Missouri, to Santa Fe, New Mexico.[19] According to Hickok's account, he found the road blocked by a cinnamon bear and its two cubs. Dismounting, he approached the bear and fired a shot into its head, but the bullet ricocheted off its skull, infuriating it. The bear attacked, crushing Hickok with its body. Hickok managed to fire another shot, wounding the bear's paw. The bear then grabbed his arm in its mouth, but Hickok was able to grab his knife and slash its throat, killing it.
Hickok was severely injured, with a crushed chest, shoulder, and arm. He was bedridden for four months before being sent to Rock Creek Station in the Nebraska Territory to work as a stable hand while he recovered. There, the freight company had built a stagecoach stop along the Oregon Trail near Fairbury, Nebraska, on land purchased from David McCanles.[20]
McCanles shooting[edit]
Main article: McCanles Gang
 David C. McCanles, alleged leader of the McCanles Gang, in 1860
On July 12, 1861, David McCanles went to the Rock Creek Station office to demand an overdue property payment from Horace Wellman, the station manager. McCanles reportedly threatened Wellman, and either Wellman or Hickok, who was hiding behind a curtain, killed McCanles.[21][22] Hickok, Wellman, and another employee, J.W. Brink, were tried for killing McCanles, but were found to have acted in self-defense. McCanles may have been the first man Hickok killed.[21] Hickok subsequently visited McCanles' widow, apologized for the killing, and offered her $35 in restitution, all the money he had with him at the time.[23][b]
Civil War service[edit]
After the Civil War broke out in April 1861, Hickok became a teamster for the Union Army in Sedalia, Missouri. By the end of 1861, he was a wagon master, but in September 1862, he was discharged for unknown reasons. He then joined General James Henry Lane's Kansas Brigade, and while serving with the brigade, saw his friend Buffalo Bill Cody, who was serving as a scout.[24]
In late 1863, Hickok worked for the provost marshal of southwest Missouri as a member of the Springfield detective police. His work included identifying and counting the number of troops in uniform who were drinking while on duty, verifying hotel liquor licenses, and tracking down individuals who owed money to the cash-strapped Union Army.[citation needed]
Buffalo Bill claimed that he encountered Hickok disguised as a Confederate officer in Missouri in 1864.[25][26]: 136  Hickok had not been paid for some time, and was hired as a scout by General John B. Sanborn by early 1865. In June, Hickok mustered out and went to Springfield, where he gambled.[25] The 1883 History of Greene County, Missouri described him as "by nature a ruffian ... a drunken, swaggering fellow, who delighted when 'on a spree' to frighten nervous men and timid women."[27]
Lawman and scout[edit]
Duel with Davis Tutt[edit]
Main article: Wild Bill Hickok   Davis Tutt shootout
 The Hickok Tutt shootout, in an 1867 illustration accompanying the article by Nichols in Harper's magazine
While in Springfield, Hickok and a local gambler named Davis Tutt had several disagreements over unpaid gambling debts and their common affection for the same women. Hickok lost a gold watch to Tutt in a poker game. The watch had great sentimental value to Hickok, so he asked Tutt not to wear it in public. They initially agreed not to fight over the watch, but when Hickok saw Tutt wearing it, he warned him to stay away. On July 21, 1865, the two men faced off in Springfield's town square, standing sideways before drawing and firing their weapons. Their quick-draw duel was recorded as the first of its kind.[28] Tutt's shot missed, but Hickok's struck Tutt through the heart from about 75 yards (69 m) away. Tutt called out, "Boys, I'm killed", before he collapsed and died.[29][30]
Two days later, Hickok was arrested for murder. The charge was later reduced to manslaughter. He was released on $2,000 bail and stood trial on August 3, 1865. At the end of the trial, Judge Sempronius H. Boyd told the jury they could not find Hickok acted in self-defense if he could have reasonably avoided the fight.[c] However, if they felt the threat of danger was real and imminent, he instructed they could apply the unwritten law of the "fair fight" and acquit.[d] The jury voted to clear Hickok, resulting in public backlash and criticism of the verdict.[31]
Several weeks later, an interview Hickok gave to Colonel George Ward Nichols, a journalist who subsequently became known as the creator of the Hickok legend,[32] was published in Harper's New Monthly Magazine. Under the name "Wild Bill Hitchcock" [sic], the article recounted the "hundreds" of men whom Hickok had personally killed and other exaggerated exploits.[12] The article was controversial wherever Hickok was known, and several frontier newspapers wrote rebuttals.[33]
Deputy U.S. marshal in Kansas[edit]
In September 1865, Hickok came in second in the election for city marshal of Springfield. Leaving Springfield, he was recommended for the position of deputy federal marshal at Fort Riley, Kansas. This was during the Indian Wars, in which Hickok sometimes served as a scout for General George A. Custer's 7th Cavalry.[9]
In 1865, Hickok recruited six Native Americans and three cowboys to accompany him to Niagara Falls, where he put on an outdoor demonstration called The Daring Buffalo Chasers of the Plains.[6] Since the event was outdoors, he could not compel people to pay, and the venture was a financial failure.[34]: 34  The show featured six buffalo, a bear, and a monkey, and one show ended in disaster when a buffalo refused to act, prompting Hickok to fire a bullet into the sky. This angered the buffalo and panicked audience members, causing the animals to break free of their wire fencing and chase audience members, some of whom were trampled. The incident helped contribute to the overall failure of the show.[citation needed]
Henry M. Stanley, of the Weekly Missouri Democrat, reported Hickok to be "an inveterate hater of Indian People", perhaps to enhance his reputation as a scout and American fighter, but  separating fact from fiction is difficult considering his recruitment of Indians to cross the nation to appear in his own Wild West show.[6][35] Witnesses confirm that while working as a scout at Fort Harker, Kansas, on May 11, 1867, Hickok was attacked by a large group of Indians, who fled after he shot and killed two. In July, Hickok told a newspaper reporter that he had led several soldiers in pursuit of Indians who had killed four men near the fort on July 2. He reported returning with five prisoners after killing 10. Witnesses confirm that the story was true to the extent the party had set out to find whoever had killed the four men,[e] but the group returned to the fort "without nary a dead Indian, [never] even seeing a live one".[36][37]
In December 1867, newspapers reported that Hickok had come to stay in Hays City, Kansas. He became a deputy U.S. marshal, and on March 28, 1868, he picked up 11 Union Army deserters who had been charged with stealing government property. Hickok was assigned to bring the men to Topeka for trial, and he requested a military escort from Fort Hays. He was assigned Buffalo Bill Cody, a sergeant, and five privates. They arrived in Topeka on April 2. Hickok remained in Hays through August 1868, when he brought 200 Cheyenne Indians to Hays to be viewed by "excursionists".[38]
On September 1, 1868, Hickok was in Lincoln County, Kansas, where he was hired as a scout by the 10th Cavalry Regiment, a segregated African-American unit. On September 4, Hickok was wounded in the foot while rescuing several cattlemen in the Bijou Creek basin who had been surrounded by Indians. The 10th Regiment arrived at Fort Lyon in Colorado in October and remained there for the rest of 1868.[38]
Marshal of Hays, Kansas[edit]
 Wild Bill Hickok in 1869.
In July 1869, Hickok returned to Hays and was elected city marshal of Hays and sheriff of Ellis County, Kansas, in a special election held on August 23, 1869.[39]  Three sheriffs had quit during the previous 18 months. Hickok may have been acting sheriff before he was elected; a newspaper reported that he arrested offenders on August 18, and the commander of Fort Hays wrote a letter to the assistant adjutant general on August 21 in which he praised Hickok for his work in apprehending deserters.[f]
The regular county election was held on November 2, 1869. Hickok ran as an Independent; but lost to his deputy, Peter Lanihan, who ran  as a Democrat.  Hickok and Lanihan, however, remained sheriff and deputy, respectively.  Hickok accused a J.V. Macintosh of irregularities and misconduct during the election.  On December 9, Hickok and Lanihan both served legal papers on Macintosh, and local newspapers acknowledged that Hickok had guardianship of Hays City.[40]: 196 
Killings as sheriff[edit]
In September 1869, his first month as sheriff, Hickok killed two men. The first was Bill Mulvey, who was rampaging through town, drunk, shooting out mirrors and whisky bottles behind bars. Citizens warned Mulvey to behave, because Hickok was sheriff. Mulvey angrily declared that he had come to town to kill Hickok. When he saw Hickok, he leveled his cocked rifle at him. Hickok waved his hand past Mulvey at some onlookers and yelled, "Don't shoot him in the back; he is drunk." Mulvey wheeled his horse around to face those who might shoot him from behind, and before he realized he had been fooled, Hickok shot him through the temple.[9][41]
The second killed by Hickok was Samuel Strawhun, a cowboy, who was causing a disturbance in a saloon at 1:00 am on September 27, when Hickok and Lanihan went to the scene.[28] Strawhun "made remarks against Hickok", and Hickok killed him with a shot through the head. Hickok said he had "tried to restore order". At the coroner's inquest into Strawhun's death, despite "very contradictory" evidence from witnesses, the jury found the shooting justifiable.[40]: 192 
On July 17, 1870, Hickok was attacked by two troopers from the 7th U.S. Cavalry, Jeremiah Lonergan and John Kyle (sometimes spelled Kile),[42] in a saloon. Lonergan pinned Hickok to the ground, and Kyle put his gun to Hickok's ear. When Kyle's weapon misfired, Hickok shot Lonergan, wounding him in the knee, and shot Kyle twice, killing him. Hickok lost his re-election bid to his deputy.[43]
Marshal of Abilene, Kansas[edit]
 John Wesley Hardin, a well-known gunfighter, was known to have killed at least 27 men. In his autobiography, Hardin made the unlikely claim that while surrendering his guns to the lawman due to a local ordinance, he had once disarmed Town Marshal "Wild Bill" Hickok with the use of the "road agent's spin".
On April 15, 1871, Hickok became marshal of Abilene, Kansas. He replaced Tom "Bear River" Smith, who had been killed while serving an arrest warrant on November 2, 1870.  
Outlaw John Wesley Hardin arrived in Abilene at the end of a cattle drive in early 1871. Hardin was a well-known gunfighter, and is known to have killed more than 27 men.[44] In his 1895 autobiography, published after his death, Hardin claimed to have been befriended by Hickok, the newly elected town marshal, after he had disarmed the marshal using the road agent's spin, but Hardin was known to exaggerate. In any case, Hardin appeared to have thought highly of Hickok.[45]
Hickok later said he did not know that "Wesley Clemmons" was Hardin's alias, and that he was a wanted outlaw.  He told Clemmons (Hardin) to stay out of trouble in Abilene and asked him to hand over his guns, and Hardin complied. Hardin alleged that when his cousin, Mannen Clements, was jailed for the killing of two cowhands (Joe and Dolph Shadden) in July 1871, Hickok at Hardin's request arranged for his escape.[46]: pp.54 56 [47]
In August 1871, Hickok sought to arrest Hardin for killing Charles Couger in an Abilene hotel "for snoring too loud".  Hardin left Kansas before Hickok could arrest him.[46]: 45 58 [48]  A newspaper reported, "A man was killed in his bed at a hotel in Abilene, Monday night, by a desperado called 'Arkansas'. The murderer escaped. This was his sixth murder."[49]
Shootout with Phil Coe[edit]
Hickok and Phil Coe, a saloon owner and acquaintance of Hardin's, had a dispute that resulted in a shootout. The Bull's Head Saloon in Abilene had been established by gambler Ben Thompson and Coe, his partner, businessman, and fellow gambler.[50] The two entrepreneurs had painted a picture of a bull with a large erect penis on the side of their establishment as an advertisement. Citizens of the town complained to Hickok, who requested that Thompson and Coe remove the image. They refused, so Hickok altered it himself. Infuriated, Thompson tried to incite John Wesley Hardin to kill Hickok by exclaiming to Hardin that "He's a damn Yankee. Picks on rebels, especially Texans, to kill." Hardin was in town under his assumed name Wesley Clemmons, but was better known to the townspeople by the alias "Little Arkansas". He seemed to have respect for Hickok's abilities and replied, "If Bill needs killing, why don't you kill him yourself?"[46] Hoping to intimidate Hickok, Coe allegedly stated that he could "kill a crow on the wing". Hickok's retort is one of the West's most famous sayings (though possibly apocryphal): "Did the crow have a pistol? Was he shooting back? I will be."[citation needed]
On October 5, 1871, Hickok was standing off a crowd during a street brawl when Coe fired two shots. Hickok ordered him to be arrested for firing a pistol within the city limits. Coe claimed that he was shooting at a stray dog,[g] and then suddenly turned his gun on Hickok, who fired first and killed Coe. In another account of the Coe shootout: Theophilus Little, the mayor of Abilene and owner of the town's lumber yard, recorded his time in Abilene by writing in a notebook, which was ultimately given to the Abilene Historical Society. Writing in 1911, he detailed his admiration for Hickok and included a paragraph on the shooting that differs considerably from the reported account:
"Phil" Coe was from Texas, ran the "Bull's Head" a saloon and gambling den, sold whiskey and men's souls. As vile a character as I ever met for some cause Wild Bill incurred Coe's hatred and he vowed to secure the death of the marshal. Not having the courage to do it himself, he one day filled about 200 cowboys with whiskey intending to get them into trouble with Wild Bill, hoping that they would get to shooting and in the melee shoot the marshal. But Coe "reckoned without his host". Wild Bill had learned of the scheme and cornered Coe, had his two pistols drawn on Coe. Just as he pulled the trigger, one of the policemen rushed around the corner between Coe and the pistols and both balls entered his body, killing him instantly. In an instant, he pulled the triggers again sending two bullets into Coe's abdomen (Coe lived a day or two) and whirling with his two guns drawn on the drunken crowd of cowboys, "and now do any of you fellows want the rest of these bullets?" Not a word was uttered.
After shooting Coe, Hickok caught a glimpse of someone running toward him and quickly fired two more shots in reaction, accidentally shooting and killing Abilene Special Deputy Marshal Mike Williams, who was coming to his aid. This was the last time Hickok was ever involved in a gunfight; the accidental death of Deputy Williams was an event that haunted Hickok for the remainder of his life.[51]
Hickok was relieved of his duties as marshal less than two months after the accidental shooting, this incident being only one of a series of questionable shootings and claims of misconduct during his career.[7]
Later life[edit]
 Hickok, Texas Jack Omohundro, and Buffalo Bill Cody as the "Scouts of the Plains" in 1873
In 1873, Buffalo Bill Cody and Texas Jack Omohundro invited Hickok to join their troupe after their earlier success.[26]: 329  Hickok did not enjoy acting, and often hid behind scenery. In one show, he shot the spotlight when it focused on him. He was released from the group after a few months.[52]
Eye trouble[edit]
In 1876, Hickok was diagnosed by a doctor in Kansas City, Missouri, with glaucoma and ophthalmia.[citation needed] Although he was just 39, his marksmanship and health were apparently in decline, and he had been arrested several times for vagrancy,[53] despite earning a good income from gambling and displays of showmanship only a few years earlier.[citation needed]
From 1871 until his death in 1876, Hickok had vision problems. A former cavalryman, J.W. "Doc" Howard, who had known Hickok, stated that Hickok had left Buffalo Bill's Wild West Exhibition "because the lights affected his eyes, so he had to give it up".[54]
Charles Snyder, the Lucien Howe Librarian of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, said "Granular conjunctivitis, ophtalmia, trachoma call it what you will was common on the Western Frontier. Jesse James suffered from it."[55]
Marriage[edit]
On March 5, 1876, Hickok married Agnes Thatcher Lake, a 50-year-old circus proprietor in Cheyenne, Wyoming Territory. Hickok left his new bride a few months later, joining Charlie Utter's wagon train to seek his fortune in the gold fields of South Dakota.[9]
 Tintype of Hickok c. 1870. It was found with the last letter he wrote to his wife, Agnes Thatcher Lake.
Shortly before his death, Hickock wrote a letter to his new wife, which read in part, "Agnes Darling, if such should be we never meet again, while firing my last shot, I will gently breathe the name of my wife Agnes and with wishes even for my enemies I will make the plunge and try to swim to the other shore."[56]
Martha Jane Cannary, known popularly as Calamity Jane, claimed in her autobiography that she was married to Hickok and had divorced him so he could be free to marry Agnes Lake, but no records that support her account have been found.[57] The two possibly met for the first time after Jane was released from the guardhouse in Fort Laramie and joined the wagon train in which Hickok was traveling. The wagon train arrived in Deadwood in July 1876.[58] Jane confirmed this account in an 1896 newspaper interview, although she claimed she had been hospitalized with illness rather than in the guardhouse.[citation needed]
Death[edit]
On August 1, 1876, Hickok was playing poker at Nuttal & Mann's Saloon No. 10 in Deadwood, Dakota Territory. When a seat opened up at the table, a drunk man named Jack McCall sat down to play. McCall lost heavily. Hickok encouraged McCall to quit the game until he could cover his losses and offered to give him money for breakfast. Although McCall accepted the money, he was apparently insulted.[59]
The next day, Hickok was playing poker again. He usually sat with his back to a wall so he could see the entrance, but the only seat available when he joined the game was a chair facing away from the door. He twice asked another man at the table, Charles Rich, to change seats with him, but Rich refused.[60] McCall then entered the saloon, walked up behind Hickok, drew his Colt Model 1873 Single Action Army .45-caliber revolver, and shouted, "Damn you! Take that!" before shooting Hickok in the back of the head at point-blank range.[61]
Hickok died instantly. The bullet emerged through his right cheek and struck another player, riverboat Captain William Massie, in the left wrist.[62][63] Hickok may have told his friend Charlie Utter and others who were traveling with them that he thought he would be killed while in Deadwood.[64]
 The poker hand purportedly held by Hickok at his demise
Hickok was playing five-card stud or five-card draw when he was shot. He was holding two pairs: black aces and black eights (although there is some dispute as to the suit of one of the aces, diamond vs. spade) as his "up cards", which has since become widely known as the "dead man's hand". The identity of the fifth card (his "hole card") is also the subject of debate.[h]
Jack McCall's two trials[edit]
 Jack McCall shot Hickok in the back of the head; the photo has been claimed to be of McCall, but is unsubstantiated.
McCall's motive for killing Hickok is the subject of speculation, largely concerning McCall's anger at Hickok's having given him money for breakfast the day before, after McCall had lost heavily.[65][66]
McCall was summoned before an informal "miners' jury" (an ad hoc local group of miners and businessmen). He claimed he was avenging Hickok's earlier slaying of his brother, which may have been true; a man named Lew McCall had indeed been killed by an unknown lawman in Abilene, Kansas, but whether or not the two McCall men were related is unknown.[66] McCall was acquitted of the murder, which prompted editorializing in the Black Hills Pioneer: "Should it ever be our misfortune to kill a man ... we would simply ask that our trial may take place in some of the mining camps of these hills." Calamity Jane is reputed to have led a mob that threatened McCall with lynching, but at the time of Hickok's death, Jane was actually being held by military authorities.[67]
After bragging about killing Hickok, McCall was rearrested. The second trial was not considered double jeopardy because of the irregular jury in the first trial and because Deadwood was at the time in unorganized Indian country. The new trial was held in Yankton, the capital of the Dakota Territory. Hickok's brother, Lorenzo Butler, traveled from Illinois to attend the retrial. McCall was found guilty and sentenced to death.[citation needed]
Leander Richardson, a reporter, interviewed McCall shortly before his execution, and wrote an article about him for the April 1877 issue of Scribner's Monthly. Lorenzo Butler Hickok spoke with McCall after the trial, and said McCall showed no remorse.[68]
As I write the closing lines of this brief sketch, word reaches me that the slayer of Wild Bill has been rearrested by the United State [sic?] authorities, and after trial has been sentenced to death for willful murder. He is now at Yankton, D.T. awaiting execution. At the [second] trial it was suggested that [McCall] was hired to do his work by gamblers who feared the time when better citizens should appoint Bill the champion of law and order   a post which he formerly sustained in Kansas border life, with credit to his manhood and his courage.[i][68]
Jack McCall was hanged on March 1, 1877, and buried in a Roman Catholic cemetery. The cemetery was moved in 1881, and when McCall's body was exhumed, the noose was found still around his neck.[69]
Burial[edit]
Arapaho Joe and Colorado Charlie Utter at Hickok's grave, photograph date unknownHickok monument in 1891Hickok monument in 2008
Charlie Utter, Hickok's friend and companion, claimed Hickok's body and placed a notice in the local newspaper, the Black Hills Pioneer, which read:
Died in Deadwood, Black Hills, August 2, 1876, from the effects of a pistol shot, J. B. Hickock [sic] (Wild Bill) formerly of Cheyenne, Wyoming. Funeral services will be held at Charlie Utter's Camp, on Thursday afternoon, August 3, 1876, at 3 o'clock P. M. All are respectfully invited to attend.
Almost the entire town attended the funeral, and Utter had Hickok buried with a wooden grave marker reading:
Wild Bill, J. B. Hickock [sic] killed by the assassin Jack McCall in Deadwood, Black Hills, August 2, 1876. Pard, we will meet again in the happy hunting ground to part no more. Good bye, Colorado Charlie, C. H. Utter.
Hickok is known to have fatally shot six men and is suspected of having killed a seventh (McCanles). Despite his reputation,[70] Hickok was buried in the Ingelside Cemetery, Deadwood's original graveyard. This cemetery filled quickly, and in 1879, on the third anniversary of Hickok's original burial, Utter paid to move Hickok's remains to the new Mount Moriah Cemetery.[j] Utter supervised the move and noted that, while perfectly preserved, Hickok had been imperfectly embalmed. As a result, calcium carbonate from the surrounding soil had replaced the flesh, leading to petrifaction. One of the workers, Joseph McLintock, wrote a detailed description of the reinterment. McLintock used a cane to tap the body, face, and head, finding no soft tissue anywhere. He noted that the sound was similar to tapping a brick wall and believed the remains weighed more than 400 lb (180 kg). William Austin, the cemetery caretaker, estimated 500 lb (230 kg). This made it difficult for the men to carry the remains to the new site. The original wooden grave marker was moved to the new site, but by 1891, it had been destroyed by souvenir hunters whittling pieces from it, and it was replaced with a statue. This, in turn, was destroyed by souvenir hunters and replaced in 1902 by a life-sized sandstone sculpture of Hickok. This, too, was badly defaced, and was then enclosed in a cage for protection. The enclosure was cut open by souvenir hunters in the 1950s, and the statue was removed.[71]
Hickok is currently interred in a 10 ft (3 m) square plot at the Mount Moriah Cemetery, surrounded by a cast-iron fence, with a U.S. flag flying nearby.[72] As of 2020, the flag is no longer flown. A monument has been built there.
Calamity Jane was reported to have been buried next to Hickok according to her dying wish. Four of the men on the self-appointed committee who planned Calamity's funeral (Albert Malter, Frank Ankeney, Jim Carson, and Anson Higby) later stated that, since Hickok had "absolutely no use" for Jane in this life, they decided to play a posthumous joke on him by laying her to rest by his side.[73]
Pistols known to have been carried by Hickok[edit]
Hickok's favorite guns were a pair of Colt 1851 Navy Model (.36 caliber) cap-and-ball revolvers. They had ivory grips and nickel plating, and were ornately engraved with "J.B. Hickok 1869" on the backstrap.[74] He wore his revolvers butt-forward in a belt or sash (when wearing city clothes or buckskins, respectively), and seldom used holsters; he drew the pistols using a "reverse", "twist", or cavalry draw, as would a cavalryman.[9]
At the time of his death, Hickok was wearing a Smith & Wesson Model No. 2 Army revolver, a five-shot, single-action, .32-caliber weapon, innovative as one of the first metallic cartridge firearms and favored by many Union officers during the Civil War. Bonhams auction company offered this pistol at auction on November 18, 2013, in San Francisco, California,[75] described as Hickok's Smith & Wesson No. 2, serial number 29963, a .32 rimfire with a six-inch barrel, blued finish, and varnished rosewood grips. The gun did not sell because the highest bid of $220,000 was less than the reserve set by the gun's owners.[76]
In popular culture[edit]
Main article: List of cultural depictions of Wild Bill Hickok
Hickok has remained one of the most popular and iconic figures of the American Old West, and is still frequently depicted in popular culture, including literature, film, and television.
Paramount Pictures' Western silent film Wild Bill Hickok (released on November 18, 1923) was directed by Clifford Smith and stars William S. Hart as Hickok.[77][78] A print of the film is maintained in the Museum of Modern Art film archive.[79]
The movie The Plainsman (1936), starring Gary Cooper as Hickok, features the alleged romance between Calamity Jane and him as its main plot line. It is a loose adaptation of Hickok's life, ending with his famous aces-and-eights card hand. A later film (1953) and subsequent stage musical, both titled Calamity Jane, also portray a romance between Calamity Jane and Hickok. In the film version, Howard Keel co-stars as Hickok to Doris Day's Calamity Jane.
Prairie Schooners is a 1940 American Western film directed by Sam Nelson, which stars Wild Bill Elliott as Hickok.
In 1954 an episode of Gunsmoke on CBS radio featured John Dehner as Hickok. Hickok was sent from Abilene to arrest Matt Dillon (William Conrad) for the murder of a man he had thrown out of Dodge earlier that month. In the episode Dillon and Hickok are old friends.
The Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok was a 1950s TV series starring Guy Madison and Andy Devine.
The White Buffalo (1977), starring Charles Bronson as Hickok, tells a tale of Hickok's hunt for a murderous white buffalo that follows him in his nightmares.
A highly fictional film account of Hickok's later years and death, titled Wild Bill (1995), stars Jeff Bridges as Hickok and David Arquette as Jack McCall, and was written and directed by Walter Hill.
Also in 1995, he's depicted as a character in an episode of Legend (TV series) by William Russ, possibly most famous for his role in Wiseguy (TV series). The episode correctly relates Hickok's vision problems late in his life, and also includes his murderer, Jack McCall, in a highly fictionalized role. It ends with Hickok surviving the murder attempt due to wearing body armor and being shot in the back, then secretly leaving for a ranch in California. Since he was actually shot in the back of the head, that plot element is a complete artifice of the episode writers.
A semifictionalized version of Hickok's time as marshal of Abilene Kansas, titled Hickok (2017), stars Luke Hemsworth as Hickok, Trace Adkins as the Bull's Head Saloon keeper Phil Coe, Kris Kristofferson as Abilene mayor George Knox, and Kaiwi Lyman-Mersereau as John Wesley Hardin. It was written by Michael Lanahan and directed by Timothy Woodward Jr.
In the early 1990s ABC television series Young Riders, a fictional account of Pony Express riders, Hickok is portrayed by Josh Brolin.[80]
In the HBO show Deadwood (2004-2006), Wild Bill is played by Keith Carradine.
Hickok is a playable character in the 2018 board game Deadwood 1876 by Fa ade Games.[81]
Memorials and honorable distinctions[edit]
Hickok's birthplace is now the Wild Bill Hickok Memorial and is a listed historic site under the supervision of the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. The town of Deadwood, South Dakota, re-enacts Hickok's murder and McCall's capture every summer evening.[69] In 1979, Hickok was inducted into the Poker Hall of Fame.[82]
Notes[edit]
^ Red objects generally appear black in early photographs, as the photographic processes were insensitive to red light.
^ Personal account of the foreman of the Overland Stage Company stations, as given to The DeWitt Times News:
At the time of this affair I was at a station farther west and reached this station just as Wild Bill was getting ready to go to Beatrice for his trial. He wanted me to go with him, and as we started on our way, imagine my surprise and uncomfortable feeling when he announced his intention of stopping at the McCanles home. I would have rather been somewhere else, but Bill stopped. He told Mrs. McCanles he was sorry he had to kill her man then took out $35 [$1,056 in 2021 dollars] and gave it to her saying: "This is all I have, sorry I do not have more to give you." We drove on to Beatrice and at the trial, his plea was self-defense; no one appeared against him, and he was cleared. The trial did not last more than fifteen minutes.[23]
^ Judge Boyd told the jury, "The defendant cannot set up justification that he acted in self-defense if he was willing to engage in a fight with the deceased. To be entitled to acquittal on the ground of self-defense, he must have been anxious to avoid a conflict, and must have used all reasonable means to avoid it. If the deceased and defendant engaged in a fight or conflict willingly on the part of each, and the defendant killed the deceased, he is guilty of the offense charged, although the deceased may have fired the first shot."
^ Judge Boyd said, "That when danger is threatened and impending a man is not compelled to stand with his arms folded until it is too late to offer successful resistance, and if the jury believe from the evidence that Tutt was a fighting character and a dangerous man and that [Defendant] was aware such was his character and that Tutt at the time he was shot by the Deft. was advancing on him with a drawn pistol and that Tutt had previously made threats of personal injury to Deft. ... and that Deft. shot Tutt to prevent the threatened impending injury [then] the jury will acquit."
^ For details, see Evening Star, July 1, 1867, which contains a garbled report of 11 men killed by Indians at Fort Harker. It also reports the death of one and the wounding of a second railroad man by Indians near Fort Harker (the two casualties are confirmed). The report of the larger number of deaths may confuse this incident with another fight with Indians, at Fort Wallace, Kansas, in which a number of soldiers were killed and wounded. For the Fort Wallace fight and casualties, see The Sun, July 15, 1867.
^ The "special election" may not have been legal, as a letter dated September 17 to the governor of Kansas noted that Hickok had presented a warrant for an arrest which was rejected by the Fort Hays commander, because, when asked to produce his commission, Hickok admitted that he had never received one.
^ At the time, shooting stray dogs within city limits was legal, and a 50-cent bounty was paid by the city for each one shot.
^ "Dead man's hand" was an established poker idiom for various hands long before Hickok died. In 1886, ten years after Hickok's death, the dead man's hand was described as "three Jacks and a pair of Tens" in a North Dakota newspaper, which attributed the term to a specific game held in Illinois forty years earlier.
^ McCall alleged that John Varnes, a Deadwood gambler, had paid him to murder Wild Bill. When Varnes could not be found, McCall then implicated Tim Brady in the plot. Brady, like Varnes, had disappeared from Deadwood and could not be found.
^ The old cemetery was in an area that was better suited for the constant influx of new settlers to live on, so the remaining bodies there were eventually also moved up the hill to the Mount Moriah Cemetery (in the 1880s).
References[edit]
^ Trimble, Marshall (April 2002). "How many men did Wild Bill Hickok actually kill?". True West Magazine. April 1, 2002
^ Rosa, Joseph G. Wild Bill Hickok, Gunfighter: An Account of Hickok's Gunfights. University of Oklahoma Press; 1st edition (May 26, 2003). p. 198. ISBN 978-0806135359
^ "James Butler Hickok May 27 1837 - August 2 1876 Better known as "Wild Bill" Hickok". www.countryside-lavie.com. December 12, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2022.
^ They Called Him Wild Bill: The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok. pp. 4 5.
^ Ostrom, Gene F. (2008). Vi's Secret: A Family's Story. iUniverse. p. 9. ISBN 9780595466252.
^ a b c Odrowaz-Sypniewska, Margaret. James Butler Hickok/"Wild Bill".
^ a b "James Butler 'Wild Bill' Hickok, Early Deadwood". Black Hills Visitor Magazine. Retrieved February 20, 2013.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (1979). They Called Him Wild Bill. University Press of Oklahoma. p. 306.
^ a b c d e Martin, George (1975).  James Garry (ed.). Guns of the Gunfighters. Peterson Publishing. ISBN 0-8227-0095-6. Retrieved October 14, 2011.
^ Miller, Nyle H. (200). Why the West Was Wild. University Press of Oklahoma. pp 184 191. ISBN 0-8061-3530-1.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (2003). Wild Bill Hickok, Gunfighter: An Account of Hickok's Gunfights. University Press of Oklahoma. ISBN 0-8061-3535-2.
^ a b "Wild Bill in Harper's Magazine". Mark Twain in His Times. Retrieved July 9, 2018.
^ Weiser, Kathy (April 2012). "Nebraska Legends: Rock Creek Station and the McCanles Massacre". Legends of America. Retrieved October 31, 2016.
^ They Called Him Wild Bill: The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok. p. 51: the name was inspired by his "sweeping nose and protruding upper lip".
^ Kelsey, D. M. (1888). Our Pioneer Heroes and Daring Deeds: The Lives and Famous Exploits of Boone ... and Other Hero Explorers, Renowned Frontier Fighters, and Early Settlers of America, from the Earliest Times to the Present. Scammell. pp. 535 .
^ "Wild Bill" Hickok Court Documents[Usurped!]. Nebraska State Historical Society. 1861 subpoena issued to Monroe McCanles to testify against Hickok.
^ Fido, Martin (1993). The Chronicle of Crime. p. 24 (citing an 1861 newspaper article reporting the McCanles shooting). ISBN 1-84442-623-8.
^ "The Lenexa Police Department History". Archived from the original on June 24, 2009. Retrieved June 24, 2009.
^ "Chronology on Life of James Butler HICKOK, Wild Bill Hickok, Old West Kansas". www.kansasheritage.org. Retrieved September 24, 2020.
^ Kelsey, D. M. (2004). Our Pioneer Heroes and Their Daring Deeds. Kessinger Publishing. pp. 355 391. ISBN 1-4179-6305-0. Originally published in 1883.
^ a b Rosa, Joseph G. (1987). They Called Him Wild Bill: The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok (second ed.). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 45 51. ISBN 978-0806115382.
^ "Rock Creek Station State Historical Park". Main Street Consulting Group. Archived from the original on December 24, 2015. Retrieved December 23, 2015.
^ a b Elliott, F. G. (November 26, 1938). "Wild Bill Hickok & McCanles Affair" (PDF). Library of Congress. Retrieved July 31, 2019.
^ Cody, William F. (1879). The Life of Hon. William F. Cody Known as Buffalo Bill, the Famous Hunter, Scout and Guide. An Autobiography. Frank E. Bliss. pp. 135 141.
^ a b Rosa, Joseph G. James 'Wild Bill' Hickok.
^ a b The Life of Hon. William F. Cody, Known as Buffalo Bill, the Famous Hunter, Scout and Guide: An Autobiography. Hartford, Connecticut: F. E. Bliss, 1879.
^ The Killing of David Tutt, 1865. Springfield, Greene County, Missouri. History of Greene County, Missouri. Western Historical Company, 1983. USGenWeb Archives.net.
^ a b "Wild Bill Hickok". Spartacus Educational. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved February 27, 2019.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (1996). pp. 116 123.
^ Nichols, George Ward (February 1867). "Wild Bill". Harper's New Monthly Magazine. Vol. 34, no. 201. hdl:2027/uc1.b000541577.
^ Lubet, Steven (2001). "Legal Culture, Wild Bill Hickok and the Gunslinger Myth". UCLA Law Review. The University of Texas. 48 (6). Archived from the original on February 13, 2007.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (1977). "George Ward Nichols and the Legend of Wild Bill Hickok". Arizona and the West. 19 (2): 135 162. JSTOR 40168620.
^ McLaird, James D. (2008). Wild Bill Hickok & Calamity Jane: Deadwood Legends. SDSHS Press. p. 1849. ISBN 978-0-9777955-9-8. "The story of 'Wild Bill,' as told in Harper's for February is not easily credited hereabouts," commented the Leavenworth Daily Conservative when the magazine appeared in late January 1867.
^ Buel, James William (1880). Life and Marvelous Adventures of Wild Bill, the Scout. Belford, Clarke & Company.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (2012). They Called Him Wild Bill: The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok (2nd., rev. & enl ed.). Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. pp. Chapter 6. ISBN 9780806115382.
^ Miller, Nyle H. (2003). Why the West was Wild. University Press of Oklahoma. p. 185. ISBN 0-8061-3530-1.
^ For confirmation that Hickok was employed as a U.S. Army scout fighting Indians in Kansas in the summer of 1867, see Ames, George Augustus, Ups and Downs of a Army Officer, p. 232.
^ a b Miller, Nyle H. (2003). Why the West Was Wild. University Press of Oklahoma. pp. 186 189. ISBN 0-8061-3530-1.
^ "Ellsworth, Kansas History". Droversmercantile.com. Archived from the original on May 6, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012.
^ a b Miller, Nyle H.; Rosa, Joseph W. (1963). Why the West Was Wild: A Contemporary Look at the Antics of Some Highly Publicized Kansas Cowtown Personalities. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-3530-1.
^ Otero, Miguel Antonio (1936). My Life on the Frontier, 1864 1882. Sunstone Press. p. 16. ISBN 9780865345546.
^ "Kyle John". HomeOfHeroes. 1999. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008. Retrieved November 9, 2018. John Kyle was awarded the Medal of Honor on July 8, 1869, at Republican River, Kansas, during the Indian campaigns
^ Eisfield, Rainer (October 15, 1995). "Myths and Realities of Frontier Violence: A Look at the Gunfighter Saga". Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture. 3 (5): 110. Retrieved September 30, 2019.
^ "Hardin Credited with 27 Killings". The Wichita City Eagle, August 30, 1877, p. 2, col. 6 (report of his arrest).
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (1996). Wild Bill Hickok: The Man and His Myth. University Press of Kansas. p. 110.
^ a b c Hardin, John Wesley (1896). The Life of John Wesley Hardin: As Written by Himself. Seguin, Texas: Smith & Moore. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-8061-1051-6. Retrieved March 30, 2011.
^ John Wesley Hardin Collection Texas State University.
^ "Article". Kansas Daily Commonwealth. August 9, 1871.
^ "Article". Saline County Journal. August 10, 1871. p. 3.
^ Keys, Jim (January 28, 2013). "Wild Bill Hickok". The History Herald: 2. Retrieved December 27, 2017.
^ Baizley, Darrell (2002). "Who Was Wild Bill Hickok?". Essortment. Pagewise. Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved August 28, 2018.
^ Burns, Walter Noble (November 2, 1911). "Frontier Hero - Reminiscences of Wild Bill Hickok by his old Friend Buffalo Bill". The Blackfoot Optimist. (Blackfoot, Idaho). Retrieved May 14, 2017.
^ "The State Journal (Jefferson City, Mo.), 1872 1886. August 18, 1876, image 3". loc.gov. August 18, 1876.
^ Rosa (1979) p. 266
^ Rosa (1979) p. 269
^ Ward, Laura (2004). Famous Last Words. ISBN 9781856487085.
^ Griske, Michael (2005). The Diaries of John Hunton. Heritage Books. pp. 89, 90. ISBN 0-7884-3804-2.
^ "Charlie Utter, Early Deadwood". Black Hills Visitor Magazine.
^ "Jack McCall   Cowardly Killer of Wild Bill Hickok". Legends of America. November 2014. Retrieved May 9, 2019.
^ "Wild Bill's Death Chair". Deadwood photos. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
^ Campagna, Jeff. "American Wonder Wild Bill Hickok Shot and Killed from Behind on This Day in History". Smithsonian Magazine. Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
^ Bozeman Avant Courier, December 22, 1876, image 1, testimony of George M. Shingle.
^ Eriksmoen, Curt (September 2, 2012). "Riverboat captain 'carried' bullet that killed Hickok". The Bismarck Tribune. Retrieved August 18, 2016.
^ McClintock, John S. Pioneer Days in the Black Hills.
^ McLaird, James D. (2008). Wild Bill Hickok and Calamity Jane: Deadwood Legends. South Dakota State Historical Society. ISBN 978-0977795598.
^ a b McManus, James (2009). Cowboys Full: The Story of Poker. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 134. ISBN 978-0374299248.
^ Griske (2005). p. 87.
^ a b Richardson, Leander P. (April 1877). "A Trip to the Black Hills". Scribner's.
^ a b "Jack McCall and the Murder of Wild Bill Hickok". Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2008.. Black Hills Visitor.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. "Wild Bill Hickok: Pistoleer, Peace Officer and Folk Hero". History net. Accessed September 2015. Originally published in Wild West.
^ Rosa, Joseph G. (1979). They Called Him Wild Bill. University Press of Oklahoma. p. 305.
^ Straub, Patrick (November 10, 2009). It Happened in South Dakota: Remarkable Events That Shaped History. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7627-6171-5.
^ Griske (2005). p. 89.
^ Photograph of Wild Bill Hickok's Colt Model 1851 Navys. Connecticut State Library, State Archives.
^ "Wild Bill Hickok's Smith & Wesson No. 2 Revolver on Offer at Bonhams This Fall". Retrieved March 18, 2014.
^ "Wild Bill Hickok's Death-Day Revolver Fails to Sell at California Auction". New York Daily News. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
^ "Wild-Bill-Hickok - Trailer - Cast - Showtimes". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
^ "Wild Bill Hickok". afi.com. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
^ "Wild Bill Hickok". silentera.com. Retrieved February 2, 2015.
^ "Josh Brolin as James Butler Hickok (aka Wild Bill)". Angelfire. Rider Web Productions. 1997. Retrieved July 20, 2018.
^ https://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0028/2964/7961/files/Deadwood_1876_Rules_English.pdf?4346553514003986582[bare URL PDF]
^ "Poker Hall of Fame". WSOP.com. Caesars Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
Works cited[edit]
Bird, Roy (1979). "The Custer-Hickok Shootout in Hays City." Real West, May 1979.
Buel, James Wilson (1881). Heroes of the Plains, or Lives and Adventures of Wild Bill, Buffalo Bill and Other Celebrated Indian Fighters. St. Louis: Historical Publishing.
DeMattos, Jack (1980). "Gunfighters of the Real West: Wild Bill Hickok." Real West, June 1980.
Hermon, Gregory (1987). "Wild Bill's Sweetheart: The Life of Mary Jane Owens." Real West, February 1987.
Matheson, Richard (1996). The Memoirs of Wild Bill Hickok. Jove. ISBN 0-515-11780-3.
Nichols, George Ward (1867). "Wild Bill." Harper's New Monthly Magazine, February 1867.
O'Connor, Richard (1959). Wild Bill Hickok. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1964, 1974). They Called Him Wild Bill: The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-1538-6.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1977). "George Ward Nichols and the Legend of Wild Bill Hickok." Arizona and the West, Summer 1977.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1979). They called Him Wild Bill, The Life and Adventures of James Butler Hickok, University of Oklahoma Press.  ISBN 978-0-8061-1538-2.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1979). "J.B. Hickok, Deputy U.S. Marshal." Kansas History: A Journal of the Central Plains, Winter 1979.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1982, 1994). The West of Wild Bill Hickok. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-2680-9.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1982). "Wild Bill and the Timber Thieves." Real West, April 1982.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1984). "The Girl and the Gunfighter: A Newly Discovered Photograph of Wild Bill Hickok." Real West, December 1984.
Rosa, Joseph G. (1996). Wild Bill Hickok: The Man and His Myth. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0-7006-0773-0.
Rosa, Joseph G. (2003). Wild Bill Hickok Gunfighter: An Account of Hickok's Gunfights. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-3535-2.
Turner, Thadd M. Wild Bill Hickok: Deadwood City   End of Trail. Universal Publishers, 2001. ISBN 1-58112-689-1
Wilstach, Frank Jenners (1926). Wild Bill Hickok: The Prince of Pistoleers. Garden City, New York: Doubleday, Page.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wild Bill Hickok.
Wild Bill Hickok collection at Nebraska State Historical Society
Police appointments
Preceded byIsaac "Doc" Thayer
 sheriff of Ellis County, Kansas August 23, 1869   December 31, 1869
Succeeded byPeter R. "Rattlesnake Pete" Lanahan
Preceded byThomas J. "Bear River" Smith
 city marshal of Abilene, Kansas April 15, 1871   December 13, 1871
Succeeded byJames A. Gauthie
vteAmerican frontierc. 1650 to 1912Notable peopleExplorersand pioneers
John Bozeman
Jim Bridger
Tom s V lez Cachup n
William Clark
Davy Crockett
John C. Fr mont
Liver-Eating Johnson
Meriwether Lewis
Joe Mayer
William John Murphy
John Wesley Powell
Juan Rivera
Levi Ruggles
Jedediah Smith
Jack Swilling
Trinidad Swilling
Ora Rush Weed
Richens Lacey Wootton
Henry Wickenburg
Brigham Young
Native Americans
Black Beaver
Black Hawk
Black Kettle
Bloody Knife
Chief Joseph
Cochise
Crazy Bear
Crazy Horse
Crazy Snake
Dasoda-hae
Geronimo
Irataba
Kiliahote
Manuelito
Massai
Plenty Coups
Quanah Parker
Red Cloud
Sacagawea
Seattle
Smallwood
Snapping Turtle
Sitting Bull
Standing Bear
Ten Bears
Touch the Clouds
Tuvi
Victorio
Lawmen
Elfego Baca
Charlie Bassett
Roy Bean
Morgan Earp
Virgil Earp
Wyatt Earp
Henry Garfias
Pat Garrett
Jack Helm
"Wild Bill" Hickok
Bat Masterson
"Mysterious Dave" Mather
Bass Reeves
George Scarborough
John Selman
John Horton Slaughter
William "Bill" Tilghman
James Timberlake
Harry C. Wheeler
Outlaws
Billy the Kid
Dalton Gang
Black Bart
"Curly Bill" Brocius
Butch Cassidy
Billy Clanton
Ike Clanton
Bill Dalton
Bill Doolin
Bill Downing
John Wesley Hardin
Johnny Ringo
Jesse James
Tom Ketchum
Frank McLaury
Tom McLaury
Joaquin Murrieta
Cochise County Cowboys
Belle Starr
Soapy Smith
Sundance Kid
Cole Younger
Soldiersand scouts
Frederick Russell Burnham
Kit Carson
"Buffalo Bill" Cody
Texas Jack Omohundro
James C. Cooney
George Crook
George Armstrong Custer
Alexis Godey
Samuel P. Heintzelman
Tom Horn
Calamity Jane
Luther Kelly
Ranald S. Mackenzie
Charley Reynolds
Philip Sheridan
Al Sieber
Others
John Jacob Astor
William H. Boring
Jonathan R. Davis
George Flavel
C. S. Fly
John Joel Glanton
George E. Goodfellow
Doc Holliday
Andrew Jackson
Zephaniah Kingsley
Seth Kinman
Octaviano Larrazolo
Nat Love
Sylvester Mowry
Emperor Norton
Annie Oakley
Sedona Schnebly
Thomas William Sweeny
Peter Lebeck
Native Americans
Apache
Arapaho
Arikara
Assiniboine (Nakota)
Blackfoot
Cahuilla
Cayuse
Cheyenne
Chinook
Chippewa (Ojibwe)
Caddo
Cocopah
Comanche
Crow
Dakota
Five Civilized Tribes
Hidatsa
Hopi
Hualapai
Kickapoo
Kiowa
Kumeyaay
Kutenai
Lakota
Lenape (Delaware)
Mandan
Maricopa
Modoc
Mohave
Muscogee
Navajo
Nez Perce
Northern Paiute
Nootka (Nuu-chah-nulth)
Pawnee
Pend d'Oreilles
Pequots
Pima
Pueblo
Seminoles
Shoshone
Sioux
Southern Paiute
Tohono O odham
Tonkawa
Umpqua
Ute
Washoe
Yakama
Yaqui
Yavapai
Yuma (Quechan)
Frontier culture
American bison
Barbed wire
Boot Hill
Cattle drive
Cowboy poetry
Cattle rustling
Cow town
Fast draw
Ghost town
Gunfights
Homesteading
Land rush
Manifest destiny
Moonshine
One-room schoolhouse
Rodeo
Stagecoach
Train robbery
Vigilante justice
Western saloon
Tack piano
Westward expansion
Wild West shows
Transportand trails
Barlow Road
Bozeman Trail
Butterfield Trail
California Trail
Chisholm Trail
Great Platte River Road
Great Western Cattle Trail
Lolo Pass
Meek Cutoff
Mormon Trail
Oregon Trail
Pony Express
Santa Fe Trail
Southern Emigrant Trail
Tanner Trail
First transcontinental railroad
Folklore
Dead man's hand
Dime novel
John Henry
Johnny Kaw
Long Tom's treasure
Lost Dutchman's Gold Mine
Lost Ship of the Desert
Montezuma's treasure
Paul Bunyan
Pecos Bill
Seven Cities of Gold
Gold rushes
Black Hills Gold Rush
California Gold Rush
Confederate Gulch and Diamond City
Klondike Gold Rush
Pike's Peak Gold Rush
Gunfights
Battle of Coffeyville
Battle of Lincoln
Frisco shootout
Gunfight at the O.K. Corral
Long Branch Saloon gunfight
Variety Hall shootout
Military conflicts
Battle of the Alamo
Battle of Glorieta Pass
Battle of the Little Bighorn
Battle of San Jacinto
Battle of Washita River
Bear Flag Revolt
Chimay  Rebellion
First Battle of Adobe Walls
Indian Wars
Mexican War
Sand Creek massacre
Seminole Wars
Texas Revolution
Wounded Knee Massacre
Range warsand feuds
Earp-Clanton feud
Johnson County War
Lincoln County War
Mason County War
Pleasant Valley War
Sheep Wars
Sutton Taylor feud
Lists
Arizona Rangers
Cowboys and cowgirls
Gangs
Ghost towns
Gunfights
Lawmen
Mountain men
Outlaws
Timeline of the American Old West
Influence
Cuisine of the Western United States
Chuckwagon
Californian
Native American
New Mexican
New Mexico chile
Pacific Northwestern
Rocky Mountain oysters
Tex-Mex
Gothic Western
Weird West
Western genre
Western lifestyle
Western music
New Mexico
Red Dirt
Tejano
Texas country
Western wear
Cowboy boots
Cowboy hat
Jeans
Snap fastener
PlacesAlaska
Anchorage
Iditarod
Nome
Seward
Skagway
Arizona Territory
Canyon Diablo
Fort Grant
Prescott
Phoenix
Tombstone
Tucson
Window Rock
Yuma
California
Bakersfield
Fresno
Jamestown
Los Angeles
Sacramento
San Diego
San Francisco
Colorado
Creede
Denver
Telluride
Trinidad
Dakota Territory
Bismarck
Deadwood
Fargo
Fort Yates
Pine Ridge
Rapid City
Standing Rock
Yankton
Florida Territory
Angola
Negro Fort
Pensacola
Prospect Bluff
St. Augustine
St. Marks
Tallahassee
Idaho Territory
Fort Boise
Fort Hall
Illinois
Fort Dearborn
Kansas
Abilene
Dodge City
Ellsworth
Hays
Leavenworth
Wichita
Missouri
Independence
Kansas City
St. Louis
Montana Territory
Billings
Bozeman
Deer Lodge
Fort Benton
Fort Peck
Helena
Livingston
Missoula
Virginia City
Nebraska
Chadron
Fort Atkinson
Fort Robinson
Nebraska City
Ogallala
Omaha
Valentine
Whiteclay
Nevada
Carson City
Virginia City
Reno
New Mexico Territory
Alamogordo
Albuquerque
Cimarron
Fort Sumner
Gallup
Las Vegas
Lincoln
Mesilla
Mogollon
Roswell
Santa Fe
Tucumcari
Oklahoma Territoryand Indian Territory
Broken Arrow
Fort Gibson
Fort Sill
Oklahoma City
Okmulgee
Pawhuska
Tahlequah
Tishomingo
Tuskahoma
Wewoka
Oregon Territory
Astoria
The Dalles
La Grande
McMinnville
Oregon City
Portland
Salem
Vale
Texas
Austin
Abilene
El Paso
Fort Worth
Gonzales
Lubbock
San Antonio
Utah Territory
Salt Lake City
Washington Territory
Everett
Port Townsend
Seattle
Vancouver
Wyoming Territory
Fort Bridger
Fort Laramie
 Category
 United States Portal
 Commons
vtePoker Hall of Fame1979
Johnny Moss
Nick Dandolos
Corky McCorquodale
Red Winn
Sid Wyman
Wild Bill Hickok
Edmond Hoyle
1980s
Blondie Forbes
Bill Boyd
Tom Abdo
Joe Bernstein
Murph Harrold
Red Hodges
Henry Green
Puggy Pearson
Doyle Brunson
Jack Straus
Sarge Ferris
1990s
Benny Binion
Chip Reese
Amarillo Slim
Jack Keller
Little Man Popwell
Roger Moore
2000s
Stu Ungar
Lyle Berman
Johnny Chan
Bobby Baldwin
Berry Johnston
Jack Binion
Crandell Addington
T. J. Cloutier
Billy Baxter
Barbara Enright
Phil Hellmuth
Dewey Tomko
Henry Orenstein
Mike Sexton
2010s
Dan Harrington
Erik Seidel
Barry Greenstein
Linda Johnson
Eric Drache
Sailor Roberts
Tom McEvoy
Scotty Nguyen
Jack McClelland
Daniel Negreanu
Jennifer Harman
John Juanda
Todd Brunson
Carlos Mortensen
Dave Ulliott
Phil Ivey
Mori Eskandani
John Hennigan
Chris Moneymaker
David Oppenheim
2020s
Huck Seed
Eli Elezra
Layne Flack
vteBlack Hills of South Dakota and WyomingAttractions
Bear Butte
Black Elk Wilderness
Black Hills Central Railroad
Black Hills National Forest
Black Elk Peak
Black Hills Playhouse
Chapel in the Hills
Crazy Horse Memorial
Custer State Park
Devils Tower
Dinosaur Park
Flintstones Bedrock City
Homestake Mine
Jewel Cave National Monument
The Mammoth Site
Minuteman Missile National Historic Site
Mount Rushmore
Mystic Miner Ski Resort
Needles
Pactola Lake
Reptile Gardens
Rushmore Cave
Sheridan Lake
Sitting Bull Crystal Caverns
Sturgis Motorcycle Rally
Sylvan Lake
Terry Peak ski area
Wind Cave National Park with bison herd
Scenic routesRoads
Norbeck Scenic Byway
Iron Mountain Road
Needles Highway
Spearfish Canyon Scenic Byway
Trails
Mickelson Centennial Trail
PopulatedplacesCities
Belle Fourche
Central City
Custer
Deadwood
Edgemont
Hot Springs
Hill City
Lead
Newcastle
Rapid City
Spearfish
Sturgis
Whitewood
Towns
Buffalo Gap
Fairburn
Hermosa
Keystone
Pringle
Sundance
Unincorporated
Dewey
Four Mile
Galena
Hanna
Johnson Siding
Nemo
Rochford
Rockerville
Silver City
Three Forks
Historyand peopleNative American
Cheyenne
Lakota people
Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868) established the Great Sioux Reservation
Black Hills War, or Great Sioux War (1876)
Black Elk
Sitting Bull
Crazy Horse
Lone Horn
Red Cloud
Spotted Tail
Old West
Dakota Territory (1861 1889)
Black Hills Expedition (1874)
Black Hills Gold Rush (1874)
Newton Jenney Party (1875)
Cheyenne-Black Hills Stage Route (1876 1887)
Sidney-Black Hills Stage Road (1876 1887)
Rapid City, Black Hills and Western Railroad (1893 1947)
Seth Bullock and Martha Bullock
General George Armstrong Custer
Dora DuFran
Wild Bill Hickok
Calamity Jane
Historian Doane Robinson
Sol Star
Al Swearengen
Charlie Utter
Ghost towns
Addie Camp
Bismuth
Blacktail
Burdock
Cambria
Carbonate
Etta
Flatiron
Greenwood
Maitland
Myers City
Nahant
Novak
Pactola
Sheridan
Spokane
Terraville
Tigerville
Tinton
Trojan
Modern
Fossil Cycad National Monument (1922 1957)
Stratobowl (1934 1959)
Black Hills flood (1972)
Sculptors Gutzon Borglum and Lincoln Borglum
Author Joseph Bottum
Politician Francis H. Case
Poet Charles Badger Clark
Historian Watson Parker
Road junctions
Cheyenne Crossing
Four Corners
Four Mile
Keystone Wye
Maverick Junction
Mule Creek Junction
Related
Mount Rushmore in popular culture
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Finland
United States
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Poland
Russia
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wild_Bill_Hickok&oldid=1149777935"