1914 murder in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Assassination of ArchdukeFranz Ferdinand of Austria and Sophie, Duchess of HohenbergAssassination illustrated in the Italian newspaper Domenica del Corriere, 12 July 1914 by Achille BeltrameDate28 June 1914; 108 years ago (1914-06-28)LocationNear the Latin Bridge, Sarajevo in the Condominium of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Austria-HungaryCoordinates43 51 29 N 18 25 44 E  /  43.857917 N 18.42875 E  / 43.857917; 18.42875Coordinates: 43 51 29 N 18 25 44 E  /  43.857917 N 18.42875 E  / 43.857917; 18.42875DeathsArchduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, SophieConvictedGavrilo Princip and others...ChargesHigh treasonSentence20 yearsWeaponFN 1910 semi-automatic handgunLocation:Map showing where Ferdinand was killed.
Events leading to World War I
Unification of Germany 1866 71
Second Concert of Europe 1871
Great Eastern Crisis 1875 78
Campaign in Bosnia 1878
Dual Alliance 1879
Boer Wars 1880 1902
Austro Serbian Alliance 1881 1903
Triple Alliance 1882
Berlin Conference 1884
Bulgarian Crisis 1885 88
Samoan Crisis 1887 89
Reinsurance Treaty 1887 90
Franco-Russian Alliance 1894
First Sino-Japanese War 1894 95
Fashoda Incident 1898
Anglo-German naval arms race 1898 1912
Tripartite Convention 1899
Anglo-Japanese Alliance 1902
Venezuelan crisis of 1902 1903
Entente Cordiale 1904
Russo-Japanese War 1904 05
First Moroccan Crisis 1905 06
Pig War 1906 08
Anglo-Russian Convention 1907
Young Turk Revolution 1908
Bosnian Crisis 1908 09
Racconigi Bargain 1909
Second Moroccan Crisis 1911
Italo-Turkish War 1911 12
Balkan Wars 1912 13
Assassination of Franz Ferdinand 1914
July Crisis 1914
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian throne, and his wife, Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg, were assassinated on 28 June 1914 by Bosnian Serb student Gavrilo Princip. They were shot at close range while being driven through Sarajevo, the provincial capital of Bosnia-Herzegovina, formally annexed by Austria-Hungary in 1908.
Princip was part of a group of six Bosnian assassins together with Muhamed Mehmedba i , Vaso  ubrilovi , Nedeljko  abrinovi , Cvjetko Popovi  and Trifko Grabe  coordinated by Danilo Ili ; all but one were Bosnian Serbs and members of a student revolutionary group that later became known as Young Bosnia. The political objective of the assassination was to free Bosnia and Herzegovina of Austria-Hungarian rule and establish a common South Slav ("Yugoslav") state. The assassination precipitated the July Crisis which led to Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia and the start of World War I.
The assassination team was helped by the Black Hand, a Serbian secret nationalist group; support came from Dragutin Dimitrijevi , at the time chief of the military intelligence section of the Serbian general staff, as well as from Major Vojislav Tankosi  and Rade Malobabi , a Serbian intelligence agent. Tankosi  provided bombs and pistols to the assassins and trained them in their use. The assassins were given access to the same clandestine network of safe-houses and agents that Malobabi  used for the infiltration of weapons and operatives into Austria-Hungary.
The assassins and key members of the clandestine network were tried in Sarajevo in October 1914. In total twenty-five people were indicted. All six assassins, except Mehmedba i , were under twenty at the time of the assassination; while the group was dominated by Bosnian Serbs, four of the indictees were Bosnian Croats, and all of them were Austro-Hungarian citizens, none from Serbia. Princip was found guilty of murder and high treason; too young to be executed, he was sentenced to twenty years in jail, while the four other attackers also received jail terms. Five of the older prisoners were sentenced to be hanged.
Black Hand members were arrested and tried before a Serbian court in Salonika in 1917 on fabricated charges of high treason; the Black Hand was disbanded and three of its leaders were executed. Much of what is known about the assassinations comes from these two trials and related records. Princip's legacy was re-evaluated following the breakup of Yugoslavia, and public opinion of him in the successor states is largely divided along ethnic lines.
Background
Further information: History of Serbia (1804 1918), Decline and modernization of the Ottoman Empire, and Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of AustriaSophie, Duchess of Hohenberg
Under the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, Austria-Hungary received the mandate to occupy and administer the Ottoman Vilayet of Bosnia, while the Ottoman Empire retained official sovereignty. Under this same treaty, the Great Powers (Austria-Hungary, the United Kingdom, France, the German Empire, Italy, and the Russian Empire) gave official recognition to the Principality of Serbia as a fully sovereign state, which four years later transformed into a kingdom under Prince Milan IV Obrenovi  who thus became King Milan I of Serbia. Serbia's monarchs, at the time from the royal House of Obrenovi  that maintained close relations with Austria-Hungary, were content to reign within the borders set by the treaty.[1]
This changed in May 1903, when Royal Serbian Army officers led by Dragutin Dimitrijevi  stormed the Serbian Royal Palace. After a fierce battle in the dark, the attackers captured General Laza Petrovi , head of the Palace Guard, and forced him to reveal the hiding place of King Alexander I Obrenovi  and his wife Queen Draga. The King was subsequently shot thirty times and the Queen eighteen. MacKenzie writes that "the royal corpses were then stripped and brutally sabred."[2] The attackers threw the corpses of King Alexander and Queen Draga out of a palace window, ending any threat that loyalists would mount a counterattack."[3] General Petrovi  was then killed when Vojislav Tankosi  organized the murders of Queen Draga's brothers.[4] The conspirators installed Peter I of the House of Kara or evi  as the new king.[4]
The new dynasty was more nationalist, friendlier to Russia and less friendly to Austria-Hungary.[5] Over the next decade, disputes between Serbia and its neighbors erupted, as Serbia moved to build its power and gradually reclaim its 14th-century empire. These conflicts included a customs dispute with Austria-Hungary beginning in 1906 (commonly referred to as the "Pig War");[6] the Bosnian crisis of 1908 1909, in which Serbia assumed an attitude of protest over Austria-Hungary's annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina (ending in Serbian acquiescence without compensation in March 1909);[7] and finally the two Balkan Wars of 1912 1913, in which Serbia acquired Macedonia and Kosovo from the Ottoman Empire and drove out Bulgaria.[8]
Serbia's military successes and Serbian outrage over the Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina emboldened Serbian nationalists in Serbia and Serbs in Bosnia who chafed under Austro-Hungarian rule and whose nationalist sentiments were stirred by Serb cultural organizations.[9][10] One notable example was a Serbian nationalist society Narodna Odbrana, which was formed in Belgrade on 8 October 1908 under the initiative of Milovan Milovanovi . Under the guise of cultural activities, it operated to undermine the loyalty of Bosnian Serbs to the Habsburg regime.[11][12] In the five years leading up to 1914, lone assassins   mostly Serb citizens of Austria-Hungary   made a series of unsuccessful assassination attempts in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina against Austro-Hungarian officials.[13] In Bosnia-Herzegovina existed an aggregation of local revolutionary groups that became known as Young Bosnia, their goal was the end of Austria-Hungarian colonial rule in Bosnia and the unification of all South Slavs. [14][15]
On 3 June 1910, Bogdan  eraji , a young revolutionary loosely connect to Young Bosnia, attempted to kill the Austrian governor of Bosnia-Herzegovina, General Marijan Vare anin.[15]  eraji  was a 22-year-old Bosnian Serb from Nevesinje, Herzegovina, who was a student at the Faculty of Law at the University of Zagreb.[16] (General Vere anin went on to crush the last Bosnian peasant uprising in the second half of 1910).[17] The five bullets  eraji  fired at Vare anin and the fatal bullet he put in his own brain made  eraji  an inspiration to future assassins, including Princip and Princip's accomplice  abrinovi . Princip said that  eraji  "was my first model. When I was seventeen I passed whole nights at his grave, reflecting on our wretched condition and thinking of him. It is there that I made up my mind sooner or later to perpetrate an outrage."[18]
In May 1911, the Black Hand, a secret society dedicated to creating a Greater Serbia through "terrorist action", was established by key members of the Narodna Odbrana including Dimitrijevi  and Tankosi .[19][20] Within Bosnia-Herzegovina, the networks of both the Black Hand and Narodna Odbrana penetrated to some extent local revolutionary movements such as Young Bosnia.[15] The fundamental difference between those movements was that the Young Bosnians regarded social revolution as a necessary corollary of national liberation, and that, even though its membership was predominantly Serb, Young Bosnia also attracted an important minority of Croats and some Muslims. In the Spring of 1912, in a plot involving Young Bosnians, Luka Juki  a Bosnian Croat student, tried to assassinate the Governor of Croatia Count Slavko Cuvaj.[21]
In 1913, Emperor Franz Joseph commanded Archduke Franz Ferdinand to observe the military maneuvers in Bosnia scheduled for June 1914.[22] Following the maneuvers, Ferdinand and his wife planned to visit Sarajevo to open the state museum in its new premises there.[23] Duchess Sophie, according to their eldest son, Duke Maximilian, accompanied her husband out of fear for his safety.[24]
As Sophie, although of high aristocratic birth, was not from a dynastic family, her union with the Habsburg heir presumptive could only be a morganatic marriage. Emperor Franz Joseph had only consented to their marriage on the condition that their descendants would never ascend the throne. The 14th anniversary of their marriage fell on 28 June. As historian A. J. P. Taylor observes:
 Photograph of the Archduke and his wife emerging from the Sarajevo Town Hall to board their car, a few minutes before the assassination
[Sophie] could never share [Franz Ferdinand's] rank ... could never share his splendours, could never even sit by his side on any public occasion. There was one loophole ... his wife could enjoy the recognition of his rank when he was acting in a military capacity. Hence, he decided, in 1914, to inspect the army in Bosnia. There, at its capital Sarajevo, the Archduke and his wife could ride in an open carriage side by side ... Thus, for love, did the Archduke go to his death.[25]
Franz Ferdinand was an advocate of increased federalism and widely believed to favor  trialism, under which Austria-Hungary would be reorganized by combining the Slavic lands within the Austro-Hungarian empire into a third crown.[26] A Slavic kingdom could have been a bulwark against Serb irredentism, and Franz Ferdinand was therefore perceived as a threat by those same irredentists.[27] Princip later stated to the court that preventing Franz Ferdinand's planned reforms was one of his motivations.[28]
The day of the assassination, 28 June (15 June in the Julian calendar), is the feast of St. Vitus. In Serbia, it is called Vidovdan and commemorates the 1389 Battle of Kosovo against the Ottomans, at which the Sultan was assassinated in his tent by a Serb.[29] Princip,  abrinovi  and other members of the Young Bosnia were inspired by the heroism of Milo  Obili , reenacting the Kosovo Myth.[30][31][32]  abrinovi  was deeply
immersed in the myth, personally identifying himself with the Kosovo heroes, while it is known that Princip knew the entire Petar II Petrovi -Njego 's The Mountain Wreath, one of the most celebrated works in the South Slavic literature that glorifies the heroic ideals and spirit of the Kosovo Myth.[33]
Preliminaries
Previous conspiracy
Danilo Ili  was a Bosnian Serb. He had worked as a schoolteacher and as a bank worker but in 1913 and 1914 he lived with, and outwardly off, his mother, who operated a small boarding house in Sarajevo. Ili  was a member of a secret revolutionary society or Kru ok organized on the model of the Black Hand. According to Serbian Colonel C. A. Popovi , a captain at the time and a member of the Black Hand, in late 1913, Danilo Ili  came to the Serbian listening post at U ice to speak to him. Popovi  claimed that Ili  recommended an end to the period of revolutionary organization building and a move to direct action against Austria-Hungary. Popovi  alleged that he sent Danilo Ili  to Belgrade to discuss this matter with Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevi , known more commonly as Apis.[34] By 1913, Apis and his fellow military conspirators (drawn heavily from the ranks of the May 1903 coup) had come to dominate what was left of the Black Hand.[35]
There are no reports as to what took place between Ili  and Apis during the alleged meeting, but soon Apis's righthand man and fellow Black Hander, Serbian Major Vojislav Tankosi , who by this time was in charge of guerrilla training, called a Serbian irredentist planning meeting in Toulouse, France.[36] Amongst those summoned to the Toulouse meeting was Muhamed Mehmedba i , a Bosniak carpenter from Herzegovina.[37] According to Luigi Albertini writing in 1942, Mehmedba i  was a member of the Black Hand, having been sworn into the organization by Black Hand Provincial Director for Bosnia-Herzegovina Vladimir Gacinovi  and Danilo Ili . Mehmedba i  was (here quoting Albertini paraphrasing Mehmedba i ) "eager to carry out an act of terrorism to revive the revolutionary spirit of Bosnia."[38] During this January 1914 meeting, various possible Austro-Hungarian targets for assassination were discussed, including Franz Ferdinand. However, the participants decided only to dispatch Mehmed Mehmedba i  to Sarajevo, to kill the Governor of Bosnia, Oskar Potiorek.[38]
According to Mehmedba i  while he was traveling to Bosnia-Herzegovina from France, police searched his train for a thief. Thinking the police might be after him, he threw his weapons (a dagger and a bottle of poison) in the lavatory.[38] Once he arrived in Bosnia-Herzegovina he wrote to Gacinovi  and did nothing more until Ili  wrote to him to summon him to Mostar. On 26 March 1914,[39] Ili  informed Mehmedba i  that Belgrade (meaning the Black Hand) thought that an attack of Franz Ferdinand instead of the Potiorek would be far more important and that they would support it.[40] (Apis later boasted to the Serbian Court that he ordered the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in his position as head of the Intelligence Department,[41] however Apis made the unproven claims in 1917 attempting to save his own life since he was about to be executed for high treason.[42])
The assassination team
 Gavrilo Princip outside the courthouse
Unknown to the Black Hand, a second plot against the archduke had arisen that spring of 1914 when student Gavrilo Princip was shown a newspaper cutting announcing Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria visit to Bosnia in June, by his friend and fellow Young Bosnia member Nedeljko  abrinovi .[43] At the time the two young Bosnian Serbs were in Belgrade eager to return to Austrian-occupied Bosnia to commit an attack on an imperial official, what they saw as performing the ultimate act of heroism.[38] Princip asked another friend Trifko Grabe  to join the plot, and then wrote to Ili , his former roommate and confidante, telling him about the plan and asking him to recruit people in Sarajevo.[44]
For the assassination Ili  recruited seventeen-year-old Sarajevo high-school student Vaso  ubrilovi , eighteen-year-old student Cvjetko Popovi , as well as Mehmed Mehmedba i , shortly after Orthodox Easter (as given by Dedijer: 19 April 1914), as testified by Ili ,  ubrilovi , and Popovi  at the Sarajevo trial.[45] Princip, Grabe , and  abrinovi  testified at the Sarajevo trial that at about the same time (a little after Easter), they approached a fellow Bosnian Serb and former guerrilla fighter known to be well connected and with access to arms, Milan Ciganovi , and through him Major Tankosi  and reached an agreement to receive arms and get smuggled across the Serbian border back into Bosnia with the weapons.
A principal agreement was quickly reached, but the delivery of the weapons was delayed for more than a month. The assassins met with Ciganovi  and he put them off. At one point, Ciganovi  told Grabe : "Nothing doing, the old Emperor is ill and the Heir Apparent  [sic] will not go to Bosnia."[46] When Emperor Franz Joseph's health recovered, the operation was a "go" again. Tankosi  gave the assassins one FN Model 1910 pistol. They practised shooting a few rounds of scarce and expensive .380 ACP pistol ammunition in a park near Belgrade.[47]
The rest of the weapons were finally delivered on 26 May.[48] The three assassins from Belgrade testified that Major Tankosi , directly and through Ciganovi , not only provided six hand grenades and four new Browning FN Model 1910 automatic pistols with .380 ACP ammunition,[47] but also money,[48] suicide pills,[49] training,[50] a special map with the location of gendarmes marked,[51] knowledge of contacts on a clandestine "tunnel" used to infiltrate agents and arms into Austria-Hungary,[52] and a small card authorizing the use of that tunnel.[53] Major Tankosi  confirmed to the journalist and historian Luciano Magrini that he provided the bombs and pistols and was responsible for training Princip, Grabe , and  abrinovi  and that he (Tankosi ) initiated the idea of the suicide pills.[54]
The secret route
 Route of the assassins from Belgrade to Sarajevo
 Route of the weapons from Belgrade to Sarajevo
Princip, Grabe , and  abrinovi  left Belgrade by boat on 28 May and traveled along the Sava River to  abac where they handed the small card to Captain Popovi  of the Serbian Border Guard. Popovi , in turn, provided them with a letter to Serbian Captain Prvanovi , and filled out a form with the names of three customs officials whose identities they could assume and thereby receive discounted train tickets for the ride to Loznica, a small border town.[55][56]
When Princip, Grabe , and  abrinovi  reached Loznica on 29 May, Captain Prvanovi  summoned three of his revenue sergeants to discuss the best way to cross the border undetected. While waiting for the sergeants to arrive, Princip and Grabe  had a falling out with  abrinovi  over  abrinovi 's repeated violations of operational security.[57]  abrinovi  handed over the weapons he was carrying to Princip and Grabe . Princip told  abrinovi  to go alone to Zvornik, make an official crossing there using Grabe 's ID card and then go on to Tuzla and link back up.[58]
On the morning of 30 May Prvanovi 's revenue sergeants assembled and Sergeant Budivoj Grbi  accepted the task and led Princip and Grabe  by foot to Isakovi 's Island, a small island in the middle of the Drina River that separated Serbia from Bosnia. They and their weapons reached the island on 31 May. Grbi  passed the terrorists and their weapons to the agents of the Serbian Narodna Odbrana for transport into Austro-Hungarian territory and from safe-house to safe-house. Princip and Grabe  crossed into Austria-Hungary on the evening of 1 June.[59] Princip and Grabe  and the weapons were passed from agent to agent until on 3 June they arrived in Tuzla. They left the weapons in the hands of the Narodna Odbrana agent Mi ko Jovanovi  and rejoined  abrinovi .[60]
The Narodna Odbrana agents reported their activities to the Narodna Odbrana President, Bo a Jankovi , who in turn reported to the then Serbian Caretaker Prime Minister Nikola Pa i .[61] The report to Pa i  added the name of a new military conspirator, Serbian Major Kosta Todorovi , Boundary Commissioner and Director of Serbian Military Intelligence Services for the frontier line from Rada to Ljubovija. Pa i 's handwritten notes from the briefing (estimated by Dedijer to have taken place on 5 June) included the nickname of one of the assassins ("Trifko" Grabe ) and also the name of Major Tankosi .[62] The Austrians later captured the report, Pa i 's handwritten notes, and additional corroborating documents.[63]
 abrinovi 's father was a Sarajevo police official. In Tuzla,  abrinovi  bumped into one of his father's friends, Sarajevo Police Detective Ivan Vila, and struck up a conversation. By coincidence, Princip, Grabe  and  abrinovi  boarded the same train for Sarajevo as Detective Vila.  abrinovi  inquired of the detective the date of Franz Ferdinand's visit to Sarajevo. The next morning,  abrinovi  passed on the news to his fellow assassins that the assassination would be on 28 June.[64]
On arriving in Sarajevo on 4 June, Princip, Grabe , and  abrinovi  went their separate ways. Princip checked in with Ili , visited his family in Had ici and returned to Sarajevo on 6 June taking up residence at Ili 's mother's house with Ili .[65] Grabe  joined his family in Pale.  abrinovi  moved back into his father's house in Sarajevo.[66]
On 14 June, Ili  went to Tuzla to bring the weapons to Sarajevo. Mi ko Jovanovi  hid the weapons in a large box of sugar. On 15 June, the two went separately by train to Doboj where Jovanovi  handed off the box to Ili .[67] Later that day, Ili  returned to Sarajevo by train, being careful to transfer to a local train outside Sarajevo and then quickly transfer to a tram to avoid police detection. Once at his mother's house, Ili  hid the weapons in a suitcase under a sofa.[68] Then, on approximately 17 June, Ili  traveled to Brod (Dedijer puts it on 16 June, but trial records put it on 18 June). Questioned at trial, Ili  gave a confusing explanation of the reason for his trip, first saying he had gone to Brod to prevent the assassination and then saying he had returned to Sarajevo from Brod to prevent the assassination.[69] Dedijer puts forward the thesis (citing Bogijevi ) that Ili  went to Brod to meet an emissary of Apis, Djuro  arac, who had instructions to cancel the assassination and then later Rade Malobabi  was dispatched from Serbia to Sarajevo to reauthorize the assassination.[70]
Eve of the attacks
Ili  began handing out the weapons on 27 June. Until that day, Ili  had kept the identities of the assassins from Belgrade secret from those he had recruited locally and vice versa. Then, that night, as Mehmedba i  told Albertini: "On the eve of the outrage Ili  introduced me to Princip in a Sarajevo caf  with the words 'Mehmedba i  who to-morrow is to be with us.'"[28] The three sent a postcard to Black Hand Provincial Director for Bosnia-Herzegovina Vladimir Ga inovi  in France.[28]
Assassination
Motorcade
 The 1911 Gr f & Stift 28/32 PS Double Phaeton in which Archduke Franz Ferdinand was riding at the time of his assassination, Museum of Military History, Vienna (2003)
On the morning of Sunday 28 June 1914, Ili  positioned the six assassins along the motorcade route. Ili  walked the street, exhorting the assassins to bravery.[28] Franz Ferdinand and his party proceeded by train from Ilid a Spa to Sarajevo.[23] Governor Oskar Potiorek met the party at Sarajevo station. Six automobiles were waiting. By mistake, three local police officers got into the first car with the chief officer of special security; the special security officers who were supposed to accompany their chief got left behind.[71] The second car carried the Mayor and the Chief of Police of Sarajevo. The third car in the motorcade was a Gr f & Stift 28/32 PS open sports car with its top folded down. Franz Ferdinand, Sophie, Governor Potiorek, and Lieutenant Colonel Count Franz von Harrach rode in this third car.[71] The motorcade's first stop on the preannounced program was for a brief inspection of a military barracks. According to the program, at 10:00 a.m., the motorcade was to leave the barracks for the town hall by way of the Appel Quay.[72]
Security arrangements within Sarajevo were limited. The local military commander, General Michael von Appel, proposed that troops line the intended route but was told that this would offend the loyal citizenry. Protection for the visiting party was accordingly left to the Sarajevo police, of whom only about 60 were on duty on the Sunday of the visit.[73]
Bombing
 A map annotated with the events of 28 June 1914, from an official report
The motorcade passed the first assassin, Mehmedba i . Danilo Ili  had placed him in front of the garden of the Mostar Cafe and armed him with a bomb.[74] Mehmedba i  failed to act. Ili  had placed Vaso  ubrilovi  next to Mehmedba i , arming him with a pistol and a bomb. He too failed to act. Further along the route, Ili  had placed Nedeljko  abrinovi  on the opposite side of the street near the Miljacka River, arming him with a bomb.
At 10:10 am,[75] Franz Ferdinand's car approached and  abrinovi  threw his bomb. The bomb bounced off the folded back convertible cover into the street.[76] The bomb's timed detonator caused it to explode under the next car, putting that car out of action, leaving a 1-foot-diameter (0.30 m), 6.5-inch-deep (170 mm) crater,[75] and wounding 16 20 people.[77]
 abrinovi  swallowed his cyanide pill and jumped into the Miljacka river.  abrinovi 's suicide attempt failed, as the old cyanide only induced vomiting, and the Miljacka was only 13 cm deep due to the hot, dry summer.[78] Police dragged  abrinovi  out of the river, and he was severely beaten by the crowd before being taken into custody.
The procession sped away towards the Town Hall leaving the disabled car behind. Cvjetko Popovi , Gavrilo Princip, and Trifun Grabe  failed to act as the motorcade passed them at high speed.[79]
Town Hall reception
 A map showing the route of Archduke Franz Ferdinand's motorcade
Arriving at the Town Hall for a scheduled reception, Franz Ferdinand showed understandable signs of stress, interrupting a prepared speech of welcome by Mayor Fehim Cur i  to protest: "Mr. Mayor, I came here on a visit and I am greeted with bombs. It is outrageous."[80] Duchess Sophie then whispered into Franz Ferdinand's ear, and after a pause, Franz Ferdinand said to the mayor: "Now you may speak."[75] He then became calm and the mayor gave his speech. Franz Ferdinand had to wait as his own speech, still wet with blood from being in the damaged car, was brought to him. To the prepared text he added a few remarks about the day's events thanking the people of Sarajevo for their ovations "as I see in them an expression of their joy at the failure of the attempt at assassination."[81]
Officials and members of the Archduke's party discussed what to do next. The archduke's chamberlain, Baron Rumerskirch, proposed that the couple remain at the Town Hall until troops could be brought into the city to line the streets. Governor-General Oskar Potiorek vetoed this suggestion[82] on the grounds that soldiers coming straight from maneuvers would not have the dress uniforms appropriate for such duties. "Do you think that Sarajevo is full of assassins?" he concluded.[82]
Franz Ferdinand and Sophie gave up their planned program in favor of visiting the wounded from the bombing, at the hospital. Count Harrach took up a position on the left-hand running board of Franz Ferdinand's car to protect the Archduke from any assault from the river side of the street.[83][84] This is confirmed by photographs of the scene outside the Town Hall. At 10:45 a.m, Franz Ferdinand and Sophie got back into the motorcade, once again in the third car.[83] In order to ensure the safety of the couple, General Oskar Potiorek decided that the imperial motorcade should travel straight along the Appel Quay to the Sarajevo Hospital so that they could avoid the crowded city center.[85][86] However, Potiorek failed to communicate his decision to the drivers.[84][87] As a result, the Archduke's driver, Leopold Lojka,[88] took a right turn at the Latin Bridge just as the two drivers ahead of him.[89] According to the historian Joachim Remak, the reason for this is that Potiorek's aide Eric(h) von Merrizzi was in the hospital, and was therefore unable to give Lojka the information about the change in plans and the driving route.[90] The Sarajevo Chief of Police Edmund Gerde, who had earlier repeatedly warned Potiorek of insufficient security precautions for the imperial visit, was asked by one of the Archduke's aides to tell the drivers of the new route, but in the confusion and tensions of the moment, he neglected to do so.[91]
Fatal shooting
 Arrest of a suspect in Sarajevo during the aftermath of the assassination[92]
 Princip's FN Model 1910 pistol, displayed at the Museum of Military History, Vienna, 2009
After learning that the first assassination attempt had been unsuccessful, Princip thought about a position to assassinate the Archduke on his return journey, and decided to move to a position in front of a nearby food shop (Schiller's delicatessen), near the Latin Bridge.[93] At this point, the first and second cars of the Archduke's motorcade suddenly turned right into a side street, leaving the Appel Quay.[89] When the Archduke's driver followed their route, Governor Potiorek, who was sharing the third vehicle with the Imperial couple, called out to the driver to stop as he was going the wrong way.[94] The driver applied the brakes, and when he attempted to put the car into reverse gear he accidentally stalled the engine close to where Princip was standing.[95] The assassin stepped up to the footboard of the car, and shot Franz Ferdinand and Sophie at point blank range[94] using a Belgian-made Fabrique Nationale model 1910 .380 caliber pistol.[96] Pistol serial numbers 19074, 19075, 19120 and 19126 were supplied to the assassins; Princip used #19074.[97] According to Albertini, "the first bullet wounded the Archduke in the jugular vein, the second inflicted an abdominal wound on the Duchess."[98] Princip tried to shoot himself, but was immediately seized and arrested.[94] At his sentencing, Princip stated that his intention had been to kill Governor Potiorek, rather than Sophie.[99]
After being shot, Sophie immediately fell unconscious and collapsed onto Franz Ferdinand's legs.[94] The Archduke, too, lost consciousness while being driven to the Governor's residence for medical treatment.[94] As reported by Count Harrach, Franz Ferdinand's last words were "Sophie, Sophie! Don't die! Live for our children!" followed by six or seven utterances of "It is nothing," in response to Harrach's inquiry as to Franz Ferdinand's injury.[100] These utterances were followed by a violent choking sound caused by hemorrhage.[87] The imperial couple were dead by 11:30 a.m on 28 June 1914;[101] Sophie was dead on arrival at the Governor's residence, and Franz Ferdinand died 10 minutes later.[102]
There is a myth which states that Princip had eaten a sandwich at Schiller's delicatessen just prior to the shooting, but there are no primary sources from the time which mention this. This myth likely originated from the 2001 novel "Twelve Fingers", which presents a fictionalized version of the events of the assassination that includes the sandwich.[103]
Funeral
The bodies were transported to Trieste by the battleship SMS Viribus Unitis and then to Vienna by special train. Even though most foreign royalty had planned to attend, they were pointedly disinvited and the funeral was just the immediate imperial family, with the dead couple's three children excluded from the few public ceremonies. The Archduke's friend Kaiser Wilhelm II was invited so that the Imperial Cabinet could consult him on foreign policy, but he declined to attend; although he publicly claimed it was due to a case of lumbago, Imperial Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg revealed that the real reason was security concerns.[104] The officer corps was forbidden to salute the funeral train, and this led to a minor revolt led by Archduke Karl, the new heir presumptive. The public viewing of the coffins was curtailed severely and even more scandalously, Montenuovo tried unsuccessfully to make the children foot the bill. Sophie's coffin was slanted down from her husband's to reassert her lower social status, gloves were placed on top of her casket as was traditional for a lady-in-waiting.[105] The Archduke and his wife were interred at Artstetten Castle because the Duchess could not be buried in the Imperial Crypt.[106]
Aftermath
 Crowds on the streets in the aftermath of the Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, 29 June 1914
All of the assassins were eventually caught.[107] Those in Austro-Hungarian custody were tried together with members of the infiltration route who had helped deliver them and their weapons to Sarajevo. Mehmedba i , the only Bosnian Muslim among the conspirators, was arrested in Montenegro by local authorities but managed to escape from the Nik i  prison before his extradition could take place (possibly with help from the gendarmes who were guarding him and were consequently put under arrest).[108] He later resurfaced in Serbia where he joined Major Tankosi 's Chetnik detachment during the war,[109] in 1916 the Serbian government imprisoned him on fabricated charges of treason during the Salonika trial, he was released in 1919. (see criminal penalty section below).
Anti-Serb rioting broke out in Sarajevo and various other places within Austria-Hungary in the hours following the assassination until order was restored by the military.[110] On the night of the assassination, country-wide anti-Serb pogroms and demonstrations were also organized in other parts of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, particularly on the territory of modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.[111][112][113] They were organized and stimulated by Oskar Potiorek, the Austro-Hungarian governor of Bosnia and Herzegovina.[114] The first anti-Serb demonstrations, led by the followers of Josip Frank, were organized in the early evening of 28 June in Zagreb. The following day, anti-Serb demonstrations in Sarajevo became more violent and could be characterized as a pogrom. The police and local authorities in the city did nothing to prevent anti-Serb violence.[115] Writer Ivo Andri  referred to the violence in Sarajevo as the "Sarajevo frenzy of hate."[116] Two Serbs were killed on the first day of pogrom in Sarajevo, many were attacked, while around 1,000 houses, shops, schools and institutions (such as banks, hotels, printing houses) owned by Serbs were razed or pillaged.[117]
Following the assassination, Franz Joseph's daughter, Marie Valerie, noted that her father expressed his greater confidence in the new heir presumptive, his grandnephew Archduke Charles. The emperor admitted to his daughter, regarding the assassination: "For me, it is a relief from a great worry."[118]
Trials and punishment
Sarajevo trial (October 1914)
 The Sarajevo trial in progress. Princip is seated in the center of the first row.
Austro-Hungarian authorities arrested and prosecuted the Sarajevo assassins (except for Mehmedba i  who had escaped to Montenegro and was released from police custody there to Serbia)[119] together with the agents and peasants who had assisted them on their way. The majority of the defendants were charged with conspiracy to commit high treason involving official circles in the Kingdom of Serbia.[11] Conspiracy to commit high treason carried a maximum sentence of death which conspiracy to commit simple murder did not. The trial was held from 12 to 23 October with the verdict and sentences announced on 28 October 1914.[11]
The adult defendants, facing the death penalty, portrayed themselves at trial as unwilling participants in the conspiracy. The examination of defendant Veljko  ubrilovi  (who helped coordinate the transport of the weapons and was a Narodna Odbrana agent) is illustrative of this effort.  ubrilovi  stated to the court: "Princip glared at me and very forcefully said 'If you want to know, it is for that reason and we are going to carry out an assassination of the Heir and if you know about it, you have to be quiet. If you betray it, you and your family will be destroyed.'"[120] Under questioning by defense counsel  ubrilovi  described in more detail the basis of the fears that he said had compelled him to cooperate with Princip and Grabe ."[121]  ubrilovi  explained that he was afraid a revolutionary organization capable of committing great atrocities stood behind Princip and that he therefore feared his house would be destroyed and his family killed if he did not comply and explained that he knew such an organization existed in Serbia, at least at one time. When pressed for why he risked the punishment of the law, and did not take the protection of the law against these threats he responded: "I was more afraid of terror than the law."[121] Another Narodna Odbrana agent, Mihajlo Jovanovi , also claimed to have been against the assassination.[11]
The three members of the original assassination team acknowledged full responsibility for their acts, proclaiming their ideal of a liberated and united South Slav people, exonerating Serbia and the Narodna Odbrana whose responsibility the prosecution tried to prove; however the court did not believe the defendants' statements as they differed from their depositions made at the preliminary investigation.[28]
Princip focused on taking full responsibility for the crime on himself, and stated: "Our enterprise was purely private and in no way official as the prosecution asserts. Serbia has no hand in it and cannot be held responsible for our deed." He then asked: "No one else knew of it beyond Ciganovi  and ourselves. How could Serbia be brought into the affair ?".[122] Princip deposed under cross-examination: "I am a Yugoslav nationalist and I believe in unification of all South Slavs in whatever form of state and that it be free of Austria." Princip was then asked how he intended to realize his goal and responded: "By means of terror."[123] Cabrinovi  testified that he was motivated to kill Franz Ferdinand because he saw him as a danger to the Slavs and to Serbia, something he claimed to have heard in cafes from students and citizens.[18] Grabe  stated that he would never have taken part had he known that it would lead to a European war.[124] In spite of the absence of proof, the Sarajevo Court deemed that Serbian military circles were also implicated and thus the verdict ran: "The court regards it as proved by the evidence that both Narodna Odbrana and military circles in the Kingdom of Serbia in charge of the espionage service, collaborated in the outrage."[125]
Prison terms, death sentences and acquittals were as follows:[126]
Name
Sentence
Gavrilo Princip
20 years
Nedjelko  abrinovi 
20 years
Trifun Grabe 
20 years
Vaso  ubrilovi 
16 years
Cvjetko Popovi 
13 years
Lazar  uki 
10 years
Danilo Ili 
Death by hanging (executed 3 February 1915)
Veljko  ubrilovi 
Death by hanging (executed 3 February 1915)
Ne o Kerovi 
Death by hanging; commuted to 20 years in prison by Kaiser Franz-Joseph based on the recommendation of the Finance Minister
Mihajlo Jovanovi 
Death by hanging (executed 3 February 1915)
Jakov Milovi 
Death by hanging; commuted to life in prison by Kaiser Franz-Joseph based on recommendation of the court and Finance Minister
Mitar Kerovi 
Life in prison
Ivo Kranjcevi 
10 years
Branko Zagorac
3 years
Marko Perin
3 years
Cvijan Stjepanovi 
7 years
Nine defendants
Acquitted
At trial,  abrinovi  had expressed his regrets for the murders. Following sentencing,  abrinovi  received a letter of complete forgiveness from the three young children the assassins had orphaned.[127]  abrinovi  and Princip died of tuberculosis in prison. Those under the age of 20 years at the time of the crime could receive a maximum sentence of 20 years under Austrian-Hungarian law. The court heard arguments regarding Princip's age, as there was some doubt as to his true date of birth but concluded that Princip was under 20 at the time of the assassination.[128] Because Bosnia and Herzegovina had not yet been assigned to Austria or to Hungary, the Austro-Hungarian Finance Minister administered Bosnia and Herzegovina and had responsibility for recommending clemency to the Kaiser.
Salonika trial (spring 1917)
From late 1916 into early 1917, secret peace talks took place between Austria-Hungary and France. There is evidence that parallel discussions were held between Austria-Hungary and Serbia with Prime Minister Pa i  dispatching his righthand man Stojan Proti  and Regent Alexander dispatching his confidant Colonel Petar  ivkovi  to Geneva on secret business.[129][130] Charles I of Austria laid out Austria-Hungary's key demand for returning Serbia to the control of the Serbian Government in exile: that Serbia should provide guarantees that there be no further political agitation emanating from Serbia against Austria-Hungary.[131]
 Indictees at the Salonika trial, after the verdict
For some time, Regent Alexander and officers loyal to him had planned to get rid of the military clique headed by Apis, as Apis represented a political threat to Alexander's power.[132] The Austro-Hungarian peace demand gave added impetus to this plan. On 15 March 1917 Apis and the officers loyal to him were indicted, on various false charges unrelated to Sarajevo (the case was retried before the Supreme Court of Serbia in 1953 and all defendants were exonerated),[133] by Serbian Court Martial on the French-controlled Salonika front. On 23 May Apis and eight of his associates were sentenced to death; two others were sentenced to 15 years in prison. One defendant died during the trial and the charges against him were dropped. The Serbian High Court reduced the number of death sentences to seven. Regent Alexander commuted four of the remaining death sentences, leaving just three death sentences in place.[134]
Amongst those tried, four of the defendants had confessed their roles in Sarajevo and their final sentences were as follows:[135]
Name
Sentence
Apis
Death by firing squad (executed 26 June 1917) and 70 dinar court fee and additional witness fees
Ljuba Vulovi 
Death by firing squad (executed 26 June 1917) and 70 dinar court fee and additional witness fees
Rade Malobabi 
Death by firing squad (executed 26 June 1917) and 70 dinar court fee and additional witness fees
Muhamed Mehmedba i 
15 years in prison (commuted and released in 1919) and 60 dinar court fee and additional witness fees
In justifying the executions, Prime Minister Pa i  wrote to his envoy in London: "...Dimitrijevi  (Apis) besides everything else admitted he had ordered Franz Ferdinand to be killed. And now who could reprieve them?"[136]
As the three condemned men were driven to their execution, Apis remarked to the driver: "Now it is clear to me and clear to you too, that I am to be killed today by Serbian rifles solely because I organized the Sarajevo outrage."[137]
Vojislav Tankosi  died in battle in late 1915 and so was not put on trial.[138]
Controversy about responsibility
Serbia's "warning" to Austria-Hungary
Following the assassinations, Serbian Ambassador to France Milenko Vesni  and Serbian Ambassador to Russia Miroslav Spalajkovi  put out statements claiming that Serbia had warned Austria-Hungary of the impending assassination.[139] Serbia soon thereafter denied making warnings and denied knowledge of the plot. Prime Minister Pa i  himself made these denials to Az Est on 7 July and to the Paris Edition of the New York Herald on 20 July.[140] Other voices eventually spoke out on the "warning". As Serbian Education Minister Ljuba Jovanovi  wrote in Krv Sloventsva, in late May or early June, Prime Minister Pa i  reviewed the plot of the impending assassination with members of his cabinet.[141] On 18 June, a telegram, lacking in specifics, ordered Serbia's Ambassador to Vienna, Jovan Jovanovi , to warn Austria-Hungary that Serbia had reason to believe there was a conspiracy to assassinate Franz Ferdinand in Bosnia.[142] On 21 June, Ambassador Jovanovi  met with Austro-Hungarian Finance Minister Bilinski. According to Serbian Military Attach  to Vienna, Colonel Le janin, Ambassador Jovanovi , spoke to Bilinski and "...stressed in general terms the risks the Archduke heir apparent  [sic] might run from the inflamed public opinion in Bosnia and Serbia. Some serious personal misadventure might befall him. His journey might give rise to incidents and demonstrations that Serbia would deprecate but that would have fatal repercussions on Austro-Serbian relations."[143] Jovanovi  came back from the meeting with Bilinski and told Le janin that "...Bilinski showed no sign of attaching great importance to the total message and dismissed it limiting himself to remarking when saying goodbye and thanking him: 'Let us hope nothing does happen.'"[144] The Austro-Hungarian Finance Minister took no action based on Jovanovi 's remarks.
In 1924, J. Jovanovi  went public stating that his warning had been made on his own initiative, and what he said was that "Among the Serb youths (in the army) there may be one who will put a ball-cartridge in his rifle or revolver in place of a blank cartridge and he may fire it, the bullet might strike the man giving provocation (Franz Ferdinand)."[145] J. Jovanovi 's account changed back and forth over the years and never adequately addressed Colonel Le janin's statement.[146] Bilinski did not speak openly on the subject, but his press department chief confirmed that a meeting had taken place including a vague warning, but there was no mention of an ethnic Serb Austro-Hungarian soldier shooting Franz Ferdinand.[145]
In the days leading up to the assassination, Pa i  was the caretaker prime minister because during this period the Serbian Government briefly fell to a political alliance led by the Serbian Military. The military favored promoting Jovan Jovanovi  to Foreign Minister,[147] and Jovanovi 's loyalties one might expect to have been divided and his orders therefore carried out poorly. By choosing a military loyalist to convey the message, and by not including any of the specifics such as the conspirators' names and weapons, Pa i , a survivor, hedged his bets against the various possible outcomes and consequences of the impending assassination.[148]
Rade Malobabi 
In 1914, Rade Malobabi  was Serbian Military Intelligence's chief undercover operative against Austria-Hungary. His name appeared in Serbian documents captured by Austria-Hungary during the war. These documents describe the running of arms, munitions, and agents from Serbia into Austria-Hungary under Malobabi 's direction.[61]
Owing to the suppression by Serbia of Apis's confession and of the Salonika trial transcripts historians did not initially link Malobabi  closely to the Sarajevo attack. Apis's confession, however, states that "I engaged Malobabi  to organize the assassination on the occasion of the announced arrival of Franz Ferdinand to Sarajevo."[41] At the Salonika trial, Colonel Ljubomir Vulovi  (head of the Serbian Frontiers Service) testified: 'In 1914 on occasion of my official trip from Loznica to Belgrade, I received a letter at the General Staff [signed by Marshal Putnik, Serbia's top military officer] noting that agents of Malobabi  would come and a teacher whose name I don't recall (Danilo Ili  was a teacher but it is unclear if the teacher in question was Ili  as Ili  can be placed in Brod but not Loznica) so I could sent  [sic] them into Bosnia.' Because of that 'I went to Loznica and either that day or very soon afterwards sent Rade and that teacher into Bosnia.' Soon thereafter occurred the Sarajevo assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand."[149] On the eve of his execution, Malobabi  told a priest: "They ordered me to go to Sarajevo when that assassination was to take place, and when everything was over, they ordered me to come back and fulfill other missions, and then there was the outbreak of the war."[150][151] Vladimir Dedijer in The Road to Sarajevo presented additional testimonial evidence that Malobabi  arrived in Sarajevo on the eve of the Sarajevo attack and gave the final go-ahead for the operation to Danilo Ili .[152] This meshes with Dedijer's theory that Djuro  arac had given instructions to Ili  on 16 June canceling the assassination. Soon after their confessions, Serbia executed Malobabi , Vulovi , and Apis on false charges. Serbia published no clarifications of their confessions with regards to the Sarajevo attack.
"Black Hand" or Serbian military intelligence?
Further information: Black Hand (Serbia)
An alternative theory to the Sarajevo attack being a Serbian Military Intelligence Operation was that it was a "Black Hand" operation. The "Black Hand" was a Serbian military society formed on 9 May 1911 by officers in the Army of the Kingdom of Serbia, originating in the conspiracy group that assassinated the Serbian royal couple in May 1903, led by captain Dragutin Dimitrijevi  (Commonly referred to as "Apis").[153]
After Serbia's victory over Bulgaria in Macedonia in the Balkan Wars, the "Black Hand" became moribund because of the death of its president and the failure to replace him, an inactive secretary, casualties, broken links between its three-man cells, and a drying up of funding.[154] By 1914 the "Black Hand" was no longer operating under its constitution but rather as a creature of the Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence, Apis, and its active ranks were composed mostly of Serbian officers loyal to Apis. Apis's confession to ordering the operation that begins with the phrase "As the Chief of the Intelligence Department of the General Staff",[41] the fact that the military chain of command was invoked, the moribund nature of the "Black Hand" and the fact that under the "Black Hand" constitution Article 16, such an assassination could only be ordered by a vote of the Supreme Council Directorate, the President or the Secretary, and no such order was made,[155] are factors in favor of assigning responsibility to Serbian Military Intelligence. The fact that Milan Ciganovi  was involved, that the key officers involved were "Black Hand" members,[156][157] that "Black Hand" Provincial Director for Bosnia and Herzegovina Vladimir Ga inovi  was consulted[158] and that there was no official budget for the operation favors assigning responsibility to the "Black Hand".
The newspaper clipping
At trial, it was noted that the three assassins from Belgrade tried to take all blame on themselves.  abrinovi  claimed the idea of killing Franz Ferdinand came from a newspaper clipping he received in the mail at the end of March announcing Franz Ferdinand's planned visit to Sarajevo.[159] He then showed the newspaper clipping to Princip and the next day they agreed they would kill Franz Ferdinand. Princip explained to the court he had already read about Franz Ferdinand's upcoming visit in German papers.[160] Princip went on to testify that, at about the time of Easter (19 April), he wrote an allegorical letter to Ili  informing him of the plan to kill Franz Ferdinand.[161] Grabe  testified that he and Princip, also at about the time of Easter, agreed between them to make an assassination of either Governor Potiorek or Franz Ferdinand and a little later settled on Franz Ferdinand.[162] The defendants refused or were unable to provide details under examination.
On 26 March Ili  and Mehmedba i  had already agreed to kill Franz Ferdinand based on instructions from Belgrade predating the newspaper clipping and the discussions amongst the three assassins in Belgrade.[39]
Narodna Odbrana
Further information: Narodna Odbrana
Serbian Military Intelligence   through remnants of the "Black Hand"   penetrated the Narodna Odbrana, using its clandestine tunnel to smuggle the assassins and their weapons from Belgrade to Sarajevo. In the 5 June 1914 report by the President of the Narodna Odbrana Bo a Milanovi  to Prime Minister Pa i , one can sense the frustration of the President over the hijacking of his organization in the final sentence dealing with Sarajevo: "Bo a has informed all the agents that they should not receive anyone unless he produces the password given by Bo a."[63]
Milan Ciganovi 
Prime Minister Pa i  received early information of the assassination plan. The information was received by Pa i  early enough, according to Education Minister Ljuba Jovanovi , for the government to order the border guards to prevent the assassins from crossing. This places the cabinet minister's discussions in late May and the information release to some time before that.[163] Albertini concluded that the source of the information was most likely Milan Ciganovi .[164] Bogi evi  made a more forceful case.
The circumstantial evidence against Ciganovi  includes his sinecure government job, his protection by the Chief of Police and Serbia's failure to arrest him (Austria-Hungary demanded Serbia arrest Major Vojislav Tankosi  and Ciganovi , but Serbia arrested only Tankosi  and lied saying that Ciganovi  could not be found), Serbia's protection of Ciganovi  during the war, and the government's provision for Ciganovi  after it. In 1917, all of the Sarajevo conspirators within Serbia's control were tried at Salonika on false charges, except Ciganovi , who even gave evidence against his comrades at the trial.
Russian military attach 's office
Apis's confession to ordering the assassination of Franz Ferdinand states that Russian Military Attach  Viktor Artamonov promised Russia's protection from Austria-Hungary if Serbia would ever come under attack. While admitting funding of the intelligence network in Austro-Hungary, Artamonov denied the involvement of his office in the assassination in an interview with Albertini. Artamonov stated that he went on vacation to Italy leaving Assistant Military Attach  Alexander Werchovsky in charge and though he was in daily contact with Apis he did not learn of Apis's role until after the war had ended.[165] Albertini writes that he "remained unconvinced by the behavior of this officer."[166] Werchovsky admitted the involvement of his office and then fell silent on the subject.[167]
There is evidence that Russia was at least aware of the plot before 14 June. De Schelking writes:
On 1 June 1914 (14 June new calendar), Emperor Nicholas had an interview with King Charles I of Roumania, at Constanza. I was there at the time ... yet as far as I could judge from my conversation with members of his (Russian Foreign Minister Sazonov's) entourage, he (Sazonov) was convinced that if the Archduke (Franz Ferdinand) were out of the way, the peace of Europe would not be endangered.[168]
Consequences
Further information: Causes of World War I
 Grave implications of the assassination were immediately recognized, as in this 29 June article with subtitles "War Sequel?" and "War May Result", and stating the assassination was "engineered by persons having a more mature organizing ability than that of the youthful assassins".[169]
 Serbien muss sterb[i]en! ("Serbia must die!"; last word altered to rhyme).The propaganda caricature depicts Austria crushing the ape-like Serb.
In August 1914, The Independent described the assassination as a "deplorable but relatively insignificant" reason for which[170]
the financial system of the world is in chaos, that international commerce is suspended, that industries are everywhere demoralized and families ruined, and that millions of men in Europe have taken up arms with the intent to slaughter each other.
"It may be doubted whether the Archduke [is] worth all this carnage", the magazine wrote.[170] The murder produced widespread shock across European royal houses, and there was initially much sympathy for the Austrian position. Ordinary people did not really care about what happened, and on the evening of the assassination the crowds in Vienna listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened.[171][172]
Within two days of the assassination, Austria-Hungary and Germany advised Serbia that it should open an investigation, but Secretary-General to the Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Slavko Gruji , replied: "Nothing had been done so far and the matter did not concern the Serbian Government." An angry exchange followed between the Austrian Charg  d'Affaires at Belgrade and Gruji .[173] After conducting a criminal investigation, verifying that Germany would honor its military alliance, and persuading the skeptical Hungarian Count Istv n Tisza, Austria-Hungary issued a formal letter to the government of Serbia on 23 July 1914. The letter reminded Serbia of its commitment to respect the Great Powers' decision regarding Bosnia-Herzegovina, and to maintain good neighborly relations with Austria-Hungary. The letter contained specific demands that Serbia should accept, including the suppression of the publication of propaganda advocating the violent destruction of Austria-Hungary, the removal of the people behind this propaganda from the Serbian Military, the dissolution of the Serbian nationalist organization Narodna Odbrana, the arrest of the people on Serbian soil who were involved in the assassination plot and the prevention of the clandestine shipment of arms and explosives from Serbia to Austria-Hungary.[174][175] It also demanded that Austro-Hungarian officials should take part in the Serbian inquiry into the assassination plot.[175]
This letter became known as the July Ultimatum, and Austria-Hungary stated that if Serbia did not accept all of the demands in total within 48 hours, it would recall its ambassador from Serbia. After receiving a telegram of support from Russia, Serbia mobilized its army and responded to the letter by completely accepting point #8 demanding an end to the smuggling of weapons and punishment of the frontier officers who had assisted the assassins and completely accepting point #10 which demanded Serbia report the execution of the required measures as they were completed. Serbia partially accepted, finessed, disingenuously answered or politely rejected elements of the preamble and enumerated demands #1 7 and #9. The shortcomings of Serbia's response were published by Austria-Hungary. Austria-Hungary responded by breaking diplomatic relations.[176] According to a 2021 study, Franz Ferdinand's absence was key to the breakdown of diplomacy and escalation into war, as Ferdinand had been the most powerful and effective proponent for peace in Vienna.[177]
The next day, Serbian reservists being transported on tramp steamers on the Danube crossed onto the Austro-Hungarian side of the river at Temes-Kubin and Austro-Hungarian soldiers fired into the air to warn them off.[178] The report of this incident was initially sketchy and reported to Emperor Franz-Joseph erroneously as "a considerable skirmish".[179][180] Austria-Hungary then declared war and mobilized the portion of its army that would face the (already mobilized) Serbian Army on 28 July 1914. Under the Secret Treaty of 1892 Russia and France were obliged to mobilize their armies if any of the Triple Alliance mobilized.[citation needed] Russia partially mobilized along its Austrian border on 29 July, and on 30 July Russia ordered general mobilization.[181] Russia's general mobilization set off full Austro-Hungarian and German mobilizations. Soon all the Great Powers except Italy had chosen sides and gone to war.
Today
 The site of the assassination is marked by a small plaque, written in both Serbo-Croatian and English.[182]
The consequences of his action were very bad for Bosnia. Bosnia ceased to exist in Yugoslavia, and Bosnian Muslims were not recognised until 1968. They were still much better rulers than the kingdom of Yugoslavia or communist Yugoslavia. You can look at the historical records and see how Austria-Hungary cared about issues like the rule of law. We lost so much in 1918. Fedzad Forto, editor of a Bosniak-Croat news agency, responding to claims that Princip helped liberate Bosnia and that Austria-Hungary was an occupying power.[183]
The shots fired 100 years ago by Gavrilo Princip were not fired at Europe, they were shots for freedom, marking the start of the Serbs' fight for liberation from foreign occupiers. Milorad Dodik, Bosnian Serb politician and president of Republika Srpska.[184]
Later, referring to Franz Ferdinand's assassination, Vaso  ubrilovi  said: "We destroyed a beautiful world that was lost forever due to the war that followed."[185]
Following the breakup of Yugoslavia, Princip's legacy came under reevaluation in the various successor states. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniaks and Croats largely view Gavrilo Princip as a terrorist and an ethnic Serb nationalist. Many Serbs consider Princip a national hero.[186][183]  The 100th anniversary of the assassination was commemorated with a concert by the Vienna Philharmonic in the Sarajevo City Hall, in an event that was organized by the European Union.[183] Austrian president Heinz Fischer was the guest of honour.[187]
The World War I commemorations were boycotted by Serb nationalists and dignitaries, who, along with Bosnian Serbs, view "Princip as a hero."[184] On the 100th anniversary of the assassination, a statue of Gavrilo Princip was erected in East Sarajevo.[183] This was followed by another statue in Belgrade, which was erected in June 2015.[188] Serbian history textbooks deny that Serbia or Princip were responsible for starting World War I,[186] laying blame on the Central Powers instead.[189] Milorad Dodik acknowledged that Bosnia is "still divided", but maintained that Princip was a "freedom fighter" and that Austria-Hungary had been an "occupier".[190]
Princip's weapon, along with the car in which the Archduke was riding, his bloodstained uniform and the chaise longue on which he died, are on permanent display in the Heeresgeschichtliches Museum in Vienna, Austria. The bullet fired by Gavrilo Princip, sometimes referred to as "the bullet that started World War I",[191] is a museum exhibit in the Konopi t  Castle near the town of Bene ov in the Czech Republic. The bronze medallion of Ferdinand and Sophie, which was part of a monument that was erected on the site of the assassination and demolished in 1918 during Yugoslav rule, is currently preserved in the Art Gallery of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo.[192] A marble plaque commemorating Princip and the assassination was erected in 1930 and, following the 1941 German invasion of Yugoslavia, was subsequently given to Adolf Hitler as a 52nd birthday present. Hitler sent it to the Berlin Zeughaus where it was put on display in the military museum until 1945 when it disappeared.
In art and culture
Literature
The Bridge on the Drina (1945) by Ivo Andri  (Nobel Prize laureate)
The Guns of August (1963) by Barbara W. Tuchman (Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction)
June 28, 1914 (2019) by Zlatko Top i [193]
Theater
This Grave Is Too Small for Me (2013) written by Biljana Srbljanovi 
Film
1914 (1931) directed by Richard Oswald
Sarajevo (1940) directed by Max Oph ls
Sarajevo (1940) directed by  kos R thonyi
Sarajevo (1955) directed by Fritz Kortner
The Day That Shook the World (1975) directed by Veljko Bulaji 
St. George Shoots the Dragon (2009) directed by Sr an Dragojevi 
Sarajevo (2014) directed by Andreas Prochaska
The Man Who Defended Gavrilo Princip (2014) directed by Sr an Koljevi 
The King's Man directed by Matthew Vaughn
TV series
The Great War (1964) written by John Terraine and Correlli Barnett
Fall of Eagles (1974) created by John Elliot
37 Days (2014) directed by Justin Hardy
See also
World War I portal
Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo
Citations
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 9 10.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 22.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 22 23.
^ a b MacKenzie 1995, pp. 23 24.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 24 33.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 27.
^ Albertini 2005, pp. 291 292.
^ Albertini 2005, pp. 364 480.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 36 37.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 19 23.
^ a b c d Biagini & Motta 2015, p. 21.
^ Martel 2014, p. 58.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 236 270.
^ Biagini & Motta 2015, p. 20.
^ a b c Clark 2012, p. 69.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 243.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 203 204.
^ a b Albertini 1953, p. 50.
^ Martel 2014, pp. 58 60.
^ McMeekin 2013, p. 21.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 262.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 285.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, p. 9.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 286.
^ Taylor 1963, p. 13.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 11 17.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 87 88.
^ a b c d e Albertini 1953, p. 49.
^ Dierauer 2013, p. 88.
^ Duijzings 2000, p. 191.
^ Greenawalt 2001, p. 50.
^ Humphreys 2013, p. 84.
^ Humphreys 2013, pp. 84 85.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 27 28, 79.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 47.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 76 77.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 282.
^ a b c d Albertini 1953, p. 78.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, p. 283; Dedijer placed the meeting in Sarajevo, not Mostar.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 78 79; Note the date error: 25 July should read 25 June
^ a b c Dedijer 1966, p. 398.
^ Butcher 2014, p. 254.
^ Sageman 2017, p. 343.
^ Butcher 2014, p. 269.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 117 118, 129 131, 140, 142.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 56.
^ a b Vanderlinden, Anthony (September 2014). "The FN Browning 1910 Pistol & The Great War". American Rifleman. Vol. 162. National Rifle Association of America. pp. 67 69.
^ a b Owings 1984, p. 59.
^ Owings 1984, p. 41; 46.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 93 94.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 109 110.
^ Owings 1984, p. 106.
^ Owings 1984, p. 40; 59.
^ Magrini 1929, pp. 94 95.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 36 38.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 296.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 295 297.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 296 297.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 298.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 61 64.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, pp. 388 389.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 503.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, p. 390; 505.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 300 301.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 303.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 305.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 185 186.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 118 119.
^ Owings 1984, p. 126.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 309.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, p. 11.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 9; 12.
^ King & Woolmans 2013, pp. 168 169.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 313.
^ a b c Dedijer 1966, p. 12.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 35.
^ Dedijer 1966, Chapter XIV, fn. 21.
^ Malmberg, Ilkka (June 2014). "T st  alkaa maailmansota". Helsingin Sanomat monthly supplement. pp. 60 65.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 318 320, 344.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 36 37.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 13 14.
^ a b Buttar 2016, p. 282.
^ a b Dedijer 1966, p. 15.
^ a b McMeekin 2013, p. 31.
^ McMeekin 2013, p. 28.
^ Biagini & Motta 2015, p. 19.
^ a b Gerolymatos 2008, p. 40.
^ "Milestones: Aug. 9, 1926". Time. 9 August 1926.
^ a b MacMillan 2013, pp. 517 518.
^ Remak 1959, p. [page needed].
^ King & Woolmans 2013, p. 169, 205.
^ Butcher 2014, p. 277; Many sources describe this picture as showing Princip being arrested, but modern historians believe that the man was a bystander named Ferdinand Behr.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 67 8.
^ a b c d e MacMillan 2013, p. 518.
^ Simpson 2010, p. 105.
^ King & Woolmans 2013, p. 206.
^ Belfield 2005, p. 237.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 36.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 346.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 37 38.
^ McMeekin 2013, p. 32.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 38.
^ Dash, Mike (15 September 2011). "The Origin of the Tale that Gavrilo Princip Was Eating a Sandwich When He Assassinated Franz Ferdinand". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2022.
^ McMeekin 2013.
^ Russell 2014, p. 63.
^ "The Funeral of the Archduke". The Independent. New York. 13 July 1914. p. 59.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 45.
^ Treadway 1998, p. 231.
^ Documents Diplomatiques Francais III Serie 1911 14,3, X Doc. 537
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 120 121.
^ Reports Service: Southeast Europe series. American Universities Field Staff. 1964. p. 44. ... the assassination was followed by officially encouraged anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo and elsewhere and a country-wide pogrom of Serbs throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia.
^ Prohi  & Bali  1976, p. 189. "Immediately after the assassination of 28th June, 1914, veritable pogroms were organised against the Serbs on the..."
^ Johnson 2007, p. 27.
^ Novak, Viktor (1971). Istoriski  asopis. p. 481.              -                          -  .
^ Mitrovi  2007, p. 18.
^ Gioseffi 1993, p. 246.
^ Donia 2006, p. 125.
^ Palmer 1994, p. 324.
^ Documents Diplomatiques Francais III Serie 1911 14,3, X Doc. 537. This document notes that the diplomatic cable was forwarded to the Secret Service of the National Security Department to investigate the matter of the January 1914 irredentist planning meeting in France but the Secret Service did not report back.
^ Owings 1984, p. 159.
^ a b Owings 1984, p. 170.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 50 1.
^ Owings 1984, p. 56.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 51.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 68.
^ Owings 1984, pp. 527 530.
^ Dedijer 1966, pp. 345 346.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 343.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 53.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 70 71.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 72.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 56 64.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 2.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 344 347.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 329, 344 347.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 392.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 80 81.
^ Magrini 1929, p. 95.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 100 101.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 99.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 90.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 101.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 104 105.
^ Magrini 1929, pp. 115 116.
^ a b Albertini 1953, pp. 102 103.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 102 105.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 106.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 106 109.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 241 242.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 399.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 391.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 394.
^ Pearson 2005, pp. 27 28, 585.
^ MacKenzie 1995, pp. 133 134, 137, 143.
^ MacKenzie 1995, p. 46.
^ Craig 2005, p. 3.
^ Remak 1971, p. 71.
^ MacKenzie 1989, p. 135.
^ Dedijer 1966, p. 289.
^ Owings 1984, p. 57.
^ Owings 1984, p. 65.
^ Owings 1984, p. 89.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 92.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 282 283.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 84 85.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 85.
^ Trydar-Burzinski 1926, p. 128.
^ De Schelking 1918, pp. 194 195.
^ "Austria Will Avenge Murder". The Winnipeg Tribune. 29 June 1914. p. 1.
^ a b "The Forces Behind the Conflict". The Independent. 10 August 1914. p. 196. Retrieved 17 May 2022.
^ "European powers maintain focus despite killings in Sarajevo  This Day in History". History.com. 30 June 1914.
^ Willmott 2003, p. 26.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 273.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 285 289.
^ a b Joll & Martel 2013, pp. 15 16.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 373.
^ Levy & Mulligan 2021.
^ Albertini 1953, pp. 461 462, 465.
^ Albertini 1953, p. 460.
^ Rauchensteiner 2014, p. 127.
^ Tuchman 2009, p. 85.
^ Simon Kuper (21 March 2014), "Sarajevo: the crossroads of history", Financial Times, retrieved 1 February 2018
^ a b c d "Gavrilo Princip: Bosnian Serbs remember an assassin", BBC News, 28 June 2014, retrieved 23 January 2018
^ a b John F. Burns (29 June 2014), "Remembering World War I in the Conflict's Flash Point", The New York Times, retrieved 29 January 2018
^ Sugar 1999, p. 70.
^ a b "Gavrilo Princip: hero or villain?", The Guardian, 6 May 2014, retrieved 1 February 2018
^ Matt Robinson; Maja Zuvela (28 June 2014), Sarajevo recalls the gunshot that sent the world to war, Reuters, retrieved 30 January 2018
^ "Serbia: Belgrade's monument to Franz Ferdinand assassin", BBC News, 8 June 2015, retrieved 23 January 2018
^ Nemanja Rujevi  (28 July 2014), "Serbia, WWI, and the question of guilt", Deutsche Welle, retrieved 1 February 2018
^ "WWI centennial event without Serbs", Deutsche Welle, 28 June 2014, retrieved 1 February 2018
^ "Show Business: The Road". Time. 14 November 1960.
^ "Reconstruction of Medallions of Sarajevo Monument of Ferdinand and Sophie in Final Phase", Sarajevo Times, 8 April 2014, retrieved 1 February 2018
^ "Zlatko Top i : Odlomak iz romana '28. 6. 1914.'". penbih.ba. 31 August 2019.
General and cited references
Albertini, Luigi (1953). Origins of the War of 1914. Vol. II. Oxford: Oxford University Press. OCLC 168712.
Albertini, Luigi (2005). Origins of the War of 1914. Vol. I. New York: Enigma Books. ISBN 1-929631-31-6.
Belfield, Richard (2005). The Assassination Business: A History of State-Sponsored Murder. New York: Carroll & Graf. ISBN 0-7867-1343-7.
Biagini, Antonello; Motta, Giovanna (2015). The First World War: Analysis and Interpretation, Volume 1. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 9781443881869.
Blakley, Patrick R. F. (May 2009). "Narodna Odbrana (The Black Hand): Terrorist Faction that Divided the World" (PDF). Oswego Historical Review (2): 13 34.
Butcher, Tim (2014). The Trigger: Hunting the Assassin Who Brought the World to War. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-80219-188-5.
Buttar, Prit (2016). Collision of Empires. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78200-648-0.
Clark, Christopher (2012). The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914. Penguin UK. ISBN 9780718192952.
Craig, John S. (2005). Peculiar Liaisons: In War, Espionage, and Terrorism in the Twentieth Century. Algora Publishing. ISBN 0-87586-331-0.
De Schelking, Eugene (1918). Recollections of a Russian Diplomat, The Suicide of Monarchies. New York: Macmillan Co. OCLC 1890657.
Dedijer, Vladimir (1966). The Road to Sarajevo. New York: Simon and Schuster. OCLC 400010.
Dierauer, Isabelle (16 May 2013). Disequilibrium, Polarization, and Crisis Model: An International Relations Theory Explaining Conflict. University Press of America. ISBN 978-0-7618-6106-5.
Donia, Robert J. (2006). Sarajevo: A Biography. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-11557-0.
Duijzings, Gerlachlus (2000). Religion and the Politics of Identity in Kosovo. C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. ISBN 978-1-85065-392-9.
Gerolymatos, Andre (2008). The Balkan Wars. Hachette UK. ISBN 9780786724574.
Gioseffi, Daniela (1993). On Prejudice: A Global Perspective. Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-46938-8.
Greenawalt, Alexander (2001). "Kosovo Myths: Karad i , Njego , and the Transformation of Serb Memory" (PDF). Spaces of Identity. 3: 49 65. Retrieved 22 October 2013.
Humphreys, Brendan (2013). The Battle Backwards A Comparative Study of the Battle of Kosovo Polje (1389) and the Munich Agreement (1938) as Political Myths (PhD). University of Helsinki. ISBN 978-952-10-9085-1.
Johnson, Wes (2007). Balkan Inferno: Betrayal, War and Intervention, 1990 2005. Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-63-6.
Joll, James; Martel, Gordon (2013). The Origins of the First World War (3rd ed.). Routledge. ISBN 9781317875369.
King, Greg; Woolmans, Sue (2013). The Assassination of the Archduke: Sarajevo 1914 and the Romance That Changed the World. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 9781250038678.
MacKenzie, David (1989). Apis, the Congenial Conspirator: the Life of Colonel Dragutin T. Dimitrijevi . East European Monographs. ISBN 0-88033-162-3.
MacKenzie, David (1995). Black Hand on Trial: Salonika 1917. Eastern European Monographs. ISBN 978-0-88033-320-7.
Levy, Jack S.; Mulligan, William (3 June 2021). "Why 1914 but Not Before? A Comparative Study of the July Crisis and Its Precursors". Security Studies. 30 (2): 213 244. doi:10.1080/09636412.2021.1915584. ISSN 0963-6412. S2CID 236269759.
MacMillan, Margaret (2013). The War That Ended Peace: How Europe Abandoned Peace for the First World War. Profile Books. ISBN 9781847654168.
Magrini, Luciano (1929). Il Dramma Di Seraievo. Origini e responsabilita della guerra europea. Milan. OCLC 8018932.
Martel, Gordon (2014). The Month that Changed the World: July 1914 and WWI. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191643279.
McMeekin, Sean (2013). 7/1/1914: Countdown to War. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-03145-0.
Mitrovi , Andrej (2007). Serbia's Great War, 1914 1918. Purdue University Press. ISBN 978-1-55753-477-4.
Owings, W.A. Dolph. (1984). The Sarajevo Trial. Chapel Hill, NC: Documentary Publications. ISBN 0-89712-122-8.
Palmer, Alan (1994). Twilight of the Habsburgs: the Life and Times of Emperor Francis Joseph. Atlantic Monthly Press. ISBN 9781857998696.
Pearson, Owen (2005). Albania in the Twentieth Century, A History: Volume I: Albania and King Zog, 1908-39. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 9781845110130.
Prohi , Kasim; Bali , Sulejman (1976). Sarajevo. Tourist Association. OCLC 442656793.
Rauchensteiner, Manfried (2014). The First World War and the End of the Habsburg Monarchy, 1914 1918. Vienna: B hlau Verlag. ISBN 9783205795889.
Remak, Joachim (1959). Sarajevo: the story of a political murder. New York: Criterion Books. LCCN 59-6557.
Remak, Joachim (1971). The First World War: Causes, Conduct, Consequences. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-71634-0.
Russell, G. (2014). The Emperors: How Europe's Rulers Were Destroyed by the First World War. Amberley Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4456-3439-5.
Sageman, M. (2017). Turning to Political Violence: The Emergence of Terrorism. University of Pennsylvania Press, Incorporated. ISBN 978-0-8122-4877-7.
Simpson, John (2010). Unreliable Sources: How the Twentieth Century Was Reported. Pan Macmillan. ISBN 9780230750104.
Sugar, Peter F. (1999). East European Nationalism, Politics and Religion. Farnham, England: Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-86078-806-5.
Taylor, A. J. P. (1963). The First World War: An Illustrated History. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-002481-6.
Treadway, J.D. (1998). The Falcon and the Eagle: Montenegro and Austria-Hungary, 1908-1914. Central European Studies. Purdue University Press. ISBN 978-1-55753-146-9.
Trydar-Burzinski, Louis (1926). Le Cr puscule d'une Autocratie. Florence. OCLC 473403651.
Tuchman, Barbara (2009). The Guns of August: The Outbreak of World War I. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 9780307567628.
Willmott, H. P. (2003). World War I. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-7894-9627-0.
Further reading
Batakovi , Du an T. (1996). The Serbs of Bosnia & Herzegovina: History and Politics. Dialogue Association. ISBN 9782911527104.
Fay, Sidney Bradshaw: Origins of the Great War. New York 1928
Fomenko, A. "There Was an Alternative! The Legacy of Franz Ferdinand" International Affairs: A Russian Journal of World Politics, Diplomacy & International Relations (2009) 55#3 p177-184.
Ponting, Clive. Thirteen Days, Chatto & Windus, London, 2002.
Stoessinger, John. Why Nations Go to War, Wadsworth Publishing, 2007.
Strachan, Hugh (2001). The First World War, Volume I: To Arms. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926191-8.
Treusch, Wolf S ren. Erzherzog Franz Ferdinand und seine Gemahlin werden in Sarajevo ermordet, DLF, Berlin, 2004
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sarajevo assassination.
Map of Europe at the time of the assassination of Franz Ferdinand at omniatlas.com
Newsreels about Franz Ferdinand's assassination at www.europeanfilmgateway.eu
Prison Interview with Gavrilo Princip after the Assassination
vteBalkan WarsBackground
Nationalism in the Ottoman Empire
Albanian
Bulgarian
Greek
Serbian
Congress of Berlin
Annexation of Eastern Rumelia
Serbo-Bulgarian War
Greco-Turkish War of 1897
Cretan State
IMRO & Ilinden Preobrazhenie Uprising
Macedonian Struggle
Young Turk Revolution
Bosnian Crisis
Bulgarian Independence
31 March Incident
Goudi coup
Italo-Turkish War
Albanian revolt of 1912
Balkan League
First Balkan WarBattles
Sarantaporo
Kardzhali
Pente Pigadia
Sorovich
Kumanovo
Kirk Kilisse
Scutari
Lule Burgas
Yenidje
Adrianople
Prilep
Himara
Monastir
First  atalca
Kaliakra
Merhamli
Driskos
Elli
Korytsa
Lemnos
Bulair
 ark y
Bizani
Second  atalca
Diplomacy and politics
London Conference
Albanian Independence
1913 Ottoman coup d' tat
Treaty of London
Second Balkan WarBattles
Kilkis Lachanas
Doiran
Bregalnica
Knja evac
Kalimanci
Kresna Gorge
Southern Dobruja
Romanian landings in Bulgaria
Vidin
Pirot
Diplomacy and politics
Greek Serbian Alliance
Provisional Government of Western Thrace
Treaty of Bucharest
Treaty of Constantinople
Treaty of Athens
Other
1913 Romanian Army cholera outbreak
GeneralAftermath
Autonomy of Northern Epirus
Greco-Turkish crisis of 1914
Sarajevo Assassination and World War I
Ottoman Bulgarian alliance
Balkans campaign of WWI
Serbian campaign
Macedonian front
Atrocities
Carnegie Commission
Massacres of Albanians
Bulgarians deportation program
Initial phase of the Greek genocide
Places burned down
Participants
Bulgaria
Ferdinand I
Ivan Geshov
Stoyan Danev
Mihail Savov
Ivan Fichev
Vasil Kutinchev
Nikola Ivanov
Radko Dimitriev
Stiliyan Kovachev
Georgi Todorov
Greece
George I
Constantine I
Eleftherios Venizelos
Panagiotis Danglis
Pavlos Kountouriotis
Konstantinos Sapountzakis
Viktor Dousmanis
Montenegro
Nicholas I
Crown Prince Danilo
Janko Vukoti 
Ottoman Empire
Mehmed V
Nazim Pasha
Zeki Pasha
Esad Pasha
K lemen Abdullah Pasha
Ali R za Pasha
Hasan Tahsin Pasha
Enver Bey
Ahmed Izzet Pasha
Romania
Carol I
Crown Prince Ferdinand
Alexandru Averescu
Serbia
Peter I
Crown Prince Alexander
Radomir Putnik
Petar Bojovi 
Stepa Stepanovi 
Bo idar Jankovi 
Other Balkan states: Albania (Ismail Qemali)
Category
vteWorld War I
Outline
Military engagements
Home fronts
Technology
Opposition
Casualties
Aftermath
Economic history
Popular culture
Memorials
Puppet states
TheatresEuropean
Balkans
Serbia
Western Front
Eastern Front
Romania
Italian Front
Middle Eastern
Gallipoli
Sinai and Palestine
Caucasus
Persia
Mesopotamia
South Arabia
African
South West
East
Kamerun
Togoland
North
Asian and Pacific
Tsingtao
German Samoa
German New Guinea
Naval warfare
U-boat campaign
North Atlantic
Mediterranean
PrincipalparticipantsEntente Powers
Leaders
Belgium
Brazil
China
France
French Empire
Greece
Italy
Japan
Montenegro
Portuguese Empire
Romania
Russia
Russian Empire
Russian Republic
Serbia
Siam
United Kingdom
British Empire
United States
Central Powers
Leaders
Germany
Austria-Hungary
Ottoman Empire
Bulgaria
TimelinePre-War conflicts
Franco-Prussian War
Scramble for Africa (1880 1914)
Russo-Japanese War (1905)
Tangier Crisis (1905 06)
Bosnian Crisis (1908 09)
Agadir Crisis (1911)
Italo-Turkish War (1911 12)
First Balkan War (1912 13)
Second Balkan War (1913)
Prelude
Origins
Historiography
Sarajevo assassination
Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo
July Crisis
Autumn 1914
Battle of the Frontiers
Battle of Cer
First Battle of the Marne
Battle of Grand Couronn 
Siege of Tsingtao
Battle of Tannenberg
Battle of Galicia
First Battle of the Masurian Lakes
Battle of Kolubara
Battle of Sarikamish
Race to the Sea
First Battle of Ypres
1915
Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes
Second Battle of Ypres
Sinking of the RMS Lusitania
Battle of Gallipoli
Second Battle of Artois
Battles of the Isonzo
Gorlice Tarn w offensive
Great Retreat
Bug-Narew Offensive
Second Battle of Champagne
Kosovo offensive
Siege of Kut
Battle of Loos
1916
Erzurum offensive
Battle of Verdun
Lake Naroch offensive
Battle of Asiago
Battle of Jutland
Battle of the Somme
first day
Brusilov offensive
Baranovichi offensive
Battle of Romani
Monastir offensive
Battle of Transylvania
1917
Capture of Baghdad
February Revolution
Zimmermann Telegram
Second Battle of Arras
Second Battle of the Aisne
Kerensky offensive
Battle of M r ti
Third Battle of Ypres (Passchendaele)
Battle of M r e ti
Third Battle of Oituz
Battle of Caporetto
Southern Palestine offensive
October Revolution
Battle of La Malmaison
Battle of Cambrai
Armistice of Foc ani
Armistice between Russia and the Central Powers
1918
Operation Faustschlag
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
German spring offensive
Zeebrugge Raid
Treaty of Bucharest of 1918
Battle of Goychay
Second Battle of the Piave River
Second Battle of the Marne
Hundred Days Offensive
Vardar offensive
Battle of Megiddo
Third Transjordan attack
Meuse Argonne offensive
Battle of Vittorio Veneto
Armistice of Salonica
Armistice of Mudros
Armistice of Villa Giusti
Second Romanian campaign
Armistice with Germany
Armistice of Belgrade
Co-belligerent conflicts
Somaliland campaign (1900 1920)
Mexican Revolution (1910 1920)
Maritz rebellion (1914 15)
Muscat rebellion (1913 1920)
Zaian War (1914 1921)
Kurdish rebellions (1914 1917)
Ovambo Uprising (1914-1917)
Kelantan rebellion (1915)
Senussi campaign (1915 1916)
Volta-Bani War (1915 1917)
Arab Revolt (1916-1918)
Central Asian Revolt (1916 17)
Darfur Expedition (1916)
Easter Rising (1916)
Kaocen revolt (1916 17)
Russian Revolution (1917)
Finnish Civil War (1918)
Post-War conflicts
Russian Civil War (1917 1921)
Ukrainian Soviet War (1917 1921)
Armenian Azerbaijani War (1918 1920)
Armeno-Georgian War (1918)
German Revolution (1918 19)
Revolutions and interventions in Hungary (1918 1920)
Hungarian Romanian War (1918 19)
Greater Poland Uprising (1918 19)
Estonian War of Independence (1918 1920)
Latvian War of Independence (1918 1920)
Lithuanian Wars of Independence (1918 1920)
Polish Ukrainian War (1918 19)
Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
Egyptian Revolution (1919)
Polish Lithuanian War (1919 1920)
Polish Soviet War (1919 1921)
Irish War of Independence (1919 1921)
Turkish War of Independence
Franco-Turkish War (1918 1921)
Greco-Turkish War (1919 1922)
Turkish Armenian War (1920)
Iraqi Revolt (1920)
Vlora War (1920)
Franco-Syrian War (1920)
Soviet Georgian War (1921)
AspectsWarfare
Trench warfare
Chemical weapons
Naval warfare
Convoy system
Air warfare
Strategic bombing
Cryptography
Horse use
AtrocitiesCivilian impact
Spanish flu
Blockade of Germany
Deportations from East Prussia
Destruction of Kalisz
Ottoman casualties
Armenian genocide
Assyrian genocide
Pontic Greek genocide
Rape of Belgium
Urkun (Kyrgyzstan)
Austro-Hungarian occupation of Serbia
Bulgarian occupations
Albania
Serbia
German occupations
Belgium
Luxembourg
Northeastern France
Ober Ost
Russian occupations
Eastern Galicia
Western Armenia
Agreements
Constantinople Agreement
Treaty of London
Damascus Protocol
Bulgaria Germany treaty
Sykes Picot Agreement
Sazonov Pal ologue Agreement
Paris Economy Pact
Treaty of Bucharest
Agreement of Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne
Peace treaties
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
Treaty of Bucharest
Paris Peace Conference
Treaty of Versailles
Treaty of St. Germain
Treaty of Neuilly
Treaty of Trianon
Treaty of S vres
Treaty of Lausanne
Other
The Golden Virgin
 World War I portal
 World portal
Category
vteSarajevoHistory of Sarajevo
Ancient times
Middle Ages
Early Ottoman
Late Ottoman
Sacking of Sarajevo
Austria-Hungary
Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand
Yugoslav era
1984 Winter Olympics
Modern era
Siege of Sarajevo
Mayors (City Council)
Timeline
MunicipalitiesCity proper
Centar
Novi Grad
Novo Sarajevo
Stari Grad
Urban area
Ilid a
Vogo a
Isto na Ilid a
Isto no Novo Sarajevo
Isto ni Stari Grad
Metro area
Had i i
Ilija 
Trnovo
FBiH
RS
Pale
Sokolac
Breza
Kiseljak
Kre evo
Visoko
Neighborhoods
Alipa ino polje
Babi a ba a
Ba ar ija
 engi  vila
Dobrinja
Grbavica
D id ikovac
Hrasno
Ko evo
Mejta 
Marijin dvor
Otoka
Vi njik
Vratnik
Buildings and landmarks
Ambassadors' Alley
ARIA Centar
Avaz Twist Tower
Bijela Tabija
Bosmal City Center
Despi  House
Eternal flame
Goat's Bridge
Greek-Bosnian Friendship Building
Latin Bridge
Mori a Han
Presidency Building
Sarajevo Rose
Sarajevo Tunnel
Sarajevo Zoo
 eher- ehaja Bridge
Skakavac Waterfall
Svrzo's House
UNIS Towers
Vidovdan Heroes Chapel
Vraca Memorial Park
Suada and Olga bridge
Vrelo Bosne
Places of worshipMuslim
Ali Pasha's
Emperor's
Ferhat-Pasha's
Gazi Husrev-Bey's
Istiqlal
King Fahd's
Had ijska
Catholic
Sarajevo Cathedral
St. Anthony's
St. Joseph's
Orthodox
Serbian Orthodox Cathedral
Sarajevo Old Orthodox Church
Church of the Holy Transfiguration
Jewish
Sarajevo Synagogue
Culture
Sarajevo National Theatre
Sarajevo Philharmonic Orchestra
Vije nica
Gazi Husrev-beg Library
Dom Mladih
Galleries and museums
Ars Aevi Museum of Contemporary Art
Historical Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina
National Museum
National Gallery
Museum of Literature and Theater Arts
Sarajevo City Museum
War Childhood Museum
EducationPublic
University of Sarajevo
Academy of Fine Arts
Academy of Performing Arts
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Faculty of Political Science
Faculty of Law
Music Academy
Private
International Burch University
International University of Sarajevo
Sarajevo School of Science and Technology
Sports venuesStadiums
Ko evo Stadium
Grbavica Stadium
Otoka Stadium
Indoor arenas
Skenderija Hall
Zetra Olympic Hall
Transport
Sarajevo Airport
Sarajevo main railway station
Sarajevo Tramway
Streets
Ferhadija street
Marshal Tito street
Sara i street
Trg Oslobo enja - Alija Izetbegovi 
Vilsonovo  etali te
Events
Ba ar ija Nights
Sarajevo Winter Festival
Jazz Fest Sarajevo
Sarajevo Film Festival
 Category
vteConspiracy theoriesList of conspiracy theoriesOverviewCore topics
Antiscience
Cabals
Civil
Criminal
Deception
Espionage
Fiction
Political
Pseudohistory
Pseudoscience
Secrecy
Secret societies
Urban legends and myths
Psychology
Attitude polarization
Cognitive dissonance
Communal reinforcement
Confirmation bias
Locus of control
Machiavellianism
Mass psychogenic illness
Moral panic
Paranoia
Psychological projection
Deaths and disappearancesAssassination / suicide theories
Zachary Taylor (1850)
Lord Kitchener (1916)
W adys aw Sikorski (1943)
Adolf Hitler (1945)
Subhas Chandra Bose (1945)
Marilyn Monroe (1962)
John F. Kennedy (1963)
Lee Harvey Oswald (1963)
Lal Bahadur Shastri (1966)
Harold Holt (1967)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1968)
Robert F. Kennedy (1968)
Pope John Paul I (1978)
Jonestown (1978)
Airey Neave (1979)
Olof Palme (1986)
Zia-ul-Haq (1988)
Vince Foster (1993)
Kurt Cobain (1994)
Yitzhak Rabin (1995)
Diana, Princess of Wales (1997)
Nepalese royal family (2001)
Yasser Arafat (2004)
Osama bin Laden (2011)
Jeffrey Epstein (2019)
Chan Yin-lam (2019)
John McAfee (2021)
Accidents / disasters
Mary Celeste (1872)
RMS Titanic (1912)
Great Kant  earthquake (1923)
Dyatlov Pass (1959)
Lost Cosmonauts (1950s / 1960s)
TWA Flight 800 (1996)
Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 (2014)
Other cases
Yemenite children (1948 54)
Elvis Presley (1977)
Lahad Datu standoff (2013)
Body double hoax
Paul McCartney (1966)
Avril Lavigne (2003)
Melania Trump (2017)
Energy, environment
Agenda 21 (1992)
Climate change denial
False theories
Free energy suppression
Red mercury
False flag allegations
USS Maine (1898)
RMS Lusitania (1915)
Reichstag fire (1933)
Pearl Harbor (1941)
USS Liberty (1967)
Wider e Flight 933 (1982)
KAL Flight 007 (1983)
Mozambican presidential jet (1986)
Pan Am Flight 103 (1988)
Oklahoma City bombing (1995)
9/11 attacks (2001)
Advance knowledge
WTC collapse
Madrid train bombing (2004)
London bombings (2005)
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (2014)
Gender and sexuality
Alpha / beta males
Anti-LGBT
Anti-gender movement
Drag panic
Gay agenda
Gay Nazis myth
HIV/AIDS stigma
United States
Homintern
Homosexual recruitment
Grooming
Litter box hoax
GamerGate
Incel ideology
Larries
Satanic panic
Soy and masculinity
Health
Anti-vaccination
Autism
MMR
in chiropractic
Misinformation
Aspartame controversy
Big Pharma
Chemtrails
COVID-19
Ivermectin
Lab leak
Vaccines
In Canada / Philippines
Ebola
Electronic harassment
GMOs
HIV/AIDS denialism
origins theories
oral polio AIDS hypothesis
Lepers' plot (1321)
SARS (2003)
Water fluoridation
Pont-Saint-Esprit mass poisoning (1951)
Race, religion and/or ethnicity
COVID-19 and xenophobia
Freemasons
Gas chambers for Poles in Warsaw (1940s)
German POWs post-WWII
Greater Bangladesh
Israeli animal theories
Priory of Sion
Product labeling
Halal
Kosher
War against Islam
White genocide
Antisemitic
Andinia Plan
Blood libel
Cohen Plan
Doctors' plot
Dreyfus affair
during the Black Death
George Soros conspiracy theories
Holocaust denial
Trivialization
International Jewish conspiracy
Judeo-Masonic plot
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion
Jewish Bolshevism
Judeopolonia
World War II
Z.O.G.
Killing of Jesus
Kalergi Plan
New World Order
Rothschilds
Stab-in-the-back myth
Christian / Anti-Christian
Anti-Catholic
Jesuits
Popish Plot
Vatican
Bible
Siri thesis
Islamophobic
Counter-jihad
Bihar human sacrifice
Eurabia
Great Replacement
Love jihad
Trojan Horse scandal
Genocide denial (list)
Armenian
Bangladesh
Bosnian
Cambodian
The Holocaust
Holodomor
Nanjing
Rwandan
Sayfo
Serbs during WWII
Uyghur
RegionalCanada
Cancellation of the Avro Arrow (1959)
Leuchter report
Middle East / North Africa
In the Arab world
10 agorot
Cairo fire
Western-supported Iranian Revolution
Russia
Alaska payment
Dulles' Plan
Petrograd Military Organization
Romanov family
Murder
Rasputin
Ukraine bioweapons
South Asia /Southeast Asia
India
Cow vigilante violence
Thailand
Finland Plot
Philippines
Tallano gold
Turkey
2016 coup attempt
Ergenekon
Operation Sledgehammer
Armenian genocide denial
Death of Turgut  zal
Gezi Park protests
S vres Syndrome
Other European
Spain
Mano Negra affair
Sweden
Lilla Saltsj badsavtalet
UK
Clockwork Orange plot
Harold Wilson
Voting pencil
United States
Apollo Moon landings
Barack Obama
citizenship
religion
parentage
Biden Ukraine
Black helicopter
Business Plot
CIA and JFK
CIA assistance to bin Laden
Clinton body count
Cultural Marxism
FEMA concentration camps
HAARP
Jade Helm 15 (2015)
Montauk Project
October Surprise (1980)
Philadelphia Experiment (1943)
Pizzagate (2016)
The Plan (Washington, D.C.)
Project Azorian (1974)
QAnon
Pastel
incidents
Saddam al-Qaeda
Sandy Hook (2012)
Seth Rich (2016)
Spygate (2018)
Trump Ukraine (2019)
"Vast right-wing conspiracy"
Vietnam War
POW/MIA issue / Stab-in-the-back myth
2020 election
Italygate
"Pence Card"
Maricopa County ballot audit
Stop the Steal
UFOs
Alien abduction
Area 51
Black Knight satellite
Cryptoterrestrial / Extraterrestrial / Interdimensional hypothesis
Dulce Base
Estimate of the Situation (1948)
MJ-12
Men in black
Nazi UFOs
Project Serpo
Reptilians
Incidents
Tunguska (1908)
Foo Fighters (1940s)
Los Angeles (1942)
Ghost Rockets (1946)
Maury Island (1947)
Roswell (1947)
Gorman Dogfight (1948)
Mantell (1948)
McMinnville (1950)
Lubbock (1951)
Washington, D.C. (1952)
Barney and Betty Hill abduction (1961)
Kecksburg (1965)
Westall (1966)
Jimmy Carter (1969)
John Lennon (1974)
Frederick Valentich (1978)
Rendlesham Forest (1980)
Cash-Landrum (1980)
Japan Air Lines (1986)
Varginha (1996)
Phoenix Lights (1997)
USS Nimitz (2004)
Chicago (2006)
Other
2012 phenomenon
Bermuda Triangle
Flat Earth
Illuminati
Lake Michigan Triangle
NESARA/GESARA
New Coke
Phantom time / New chronology
Pseudolaw
Admiralty law
Freeman on the land movement
Redemption movement
Sovereign citizens
Strawman theory
Tax protesters
Shakespearean authorship
Satirical
Bielefeld
Birds Aren't Real
Li's field
Ted Cruz Zodiac Killer meme
See also
Conspiracy Encyclopedia
Falsifiability
Fringe science
Historical negationism
Paranormal
Prejudice
Hate speech
Superstition
vteYoung BosniaIdeology and political methods
Anarchism
Revolutionary socialism
Romanticism
Yugoslavism
Propaganda of the deed
Tyrannicide
Notable members
Danilo Ili 
Veljko  ubrilovi 
Mi ko Jovanovi 
Nedeljko  abrinovi 
Vladimir Ga inovi 
Trifko Grabe 
Gavrilo Princip
Muhamed Mehmedba i 
Cvjetko Popovi 
Vaso  ubrilovi 
Dimitrije Mitrinovi 
Ivo Andri 
Dobroslav Jev evi 
Mladen Stojanovi 
Vojislav Tankosi 
Mustafa Golubi 
Ratko Pare anin
Vi nja Mosi 
Avdo Sumbul
Related people and events
Dragutin Dimitrijevi 
Risto Radulovi 
Bogdan  eraji 
Petar Ko i 
Rudolf Zistler
Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand
Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo
Black Hand
July Crisis
Authority control: National 
Czech Republic
Poland
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand&oldid=1145363100"