Hotel at Walt Disney World
Coordinates: 28 21 13 N 81 36 10 W  /  28.353637 N 81.602756 W  / 28.353637; -81.602756
Disney's Animal Kingdom LodgeLobby of Jambo HouseLocationAnimal Kingdom Resort AreaResort typeDeluxe resortOpenedApril 16, 2001; 21 years ago (2001-04-16)ThemeAfrican Wildlife PreserveAreasJambo House, including Kudu Trail, Zebra Trail, Ostrich Trail, Giraffe Trail; Kidani VillageRooms1307SuitesStandard Suites, Royal Kuba Vice-Presidential Suite, Royal Asante Presidential SuiteGreen lodgeyesWebsiteOfficial website 
Walt Disney World
Theme parks
Magic Kingdom
Epcot
Disney's Hollywood Studios
Disney's Animal Kingdom
Water parks
Disney's Typhoon Lagoon
Disney's Blizzard Beach
Other attractions
Disney Springs
ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex
Hotels
Walt Disney World Resorts
Transport
Disney Transport (Walt Disney World Monorail System
Disney Skyliner)
vte
 Animal Kingdom Lodge pool
 Giraffe on the savannah at Jambo House
Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge is an African-themed deluxe resort at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida. It opened on April 16, 2001. The resort is owned and operated by Disney Parks, Experiences and Products.
Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge is located in the Animal Kingdom Resort Area, adjacent to Disney's Animal Kingdom. It gives guests the opportunity to view grazing wildlife outside their rooms and public areas in the resort within proximity of the animals, conveying the feeling of being in an African savanna.
History[edit]
This hotel was designed by Denver architect Peter Dominick of Urban Design Group (now 4240 Architecture), who also designed Disney's Wilderness Lodge and Disney's Grand Californian Hotel & Spa.[1]
On October 11, 2006, Disney announced to local media that Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge would become home to the newest Disney Vacation Club property, Disney's Animal Kingdom Villas. On February 18, 2008, Disney announced the first phase of this expansion was complete and included 109 rooms.[2]
A separate building named Kidani Village[3] was built to the west of the lodge and houses more than 300 villas. The Sunset Savanna was extended to the new structure and more species of animals were introduced. A new pool was built and features water slides and an aquatic playground.[4] 
Kidani Village opened 65% of its rooms on May 1, 2009. At that time, the main lodge building was renamed Jambo House. The remainder of Kidani Village was completed in September 2009.[5]
Resort[edit]
Rooms[edit]
Most rooms are available with either two queen-size beds, or one queen-size bed and twin-size bunk beds. Rooms with a king bed are available but are fewer in count than the others.
Rooms are available with accommodations for guests with disabilities, including rooms with roll-in showers and accommodations for hearing impairments.
Amenities including room service, irons, ironing boards, hairdryers, and make-up mirrors are available for each room. In-room coffee makers and mini-fridges are also available.
All Walt Disney World resorts are entirely non-smoking, made effective June 1, 2012.
Dining[edit]
Jiko The Cooking Place: This Signature Dining restaurant is located in Jambo House and features African-style cooking with influences from the Mediterranean coast, India and Europe. Jiko also features South African vintage wines. The restaurant was designed by designer Jeffrey Beers[6] and emulates an African lodge with a color palette in earth tones. The dining room surrounds an open kitchen which includes twin wood-burning stoves. The private Cape Town Wine Room seats up to forty guests and showcases a collection of wine-based sculptures.[7] Jiko means "a cooking place" in Swahili, thus the restaurant's subtitle "The Cooking Place".
Cape Town Lounge and Wine Bar: Located near Jiko, this quaint lounge features a wide variety of specialty African wines, along with hand-crafted cocktails, imported beer, and other specialty drinks.[8]
Boma Flavors of Africa: This restaurant is also located in Jambo House and features African-style cooking in a buffet setting. The buffet itself features items from fifty different African countries.[9]  The restaurant was designed to resemble an open African marketplace. Food is prepared in view of diners in open cooking areas which allows for interaction between chefs, cooks, and guests.[10] Boma is a word in Swahili and several other African languages, meaning an enclosure, such as a fort or a livestock pen.[11]
Victoria Falls Lounge: Perched above Boma, this lounge offers a variety of African wines, beers, specialty cocktails and other drinks. In addition, the lounge also features a small menu of African-inspired bar fare.[12]
The Mara: This is the counter service restaurant serving American and some African food, located also in Jambo House.
Uzima Springs Pool Bar: This quaint watering hole-inspired pool bar is located on within Jambo House. Located right beside the Uzima Springs pool guests can indulge in various cocktails and African beers and wines. Food is also available from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. offering multiple selections from the quick service with the convenience of dining poolside. The Disney Dining Plan is also accepted at this location.
Sanaa: Located in Kidani Village and overlooking the savanna, this restaurant draws its inspiration from the cuisines along the historical spice route of Africa, India, China, and Europe. Serving foods from tandoor ovens as well as slow-cooked specialties, the selections here are filled with flavorful spices of Africa.  There is also a lounge area inside Sanaa with a more limited menu.
Maji Pool Bar: Similarly to Uzima Springs, Samawati Springs (the main pool of Kidani Village) contains a quaint pool bar, featuring a variety of cocktails, African beers and wines. Along with this, the bar also features various food options from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.  Maji  translates to water in Swahili.[13]
Recreation & Amenities[edit]
Pools: The resort features two main pools: Uzima Springs (Located in Jambo House) & Samawati Springs (Located in Kidani Village). Both pools feature zero-depth entries & waterslides along with a lush African-inspired setting within the resort's savanna. Resort guests have access to both pools. In addition, Samawati Springs contains Uwanja Camp, a water playground containing three distinct areas (Observation Station, Departure Zone & Base Camp) and featuring various water cannons, play structures, interactive water features and a tipping bucket.[14]
Playground: Jambo House also contains a playground for children, Hakuna Matata Playground, featuring various slides and other play structures. The playground itself overlooks the flamingo area and surrounding savanna.
Arcades: There are two arcades that service the main buildings of the resort: Jambo House has Pumbaa's Fun and Games Arcade, while Kidani Village has Safari So Good Arcade. Both arcades contain a mix of classic and modern arcade games.
Fitness Centres: The resort features two fitness centres featuring a large collection of workout equipment, ranging from weights to treadmills and other cardio equipment: Survival of the Fittest services Kidani Village,[15] while Zahanati is located in Jambo House.[16]
Spa: In addition to a fitness centre, Zahanati also features a full-service spa, offering a variety of massages and facials.[16]
Sports: Kidani Village has two different courts for guests to use, a half-court for basketball, and two tennis courts. Both courts are accessible to guests at Jambo House as well.
Other Activities: Like many of the other resorts on property, Animal Kingdom Lodge features other activities for guests to enjoy, including "Movies Under the Stars", pool events, painting, a community hall containing various tabletop games, and campfires (located in both areas of the resort), to name a few.
Savannas[edit]
Around the lodge, there are three total 11-acre savannas (Sunset Savanna, Arusha Savanna, Uzima Savanna) housing a variety of African mammals and birds including addax,[17] Ankole cattle, bongo, blesbok, eland, gemsbok, Grant's zebra, greater kudu, impala, okapi,[18] red river hog,[19] reticulated giraffe, Thomson's gazelle, waterbuck, white-bearded wildebeest, Abyssinian ground hornbill, blue crane, East African crowned crane, greater flamingo, Marabou stork, ostrich, pink-backed pelican, and R ppell's griffon vulture.[20]
References[edit]
^ "Peter Dominick, Architect of Disney Hotels, Dies at 67". Architectural Record. Retrieved November 20, 2011.
^ "Animal Kingdom Lodge". WDWHistory.com. Retrieved February 3, 2008.
^ "Kidani Village". WDWHistory.com. Retrieved February 3, 2008.
^ "Recreation-Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2012-03-31.
^ "Kidani Village at Animal Kingdom Lodge". AllEars.Net. Retrieved November 18, 2012.
^ Henthorn, Dawn. "Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge - A Culinary Journey". Florida for Visitors. About.com. Retrieved May 2, 2006.
^ Carey, Jeanine (2001-06-28). "Animal Kingdom Lodge Pairs Design With F&B". Hotel Interactive. Archived from the original on May 8, 2006. Retrieved May 2, 2006.
^ "Cape Town Lounge and Wine Bar". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ "Dining at Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge". Go.com. Walt Disney World. Retrieved 28 April 2014.
^ Carey, Jeanine (2001-06-28). "Animal Kingdom Lodge Pairs Design With F&B". Hotel Interactive. Archived from the original on May 8, 2006. Retrieved May 2, 2006.
^ "Kamusi - Search Results". Archived from the original on 2006-09-04. Retrieved 2006-08-07.
^ "Victoria Falls Lounge". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ "Maji Pool Bar". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ "Pools at Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ "Survival of the Fittest Fitness Center". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ a b "Zahanati Massage & Fitness Center". Walt Disney Company. Retrieved 2022-07-02.
^ "Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge Welcomes the Early Birth of a Rare African Antelope - WDW News Today". wdwnt.com. 2022-10-03. Retrieved 2023-01-13.
^ McReynolds, Landon (2023-01-04). "Meet Beni: Baby okapi makes debut at Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge savanna". WKMG. Retrieved 2023-01-13.
^ "PHOTOS: Baby Red River Hog Born at Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge - WDW News Today". wdwnt.com. 2022-07-09. Retrieved 2023-01-13.
^ "Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge Animals". www.wdwinfo.com. Retrieved 2021-07-26.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge.
Official website 
vteResorts at Walt Disney WorldFrom left to right: Resorts are sorted by accommodation category, resort area, and resort name. Future resorts are denoted in italics. Residential areas and on site resorts not owned or operated by Disney are not listed here.Value resortsAnimal Kingdom
Disney's All-Star Movies Resort
Disney's All-Star Music Resort
Disney's All-Star Sports Resort
ESPN Wide  World of Sports
Disney's Art of Animation Resort
Disney's Pop Century Resort
Moderate resortsAnimal Kingdom
Disney's Coronado Springs Resort
Disney Springs
Disney's Port Orleans Resort
Epcot
Disney's Caribbean Beach Resort
Magic Kingdom
Disney's Fort Wilderness Resort & Campground
Deluxe resortsAnimal Kingdom
Disney's Animal Kingdom Lodge
Epcot
Disney's Beach Club Resort
Disney's BoardWalk Inn
Disney's Yacht Club Resort
Star Wars: Galactic Starcruiser
Magic Kingdom
Disney's Contemporary Resort
Disney's Grand Floridian Resort & Spa
Disney's Polynesian Village Resort
Disney's Wilderness Lodge
Disney Vacation ClubAnimal Kingdom
Disney's Animal Kingdom Villas
Disney Springs
Disney's Old Key West Resort
Disney's Saratoga Springs Resort & Spa
Epcot
Disney's Beach Club Villas
Disney's BoardWalk Villas
Disney's Riviera Resort
Magic Kingdom
Bay Lake Tower at Disney's Contemporary Resort
Disney's Polynesian Village Resort
The Villas at Disney's Grand Floridian Resort & Spa
Boulder Ridge Villas at Disney's Wilderness Lodge
Copper Creek Villas & Cabins at Disney's Wilderness Lodge
Reflections   A Disney Lakeside Lodge
vteWalt Disney World ResortTheme parks
Magic Kingdom
attractions
Epcot
attractions
Disney's Hollywood Studios
attractions
Disney's Animal Kingdom
attractions
Water parks
Disney's Typhoon Lagoon
Disney's Blizzard Beach
Beyond the parks
Disney Springs
ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex
Fantasia Gardens
Winter Summerland
Resorts and residential areas
Golden Oak at Walt Disney World Resort
Celebration
Bonnet Creek Resort
Magic Kingdom
Contemporary Resort
Fort Wilderness Resort & Campground
Grand Floridian Resort & Spa
Polynesian Village Resort
Wilderness Lodge
Shades of Green 
Epcot
Caribbean Beach Resort
Yacht Club Resort
Beach Club Resort
BoardWalk Resort
Star Wars: Galactic Starcruiser
Riviera Resort
Walt Disney World Dolphin 
Walt Disney World Swan 
Disney Springs
Port Orleans Resort
French Quarter
Riverside
Old Key West Resort
Saratoga Springs Resort & Spa
Animal Kingdom
All-Star Resorts
Movies
Music
Sports
Animal Kingdom Lodge
Coronado Springs Resort
Wide World of Sports
Art of Animation Resort
Pop Century Resort
Unbuilt Disney resorts
Asian Resort
Mediterranean Resort
Persian Resort
Venetian Resort
Fort Wilderness Junction
Transportation
Transportation and Ticket Center
Walt Disney World Monorail System
Disney Skyliner
Liberty Belle Riverboat
Events and festivitiesResort
Disney Weddings
Disney's Wedding Pavilion
Magic Music Days
Disney World Marathon Weekend
The World's Most Magical Celebration
Magic Kingdom
Mickey's Not-So-Scary Halloween Party
Mickey's Very Merry Christmas Party
Epcot
Epcot International Flower & Garden Festival
Epcot International Food & Wine Festival
Retired events,former attractions,and closed facilities
ABC Super Soap Weekend
Discovery Island
DisneyQuest
Epcot Center Ultralight Flightpark
Fort Wilderness Railroad
Give a Day, Get a Disney Day
Happiest Celebration on Earth
Mickey's Pirate and Princess Party
Millennium Celebration
The Osborne Family Spectacle of Dancing Lights
Pleasure Island
River Country
Star Wars Weekends
Summer Nightastic!
Walt Disney World Airport
Walt Disney World Speedway
Notable peoplePast leaders
Walt Disney
Roy O. Disney
Ron Dominguez
Joe Fowler
Richard Irvine
Michael Eisner
Thomas O. Staggs
Al Weiss
Bob Chapek
Current leaders
Bob Iger
Josh D'Amaro
Jeff Vahle
Other people
Jack Wagner
Corey Burton
Paul Frees
Herbert Ryman
Marc Davis
Thurl Ravenscroft
Other
Casting Center
Club 33
Creative Entertainment
Dining Plan
Disney Programs
Disney College Program
Disney International Programs
EPCOT Concept
Escape from Tomorrow
FastPass
Imagineering
MyMagic+
MagicBands
PhotoPass
Central Florida Tourism Oversight District
Lake Buena Vista
Bay Lake
University
Utilidor system
Walt Disney World Company
The Walt Disney World Explorer
List of incidents at Walt Disney World
Wild About Safety
Disney Parks, Experiences and Products (The Walt Disney Company)    indicates a non-Disney resort
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Disney%27s_Animal_Kingdom_Lodge&oldid=1133297739"