Standard way to send messages
Multimedia Messaging Service  (MMS) is a standard way to send messages that include multimedia content to and from a mobile phone over a cellular network. Users and providers may refer to such a message as a PXT, a picture message, or a multimedia message.[1] The MMS standard extends the core SMS (Short Message Service) capability, allowing the exchange of text messages greater than 160 characters in length. Unlike text-only SMS, MMS can deliver a variety of media, including up to forty seconds of video, one image, a slideshow[2] of multiple images, or audio.
The most common use involves sending photographs from camera-equipped handsets.[citation needed][needs update] Media companies have utilized MMS on a commercial basis as a method of delivering news and entertainment content, and retailers have deployed it as a tool for delivering scannable coupon codes, product images, videos, and other information.
The 3GPP and WAP groups fostered the development of the MMS standard, which is now continued by the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA).
Multimedia messaging service was built using the technology of SMS messaging, first developed in 1984[2] as a captive technology which enabled service providers to "collect a fee every time anyone snaps a photo."[3]
The commercial introduction of MMS started in March 2002.[4]
Between 2010 and 2013, MMS traffic in the U.S. increased by 70% from 57 billion to 96 billion messages sent.[5] This is due in part to the wide adoption of smartphones.
Technical description[edit]
MMS messages are delivered in a different way from SMS. The first step is for the sending device to encode the multimedia content in a fashion similar to sending a MIME message (MIME content formats are defined in the MMS Message Encapsulation specification). The message is then forwarded to the carrier's MMS store and forward server, known as the MMSC (Multimedia Messaging Service Centre). If the receiver is on a carrier different from the sender, then the MMSC acts as a relay, and forwards the message to the MMSC of the recipient's carrier using the Internet.[6]
Once the recipient's MMSC has received a message, it first determines whether the receiver's handset is "MMS capable" or not.  If it supports the standards for receiving MMS, the content is extracted and sent to a temporary storage server with an HTTP front-end. An SMS "control message" containing the URL of the content is then sent to the recipient's handset to trigger the receiver's WAP browser to open and receive the content from the embedded URL. Several other messages are exchanged to indicate the status of the delivery attempt.[7]  Before delivering content, some MMSCs also include a conversion service that will attempt to modify the multimedia content into a format suitable for the receiver. This is known as "content adaptation".
If the receiver's handset is not MMS capable, the message is usually delivered to a web-based service from where the content can be viewed from a normal internet browser.  The URL for the content is usually sent to the receiver's phone in a normal text message. This behavior is usually known as a "legacy experience" since content can still be received by the user.
The method for determining whether a handset is MMS capable is not specified by the standards. A database is usually maintained by the operator, and in it each mobile phone number is marked as being associated with a legacy handset or not. This method is unreliable, however, because customers can independently change their handsets, and many of these databases are not updated dynamically.
MMS does not utilize operator-maintained "data" plans to distribute multimedia content; they are used only if the user clicks links inside the message.
E-mail and web-based gateways to the MMS system are common. On the reception side, the content servers can typically receive service requests both from WAP and normal HTTP browsers, so delivery via the web is simple. For sending from external sources to handsets, most carriers allow a MIME encoded message to be sent to the receiver's phone number using a special e-mail address combining the recipient's public phone number and a special domain name, which is typically carrier-specific.
Challenges[edit]
There are some challenges with MMS that do not exist with SMS:
 Handset configuration can cause problems sending and receiving MMS messages.
Content adaptation:[8] Multimedia content created by one brand of MMS phone may not be entirely compatible with the capabilities of the recipient's MMS phone. In the MMS architecture, the recipient MMSC is responsible for providing for content adaptation (e.g., image resizing, audio codec transcoding, etc.), if this feature is enabled by the mobile network operator.  When content adaptation is supported by a network operator, its MMS subscribers enjoy compatibility with a larger network of MMS users than would otherwise be available.
Distribution lists: Current MMS specifications do not include distribution lists nor methods by which large numbers of recipients can be conveniently addressed, particularly by content providers, called Value-added service providers (VASPs) in 3GPP. Since most SMSC vendors have adopted FTP as an ad-hoc method by which large distribution lists are transferred to the SMSC prior to being used in a bulk-messaging SMS submission, it is expected[timeframe?] that MMSC vendors will also adopt FTP.
Bulk messaging: The flow of peer-to-peer MMS messaging involves several over-the-air transactions that become inefficient when MMS is used to send messages to large numbers of subscribers, as is typically the case for VASPs. For example, when one MMS message is submitted to a very large number of recipients, it is possible to receive a delivery report and read-reply report for each and every recipient. Future MMS specification work is likely to optimize and reduce the transactional overhead for the bulk-messaging case.
Handset configuration: Unlike SMS, MMS requires a number of handset parameters to be set. Poor handset configuration is often blamed as the first point of failure for many users. Service settings are sometimes preconfigured on the handset, but mobile operators are now looking at new device management technologies as a means of delivering the necessary settings for data services (MMS, WAP, etc.) via over-the-air programming (OTA).
WAP Push: Few mobile network operators offer direct connectivity to their MMSCs for content providers.[citation needed]  This has resulted in many content providers using WAP push as the only method available to deliver 'rich content' to mobile handsets.  WAP push enables 'rich content' to be delivered to a handset by specifying the URL (via binary SMS) of a pre-compiled MMS, hosted on a content provider's web server.  A consequence is that the receiver who pays WAP per kb or minute (as opposed to a flat monthly fee) pays for receiving the MMS, as opposed to only paying for sending one, and also paying a different rate.
Although the standard does not specify a maximum size for a message, 300 kB and 600 kB are the recommended sizes used by networks[9] for compatibility with MMS 1.2 and MMS 1.3 devices respectively. The limit for the first generation of MMS was 50 kB.[10]
Interfaces[edit]
Main article: MMS Architecture
 MMSC Reference Architecture
MM1: the 3GPP interface between MMS User Agent and MMS Center (MMSC, the combination of the MMS Relay & Server)
MM2: the 3GPP interface between MMS Relay and MMS Server
MM3: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and external servers
MM4: the 3GPP interface between different MMSCs
MM5: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and HLR
MM6: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and user databases
MM7: the 3GPP interface between MMS VAS applications and MMSC
MM8: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and the billing systems
MM9: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and an online charging system
MM10: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and a message service control function
MM11: the 3GPP interface between MMSC and an external transcoder
See also[edit]
Enhanced Messaging Service (EMS)
Rich Communication Services (RCS)
Mobile marketing
Short code
Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language
References[edit]
^ "How to send a PXT". Vodafone Hutchison Australia Pty Limited. 2015. Archived from the original on 2017-05-10. Retrieved 2016-02-02. PXT is a really easy way to send a picture, sound, video, animation or text to another phone or email address. They're also known as MMS, picture messages or multimedia messages. [...] If you're used to sending TXT messages, sending a PXT is pretty similar.
^ a b "The History of Multimedia Messaging (MMS) - MMS London". www.mmsworldlondon.com. Archived from the original on 2017-05-04. Retrieved 2016-12-27.
^ Parks, Bob (October 2000). "Wired Magazine, The Big Picture - Philippe Kahn". Wired. Archived from the original on 2006-03-26. Retrieved 2006-04-20.
^ Le Bodic, Gwena l (2005). Mobile Messaging Technologies and Services: SMS, EMS and MMS (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. p. 208. ISBN 0-470-01143-2.
^ "CTIA's Annual Survey Says US Wireless Providers Handled 3.2 Trillion Megabytes of Data Traffic in 2013 for a 120 Percent Increase Over 2012". www.ctia.org. Archived from the original on 2014-07-23. Retrieved 2014-07-29.
^ "Overview of MMS" Archived 2009-08-27 at the Wayback Machine, mbuni
^ "Sending MMS Notifications and Content" Archived 2009-09-25 at the Wayback Machine, now.sms
^ Coulombe, St phane; Guido Grassel (July 2004). "Multimedia Adaptation for the Multimedia Messaging Service". IEEE Communications Magazine. 42 (7): 120 126. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2004.1316543. S2CID 4785100.
^ "MMS definition", GSM Arena
^ "MMS Developer's Guide" (PDF). Ericsson Mobility World USA. October 2001. Retrieved May 12, 2021.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to MMS.
"Multimedia Messaging Service 1.3". Open Mobile Alliance. Retrieved 14 Jan 2009.
"Consumer Best Practices Guide for Cross-Carrier Mobile Content Programs (United States)" (PDF). Mobile Marketing Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2011. Retrieved 14 Jan 2009.
Eicher, Richard (13 Jan 2009). "Advances in MMS offer interactive tools to mobile marketers". Mobile Marketer. Retrieved 14 Jan 2009.
Morrison, Diane See (17 Sep 2008). "BMW MMS Campaign Gets 30 Percent Conversion Rate". mocoNews.net. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 14 Jan 2009.
vteMobile phonesMobilenetworks,protocols
Channel capacity
Frequencies
Multi-band
Network operator
list
Roaming
Signal
SIM card
dual SIM
SIM lock
Standards comparison
Tethering
VoIP
WAP
XHTML-MP
Generations
Analogue:
0G
1G
Digital:
2G
3G
adoption
3.5G
4G
4.5G
5G
6G
Generaloperation
Features
GSM
services
History
Operating system
Security
phone cloning
Telephony
airplane mode
Text messaging
SMS
MMS
RCS
Spam
Tracking
Web browsing
Mobiledevices
Manufacturers
3D phone
Camera phone
Car phone
Feature phone
Projector phone
Satellite phone
Smartphone
Form factors
Bar
Flip
Phablet
Slider
Slate
Smartwatch
Fold
Smartphones
Android devices
rooting
BlackBerry 10
iPhone
iOS jailbreaking
Open-source mobile phones
Symbian devices
Windows Phone devices
MobilespecificsoftwareApps
Development
Distribution
Management
Cloud computing
Commerce
Banking
Marketing
advertising
campaigns
Payments
contactless
donating
Ticketing
Content
Blogging
Email
Gambling
Gaming
Health
Instant messaging
Learning
Music
News
Search
local
Social
address book
Television
Culture
Box breaking
Charms
Comics
Dating
Japanese culture
Novels
Ringtones
silent mode
Selfie
Txt-spk
Wallpaper
Environmentand health
BlackBerry thumb
Driving safety
Electronic waste
External power supply
Mental health from overuse
Phantom vibration syndrome
Radiation and health
Recycling
Law
Carrier IQ
Legality of recording by civilians
Mobile phones in prison
Photography and the law
Telephone tapping
Texting while driving
USA use restrictions while driving
 Telecommunication portal
 Telephones portal
 Category
vteStandards of Open Mobile AllianceStandards
FUMO
MMS
OMA BCAST
OMA CP
OMA DM
OMA DRM
OMA DS
OMA IMPS / Wireless Village
OMA LWM2M
OMA PoC
OMA Presence SIMPLE
OMA SE
WAP
WBMP
WBXML
WML
WMLScript
WSP
WTP
XHTML Mobile Profile
MLP
SCOMO
vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Daniel Davis Jr.
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Pusk s
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
(Global telecommunications regulation bodies)
 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multimedia_Messaging_Service&oldid=1146788606"