American statesman (1792 1868)
Thaddeus StevensPortrait by Brady-Handy, c. 1860 1868Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom PennsylvaniaIn officeMarch 4, 1859  August 11, 1868Preceded byAnthony RobertsSucceeded byOliver DickeyConstituency9th districtIn officeMarch 4, 1849  March 3, 1853Preceded byJohn StrohmSucceeded byHenry A. MuhlenbergConstituency8th districtChair of the House Ways and Means CommitteeIn officeMarch 4, 1861  March 3, 1865Preceded byJohn ShermanSucceeded byJustin Smith MorrillChair of the House Appropriations CommitteeIn officeDecember 11, 1865  August 11, 1868Preceded byPosition establishedSucceeded byElihu B. Washburne
Personal detailsBorn(1792-04-04)April 4, 1792Danville, Vermont, U.S.DiedAugust 11, 1868(1868-08-11) (aged 76)Washington, D.C., U.S.Resting placeShreiner-Concord CemeteryPolitical partyFederalist (before 1828)Anti-Masonic (1828 1838)Whig (1838 1853)Know Nothing (1853 1855)Republican (1855 1868)Domestic partnerLydia Hamilton Smith (1848 1868)EducationUniversity of VermontDartmouth College (BA)SignatureNickname(s)The Old CommonerThe Great Commoner
Thaddeus Stevens (April 4, 1792  August 11, 1868) was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Pennsylvania, one of the leaders of the Radical Republican faction of the Republican Party during the 1860s. A fierce opponent of slavery and discrimination against black Americans, Stevens sought to secure their rights during Reconstruction, leading the opposition to U.S. President Andrew Johnson. As chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee during the American Civil War, he played a leading role, focusing his attention on defeating the Confederacy, financing the war with new taxes and borrowing, crushing the power of slave owners, ending slavery, and securing equal rights for the freedmen.
Stevens was born in rural Vermont, in poverty, and with a club foot, which left him with a permanent limp. He moved to Pennsylvania as a young man and quickly became a successful lawyer in Gettysburg. He interested himself in municipal affairs and then in politics.  He was an active leader of the Anti-Masonic Party, as a fervent believer that Freemasonry in the United States was an evil conspiracy to secretly control the republican system of government.  He was elected to the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, where he became a strong advocate of free public education. Financial setbacks in 1842 caused him to move his home and practice to the larger city of Lancaster. There, he joined the Whig Party and was elected to Congress in 1848. His activities as a lawyer and politician in opposition to slavery cost him votes, and he did not seek reelection in 1852. After a brief flirtation with the Know-Nothing Party, Stevens joined the newly formed Republican Party and was elected to Congress again in 1858. There, with fellow radicals such as Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner, he opposed the expansion of slavery and concessions to the South as the war came.
Stevens argued that slavery should not survive the war; he was frustrated by the slowness of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln to support his position. He guided the government's financial legislation through the House as Ways and Means chairman. As the war progressed towards a Northern victory, Stevens came to believe that not only should slavery be abolished, but that black Americans should be given a stake in the South's future through the confiscation of land from planters to be distributed to the freedmen. His plans went too far for the Moderate Republicans and were not enacted.
After the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in April 1865, Stevens came into conflict with the new president, Johnson, who sought rapid restoration of the seceded states without guarantees for freedmen. The difference in views caused an ongoing battle between Johnson and Congress, with Stevens leading the Radical Republicans. After gains in the 1866 election, the radicals took control of Reconstruction away from Johnson. Stevens's last great battle was to secure in the House articles of impeachment against Johnson, acting as a House manager in the impeachment trial, though the Senate did not convict the President.
Historiographical views of Stevens have dramatically shifted over the years, from the early 20th-century view of Stevens as reckless and motivated by hatred of the white South to the perspective of the neoabolitionists of the 1950s and afterward, who lauded him for his commitment to equality.
Early life and education[edit]
Stevens was born in Danville, Vermont, on April 4, 1792. He was the second of four children, all boys, and was named to honor the Polish general who served in the American Revolution, Thaddeus Ko ciuszko. His parents were Baptists who had emigrated from Massachusetts around 1786. Thaddeus was born with a club foot which, at the time, was seen by some as a judgment from God for secret parental sin. His older brother was born with the same condition in both feet. The boys' father, Joshua Stevens, was a farmer and cobbler who struggled to make a living in Vermont. After fathering two more sons (born without disability), Joshua abandoned the children and his wife Sarah (n e Morrill). The circumstances of his departure and his subsequent fate are uncertain; he may have died at the Battle of Oswego during the War of 1812.[1]
Sarah Stevens struggled to make a living from the farm even with the increasing aid of her sons.[2] She was determined that her sons improve themselves, and in 1807 moved the family to the neighboring town of Peacham, Vermont, where she enrolled young Thaddeus in the Caledonia Grammar School (often called the Peacham Academy). He suffered much from the taunts of his classmates for his disability. Later accounts describe him as "wilful, headstrong" with "an overwhelming burning desire to secure an education."[3]
After graduation, he enrolled at the University of Vermont, but  suspended his studies due to the federal government's appropriation of campus buildings during the War of 1812.[4] Stevens then enrolled in the sophomore class at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire. At Dartmouth, despite a stellar academic career, he was not elected to Phi Beta Kappa; this was reportedly a scarring experience for him.[5][6]
Stevens graduated from Dartmouth in 1814 and was chosen as a speaker at the commencement ceremony. Afterward, he returned to Peacham and briefly taught there. Stevens also began to read law in the office of John Mattocks. In early 1815, correspondence with a friend Samuel Merrill, a fellow Vermonter who had moved to York, Pennsylvania to become preceptor of the York Academy, led to an offer for Stevens to join the academy faculty. He moved to York to teach, and continued the study of law in the offices of David Cossett.[7]
Pennsylvania attorney and politician[edit]
Gettysburg lawyer[edit]
In Pennsylvania, Stevens taught school at the York Academy and continued his studies for the bar.[8] Local lawyers passed a resolution barring from membership anyone who had "followed any other profession while preparing for admission,"[4] a restriction likely aimed at Stevens. Undaunted, he reportedly (according to a story he often retold) presented himself and four bottles of Madeira wine to the examining board in nearby Harford County, Maryland. Few questions were asked, but much wine was drunk. He left Bel Air the next morning with a certificate allowing him, through reciprocity, to practice law anywhere. Stevens then went to Gettysburg, the seat of Adams County,[8][9] where he opened an office in September 1816.[10]
Stevens knew no one in Gettysburg and initially had little success as a lawyer. His breakthrough, in mid-1817, was a case in which a farmer who had been jailed for debt later killed one of the constables who had arrested him. His defense, although unsuccessful, impressed the local people, and he never lacked for business thereafter.[10] In his legal career, he demonstrated the propensity for sarcasm that would later mark him as a politician, once telling a judge who accused him of manifesting contempt of court, "Sir, I am doing my best to conceal it."[11]
Many who memorialized Stevens after his death in 1868 agreed on his talent as a lawyer. He was involved in the first ten cases to reach the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania from Adams County after he began his practice and won nine. One case he later wished he had not won was Butler v. Delaplaine, in which he successfully reclaimed a slave on behalf of her owner.[12]
In Gettysburg, Stevens also began his involvement in politics, serving six one-year terms on the borough council between 1822 and 1831 and becoming its president.[13]  He took the profits from his practice and invested them in Gettysburg real estate, becoming the largest landowner in the community by 1825, and had an interest in several iron furnaces outside town.[12] In addition to assets, he acquired enemies; after the death of a pregnant black woman in Gettysburg, there were anonymous letter-writers to newspapers, hinting that Stevens was culpable. The rumors dogged him for years;[14] when one newspaper opposed to Stevens printed a letter in 1831 naming him as the killer, he successfully sued for libel.[15]
Anti-Masonry[edit]
Stevens's first political cause was Anti-Masonry, which became widespread in 1826 after the disappearance and death of William Morgan, a Mason in Upstate New York; fellow Masons were presumed to be the killers of Morgan because they disapproved of his publishing a book revealing the order's secret rites. Since the leading candidate in opposition to President John Quincy Adams was General Andrew Jackson, a Mason who mocked opponents of the order, Anti-Masonry became closely associated with opposition to Jackson and his Jacksonian democracy policies once he was elected president in 1828.[16]
Jackson's adherents were from the old Democratic-Republican Party and eventually became known as the Democrats. Stevens had been told by a fellow attorney (and future president) James Buchanan that he could advance politically if he joined them. However, Stevens could not support Jackson, out of principle.[17] For Stevens, Anti-Masonry became one means of opposing Jackson; he may also have had personal reasons as the Masons barred "cripples" from joining. Stevens took to Anti-Masonry with enthusiasm and remained loyal to it after most Pennsylvanians had dropped the cause. His biographer, Hans Trefousse, suggested that another reason for Stevens's virulence was an attack of disease in the late 1820s that cost him his hair (he thereafter wore wigs, often ill-fitting), and "the unwelcome illness may well have contributed to his unreasonable fanaticism concerning the Masons."[18]
By 1829, Anti-Masonry had evolved into a political party, the Anti-Masonic Party, that proved popular in rural central Pennsylvania. Stevens quickly became prominent in the movement, attending the party's first two national conventions in 1830 and 1831. At the latter, he pressed the candidacy of Supreme Court Justice John McLean as the party's presidential candidate, but in vain as the nomination fell to former Attorney General William Wirt. Jackson was easily reelected; the crushing defeat (Wirt won only Vermont) caused the party to disappear in most places, though it remained powerful in Pennsylvania for several years.[19][20]
In September 1833, Stevens was elected to a one-year term in the Pennsylvania House of Representatives as an Anti-Mason. Once in the capital Harrisburg, he sought to have the body establish a committee to investigate Masonry. Stevens gained attention far beyond Pennsylvania for his oratory against Masonry and quickly became an expert in legislative maneuvers. In 1835, a split among the Democrats put the Anti-Masons in control of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, the legislature. Granted subpoena powers, Stevens summoned leading state politicians who were Masons, including Governor George Wolf. The witnesses invoked their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, and when Stevens verbally abused one of them, it created a backlash that caused his own party to end the investigation. The fracas cost Stevens reelection in 1836, and the issue of Anti-Masonry died in Pennsylvania. Nevertheless, Stevens remained an opponent of the order for the rest of his life.[21][22]
Crusader for education[edit]
Beginning with his early years in Gettysburg, Stevens advanced the cause of universal education. At the time, no state outside New England had free public education for all. In Pennsylvania, there was free education in Philadelphia, but elsewhere in the state, those wishing to have their children educated without paying tuition had to swear a pauper's oath. Stevens opened his extensive private library to the public and gave up his presidency of the borough council, believing his service on the school board more important.[23] In 1825, he was elected by the voters of Adams County as a trustee of Gettysburg Academy. As the school was failing, Stevens got county voters to agree to pay its debt, allowing it to be sold as a Lutheran seminary. It was granted the right to award college degrees in 1831 as Pennsylvania College, and in 1921 became Gettysburg College. Stevens gave the school land upon which a building could be raised and served as a trustee for many years.[24][25][26]
 Portrait of Stevens by Jacob Eichholtz now owned by Gettysburg College
In April 1834, Stevens, working with Governor Wolf, guided an act through the legislature to allow districts across the state to vote on whether to have public schools and the taxes to pay for them. Gettysburg's district voted in favor and also elected Stevens as a school director, where he served until 1839. Tens of thousands of voters signed petitions urging a reversal. The result was a repeal bill that easily passed the Pennsylvania Senate. It was widely believed the bill would also pass the House and be enacted despite opposition by Stevens. When he rose to speak on April 11, 1835, he defended the new educational system, stating that it would actually save money, and demonstrated how. He stated that opponents were seeking to separate the poor into a lower caste than themselves and accused the rich of greed and failure to empathize with the poor. Stevens argued, "Build not your monuments of brass or marble, but make them of everliving mind!"[27][28] The repeal bill was defeated; Stevens was given wide credit. Trefousse suggested that the victory was not due to Stevens's eloquence, but due to his influence, combined with that of Governor Wolf.[29]
Political change; move to Lancaster[edit]
Further information: William Henry Harrison 1840 presidential campaign
In 1838, Stevens ran again for the legislature. He hoped that if the remaining Anti-Masons and the emerging Whig Party gained a majority, he could be elected to the United States Senate, whose members until 1913 were chosen by state legislatures. A campaign, dirty even by the standards of the times, followed. The result was a Democrat elected as governor, Whig control of the state Senate, and the state House in dispute, with several seats from Philadelphia in question. Stevens won his seat in Adams County, and sought to have those Philadelphia Democrats excluded, which would create a Whig majority that could elect a Speaker and himself as a senator. Amid rioting in Harrisburg  later known as the "Buckshot War"  Stevens's ploy backfired, with the Democrats taking control of the House. Stevens remained in the legislature for most years through 1842 but the episode cost him much of his political influence. The Whigs blamed him for the debacle and were increasingly unwilling to give leadership to someone who had not yet joined their party. Nevertheless, he supported the pro-business and pro-development Whig stances.[30] He campaigned for the Whig candidate in the 1840 presidential election, former general William Henry Harrison. Though Stevens later alleged that Harrison had promised him a Cabinet position if elected, he received none, and any influence ended when Harrison died after a month in office, to be succeeded by John Tyler, a southerner hostile to Stevens's stances on slavery.[30][31]
Although Stevens was the most successful lawyer in Gettysburg, he had accrued debt due to his business interests. Refusing to take advantage of the bankruptcy laws, he felt he needed to move to a larger municipality to gain the money to pay his obligations. In 1842, Stevens moved his home and practice to Lancaster. He knew Lancaster County was an Anti-Mason and Whig stronghold, which ensured that he retained a political base. Within a short period, he was earning more than any other Lancaster attorney; by 1848, he had reduced his debts to $30,000 and paid them off soon after. It was in Lancaster that he engaged the services of Lydia Hamilton Smith, a housekeeper, whose racial makeup was described as mulatto, and who remained with him the rest of his life.[32]
Abolitionist and prewar congressman[edit]
Evolution of views[edit]
In the 1830s, few sought the immediate eradication of slavery. The abolitionist movement was young and only recently had figures such as William Lloyd Garrison taken on the fight.[33] Stevens's reason for adopting slavery as a cause has been disputed among his recent biographers. Richard N. Current, in 1942, suggested it was out of ambition; Fawn Brodie, in her controversial 1959 psychobiography of Stevens, suggested it was out of identification with the downtrodden, based on his handicap.[34] Trefousse, in his 1997 work, also suggested that Stevens's feelings towards the downtrodden were a factor, combined with remorse over the Butler case, but that ambition was unlikely to have been a significant motivator, as Stevens's fervor in the anti-slavery cause inhibited his career.[35]
 Stevens's home on Queen Street, Lancaster, Pennsylvania
At the 1837 Pennsylvania constitutional convention, Stevens, who was a delegate, fought against the disenfranchisement of African-Americans (see Black suffrage in Pennsylvania).[36] According to historian Eric Foner, "When Stevens refused to sign the 1837 constitution because of its voting provision, he announced his commitment to a non-racial definition of American citizenship to which he would adhere for the remainder of his life."[37] After he moved to Lancaster, a city not far from the Mason Dixon line, he became active in the Underground Railroad, not only defending people believed to be fugitive slaves, but coordinating the movements of those seeking freedom.[38] A 2003 renovation at his former home in Lancaster disclosed that there was a hidden cistern, attached to the main building by a concealed tunnel, in which escaped slaves hid.[39][40]
Until the outbreak of the American Civil War, Stevens took the public position that he supported slavery's end and opposed its expansion. Nevertheless, he would not seek to disturb it in the states where it existed, because the Constitution protected their internal affairs from federal interference.[33] He also supported slave-owning Whig candidates for president: Henry Clay in 1844[41] and Zachary Taylor in 1848.[42]
First tenure in Congress[edit]
In 1848, Stevens ran for election to Congress from Pennsylvania's 8th congressional district. There was opposition to him at the Whig convention. Some delegates felt that because Stevens had been late to join the party, he should not receive the nomination; others disliked his stance on slavery. He narrowly won the nomination. In a strong year for Whigs nationally, Taylor was chosen as president and Stevens was elected to Congress.[43]
It is my purpose nowhere in these remarks to make personal reproaches; I entertain no ill-will toward any human being, nor any brute, that I know of, not even the [Democratic] skunk across the way to which I referred. Least of all would I reproach the South. I honor her courage and fidelity. Even in a bad, a wicked cause, she shows a united front. All her sons are faithful to the cause of human bondage, because it is their cause. But the North  the poor, timid, mercenary, driveling North  has no such united defenders of her cause, although it is the cause of human liberty ... She is offered up a sacrifice to propitiate southern tyranny  to conciliate southern treason.
 Stevens in the House debate over theFugitive Slave Act, June 10, 1850[44]
When the 31st United States Congress convened in December 1849, Stevens took his seat, joining other newly elected slavery opponents such as Salmon P. Chase. Stevens spoke out against the Compromise of 1850, crafted by Kentucky Senator Henry Clay, that gave victories to both North and South, but would allow for some of the territories of the United States recently gained from Mexico to become slave states.[45] As the debates continued, in June he said, "This word 'compromise' when applied to human rights and constitutional rights I abhor."[46] Nevertheless, the pieces of legislation that made up the Compromise passed, including the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, which Stevens found particularly offensive.[47] Although many Americans hoped that the Compromise would bring sectional peace, Stevens warned that it would be "the fruitful mother of future rebellion, disunion, and civil war."[48]
Stevens was easily renominated and reelected in 1850, even though his stance caused him problems among pro-Compromise Whigs.[49] In 1851, Stevens was one of the defense lawyers in the trial of 38 African-Americans and three others in federal court in Philadelphia on treason charges. The defendants had been implicated in the so-called Christiana Riot: an attempt to enforce a Fugitive Slave Act warrant had resulted in the killing of the slaveowner. Justice Robert Grier of the U.S. Supreme Court, as circuit justice, tried the case, and instructed the jury to acquit because though the defendants might be guilty of murder or riot, they were not charged with that and were not guilty of treason. The well-publicized incident (and others like it) increased polarization over the issue of slavery, and made Stevens a prominent face of Northern abolitionism.[49][50]
Despite this trend, Stevens suffered political problems. He left the Whig caucus in December 1851, when his colleagues would not join him in seeking the repeal of the offensive elements of the Compromise. Nevertheless, he supported its unsuccessful 1852 candidate for president, General Winfield Scott. His political opposition, and local dislike of his stance on slavery and participation in the treason trial, made him unlikely to win renomination, and he sought only to pick his successor. His choice was defeated for the Whig nomination.[51]
Know-Nothing and Republican[edit]
Out of office, Stevens concentrated on the practice of law in Lancaster, remaining one of the leading attorneys in the state. He stayed active in politics, and in 1854, to gain more votes for the anti-slavery movement, he joined the nativist Know Nothing Party. The members were pledged not to speak of party deliberations (thus, they knew nothing), and Stevens was attacked for his membership in a group with similar secrecy rules as the Masons. In 1855, Stevens joined the new Republican Party. Other former Whigs who were anti-slavery joined as well, including William H. Seward of New York, Charles E. Sumner of Massachusetts, and Abraham Lincoln of Illinois.[52]
Stevens was a delegate to the 1856 Republican National Convention, where he supported Justice McLean, as he had in 1832. However, the convention nominated John C. Fr mont, whom Stevens actively supported in the race against his fellow Lancastrian, the Democratic candidate James Buchanan. Nonetheless, Pennsylvania helped elect Buchanan.[53] Stevens returned to the practice of law, but in 1858, with the President and his party unpopular and the nation torn by such controversies as the Dred Scott decision, Stevens saw an opportunity to return to Congress. As the Republican nominee, he was easily elected. Democratic papers were appalled. One banner headline read, "Niggerism Triumphant."[54]
1860 election; secession crisis[edit]
Stevens took his seat in the 36th United States Congress in December 1859, only days after the hanging of John Brown, who had attacked the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry hoping to cause a slave insurrection. Stevens opposed Brown's violent actions at the time, though later, he was more approving. Sectional tensions spilled over into the House, which proved unable to elect a Speaker of the United States House for eight weeks. Stevens was active in the bitter flow of invective from both sides; at one point, Mississippi Congressman William Barksdale drew a knife on him, though no blood was spilled.[55]
 Southern view of the proposed compromises of 1860 and 1861, with "Dr. North" (Stevens) proposing to cut the South's legs off using a constitutional amendment. Stevens actually opposed such measures.
With the Democrats unable to agree on a single presidential candidate, the 1860 Republican National Convention in Chicago became crucial, as the nominee would be in a favorable position to become president. Prominent figures in the party, such as Seward and Lincoln, sought the nomination. Stevens continued to support the 75-year-old Justice McLean. Beginning on the second ballot, most Pennsylvania delegates supported Lincoln, helping to win him the nomination. As the Democrats put up no candidate in his district, Stevens was assured of reelection to the House and campaigned for Lincoln in Pennsylvania. Lincoln won a majority in the Electoral College. The President-elect's known opposition to the expansion of slavery caused immediate talk of secession in the southern states, a threat that Stevens had downplayed during the campaign.[56][57]
Congress convened in December 1860, with several of the southern states already pledging to secede. Stevens was unyielding in opposing efforts to appease the southerners, such as the Crittenden Compromise, which would have enshrined slavery as beyond constitutional amendment.[58] He stated, in a remark widely quoted both North and South, that rather than offer concessions because of Lincoln's election, he would see "this Government crumble into a thousand atoms," and that the forces of the United States would crush any rebellion.[59] Despite Stevens's protests, the lame-duck Buchanan administration did little in response to the secession votes, allowing most federal resources in the South to fall into rebel hands. Even in the abolition movement, many were content to let it be so and let the South go its own way. Stevens disagreed, and the congressman was "undoubtedly pleased" by Lincoln's statement in his first inaugural address on March 4, 1861, that he would "hold, occupy and possess the property and places belonging to the Government."[60][61]
American Civil War[edit]
Slavery[edit]
When the war began in April 1861, Stevens argued that the Confederates were revolutionaries to be crushed by force. He also believed that the Confederacy had placed itself beyond the protection of the U.S. Constitution by making war, and that in a reconstituted United States, slavery should have no place. Speaker Galusha Grow, whose views placed him with Stevens among the members becoming known as the Radical Republicans (for their position on slavery, as opposed to the liberal or moderate Republicans), appointed him as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. This position gave him power over the House's agenda.[62]
Abolition  Yes! abolish everything on the face of the earth, but this Union; free every slave  slay every traitor  burn every rebel mansion if these things are necessary to preserve this temple of freedom to the world and to our posterity.
 Stevens accepting renominationfor his congressional seat,September 1, 1862[63]
In July 1861, Stevens secured the passage of an act to confiscate the property, including slaves, of certain rebels. In November 1861, Stevens introduced a resolution to emancipate all slaves; it was defeated.[39] However, legislation did pass that abolished slavery in the District of Columbia and in the territories. By March 1862, to Stevens's exasperation, the most Lincoln had publicly supported was gradual emancipation in the Border states, with the slave owners compensated by the federal government.[64]
Stevens and other radicals were frustrated at how slow Lincoln was to adopt their policies for emancipation; according to Brodie, "Lincoln seldom succeeded in matching Stevens's pace, though both were marching towards the same bright horizon."[65] In April 1862, Stevens wrote to a friend, "As for future hopes, they are poor as Lincoln is nobody."[66] The radicals aggressively pushed the issue, provoking Lincoln to comment: "Stevens, Sumner and [Massachusetts Senator Henry] Wilson simply haunt me with their importunities for a Proclamation of Emancipation. Wherever I go and whatever way I turn, they are on my tail, and still in my heart, I have the deep conviction that the hour [to issue one] has not yet come."[67] The President stated that if it came to a showdown between the radicals and their enemies, he would have to side with Stevens and his fellows, and deemed them "the unhandiest devils in the world to deal with" but "with their faces ... set Zionwards."[68] Although Lincoln composed his proclamation in June and July 1862, the secret was held within his Cabinet, and the President turned aside radical pleadings to issue one until after the Union victory at the Battle of Antietam in September. Stevens quickly adopted the Emancipation Proclamation for use in his successful re-election campaign.[69] When Congress returned in December, Stevens maintained his criticism of Lincoln's policies, calling them "flagrant usurpations, deserving the condemnation of the community."[70] Stevens generally opposed Lincoln's plans to colonize freed slaves abroad, though sometimes he supported emigration proposals for political reasons.[71] Stevens wrote to a nephew in June 1863 saying, "The slaves ought to be incited to insurrection and give the rebels a taste of real civil war."[72]
... the adoption of the measures I advocated at the outset of the war, the arming of the negroes, the slaves of the rebels, is the only way left on earth in which these rebels can be exterminated. They will find that they must treat those States now outside of the Union as conquered provinces and settle them with new men, and drive the present rebels as exiles from this country. ... They have such determination, energy, and endurance, that nothing but actual extermination or exile or starvation will ever induce them to surrender to this Government.
 Thaddeus Stevens, U.S. House of Representatives,January 8, 1863[73]
During the Confederate incursion into the North in mid-1863 that culminated in the Battle of Gettysburg, Confederates twice sent parties to Stevens's Caledonia Forge. Stevens, who had been there supervising operations, was hastened away by his workers against his will. General Jubal Early looted and vandalized the Forge, causing a loss to Stevens of about $80,000. Early said that the North had done the same to southern figures and that Stevens was well known for his vindictiveness towards the South.[74] Asked if he would have taken the congressman to Libby Prison in Richmond, Early replied that he would have hanged Stevens and divided his bones among the Confederate states.[75]
Stevens pushed Congress to pass a constitutional amendment abolishing slavery. The Emancipation Proclamation was a wartime measure, did not apply to all slaves, and might be reversed by peacetime courts; an amendment would be slavery's end.[39] The Thirteenth Amendment[a]  which outlawed slavery and involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime  easily passed the Senate but failed in the House in June; fears that it might not pass delayed a renewed attempt there.[77] Lincoln campaigned aggressively for the amendment after his re-election in 1864, and Stevens described his December annual message to Congress as "the most important and best message that has been communicated to Congress for the last 60 years".[78] Stevens closed the debate on the amendment on January 13, 1865. Illinois Representative Isaac Arnold wrote: "distinguished soldiers and citizens filled every available seat, to hear the eloquent old man speak on a measure that was to consummate the warfare of forty years against slavery."[79]
The amendment passed narrowly after heavy pressure exerted by Lincoln himself, along with offers of political appointments from the "Seward lobby". Democrats made allegations of bribery;[80][81] Stevens stated: "the greatest measure of the nineteenth century was passed by corruption, aided and abetted by the purest man in America."[82] The amendment was declared ratified on December 18, 1865. Stevens continued to push for a broad interpretation of it that included economic justice in addition to the formal end of slavery.[83][84]
After passing the Thirteenth Amendment, Congress debated the economic rights of the freedmen. Urged on by Stevens,[50] it voted to authorize the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands, with a mandate (though no funding) to set up schools and to distribute "not more than forty acres" [16 ha] of confiscated Confederate land to each family of freed slaves.[85]
Financing the war[edit]
Stevens worked closely with Lincoln administration officials on legislation to finance the war. Within a day of his appointment as Ways and Means chairman, he had reported a bill for a war loan. Legislation to pay the soldiers Lincoln had already called into service and to allow the administration to borrow to prosecute the war quickly followed. These acts and more were pushed through the House by Stevens. To defeat the delaying tactics of Copperhead opponents, he had the House set debate limits as short as half a minute.[86]
Stevens played a major part in the passage of the Legal Tender Act of 1862 when for the first time, the United States issued currency backed only by its own credit, not by gold or silver. Early makeshifts to finance the war, such as war bonds, had failed as it became clear the war would not be short.[87] In 1863, Stevens aided the passage of the National Banking Act, which required that banks limit their currency issues to the number of federal bonds that they were required to hold. The system endured for half a century until supplanted by the Federal Reserve System in 1913.[88]
Although the Legal Tender legislation allowed for the payment of government obligations in paper money, Stevens was unable to get the Senate to agree that interest on the national debt should be paid with greenbacks.[89] As the value of paper money dropped, Stevens railed against gold speculators, and in June 1864, after consultation with Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase, proposed what became known as the Gold Bill  to abolish the gold market by forbidding its sale by brokers or for future delivery. It passed Congress in June; the chaos caused by the lack of an organized gold market caused the value of paper to drop even faster. Under heavy pressure from the business community, Congress repealed the bill on July 1, twelve days after its passage.[90] Stevens was unrepentant even as the value of paper currency recovered in late 1864 amid the expectation of Union victory, proposing legislation to make paying a premium in greenbacks for an amount in gold coin a criminal offense. It did not pass.[91]
Like most Pennsylvania politicians of both parties, Stevens was a major proponent of tariffs, which increased from 19% to 48% from fiscal 1861 to fiscal 1865.[92][93] According to activist Ida Tarbell in "The Tariff in Our Times:" [Import] duties were never too high for [Stevens], particularly for iron, for he was a manufacturer and it was often said in Pennsylvania that the duties he advocated in no way represented the large iron interests of the state, but were hoisted to cover the needs of his own ... badly managed works."[94]
Reconstruction[edit]
Main article: Reconstruction Era
Problem of reconstructing the South[edit]
As Congress debated how the U.S. would be organized after the war, the status of freed slaves and former Confederates remained undetermined.[95][96] Stevens stated that what was needed was a "radical reorganization of southern institutions, habits, and manners."[97] Stevens, Sumner, and other radicals argued that the southern states should be treated like conquered provinces without constitutional rights. Lincoln, on the contrary, said that only individuals, not states, had rebelled.[98] In July 1864, Stevens pushed Lincoln to sign the Wade Davis Bill, which required at least half of prewar voters to sign an oath of loyalty for a state to gain readmission. Lincoln, who advocated his more lenient ten percent plan, pocket vetoed it.[99]
Stevens reluctantly voted for Lincoln at the convention of the National Union Party, a coalition of Republicans and War Democrats. He would have preferred to vote for the sitting vice president, Hannibal Hamlin, as Lincoln's running mate in 1864. However, his delegation voted to cast the state's ballots for the administration's favored candidate, Military Governor of Tennessee Andrew Johnson, a War Democrat who had been a Tennessee senator and elected governor. Stevens was disgusted at Johnson's nomination, complaining, "can't you get a candidate for Vice-President without going down into a damned rebel province for one?"[100] Stevens campaigned for the Lincoln Johnson ticket; it was elected, as was Stevens for another term in the House.[101] When in January 1865 Congress learned that Lincoln had attempted peace talks with Confederate leaders, an outraged Stevens declared that if the American electorate could vote again, they would elect General Benjamin Butler instead of Lincoln.[102]
Presidential Reconstruction[edit]
Before leaving town after Congress adjourned in March 1865, Stevens privately urged Lincoln to press the South hard militarily, though the war was ending. Lincoln replied, "Stevens, this is a pretty big hog we are trying to catch and to hold when we catch him. We must take care that he does not slip away from us."[103] Never to see Lincoln again, Stevens left with "a homely metaphor but no real certainty of having left as much as a thumbprint on Lincoln's policy."[104] On the evening of April 14, 1865, Lincoln was assassinated by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth. Stevens did not attend the ceremonies when Lincoln's funeral train stopped in Lancaster; he was said to be ill. Trefousse speculated he might have avoided the rites for other reasons. According to Lincoln biographer Carl Sandburg, Stevens stood at a railroad bridge and lifted his hat.[105]
In May 1865, Andrew Johnson began what came to be known as "Presidential Reconstruction": recognizing a provisional government of Virginia led by Francis Harrison Pierpont, calling for other former rebel states to organize constitutional conventions, declaring amnesty for many southerners, and issuing individual pardons to even more. Johnson did not push the states to protect the rights of freed slaves, and immediately began to counteract the land reform policies of the Freedmen's Bureau. These actions outraged Stevens and others who took his view. The radicals saw that freedmen in the South risked losing the economic and political liberty necessary to sustain emancipation from slavery. They began to call for universal male suffrage and continued their demands for land reform.[106][107]
Stevens wrote to Johnson that his policies were gravely damaging the country and that he should call a special session of Congress, which was not scheduled to meet until December. When his communications were ignored, Stevens began to discuss with other radicals how to prevail over Johnson when the two houses convened. Congress has the constitutional power to judge whether those seeking to be its members are properly elected; Stevens urged that no senators or representatives from the South be seated.[108] He argued that the states should not be readmitted as thereafter Congress would lack the power to force race reform.[109]
In September, Stevens gave a widely reprinted speech in Lancaster in which he set forth what he wanted for the South. He proposed that the government confiscate the estates of the largest 70,000 landholders there, those who owned more than 200 acres (81 ha). Much of this property he wanted distributed in plots of 40 acres (16 ha) to the freedmen; other lands would go to reward loyalists both North and South, or to meet government obligations. He warned that under the President's plan, the southern states would send rebels to Congress who would join with northern Democrats and Johnson to govern the nation and perhaps undo emancipation.[110]
Through late 1865, the southern states held white-only balloting and, in congressional elections, chose many former rebels, most prominently Confederate Vice President Alexander Stephens, voted as senator by the Georgia Legislature. Violence against African-Americans was common and unpunished in the South; the new legislatures enacted Black Codes, depriving the freedmen of most civil rights. These actions, seen as provocative in the North, both privately dismayed Johnson and helped turn northern public opinion against the president.[108] Stevens proclaimed that "This is not a 'white man's Government'! ... To say so is political blasphemy, for it violates the fundamental principles of our gospel of liberty."[111]
Congressional Reconstruction[edit]
 Stevens in a thoughtful pose
By this time, Stevens was past age seventy and in poor health; he was carried everywhere in a special chair. When Congress convened in early December 1865, Stevens made arrangements with the Clerk of the House that when the roll was called, the names of the Southern electees be omitted. The Senate also excluded Southern claimants. A new congressman, Ohio's Rutherford B. Hayes, described Stevens: "He is radical throughout, except, I am told, he don't [recte doesn't] believe in hanging. He is [a] leader."[112]
As the responsibilities of the Ways and Means chairman had been divided, Stevens took the post of Chairman of the House Committee on Appropriations, retaining control over the House's agenda.[113] Stevens focused on legislation that would secure the freedom promised by the newly ratified Thirteenth Amendment.[114] He proposed and then co-chaired the Joint Committee on Reconstruction with Maine Senator William Pitt Fessenden.[115] This body, also called the Committee of Fifteen, investigated conditions in the South. It heard not only of the violence against African-Americans but against Union loyalists and against what southerners termed "carpetbaggers". Northerners who had journeyed south after the restoration of peace. Stevens declared: that "our loyal brethren at the South, whether they be black or white," required urgent protection "from the barbarians who are now daily murdering them".[114]
The Committee of Fifteen began to consider what would become the Fourteenth Amendment. Stevens had begun drafting versions in December 1865, before the Committee had even formed.[116] In January 1866, a subcommittee including Stevens and John Bingham proposed two amendments: one giving Congress the unqualified power to secure equal rights, privileges, and protections for all citizens; the other explicitly annulling all racially discriminatory laws.[117] Stevens believed that the Declaration of Independence and Organic Acts already bound the federal government to these principles, but that an amendment was necessary to allow enforcement against discrimination at the state level.[118] The resolution providing for what would become the Fourteenth Amendment was watered down in Congress; during the closing debate, Stevens said these changes had shattered his lifelong dream in equality for all Americans.[119][120] Nevertheless, stating that he lived among men, not angels, he supported the passage of the compromise amendment.[121] Still, Stevens told the House: "Forty acres of land and a hut would be more valuable to [the African-American] than the immediate right to vote."[122]
 Based on ill-considered exchanges between Johnson and hecklers during the Swing Around the Circle, this Thomas Nast cartoon excerpt shows Johnson delivering a pardon to Davis as Stevens and Wendell Phillips hang in the background.
When Illinois Senator Lyman Trumbull introduced legislation to reauthorize and expand the Freedmen's Bureau, Stevens called the bill a "robbery" because it did not include sufficient provisions for land reform or protect the property of refugees given them by the military occupation of the South.[123] Johnson vetoed the bill anyway, calling the Freedmen's Bureau unconstitutional, and decrying its cost: Congress had never purchased land, established schools, or provided financial help for "our own people."[124][125] Congress was unable to override Johnson's veto in February, but five months later passed a similar bill. Stevens criticized the passage of the Southern Homestead Act of 1866, arguing that the low-quality land it made available would not drive real economic growth for black families.[123]
Congress overrode a Johnson veto to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1866 (also introduced by Trumbull), granting African-Americans citizenship and equality before the law and forbidding any action by a state to the contrary. Johnson made the gap between him and Congress wider when he accused Stevens, Sumner, and Wendell Phillips of trying to destroy the government.[126]
After Congress adjourned in July, the campaigning for the fall elections began. Johnson embarked on a trip by rail, dubbed the "Swing Around the Circle" that won him few supporters; his arguments with hecklers were deemed undignified. He attacked Stevens and other radicals during this tour. Stevens campaigned for firm measures against the South, his hand strengthened by violence in Memphis and New Orleans, where African-Americans and white Unionists had been attacked by mobs, including the police. Stevens was returned to Congress by his constituents; Republicans would have a two-thirds majority in both houses in the next Congress.[127]
Radical Reconstruction[edit]
In January 1867, Stevens introduced legislation to divide the South into five districts, each commanded by an army general empowered to override civil authorities. These military officers were to supervise elections with all males of whatever race, entitled to vote, except for those who could not take an oath of past loyalty  most white Southerners could not. The states were to write new constitutions (subject to approval by Congress) and hold elections for state officials. Only if a state ratified the Fourteenth Amendment would its delegation be seated in Congress.[128] The system gave power to a Republican coalition of freedmen (mobilized by the Union League), carpetbaggers, and co-operative Southerners (the last dubbed scalawags by indignant ex-rebels) in most southern states.[129] These states ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, which became part of the Constitution in mid-1868.[130]
Stevens introduced a Tenure of Office Act, restricting Johnson from firing officials who had received Senate confirmation without getting that body's consent. The Tenure of Office Act was ambiguous since it could be read to protect officeholders only during the tenure of the president who appointed them, and most of the officials the radicals sought to protect had been named by Lincoln. Chief among these was Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, a radical himself.[131]
Stevens steered a bill to enfranchise African-Americans in the District of Columbia through the House. The Senate passed it in 1867, and it was enacted over Johnson's veto. Congress was downsizing the Army for peacetime; Stevens offered an amendment, which became part of the bill as enacted, to have two regiments of African-American cavalry. His solicitude for African-Americans extended to the Native American; Stevens was successful in defeating a bill to place reservations under state law, noting that the native people had often been abused by the states.[132] An expansionist, he supported the railroads.[133] He added a stipulation into the [Transcontinental] Pacific Railroad Act requiring the applicable railroads to buy iron "of American manufacture" of the top price qualities.[134] Although he sought to protect manufacturers with high tariffs, he also sought unsuccessfully to get a bill passed to protect labor with an eight-hour day in the District of Columbia. Stevens advocated a bill to give government workers raises; it did not pass.[135]
Impeaching President Johnson[edit]
Main articles: Efforts to impeach Andrew Johnson, Impeachment of Andrew Johnson, and Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson
See also: 1868 impeachment managers investigation and Timeline of the impeachment of Andrew Johnson
With Stevens' agreement, James Mitchell Ashley introduced a resolution on January 7, 1867 for a Judiciary Committee-run inquiry on impeachment, which passed the House.[136][137]
The 40th Congress, which convened on March 4, 1867, proved to be less aggressive in opposing Johnson than Stevens had hoped. It soon adjourned until July, though the Judiciary Committee remained to hold hearings on impeachment.[138] Stevens (who believed that impeachment was a "purely political proceeding intended as a remedy for malfeasance in office and to prevent continuance thereof"[139]) firmly supported impeachment, but others were less enthusiastic once the Senate elected Ohio's Benjamin Wade as its president pro tempore, next in line to the presidency in the absence of a vice president. Wade was a radical who supported wealth redistribution; a speech of his in Kansas so impressed Karl Marx that he mentioned it in the first German edition of Das Kapital.[140] Also a supporter of women's suffrage, Wade was widely mistrusted for his views;[141] the prospect of his succession made some advocates of Johnson's removal more hesitant. Stevens, though, strongly supported the removal of the president, and when the Judiciary Committee failed to report, tried to keep Congress in session until it did.[142] Despite his opposition to its leader, Stevens worked with the administration on matters both supported; he obtained an appropriation for the purchase of Alaska and urged Secretary of State Seward to seek other territories into which to expand .[143]
Most of Johnson's Cabinet supported him, but Secretary of War Stanton did not, and with the General of the Army, war hero Ulysses S. Grant, worked to undermine Johnson's Reconstruction policies. Johnson obeyed the laws that Congress had passed, sometimes over his veto, but often interpreted them in ways contrary to their intent. After Stanton refused Johnson's request that he resign in August 1867, Johnson suspended Stanton, as permitted by the Tenure of Office Act, and made General Grant interim Secretary of War.[144] Republicans campaigned in that year's election on the issue of African-American suffrage, but were met with a voter surge towards the Democrats, who opposed it. Although no seats at Congress were directly at stake, voters in Ohio both defeated a referendum on black suffrage and elected the Democrats to the majority in the legislature, meaning that Wade, whose term was due to expire in 1869, would not be reelected.[145]
When Congress met again, on December 7, 1867 Stevens voted for an impeachment resolution that was heavily defeated,[146] though the Judiciary Committee had voted 5 4 for impeachment.[147]
 Color print of a Harper's Weekly woodcut by Theodore R. Davis depicting Stevens making his final argument to the House during March 2, 1868 debate on the articles of impeachment
Stevens was chairman of the House Select Committee on Reconstruction,[148] which was tasked by the House on January 27, 1868 with running a second impeachment inquiry.[149][150] Only four of the nine members (three Republicans and a Democrat) had supported impeachment in December 1867.[146][148][151] On February 13, 1868, Stevens presented to the committee a report accusing Johnson of actions that intended to violate the Tenure of Office Act. The committee tabled it by a 5 4 vote.[152][153][154]
The prospects of impeachment took new life on February 21, 1868. The Senate had previously, on January 13, 1868, overturned Johnson's suspension of Stanton. Grant then resigned as Secretary of War, and Stanton reclaimed his place.[155] However, on February 21, the president ousted Stanton from his position, appointing General Lorenzo Thomas in his place  though Stanton barricaded himself in his office.[156][157] These actions caused great excitement in Washington, and in the House of Representatives, Stevens went from group to group on the floor, repeating, "Didn't I tell you so? What good did your moderation do you? If you don't kill the beast, it will kill you."[158]  On February 22, Stevens reported from the Select Committee on Reconstruction a resolution and a report opining that Johnson should be impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors.[149][159][160][161] Stevens concluded the debate on the impeachment resolution on February 24, though due to his poor health, he could not complete his speech and gave it to the Clerk to read aloud. In the speech, he accused Johnson of usurping the powers of other branches of government and ignoring the people's will. He did not deny impeachment was a political matter, but "this is not to be the temporary triumph of a political party, but is to endure in its consequence until the whole continent shall be filled with a free and untrammeled people or shall be a nest of shrinking, cowardly slaves."[162][163] The House voted 126 47 to impeach the president.[164]
 Illustration from Harper's Weeklyof Stevens (right) and John A. Bingham formally notifying the Senate of Johnson's impeachment
Stevens led the delegation of House members sent the following day to inform the Senate of the impeachment, though he had to be carried to its doors by his bearers. Elected to the committee charged with drafting articles of impeachment, his illness limited his involvement. Nevertheless, dissatisfied with the committee's proposed articles, Stevens suggested another that would become Article XI. This grounded the various accusations in statements Johnson had made denying the legitimacy of Congress due to the exclusion of the southern states and stated that Johnson had tried to disobey the Reconstruction Acts.[165] Stevens also urged Benjamin Butler to, independent of the committee, write his own impeachment article, which would ultimately be adopted as Article X.[166]
 Johnson impeachment managersSeated L-R: Benjamin Butler, Stevens, Thomas Williams, John Bingham;Standing L-R: James F. Wilson, George S. Boutwell, John A. Logan
Stevens was one of the House impeachment managers (prosecutors) elected by the House to present its case in the impeachment trial. Although Stevens was too ill to appear in the Senate on March 3, when the managers requested that Johnson be summoned (the president would appear only by his counsel or defense managers), he was there ten days later when the summons was returnable. The New York Herald described him as having a "face of corpselike color, and rigidly twitching lips ... a strange and unearthly apparition  a reclused remonstrance from the tomb ... the very embodiment of fanaticism, without a solitary leaven of justice or mercy ... the avenging Nemesis of his party  the sworn and implacable foe of the Executive of the nation."[165]
Increasingly ill, Stevens took little part in the impeachment trial, at which the leading House manager was Massachusetts Representative Benjamin F. Butler. Stevens nourished himself on the Senate floor with raw eggs and terrapin, port and brandy. He spoke only twice before making a closing argument for the House managers on April 27. As he spoke, his voice weakened, and finally, he allowed Butler to read the second half of his speech for him. Stevens focused on Article XI, taking the position that Johnson could be removed for political crimes; he need not have committed an offense against the law. The president, having sworn to faithfully execute the laws, had intentionally disobeyed the Tenure of Office Act after the Senate had refused to uphold his removal of Stanton, "and now this offspring of assassination turns upon the Senate who have ... rebuked him in a constitutional manner and bids them defiance. How can he escape the just vengeance of the law?"[167][168]
Most radicals were confident that Johnson would be convicted and removed from office. Stevens, though, was never certain of the result as Chief Justice Chase (the former Treasury Secretary) made rulings that favored the defense, and he had no great confidence Republicans would stick together. On May 11, the Senate met in secret session, and senators gave speeches explaining how they intended to vote. All Democrats were opposed, but an unexpectedly large number of Republicans also favored acquittal on some or all of the articles. Counting votes, managers realized their best chance of gaining the required two-thirds for conviction was on the Stevens-inspired Article XI, and when the Senate assembled to give its verdict, they scheduled it to be voted upon first. The suspense was broken when Kansas Senator Edmund Ross, whose position was uncertain, voted for acquittal. This meant that, with the votes of those who remained, the president would not be convicted on that article. The article failed, 35 in favor to 19 opposed. In the hope that delay would bring a different result, Republicans adjourned the Senate for ten days. Stevens was carried from the Senate in his chair  one observer described him as "black with rage and disappointment"  and when those outside clamored for the result, Stevens shouted, "The country is going to the devil!"[169][170]
Final months and death[edit]
 Stevens's grave in Lancaster
During the recess of the impeachment court, the Republicans met in convention in Chicago and nominated Grant for president. Stevens did not attend and was dismayed by the exclusion of African-American suffrage from the party platform as radical influence began to fade in the Republican Party. When the Senate returned to session, it voted down Articles II and III by the same 35 19 margin as before, and Chase declared the President acquitted. Stevens did not give up on the idea of removing Johnson; in July, he proffered several more impeachment articles (the House refused to adopt them).[171] He offered a bill to divide Texas into several parts to gain additional Republican senators to vote out Johnson. It was defeated; the Herald stated, "It is lamentable to see this old man, with one foot in the grave, pursuing the President with such vindictiveness."[172] Nevertheless, Stevens planned to revisit the question of impeachment when Congress met again in late 1868.[173]
Brodie suggested that Stevens's hatred of Johnson was the only thing keeping him from despair, aware as he was of the continued violence in the South, some of which was committed by the Ku Klux Klan. Several of the southern states had been re-admitted by this time. The murders and intimidation were aiding the Democrats there in restoring white rule. With the Republicans unwilling to embrace black suffrage in their platform and the Democrats opposed to it, Stevens feared Democratic victory in the 1868 elections might even bring back slavery. He told his fellow Pennsylvania politician, Alexander McClure, "My life has been a failure. With all this great struggle of years in Washington and the fearful sacrifice of life and treasure, I see little hope for the Republic." Stevens took pride in his role in establishing free public education in Pennsylvania.[174] When interviewed by a reporter seeking to gain his life story, Stevens replied, "I have no history. My life-long regret is that I have lived so long and so uselessly."[175] Nevertheless, in his last formal speech to the House, Stevens stated that "man still is vile. But such large steps have lately been taken in the true direction, that the patriot has a right to take courage."[176]
I repose in this quiet and secluded spot
Not from any natural preference for solitude
But, finding other Cemeteries limited as to Race
by Charter Rules
I have chosen this that I might illustrate
in my death
The Principles which I advocated
through a long life;
EQUALITY OF MAN BEFORE HIS CREATOR
 The inscription on Stevens's grave[177]
When Congress adjourned in late July, Stevens remained in Washington, too ill to return to Pennsylvania. Stevens was in pain from his stomach ailments, from swollen feet, and from dropsy. By early August, he was unable to leave the house. He still received some visitors, though, and correctly predicted to his friend and former student Simon Stevens (no relation) that Grant would win the election. On the afternoon of August 11, his doctor warned that he would probably not last through the night. His longtime housekeeper and companion, Lydia Hamilton Smith, his nephew Thaddeus, and friends gathered by him. Two black preachers came to pray by him, telling him that he had the prayers of all their people. He sucked on ice to try to soothe the pain; his last words were a request for more of it. Thaddeus Stevens died on the night of August 11, 1868, as the old day departed.[178]
President Johnson issued no statement upon the death of his enemy.[179] Newspaper reaction was generally along partisan lines, though sometimes mixed. The Detroit Post stated that "if to die crowned with noble laurels, and ... secure of [recte in] the respect of the world ... is an end worthy the ambition of a well spent life, then the veteran Radical may lie down with the noblest of the fathers to a well contented sleep."[180] The New York Times stated that Stevens had "discerned the expediency of emancipation, and urged it long before Mr. Lincoln issued his proclamation" but that after the war, "on the subject of Reconstruction, then, Mr. Stevens must be deemed the Evil Genius of the Republican Party.[181] The [Franklin, Louisiana] Planter's Banner exulted, "The prayers of the righteous have at last removed the Congressional curse! May ... the fires of his new furnace never go out!"[182]
 Stevens's casket lying in state in the Capitol Rotunda, guarded by black soldiers.
Stevens's body was conveyed from his house to the Capitol by white and black pallbearers together. Thousands of mourners, of both races, filed past his casket as he lay in state at the United States Capitol rotunda;[179][183] Stevens was the third man, after Clay and Lincoln, to receive that honor. African-American soldiers constituted the guard of honor. After a service there, his body was taken by funeral train to Lancaster, a city draped in black for the funeral. Stevens was laid to rest in Shreiner's Cemetery (today the Shreiner-Concord Cemetery); it allowed the burial of people of all races, although, at the time of Stevens's interment, only one African-American was buried there. The people of his district posthumously renominated him to Congress. They elected his former student Oliver J. Dickey to succeed him. When Congress convened in December 1868, there were several speeches in tribute to Stevens; they were afterward collected in book form.[184]
Personal life[edit]
Stevens never married, though there were rumors about his twenty-year relationship (1848 1868) with his widowed housekeeper, Lydia Hamilton Smith (1813 1884).[185][186] She was a light-skinned African-American; her husband Jacob and at least one of her sons were much darker than she was.[187]
 Lydia Hamilton Smith
It is uncertain if the Stevens-Smith relationship was romantic. The Democratic press, especially in the South, assumed so, and when he brought Mrs. Smith to Washington in 1859, she managed his household, which did nothing to stop their insinuations.[188] In the one brief surviving letter from Stevens to her, Stevens addresses her as Mrs. Lydia Smith.[189] Stevens insisted that his nieces and nephews refer to her as Mrs. Smith, deference towards an African-American servant almost unheard of at that time. They do so in surviving letters, warmly, asking Stevens to see that she comes with him next time he visits.[190]
As evidence that their relationship was sexual, Brodie pointed to an 1868 letter in which Stevens compares himself to Richard M. Johnson, vice president under Martin Van Buren, who lived openly with a series of African-American slave mistresses. Johnson was elected even though this became known during the 1836 campaign, a fact that Stevens notes, and expresses his bitterness about his inability to gain election by the legislature to the Senate, or to secure a Cabinet position.[191]
When Stevens died, Smith was at his bedside, along with his friend Simon Stevens, nephew Thaddeus Stevens Jr., two African-American nuns, and several other individuals. Under Stevens's will, Smith was allowed to choose between a lump sum of $5,000 or a $500 annual allowance; she could also take any furniture in his house.[192] With the inheritance, she purchased Stevens's house, where she had lived for many years. A Roman Catholic, she chose to be buried in a Catholic cemetery, not near Stevens, although she left money for the upkeep of his grave.[193]
Stevens had taken custody of his two young nephews, Thaddeus (often called "Thaddeus Jr.") and Alanson Joshua Stevens, after their parents died in Vermont. Alanson was sent to work at Stevens's business, Caledonia Forge; Thaddeus Jr. was expelled from Dartmouth College, though he subsequently graduated and was taken into his uncle's law practice.[194] Alanson during the Civil War rose to be commanding captain of a Pennsylvania Volunteers field artillery unit and was killed in action at Chickamauga.[195] After Alanson's death, his uncle used his influence to have Thaddeus Jr. made provost marshal of Lancaster.[196]
 Thaddeus Stevens School, also known as Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School, located at 1050 21st Street, NW in Washington, D.C. The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.
Buildings associated with Stevens and with Smith in Lancaster are being renovated by the local historical society, LancasterHistory.org.[197] In his will, Stevens made several bequests, with much of his estate to his nephew Thaddeus Jr., on condition that he refrain from alcohol. If he did not, that bequest would establish an orphanage in Lancaster open to all races and nationalities without discrimination. A legal fight over his estate ensued, and it was not until 1894 that the courts settled the matter, awarding $50,000 to found the orphanage.[192] The school today is the Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology, in Lancaster.[198]
Schools named after Stevens include Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School in Washington, D.C., founded in 1868 as the first school built for African-American children there. It was segregated for the first 86 years of its existence. In 1977, Amy Carter, daughter of President Jimmy Carter, a Georgian, was enrolled there, the first child of a sitting president to attend public school in almost 70 years.[199]
Historical and popular view[edit]
As Stevens' biographer Richard N. Current put it, "to find out what really made the man go, the historian would need the combined aid of two experts from outside the profession  a psychoanalyst and a spiritualist."[200] The historical view of Thaddeus Stevens has fluctuated widely since his death, generally in a manner inverse to that of Andrew Johnson. Early biographical works on Stevens were composed by men who knew him and reflected their viewpoints. Biographies at the turn of the twentieth century, such as those by Samuel McCall in 1899 and by James Albert Woodburn in 1913, presented Stevens favorably, as a sincere man, motivated by principle.[201] Early African-American historian W. E. B. Du Bois called Stevens "a leader of the common people" and "a stern believer in democracy, both in politics and in industry."[202] Pulitzer Prize-winning historian James Ford Rhodes argued that though Stevens had a "profound sympathy" towards the African-American, "coming straight from the heart," he also showed "virulence toward the South" and was "bitter and vindictive."[202] This view of a vengeful Stevens originated during Reconstruction and persisted well into the 20th century.[203]
 Ralph Lewis as Austin Stoneman and Mary Alden as Lydia Brown, The Birth of a Nation, 1915
With the advent of the Dunning School's view of Reconstruction after 1900, Stevens continued to be viewed negatively and generally as motivated by hatred. These historians, led by William Dunning, taught that Reconstruction had been an opportunity for radical politicians, motivated by ill will towards the South, to destroy what little of southern life and dignity the war had left.[204][205][206] Dunning himself deemed Stevens "truculent, vindictive, and cynical".[204] Lloyd Paul Stryker, who wrote a highly favorable 1929 biography of Johnson, labeled Stevens as a "horrible old man ... craftily preparing to strangle the bleeding, broken body of the South" and who thought it would be "a beautiful thing" to see "the white men, especially the white women of the South, writhing under negro domination".[206][207] In 1915, D. W. Griffith's film The Birth of a Nation (based on the 1905 novel The Clansman, by Thomas Dixon Jr.) was released, containing the influenceable and ill-advised Congressman Austin Stoneman, who resembles Stevens down to the ill-fitting wig, limp, and African-American lover, Lydia Brown. This popular treatment reinforced and reinvigorated public prejudices towards Stevens.[208][209] According to Foner, "as historians exalted the magnanimity of Lincoln and Andrew Johnson, Stevens came to symbolize Northern malice, revenge, and irrational hatred of the South."[210] The highly popular historian James Truslow Adams described Stevens as "perhaps the most despicable, malevolent, and morally deformed character who has ever risen to high power in America".[211]
Historians who penned biographies of Stevens in the late 1930s sought to move away from this perspective, seeking to rehabilitate him and his political career. Thomas F. Woodley, writing in 1937, shows admiration of Stevens, but he attributed Stevens's driving force to bitterness over his clubfoot. In his 1939 biography, Alphonse Miller found that the former congressman was motivated by a desire for justice. Both men were convinced that recent books had not treated him fairly. Richard Current's 1942 work reflected current Beardian historiography, which saw all American history, including Reconstruction, as a three-way economic struggle between the industrialists of the Northeast (represented by Stevens), the planters of the South, and the farmers of the Midwest. Current argued that Stevens was motivated in his Reconstruction policies by frustrated ambitions and a desire to use his political position to promote industrial capitalism and advance the Republican Party. He concluded that despite Stevens's egalitarian beliefs, he promoted inequality, for "none had done more than he to bring on the age of Big Business, with its concentration of wealth."[212]
With Ralph Korngold's 1955 biography of Stevens, the neoabolitionist school of historians began to consider the former congressman. These professors rejected the earlier view that those who had gone South to aid the African-Americans after the war were "rapscallion carpetbaggers" defeated by "saintly redeemers." Instead, they applauded those who had sought to end slavery and forward civil rights and castigated Johnson for obstructionism. They believed that the African-American was central to Reconstruction, and the only things wrong with the congressional program were that it did not go far enough and that it stopped too soon. Brodie's 1959 biography of Stevens was of this school. Controversial in its conclusions for being a psychobiography, it found that Stevens was a "consummate underdog who identified with the oppressed" and whose intelligence won him success, while his consciousness of his clubfoot stunted his social development.[213][214] According to Brodie, this also made him unwilling to marry a woman of his social standing.[215]
Scholars who followed Brodie continued to chip away at the idea of Stevens as a vindictive dictator who dominated Congress to get his way. In 1960, Eric McKitrick deemed Stevens "a picturesque and adroit politician, but a very limited one," whose career was "a long comic sequence of devilish schemes which, one after another, kept blowing up in his face."[216] From the mid-1970s onward, Foner argued that Stevens's role was in staking out a radical position, though events, not Stevens, caused the Republicans to support him. Michael Les Benedict in 1974 suggested that Stevens's reputation as a dictator was based more on his personality than on his influence. In 1989, Allan Bogue found that as chairman of Ways and Means, Stevens was "less than complete master" of his committee.[217]
Historian Hans Trefousse stated in a 1969 study of the Radical Republicans that Stevens's "one abiding passion was equality".[218] In 1991, he noted that Stevens "was one of the most influential representatives ever to serve in Congress. [He dominated] the House with his wit, knowledge of parliamentary law, and sheer willpower, even though he was often unable to prevail."[219] In his 1997 biography of Stevens, though, he took a position similar to McKitrick's: that Stevens was a relatively marginal figure, with his influence often limited by his extremism.[220] Trefousse believed Brodie went too far  in deeming Stevens's clubfoot responsible for so much about him and in giving full credence to the Stevens-Smith relationship  both those things cannot now be determined with certainty.[221]
Stevens was celebrated for his wit and sarcasm. When Lincoln appointed rival Pennsylvania Republican leader Simon Cameron as Secretary of War, Stevens expressed disgust at Cameron's reputed corruption. Asked whether Cameron was a thief, Stevens supposedly replied, "I don't think he would steal a red-hot stove." When Cameron objected to this characterization, Stevens said "I believe I told you he would not steal a red hot stove. I will now take that back."[222] Stevens's ill-fitting wigs were a well-known topic of discussion in Washington, but when a female admirer who apparently did not know asked for a lock of Stevens's hair as a keepsake, he removed his hairpiece, held it out to her, and "invited her to help herself."[223]
Steven Spielberg's 2012 film Lincoln, in which Stevens was portrayed by Tommy Lee Jones, brought new public interest in Stevens. Jones's character is portrayed as the central figure among the radicals, responsible in large part for the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment. Historian Matthew Pinsker notes that Stevens is referred to only four times in Doris Kearns Goodwin's 2005 book Team of Rivals, on which screenwriter Tony Kushner based the film's screenplay; other radicals were folded into the character. Stevens is depicted as unable to moderate his views for the sake of gaining passage of the amendment until after he is urged to do so by the ever-compromising Lincoln.[224] According to Aaron Bady in his article about the film and how it portrays the radicals, "he's the uncle everyone is embarrassed of, even if they love him too much to say so. He's not a leader, he's a liability, one whose shining heroic moment will be when he keeps silent about what he really believes."[225] The film depicts a Stevens-Smith sexual relationship; Pinsker comments that "it may well have been true that they were lovers, but by injecting this issue into the movie, the filmmakers risk leaving the impression for some viewers that the 'secret' reason for Stevens's egalitarianism was his desire to legitimize his romance across racial lines."[224]
On April 2, 2022, in front of the Adams County Courthouse in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, a statue of Stevens was unveiled as part of a celebration of Stevens' 230th birthday. The statue was commissioned by the Thaddeus Stevens Society and was sculpted by multidisciplinary artist Alex Paul Loza.[226]
See also[edit]
American Civil War portal
List of civil rights leaders
General bibliography[edit]
Berlin, Jean V. (April 1993). "Thaddeus Stevens and His Biographers". Pennsylvania History. University Park: Penn State University Press. 60 (2): 153 62. JSTOR 27773615.
Bond, Horace Mann. "Social and Economic Forces in Alabama Reconstruction." Journal of Negro History 23(3), July 1938. Accessed via JSTOR, 7 July 2013.
Brodie, Fawn (1966) [1959]. Thaddeus Stevens: Scourge of the South (Norton Library ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Co., Inc. ISBN 0393003310. online
Bryant-Jones, Mildred (1941). "The Political Program of Thaddeus Stevens, 1865". Phylon. Atlanta: Clark Atlanta University. 2 (2, 2nd Qtr. 1941): 147 54. doi:10.2307/271784. JSTOR 271784.
Castel, Albert E. (1979). The Presidency of Andrew Johnson. American Presidency. Lawrence: The Regents Press of Kansas. ISBN 0700601902.
Cox, LaWanda and John H. Cox. Politics, Principle, and Prejudice 1865 1866: Dilemma of Reconstruction America. London: Collier-Macmillan, 1963.
Current, Richard N. (October 1947). "Love, Hate, and Thaddeus Stevens". Pennsylvania History. University Park: Penn State University Press. 14 (4): 259 72. JSTOR 27766829. text
Donald, David Herbert (1995). Lincoln. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0684808463.
DuBois, W. E. B. Black Reconstruction: An Essay Toward a History of the Part Which Black Folk Played in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in America, 1860 1880. New York: Russell & Russell, 1935.
Epps, Garrett (2006). Democracy Reborn: The Fourteenth Amendment and the Fight for Equal Rights in post-Civil War American. New York: Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 080507130X.
Foner, Eric. Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War. Oxford University Press, 1980. ISBN 978-0199727087
Foner, Eric (2002) [1988]. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0060937165.
Gans, David H. (2011-11-16). "Perfecting the Declaration: The Text and History of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment". Constitutional Accountability Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-01-31. Retrieved 2020-11-15.
Glatfelter, Charles H. (April 1993). "Thaddeus Stevens in the Cause of Education: The Gettysburg Years". Pennsylvania History. University Park: Penn State University Press. 60 (2): 163 75. JSTOR 27773616. text
Hamilton, Howard Devon. The Legislative and Judicial History of the Thirteenth Amendment. Political Science dissertation at the University of Illinois; accepted 15 May 1950. Accessed via ProQuest, 4 July 2013.
Halbrook, Stephen P. (1998). Freedmen, the Fourteenth Amendment, and the Right to Bear Arms, 1866 1876. Westport, Ct.: Greenwood. ISBN 0275963314.
Meltzer, Milton (1967). Thaddeus Stevens and the Fight for Negro Rights. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company. ISBN 978-0690809732. online
Soifer, Aviam. "Federal Protection, Paternalism, and the Virtually Forgotten Prohibition of Voluntary Peonage". Columbia Law Review 112(7), November 2012; pp. 1607 40.
Stewart, David O. (2009). Impeached: The Trial of President Andrew Johnson and the Fight for Lincoln's Legacy. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1416547495.
Trefousse, Hans (1997). Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century Egalitarian. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0807856665. online
Andreasen, Bryon C. (Summer 2000). Online review by Hans L. Trefousse, in Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association, vol. 21, no. 2 (Summer 2000), pp. 75 81.
Tsesis, Alexander. The Thirteenth Amendment and American Freedom: A Legal History. New York University Press, 2004. ISBN 0814782760
Vorenberg, Michael.  Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment. Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 978-1139428002.
Woodley,  Thomas F. Great Leveler: The Life of Thaddeus Stevens (1937) online
Notes[edit]
Footnotes[edit]
^ James Ashley introduced the amendment in December 1863. In March 1864, Stevens proposed a version that added "forever" to the conditional prohibition and explicitly annulled the Fugitive Slave Clause in Article 4, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. The version which ultimately passed had already been crafted by the Senate Judiciary Committee.[76]
References[edit]
^ Trefousse, pp. 1 2
^ Meltzer, pp. 3 4
^ Brodie, pp. 26 27
^ a b Franklin Ellis; Samuel Evans; Everts & Peck. (1993). History of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, with Biographical Sketches of Many of its Pioneers and Prominent Men:
Chapter XXI. Salem, Ma.: The Bench and Bar of Lancaster County, OCLC 29849748, 41140187, 823869219
^ Trefousse, pp. 4 5
^ Brodie, pp. 27 29
^ Trefousse, pp. 5 7
^ a b Trefousse, p. 11
^ Meltzer, p. 14
^ a b Brodie, p. 32
^ Meltzer, p. 17
^ a b Trefousse, pp. 13 16
^ Glatfelter, p. 163
^ Trefousse, pp. 21 22
^ Brodie, pp. 42 45
^ Brodie, pp. 38 39
^ Trefousse, pp. 17, 19
^ Trefousse, pp. 25 26
^ Meltzer, pp. 27 29
^ Trefousse, pp. 26 31
^ Brodie, pp. 57 59
^ Trefousse, pp. 33 37, 42 43
^ Meltzer, pp. 31 32
^ Brodie, p. 59
^ Glatfelter, pp. 164 66
^ "College History". Gettysburg College. Archived from the original on 2013-07-18. Retrieved July 17, 2013.
^ Brodie, pp. 60 61
^ Trefousse, pp. 39 40
^ Trefousse, p. 40
^ a b Brodie, pp. 75 84
^ Trefousse, pp. 57 67
^ Trefousse, pp. 68 69
^ a b Brodie, pp. 105 06
^ Berlin, pp. 155 58
^ Trefousse, p. 46
^ Meltzer, pp. 52 53
^ Foner, p. 143
^ Trefousse, p. 73
^ a b c Carlson, Peter (February 19, 2013). "Thaddeus Stevens". Weder History Group. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ Delle, James A.; Levine, Mary Ann. "Excavations at the Thaddeus Stevens and Lydia Hamilton Smith Site, Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Archaeological Evidence for the Underground Railroad". Northeast Historical Archaeology. Buffalo: State University of New York College at Buffalo. 33 (1). Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ Brodie, p. 103
^ Meltzer, pp. 81 82
^ Trefousse, pp. 76 77
^ "Thaddeus Stevens quotes". Thaddeus Stevens Society. Retrieved October 3, 2020.
^ Trefousse, pp. 79 80
^ Trefousse, p. 81
^ Meltzer, p. 94
^ Brodie, p. 114
^ a b Brodie, pp. 116 19
^ a b Bond, p. 305.
^ Trefousse, pp. 84 86
^ Brodie, pp. 121 23
^ Brodie, pp. 129 30
^ Trefousse, pp. 95 97
^ Brodie, pp. 130 32
^ Trefousse, pp. 100 03
^ Brodie, p. 133
^ Meltzer, pp. 119 21
^ Trefousse, p. 107
^ Trefousse, p. 109
^ Brodie, p. 139
^ Trefousse, pp. 109 14
^ Thaddeus Stevens (1997). The Selected Papers of Thaddeus Stevens: January 1814   March 1865. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 322. ISBN 978-0822970453.
^ Trefousse, pp. 118 19
^ Brodie, p. 153
^ Trefousse, p. 119
^ Michael Burlingame (2012). Abraham Lincoln: A Life. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 526. ISBN 978-1421410685.
^ David Herbert Donald (2004). We Are Lincoln Men: Abraham Lincoln and His Friends. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 205. ISBN 978-0743254700.
^ Trefousse, pp. 120 21, 126 27
^ Donald 1995, p. 424
^ Brodie, pp. 161 62
^ Thaddeus Stevens, Selected Papers of Thaddeus Stevens (Pittsburg: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997), 397
^ The Congressional Globe, Volume 54, Part 1, p. 243
^ Trefousse, p. 134
^ Brodie, p. 180
^ Hamilton, pp. 5 6.
^ Trefousse, p. 140
^ Trefousse, p. 162
^ Brodie, p. 203
^ Vorenberg, pp. 182 202
^ Cox & Cox, p. 28
^ Scovel, James M. (1898). "Thaddeus Stevens". Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, A Popular Journal of General Literature. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company: 550.
^ Tsesis, pp. 41 43.
^ Brodie, p. 204
^ Bond, p. 304
^ Brodie, pp. 150 51
^ Trefousse, pp. 121 22
^ Trefousse, p. 131
^ Brodie, pp. 174 75
^ Brodie, pp. 174 77
^ Brodie, p. 178
^ Census Bureau, "Historical Statistics of the United States from Colonial Times to 1970, Part 2, 888
^ Steve Moyer, "Remarkable Radical: Thaddeus Stevens", Humanities Magazine, vol. 33, no. 6 (December 2012), Boston College, OCLC 5014069
^ Ida Tarbell, The Tariff in Our Times (New York: Macmillan, 1911), 15 OCLC 1031677916
^ Stewart, pp. 17 18
^ Bryant-Jones, p. 148
^ Stewart, p. 17
^ Bryant-Jones, pp. 148 49
^ Donald 1995, p. 510
^ Trefousse, pp. 144 47
^ Trefousse, pp. 148 49
^ William C. Harris, "The Hampton Roads Peace Conference: A Final Test of Lincoln's Presidential Leadership", Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association 21(1), Winter 2000. Retrieved on June 30, 2013.
^ Trefousse, p. 157
^ Brodie, p. 216
^ Trefousse, pp. 158 59
^ Meltzer, pp. 165 67
^ Trefousse, pp. 163 64
^ a b Brodie, pp. 225 30, 234 39
^ Brodie, p. 231
^ Brodie, pp. 231 33
^ Trefousse (2000). Thaddeus Stevens. p. 177. ISBN 978-0807864999.
^ Brodie, pp. 240 42
^ Trefousse, p. 176
^ a b Soifer, p. 1616
^ Soifer, p. 1613
^ Gans 2011, p. 10.
^ Halbrook 1998, pp. 6 8
^ Halbrook 1998, p. 34
^ Stewart, pp. 55 57
^ Du Bois, pp. 300 07.
^ Trefousse, pp. 178 79
^ Bond, p. 300
^ a b Foner (1980), pp. 139 40
^ Foner, pp. 242 47
^ Trefousse, pp. 180 81
^ Trefousse, pp. 181 86
^ Brodie, pp. 277 89
^ Foner, pp. 273 77
^ Foner, pp. 282 83, 296 99, 332 33
^ "Amendment XIV". US Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2013.
^ Brodie, pp. 296 303
^ Trefousse, p. 193
^ Trefousse, pp. 194
^ Ludwell Johnson Division and Reunion (New York: John Wiley, 1978), 110, ISBN 978-0471443506, OCLC 3415277, 1200053750
^ Trefousse, p. 195
^ Stewart, pp. 85 87
^ "Building the Case for Impeachment, December 1866 to June 1867 | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. United States House of Representatives. Retrieved 2 March 2021.
^ Trefousse, pp. 210 12
^ "The impeachment of Andrew Johnson". The Week. October 19, 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2022.
^ Foner, p. 309
^ Stewart, p. 39
^ Trefousse, pp. 217 18
^ Trefousse, pp. 213 14
^ Castel, pp. 136 37
^ Castel, pp. 146 47
^ a b "TO PASS THE IMPEACHMENT OF PRESIDENT RESOLUTION. -- House Vote #119 -- Dec 7, 1867". GovTrack.us.
^ Stewart, pp. 103 11
^ a b Perros, George P. (1960). "PRELIMINARY INVENTORY OF THE R1OC:ORDS OF THE HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON RECONSTRUCTIO~ 40TH AND 41ST CONGRESSES (1867-1871)". history.house.gov. The National Archives National Archives and Records Service General Services Administration. Retrieved 28 March 2022.
^ a b Hinds, Asher C. (4 March 1907). "HINDS' PRECEDENTS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES INCLUDING REFERENCES TO PROVISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION, THE LAWS, AND DECISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES SENATE" (PDF). United States Congress. pp. 845 847. Retrieved 2 March 2021.
^ "Journal of the United States House of Representatives (40th Congress, second session) pages 259 262". voteview.com. United States House of Representatives. 1868. Retrieved 16 March 2022.
^ "The Capital". Philadelphia Inquirer. February 10, 1868. Retrieved 22 July 2022   via Newspapers.com.
^ Stewart, pp. 136 137
^ "Staunton Spectator Tuesday, February 18, 1868". Staunton Spectator. February 18, 1868. Retrieved 22 July 2022   via Newspapers.com.
^ "Washington". Newspapers.com. Chicago Evening Post. February 13, 1868. Retrieved 22 July 2022.
^ Castel, pp. 158 59
^ Brodie, p. 334
^ Foner, p. 334
^ Trefousse, pp. 224 25
^ "Impeachment". Newspapers.com. Harrisburg Telegraph. February 22, 1868. Retrieved 22 July 2022.
^  This article incorporates public domain material from Stephen W. Stathis and David C. Huckabee. Congressional Resolutions on Presidential Impeachment: A Historical Overview (PDF). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved December 31, 2019.
^ "A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774 - 1875". memory.loc.gov. Library of Congress. Retrieved 28 March 2022.
^ Trefousse, p. 225
^ Meltzer, p. 200
^ Meltzer, p. 201
^ a b Trefousse, pp. 226 29
^ "The House Impeaches Andrew Johnson". Washington, D.C.: Office of the Historian and the Clerk of the House's Office of Art and Archives. Retrieved January 13, 2021.
^ Trefousse, pp. 231 33
^ Stewart, pp. 233 34
^ Stewart, pp. 275 79
^ Trefousse, pp. 233 34
^ Trefousse, pp. 234 35
^ Brodie, pp. 356 57
^ Trefousse, p. 235
^ Brodie, pp. 361 63
^ Brodie, p. 363
^ Brodie, p. 364
^ Brodie, p. 366
^ Trefousse, pp. 240 41
^ a b Meltzer, p. 218
^ Trefousse, p. 242
^ "Thaddeus Stevens. The New York Times, August 13, 1868. Retrieved on June 14, 2013.
^ Brodie, p. 369
^ "Lying in State or in Honor". US Architect of the Capitol (AOC). Retrieved 2018-09-01.
^ Trefousse, pp. 242 43
^ "Who was Lydia Hamilton Smith?". Stevensandsmith.org. February 6, 2010. Archived from the original on February 6, 2010. Retrieved June 22, 2013.
^ Woodley, Thomas Frederick (1969) [1937]. The Great Leveler: Thaddeus Stevens. New York: Stackpole Sons. p. 149. ISBN 978-0836951042.
^ Brodie, pp. 86 87
^ Brodie, p. 87
^ Palmer, Beverly Wilson (1997). Selected Papers of Thaddeus Stevens. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 219. ISBN 1555530788.
^ Brodie, p. 88
^ Brodie, pp. 90 91
^ a b Trefousse, p. 244
^ Brodie, p. 92
^ Trefousse, pp. 78, 90 91
^ Chadwick, Albert G. (1883). Soldiers' record of the town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont in the War of the Rebellion, 1861 5. St. Johnsbury, Vt.: C.M. Stone & Co. p. 177. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ Trefousse, p. 136
^ LancasterHistory.org. LancasterHistory.org. Retrieved on June 15, 2013.
^ "Legacy of Thaddeus Stevens". Thaddeus Stevens College. Retrieved on November 12, 2022.
^ Lelyveld, Joseph. "Well-wishers besiege Amy Carter's school". The New York Times, November 30, 1976, p. 41. Retrieved on June 17, 2013. (subscription required)
^ Current, p. 262
^ Berlin, pp. 153 54
^ a b Current, p. 260
^ Andreasen, p. 78
^ a b Berlin, p. 154
^ Brodie, p. 370
^ a b Castel, pp. 220 21
^ Brodie, pp. 369 70
^ Berlin, p. 155
^ Brodie, p. 86
^ Foner, Eric. "If you wondered about Thaddeus Stevens ...". The New York Times, December 31, 1976, p. 14. Retrieved on June 16, 2013. (subscription required)
^ James Truslow Adams. The Epic of America. Boston: Little, Brown, 1931. p. 275. OCLC 1029937995
^ Berlin, pp. 155 57
^ Berlin, p. 157
^ Castel, pp. 222, 225
^ Andreasen, pp. 76 77
^ Andreasen, p. 79
^ Andreasen, pp. 79 80
^ Andreasen, p. 75
^ Hans L. Trefousse (1991). Historical Dictionary of Reconstruction. Westport, Ct.: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 214. ISBN 0313258627.
^ Andreasen, p. 80
^ Andreasen, p. 77
^ Glass, Andrew (March 12, 2016). "Senate Votes to Seat Pennsylvania's Simon Cameron, March 13, 1857". Politico.com. Washington, D.C.
^ Korngold, Ralph (1974). Thaddeus Stevens: A Being Darkly Wise and Rudely Great. Westport, Ct.: Greenwood Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0837177335.
^ a b Pinsker, Matthew (February 14, 2013). "Warning: Artists at work". Dickinson College. Retrieved on June 15, 2013.
^ Bady, Aaron. "Lincoln Against the Radicals". Jacobin. Retrieved on June 15, 2013.
^ Stangor, Charles (2022-04-02). "Thaddeus Stevens statue unveiled in Gettysburg". Gettysburg Connection. Retrieved 2022-04-04.
Further reading[edit]
Beale, Howard K. The Critical Year: A Study of Andrew Johnson and Reconstruction (1967 [1930]), New York: F. Ungar, OCLC 491147473
Belz, Herman. Reconstructing the Union: Theory and Practice During the Civil War (1979 [1969]), Westport, Ct.: Greenwood Press, ISBN 978-0313208621, OCLC 4494724
Benedict, Michael Les. A Compromise of Principle: Congressional Republicans and Reconstruction 1863 1869 (1974), New York: Norton, ISBN 978-0393055245, OCLC 879050178
Birkner, Michael J., et al. eds. The Worlds of James Buchanan and Thaddeus Stevens: Place, Personality, and Politics in the Civil War Era (Louisiana State University Press, 2019)
Bordewich, Fergus M. How Republican Reformers Fought the Civil War, Defied Lincoln, Ended Slavery, and Remade America (2020), pro=Stevens
Bowers, Claude G. The Tragic Era: The Revolution After Lincoln (1929), Cambridge, Ma.: Houghton Mifflin, an intense attack on Stevens from Dunning School perspective.
Current, Richard N. "Love, Hate, and Thaddeus Stevens." Pennsylvania History 14.4 (1947): 259-272. online
Current, Richard Nelson. Old Thad Stevens: A Story of Ambition (1980 [1942]), Westport, Ct.: Greenwood Press, ISBN 978-0313225697, OCLC 256434391, a scholarly biography that argues Stevens was primarily concerned with enhancing his power, the power of the Republican Party, and the needs of big business, especially iron-making and railroads.
Delle, James A.; Levine, Mary Ann (2015). "'Equality of man before his creator': Thaddeus Stevens and the struggle against slavery".  In Delle, James A. (ed.). The limits of tyranny: archaeological perspectives on the struggle against new world slavery. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. pp. 121 46. ISBN 978-1621900870.
Foner, Eric. "Thaddeus Stevens, Confiscation, and Reconstruction," in Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick, eds. The Hofstadter Aegis (1974). [1]
Foner, Eric. "Thaddeus Stevens and the Imperfect Republic." Pennsylvania History, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 140 52 (April 1993) in JSTOR
Everdell, William R. "Thaddeus Stevens: The Legacy of the America Whigs" in The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. ISBN 978-0226224824, OCLC 42080394
Goldenberg, Barry M. The Unknown Architects of Civil Rights: Thaddeus Stevens, Ulysses S. Grant, and Charles Sumner. Los Angeles, CA: Critical Minds Press. (2011).
Graber, Mark A. "Subtraction by Addition?: The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments". Columbia Law Review 112(7), November 2012; pp. 1501 49.
Hoelscher, Robert J. Thaddeus Stevens as a Lancaster Politician, 1842-1868 (Lancaster County Historical Society, 1974) online.
Korngold, Ralph. Thaddeus Stevens: A Being Darkly Wise and Rudely Great (1955) online
Lawson, Elizabeth. Thaddeus Stevens. New York: International Publishers. 1942. (1962 reprint)
Levine, Bruce C. (2021). Thaddeus Stevens: Civil War Revolutionary, Fighter for Racial Justice. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1476793375.
Lee, James F. (June 10, 2021). "On the trail of Thaddeus Stevens, Pennsylvania's equal rights champion". Washington Post.
McCall, Samuel Walker. Thaddeus Stevens (1899) 369 pages; outdated biography online
Parra, Fernando. "Thaddeus Stevens: Early Civil Rights Leader." Footnotes: A Journal of History 1 (2017): 184-203. online
Pitts, Joe (April 24, 2002). Thaddeus Stevens, A Man Before His Time. Sixteenth Congressional District of Pennsylvania. United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original on January 16, 2003. Retrieved January 16, 2003.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
Shepard, Christopher, "Making No Distinctions between Rich and Poor: Thaddeus Stevens and Class Equality", Pennsylvania History, 80 (Winter 2013), 37 50. online
Simpson, Brooks D. (April 1993). "Land and the Ballot: Securing the Fruits of Emancipation?". Pennsylvania History. University Park: Penn State University Press. 60 (2): 176 88. JSTOR 27773617.
Stryker, Lloyd Paul. Andrew Johnson: A Study in Courage (1929), New York: Macmilliam, OCLC 1184750151, hostile to Stevens.
Woodburn, James Albert. The Life of Thaddeus Stevens: A Study in American Political History, Especially in the Period of the Civil War and Reconstruction. (1913) online version
Woodburn, James Albert. "The Attitude of Thaddeus Stevens Toward the Conduct of the Civil War", American Historical Review, Vol. 12, no. 3 (April 1907), pp. 567 83 in JSTOR
Zeitz, Josh. "Stevens, Thaddeus", American National Biography Online. February 2000. ISBN 978-0198606697, Unique Identifier: 4825694186
Historiography[edit]
Berlin, Jean V. "Thaddeus Stevens and His Biographers." Pennsylvania History 60.2 (1993): 153-162. online
Foner, Eric. "Thaddeus Stevens and the Imperfect Republic." Pennsylvania History 60.2 (1993): 140-152. online
Jolly, James A. "The Historical Reputation of Thaddeus Stevens," Journal of the Lancaster County Historical Society (1970) 74:33 71, online
Pickens, Donald K. "The Republican Synthesis and Thaddeus Stevens," Civil War History (1985) 31:57 73, ISSN 0009-8078, Unique Identifier: 5183399288; argues that Stevens was committed to Republicanism and capitalism in terms of self-improvement, the advance of society, equal distribution of land, and economic liberty for all; to achieve that he had to destroy slavery and the aristocracy.
Primary sources[edit]
Kendrick, Benjamin B. The Journal of the Joint Committee of Fifteen on Reconstruction. New York: Columbia University, 1914.
Palmer, Beverly Wilson and Holly Byers Ochoa, eds. The Selected Papers of Thaddeus Stevens. Two vol. (1998), 900 pages; his speeches plus letters to and from Stevens. ISBN 978-0822940524, OCLC 806290019 excerpt vol 1
online review
Stevens, Thaddeus, et al.  Report of the Joint Committee on Reconstruction, at the First Session ... by United States Congress. Joint Committee on Reconstruction, (1866) 791 pages; online edition
Memorial Addresses on the Life and Character of Thaddeus Stevens: Delivered ... by United States 40th Cong., 3d sess., 1868 1869. (1869) 84 pages; online edition
External links[edit]
Wikiquote has quotations related to Thaddeus Stevens.
Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclop dia Britannica article "Stevens, Thaddeus".
 Media related to Thaddeus Stevens at Wikimedia Commons
Lydia Hamilton Smith, Abolitionist And African American Businesswoman
Stevens and Smith Historic Site
Thaddeus Stevens Society
United States Congress. "Thaddeus Stevens (id: S000887)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Includes Guide to Research Collections where his papers are located.
Mr. Lincoln and Freedom: Thaddeus Stevens
Mr. Lincoln's White House: Thaddeus Stevens Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJohn Strohm
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Pennsylvania's 8th congressional district 1849 1853
Succeeded byHenry Augustus Muhlenberg
Preceded byAnthony Roberts
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Pennsylvania's 9th congressional district 1859 1868
Succeeded byOliver Dickey
Preceded byJohn Sherman
 Chair of the House Ways and Means Committee 1861 1865
Succeeded byJustin Morrill
New office
 Chair of the House Appropriations Committee 1865 1868
Succeeded byElihu B. Washburne
Honorary titles
Preceded byAbraham Lincoln
 Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1868
Succeeded byCharles Sumner
vteChairmen of the United States House Committee on Ways and Means
Fitzsimons
W. Smith
Harper
Griswold
Randolph
Clay
G. Campbell
Eppes
Bacon
Cheves
Eppes
Lowndes
S. Smith
McLane
Randolph
McDuffie
Verplanck
Polk
Cambreleng
J. W. Jones
Fillmore
McKay
Vinton
Bayly
Houston
L. Campbell
J. G. Jones
Phelps
Sherman
Stevens
Morrill
Schenck
Hooper
Dawes
Morrison
Wood
Tucker
Kelley
Morrison
R. Mills
McKinley
Springer
Wilson
Dingley
Payne
Underwood
Kitchin
Fordney
Green
Hawley
Collier
Doughton
Knutson
Doughton
Reed
Cooper
W. Mills
Ullman
Rostenkowski
Gibbons
Archer
Thomas
Rangel
Levin
Camp
Ryan
Johnson
Brady
Neal
J. Smith
Italics indicates acting chairman
vteChairs of the United States House Committee on Appropriations
Stevens
Washburne
Dawes
Garfield
Randall
Clymer
Holman
Atkins
Hiscock
Randall
J. Cannon
Holman
Sayers
J. Cannon
Hemenway
Tawney
Fitzgerald
Sherley
Good
Davis
Madden
Anthony
Wood
Byrns
Buchanan
Taylor
C. Cannon
Taber
C. Cannon
Taber
C. Cannon
Mahon
Whitten
Natcher
Obey
Livingston
Young
Lewis
Obey
Rogers
Frelinghuysen
Lowey
DeLauro
Granger
vteMembers of the U.S. House of Representatives from Pennsylvania1st district
Fitzsimons
Swanwick
Waln
W. Jones
(3- and 4-seat era, A: Clay
Say
Seybert
W. Milnor
Seybert
Forrest
W. Milnor
Forrest, B: Ja. Richards
W. Anderson
T. Smith
W. Anderson
Hemphill, C: Leib
Porter
J. Milnor
C. Ingersoll
Hopkinson
S. Edwards, D: Conard
J. Williams
Sergeant)
Breck
Wurts
Sutherland
Paynter
C. Brown
E. Morris
Levin
Florence
Lehman
Randall
Freeman
Bingham
Vare
Hazlett
Beck
Ransley
Sacks
Gallagher
Barrett
Gallagher
Barrett
M. Myers
Foglietta
B. Brady
B. Fitzpatrick
2nd district
F. A. C. Muhlenberg
(Multiple seat era, A: F. A. C. Muhlenberg
McClenachan
Leib
W. Milnor
R. Brown
Rog. Davis
W. Darlington
I. Darlington
W. Darlington
Hemphill
T. Kittera
Hemphill
Sergeant
Horn
Binney
J. Ingersoll
Sergeant
J. Ingersoll, B: Conrad
W. Milnor
J. Roberts
Henderson
Hahn
Pawling
Gross
Harper
Toland, C: I. Van Horne
Pugh
J. Ross
Rodman)
J. Ingersoll
Chandler
Tyson
E. Morris
Biddle
O'Neill
Creely
O'Neill
Adams
J. Reyburn
Cook
W. Reyburn
Graham
Stokes
Beck
W. H. Wilson
Pratt
W. Granahan
McGarvey
W. Granahan
K. Granahan
Nix
Gray
Blackwell
Fattah
D. Evans
Boyle
3rd district
Jacobs
(Multiple seat era, A: Thomas
Hemphill
Jos. Hiester
Lower
Joh. Hiester
D. Hiester II
Rog. Davis
Gloninger
Crouch
Whiteside
Hibshman
Buchanan, B: I. Anderson
M. Richards
Hyneman
Ja. Whitehill
Slaymaker
Wallace
J. Phillips, C: Jo. Whitehill
R. Jenkins
Lefever)
D. Miller
Watmough
Ash
Harper
Naylor
C. Ingersoll
Joh. Smith
Jo. Campbell
C. Brown
H. Moore
Robbins
Millward
Landy
Verree
L. Myers
Moffet
L. Myers
Randall
Vaux
McAleer
Halterman
McAleer
Burk
Castor
J. Moore
Ransley
Waldron
Fenerty
Bradley
Ha. Scott
Byrne
W. J. Green III
Lederer
Jos. Smith
Borski
English
Dahlkemper
M. Kelly
D. Evans
4th district
D. Hiester I
(Multiple seat era, A: Sitgreaves
R. Brown
Hanna
R. Whitehill
Glasgow
Spangler
Hostetter
Ja. Mitchell
Buchanan
W. Heister
Davies
Je. Brown, B: Jo. Richards
Chapman
P. Muhlenberg
I. Van Horne
Bard
S. Edwards
S. Anderson
Leiper
Potts
James, C: Wayne
Miner
J. Evans
E. Darlington
J. Edwards)
C. Ingersoll
Robbins
Witte
Broom
H. Phillips
Millward
Kelley
J. Reyburn
Young
Foerderer
Moon
Edmonds
Golder
Edmonds
Daly
Sheridan
Maloney
Chudoff
Nix
Toll
Eilberg
Dougherty
Kolter
Klink
M. Hart
Altmire
Perry
Dean
5th district
J. Kittera
D. Hiester I
Ege
Jos. Hiester
Gregg
D. Montgomery
G. Smith
(2-seat era, A: W. Crawford
Boden
Findlay, B: R. Whitehill
Rea
W. Maclay
Fullerton
McCullough
McSherry)
Markley
Sterigere
J. K. Mann
Ja. Fry
Fornance
Yost
Freedley
McNair
Cadwalader
O. Jones
J. Wood
W. Davis
Thayer
Taylor
Reading
Taylor
Harmer
Robbins
Harmer
Morrell
Foulkrod
Donohoe
P. Costello
Connolly
Dorsey
Gartner
F. Smith
Pracht
W. J. Green Jr.
Sarbacher
W. J. Green Jr.
W. J. Green III
Ware
Schulze
Clinger
Peterson
G. Thompson
M. Scanlon
6th district
Gregg
(1- and 2-seat era, A: S. Maclay
Hanna
J. Stewart
J. Kelly
W. Crawford
Ingham
S. Moore
Ingham, B: R. Brown
J. Ross
Rogers)
Harris
I. Green
Bucher
R. Ramsey
M. Morris
J. Davis
R. Ramsey
Jenks
Erdman
Hornbeck
Bridges
T. Ross
W. Everhart
Hickman
Stiles
Boyer
Stiles
Acker
Biery
Townsend
Ward
J. Everhart
S. Darlington
Robinson
T. Butler
McCreary
Logue
Darrow
Welsh
Rob. Davis
Stokes
Stack
F. Myers
McGlinchey
Hu. Scott
Toll
Rhodes
Yatron
Holden
Gerlach
R. Costello
Houlahan
7th district
Hartley
J. Kittera
Boude
Rea
Piper
Hyneman
Udree
Jos. Hiester
Udree
Worman
Udree
(2-seat era, A: H. Wilson
Krebs
Jo. Fry
H. King, B: Udree
Addams
H. Muhlenberg)
Wagener
Westbrook
McIlvaine
Dickey
Morrison
Bridges
Bradshaw
Chapman
Longnecker
T. Cooper
Stiles
Broomall
Townsend
A. Wood
I. Evans
Godshalk
I. Evans
Yardley
Hallowell
Wanger
T. Butler
Darrow
Drew
Darrow
Hu. Scott
Wolfenden
Chadwick
James
Milliken
Watkins
L. Williams
Edgar
Weldon
Sestak
Meehan
M. Scanlon
Wild
8th district
Findley
Hartley
J. Stewart
Findley
Piper
A. Ogle
Philson
Tod
(2 seat era, A: Rogers
Wolf
S. A. Smith, B: Ingham
Ihrie)
H. King
Hubley
Newhard
Stevens
H. Muhlenberg
J. Jones
Keim
Schwartz
McKenty
Ancona
Getz
Clymer
Ermentrout
Mutchler
Wanger
Difenderfer
Watson
T. Butler
Wolfenden
Gerlach
Lichtenwalter
Vaughn
K. King
Curtin
Biester
Kostmayer
J. Coyne
Kostmayer
Greenwood
M. Fitzpatrick
P. Murphy
M. Fitzpatrick
B. Fitzpatrick
Cartwright
9th district
Gregg
Smilie
Bard
Burnside
W. P. Maclay
Jo. Brown
(3 seat era, A: Kremer
Ford, B: McKean
Stephens, C: Ellis
E. Van Horne
Marr
L. Dewart)
H. Muhlenberg
Keim
Ritter
Strong
J. Jones
I. Hiester
A. Roberts
Stevens
O. Dickey
A. Smith
Hiestand
Brunner
Erdman
Ermentrout
H. Green
Cassel
Griest
Watson
Frey
Gerlach
Kinzer
Dague
Watkins
Ware
Bu. Shuster
Bi. Shuster
Meuser
10th district
Bard
H. Woods
W. Hoge
J. Hoge
Hamilton
W. Hoge
Lyle
(2-seat era, A: I. Smith
W. Wilson
Denison, B: J. Irwin
D. Scott
J. Murray
Ellis
T. Murray)
Ja. Mitchell
A. King
Clark
Reily
Simonton
Brodhead
M. Dimmick
Middleswarth
J. Ch. Kunkel
Killinger
Strouse
Cake
Killinger
Mutchler
Bridges
Bachman
Mutchler
Sowden
Brosius
W. Connell
Cassel
Howell
Dale
Nicholls
Farr
McLane
Farr
C. Connell
Griest
Kinzer
J. Murphy
Scoblick
O'Neill
Carrigg
Prokop
W. Scranton
McDade
Sherwood
Carney
Marino
Perry
11th district
Findley
Smilie
Lucas
S. Smith
Lacock
Findley
Marchand
Plumer
(2-seat era, A: J. Wilson
T. Crawford, B: Findlay
W. Ramsey
McCoy)
Barnitz
Logan
Gerry
Bidlack
Leib
C. Butler
Brisbin
H. Fuller
Straub
Jam. Campbell
W. L. Dewart
Jam. Campbell
Johnson
Van Auken
Collins
Klotz
Storm
Buckalew
J. Scranton
Amerman
J. Scranton
W. Connell
Palmer
Lenahan
Palmer
Bowman
Joh. Casey
Templeton
Joh. Casey
C. Coughlin
Watres
P. Boland
V. Boland
J. Murphy
Flood
M. Jenkins
Flood
Musto
Nelligan
Harrison
Kanjorski
Barletta
Smucker
12th district
Gallatin
W. Hoge
Lyle
Patterson
Jo. Brown
Jo. Mitchell
J. Scott
R. Allison
Chambers
Sheffer
J. Cooper
Read
G. Fuller
Wilmot
Grow
H. Wright
H. Fuller
J. Montgomery
Leidy
G. Scranton
H. Wright
Denison
Woodward
Shoemaker
Ketcham
Stanton
H. Wright
J. Scranton
Connolly
J. Scranton
Lynch
Osborne
Shonk
Hines
Leisenring
M. Williams
Davenport
Palmer
Patterson
C. Brumm
Garner
R. Lee
Heaton
Reber
Joh. Casey
Carpenter
Joh. Casey
Turpin
Flannery
T. Miller
Fenton
Whalley
Saylor
Murtha
Critz
Rothfus
Marino
Keller
S. Lee
13th district
Griffin
Tarr
A. Stewart
Tod
Thomson
C. Forward
Burd
J. Miller
J. Black
McClure
W. S. Ramsey
McClure
Gustine
Frick
Pollock
Jos. Casey
Gamble
Packer
W. Dimmick
Johnson
Tracy
Mercur
Bunnell
Strawbridge
Ja. Reilly
Ryon
C. Brumm
Ja. Reilly
C. Brumm
Ryan
Patterson
Kline
Rothermel
Dewalt
Gernerd
G. Brumm
Palmer
G. Brumm
Gildea
Fenton
Hoch
F. A. Muhlenberg
Rhodes
McConnell
Lafore
Schweiker
L. Coughlin
Margolies-Mezvinsky
Fox
Hoeffel
Schwartz
Boyle
Joyce
14th district
Tannehill
J. Woods
Baldwin
W. Forward
A. Stewart
T. Irwin
Potter
McCulloch
Irvin
A. Ramsey
Eckert
Pitman
Bibighaus
Grow
W. Miller
G. Miller
Packer
Killinger
Barr
Bound
Rife
Woomer
Olmsted
C. Wright
Lilley
Pratt
Kipp
Ainey
McFadden
Croll
Esterly
Bushong
Esterly
Lichtenwalner
Richardson
Moser
Hoch
Gillette
Carrigg
Rhodes
Moorhead
W. Coyne
Doyle
Reschenthaler
15th district
T. Wilson
R. Moore
Farrelly
Patterson
Lawrence
McCreery
McKennan
Beaumont
Petrikin
Bidlack
Nes
McClean
Nes
Danner
Kurtz
Gamble
Pearce
A. White
Hale
J. Bailey
Glossbrenner
Haldeman
Magee
Powell
Overton
Jadwin
Post
Bunnell
M. Wright
Jorden
Codding
C. Wright
Deemer
W. B. Wilson
Kiess
McFadden
Dietrich
Rutherford
Gillette
Rich
Bush
Walter
Rooney
Ritter
McHale
Toomey
C. Dent
Wild
G. Thompson
16th district
(2-seat era, A: J. Allison
Orr
Denny, B: W. Forward
Stevenson
Gilmore)
Anthony
Hammond
Snyder
J. Black
Brady
McLanahan
Kurtz
Todd
Ahl
Junkin
J. Bailey
Coffroth
Koontz
Meyers
Cessna
S. Ross
Jo. I. Mitchell
R. J. C. Walker
W. Brown
McCormick
Hopkins
Leonard
Packer
Deemer
Dickerman
Samuel
McHenry
Lesher
Kline
Kiess
Rich
T. Scanlon
McConnell
J. Cr. Kunkel
Eshleman
B. Walker
Pitts
Smucker
M. Kelly
17th district
Plumer
Coulter
Laporte
S. Morris
Dimock
Read
Irvin
Blanchard
Calvin
Parker
Russell
Robison
W. Reilly
McPherson
McAllister
Barker
Morrell
Speer
Jo. Reilly
Jac. Campbell
Coffroth
Jac. Campbell
Scull
Buckalew
Wolverton
Kulp
Polk
Billmeyer
Mahon
Focht
Dershem
Focht
Cummings
Magrady
Ditter
McConnell
Simpson
Bush
Schneebeli
Ertel
Gekas
Holden
Cartwright
Lamb
Deluzio
18th district
Farrelly
Barlow
Sill
Banks
Burd
J. Mann
C. Ogle
H. Black
J. Russell
A. Stewart
A. Ogle
Dawson
McCulloch
Edie
Blair
Hale
S. Wilson
Armstrong
Sherwood
S. Ross
Stenger
Fisher
Atkinson
Mahon
Olmsted
Kreider
Beers
Biddle
Focht
Simpson
J. Cr. Kunkel
Mumma
Simpson
Elliott
Whalley
Corbett
Heinz
Walgren
Santorum
Doyle
T. Murphy
Lamb
Doyle
19th district
Coulter
Klingensmith
Marchand
Foster
J. Mann
Kuhns
Drum
Covode
Scofield
Curtis
Maish
Beltzhoover
Duncan
Swope
Maish
Beltzhoover
Stahle
Benner
Ziegler
Lewis
A. Evans
Reynolds
Hartman
W. Bailey
Rose
Sites
Swartz
Doutrich
Swope
Gavin
Stauffer
Quigley
Stauffer
Quigley
G. Goodling
Craley
G. Goodling
B. Goodling
Platts
32nd district
Ja. Brown
Barchfeld
G. Campbell
S. Porter
Erk
Muldowney
Moritz
Eberharter
J. Wright
Eberharter
33rd district
M. C. Kelly
Ellenbogen
McArdle
Holland
Weiss
F. Buchanan
V. Buchanan
34th district
Morin
Sullivan
Dunn
J. Wright
35th district
J. M. Magee
Estep
36th district
G. Campbell
vteLain in state (United States)Lain in stateUS Capitol rotunda
Clay (1852)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
Stevens (1868)
Sumner (1874)
Wilson (1875)
Garfield (1881)
Logan (1886)
McKinley (1901)
L'Enfant (1909)
Dewey (1917)
Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921)
Harding (1923)
W. H. Taft (1930)
Pershing (1948)
R. A. Taft (1953)
Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
MacArthur (1964)
H. Hoover (1964)
Eisenhower (1969)
Dirksen (1969)
J. E. Hoover (1972)
Johnson (1973)
Humphrey (1978)
Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984)
Pepper (1989)
Reagan (2004, funeral)
Ford (2006 07, funeral)
Inouye (2012)
McCain (2018)
Bush (2018, funeral)
Lewis (2020)
Dole (2021)
Reid (2022)
National Statuary Hall
Cummings (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Young (2022)
House Chamber
Hooper (1875)
Herbert C. Hoover Building
Brown (1996)
Old Senate Chamber
Chase (1873)
Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda
Chestnut and Gibson (1998)
Parks (2005)
Graham (2018)
Sicknick (2021)
Evans (2021)
Williams (2022)
Lain in reposeEast Room
Harrison (1841)
Taylor (1850)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
McKinley (1901)
Harding (1923)
Roosevelt (1945)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
Great Hall of theUS Supreme Court
Warren (1974)
Marshall (1993)
Burger (1995)
Brennan (1997)
Blackmun (1999)
Rehnquist (2005)
Scalia (2016)
Stevens (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Senate Chamber
Byrd (2010)
Lautenberg (2013)
Bold: Presidents and chief justices
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
Portals: Biography United States American Civil War Utah Pennsylvania History
vteReconstruction eraParticipantsFederal government
Presidents
Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
Rutherford B. Hayes
Congress
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
Radical Republicans
Moderate Republicans
Conservative Republicans
African-American senators
African-American representatives
Reconstruction Amendments
United States Congress Joint Committee on Reconstruction
United States House Select Committee on Reconstruction
Federal judiciary
Taney Court
Chase Court
Waite Court
Federal bureaucracy
Edwin Stanton
Freedmen's Bureau
Justice Department
State governments
Southern United States
Confederate States of America
Others
African Americans
Free people of color
Freedman
Politicians
Carpetbaggers
Ku Klux Klan
Scalawag
Redeemers
White League
Red Shirts
Democratic Party
Bourbon Democrat
Horatio Seymour
Samuel J. Tilden
Republican Party
Stalwart
Charles Sumner
Thaddeus Stevens
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin Wade
John Bingham
James Mitchell Ashley
Freedman's Savings Bank
ElectionsPresidential
1864
DNC
National Union Convention
Radical Democracy Party
1868
DNC
RNC
1872
DNC
RNC
Liberal Republican Party
Straight-Out Democratic Party
Victoria Woodhull
1876
DNC
RNC
Greenback Convention
Prohibition Convention
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
U.S. Senate
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
U.S. House
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
Gubernatorial
1863
CA
CT
MA
MN
NH
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
WV
1864
CT
IL
IN
LA
MD
MA
MI
MO
NH
VT
WV
1865
CT
FL
LA
MA
MN
NJ
OH
SC
VT
WI
1866
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
NC
OR
PA
TX
VT
WV
1867
CA
CT
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
VT
WI
1868
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
NJ
SC
VT
WV
1869
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
1870
AL
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
MO
OR
SC
VT
WV
1871
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
NJ
OH
WI
1872
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
PA
SC
VT
WV
1873
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
VA
WI
1874
AL
CT
DE
KS
MA
ME
MI
MO
DE
OR
SC
VT
1875
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
OH
WI
1876
AL
CO
CT Apr.
CT Nov.
FL
IL
IN
KS
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
RI
SC
VT
WV
1864 elections
1866 elections
1868 elections
1870 elections
1872 elections
1874 elections
1876 electionsKey eventsPrelude
American Indian Wars
Slavery in the United States
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792)
The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women (1838)
Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1839)
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
National Women's Rights Convention (1850)
American Civil War
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act (1862)
Militia Act of 1862
1863
Emancipation Proclamation
General Order No. 143
Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction
Ten Percent Plan
National Bank Act
Women's Loyal National League
New York City draft riots
1863 State of the Union Address
1864
Wade Davis Bill
1864 elections
1864 State of the Union Address
1865
13th Amendment
Second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln
Address
Black Codes
Special Field Orders No. 15 
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedmen's Bureau bills
Confederates surrender at Appomattox
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Shaw University
New Departure
1865 State of the Union Address
Founding of the Ku Klux Klan
1866
Civil Rights Act of 1866
Memphis riots of 1866
New Orleans massacre of 1866
Swing Around the Circle
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Fort Smith Conference and Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866
Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866
Tennessee readmitted to Union
Petition for Universal Freedom
National Labor Union
Ex parte Garland
Ex parte Milligan
Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866
1866 elections
1867
Tenure of Office Act
Command of Army Act
Indian Peace Commission
Knights of the White Camelia
Pulaski riot
Reconstruction Acts
Constitutional conventions of 1867
Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Peonage Act of 1867
First impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
1867 State of the Union Address
1868
14th Amendment
Second impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Timeline
Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson
Impeachment managers investigation
Articles of impeachment
Arkansas readmitted to Union
Florida readmitted to Union
North Carolina readmitted to Union
South Carolina readmitted to Union
Louisiana readmitted to Union
Alabama readmitted to Union
Opelousas massacre
Fourth Reconstruction Act
Georgia v. Stanton
1868 elections
1868 State of the Union Address
1869
National Woman Suffrage Association
American Woman Suffrage Association
Alabama Claims
Annexation of Santo Domingo
Board of Indian Commissioners
Public Credit Act of 1869
Black Friday (1869)
Ex parte McCardle
First transcontinental railroad
1869 State of the Union Address
1870
15th Amendment
Enforcement Act of 1870
Justice Department
Naturalization Act of 1870
Kirk-Holden War
Shoffner Act
1870 elections
1870 State of the Union Address
1871
Ku Klux Klan hearings
First Enforcement Act of 1871
Second Enforcement Act of 1871
Alcorn State University
Meridian race riot of 1871
Treaty of Washington
New York custom house ring
Civil service commission
United States expedition to Korea
1871 State of the Union Address
1872
General Mining Act of 1872
Cr dit Mobilier Scandal
Modoc War
Star route scandal
Salary Grab Act
Amnesty Act
1872 elections
1872 State of the Union Address
1873
Panic of 1873
Colfax Massacre
Timber Culture Act
Slaughter-House Cases
Virginius Affair
Coinage Act of 1873
Long Depression
Comstock laws
1873 State of the Union Address
1874
Brooks Baxter War
Battle of Liberty Place
Coushatta Massacre
Red River War
Timber Culture Act
White League
Election Massacre of 1874
Vicksburg Riot of 1874
Black Hills Gold Rush
Sanborn incident
Anti-Moiety Acts
1874 elections
1874 State of the Union Address
1875
United States v. Cruikshank
Civil Rights Act of 1875
Red Shirts
Mississippi Plan
Clifton Riot of 1875
Yazoo City Riot of 1875
Specie Payment Resumption Act
Whiskey Ring
Wheeler Compromise
Delano affair
Pratt & Boyd
1875 State of the Union Address
1876
Hamburg Massacre
South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876
Ellenton massacre
Great Sioux War of 1876
Battle of the Little Bighorn
United States v. Reese
Trader post scandal
Centennial Exposition
Cattellism
Safe burglary conspiracy
1876 elections
1876 State of the Union Address
1877
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
Nez Perce War
Desert Land Act
Great Railroad Strike of 1877
Aftermath
Posse Comitatus Act (1878)
Civil Rights Cases (1883)
United States v. Harris (1883)
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Williams v. Mississippi (1898)
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Giles v. Harris (1903)
Disenfranchisement
AspectsHistoriography
Bibliography of the Reconstruction Era
James Shepherd Pike
The Prostrate State (1874)
James Bryce
The American Commonwealth (1888)
Claude Bowers
The Tragic Era (1929)
Columbia University
John Burgess
Walter Lynwood Fleming
Dunning School
William Archibald Dunning
Charles A. Beard
Howard K. Beale
W. E. B. Du Bois
Black Reconstruction (1935)
C. Vann Woodward
Joel Williamson
William R. Brock
American Crisis (1963)
John Hope Franklin
From Slavery to Freedom (1947)
After Slavery (1965)
Leon Litwack
Been in the Storm So Long (1979)
Eric Foner
Reconstruction (1988)
Kenneth M. Stampp
Steven Hahn
A Nation Under Our Feet (2003)
The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution (2019)
Memory
Winslow Homer
A Visit from the Old Mistress (1876)
Thomas Dixon, Jr.
The Leopard's Spots (1902)
The Clansman (1905)
D. W. Griffith
The Birth of a Nation (1915)
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Gone with the Wind (1939)
David W. Blight
Race and Reunion (2001)
Legacy
Women's suffrage in the United States
Labor history of the United States
Gilded Age
Jim Crow era
Civil rights movement
American frontier
Other topics
History of the United States (1865 1918)
African American founding fathers of the United States
Industrialization
Suffrage
Habeas corpus
Race (human categorization)
White supremacy
Paramilitary
Forty acres and a mule
Reconstruction Treaties
Whitecapping
Category
vteImpeachment and impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson
Efforts to impeach Andrew JohnsonTimeline
Inquiries
First inquiry
Second inquiry
 Impeachment
Articles of impeachment
Dismissal of Edwin Stanton
Tenure of Office Act
Lorenzo Thomas
Ulysses S. Grant
Command of Army Act
Swing Around the Circle
John Covode
Hamilton Ward Sr.
Impeachment trialSalmon P. Chase
House managers
John Bingham
George S. Boutwell
Benjamin Butler
John A. Logan
Thaddeus Stevens
Thomas Williams
James F. Wilson
President's counsel
William M. Evarts
Benjamin R. Curtis
William S. Groesbeck
Thomas A. R. Nelson
Henry Stanbery
Witnesses for the prosecution
Foster Blodgett
Walter A. Burleigh
William E. Chandler
James O. Clephane
William H. Emory
Thomas W. Ferry
Burt Van Horn
James K. Moorhead
Witnesses for the defense
William W. Armstrong
Walter Smith Cox
Richard T. Merrick
Alexander Randall
Frederick W. Seward
William Tecumseh Sherman
Lorenzo Thomas
Gideon WellesOther
Impeachment  managers investigation
Vinnie Ream
Profiles in Courage
Tennessee Johnson
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Poland
Academics
CiNii
People
US Congress
Other
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thaddeus_Stevens&oldid=1148511499"