Undeclared war between Argentina and the United Kingdom in 1982
Not to be confused with the Falkland Crisis of 1770, the South Atlantic conflict or the Battle of the Falkland Islands.
Falklands WarFrom top right and in clockwise direction:HMS Hermes and HMS Broadsword of the British Task Force; Argentine ARA General Belgrano sinking; Argentine Army POWs in Stanley; British HMS Antelope after being hit (later sank); two Super  tendards of the Argentine Navy; Argentine forces at Port Stanley, 2 April 1982Date2 April  14 June 1982 (1982-04-02  1982-06-14) (2 months and 12 days)LocationFalkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich IslandsResult
British victory: Fall of the military junta. Transition to democracy in Argentina.Belligerents
 United Kingdom
 ArgentinaCommanders and leaders
 Elizabeth II
 Margaret Thatcher
 Terence Lewin
 Henry Leach
 John Fieldhouse
 Sandy Woodward
 Jeremy Moore
 Michael Clapp
 Julian Thompson
 Tony Wilson
 Leopoldo Galtieri
 Jorge Anaya
 Basilio Lami Dozo
 Juan Lombardo
 Ernesto Horacio Crespo
 Mario Men ndez
Casualties and losses
Casualties:255 killed[1]775 wounded107 capturedLosses:2 destroyers2 frigates1 landing ship1 landing craft1 container ship 24 helicopters10 fighters
Casualties:649 killed[2][3]1,657 wounded[3]11,313 capturedLosses:1 cruiser1 submarine4 cargo vessels2 patrol boats1 naval trawler 25 helicopters35 fighters2 bombers4 cargo aircraft25 COIN aircraft9 armed trainers
3 Falkland Islanders killed by shellingvteFalklands WarOperation Rosario
South Georgia
Occupation
Operation Corporate
Paraquet
Black Buck
Santa Fe
Belgrano
Sobral
Sheffield
Pebble Island
Mikado
Sutton
San Carlos
Ardent
Seal Cove
Antelope
Atlantic Conveyor
Coventry
Goose Green
Mount Kent
Top Malo House
Bluff Cove
Many Branch Point
Mount Harriet
Two Sisters
Glamorgan
Sir Galahad
Mount Longdon
Wireless Ridge
Mount Tumbledown
Port Stanley
Thule & South Sandwich Islands
The Falklands War (Spanish: Guerra de las Malvinas) was a ten-week undeclared war between Argentina and the United Kingdom in 1982 over two British dependent territories in the South Atlantic: the Falkland Islands and its territorial dependency, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. The conflict began on 2 April, when Argentina invaded and occupied the Falkland Islands, followed by the invasion of South Georgia the next day. On 5 April, the British government dispatched a naval task force to engage the Argentine Navy and Air Force before making an amphibious assault on the islands. The conflict lasted 74 days and ended with an Argentine surrender on 14 June, returning the islands to British control. In total, 649 Argentine military personnel, 255 British military personnel, and three Falkland Islanders were killed during the hostilities.
The conflict was a major episode in the protracted dispute over the territories' sovereignty. Argentina asserted (and maintains) that the islands are Argentine territory,[4] and the Argentine government thus characterised its military action as the reclamation of its own territory. The British government regarded the action as an invasion of a territory that had been a Crown colony since 1841. Falkland Islanders, who have inhabited the islands since the early 19th century, are predominantly descendants of British settlers, and strongly favour British sovereignty. Neither state officially declared war, although both governments declared the islands a war zone. 
The conflict had a strong effect in both countries and has been the subject of various books, articles, films, and songs. Patriotic sentiment ran high in Argentina, but the unfavourable outcome prompted large protests against the ruling military government, hastening its downfall and the democratisation of the country. In the United Kingdom, the Conservative government, bolstered by the successful outcome, was re-elected with an increased majority the following year. The cultural and political effect of the conflict has been less in the UK than in Argentina, where it has remained a common topic for discussion.[5]
Diplomatic relations between the United Kingdom and Argentina were restored in 1989 following a meeting in Madrid, at which the two governments issued a joint statement.[6] No change in either country's position regarding the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands was made explicit. In 1994, Argentina adopted a new constitution,[7] which declared the Falkland Islands as part of one of its provinces by law.[8] However, the islands continue to operate as a self-governing British Overseas Territory.[9]
Prelude[edit]
Main article: Events leading to the Falklands War
Failed diplomacy[edit]
In 1965, the United Nations called upon Argentina and the United Kingdom to reach a settlement of the sovereignty dispute. The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) regarded the islands as a nuisance and barrier to UK trade in South America. Therefore, while confident of British sovereignty, the FCO was prepared to cede the islands to Argentina. When news of a proposed transfer broke in 1968, elements sympathetic with the plight of the islanders were able to organise an effective parliamentary lobby to frustrate the FCO plans. Negotiations continued, but in general failed to make meaningful progress; the islanders steadfastly refused to consider Argentine sovereignty on one side, whilst Argentina would not compromise over sovereignty on the other.[10] The FCO then sought to make the islands dependent on Argentina, hoping this would make the islanders more amenable to Argentine sovereignty. A Communications Agreement signed in 1971 created an airlink and later YPF, the Argentine oil company, was given a monopoly in the islands.
In 1977, British prime minister James Callaghan, in response to heightened tensions in the region and the Argentine occupation of Southern Thule, secretly sent a force of two frigates and a nuclear-powered submarine, HMS Dreadnought, to the South Atlantic, codenamed Operation Journeyman.[11] It is unclear whether the Argentines were aware of their presence, but British sources state that they were advised of it through informal channels. Nevertheless, talks with Argentina on Falklands sovereignty and economic cooperation opened in December of that year, though they proved inconclusive.[12]
In 1980, a new UK Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Nicholas Ridley, went to the Falklands trying to sell the islanders the benefits of a leaseback scheme, which met with strong opposition from the islanders. On his return to London in December 1980, he reported to parliament but was viciously attacked at what was seen as a sellout. (It was unlikely that leaseback could have succeeded since the British had sought a long-term lease of 99 years, whereas Argentina was pressing for a much shorter period of only ten years.) At a private committee meeting that evening, it was reported that Ridley said: "If we don't do something, they will invade. And there is nothing we could do."[13]
The Argentine junta[edit]
Jorge Anaya was the driving force in the junta's decision to invade.[14][15][16]Leopoldo Galtieri, leader of the Argentine junta
In the period leading up to the war and, in particular, following the transfer of power between the military dictators General Jorge Rafael Videla and General Roberto Eduardo Viola late in March 1981 Argentina had been in the midst of devastating economic stagnation and large-scale civil unrest against the National Reorganization Process, the military junta that had been governing the country since 1976.[17][18]
In December 1981, there was a further change in the Argentine military regime, bringing to office a new junta headed by General Leopoldo Galtieri (acting president), Air Brigadier Basilio Lami Dozo and Admiral Jorge Anaya. Anaya was the main architect and supporter of a military solution for the long-standing claim over the islands,[19] expecting that the United Kingdom would never respond militarily.[20]
By opting for military action, the Galtieri government hoped to mobilise the long-standing patriotic feelings of Argentines towards the islands, diverting public attention from the chronic economic problems and the ongoing human rights violations of its Dirty War,[21] bolstering the junta's dwindling legitimacy. The newspaper La Prensa speculated on a step-by-step plan beginning with cutting off supplies to the islands, ending in direct actions late in 1982, if the UN talks were fruitless.[22]
The ongoing tension between the two countries over the islands increased on 19 March, when a group of Argentine scrap metal merchants (which had been infiltrated by Argentine Marines)[23] raised the Argentine flag at South Georgia Island, an act that would later be seen as the first offensive action in the war. The Royal Navy ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance was dispatched from Stanley to South Georgia on the 25th in response. The Argentine military junta, suspecting that the UK would reinforce its South Atlantic Forces, ordered the invasion of the Falkland Islands to be brought forward to 2 April.
The UK was initially taken by surprise by the Argentine attack on the South Atlantic islands, despite repeated warnings by Royal Navy captain Nicholas Barker (Commanding Officer of the Endurance) and others. Barker believed that Defence Secretary John Nott's 1981 Defence White Paper (in which Nott described plans to withdraw the Endurance, the UK's only naval presence in the South Atlantic) had sent a signal to the Argentines that the UK was unwilling, and would soon be unable, to defend its territories and subjects in the Falklands.[24][25]
Argentine invasion[edit]
Main articles: 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands, Invasion of South Georgia, Argentine air forces in the Falklands War, Argentine naval forces in the Falklands War, and Argentine ground forces in the Falklands War
 The Argentine destroyer ARA Sant sima Trinidad landed special forces south of Stanley
 Argentine soldiers and Falklanders in 1982
On 2 April 1982 Argentine forces mounted amphibious landings, known as Operation Rosario,[26] on the Falkland Islands.[27] The invasion was met with a fierce but brief defence organised by the Falkland Islands' Governor Sir Rex Hunt, giving command to Major Mike Norman of the Royal Marines. The garrison consisted of 68 marines and eleven naval hydrographers,[28] They were assisted by 23 volunteers of the Falkland Islands Defence Force (FIDF), who had few weapons and were used as lookouts.[29] The invasion started with the landing of Lieutenant Commander Guillermo Sanchez-Sabarots' Amphibious Commandos Group, who attacked the empty Moody Brook barracks and then moved on Government House in Stanley. When the 2nd Marine Infantry Battalion with Assault Amphibious Vehicles arrived, the governor ordered a ceasefire and surrendered.[30] The governor, his family and the British military personnel were flown to Argentina that afternoon and later repatriated to the United Kingdom.[31]
Initial British response[edit]
Further information: British naval forces in the Falklands War, British ground forces in the Falklands War, and British air services in the Falklands War
 The cover of Newsweek magazine, 19 April 1982, depicting HMS Hermes, flagship of the British Task Force. The headline evokes the 1980 Star Wars sequel.
The British had already taken action prior to the 2 April invasion. In response to events on South Georgia, on 29 March, Ministers decided to send the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) Fort Austin south from the Mediterranean to support HMS Endurance, and the nuclear-powered fleet submarine HMS Spartan from Gibraltar, with HMS Splendid ordered south from Scotland the following day.[32]: 75 [33] Lord Carrington had wished to send a third submarine, but the decision was deferred due to concerns about the impact on operational commitments.[33] Coincidentally, on 26 March, the submarine HMS Superb left Gibraltar and it was assumed in the press she was heading south. There has since been speculation that the effect of those reports was to panic the Argentine junta into invading the Falklands before submarines could be deployed;[33] however, post-war research has established that the final decision to proceed was made at a junta meeting in Buenos Aires on 23 March.[34]
The following day, during a crisis meeting headed by the Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Sir Henry Leach, advised them that "Britain could and should send a task force if the islands are invaded". On 1 April, Leach sent orders to a Royal Navy force carrying out exercises in the Mediterranean to prepare to sail south. Following the invasion on 2 April, after an emergency meeting of the cabinet, approval was given to form a task force to retake the islands. This was backed in an emergency sitting of the House of Commons the next day.[35]
 Some of the Advanced Group, pennant numbers painted over, off Gibraltar March 1982
Word of the invasion first reached the UK from Argentine sources.[36] A Ministry of Defence operative in London had a short telex conversation with Governor Hunt's telex operator, who confirmed that Argentines were on the island and in control.[36][37] Later that day, BBC journalist Laurie Margolis spoke with an islander at Goose Green via amateur radio, who confirmed the presence of a large Argentine fleet and that Argentine forces had taken control of the island.[36] British military operations in the Falklands War were given the codename Operation Corporate, and the commander of the task force was Admiral Sir John Fieldhouse. Operations lasted from 1 April 1982 to 20 June 1982.[38]
On 6 April, the British Government set up a War Cabinet to provide day-to-day political oversight of the campaign.[39] This was the critical instrument of crisis management for the British with its remit being to "keep under review political and military developments relating to the South Atlantic, and to report as necessary to the Defence and Overseas Policy Committee". The War Cabinet met at least daily until it was dissolved on 12 August. Although Margaret Thatcher is described as dominating the War Cabinet, Lawrence Freedman notes in the Official History of the Falklands Campaign that she did not ignore opposition or fail to consult others. However, once a decision was reached she "did not look back".[39]
United Nations Security Council Resolution 502[edit]
On 31 March 1982, the Argentine ambassador to the UN, Eduardo Roca, began attempting to garner support against a British military build-up designed to thwart earlier UN resolutions calling for both countries to resolve the Falklands dispute through discussion.[32]: 134  On 2 April, the night of the invasion, a banquet was held at Roca's official residence for the US ambassador to the UN, Jeane Kirkpatrick, and several high-ranking officials of the United States Department of State and the United States Department of Defense. This led British diplomats to view Kirkpatrick, who had earlier called for closer relationships with South American dictatorships, with considerable suspicion.[40]
On 1 April, London told the UK ambassador to the UN, Sir Anthony Parsons, that an invasion was imminent and he should call an urgent meeting of the Security Council to get a favourable resolution against Argentina.[41] Parsons had to get nine affirmative votes from the 15 Council members (not a simple majority) and to avoid a blocking vote from any of the other four permanent members. The meeting took place at 11:00 am on 3 April, New York time (4:00 pm in London). United Nations Security Council Resolution 502 was adopted by 10 to 1 (with Panama voting against) and 4 abstentions. Significantly, the Soviet Union and China both abstained.[42][43][44] The resolution stated that the UN Security Council was:
Deeply disturbed at reports of an invasion on 2 April 1982 by armed forces of Argentina; 
Determining that there exists a breach of the peace in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), 
Demands an immediate cessation of hostilities; 
Demands an immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces from the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
Calls on the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to seek a diplomatic solution to their differences and to respect fully the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
This was a significant win for the UK, giving it the upper hand diplomatically. The draft resolution Parsons submitted had avoided any reference to the sovereignty dispute (which might have worked against the UK): instead it focused on Argentina's breach of Chapter VII of the UN Charter which forbids the threat or use of force to settle disputes.[45] The resolution called for the removal only of Argentine forces: this freed Britain to retake the islands militarily, if Argentina did not leave, by exercising its right to self-defence allowed under the UN Charter.[32]: 141 
Argentine occupation[edit]
 Vandalism of a Falkland Islander's home by Argentine soldiers, the message reads Ingleses putos, an insult against people considered weak, unmasculine and contemptible
Main article: Occupation of the Falkland Islands
The Argentine Army unit earmarked for the occupation was the 25th Infantry Regiment, a unit of about 681 men specially trained from all the regions of Argentina; it was flown into Stanley Airport as soon as the runway had been cleared.[46] Once it became clear that the British were sending an amphibious task force, there was a general recall of reservists and two brigades of eight infantry regiments and their supporting units were dispatched to the islands. The total Argentine garrison numbered some 13,000 troops by the beginning of May. The conscripts born in 1963 had only recently been called-up, so they were supplemented by the recall of the previous year's intake. Brigadier General Mario Benjam n Men ndez was appointed Military Governor of the Malvinas.[47]
Argentine military police arrived with detailed files on many islanders,[48] allowing intelligence officer Major Patricio Dowling to arrest and interrogate islanders who he suspected might lead opposition to the occupation.[48] Initially, Islanders suspected of holding anti-Argentine views were expelled,[48] including the Luxton family[48] (who had lived in the islands since the 1840s) and David Colville,[49] editor of the Falkland's Times. This proved to be counter-productive, as those expelled gave interviews to the press. Subsequently, fourteen other community leaders, including the senior medical officer, were interned at Fox Bay on West Falkland.[50] Concerned by Dowling's actions, senior Argentine officers had him removed from the islands.[48] For almost a month, the civilian population of Goose Green was detained in the village hall in "unpleasant conditions".[51]Less well known are similar detentions in other outlying settlements, in one case leading to the death of an islander denied access to his medication. In the closing moments of the war, some troops began to place booby traps in civilian homes,[52] defiled homes with excrement,[53] destroyed civilian property and committed arson against civilian properties.[54]
Argentine officers and NCOs have been accused of handing out rough Field punishment to their conscript soldiers. Ration packs from the Moody Brook depot were found to have foodstuff missing according to Private Alan Craig from the 7th Regiment,[55] and troops garrisoning Port Howard were starved,[56] and according to Max Hastings and Simon Jenkins in their book The Battle for the Falklands (Norton, 1984), "Attempts to go absent without leave were punished by beatings or forcing the offender to sit for hours with his naked feet in the freezing water on the mountainside."  Private Rito Portillo[57] from the 1st Marine Anti-Aircraft Battalion and Private Remigio Fern ndez[58] from the 5th Regiment were reported to have been executed or died because of mistreatment by their own officers. Soldiers were made to sign non-disclosure documents on their return from the Islands.[59]
Shuttle diplomacy[edit]
 Margaret Thatcher meets Alexander Haig in London.
On 8 April, Alexander Haig, the United States Secretary of State, arrived in London on a shuttle diplomacy mission from President Ronald Reagan to broker a peace deal based on an interim authority taking control of the islands pending negotiations. After hearing from Thatcher that the task force would not be withdrawn unless the Argentines evacuated their troops, Haig headed for Buenos Aires.[60] There he met the junta and Nicanor Costa M ndez, the foreign minister. Haig was treated coolly and told that Argentine sovereignty must be a pre-condition of any talks. Returning to London on 11 April, he found the British cabinet in no mood for compromise. Haig flew back to Washington before returning to Buenos Aires for a final protracted round of talks. These made little progress, but just as Haig and his mission were leaving, they were told that Galtieri would meet them at the airport VIP lounge to make an important concession; however, this was cancelled at the last minute. On 30 April, the Reagan administration announced that they would be publicly supporting the United Kingdom.[61]
British task force[edit]
Main article: British logistics in the Falklands War
 Distances from British airbases to the Falklands
 HMS Invincible, one of two available aircraft carriers for the task force
 Royal Navy FAA Sea Harrier FRS1
The British government had no contingency plan for an invasion of the islands, and the task force was rapidly put together from whatever vessels were available.[citation needed]
Main article: List of Royal Navy vessels active in 1982
The nuclear-powered submarine Conqueror set sail from Faslane, Scotland on 4 April. The two aircraft carriers Invincible and Hermes and their escort vessels left Portsmouth, England only a day later.[35] On its return to Southampton from a world cruise on 7 April, the ocean liner SS Canberra was requisitioned and set sail two days later with the 3 Commando Brigade aboard.[35] The ocean liner Queen Elizabeth 2 was also requisitioned, and left Southampton on 12 May, with the 5th Infantry Brigade on board.[35] The whole task force eventually comprised 127 ships: 43 Royal Navy vessels, 22 Royal Fleet Auxiliary ships, and 62 merchant ships.[citation needed]
The retaking of the Falkland Islands was considered extremely difficult. The chances of a British counter-invasion succeeding were assessed by the US Navy, according to historian Arthur L. Herman, as "a military impossibility".[62] Firstly, the British were significantly constrained by the disparity in deployable air cover.[63] The British had 42 aircraft (28 Sea Harriers and 14 Harrier GR.3s) available for air combat operations,[citation needed] against approximately 122 serviceable jet fighters, of which about 50 were used as air superiority fighters and the remainder as strike aircraft, in Argentina's air forces during the war.[64] Crucially, the British lacked airborne early warning and control (AEW) aircraft. Planning also considered the Argentine surface fleet and the threat posed by Exocet-equipped vessels or the two Type 209 submarines.[65]
By mid-April, the Royal Air Force had set up an airbase on RAF Ascension Island, co-located with Wideawake Airfield, on the mid-Atlantic British overseas territory of Ascension Island. They included a sizeable force of Avro Vulcan B Mk 2 bombers, Handley Page Victor K Mk 2 refuelling aircraft, and McDonnell Douglas Phantom FGR Mk 2 fighters to protect them. Meanwhile, the main British naval task force arrived at Ascension to prepare for active service. A small force had already been sent south to recapture South Georgia.
Encounters began in April; the British Task Force was shadowed by Boeing 707 aircraft of the Argentine Air Force during their travel to the south.[66] Several of these flights were intercepted by Sea Harriers outside the British-imposed Total Exclusion Zone; the unarmed 707s were not attacked because diplomatic moves were still in progress and the UK had not yet decided to commit itself to armed force. On 23 April, a Brazilian commercial Douglas DC-10 from VARIG Airlines en route to South Africa was intercepted by British Harriers who visually identified the civilian plane.[67]
Recapture of South Georgia and the attack on Santa Fe[edit]
The South Georgia force, Operation Paraquet, under the command of Major Guy Sheridan RM, consisted of Marines from 42 Commando, a troop of the Special Air Service (SAS) and Special Boat Service (SBS) troops who were intended to land as reconnaissance forces for an invasion by the Royal Marines, a total of 240 men. All were embarked on RFA Tidespring. First to arrive was the Churchill-class submarine HMS Conqueror on 19 April, and the island was over-flown by a Handley Page Victor aircraft with radar-mapping equipment on 20 April, to establish that no Argentine ships were in the vicinity.[68]
 ARA Santa Fe
The first landings of SAS and SBS troops took place on 21 April, but a mission to establish an observation post on the Fortuna Glacier had to be withdrawn after two helicopters crashed in fog and high winds. On 23 April, a submarine alert was sounded and operations were halted, with Tidespring being withdrawn to deeper water to avoid interception. On 24 April, British forces regrouped and headed in to attack.[69]
On 25 April, after resupplying the Argentine garrison in South Georgia, the submarine ARA Santa Fe was spotted on the surface[70] by a Westland Wessex HAS Mk 3 helicopter from HMS Antrim, which attacked the Argentine submarine with depth charges. HMS Plymouth launched a Westland Wasp HAS.Mk.1 helicopter, and HMS Brilliant launched a Westland Lynx HAS Mk 2. The Lynx launched a torpedo, and strafed the submarine with its pintle-mounted general purpose machine gun; the Wessex also fired on Santa Fe with its GPMG. The Wasp from HMS Plymouth as well as two other Wasps launched from HMS Endurance fired AS-12 ASM antiship missiles at the submarine, scoring hits. Santa Fe was damaged badly enough to prevent her from diving. The crew abandoned the submarine at the jetty at King Edward Point on South Georgia.[71]
With Tidespring now far out to sea and the Argentine forces augmented by the submarine's crew, Major Sheridan decided to gather the 76 men he had and make a direct assault that day. After a short forced march by the British troops and a naval bombardment demonstration by two Royal Navy vessels (Antrim and Plymouth), the Argentine forces, a total of 190 men, surrendered without resistance.[72] The message sent from the naval force at South Georgia to London was, "Be pleased to inform Her Majesty that the White Ensign flies alongside the Union Jack in South Georgia. God Save the Queen." The Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, broke the news to the media, telling them to "Just rejoice at that news, and congratulate our forces and the Marines!"[73]
Black Buck raids[edit]
Main article: Operation Black Buck
 RAF Avro Vulcan B.Mk.2 strategic bomber
On 1 May British operations on the Falklands opened with the "Black Buck 1" attack (of a series of five) on the airfield at Stanley. A Vulcan bomber from Ascension flew an 8,000-nautical-mile (15,000 km; 9,200 mi) round trip, dropping conventional bombs across the runway at Stanley. The mission required repeated refuelling using several Victor K2 tanker aircraft operating in concert, including tanker-to-tanker refuelling.[74] The overall effect of the raids on the war is difficult to determine. The runway was cratered by only one of the twenty one bombs, but as a result, the Argentines realised that their mainland was vulnerable and fighter aircraft were redeployed from the theatre to bases further north.[75]
Historian Lawrence Freedman, who was given access to official sources, comments that the significance of the Vulcan raids remains a subject of controversy.[76] Although they took pressure off the small Sea Harrier force, the raids were costly and used a great deal of resources. The single hit in the centre of the runway was probably the best that could have been expected, but it did reduce the capability of the runway to operate fast jets and caused the Argentine air force to deploy Mirage IIIs to defend the capital.[77] Argentine sources confirm that the Vulcan raids influenced Argentina to shift some of its Mirage IIIs from southern Argentina to the Buenos Aires Defence Zone.[78] This dissuasive effect was watered down when British officials made clear that there would not be strikes on air bases in Argentina.[citation needed] The raids were later dismissed as propaganda by Falklands veteran Commander Nigel Ward.[79]
Of the five Black Buck raids, three were against Stanley Airfield, with the other two being anti-radar missions using Shrike anti-radiation missiles.[80]
Escalation of the air war[edit]
 French-built Super  tendard of the Argentine Naval Aviation
The Falklands had only three airfields. The longest and only paved runway was at the capital, Stanley, and even that was too short to support fast jets. Therefore, the Argentines were forced to launch their major strikes from the mainland, severely hampering their efforts at forward staging, combat air patrols, and close air support over the islands. The effective loiter time of incoming Argentine aircraft was low, limiting the ability of fighters to protect attack aircraft, which were often compelled to attack the first target of opportunity, rather than selecting the most lucrative target.[81]
The first major Argentine strike force comprised 36 aircraft (A-4 Skyhawks, IAI Daggers, English Electric Canberras, and Mirage III escorts), and was sent on 1 May, in the belief that the British invasion was imminent or landings had already taken place. Only a section of Grupo 6 (flying IAI Dagger aircraft) found ships, which were firing at Argentine defences near the islands. The Daggers managed to attack the ships and return safely. This greatly boosted the morale of the Argentine pilots, who now knew they could survive an attack against modern warships, protected by radar ground clutter from the islands and by using a late pop up profile. Meanwhile, other Argentine aircraft were intercepted by BAE Sea Harriers operating from HMS Invincible. A Dagger[82] and a Canberra were shot down.[83]
Combat broke out between Sea Harrier FRS Mk 1 fighters of No. 801 Naval Air Squadron and Mirage III fighters of Grupo 8. Both sides refused to fight at the other's best altitude, until two Mirages finally descended to engage. One was shot down by an AIM-9L Sidewinder air-to-air missile (AAM), while the other escaped but was damaged and without enough fuel to return to its mainland airbase. The plane made for Stanley, where it fell victim to friendly fire from the Argentine defenders.[84]
As a result of this experience, Argentine Air Force staff decided to employ A-4 Skyhawks and Daggers only as strike units, the Canberras only during the night, and Mirage IIIs (without air refuelling capability or any capable AAM) as decoys to lure away the British Sea Harriers. The decoying would be later extended with the formation of the Escuadr n F nix, a squadron of civilian jets flying 24 hours a day, simulating strike aircraft preparing to attack the fleet. On one of these flights on 7 June, an Air Force Learjet 35A was shot down, killing the squadron commander, Vice Commodore Rodolfo De La Colina, the highest-ranking Argentine officer to die in the war.[85][86]
Stanley was used as an Argentine strongpoint throughout the conflict. Despite the Black Buck and Harrier raids on Stanley airfield (no fast jets were stationed there for air defence) and overnight shelling by detached ships, it was never out of action entirely. Stanley was defended by a mixture of surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems (Franco-German Roland and British Tigercat) and light anti-aircraft guns, including Swiss-built Oerlikon 35 mm twin anti-aircraft cannons and 30 mm Hispano-Suiza cannon and German Rheinmetall 20 mm twin anti-aircraft cannons. More of the anti-aircraft guns were deployed to the airstrip at Goose Green.[87][88] Lockheed Hercules transport night flights brought supplies, weapons, vehicles, and fuel, and airlifted out the wounded up until the end of the conflict.[89]
The only Argentine Hercules shot down by the British was lost on 1 June when TC-63 was intercepted by a Sea Harrier in daylight[90][91] as it was searching for the British fleet north-east of the islands, after the Argentine Navy retired its last SP-2H Neptune due to unreliability.[92]
Various options to attack the home base of the five Argentine  tendards at R o Grande were examined and discounted (Operation Mikado); subsequently five Royal Navy submarines were lined up, submerged, on the edge of Argentina's 12-nautical-mile (22 km; 14 mi) territorial limit to provide early warning of bombing raids on the British task force.[93]
Operation Folklore was a plan to deploy two Canberra PR.9 aircraft of No. 39 Squadron RAF, disguised in Chilean Air Force markings, to the Chilean air base at Punta Arenas, with the intention of undertaking high-level photo-reconnaissance flights over the Falklands;[94] however the Canberras had reached Belize when the operation was abandoned after part of the plan had been reported in the British press.[95] Operation Acme was the deployment of a single Nimrod R.1 surveillance aircraft of No. 51 Squadron RAF to the Chilean base at Isla San F lix to gather signals intelligence from Argentinian forces in the Falklands;[96] three sorties were conducted, the last on 17 May narrowly avoided being shot down by the Chileans, leading to the cancellation of the operation.[97] More successful was Operation Fingent, the placement of a Marconi S259 radar on high ground in Tierra del Fuego from where it could monitor movements at southern Argentinian air bases; the RAF crew wore civilian clothes in the guise of a sales team.[98] Information was passed to Northwood and the Task Force by means of Operation Shutter, a US supplied SATCOM system installed at the Chilean Air Force headquarters in Santiago and operated by two soldiers of the Royal Corps of Signals.[99]
Sinking of ARA General Belgrano[edit]
 ARA General Belgrano sinking
 Alferez Sobral
On 30 April, the British government had brought into force a 200 nautical miles (370 kilometres; 230 miles) Total Exclusion Zone (TEZ) to replace the previous Maritime Exclusion Zone; aircraft as well as ships of any nation were liable to attack inside it, if they were aiding the Argentine occupation. Admiral Woodward's carrier battle group of twelve warships and three supply ships entered the TEZ on 1 May, shortly before the first Black Buck raid, intending to degrade Argentine air and sea forces before the arrival of the amphibious group two weeks later.[100] In anticipation, Admiral Anaya had deployed all his available warships into three task groups. The first was centred around the aircraft carrier ARA Veinticinco de Mayo with two old but missile-armed destroyers, and a second comprised three modern frigates. Both these groups were intended to approach the TEZ from the north. A third group approaching from the south was led by the Second World War-vintage Argentine light cruiser ARA General Belgrano;[101] although old, her large guns and heavy armour made her a serious threat, and she was escorted by two modern Type 42 guided-missile destroyers, armed with Exocet missiles.[102]
On 1 May, the British nuclear-powered submarine HMS Conqueror (one of three patrolling the TEZ) located the Belgrano group and followed it until the following day, when it was about 12 hours away from the Task Force and just outside the Total Exclusion Zone. Admiral Woodward was aware of the Argentine carrier group approaching from the other direction, and ordered the cruiser to be attacked to avoid being caught in a pincer movement; he was unaware that the Veinticinco de Mayo had failed to gain enough headwind to launch her aircraft. The order to sink the cruiser was confirmed by the War Cabinet in London and the General Belgrano was hit by two torpedoes at 4 pm local time on 2 May, sinking an hour later.[103] 321 members of General Belgrano's crew, along with two civilians on board the ship, died in the incident. More than 700 men were eventually rescued from the open ocean despite cold seas and stormy weather, enduring up to 30 hours in overcrowded life rafts.[104] The loss of General Belgrano drew heavy criticism from Latin American countries and from opponents of the war in Britain; support for the British cause wavered amongst some European allies, but critically, the United States remained supportive.[105]
Regardless of controversies over the sinking   including disagreement about the exact nature of the exclusion zone and whether General Belgrano had been returning to port at the time of the sinking   it had a crucial strategic effect: the elimination of the Argentine naval threat. After her loss, the entire Argentine fleet, with the exception of the diesel-powered submarine ARA San Luis,[70] returned to port and did not leave again during the fighting. This had the secondary effect of allowing the British to redeploy their nuclear submarines to the coast of Argentina, where they were able to provide early warning of outgoing air attacks leaving mainland bases.[106] However, settling the controversy in 2003, the ship's captain, Hector Bonzo, stated to a documentary crew that General Belgrano had actually been manoeuvering, not sailing away from the exclusion zone, and that he had orders to sink any British ship he could find.[107]
In a separate incident later that night, British forces engaged an Argentine patrol gunboat, the ARA Alferez Sobral, that was searching for the crew of an Argentine Air Force Canberra light bomber shot down on 1 May. Two Royal Navy Lynx helicopters, from HMS Coventry and HMS Glasgow, fired four Sea Skua missiles at her. Badly damaged and with eight crew dead, Alferez Sobral managed to return to Puerto Deseado two days later.[108] The Canberra's crew were never found.[109]
Sinking of HMS Sheffield[edit]
 HMS Sheffield
On 4 May, two days after the sinking of General Belgrano, the British lost the Type 42 destroyer HMS Sheffield to fire following an Exocet missile strike from the Argentine 2nd Naval Air Fighter/Attack Squadron.[110]
Sheffield had been ordered forward with two other Type 42s to provide a long-range radar and medium-high altitude missile picket far from the British carriers. She was struck amidships, with devastating effect, ultimately killing 20 crew members and severely injuring 24 others. The ship was abandoned several hours later, gutted and deformed by fires. For four days she was kept afloat for inspections and the hope that she might attract Argentine submarines which could be hunted by helicopter. The decision was then taken to tow her to Ascension, but while under tow by HMS Yarmouth, she finally sank east of the Falklands on 10 May.[111]
The incident is described in detail by Admiral Sandy Woodward in his book One Hundred Days, in Chapter One. Woodward was a former commanding officer of Sheffield.[112] The destruction of Sheffield, the first Royal Navy ship sunk in action since the Second World War, had a profound impact on the War Cabinet and the British public as a whole, bringing home the fact that the conflict was now an actual shooting war.[113]
Diplomatic activity[edit]
The tempo of operations increased throughout the first half of May as the United Nations' attempts to mediate a peace were rejected by the Argentines. The final British negotiating position was presented to Argentina by UN Secretary General P rez de Cu llar on 18 May 1982. In it, the British abandoned their previous "red-line" that British administration of the islands should be restored on the withdrawal of Argentine forces, as supported by United Nations Security Council Resolution 502.[114]
Instead, it proposed a UN administrator should supervise the mutual withdrawal of both Argentine and British forces, then govern the islands in consultation with the representative institutions of the islands, including Argentines, although no Argentines lived there. Reference to "self-determination" of the islanders was dropped and the British proposed that future negotiations over the sovereignty of the islands should be conducted by the UN.[115] However, the proposals were rejected by the Argentines on the same day.[116]
Special forces operations[edit]
Given the threat to the British fleet posed by the  tendard-Exocet combination, plans were made to use C-130s to fly in some SAS troops to attack the home base of the five  tendards at R o Grande, Tierra del Fuego. The operation was codenamed "Mikado". The operation was later scrapped, after acknowledging that its chances of success were limited, and replaced with a plan to use the submarine HMS Onyx to drop SAS operatives several miles offshore at night for them to make their way to the coast aboard rubber inflatables and proceed to destroy Argentina's remaining Exocet stockpile.[117]
An SAS reconnaissance team was dispatched to carry out preparations for a seaborne infiltration. A Westland Sea King helicopter carrying the assigned team took off from HMS Invincible on the night of 17 May, but bad weather forced it to land 50 miles (80 km) from its target and the mission was aborted.[118] The pilot flew to Chile, landed south of Punta Arenas, and dropped off the SAS team. The helicopter's crew of three then destroyed the aircraft, surrendered to Chilean police on 25 May, and were repatriated to the UK after interrogation. The discovery of the burnt-out helicopter attracted considerable international attention. Meanwhile, the SAS team crossed the border and penetrated into Argentina, but cancelled their mission after the Argentines suspected an SAS operation and deployed some 2,000 troops to search for them. The SAS men were able to return to Chile, and took a civilian flight back to the UK.[119]
On 14 May the SAS carried out a raid on Pebble Island on the Falklands, where the Argentine Navy had taken over a grass airstrip map for FMA IA 58 Pucar  light ground-attack aircraft and Beechcraft T-34 Mentors, which resulted in the destruction of several aircraft.[nb 1][120]
On 15 May, SBS teams were inserted by HMS Brilliant at Grantham Sound to reconnoitre and observe the landing beaches at San Carlos Bay.[121] On the evening of 20 May, the day before the main landings, an SBS troop and artillery observers were landed by Wessex helicopters for an assault on an Argentine observation post at Fanning Head which overlooked the entrance of the bay; meanwhile, the SAS conducted a diversionary raid at Darwin.[122]
Air attacks[edit]
Main article: Battle of San Carlos (1982)
 HMS Antelope smoking after being hit, 23 May
 HMS Coventry in 1981
In the landing zone, the limitations of the British ships' anti-aircraft defences were demonstrated in the sinking of HMS Ardent on 21 May which was hit by nine bombs,[123] and HMS Antelope (F170) on 24 May when attempts to defuse unexploded bombs failed.[124] Out at sea with the carrier battle group, MV Atlantic Conveyor was struck by an air-launched Exocet on 25 May, which caused the loss of three out of four Chinook and five Wessex helicopters as well as their maintenance equipment and facilities, together with runway-building equipment and tents. This was a severe blow from a logistical perspective. Twelve of her crew members were killed.[125]
Also lost on 25 May was HMS Coventry, a sister to Sheffield, whilst in company with HMS Broadsword after being ordered to act as a decoy to draw away Argentine aircraft from other ships at San Carlos Bay.[126] HMS Argonaut and HMS Brilliant were moderately damaged.[64]
 Argentine A4 SkyHawk Attack on HMS Brilliant and HMS Glasgow, 12 May 1982
Many British ships escaped being sunk because of limitations imposed by circumstances on Argentine pilots. To avoid the highest concentration of British air defences, Argentine pilots released bombs at very low altitude, and hence those bomb fuses did not have sufficient time to arm before impact. The low release of the retarded bombs (some of which the British had sold to the Argentines years earlier) meant that many never exploded, as there was insufficient time in the air for them to arm themselves.[nb 2] The pilots would have been aware of this but due to the high concentration required to avoid surface-to-air missiles, anti-Aircraft Artillery (AAA), and British Sea Harriers, many failed to climb to the necessary release point. The Argentine forces solved the problem by fitting improvised retarding devices, allowing the pilots to effectively employ low-level bombing attacks on 8 June.
 Atlantic Conveyor approaching the Falklands, on or about 19 May 1982
Thirteen bombs hit British ships without detonating.[127] Lord Craig, the retired Marshal of the Royal Air Force, is said to have remarked: "Six better fuses and we would have lost"[128] although Ardent and Antelope were both lost despite the failure of bombs to explode, and Argonaut was out of action. The fuses were functioning correctly, and the bombs were simply released from too low an altitude.[129][130] The Argentines lost 22 aircraft in the attacks.[nb 3]
In his autobiographical account of the Falklands War, Admiral Woodward blamed the BBC World Service for disclosing information that led the Argentines to change the retarding devices on the bombs. The World Service reported the lack of detonations after receiving a briefing on the matter from a Ministry of Defence official. He describes the BBC as being more concerned with being "fearless seekers after truth" than with the lives of British servicemen.[129] Colonel 'H'. Jones levelled similar accusations against the BBC after they disclosed the impending British attack on Goose Green by 2 Para.[131]
 HMS Broadsword and HMS Hermes during the war
On 30 May, two Super  tendards, one carrying Argentina's last remaining Exocet, escorted by four A-4C Skyhawks each with two 500 lb bombs, took off to attack Invincible.[132] Argentine intelligence had sought to determine the position of the carriers from analysis of aircraft flight routes from the task force to the islands.[132] However, the British had a standing order that all aircraft conduct a low level transit when leaving or returning to the carriers to disguise their position.[133] This tactic compromised the Argentine attack, which focused on a group of escorts 40 miles (64 km) south of the carrier group.[134] Two of the attacking Skyhawks[134] were shot down by Sea Dart missiles fired by HMS Exeter,[132] with HMS Avenger claiming to have shot down the Exocet missile with her 4.5" gun (although this claim is disputed).[135] No damage was caused to any British vessels.[132] During the war, Argentina claimed to have damaged Invincible and continues to do so thereafter,[136] although no evidence of any such damage has been produced or uncovered.[64][137]
Land battles[edit]
San Carlos   Bomb Alley[edit]
Main article: Operation Sutton
 British sailors in anti-flash gear at action stations on HMS Cardiff near San Carlos, June 1982
During the night of 21 May, the British Amphibious Task Group under the command of Commodore Michael Clapp (Commodore, Amphibious Warfare   COMAW) mounted Operation Sutton, the amphibious landing on beaches around San Carlos Water,[nb 4] on the northwestern coast of East Falkland facing onto Falkland Sound. The bay, known as Bomb Alley by British forces, was the scene of repeated air attacks by low-flying Argentine jets.[138][139]
The 4,000 men of 3 Commando Brigade were put ashore as follows: 2nd Battalion, Parachute Regiment (2 Para) from the RORO ferry Norland and 40 Commando Royal Marines from the amphibious ship HMS Fearless were landed at San Carlos (Blue Beach), 3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment (3 Para) from the amphibious ship HMS Intrepid was landed at Port San Carlos (Green Beach) and 45 Commando from RFA Stromness was landed at Ajax Bay (Red Beach).[140] Notably, the waves of eight LCUs and eight LCVPs were led by Major Ewen Southby-Tailyour, who had commanded the Falklands detachment NP8901 from March 1978 to 1979. 42 Commando on the ocean liner SS Canberra was a tactical reserve. Units from the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, etc. and armoured reconnaissance vehicles were also put ashore with the landing craft, the Round Table class LSL and mexeflote barges. Rapier missile launchers were carried as underslung loads of Sea Kings for rapid deployment.[141]
By dawn the next day, they had established a secure beachhead from which to conduct offensive operations. Brigadier Julian Thompson established his brigade headquarters in dugouts near San Carlos Settlement.[142]
Goose Green[edit]
Main article: Battle of Goose Green
 Infantry deployment in East Falklands after landing in San Carlos
From early on 27 May until 28 May 2 Para approached and attacked Darwin and Goose Green, which was held by the Argentine 12th Infantry Regiment. 2 Para s 500 men had naval gunfire support from HMS Arrow[85] and artillery support from 8 Commando Battery and the Royal Artillery. After a tough struggle that lasted all night and into the next day, the British won the battle; in all, 18 British and 47 Argentine soldiers were killed. A total of 961 Argentine troops (including 202 Argentine Air Force personnel of the Condor airfield) were taken prisoner.
The BBC announced the taking of Goose Green on the BBC World Service before it had actually happened. During this attack Lieutenant Colonel H. Jones, the commanding officer of 2 Para, was killed at the head of his battalion while charging into the well-prepared Argentine positions. He was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross.
With the sizeable Argentine force at Goose Green out of the way, British forces were now able to break out of the San Carlos beachhead. On 27 May, men of 45 Cdo and 3 Para started a loaded march across East Falkland towards the coastal settlement of Teal Inlet.
Special forces on Mount Kent[edit]
Main article: Assault on Mount Kent
Meanwhile, 42 Commando prepared to move by helicopter to Mount Kent.[nb 5] Unbeknownst to senior British officers, the Argentine generals were determined to tie down the British troops in the Mount Kent area, and on 27 and 28 May they sent transport aircraft loaded with Blowpipe surface-to-air missiles and commandos (602nd Commando Company and 601st National Gendarmerie Special Forces Squadron) to Stanley. This operation was known as Autoimpuesta ("Self-imposed").
For the next week, the SAS and the Mountain and Arctic Warfare Cadre (M&AWC) of 3 Commando Brigade waged intense patrol battles with patrols of the volunteers' 602nd Commando Company under Major Aldo Rico, normally second in Command of the 22nd Mountain Infantry Regiment. Throughout 30 May, Royal Air Force Harriers were active over Mount Kent. One of them, Harrier XZ963, flown by Squadron Leader Jerry Pook in responding to a call for help from D Squadron, attacked Mount Kent's eastern lower slopes, which led to its loss through small-arms fire. Pook was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.[143]
On 31 May, the M&AWC defeated Argentine Special Forces at the skirmish at Top Malo House. A 13-strong Argentine Army Commando detachment (Captain Jos  Vercesi's 1st Assault Section, 602nd Commando Company) found itself trapped in a small shepherd's house at Top Malo. The Argentine commandos fired from windows and doorways and then took refuge in a stream bed 200 metres (700 ft) from the burning house. Completely surrounded, they fought 19 M&AWC marines under Captain Rod Boswell for 45 minutes until, with their ammunition almost exhausted, they elected to surrender.
Three Cadre members were badly wounded. On the Argentine side, there were two dead, including Lieutenant Ernesto Espinoza and Sergeant Mateo Sbert (who were posthumously decorated for their bravery). Only five Argentines were left unscathed. As the British mopped up Top Malo House, Lieutenant Fraser Haddow's M&AWC patrol came down from Malo Hill, brandishing a large Union Flag. One wounded Argentine soldier, Lieutenant Horacio Losito, commented that their escape route would have taken them through Haddow's position.[144]
601st Commando tried to move forward to rescue 602nd Commando Company on Estancia Mountain. Spotted by 42 Commando, they were engaged with L16 81mm mortars and forced to withdraw to Two Sisters mountain. The leader of 602nd Commando Company on Estancia Mountain realised his position had become untenable and after conferring with fellow officers ordered a withdrawal.[145]
The Argentine operation also saw the extensive use of helicopter support to position and extract patrols; the 601st Combat Aviation Battalion also suffered casualties. At about 11:00 am on 30 May, an A rospatiale SA 330 Puma helicopter was brought down by a shoulder-launched FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missile (SAM) fired by the SAS in the vicinity of Mount Kent. Six Argentine National Gendarmerie Special Forces were killed and eight more wounded in the crash.[146]
As Brigadier Thompson commented, "It was fortunate that I had ignored the views expressed by Northwood HQ that reconnaissance of Mount Kent before insertion of 42 Commando was superfluous. Had D Squadron not been there, the Argentine Special Forces would have caught the Commando before de-planing and, in the darkness and confusion on a strange landing zone, inflicted heavy casualties on men and helicopters."[147]
Bluff Cove and Fitzroy[edit]
Main article: Bluff Cove Air Attacks
By 1 June, with the arrival of a further 5,000 British troops of the 5th Infantry Brigade, the new British divisional commander, Major General Jeremy Moore RM, had sufficient force to start planning an offensive against Stanley. During this build-up, the Argentine air assaults on the British naval forces continued, killing 56. Of the dead, 32 were from the Welsh Guards on RFA Sir Galahad and RFA Sir Tristram on 8 June. According to Surgeon-Commander Rick Jolly of the Falklands Field Hospital, more than 150 men suffered burns and injuries of some kind in the attack, including Simon Weston.[148]
The Guards were sent to support an advance along the southern approach to Stanley. On 2 June, a small advance party of 2 Para moved to Swan Inlet house in a number of Army Westland Scout helicopters. Telephoning ahead to Fitzroy, they discovered that the area was clear of Argentines and (exceeding their authority) commandeered the one remaining RAF Chinook helicopter to frantically ferry another contingent of 2 Para ahead to Fitzroy (a settlement on Port Pleasant) and Bluff Cove (a settlement on Port Fitzroy).[149]
 The road to Stanley
This uncoordinated advance caused great difficulties in planning for the commanders of the combined operation, as they now found themselves with 30 miles (48 km) of indefensible positions, strung along their southern flank. Support could not be sent by air as the single remaining Chinook was already heavily oversubscribed. The soldiers could march, but their equipment and heavy supplies would need to be ferried by sea.
Plans were drawn up for half the Welsh Guards to march light on the night of 2 June, whilst the Scots Guards and the second half of the Welsh Guards were to be ferried from San Carlos Water in the Landing Ship Logistics (LSL) Sir Tristram and the landing platform dock (LPD) Intrepid on the night of 5 June. Intrepid was planned to stay one day and unload itself and as much of Sir Tristram as possible, leaving the next evening for the relative safety of San Carlos. Escorts would be provided for this day, after which Sir Tristram would be left to unload using a Mexeflote (a powered raft) for as long as it took to finish.[150]
Political pressure from above to not risk the LPD forced Commodore Michael Clapp to alter this plan. Two lower-value LSLs would be sent, but with no suitable beaches to land on, Intrepid's landing craft would need to accompany them to unload. A complicated operation across several nights with Intrepid and her sister ship Fearless sailing half-way to dispatch their craft was devised.[151]
The attempted overland march by half the Welsh Guards failed, possibly as they refused to march light and attempted to carry their equipment.[152] They returned to San Carlos and landed directly at Bluff Cove when Fearless dispatched her landing craft. Sir Tristram sailed on the night of 6 June and was joined by Sir Galahad at dawn on 7 June. Anchored 1,200 feet (370 m) apart in Port Pleasant, the landing ships were near Fitzroy, the designated landing point. The landing craft should have been able to unload the ships to that point relatively quickly, but confusion over the ordered disembarkation point (the first half of the Guards going direct to Bluff Cove) resulted in the senior Welsh Guards infantry officer aboard insisting that his troops should be ferried the far longer distance directly to Port Fitzroy/Bluff Cove. The alternative was for the infantrymen to march via the recently repaired Bluff Cove bridge (destroyed by retreating Argentine combat engineers) to their destination, a journey of around seven miles (11 km).[153]
On Sir Galahad's stern ramp there was an argument about what to do. The officers on board were told that they could not sail to Bluff Cove that day. They were told that they had to get their men off ship and onto the beach as soon as possible as the ships were vulnerable to enemy aircraft. It would take 20 minutes to transport the men to shore using the LCU and Mexeflote. They would then have the choice of walking the seven miles to Bluff Cove or wait until dark to sail there. The officers on board said that they would remain on board until dark and then sail. They refused to take their men off the ship. They possibly doubted that the bridge had been repaired due to the presence on board Sir Galahad of the Royal Engineer Troop whose job it was to repair the bridge. The Welsh Guards were keen to rejoin the rest of their Battalion, who were potentially facing the enemy without their support. They had also not seen any enemy aircraft since landing at San Carlos and may have been overconfident in the air defences. Ewen Southby-Tailyour gave a direct order for the men to leave the ship and go to the beach; the order was ignored.[154]
The longer journey time of the landing craft taking the troops directly to Bluff Cove and the squabbling over how the landing was to be performed caused an enormous delay in unloading. This had disastrous consequences, since the ships were visible to Argentine troops on Mount Harriet, some ten miles (16 km) distant.[155] Without escorts, having not yet established their air defence, and still almost fully laden, the two LSLs in Port Pleasant were sitting targets for eight Argentine A-4 Skyhawks. A coordinated sortie by six Daggers attacked HMS Plymouth, which had the effect of drawing off the patrolling Sea Harriers. At 17.00, the Skyhawks attacked from seaward, hitting Sir Galahad with three bombs; although none exploded, they caused fierce fires which quickly grew out of control. Two bombs hit Sir Tristram, also starting fires and causing the ship to be abandoned, but the damage was not as serious. Three Sea King and a Wessex helicopter ferried the wounded to an advanced dressing station which was set up on the shore.[156]
British casualties were 48 killed and 115 wounded.[157] Three Argentine pilots were also killed. The air strike delayed the scheduled British ground attack on Stanley by two days.[158] The British casualties amounted to two infantry companies, but it was decided not to release detailed casualty figures because intelligence indicated that Argentine commanders believed that a much more severe reverse had been inflicted. However, the disaster at Port Pleasant (although often known as Bluff Cove) would provide the world with some of the most sobering images of the war as ITV News video showed helicopters hovering in thick smoke to winch survivors from the burning landing ships.[159]
Fall of Stanley[edit]
See also: Argentine surrender in the Falklands War
 HMS Cardiff anchored outside Port Stanley at the end of hostilities in 1982
 Argentine prisoners of war in Port Stanley
On the night of 11 June, after several days of painstaking reconnaissance and logistic build-up, British forces launched a brigade-sized night attack against the heavily defended ring of high ground surrounding Stanley. Units of 3 Commando Brigade, supported by naval gunfire from several Royal Navy ships, simultaneously attacked in the Battle of Mount Harriet, Battle of Two Sisters, and Battle of Mount Longdon. Mount Harriet was taken at a cost of 2 British and 18 Argentine soldiers. At Two Sisters, the British faced both enemy resistance and friendly fire, but managed to capture their objectives. The toughest battle was at Mount Longdon. British forces were bogged down by rifle, mortar, machine gun, artillery and sniper fire, and ambushes. Despite this, the British continued their advance.[160]
During this battle, 14 were killed when HMS Glamorgan, straying too close to shore while returning from the gun line, was struck by an improvised trailer-based Exocet MM38 launcher taken from the destroyer ARA Segu  by Argentine Navy technicians.[161] On the same day, Sergeant Ian McKay of 4 Platoon, B Company, 3 Para died in a grenade attack on an Argentine bunker; he received a posthumous Victoria Cross for his actions.[162] After a night of fierce fighting, all objectives were secured. Both sides suffered heavy losses.[163]
 A pile of discarded Argentine weapons in Port Stanley
The second phase of attacks began on the night of 13 June, and the momentum of the initial assault was maintained. 2 Para, with light armour support from the Blues and Royals, captured Wireless Ridge, with the loss of 3 British and 25 Argentine lives, and the 2nd Battalion, Scots Guards captured Mount Tumbledown at the Battle of Mount Tumbledown, which cost 10 British and 30 Argentine lives.[164] A simultaneous special forces raid by the SAS and SBS in fast boats to attack the oil tanks in Stanley Harbour was beaten off by anti-aircraft guns.[165]
With the last natural defence line at Mount Tumbledown breached, the Argentine town defences of Stanley began to falter. In the morning gloom, one company commander got lost and his junior officers became despondent. Private Santiago Carrizo of the 3rd Regiment described how a platoon commander ordered them to take up positions in the houses and "if a Kelper resists, shoot him", but the entire company did nothing of the kind.[166] A daylight attack on Mount William by the Gurkhas, delayed from the previous night by the fighting at Tumbledown, ended in anticlimax when the Argentine positions were found to be deserted.[167]
A ceasefire was declared on 14 June and Thatcher announced the commencement of surrender negotiations. The commander of the Argentine garrison in Stanley, Brigade General Mario Men ndez, surrendered to Major General Jeremy Moore the same day.[168]
Recapture of South Sandwich Islands[edit]
Main article: Operation Keyhole
 The Argentine Thule Garrison at the Corbeta Uruguay base
On 20 June, the British retook the South Sandwich Islands, which involved accepting the surrender of the Southern Thule Garrison at the Corbeta Uruguay base, and declared hostilities over. Argentina had established Corbeta Uruguay in 1976, but prior to 1982 the United Kingdom had contested the existence of the Argentine base only through diplomatic channels.[169]
Foreign involvement[edit]
Commonwealth[edit]
The UK received political support from member countries of the Commonwealth of Nations. Australia, Canada, and New Zealand withdrew their diplomats from Buenos Aires.[170]
New Zealand[edit]
The New Zealand government expelled the Argentine ambassador following the invasion. The Prime Minister, Robert Muldoon, was in London when the war broke out[171] and in an opinion piece published in The Times he said: "The military rulers of Argentina must not be appeased   New Zealand will back Britain all the way." Broadcasting on the BBC World Service, he told the Falkland Islanders: "This is Rob Muldoon. We are thinking of you and we are giving our full and total support to the British Government in its endeavours to rectify this situation and get rid of the people who have invaded your country."[172] On 20 May 1982, he announced that New Zealand would make HMNZS Canterbury, a Leander-class frigate, available for use where the British thought fit to release a Royal Navy vessel for the Falklands.[173] In the House of Commons afterwards, Margaret Thatcher said: " the New Zealand Government and people have been absolutely magnificent in their support for this country [and] the Falkland Islanders, for the rule of liberty and of law".[172][174]
Australia[edit]
Embarrassed by the generous response of New Zealand, the Australian prime minister, Malcolm Fraser, was rushed into offering to cancel the intended purchase of HMS Invincible, which was quickly accepted by the British. However, this left the Royal Australian Navy without a replacement for their only aircraft carrier, HMAS Melbourne (R21), which was in the process of decommissioning.[175]
France[edit]
The French president, Fran ois Mitterrand, declared an embargo on French arms sales and assistance to Argentina.[176] In addition, France allowed UK aircraft and warships use of its port and airfield facilities at Dakar in Senegal[177] and France provided dissimilar aircraft training so that Harrier pilots could train against the French aircraft used by Argentina.[178] French intelligence also cooperated with Britain to prevent Argentina from obtaining more Exocet missiles on the international market.[179] In a 2002 interview, and in reference to this support, John Nott, the then British Defence Secretary, had described France as Britain's 'greatest ally'. In 2012, it came to light that while this support was taking place, a French technical team, employed by Dassault and already in Argentina, remained there throughout the war despite the presidential decree. The team had provided material support to the Argentines, identifying and fixing faults in Exocet missile launchers. John Nott said he had known the French team was there but said its work was thought not to be of any importance. An adviser to tthe then French government denied any knowledge at the time that the technical team was there. The French DGSE did know the team was there as they had an informant in the team but decried any assistance the team gave: "It's bordering on an act of treason, or disobedience to an embargo". John Nott, when asked if he felt let down by the French said "If you're asking me: 'Are the French duplicitous people?' the answer is: 'Of course they are, and they always have been".[176] Four Exocet missiles that had been ordered by Peru were prevented by the French government from being delivered by air and, after pressure from Britain who suspected that they would be passed on to Argentina, delayed their release to a Peruvian ship until the conflict was over.[180]
United States[edit]
Declassified cables show the United States both felt that Thatcher had not considered diplomatic options and feared that a protracted conflict could draw the Soviet Union on Argentina's side.[181] The US initially tried to mediate an end to the conflict through shuttle diplomacy, but when Argentina refused the American peace overtures, US Secretary of State Alexander Haig announced that the United States would prohibit arms sales to Argentina and provide material support for British operations. Both houses of the US Congress passed resolutions supporting the American action siding with the United Kingdom.[182]
The US provided the United Kingdom with 200 Sidewinder missiles for use by the Harrier jets,[183][184] eight Stinger surface-to-air missile systems, Harpoon anti-ship missiles and mortar bombs.[185] On Ascension Island, the underground fuel tanks were empty when the British Task Force arrived in mid-April 1982 and the leading assault ship, HMS Fearless, did not have enough fuel to dock when it arrived off the island. The United States diverted a supertanker to replenish both the fuel tanks of ships at anchor there and the storage tanks on the island with approximately 2,000,000 US gallons (7,600,000 l; 1,700,000 imp gal) of fuel.[186] The Pentagon further committed to providing additional support in the event that the war dragged on into the Southern Hemisphere's winter. In that scenario, the US committed tanker aircraft to support Royal Air Force missions in Europe, releasing RAF aircraft to support operations over the Falklands.[187]
The United States allowed the United Kingdom to use American communication satellites to allow secure communications between submarines in the Southern Ocean and Naval HQ in Britain. The US also passed on satellite imagery (which it publicly denied[188]) and weather forecast data to the British Fleet.[189]
US President Ronald Reagan approved the Royal Navy's request to borrow a Sea Harrier-capable Iwo Jima-class amphibious assault ship (the US Navy had earmarked USS Guam (LPH-9) for this[190]) in the event a British aircraft carrier was lost. The US Navy developed a plan to help the British man the ship with American military contractors, who would likely be retired sailors with knowledge of the ship's systems.[191]
Other OAS members[edit]
Cuba[edit]
Argentina itself was politically backed by a number of countries in Latin America (though, notably, not Chile). Several members of the Non-Aligned Movement also backed Argentina's position; notably, Cuba and Nicaragua led a diplomatic effort to rally non-aligned countries from Africa and Asia to Argentina's position. This initiative came as a surprise to Western observers, as Cuba had no diplomatic relations with Argentina's right-leaning military junta. British diplomats complained that Cuba had "cynically exploited" the crisis to pursue its normalization of relations with Latin American countries; Argentina eventually resumed relations with Cuba in 1983; Brazil did so in 1986.[192]
Peru[edit]
Peru attempted to purchase 12 Exocet missiles from France, to be delivered to Argentina in a failed secret operation.[193][194] Peru also openly sent "Mirages, pilots and missiles" to Argentina during the war.[195] Peru had earlier transferred ten Hercules transport planes to Argentina soon after the British Task Force had set sail in April 1982.[196] Nick van der Bijl records that, after the Argentine defeat at Goose Green, Venezuela and Guatemala offered to send paratroopers to the Falklands.[197]
Chile[edit]
At the outbreak of the war, Chile was in negotiations with Argentina for control over the Beagle Channel and feared Argentina would use similar tactics to secure the channel.[198] During this conflict, Argentina had already rejected two attempts at international mediation and tried to exert military pressure on Chile with an operation to occupy the disputed territory. Considering this, Chile refused to support the Argentine position during the war[199] and gave support to the UK in the form of intelligence about the Argentine military and early warning intelligence on Argentine air movements.[200][201] Throughout the war, Argentina was afraid of a Chilean military intervention in Patagonia and kept some of its best mountain regiments away from the Falklands near the Chilean border as a precaution.[202] The Chilean government also allowed the United Kingdom to requisition the refuelling vessel RFA Tidepool, which Chile had recently purchased and which had arrived at Arica in Chile on 4 April. The ship left port soon afterwards, bound for Ascension Island through the Panama Canal and stopping at Cura ao en route.[203][204][205]
Brazil[edit]
At the end of May, Brazilian authorities allowed FAA Boeing 707s to refuel at Recife International Airport carrying arms shipments from Libya. When the British Embassy in Brasilia became aware of this, the British Secret Intelligence Service devised a plan to sabotage the next flight on the ground, but diplomatic pressure on the Brazilian government to observe their legal duties as a neutral country resulted in no further flights being accepted.[206] On 3 June, an RAF Vulcan on returning from a Black Buck raid on the Falklands, was forced to make an emergency landing at Rio de Janeiro International Airport after damage to its refuelling probe prevented it returning to Ascension Island. The Vulcan and her crew were interned and released seven days later, although an unused Shrike missile that the aircraft had been carrying was retained.[207]
Soviet Union[edit]
The Soviet Union described the Falklands as "a disputed territory," recognising Argentina's ambitions over the islands and called for restraint on all sides. Soviet media frequently criticised the UK and US during the war. Significantly, however, the Soviet Union refrained from vetoing and thus made possible UN Security Council Resolution 502 demanding the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine troops from the Falklands. However, the Soviet Union mounted some clandestine logistics operations to assist the Argentines.[208] Days after the invasion by the Argentine forces, the Soviets launched additional intelligence satellites into low Earth orbit covering the southern Atlantic Ocean. Conflicting reports exist on whether Soviet ocean surveillance data might have played a role in the sinking of HMS Sheffield and HMS Coventry.[209][210][211]
Spain[edit]
Spain's position was one of ambiguity, underpinning the basic dilemma of the Spanish foreign policy regarding the articulation of relationships with Latin America and European communities.[212] On 2 April 1982, the Council of Ministers issued an official note defending principles of decolonisation and against the use of force.[213] Spain abstained in the vote of UN Security Council Resolution 502, a position that Spanish UN representative Jaime de Pini s justified by pointing out that the resolution did not mention the underlying problem of decolonisation.[213] The Spanish stance throughout the conflict contrasted with those of the countries in its immediate vicinity (EEC members and Portugal).[214]
Spanish authorities also foiled a covert attack by the Argentine Naval Intelligence Service on a British warship at Gibraltar, code named Operation Algeciras. Three frogmen, recruited from a former anti-government insurgent group, were to plant mines on a ship's hull. The divers travelled to Spain through France, where French security services noted their military diving equipment and alerted their Spanish counterparts. They were covertly monitored as they moved from the Argentine embassy in Madrid to Algeciras, where they were arrested on 17 May by the Guardia Civil and deported.[215]
Portugal[edit]
Portugal supported his long-standing ally Britain and the facilities of the Azores were offered to the Royal Navy.[216]
EEC[edit]
The European Economic Community provided economic support by imposing economic sanctions on Argentina. In a meeting on Good Friday, 9 April, at the Egmont Palace, the EEC Political Committee proposed a total import ban from Argentina. Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Luxembourg and Ireland agreed immediately; France, Germany and the Netherlands were persuaded before the meeting ended. Italy, which had close cultural ties with Argentina, consented on the next day.[217]
Other countries[edit]
Ireland[edit]
Ireland's position altered during the war. As a rotating member of the United Nations Security Council, it supported Resolution 502. However, on 4 May, the Fianna F il government led by Charles Haughey decided to oppose EEC sanctions and called for a ceasefire. Haughey justified this as complying with Irish neutrality. Historians have suggested it was an opportunistic appeal to anti-British sentiment and reaction to Haughey's being sidelined during the 1981 republican hunger strike. The strain on British Irish relations eased when Haughey's government fell in November 1982.[218][219][220]
Israel[edit]
According to the book Operation Israel, advisers from Israel Aerospace Industries were already in Argentina and continued their work during the conflict. The book also claims that Israel sold weapons and drop tanks to Argentina in a secret operation via Peru.[221][222]
Sierra Leone[edit]
The Sierra Leonean government allowed British task force ships to refuel at Freetown.[223]
The Gambia[edit]
VC10 transport aircraft landed at Banjul in The Gambia while flying between the UK and Ascension Island.[177]
Libya[edit]
Through Libya, under Muammar Gaddafi, Argentina received 20 launchers and 60 SA-7 missiles (which Argentina later described as "not effective"), as well as machine guns, mortars and mines. To retrieve the weapons, four trips were made using two Argentine Air Force Boeing 707s[clarification needed] which refuelled in Recife with the consent of the Brazilian government.[224]
South Africa[edit]
The UK had terminated the Simonstown Agreement in 1975, thereby effectively denying the Royal Navy access to ports in South Africa and forcing it to use Ascension Island as a staging post.[225]
Casualties[edit]
 The Argentine Military Cemetery on East Falkland
 The British Military Cemetery at San Carlos on East Falkland
In total, 907 people were killed during the 74 days of the conflict. Additionally, there were 1,188 Argentine and 777 British injured or wounded.
Argentina[edit]
A total of 649 Argentine servicemen were killed:[226]
Ej rcito Argentino (Army)   194 (16 officers, 35 non-commissioned officers (NCOs) and 143 conscript privates)[227]
Armada de la Rep blica Argentina (Navy)   341 (including 321 in ARA General Belgrano and 4 naval aviators)
IMARA (Marines)   34[228]
Fuerza A rea Argentina (Air Force)   55 (including 31 pilots and 14 ground crew)[229]
Gendarmer a Nacional Argentina (Border Guard)   7
Prefectura Naval Argentina (Coast Guard)   2
United Kingdom[edit]
A total of 255 British servicemen were killed:[230]
Royal Navy   86 + 2 Hong Kong laundrymen (see below)[231]
Royal Marines   27 (2 officers, 14 NCOs and 11 marines)[232]
Royal Fleet Auxiliary   4 + 6 Hong Kong sailors[233][234]
Merchant Navy   6[233]
British Army   123 (7 officers, 40 NCOs and 76 privates)[235][236][237]
Royal Air Force   1 (1 officer)[233]
Of the 86 Royal Navy personnel, 22 were lost in HMS Ardent, 19 + 1 lost in HMS Sheffield, 19 + 1 lost in HMS Coventry and 13 lost in HMS Glamorgan.
Fourteen naval cooks were among the dead, the largest number from any one branch in the Royal Navy.
Thirty-three of the British Army's dead came from the Welsh Guards (32 of whom died on the RFA Sir Galahad in the Bluff Cove Air Attacks), 21 from the 3rd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, 18 from the 2nd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, 19 from the Special Air Service, 3 each from Royal Signals and Royal Army Medical Corps and 8 from each of the Scots Guards and Royal Engineers. The 1st battalion/7th Duke of Edinburgh's Own Gurkha Rifles lost one man.
Civilians[edit]
Three civilians on the Falkland Islands were accidentally killed by British shelling during the night of 11/12 June. The military command identified those killed as Susan Whitley, 30, a British citizen, and Falkland Islands natives Doreen Bonner, 36 and Mary Goodwin, 82.[238][233][239]
Red Cross Box[edit]
 Hecla at HM Naval Base Gibraltar, during conversion to a hospital ship for service during the Falklands War
Before British offensive operations began, the British and Argentine governments agreed to establish an area on the high seas where both sides could station hospital ships without fear of attack by the other side. This area, a circle 20 nautical miles in diameter, was referred to as the Red Cross Box (48 30 S 53 45 W  /  48.500 S 53.750 W  / -48.500; -53.750) and located about 45 miles (72 km) north of Falkland Sound.[240] Ultimately, the British stationed four ships (HMS Hydra, HMS Hecla and HMS Herald and the primary hospital ship SS Uganda) within the box,[241] while the Argentines stationed three (ARA Almirante Ir zar, ARA Bah a Para so and Puerto Deseado).
The hospital ships were non-warships converted to serve as hospital ships.[242] The three British naval vessels were survey vessels and Uganda was a passenger liner. Almirante Irizar was an icebreaker, Bahia Paraiso was an Antarctic supply transport and Puerto Deseado was a survey ship. British and Argentine vessels operating within the Box were in radio contact and there was some transfer of patients between hospital ships. For example, the Uganda transferred patients to an Argentine hospital ship on four occasions.[243] Hydra worked with Hecla and Herald to take casualties from Uganda to Montevideo, Uruguay, where a fleet of Uruguayan ambulances met them. RAF VC10 aircraft then flew the casualties to the UK for transfer to the Princess Alexandra Hospital at RAF Wroughton, near Swindon.[244]
Throughout the conflict, officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) conducted inspections to verify that all concerned were abiding by the rules of the Geneva Conventions. Argentine naval officers also inspected the British casualty ferries in the estuary of the River Plate.[citation needed]
Aftermath[edit]
Main article: Aftermath of the Falklands War
 The Monumento a los Ca dos en Malvinas ("Monument for the Fallen in the Falklands") in Plaza San Mart n, Buenos Aires; a member of the historic Patricios regiment stands guard[nb 6]
This brief war brought many consequences for all the parties involved, besides the considerable casualty rate and large materiel loss, especially of shipping and aircraft, relative to the deployed military strengths of the opposing sides.
In the United Kingdom, Margaret Thatcher's popularity increased. The success of the Falklands campaign was widely regarded as a factor in the turnaround in fortunes for the Conservative government, who had been trailing behind the SDP Liberal Alliance in the opinion polls for months before the conflict began. Following the success in the Falklands, the Conservatives returned to the top of the opinion polls by a wide margin and went on to win the following year's general election by a landslide.[245] Subsequently, Defence Secretary Nott's proposed cuts to the Royal Navy were abandoned.
The islanders had full British citizenship restored in 1983; their quality of life improved through investments made by the UK after the war and by economic liberalisation that had been stalled for fear of angering Argentina. In 1985, a new constitution was enacted, promoting self-government which has continued to devolve power to the islanders.
In Argentina, defeat in the Falklands War meant that a possible war with Chile was avoided. Further, Argentina returned to a democratic government in the 1983 general election, the first free general election since 1973. It also had a major social impact, destroying the military's image as the "moral reserve of the nation" that they had maintained through most of the 20th century.
A detailed study[246] of 21,432 British veterans of the war commissioned by the UK Ministry of Defence found that between 1982 and 2012, only 95 had died from "intentional self-harm and events of undetermined intent (suicides and open verdict deaths)", a proportion lower than would be expected within the general population over the same period.[247] However, a study of British combat veterans conducted five years after the conflict found that half of the sample group had suffered some symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), while 22% were assessed to have the complete syndrome.[248]
"Fortress Falklands"[edit]
 Two RAF Tornado F3 fighters flying over the Falkland Islands in 2007
Main article: Military of the Falkland Islands
In the immediate aftermath of the conflict, the British government embarked on a long-term policy of providing the islands with a viable military garrison, known informally as "Fortress Falklands". Initially, an aircraft carrier was kept in the area until the runway at Stanley Airport could be improved to take conventional RAF fighters. A permanent military complex with a runway designed to take long-haul airliners was constructed in the south of East Falkland, RAF Mount Pleasant, which opened in 1985; an associated deep-water port at Mare Harbour was also constructed. A small military outpost was established at King Edward Point on South Georgia, but it was closed in 2001.[249]
Military analysis[edit]
Militarily, the Falklands conflict remains one of the largest air-naval combat operations between modern forces since the end of the Second World War. As such, it has been the subject of intense study by military analysts and historians. Significant takeaways include the vulnerability of surface ships to anti-ship missiles and submarines, the challenges of co-ordinating logistical support for long-distance projections of power, and reconfirmation of the importance of tactical air power, including helicopters.
In 1986, the BBC broadcast the Horizon programme In the Wake of HMS Sheffield, which discussed lessons learned from the conflict, and measures taken to implement them, such as incorporating greater stealth capabilities and providing better close-in weapon systems for the Fleet. The principal British military responses to the Falklands War were the measures adopted in the December 1982 Defence White Paper.[250]
Memorials[edit]
 The 1982 Liberation Memorial in Stanley
There are several memorials on the Falkland Islands themselves, the most notable of which is the 1982 Liberation Memorial, unveiled in 1984 on the second anniversary of the end of the war. It lists the names of the 255 British military personnel who died during the war and is located in front of the Secretariat Building in Stanley, overlooking Stanley Harbour. The Memorial was funded entirely by the Islanders and is inscribed with the words "In Memory of Those Who Liberated Us".[251]
During the war, British dead were put into plastic body bags and buried in mass graves. After the war, the bodies were recovered; 14 were reburied at Blue Beach Military Cemetery and 64 were returned to the United Kingdom. Many of the Argentine dead are buried in the Argentine Military Cemetery two kilometers northeast of the small settlement of Darwin, approximately 82 kilometers west of Stanley. The Argentine government declined an offer by the UK to have the bodies repatriated to Argentina.[252]
In addition to memorials on the islands, there is a memorial in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London to the British war dead.[253] At the National Memorial Arboretum in Staffordshire, a Falklands War memorial was unveiled in May 2012 in a service attended by 600 veterans and their families; the names of the fallen were also inscribed on the Armed Forces Memorial at the arboretum, which commemorates all British servicemen killed in action since the end of the Second World War.[254] A memorial to the seamen of the Merchant Navy who died in the war stands at the Tower Hill Memorial in Trinity Square Gardens, London.[255] The Falkland Islands Memorial Chapel at Pangbourne College was opened in March 2000 as a commemoration of the lives and sacrifice of all those who served and died in the South Atlantic in 1982.[256]
In Argentina, there is a memorial at Plaza San Mart n in Buenos Aires,[257] another one in Rosario, and a third one in Ushuaia.
Minefields[edit]
Main article: Land mines in the Falkland Islands
 Former minefield located at Port William, East Falkland.
In 2011 there were 113 uncleared minefields plus unexploded ordnance (UXOs) covering an area of 13 km2 (3,200 acres) on the Falkland Islands. Of this area, 5.5 km2 (1,400 acres) on the Murrell Peninsula were classified as being "suspected minefields" the area had been heavily pastured for 25 years without incident. It was estimated that these minefields had 20,000 anti-personnel mines and 5,000 anti-tank mines.
The UK reported six military personnel injured by mines or UXO in 1982, then two more in 1983. Most military accidents took place in the immediate aftermath of the conflict, while clearing minefields or trying to establish the extent of minefield perimeters, particularly where no detailed records existed. No civilian mine casualties have ever occurred on the islands, and no human casualties from mines or UXO have been reported since 1984.
On 9 May 2008, the Falkland Islands Government asserted that the minefields, which represent 0.1% of the available farmland on the islands "present no long term social or economic difficulties for the Falklands," and that the impact of clearing the mines would cause more problems than containing them. However, the British Government, in accordance with its commitments under the Mine Ban Treaty had a commitment to clear the mines by the end of 2019.[258][259]
In May 2012, it was announced that 3.7 km2 (1.4 sq mi) of Stanley Common (which lies between the Stanley   Mount Pleasant road and the shoreline) was made safe and had been opened to the public, opening up a 3 km (1.9 mi) stretch of coastline and a further two kilometres of shoreline along Mullet's Creek.[260]
In November 2020, it was declared that the Falkland islands were now free of all landmines. A celebration of the event took place on the weekend of 14 November where the final landmine was detonated.[261]
Press and publicity[edit]
Argentina[edit]
 Gente's "Estamos ganando" headline ("We're winning")
Selected war correspondents were regularly flown to Port Stanley in military aircraft to report on the war. Back in Buenos Aires, newspapers and magazines reported on "the heroic actions of the largely conscript army and its successes".[22]
Officers from the intelligence services were attached to the newspapers and 'leaked' information corroborating the official communiqu s from the government. The glossy magazines Gente and Siete D as swelled to 60 pages with colour photographs of British warships in flames many of them faked and bogus eyewitness reports of the Argentine commandos' guerrilla war on South Georgia (6 May) and an already dead Pucar  pilot's attack on HMS Hermes[22] (Lt. Daniel Antonio Jukic had been killed at Goose Green during a British air strike on 1 May). Most of the faked photos actually came from the tabloid press. One of the best remembered headlines was "Estamos ganando" ("We're winning") from the magazine Gente, that would later use variations of it.[262]
The Argentine troops on the Falkland Islands could read Gaceta Argentina a newspaper intended to boost morale among the servicemen. Some of its untruths could easily be unveiled by the soldiers who recovered corpses.[263]
The Malvinas cause united the Argentines in a patriotic atmosphere that protected the junta from critics, and even opponents of the military government supported Galtieri; Ernesto Sabato said:
In Argentina, it is not a military dictatorship that is fighting. It is the whole people, her women, her children, her old people, regardless of their political persuasion. Opponents to the regime like myself are fighting for our dignity, fighting to extricate the last vestiges of colonialism. Don't be mistaken, Europe, it is not a dictatorship that is fighting for the Malvinas; it is the whole nation.[264]
In the Argentine press, false reports that HMS Hermes was sunk and HMS Invincible had been damaged were circulated after the weekly magazines Gente and La Semana had received information of naval action from an air force officer in the president's office.[265] On 30 April 1982 the Argentine magazine Tal Cual showed Prime Minister Thatcher with an eyepatch and the text: Pirate, witch and assassin. Guilty![266] Three British reporters sent to Argentina to cover the war from the Argentine perspective were jailed until the end of the war.[267] The Madres de Plaza de Mayo were even exposed to death threats from ordinary people.[22]
United Kingdom[edit]
 The Sun's infamous "Gotcha" headline
Seventeen newspaper reporters, two photographers, two radio reporters and three television reporters with five technicians sailed with the Task Force to the war. The Newspaper Publishers' Association selected them from among 160 applicants, excluding foreign media.
The hasty selection resulted in the inclusion of two journalists among the war reporters who were interested only in Queen Elizabeth II's son Prince Andrew, who was serving in the conflict.[268] The Prince flew a helicopter on multiple missions, including Exocet missile decoy and casualty evacuation.[269]
Merchant vessels had the civilian Inmarsat uplink, which enabled written telex and voice report transmissions via satellite. SS Canberra had a facsimile machine that was used to upload 202 pictures from the South Atlantic over the course of the war. The Royal Navy leased bandwidth on the U.S. Defense Satellite Communications System for worldwide communications. Television demands a thousand times the data rate of telephone, but the Ministry of Defence was unsuccessful in convincing the U.S. to allocate more bandwidth.[270]
TV producers suspected that the enquiry was half-hearted; since the Vietnam War television pictures of casualties and traumatised soldiers were recognised as having negative propaganda value. However, the technology only allowed uploading a single frame per 20 minutes and only if the military satellites were allocated 100% to television transmissions. Videotapes were shipped to Ascension Island, where a broadband satellite uplink was available, resulting in TV coverage being delayed by three weeks.[270]
The press was very dependent on the Royal Navy, and was censored on site. Many reporters in the UK knew more about the war than those with the Task Force.[270] Ministry of Defence press briefings in London were characterised by the restrained dictation-speed delivery of its spokesman, Ian McDonald.[271]
The Royal Navy expected Fleet Street to conduct a Second World War-style positive news campaign[272] but the majority of the British media, especially the BBC, reported the war in a neutral fashion.[273] These reporters referred to "the British troops" and "the Argentinian troops" instead of "our lads" and the "Argies".[274] The two main tabloid papers presented opposing viewpoints: The Daily Mirror was decidedly anti-war, whilst The Sun became well known for headlines such as "Stick It Up Your Junta!," which, along with the reporting in other tabloids,[275] led to accusations of xenophobia[275][276][277] and jingoism.[276][277][278][279] The Sun was criticised for its "Gotcha" headline following the sinking of the ARA General Belgrano.[280][281][282]
The British Ministry of Defence operated a psychological warfare operation under the codename "Moonshine", which took the form of a spurious radio station purporting to be from a neutral South American country, but was actually in London, broadcasting to the Falklands and Argentina via a transmitter on Ascension which had been requisitioned from the BBC. Under the name of Radio Atl ntico del Sur ("Radio South Atlantic" - Spanish Wikipedia article), the station was operated by a small team of civilians and Spanish-speaking military officers. The first three-hour broadcast was on 19 May and a total of 47 had been made by 15 June when the operation was cancelled. There is some evidence that the Argentines attempted to jam the broadcasts and that some civilian radio receivers were confiscated from soldiers, but the results overall were difficult to assess.[283]
Cultural impact[edit]
Main article: Cultural impact of the Falklands War
There were wide-ranging influences on popular culture in both the UK and Argentina, from the immediate postwar period to the present. The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges described the war as "a fight between two bald men over a comb."[284] The words yomp and Exocet entered the British vernacular as a result of the war. The Falklands War also provided material for theatre, film and TV drama and influenced the output of musicians. In Argentina, the military government banned the broadcasting of music in the English language, giving way to the rise of local rock musicians.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
1980s portalArgentina portalUnited Kingdom portal
London Victory Parade of 1982, victory parade held in London in October 1982 to celebrate the victory.
Beagle conflict, a border dispute between Chile and Argentina that involved island territory.
Hope Bay incident, Argentine aggression on the Antarctic Peninsula
Operation Algeciras, a failed Argentine plan to send Montoneros to sabotage British military facilities in Gibraltar
Operation Soberan a, plans for Argentina's invasion of Chile in 1978 and later.
Reassertion of British sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (1833)
Argentina United Kingdom relations
British naval forces in the Falklands War
Notes[edit]
^ 6 Pucaras, 4 T-34 Mentor and 1 Short Skyvan
^ A simple free-fall bomb in a low-altitude release impacts almost directly below the aircraft, which is then within the lethal fragmentation zone of the explosion. A retarded bomb has a small parachute or air brake that opens to reduce the speed of the bomb to produce a safe horizontal separation between the bomb and the aircraft. The fuse for a retarded bomb requires that the retarder be open a minimum time to ensure safe separation.
^ 21/27 May: 9 Dagger, 5 A-4C, 3 A-4Q, 3 A-4B & 2 Pucara
^  Location: "Bomb Alley" San Carlos Water, Falkland Islands
^ Location: Mount Kent, Falkland Islands
^ Buenos Aires War Memorial is at coordinates 34 35 37 S 58 22 29 W  /  34.59373 S 58.374782 W  / -34.59373; -58.374782  (Buenos Aires War Memorial)
Footnotes[edit]
^ "Falkland Islands profile". BBC News. 5 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2014.
^ Burns, John F. (5 January 2013). "Vitriol Over Falklands Resurfaces, as Do Old Arguments". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 January 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2019.
^ a b Historia Mar tima Argentina, Volume 10, p. 137. Departamento de Estudios Hist ricos Navales, Cu ntica Editora, Argentina: 1993.
^ "Argentine to reaffirm Sovereignty Rights over The Falkland Islands". National Turk. 4 January 2012. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2012.
^ "C mo evitar que Londres convierta a las Malvinas en un Estado independiente". Clarin. 1 April 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "Joint statement of 19 October 1989: Re-establishing Consular Relations Between Britain and Argentina, and Agreeing a Framework on Sovereignty Which Would Allow Further Talks". Falklands info. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2013.
^ "Constituci n Nacional". Argentine Senate (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 June 2004. La Naci n Argentina ratifica su leg tima e imprescriptible soberan a sobre las Islas Malvinas, Georgias del Sur y Sandwich del Sur y los espacios mar timos e insulares correspondientes, por ser parte integrante del territorio nacional.
^ "Argentina: Constituci n de 1994". pdba.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on 14 November 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020.
^ Cahill 2010, "Falkland Islands".
^ Welch, David A. (2011). Painful Choices: A Theory of Foreign Policy Change. Google Books: Princeton University Press. p. 75. ISBN 9781400840748. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2020.
^ "Secret Falklands fleet revealed". news.bbc.co.uk. BBC News. 1 June 2005. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022.
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 51
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 53
^ White, Rowland (2006). Vulcan 607. London: Bantam Press. pp. 13 14. ISBN 9780593053928. The price for Anaya's blessing was approval for the navy's plan to seize Las Malvinas, the Falkland Islands
^ Bicheno 2006, p. 25: "A basic assumption underlying the conflict was that the British were, in the opinion of the war's main architect, Admiral Jorge Anaya, unworthy heirs to a glorious heritage, the men mainly maricones  to call a man a maric n does not question his heterosexuality; but it definitely impugns his physical and moral courage. Anaya was Naval Attach  in London from January 1975 to January 1976  He returned to Argentina, making no attempt to conceal his contempt for all things British."
^ Middlebrook 1989, p. 1: "He was an ardent 'Malvinist'  Anaya was enthusiastic, and his orders in the last days of 1981 were to set in train that tragic series of events."
^ Boughton, James M. (2001). "Silent Revolution: The IMF 1979 1989" (PDF). IMF. pp. 328 329. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2003. Retrieved 28 June 2019.
^ "Argentina   the horrors of a dictatorial past live on   Radio Netherlands Worldwide   English". Radionetherlands.nl. 30 March 2006. Archived from the original on 16 March 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Kirschbaum, Oscar; Van Der Kooy, Roger; Cardoso, Eduardo (1983). Malvinas, La Trama Secreta (in Spanish). Buenos Aires: Sudamericana/Planeta. ISBN 978-950-37-0006-8.[page needed]
^ "Haig: "Malvinas fue mi Waterloo"". La Naci n (in Spanish). 10 August 1997. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 25 October 2010.  Qu  cre a? Que ten a que ver con despertar el orgullo nacional y con otra cosa. ... La junta   Galtieri me lo dijo   nunca crey  que los brit nicos dar an pelea.  l cre a que Occidente se hab a corrompido. Que los brit nicos no ten an Dios, que Estados Unidos se hab a corrompido  Nunca lo pude convencer de que ellos no s lo iban a pelear, que adem s iban a ganar." ("What do you believe? This was neither about national pride nor anything else.  The junta   Galtieri told me   never believed the British would respond. He thought the Western World was corrupt. That the British people had no God, that the U.S. was corrupt  I could never convince him that the British would not only fight back but also win [the war].
^ "Ministerio de Educaci n, Ciencia y Tecnolog a de la Naci n" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ a b c d Jimmy Burns: The land that lost its heroes, 1987, Bloomsbury Publishing, ISBN 0-7475-0002-9.
^ "infiltrated on board, pretending to be scientists, were members of an Argentine naval special forces unit" Nick van der Bijl, Nine Battles to Stanley, London, Leo Cooper p. 8 as reported in Lawrence Freedman, The Official History of the Falklands Campaign: Vol I The Origins of the Falklands War
^ Briley, Harold (9 April 1997). "Obituary: Captain Nicholas Barker". The Independent. UK. p. 16. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Barnett, Correlli (1997). "The high cost of cuts". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "The Falklands War 1982   Operation Rosario". The British Empire. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2018.
^ "Falklands War: The first day, 2 April 1982". 2 April 2002. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2018.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 43
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 45
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 47 52
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 92
^ a b c Freedman, Lawrence; Gamba-Stonehouse, Virginia (1991). Signals of War: The Falklands Conflict of 1982. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-6158-3.
^ a b c Freedman 2005a, pp. 202 203
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 40
^ a b c d "A Chronology of events during the Falklands Conflict of 1982". Falkland Islands Information. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 24 December 2011.
^ a b c Margolis, Laurie (2 April 2007). "UK | How BBC man scooped invasion news". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Duncan, Andrew, The Falklands War, Marshall Cavendish Books Limited, ISBN 1-84415-429-7
^ "No. 49194". The London Gazette (Supplement). 13 December 1982. p. 16109.
^ a b Freedman 2005b, pp. 21 22: "day-to-day oversight was to be provided by ... which came to be known as the War Cabinet. This became the critical instrument of crisis management"
^ Eddy et al. 1982, pp. 123 124
^ Parsons, Anthony (1983). "The Falklands Crisis in the United Nations, 31 March-14 June 1982". International Affairs. Oxford University Press on behalf of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. 59 (2): 169 178. doi:10.2307/2619933. JSTOR 2619933.
^ Gold 2005, p. 39
^ Gold 2005, p. 37
^ "Voting System". UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL. United Nations. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2020.
^ "CHAPTER VII: ACTION WITH RESPECT TO THREATS TO THE PEACE, BREACHES OF THE PEACE, AND ACTS OF AGGRESSION". CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS. United Nations. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 42
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 86 88
^ a b c d e Bound 2006, pp. 81 88
^ "'We've been invaded'". Dorset Echo. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
^ Bound 2006, p. 198
^ For most of May the population of Goose Green was confined to a meeting hall in unpleasant conditions. The Official History of the Falklands Campaign: War and Diplomacy, Lawrence Freedman, p. 87, Routledge, 2004
^ Fursdon 1988, p. 32
^ Bound 2006, p. 154
^ Bennett & Bennett 2021, p. Appendix 1
^ "The army did give us a plastic pack of food, one per person per week. These contained two packets of sweets, four water biscuits, one tin of cold stew, some fuel tablets and a box of matches. Most of us sat down and ate the food straight away, possibly keeping the tins for the second day, but after that another wait of five days before the next packet. Often the packets were broken open and things were missing. I heard there were containers of gift food for us down at Port Stanley but I never got any of it, except some chocolate that a soldier sold to me." Argentine Fight for the Falklands, Martin Middlebrook, pp.221-222, Pen & Sword, 2003
^ "Asimismo, se denuncia que el soldado Remigio Fern ndez falleci  de hambre en Puerto Howard debido a que los oficiales no le entregaban los alimentos."Grave denuncia de ex combatientes de Malvinas
^ Ex Argentinian troops file Falkland lawsuits
^ https://www.eldia.com/nota/2007-4-14-grave-denuncia-de-ex-combatientes-de-malvinas
^ Go i, Uki (2 April 2022). "Argentinian Falklands veterans mark 'day of sadness' over torture they endured". The Guardian. Buenos Aires. Archived from the original on 2 April 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2022.
^ Eddy et al. 1982, pp. 129 132
^ Eddy et al. 1982, pp. 132 137
^ Woodward & Robinson 1997, p. 72 Cited in To Rule The Waves: How the British Navy Shaped the Modern World Herman, A. (2004) HarperCollins, New York, p. 560.
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 431 444 "During the course of May confidence that the naval threat was under control grew. Optimism on the air threat was much scarcer, especially among those who might be on the receiving end."
^ a b c Corum, James S. (2002). "Argentine Airpower in the Falklands War: An Operational View". Air and Space Power Journal. 16 (3): 59 77. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014.
^ Hastings & Jenkins 1984, pp. 115 116
^ "FAA map". Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2007.
^ Brown 1987, p. 110
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 103 104
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 105 108
^ a b "Submarine Operations during the Falklands War   U.S. Naval War College". Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 109 111
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 112 113
^ "1982: Marines land in South Georgia". BBC. 25 April 1982. Archived from the original on 30 March 2006. Retrieved 20 June 2005.
^ Ward 2000, p. 186: "... to get twenty-one bombs to Port Stanley is going to take about one million, one hundred thousand pounds of fuel   equalled about 137,000 gallons. That was enough fuel to fly 260 Sea Harrier bombing missions over Port Stanley. Which in turn meant just over 1300 bombs. Interesting stuff!"
^ Chun 2001, p. 230
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 285
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 285 286
^ "La familia Mirage". Aeroespacio (in Spanish). ISSN 0001-9127. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011. "Los M III deb an defender el territorio continental argentino de posibles ataques de los bombarderos Vulcan de la RAF, brindar escolta a los cazabombarderos de la FAA, e impedir los ataques de aviones de la Royal Navy y de la RAF sobre las Malvinas." ("The M III would defend the Argentine mainland against possible attacks by Vulcan bombers from the RAF, providing escort of fighter bombers to the FAA, and to prevent attacks by aircraft of the Royal Navy and RAF on the Falklands.")
^ Ward 2000, pp. 247 48: "Propaganda was, of course, used later to try to justify these missions: 'The Mirage IIIs were withdrawn from Southern Argentina to Buenos Aires to add to the defences there following the Vulcan raids on the islands.' Apparently the logic behind this statement was that if the Vulcan could hit Port Stanley, the  [sic] Buenos Aires was well within range as well and was vulnerable to similar attacks. I never went along with that baloney. A lone Vulcan or two running in to attack Buenos Aires without fighter support would have been shot to hell in quick time."-"Mirage IIIs were in evidence near the islands on several occasions during the conflict, either escorting the Neptune reconnaissance missions or on 'interference' flights that attempted to draw CAP attention away from air-to-ground attacks."-"Suffice it to say that you didn't need more than one or two Mirage IIIs to intercept a Vulcan attack on Buenos Aires"-"It would have taken much more than a lone Vulcan raid to upset Buenos Aires"
^ Burden et al. 1986, pp. 363, 365, 367
^ Chun 2001, pp. 237 238
^ "Argentine Air Force remembers its 'baptism of fire' twenty years on". En.mercopress.com. 1 May 2002. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 9 June 2010.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 136
^ Rodr guez Mottino, Horacio (1984). La artiller a argentina en Malvinas (in Spanish). Editorial Clio. p. 170. ISBN 978-9509377028.
^ "Rodolfo Manuel de la Colina". Fuerza A rea Argentina (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 12 March 2015.
^ "Noticias Municipales | Puerto Madryn". Madryn.gov.ar. 2 April 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2013.
^ Burden et al. 1986, pp. 17 18
^ Cullen & Foss 1992, p. 273
^ Burden et al. 1986, pp. 79 82
^ "Fuerza A rea Argentina". Fuerzaaerea.mil.ar. Archived from the original on 30 April 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "ASN Aircraft accident description Lockheed C-130H Hercules TC-63   Pebble Island". Aviation-safety.net. Archived from the original on 28 November 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Burden et al. 1986, pp. 48, 80 81
^ Evans, Michael (27 November 2007). "Underwater and undercover: how nuclear subs were first line of Falklands defence". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 22 September 2009.
^ White 2020, pp. 109-111
^ White 2020, pp. 199-200
^ White 2020, pp. 203-205
^ White 2020, pp. 248-250
^ White 2020, pp. 217-218
^ White 2020, pp. 110-111
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 125 126
^ Woodward 2012, pp. 144-145
^ Finlan 2004, p. 82
^ Finlan 2004, pp. 82 84
^ Eddy et al. 1982, pp. 158 159
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 150
^ Finlan 2004, p. 85
^ Peter Beaumont (25 May 2003). "Belgrano crew 'trigger happy'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2018.
^ Burden et al. 1986, p. 179
^ Burden et al. 1986, pp. 91 92
^ "HMS Sheffield lost after missile hit". BBC News. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 166
^ Woodward & Robinson 1997, p. 8
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 165
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 174
^ Charles Moore, Margaret Thatcher: The Authorized Biography (2013) Volume 1, pp. 726 728
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 175
^ "The SAS vs the Exocet". eliteukforces.info. 27 October 2007. Archived from the original on 2 March 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Evans, Michael; Hamilton, Alan (27 June 2005). "Thatcher in the dark on sinking of Belgrano". The Times. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2011.
^ "British Special Air Service SAS   The Falklands   Operation Corporate". Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 190 191
^ Brown 1987, p. 166
^ Brown 1987, p. 179
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 225
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 233 234
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 244 248
^ Rumley, Leesa (1 June 2007). "Captain Hart Dyke, Commanding Officer of HMS Coventry". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "British Ships Sunk and Damaged   Falklands War 1982". Naval-history.net. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Gethin Chamberlain (5 April 2002). "Would British forces be able to retake the Falklands today?". The Scotsman. UK. p. 12. Archived from the original on 27 March 2007. Alt URL Archived 24 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Woodward & Robinson 1997[page needed]
^ "The Falklands Conflict 1982". Royal Navy. 2 April 1982. Archived from the original on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 257
^ a b c d Lawrence Freedman; Lawrence (King's College London Freedman, University of London UK); Professor of War Studies Lawrence Freedman, Sir (2005). The Official History of the Falklands Campaign: War and diplomacy. Psychology Press. p. 545. ISBN 978-0-7146-5207-8. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
^ Pook 2008, p. 132
^ a b Morgan 2007, p. 240
^ Ewen Southby-Tailyour (2 April 2014). Exocet Falklands: The Untold Story of Special Forces Operations. Pen and Sword. pp. 238 . ISBN 978-1-4738-3513-9. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
^ "- Fuerza A rea Argentina" (in Spanish). www.fuerzaaerea.mil.ar. Archived from the original on 28 April 2009. Retrieved 26 February 2009.
^ "Argentine Aircraft in the Falklands". Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 25 February 2009.
^ Yates, David (2006). Bomb Alley   Falkland Islands 1982. Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-1-84415-417-3.[page needed]
^ "Americas | Charles ends Falklands tour on sombre note". BBC News. 15 March 1999. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 209 212
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 213
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 216 217
^ "No. 49134". The London Gazette (Supplement). 8 October 1982. p. 12854.
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 279 281
^ "The Argentine Commandos on Mount Kent". Britains-smallwars.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "Argentine Puma Shot Down By American "Stinger" Missile". En.mercopress.com. 12 April 2002. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Julian Thompson, No Picnic, p. 93, Cassell & Co, 2001.
^ Rick Jolly, The Red & Green Life Machine, p. 124.
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 297 298
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 298 299
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 301
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 509
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 303
^ Ewen Southby-Tailyour (31 December 1990). Reasons in Writing: A Commando's View of the Falklands War. Pen and Sword. p. 297. ISBN 978-1-84415-014-4. "It was clear that I was achieving nothing and so, in desperation, I gave a direct order for the infantry to get ashore with or without their kit in order that we could get on with unloading Sir Tristram. The officers ignored my order. In doing so they explained to me quite clearly that no orders would be accepted from an officer of equivalent rank."
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 304
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 518
^ "1982:Fifty die in Argentine air attack". BBC News. 8 June 1982. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 2 September 2011.
^ Bolia, Robert S. "The Falklands War:The Bluff Cove Disaster" (PDF). Military Review (November December 2004): 71. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2012.
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 519
^ Eddy et al. 1982, pp. 244 250
^ "An interview with CL (R) Ing. Julio P rez, chief designer of Exocet trailer-based launcher" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2 March 2008.
^ Adkin, Mark (2004). "McKay, Ian John". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/71667. Retrieved 28 March 2022. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 539
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 544 546
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 372 373
^ Hastings & Jenkins 1984, p. 307
^ Middlebrook 2012, pp. 374 375
^ "The British Army and the Falklands War". National Army Museum. Archived from the original on 14 May 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2021.
^ "The race to regain Thule". Navy News p.21. July 1982. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2017.
^ Martin, Lisa L. (Spring 1992). "Institutions and Cooperation: Sanctions during the Falkland Islands Conflict" (PDF). International Security. p9. 16 (4): 143 178. doi:10.2307/2539190. JSTOR 2539190. S2CID 154742007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2018.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: location (link)
^ "Falklands War cartoon". NZ History. Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 20 November 2013. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2018.
^ a b Black, Joanne (9 April 2013). "From our archive: when Rob met Maggie". New Zealand Listener. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2018.
^ New Zealand Foreign Affairs Review, Volume 32 p. 44, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 1982
^ "United Kingdom, Parliamentary Debate, Debates, 20 May 1982". Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 183
^ a b Thomson, Mike (5 March 2012). "How France helped both sides in the Falklands War". BBC. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.
^ a b Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. "An A-Z of the Falklands War". The History Press. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2018.
^ John, Nott (2002). "Here Today, Gone Tomorrow". Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. As soon as the conflict began Hernou (French Defence Minister) got in touch with me to make available a Super- tendard and Mirage aircraft so our Harrier pilots could train against them before setting off to the South Atlantic. (John Nott, defence minister during the Falklands war)
^ John, Nott (2002). "Here Today, Gone Tomorrow". Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. A remarkable world-wide operation then ensured to prevent further Exocets being bought by Argentina. I authorised our agents to pose as bona fide purchasers of equipment on the international market, ensuring that we outbid the Argentines. Other agents identified Exocet missiles in various markets and covertly rendered them inoperable, based on information from the French. (John Nott, defence minister during the Falklands war)
^ White 2020, p. 391
^ Borger, Julian (1 April 2012). "U.S. feared Falklands war would be 'close-run thing', documents reveal". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 21 April 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ Grimmett, Richard F. (1 June 1999). "Foreign Policy Roles of the President and Congress". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2010.
^ Paul Reynolds, "Obituary: Caspar Weinberger Archived 30 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine," BBC News, 28 March 2006.
^ Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher would later write, "Without the Harriers... using the latest version of the Sidewinder air-to-air missile supplied by Caspar Weinberger, we could not have retaken the Falklands." Dan Snow, Peter Snow, p. 270, 20th Century Battlefields, Random House, 2012
^ "Lehman: British Would Have Lost Falklands War Without U.S. Support". AP News. 29 May 1988. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Fo, Robert (4 April 2012). "CIA files reveal how US helped Britain retake the Falklands". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Halloran, Richard (21 May 1982). "U.S. Plans Supplies If Fighting Lasts" (PDF). The New York Times. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. via CIA Reading Room
^ Wilson, George C. (16 April 1982). "U.S.: No Spy Satellites Operating Over Falklands" (PDF). Washington Post. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Koppel, Ted (13 April 1982). U.S. and the Falklands (PDF) (TV News Report). Haig, Alexander; Laurence, John; Bernstein, Carl; Von Fremd, Mike; Clinton-Davis, Stanley; Quijano, Raul; Vanocur, Sander; Dunsmore, Barrie. CIA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2021.
^ "Lehman: British Would Have Lost Falklands War Without U.S. Support". AP News. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020.
^ "Reagan Readied U.S. Warship for '82 Falklands War". News and Analysis, U.S. Naval Institute. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2012.
^ Krepp, Stella Paresa (April 2017). "Between the Cold War and the Global South: Argentina and Third World Solidarity in the Falklands/Malvinas Crisis". Estudos Hist ricos (Rio de Janeiro). 30 (60): 141 160. doi:10.1590/s2178-14942017000100008. ISSN 0103-2186.
^ "The Peruvian Exocet connection in the Falklands/Malvinas war". Mercopress. 3 April 2012. Archived from the original on 8 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
^ "El otro rol de Peru durante la guerra de Malvinas". Infobae (in Spanish). 1 April 2012. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
^ "Tras el pedido de perd n y en medio de elogios, Cristina regres  de Per " Archived 23 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine in Argentine newspaper Clar n on 24 March 2010 (in Spanish)
^ Land that Lost Its Heroes: How Argentina Lost the Falklands War, Jimmy Burns, p. 190, Bloomsbury Publishing, 11 April 2012
^ van der Bijl, Nick (1999). Nine battles to Stanley. Leo Cooper. p. 141. ISBN 978-0850526196. The Junta were slow to admit defeat, but when the news was broadcast, Venezuela and Guatemala offered to send airborne units to 'smash the British in the Falklands'.
^ Falkland Islands Situation Report #1 (PDF) (Report). CIA (published 14 February 2008). 2 April 1982. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Falkland Islands Situation Report #2 (PDF) (Report). CIA (published 14 February 2008). 3 April 1982. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Interview with Chilean Air Force Chief during the Falklands War Fernando Matthei Malvinas: "Hice todo lo posible para que Argentina perdiera la guerra" Archived 26 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine in Clarin, Buenos Aires on 1. September 2005. Retrieved 11 Jule 2011
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 397
^ "The best trained units of the Argentine army, the 6th and 8th Mountain Brigades and the 11th Cold Weather Brigade were left behind to guard the frontier with Chile." Pradeep Barua, p. 152, The Military Effectiveness of Post-Colonial States, BRILL, 2013
^ "Royal Fleet Auxiliary Tidepool". RFA Historical Society. Archived from the original on 27 May 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2019.
^ Oyarz n Lemonnier, Agust n (1983). Guerra en las Falklands (in Spanish). Editorial Cumbres. p. 199.
^ Lepot, Fran ois (2002). Malvinas desde Londres (in Spanish). Ciudad Argentina. p. 254.
^ White 2020, pp. 391 392
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 293
^ "Brazil helped Soviet support operation for Argentina during the Falklands conflict". MercoPress. 23 April 2012. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2012.
^ Jonson, Nicholas L. (1 March 1983). "Soviet Strides in Space". Air Force Magazine. Archived from the original on 6 October 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Mastny, Vojtech (1983). "The Soviet Union and the Falklands War". Naval War College Review. 36 (3): 46 55. ISSN 0028-1484. JSTOR 44636371. Archived from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 17 September 2020.
^ "Russian book confirms Soviet intelligence support for Argentina in Malvinas war". MercoPress. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 17 September 2020.
^ Barb , Esther (1994). "Entre Europa y Am rica Latina: la diplomacia espa ola frente al conflicto de las Malvinas" (pdf). Estudios Internacionales. Universidad de Chile. 27 (106): 224. doi:10.5354/0719-3769.1994.15349. JSTOR 41391473. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021.
^ a b Barb  1994, p. 228.
^ Barb  1994, pp. 222 223.
^ Southby-Tailyour 2014, pp. 32-34
^ Fergusson, George; Trowbridge, Benjamin (9 May 2016). "History's Unparalleled Alliance: the Anglo-Portuguese Treaty of Windsor, 9th May 1386". History of British Government.
^ Eddy et al. 1982, p. 118
^ MacQueen, Norman (March 1985). "The Expedience of Tradition: Ireland, International Organization and the Falklands Crisis". Political Studies. 33 (1): 38 55. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.1985.tb01560.x. S2CID 143438196.
^ Tonra, Ben (1996). "The internal dissenter (II) : Ireland".  In Stavridis, Stelios; Hill, Christopher (eds.). Domestic sources of foreign policy : West European reactions to the Falklands Conflict. Oxford: Berg. pp. 132 150. ISBN 978-1-85973-088-1   via Internet Archive.
^ Kelly, Stephen (October 2016). "An Opportunistic Anglophobe: Charles J. Haughey, the Irish Government and the Falklands War, 1982". Contemporary British History. 30 (4): 522 541. doi:10.1080/13619462.2016.1162158. S2CID 146944559. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021.
^ Robin Yapp (20 April 2011). "Israel 'supplied arms to Argentina during Falklands War'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2012.
^ "Begin aided Argentina during Falklands War to avenge the British". Haaretz. 21 April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 18 April 2012.
^ "Falklands: MT message to President Stevens of Sierra Leone (thanks for allowing Navy ships to refuel at Freetown)". Margaret Thatcher Foundation. 24 April 1982. Archived from the original on 8 October 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018.
^ Hernan Dobry in article Kadafi fue un amigo solidario de la dictadura durante Malvinas Archived 17 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine, in Argentine newspaper Perfil on 27 February 2011, in Spanish language
^ Van Slambrouck, Paul (25 May 1982). "S. Africa claims neutrality on Falklands' but may be selling arms". Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
^ "Ley 24.950: Decl ranse "H roes nacionales" a los combatientes argentinos fallecidos durante la guerra de Malvinas". InfoLEG (in Spanish). 18 March 1998. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 11 March 2015.
^ "list". Ejercito.mil.ar. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ list Archived 4 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine
^ "list". Fuerzaaerea.mil.ar. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "Databases   Falklands War 1982". Roll of Honour. Archived from the original on 30 December 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2013.
^ "list". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "list". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ a b c d "Falkland Islands   A history of the 1982 conflict". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Force 4: The Newsletter of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary, April 1983
^ "Para". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 11 December 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "SAS". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 11 December 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "rest of army". Raf.mod.uk. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 11 December 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Middlebrook 2012, p. 410
^ "Argentina blames Britain for civilian casualties". UPI. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 21 January 2022.
^ International Committee of the Red Cross. "Argentina/United Kingdom, The Red Cross Box". Archived from the original on 1 October 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2019.
^ Smith, Arthur (January 2017). "Logistics in The Falklands War". jmvh.org. Journal of Military and Veterans' Health. pp. 41 43. Archived from the original on 14 July 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2020.
^ Smith, Arthur (January 2017). "Logistics in The Falklands War". jmvh.org. Journal of Military and Veterans' Health. p. 42. Archived from the original on 14 July 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2020.
^ Albon, Christopher (29 June 2011). "The Red Cross Box". U.S. Naval Institute Blog. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Davis, Ian (17 October 2014). "NATO's Ebola 'capability gap': where are the hospital ships?". NATO Watch. NATO. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017.
^ "1983: Thatcher triumphs again". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 8 June 2010.
^ A study of deaths among UK Armed Forces personnel deployed to the 1982 Falklands Campaign: 1982 to 2012 (PDF) (Report). Defence Statistics, Ministry of Defence. 14 May 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Norton-Taylor, Richard (14 May 2013). "Falklands war: new study debunks claims of high suicide rates". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013.
^ O'Brien, L. S.; Hughes, S. J. (July 1991). "Symptoms of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder in Falklands Veterans Five Years After the Conflict". The British Journal of Psychiatry. 159 (1): 135 141. doi:10.1192/bjp.159.1.135. PMID 1888961. S2CID 30060754. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022.
^ Phillips 2014, Ch. "After the Conflict"
^ "Falkland Islands (White Paper)". api.parliament.uk. 14 December 1982. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2021.
^ "1982 Liberation Memorial   Things to Do in the Falkland Islands". falklandislands.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. Retrieved 14 February 2018.
^ Peter Snow, Dan Snow (16 July 2008). "1982 Falklands". 20th Century Battlefields. BBC. BBC Two. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2011. After the war the British government offered to return the bodies of the Argentine dead to Argentina for burial, but their government refused. They said that these islands were part of Argentina, and the bodies would remain here. For the Falkland islanders, these graves are daily reminder that Argentina refuses to drop its claim their homeland.
^ "Lady Thatcher marks Falklands anniversary at St Paul's". Archived from the original on 3 March 2008.
^ "Falklands War memorial unveiled at National Arboretum". www.bbc.co.uk. BBC News. 20 May 2012. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022.
^ "Falklands Memorial London". www.cornwallfhs.com. Cornwall Family History Society. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022.
^ "About the Chapel". The Falkland Islands Memorial Chapel website. 4 January 2013. Archived from the original on 16 June 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. The Falkland Islands Memorial Chapel at Pangbourne College has been built to commemorate the lives and sacrifice of all those who died in the South Atlantic in 1982   to stand as a permanent and 'living' memorial to remember them   and the courage of the thousands of Servicemen and women who served with them to protect the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands
^ "Falklands (Las Malvinas) War Memorial Wall". Archived from the original on 16 July 2007. Retrieved 16 July 2007.
^ "United Kingdom   Mine Action, Contamination and Impact". Landmine and Cluster Munition Monitor. 21 September 2011. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2012.
^ "Falklands' land mine clearance set to enter a new expanded phase in early 2012". MercoPress. Montevideo. 8 December 2011. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ "Falklands recover 370 hectares of Stanley Common made minefields in 1982 by Argentine forces". MercoPress. Montevideo. 17 May 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012.
^ Rawlinson, Kevin (10 November 2020). "Falklands cleared of nearly all landmines, 38 years on from war". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020.
^ "El periodismo argentino y su papel en la Guerra de Malvinas". Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.
^ Middlebrook 1989, p. 94: "First of May. Men ndez ordered the publication of a newspaper for the troops on the Falkland Islands called Gaceta Argentina. It stated that one of the Mirages lost on 1 May had collided with a Sea Harrier and the Argentine pilot survived. In fact Argentine AAA at Stanley shot down the Mirage when it tried an emergency landing there. It was a blatant lie for all those Argentine servicemen who had seen the Mirage being shot down by Argentine guns and had removed the dead pilot from the crashed aeroplane. Similarly, the junta's press office in Buenos Aires informed that Lieutenant Antonio Jukic, who actually was killed in his Pucar  on the ground at Goose Green, had perished in a gallant, single-handed Pucar  attack on HMS Hermes, setting it on fire. This statement was illustrated with dramatic sketches. The men at Goose Green knew that Lieutenant Jukic had died on the ground there.
Gaceta Argentina summed up the British losses up to 25 May as: 5 warship sunk (correct number 3), 3 transport ships including SS Canberra (1; Atlantic Conveyor), 14 Sea Harriers (2 shot down & 3 accidents) and many ships damaged, including HMS Hermes. Gaceta Argentina even wrote: 'All of these details refer only to proven claims and not to estimated or unproven claims ...'."
^ Welch, David A. (1993). Justice and the Genesis of War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 175. ISBN 9780521558686. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020.
^ Graham-Yooll, Andrew (2008). "South Atlantic, 1982: A Forgotten War (Part II)". The Antioch Review. 66 (1): 25. JSTOR 25475515. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020.
^ "Margaret Thatcher portrayed as a pirate, 30 April 1982". Science and Society Picture Library. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011.
^ Mather, Ian (1 April 2007). "I went as a reporter but ended up a prisoner of war". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ Freedman, "two journalists on Invincible were interested in no issue other than what Prince Andrew, a helicopter pilot as well as the Queen's son, was up to".
^ "Prince Andrew used his helicopter to decoy deadly Exocet..." UPI. Archived from the original on 3 June 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021.
^ a b c Freedman 2005b, p. 36
^ "'Voice of Falklands War' Ian McDonald Remembered". Forces Network. 10 April 2019. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 11 April 2019.
^ Harris 1983: "You must have been told you couldn't report bad news ... You were expected to do a 1940 propaganda job."[page needed]
^ Hastings & Jenkins 1984[page needed]
^ "When Britain Went to War". Channel 4. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ a b Fowler, Dawn. "Margaret Thatcher And Falklands War Drama" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
^ a b Harris 1983[page needed]
^ a b "A new Britain, a new kind of newspaper". The Guardian. London. 25 February 2002. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
^ Stefanie Hauk. "Between censorship and rude sensationalism   Falkland and "the information war"" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
^ Kassimeris, George; Buckley, John D. (16 February 2010). The Ashgate research companion to modern warfare. p. 425. ISBN 978-0-7546-7410-8. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2011. The Falklands conflict was no different, although the excessively jingoistic headlines of The Sun newspaper ('UP YOURS GALTIERI!', 'ARGIE BARGEY' and 'GOTCHA') resulted in a downturn in readership.
^ "The Sun newspaper on the Falklands". The Guardian. London. 25 February 2002. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Douglas, Torin (14 September 2004). "UK | Forty years of The Sun". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 September 2007. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ "War". British-library.uk. 4 May 1982. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010.
^ Freedman 2005b, pp. 352 354
^ "Falkland Islands: Imperial pride". The Guardian. 19 February 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Bibliography[edit]
Barnett, Anthony (1982). Iron Britannia: Why Parliament Waged Its Falklands War. Allison & Busby. ISBN 978-0-85031-493-9.
Bennett, Neville; Bennett, Valerie (May 2021). A Falklands Family at War: Diaries of the 1982 Conflict. Pen & Sword Books Limited. ISBN 978-1-399-01023-8. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2022.
Bicheno, Hugh (2006). Razor's edge: the unofficial history of the Falklands War. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84633-8.
Blakeway, Denys (1992). The Falklands War. Sidgwick & Jackson. ISBN 978-0-283-06101-1.
Bound, Graham (2006). Falkland Islanders at War. Pen & Sword Books Limited. ISBN 978-1-84415-429-6. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2022.
Brown, David (1987). The Royal Navy and the Falklands War. Leo Cooper. ISBN 978-0-85052-059-0.
Burden, Rodney A.; Draper, Michael A.; Rough, Douglas A.; Smith, Colin A.; Wilton, David (1986). Falklands: The Air War. Twickenham, UK: British Air Review Group. ISBN 0-906339-05-7.
Cahill, Kevin (2010). Who Owns the World: The Surprising Truth About Every Piece of Land on the Planet. New York: Grand Central Publishing. ISBN 978-0-446-55139-7.
Chun, Clatton K. S. (2001). Aerospace Power in the Twenty-First Century: a Basic Primer. Colorado Springs: Air University Press. ISBN 1-58566-091-4. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2022.
Cullen, Tony; Foss, Christopher F., eds. (1992). Jane's Land-Based Air Defence 1992 93 (5th ed.). Coulsdon, UK: Jane's Data Division. ISBN 0-7106-0979-5.
Dalyell, Tam (1982). One man's Falklands. Cecil Woolf. ISBN 978-0-900821-65-3.
Dalyell, Tam (1983). Thatcher's Torpedo. Cecil Woolf. ISBN 978-0-900821-66-0.
Eddy, Paul; Gillman, Peter; Linklater, Magnus; Sunday Times of London Insight Team (1982). The Falklands War. Sphere Books. ISBN 978-0-7221-8282-6.
Femenia, Nora (1996). National identity in times of crises: The scripts of the Falklands-Malvinas War. Nova Science Publishers. ISBN 978-1-56072-196-3.
Finlan, Alastair (2004). The Royal Navy in the Falklands Conflict and the Gulf War: Culture and Strategy. Psychology Press.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory (2012). The Falklands 1982: Ground operations in the South Atlantic. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84908-607-3.
Franks;  et al. (January 1983). Falkland Islands Review: Report of a Committee of Privy Counsellors (PDF) (Report). HMSO. Cmnd. 8787. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 September 2015.
Freedman, Lawrence (2005a). The official history of the Falklands Campaign. Vol. 1. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5206-1.
Freedman, Lawrence (2005b). The official history of the Falklands Campaign. Vol. 2. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5207-8.
Fursdon, Edward (19 September 1988). Falklands Aftermath: Picking Up The Pieces. Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-0-85052-205-1. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2022.
Gavshon, Arthur; Rice, Desmond (1984). The sinking of the Belgrano. Secker & Warburg. ISBN 978-0-436-41332-2.
Gold, Peter (2005). Gibraltar, British or Spanish?. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-34795-2.
Harris, Robert (1983). GOTCHA! The Media, the Government and the Falklands Crisis. Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-13052-8.
Hastings, Max; Jenkins, Simon (1984). The battle for the Falklands. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-30198-4.
Hobson, Chris; Noble, Andrew (2002).  Munro, Bob (ed.). Falklands air war. North American trade distribution, Specialty Press Publishers & Wholesalers. ISBN 978-1-85780-126-2.
Hunt, Rex (1992). My Falkland Days. Politico's Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84275-017-9.
Kon, Daniel (1983). Los chicos de la guerra = The boys of the war. New English Library. ISBN 978-0-450-05611-6. (English translation)
McClure, Jason (November 2004). "The Falklands War: Causes and Lessons" (PDF). Strategic Insights. 3 (11). Archived from the original on 8 April 2013.
McManners, Hugh (2007). Forgotten Voices of the Falklands. Ebury. ISBN 978-0-09-190880-5.
Middlebrook, Martin (1985). Operation Corporate: The story of the Falklands War, 1982. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-80223-4.
Middlebrook, Martin (1989). The fight for the "Malvinas": The Argentine Forces in the Falklands War. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-82106-8.
Middlebrook, Martin (2012). The Falklands War. Barnsley, UK: Pen & Sword Military. ISBN 978-1-84884-636-4.
Morgan, David (2007). Hostile Skies. Phoenix. ISBN 978-0-7538-2199-2. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
Norton-Taylor, Richard (1985). The Ponting affair. Cecil Woolf. ISBN 978-0-900821-73-8.
Ponting, Clive (1985). The right to know: The inside story of the Belgrano affair. Sphere. ISBN 978-0-7221-6944-5.
Pook, Jerry (2008). RAF Harrier Ground Attack: Falklands. Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-1-84884-556-5. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2020.
Prince, Stephen. "British command and control in the Falklands Campaign." Defense & Security Analysis 18.4 (2002): 333-349.
Southby-Tailyour, Ewan (2014). Exocet Falklands: The Untold Story of Special Forces Operations. Barnsley, S. Yorkshire: Pen & Sword Military. ISBN 978-1783463879.
Tinker, David (1982). A message from the Falklands: The life and gallant death of David Tinker: From his letters and poems. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-006778-1.
Thornton, Richard C. (1998). The Falklands sting: Reagan, Thatcher, and Argentina's bomb. Brassey's. ISBN 978-1-57488-155-4.
Underwood, Geoffrey (1983). Our Falklands war: The men of the task force tell their story. Maritime Books. ISBN 978-0-907771-08-1.
Ward, Nigel (2000). Sea Harrier over the Falklands. Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-35542-6.
White, Rowland (2020). Harrier 809: Britain's Legendary Jump Jet and the Untold Story of the Falklands War. London: Penguin Random House. ISBN 978-0-55217-635-4.
Woodward, Sandy; Robinson, Patrick (1997). One hundred days: The memoirs of the Falklands battle group commander. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-55750-652-8.
Historiography[edit]
Caviedes, C sar N (1994). "Conflict over the Falkland Islands: A never-ending story?". Latin American Research Review. 29 (2): 172 87. doi:10.1017/S0023879100024171. S2CID 252749716.
Bluth, Christoph (1987). "The British Resort to Force in the Falklands/Malvinas Conflict 1982: International Law and Just War Theory". Journal of Peace Research. 24 (1): 5 20. doi:10.1177/002234338702400102. S2CID 145424339.
Tulchin, Joseph S (1987). "The Malvinas War of 1982: An Inevitable Conflict That Never Should Have Occurred". Latin American Research Review. 22 (3): 123 141. doi:10.1017/S0023879100037079. S2CID 252936590.
Little, Walter. "The Falklands Affair: A Review of the Literature," Political Studies, (June 1984) 32#2 pp 296 310
Further reading[edit]
Privratsky, Kenneth L.: Logistics in the Falklands War - A Case Study in Expeditionary Warfare, 2017, Pen & Sword, Great Britain, ISBN 978-1473899049
Shields, John: Air Power in the Falklands Conflict - An Operational Level Insight into Air Warfare in the South Atlantic, 2021, Pen & Sword, Great Britain, ISBN 9781399007528
External links[edit]
Wikiquote has quotations related to Falklands War.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Falklands War.
Argentine website with opinion pieces and photos of the war
Interview with the then British UN ambassador about initial post invasion peace efforts
"Falkland Islands History Roll of Honour". Royal Air Force. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2015.
"The Falkland Islands Conflict 1982". falklandswar.org.uk.
Schumann, Peter B. "Argentiniens unbew ltigte Vergangenheit" [Argentina's unresolved past]. Deutschlandfunk (in German).
"The South Atlantic Medal Association 1982". sama82.org.uk.
"Battle atlas of the Falklands war 1982 by land, sea and air". naval-history.net.
"No. 49134". The London Gazette (Supplement). 8 October 1982. pp. 12831 12861. Victoria Cross and other decorations
"No. 48999". The London Gazette (Supplement). 3 June 1982. pp. 7421 7422. Decorations specifically for the defence of South Georgia
"ITB Bater a Costera Exocet en Malvinas: Entrevista con el CL (R) Ing. Julio P rez" [ITB Exocet battery: Interview with Julio P rez]. Fuerzas Navales Magazine (in Spanish) (14). 2002. Archived from the original on 2 March 2008.
ex-7th Argentine Infantry Regiment veterans (in Spanish)
"Coverage of the Falklands war". RadioTapes.com.
Rey, Carlos Alberto; Rattenbach, Benjam n;  et al. Report Rattenbach: Report of the commission for analysis and evaluation of responsibility in the conflict `South Atlantic`  (in Spanish)   via Wikisource.
Paul A Olsen (17 May 2012). Operation Corporate: Operational Art and Implications for the Joint Operational Access Concept (PDF). School of Advanced Military Studies (Report). DTIC. ADA566546. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013.
Lessons of the Falklands. Department of the Navy (Report). DTIC. February 1983. ADA133333. Archived from the original on 22 June 2015.
vteFalklands WarTimeline
Background
Causes
Invasion of the Falklands
Invasion of South Georgia
Occupation
Total Exclusion Zone
Surrender
Battles
San Carlos
Goose Green
Many Branch Point
Mount Harriet
Mount Longdon
Mount Tumbledown
Top Malo House
Two Sisters
Wireless Ridge
Seal Cove
Mount Kent
Bluff Cove
Operations
Algeciras
Black Buck
Corporate
Keyhole
Paraquet
Sutton
Mikado
Forces
Argentine: Air
Ground
Naval
British: Air
Ground
Naval
Falkland Islands Defence Force
Ships
Argentine: ARA General Belgrano
ARA Alf rez Sobral
British: HMS Sheffield
HMS Antelope
HMS Ardent
HMS Arrow
HMS Coventry
HMS Glamorgan
RFA Sir Galahad
SS Atlantic Conveyor
Related
Aftermath
Argentine cemetery
British cemetery
British logistics
Cultural impact
Land mines
Memorial
Yomp
Links to related articles
vteArgentina articlesHistory
First inhabitants
Colonial Argentina
Governorate
Viceroyalty
War of Independence
Civil Wars
Generation of '80
Arms race with Chile
Dreadnought race with Brazil, Chile
Infamous Decade
World War II
Peronism
Dirty War
National Reorganization Process
Falklands War
Trial of the Juntas
December 2001 riots
Geography
Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Environment
Extreme points
Fauna
Flora
Islands
Mountains
National Parks
Regions
Rivers
World Heritage Sites
Politics
Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
ministries
Human rights
Intersex
LGBT
Transgender
Law
Law enforcement
Military
National Congress
Political parties
President
list
Vice President
Supreme Court
Economy
Agriculture
Banking
Central Bank
Communications
Electricity sector
Economic history
Foreign trade
Peso (currency)
Science and technology
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Society
Corruption
Crime
Education
Healthcare
Languages
LGBT+
People
Demographics
Ethnic groups
Religion
Water supply and sanitation
Women
Culture
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Humor
Literature
Music
National symbols
Newspapers
Painting
Public holidays
Radio
Sports
Television
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteFalkland IslandsCapital: Port StanleyHistory
1770 Falklands crisis
1833 British Reassertion
Hope Place
Port Egmont
Puerto Soledad
1982 invasion
Falklands War
GeographyIslands
Arch
Bald
Barclay
Barren
Beaver
Becher
Beauchene
Beef
Bird
Bleaker
Bobs
Box
Brandy
Broken
Burdwood Bank
Burnt
Carcass
Cochon
Coffin
Dunbar
Dyke
Ear
East Falkland
Lafonia
East
Eddystone Rock
Elephant Cays
Eddystone Rock
Fox
George
Golding
Great
Green
Halt
High
Hog
Hummock
Jason
Kelp
Keppel
Kidney
Lively
Long
New
North East
North Point
Passage
Pebble
Penn
Phillimore
Pleasant
Quaker
Rabbit
Ruggles
Rum
Samuel
Sandy Bay
Saunders
Sea Dog
Sea Lion
Seal Rocks
Shag
Speedwell
Split
Staats
Swan
Tea
Tussac
Tyssen
Weddell
West Falkland
West Point
Whisky
Locations
Airport
Ajax Bay
Bay of Harbours
Bertha's Beach
Brenton Loch
Bull Point
Byron Heights
Camp
Cape Bougainville
Cape Pembroke
Chatham
Circum Peak
Darwin
Eagle Passage
Falkland Sound
Fox Bay
French
Goose Green
Grantham Sound
Green Patch
Gull
Hill Cove
Hope Harbour
Hornby Mountains
Horse
Johnson's Harbour
Lafonia
Loop
Mount Adam
Mount Alice
Mount Maria
Mount Usborne
Mount Weddell
New Haven
New Year Cove
North Arm
Pebble Island Settlement
Pillar
Pleasant Peak
Port Albemarle
Port Howard
Port Louis
Port Patterson
Port San Carlos
Port Stephens
Quaker Harbour
Race
Salvador
San Carlos
Seal Bay
Smylie Channel
Stanley
Stanley Harbour
Swan
Volunteer Point
Weddell Point
Weddell Settlement
Military
Falkland Islands Defence Force
Mare Harbour
RAF Mount Pleasant
RRH Mount Kent
RRH Byron Heights
RRH Mount Alice
Politics
Chief Executive
Constitution
Falkland Islands pound (currency)
Government House
Governor
list
Legislative Assembly
Representative Office, London
Sovereignty dispute
Economy
Falkland Islands Company
Falkland Islands Development Corporation
Falkland Islands General Employees Union
Falkland Landholdings Corporation
Falklands Oil and Gas
Society
Education
Falkland Islands Community School(*)
Falkland Islanders
Origins
Falklands Conservation
Human rights
LGBT
Languages
Falkland Islands English
Telecommunications
Internet domain
Transport
Law Enforcement
Culture
Anglican parish
Coat of arms
Flag
Motto
Religion
Christ Church Cathedral
Roman Catholicism
Scouting and Guiding
Sport
Commonwealth Games
Cricket team
Football team
Rifle Association
Rugby union
(*) Sixth-formers attend Peter Symonds College in England and national diploma/NVQ students attend Chichester College in England
vteMargaret Thatcher
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1979 1990)
Leader of the Conservative Party (1975 1990)
MP for Finchley (1959 1992)
Member of Parliament
Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act (1960)
Circular 10/70 (1970)
Shadow Cabinet
"Britain Awake" (1976)
Vote of no confidence in the Callaghan ministry (1979)
Ideology
Thatcherism
Conservatism
Free market
Union democracy
Premiership
Ministers
wets and dries
Cold War
1st term
2nd 3rd term
1st ministry(1979 1983)
Budget (1979)
Budget (1980)
"The lady's not for turning" (1980)
Budget (1981)
Gang of 25
Irish hunger strike (1981)
Budget (1982)
Falklands War (1982)
"Rejoice"
Diana Gould exchange
"White flags over Port Stanley"
Budget (1983)
2nd ministry(1983 1987)
Budget (1984)
Brighton hotel bombing (1984)
GCHQ trade union ban (1984)
CCSU case
Miners' strike (1984 85)
Budget (1985)
Anglo-Irish Agreement (1985)
Local Government Act (1985)
rate-capping rebellion
Westland affair (1986)
Budget (1986)
Budget (1987)
3rd ministry(1987 1990)
Budget (1988)
Broadcasting restrictions (1988)
"Sermon on the Mound" (1988)
Bruges speech (1988)
Budget (1989)
Community Charge (1989 90)
Poll tax riots
Budget (1990)
Gulf War (1990)
"No. No. No." (1990)
Resignation Honours (1990)
Party elections
1975
1989
1990
General elections
1979
1983
1987
Books
The Downing Street Years (1993 autobiography)
The Path to Power (1995 memoir)
Statecraft: Strategies for a Changing World (2003)
Family
Sir Denis Thatcher (husband)
baronetcy
Sir Mark Thatcher (son)
Carol Thatcher (daughter)
Alfred Roberts (father)
"We have become a grandmother" (1989)
Cultural depictionsFilm andtelevision
Anyone for Denis? (1982 TV play)
Spitting Image (1984 1996 & 2020 TV series)
The New Statesman (1987 1991 TV series)
Thatcher: The Final Days (1991 film)
The Falklands Play (2002 play)
Jeffrey Archer: The Truth (2002 TV film)
The Alan Clark Diaries (2004 TV series)
Pinochet in Suburbia (2006 docudrama)
The Long Walk to Finchley (2008 film)
Margaret (2009 film)
The Queen (2009 TV serial)
The Iron Lady (2011 film)
The Hunt for Tony Blair (2011 episode)
In Search of La Che (2011 film)
The Crown (2020 TV series)
Reagan (2023 film)
Plays
Handbagged (2010, 2013)
The Audience (2013)
Statues
London Guildhall (1998)
Palace of Westminster (2007)
Grantham (2022)
See also
Let's Start a War
Thatchergate
The Ploughman's Lunch
 James Callaghan
John Major 
 Category
 Honours
 Death and funeral
vteColonial conflicts involving the English/British Empire17thcentury
Ireland (1593 1603)
Virginia (1609 46)
Swally (1612)
Ormuz (1622)
Saint Kitts (1626)
Quebec (1628)
Pequot War (1634 38)
Irish Rebellion (1641)
Confederate War (1641 53)
Cromwellian conquest of Ireland (1649 53)
Acadia (1654 67)
Anglo-Spanish War (1654 60)
Jamaica (1655 1739)
Tangier (1664)
King Philip's War (1675 78)
Child's War (1686 90)
Siam (1687)
Williamite War (1688 91)
King William's War (1688 97)
Ghana (1694 1700)
18thcentury
Queen Anne's War (1702 13)
Tuscarora War (1711 15)
Yamasee War (1715 17)
Father Rale's War/Dummer's War (1722 25)
War of Jenkins' Ear (1740 42)
King George's War (1744 48)
Carnatic Wars (1746 63)
Nova Scotia (1749 55)
French and Indian War (1754 63)
Seven Years' War (1756 63)
Bengal War (1756 65)
Anglo-Cherokee War (1758 61)
Jamaica (1762)
Anglo-Spanish War (1762 63)
Pontiac's War (1763 66)
War of the Regulation (1765 71)
First Carib War (1769 73)
Rohilkhand (1773 74)
Lord Dunmore's War (1774)
American Revolutionary War (1775 83)
First Anglo-Maratha War (1775 82)
Second Anglo-Mysore War (1779 84)
Gold Coast (1781 82)
Assam (1786)
Australian frontier wars (1788 1934)
Nootka Sound (1789)
Third Anglo-Mysore War (1789 92)
Cotiote (Wayanad) War (1793 1806)
Rohilkhand (1794)
Cape Colony (1795)
Jamaica (1795 96)
Grenada (1795 96)
Ceylon (1795)
Kandyan Wars (1796 1818)
Irish Rebellion (1798)
Malta (1798 1800)
Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1798 99)
Dwyer's guerrilla campaign (1799 1803)
Polygar Wars (1799 1805)
19thcentury
Newfoundland (1800)
Second Anglo-Maratha War (1803 05)
Castle Hill convict rebellion (1804)
Suriname (1804)
Cape Colony (1806)
R o de la Plata (1806 07)
Egypt (1807)
Froberg mutiny (1807)
Santo Domingo (1808 09)
Martinique (1809)
Persian Gulf (1809)
Guadeloupe (1810)
Reunion (1810)
Mauritius (1810)
Seychelles (1810)
Spice Islands (1810)
Java (1810 11)
Xhosa Wars (1811 79)
USA (1812 15)
Nepal (1814 16)
Guadeloupe (1815)
Cape Colony (1815)
Algiers (1816)
Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817 18)
Persian Gulf (1819)
Guiana (1823)
Anglo-Ashanti wars (1824 1901)
First Anglo-Burmese War (1824 26)
Black War (Van Diemen's Land) (1828 32)
Jamaica (1831 32)
Malacca (1831 33)
Lower Canada (1837 38)
Upper Canada (1837 38)
Aden Expedition (1839)
Egyptian Ottoman War (1839 41)
First Anglo-Afghan War (1839 42)
First Opium War (1839 42)
New Zealand Wars (1845 72)
First Anglo-Sikh War (1845 46)
R o de la Plata (1845 50)
Canton (1847)
British Honduras (1847 1901)
Ceylon (1848)
Second Anglo-Sikh War (1848 49)
Second Anglo-Burmese War (1852)
Eureka Rebellion (1854)
 land War (1854 56)
Anglo-Persian War (1856 57)
Second Opium War (1856 60)
Indian Rebellion (1857 59)
Revolt of Rajab Ali (1857-58)
Kagoshima (1863)
Ambela campaign (1863 64)
Shimonoseki (1864)
Duar War (1864 65)
Fenian Rebellion in Canada (1866 71)
Abyssinia (1868)
Manitoba (1870)
Perak (1875 76)
Anglo-Zulu War (1879)
Second Anglo-Afghan War (1879 80)
Basutoland (1880 81)
First Boer War (1880 81)
Mahdist War (1881 99)
Anglo-Egyptian War (1882)
Saskatchewan (1885)
Third Anglo-Burmese War (1885)
Central Africa (1886 89)
Hazara (1888)
Mashonaland (1890)
Hunza Nagar Campaign (1891)
Anglo-Manipur War (1891)
Pahang Uprising (1891 1895)
Matabeleland (1893 94)
North Borneo (1894 1905)
Chitral Expedition (1895)
Jameson Raid South Africa (1896)
Anglo-Zanzibar War (1896)
Matabeleland (1896 97)
Benin Expedition (1897)
Siege of Malakand (1897)
First Mohmand campaign (1897 98)
Tirah campaign (1897 98)
Six-Day War (1899)
Boxer Rebellion (1898 1901)
Second Boer War (1899 1902)
20thcentury
Somaliland (1900 20)
West Africa (1901 02)
Tibet expedition (1903 04)
Bambatha Rebellion (1906)
Maritz rebellion (1914 15)
Tochi (1914 15)
Nyasaland (1915)
Nigeria (1915)
Peshawar (1915)
Mohmand (1916 17)
Quebec (1917)
Nigeria (1918)
Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
Waziristan campaign (1919 20)
Iraqi Revolt (1920)
Malabar rebellion (1921)
Kurdistan (1922 24)
Transjordan (1923)
Pink's War (1925)
Ikhwan revolt (1927 30)
Tirah (1930 31)
Barzani revolt (1931 32)
Second Mohmand campaign (1935)
Palestine (1936 39)
Waziristan campaign (1936 39)
Ethiopia (1943)
Indochina (1945 46)
Indonesia (1945)
Sarawak (1946 50)
Malayan Emergency (1948 60)
Mau Mau Uprising Kenya (1952 60)
Oman (1954 59)
Cyprus Emergency (1955 59)
Suez Crisis (1956)
Oman (1962 76)
Brunei (1962)
Sarawak (1962 90)
Malaysia (1962 66)
Aden (1963 67)
Falklands (1982)
Authority control International
FAST
National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Falklands_War&oldid=1149692638"