President of the United States from 1963 to 1969
"Lyndon Johnson" and "LBJ" redirect here. For the American football player, see Lyndon Johnson (American football). For other uses, see LBJ (disambiguation).
Lyndon B. JohnsonOval Office photo, 196436th President of the United StatesIn officeNovember 22, 1963  January 20, 1969Vice President
None (1963 1965)[a]
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Preceded byJohn F. KennedySucceeded byRichard Nixon37th Vice President of the United StatesIn officeJanuary 20, 1961  November 22, 1963PresidentJohn F. KennedyPreceded byRichard NixonSucceeded byHubert HumphreySenate Majority LeaderIn officeJanuary 3, 1955  January 3, 1961DeputyEarle C. Clements (1955 1957)Mike Mansfield (1957 1961)Preceded byWilliam F. KnowlandSucceeded byMike MansfieldSenate Minority LeaderIn officeJanuary 3, 1953  January 3, 1955DeputyEarle C. ClementsPreceded byStyles BridgesSucceeded byWilliam F. KnowlandChair of the Senate Democratic CaucusIn officeJanuary 3, 1953  January 3, 1961Preceded byErnest McFarlandSucceeded byMike MansfieldSenate Majority WhipIn officeJanuary 3, 1951  January 3, 1953LeaderErnest McFarlandPreceded byFrancis J. MyersSucceeded byLeverett SaltonstallUnited States Senatorfrom TexasIn officeJanuary 3, 1949  January 3, 1961Preceded byW. Lee O'DanielSucceeded byWilliam A. BlakleyMember of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Texas's 10th districtIn officeApril 10, 1937  January 3, 1949Preceded byJames P. BuchananSucceeded byHomer Thornberry
Personal detailsBornLyndon Baines Johnson(1908-08-27)August 27, 1908Gillespie County, Texas, U.S.DiedJanuary 22, 1973(1973-01-22) (aged 64)Gillespie County, Texas, U.S.Resting placeJohnson Family Cemetery[1]Political partyDemocraticSpouseClaudia "Lady Bird" Taylor
   (m. 1934) ChildrenLyndaLuciParentsSamuel Ealy Johnson Jr.Rebekah BainesEducationSouthwest Texas State Teachers College (BS)Georgetown University (no degree)OccupationPoliticianteacherCivilian awardsPresidential Medal of Freedom (posthumously, 1980)SignatureMilitary serviceBranch/serviceUnited States NavyYears of service1940 1941 (inactive)1941 1942 (active)1942 1964 (reserve)RankCommanderBattles/wars
World War II
Salamaua Lae campaign
Military awardsSilver Star
Lyndon B. Johnson's voice
Johnson on the passing of the Civil Rights Act of 1964Recorded July 2, 1964
This article is part of a series aboutLyndon B. Johnson
Early life
Family
Electoral history
Public image
Memorials
Bibliography
Senator from Texas
Senate career
37th Vice President of the United States
Transition
Tenure
Kennedy administration
Inauguration
36th President of the United States
Presidency
timeline
Executive actions
Cannabis policy
Foreign policy
Johnson Doctrine
international trips
Cabinet appointments
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court candidates
controversy
First term
First inauguration
Let Us Continue
Civil Rights Act (1964)
Transportation Act (1964)
Food Stamp Act (1964)
War on poverty
Timeline
'63
'64
Second term
Second inauguration
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Department of Transportation
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965
Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Child Nutrition Act
Non-Discrimination in Federal contracts
Thurgood Marshall Supreme Court nomination
Civil Rights Act (1968)
Timeline
'65
'66
'67
'68 '69
Presidential and Vice presidential campaigns
1960
primaries
convention
campaign
election
1964
primaries
convention
campaign
election
1968
campaign
Post-presidency
Presidential library
Death
vte
Lyndon Baines Johnson (/ l nd n  be nz/; August 27, 1908 January 22, 1973), often referred to by his initials LBJ, was an American politician who served as the 36th president of the United States from 1963 to 1969. He previously served as the 37th vice president from 1961 to 1963 under President John F. Kennedy, and was sworn in shortly after Kennedy's assassination. A Democrat from Texas, Johnson also served as a U.S. representative, U.S. Senator and the Senate's majority leader. He holds the distinction of being one of the few presidents who served in all elected offices at the federal level.
Born in a farmhouse in Stonewall, Texas, to a local political family, Johnson worked as a high school teacher and a congressional aide before winning election to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1937. In 1948, he won the 1948 Senate election in Texas after a narrow and controversial victory in the Democratic Party's primary.[2] He was appointed to the position of Senate Majority Whip in 1951. He became the Senate Democratic leader in 1953 and majority leader in 1954. In 1960 Johnson ran for the Democratic nomination for president. Ultimately, Senator Kennedy bested Johnson and his other rivals for the nomination, then surprised many by offering to make Johnson his vice presidential running mate.  The Kennedy-Johnson ticket won in the 1960 presidential election. Vice President Johnson assumed the presidency on November 22, 1963, after President Kennedy was assassinated. The following year Johnson was elected to the presidency when he won in a landslide against Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, receiving 61.1% of the popular vote in the 1964 presidential election, the largest share won by any presidential candidate since the 1820 election.
Johnson's domestic policy was aimed at expanding civil rights, public broadcasting, access to healthcare, aid to education and the arts, urban and rural development, and public services. In 1964 Johnson coined the term the "Great Society"  to describe these efforts. In addition, he sought to create better living conditions for low-income Americans by spearheading a campaign unofficially called the "War on Poverty". As part of these efforts, Johnson signed the Social Security Amendments of 1965, which resulted in the creation of Medicare and Medicaid. Johnson followed his predecessor's actions in bolstering NASA and made the Apollo Program a national priority. He enacted the Higher Education Act of 1965 which established federally insured student loans. Johnson signed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 which laid the groundwork for U.S. immigration policy today. Johnson's opinion on the issue of civil rights put him at odds with other white, southern Democrats. His civil rights legacy was shaped by signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Civil Rights Act of 1968. During his presidency, the American political landscape transformed significantly,[3] as white southerners who were once staunch Democrats began moving to the Republican Party[4] and black voters began moving to the Democratic Party.[5][6] Because of his domestic agenda, Johnson's presidency marked the peak of modern liberalism in the United States in the 20th century.[7]
Johnson's presidency took place during the Cold War, thus his foreign policy prioritized containment of communism. Prior to his presidency, the U.S. was already involved in the Vietnam War, supporting South Vietnam against the communist North. Following a naval skirmish in 1964 between the United States and North Vietnam, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which granted Johnson the power to launch a full-scale military intervention in South East Asia. The number of American military personnel in Vietnam increased dramatically, and casualties soared among U.S. soldiers and Vietnamese civilians. Johnson also expanded military operations in neighboring Laos to destroy North Vietnamese supply lines. In 1968, the communist Tet Offensive inflamed the anti-war movement, especially among draft-age students on university campuses, and public opinion turned against America's involvement in the war. In Europe, Johnson's administration continued to promote and foster Western European political and economic cooperation and integration as his predecessors had.[8]
At home, Johnson faced further troubles with race riots in major cities and increasing crime rates. His political opponents seized the opportunity and raised demands for "law and order" policies. Johnson began his presidency with near-universal support, but his approval declined throughout his presidency as the public became frustrated with both the Vietnam War and domestic unrest. Johnson initially sought to run for re-election; however, following disappointing results in the New Hampshire primary he withdrew his candidacy. The war was a major election issue and the 1968 presidential election saw Republican candidate Richard Nixon defeat Johnson's vice president Hubert Humphrey. At the end of his presidency in 1969, Johnson returned to his Texas ranch, published his memoirs, and in other respects kept a low profile until he died of a heart attack in 1973.
Johnson is one of the most controversial presidents in American history. Public opinion and academic assessments of his legacy have fluctuated greatly ever since his death. Historians and scholars rank Johnson in the upper tier because of his accomplishments regarding domestic policy. His administration passed many major laws that made substantial changes in civil rights, health care, welfare, and education.[9] Conversely, Johnson is strongly criticized for his foreign policy, namely escalating American involvement in the Vietnam War.[10][11]
Early life
 Seven-year-old Johnson with his trademark cowboy hat, c. 1915.
Lyndon Baines Johnson was born on August 27, 1908, near Stonewall, Texas, in a small farmhouse on the Pedernales River.[12] He was the eldest of five children born to Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr. and Rebekah Baines.[13][14] Johnson had one brother, Sam Houston Johnson, and three sisters, Rebekah, Josefa, and Lucia.[15] The nearby small town of Johnson City, Texas, was named after LBJ's father's cousin, James Polk Johnson,[16][17] whose forebears had moved west from Georgia.[18] Johnson had English-Irish, German, and Ulster Scots ancestry.[19] Through his mother, he was a great-grandson of pioneer Baptist clergyman George Washington Baines, who pastored eight churches in Texas, as well as others in Arkansas and Louisiana. Baines was also the president of Baylor University during the American Civil War.[20]
Johnson's grandfather, Samuel Ealy Johnson Sr., was raised as a Baptist and for a time was a member of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). In his later years, the grandfather became a Christadelphian; Johnson's father also joined the Christadelphian Church toward the end of his life.[21] Later, as a politician, Johnson was influenced in his positive attitude toward Jews by the religious beliefs that his family, especially his grandfather, had shared with him.[22] Johnson's favorite Bible verse came from the King James Version of Isaiah 1:18 "Come now, and let us reason together ..."[23]
Johnson grew up in poverty, with his father losing a great deal of money.[24] Biographer Robert Caro described him as being raised "in a land without electricity, where the soil was so rocky that it was hard to earn a living from it."[24]
 Johnson's boyhood home in Johnson City, Texas
In school, Johnson was a talkative youth who was elected president of his 11th-grade class. He graduated in 1924 from Johnson City High School, where he participated in public speaking, debate, and baseball.[25][26] At the age of 15, Johnson was the youngest member of his class. Pressured by his parents to attend college, he enrolled at a "sub college" of Southwest Texas State Teachers College (SWTSTC) in the summer of 1924, where students from unaccredited high schools could take the 12th-grade courses needed for admission to college. He left the school just weeks after his arrival and decided to move to southern California. He worked at his cousin's legal practice and in various odd jobs before returning to Texas, where he worked as a day laborer.[27]
In 1926, Johnson managed to enroll at SWTSTC (now Texas State University). He worked his way through school, participated in debate and campus politics, and edited the school newspaper, The College Star.[28] The college years refined his skills of persuasion and political organization. For nine months, from 1928 to 1929, Johnson paused his studies to teach Mexican American children at the segregated Welhausen School in Cotulla, some 90 miles (140 km) south of San Antonio in La Salle County. The job helped him to save money to complete his education, and he graduated in 1930 with a Bachelor of Science degree in history and his certificate of qualification as a high school teacher.[29][30] He briefly taught at Pearsall High School before taking a position as teacher of public speaking at Sam Houston High School in Houston.[31]
When he returned to San Marcos in 1965, after signing the Higher Education Act of 1965, Johnson reminisced:
I shall never forget the faces of the boys and the girls in that little Welhausen Mexican School, and I remember even yet the pain of realizing and knowing then that college was closed to practically every one of those children because they were too poor. And I think it was then that I made up my mind that this nation could never rest while the door to knowledge remained closed to any American.[32]
Entry into politics
After Richard M. Kleberg won a 1931 special election to represent Texas in the United States House of Representatives, he appointed Johnson as his legislative secretary. This marked Johnson's formal introduction into politics. Johnson secured the position on the recommendation of his father and that of State Senator Welly Hopkins, for whom Johnson had campaigned in 1930.[33] Kleberg had little interest in performing the day-to-day duties of a Congressman, instead delegating them to Johnson.[34] After Franklin D. Roosevelt won the 1932 presidential election, Johnson became a lifelong supporter of Roosevelt's New Deal.[35] Johnson was elected speaker of the "Little Congress", a group of Congressional aides, where he cultivated Congressmen, newspapermen, and lobbyists. Johnson's friends soon included aides to President Roosevelt as well as fellow Texans such as Vice President John Nance Garner and Congressman Sam Rayburn.[36]
Johnson married Claudia Alta Taylor, also known as "Lady Bird", of Karnack, Texas, on November 17, 1934. He met her after he had attended Georgetown University Law Center for several months. Johnson later quit his Georgetown studies after the first semester in 1934.[37] During their first date he asked her to marry him; many dates later, she finally agreed.[38] The wedding was officiated by Arthur R. McKinstry at St. Mark's Episcopal Church in San Antonio.[39] They had two daughters, Lynda Bird, born in 1944, and Luci Baines, born in 1947. Johnson gave his children names with the LBJ initials; his dog was Little Beagle Johnson. His home was the LBJ Ranch; his initials were on his cufflinks, ashtrays, and clothes.[40] During his marriage, Lyndon Johnson had affairs with "numerous"[41] women, in particular with Alice Marsh (n e Glass) who assisted him politically.[41]
In 1935, he was appointed head of the Texas National Youth Administration, which enabled him to use the government to create education and job opportunities for young people. He resigned two years later to run for Congress. Johnson, a notoriously tough boss throughout his career, often demanded long workdays and work on weekends.[42] He was described by friends, fellow politicians, and historians as motivated by an exceptional lust for power and control. As Johnson's biographer Robert Caro observes, "Johnson's ambition was uncommon  in the degree to which it was unencumbered by even the slightest excess weight of ideology, of philosophy, of principles, of beliefs."[43]
 President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Governor James V. Allred of Texas, and Johnson, 1937. Johnson later used an edited version of this photo, with Allred airbrushed out, in his 1941 senatorial campaign.[44]
U.S. House of Representatives (1937 1949)
In 1937, after the death of thirteen-term Congressman James P. Buchanan, Johnson successfully campaigned in a special election for Texas's 10th congressional district, that covered Austin and the surrounding hill country. He ran on a New Deal platform and was effectively aided by his wife. He served in the House from April 10, 1937, to January 3, 1949.[45] President Franklin D. Roosevelt found Johnson to be a welcome ally and conduit for information, particularly about issues concerning internal politics in Texas and the machinations of Vice President John Nance Garner and Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn. Johnson was immediately appointed to the Naval Affairs Committee. He worked for rural electrification and other improvements for his district. Johnson steered the projects towards contractors he knew, such as Herman and George Brown, who would finance much of Johnson's future career.[26] In 1941, he ran for the Democratic U.S. Senate nomination in a special election, losing narrowly to the sitting Governor of Texas, businessman and radio personality W. Lee O'Daniel. O'Daniel received 175,590 votes (30.49 percent) to Johnson's 174,279 (30.26 percent).
Active military duty (1941 1942)
 LCDR Johnson, March 1942
Johnson was appointed a Lieutenant Commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 21, 1940. While serving as a U.S. representative, he was called to active duty three days after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941. His orders were to report to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington, D.C., for instruction and training.[46] Following his training, he asked Undersecretary of the Navy James Forrestal for a job in Washington. He was sent instead to inspect shipyard facilities in Texas and on the West Coast. In the spring of 1942, President Roosevelt decided he needed better information on conditions in the Southwest Pacific, and to send a highly trusted political ally to get it. From a suggestion by Forrestal, Roosevelt assigned Johnson to a three-man survey team covering the Southwest Pacific.[47]
Johnson reported to General Douglas MacArthur in Australia. Johnson and two U.S. Army officers went to the 22nd Bomb Group base, which was assigned the high-risk mission of bombing the Japanese airbase at Lae in New Guinea. On June 9, 1942, Johnson volunteered as an observer for an airstrike on New Guinea by B-26 bombers. Reports vary on what happened to the aircraft carrying Johnson during that mission. Johnson's biographer Robert Caro accepts Johnson's account and supports it with testimony from the aircrew concerned: the aircraft was attacked, disabling one engine and it turned back before reaching its objective, though remaining under heavy fire. Others claim that it turned back because of generator trouble before reaching the objective and before encountering enemy aircraft and never came under fire; this is supported by official flight records.[48][49] Other airplanes that continued to the target came under fire near the target about the same time Johnson's plane was recorded as having landed back at the original airbase. MacArthur recommended Johnson for the Silver Star for gallantry in action: the only member of the crew to receive a decoration.[49] After it was approved by the Army, he presented the medal to Johnson, with the following citation:[48]
For gallantry in action in the vicinity of Port Moresby and Salamaua, New Guinea, on June 9, 1942. While on a mission of obtaining information in the Southwest Pacific area, Lieutenant Commander Johnson, to obtain personal knowledge of combat conditions, volunteered as an observer on a hazardous aerial combat mission over hostile positions in New Guinea. As our planes neared the target area they were intercepted by eight hostile fighters. When, at this time, the plane in which Lieutenant Commander Johnson was an observer, developed mechanical trouble and was forced to turn back alone, presenting a favorable target to the enemy fighters, he evidenced marked coolness despite the hazards involved. His gallant actions enabled him to obtain and return with valuable information.
Johnson, who had used a movie camera to record conditions,[50] reported to Roosevelt, to Navy leaders, and Congress that conditions were deplorable and unacceptable: some historians have suggested this was in exchange for MacArthur's recommendation to award the Silver Star.[49] He argued that the southwest Pacific urgently needed a higher priority and a larger share of war supplies. The warplanes sent there, for example, were "far inferior" to Japanese planes; and morale was bad. He told Forrestal that the Pacific Fleet had a "critical" need for 6,800 additional experienced men. Johnson prepared a twelve-point program to upgrade the effort in the region, stressing "greater cooperation and coordination within the various commands and between the different war theaters". Congress responded by making Johnson chairman of a high-powered subcommittee of the Naval Affairs Committee,[51] with a mission similar to that of the Truman Committee in the Senate. He probed the peacetime "business as usual" inefficiencies that permeated the naval war and demanded that admirals shape up and get the job done. Johnson went too far when he proposed a bill that would crack down on the draft exemptions of shipyard workers if they were absent from work too often; organized labor blocked the bill and denounced him. Johnson's biographer Robert Dallek concludes, "The mission was a temporary exposure to danger calculated to satisfy Johnson's personal and political wishes, but it also represented a genuine effort on his part, however misplaced, to improve the lot of America's fighting men."[52]
In addition to the Silver Star, Johnson received the American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. He was released from active duty on July 17, 1942, and remained in the Navy Reserve, later promoted to Commander on October 19, 1949 (effective June 2, 1948). He resigned from the Navy Reserve effective January 18, 1964.[53]
U.S. Senate (1949 1961)
1948 U.S. Senate election
Main article: 1948 United States Senate election in Texas
 LBJ's 1948 U.S. Senate campaign spots
In the 1948 elections, Johnson again ran for the Senate and won in a highly controversial Democratic Party primary against the well-known former governor Coke Stevenson. Johnson drew crowds to fairgrounds with his rented helicopter, dubbed "The Johnson City Windmill". He raised money to flood the state with campaign circulars and won over conservatives by casting doubts on Stevenson's support for the Taft Hartley Act (curbing union power). Stevenson came in first in the primary but lacked a majority, so a runoff election was held; Johnson campaigned harder, while Stevenson's efforts slumped due to a lack of funds.
US presidential historian Michael Beschloss observed that Johnson "gave white supremacist speeches" during the 1948 campaign, in order to secure the white vote. This cemented his reputation as a moderate in American politics, which would enable his ability to pivot and further civil rights causes upon assuming the presidency.[54]
The runoff vote count, handled by the Democratic State Central Committee, took a week. Johnson was announced the winner by 87 votes out of 988,295, an extremely narrow margin of victory. However, Johnson's victory was based on 200 "patently fraudulent"[55]: 608  ballots reported six days after the election from Box 13 in Jim Wells County, in an area dominated by political boss George Parr. The added names were in alphabetical order and written with the same pen and handwriting, following at the end of the list of voters. Some of the persons in this part of the list insisted that they had not voted that day.[56] Election judge Luis Salas said in 1977 that he had certified 202 fraudulent ballots for Johnson.[57] Robert Caro made the case in his 1990 book that Johnson had stolen the election in Jim Wells County, and that there were thousands of fraudulent votes in other counties as well, including 10,000 votes switched in San Antonio.[58] The Democratic State Central Committee voted to certify Johnson's nomination by a majority of one (29 28), with the last vote cast on Johnson's behalf by the publisher Frank W. Mayborn of Temple, Texas. The state Democratic convention upheld Johnson. Stevenson went to court, eventually taking his case before the U.S. Supreme Court, but with timely help from his friend and future U.S. Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas, Johnson prevailed on the basis that jurisdiction over naming a nominee rested with the party, not the federal government. Johnson soundly defeated Republican Jack Porter in the general election in November and went to Washington, permanently dubbed "Landslide Lyndon". Johnson, dismissive of his critics, happily adopted the nickname.[59]
Freshman senator to majority whip
 Johnson as U.S. senator from Texas
Once in the Senate, Johnson was known among his colleagues for his highly successful "courtships" of older senators, especially Senator Richard Russell, Democrat from Georgia, the leader of the Conservative coalition and arguably the most powerful man in the Senate. Johnson proceeded to gain Russell's favor in the same way he had "courted" Speaker Sam Rayburn and gained his crucial support in the House.
Johnson was appointed to the Senate Armed Services Committee, and in 1950 helped create the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. He became its chairman, and conducted investigations of defense costs and efficiency. These investigations revealed old investigations and demanded actions that were already being taken in part by the Truman administration, although it can be said that the committee's investigations reinforced the need for changes. Johnson gained headlines and national attention through his handling of the press, the efficiency with which his committee issued new reports, and the fact that he ensured that every report was endorsed unanimously by the committee. He used his political influence in the Senate to receive broadcast licenses from the Federal Communications Commission in his wife's name.[57][60] After the 1950 general elections, Johnson was chosen as Senate Majority Whip in 1951 under the new Majority Leader, Ernest McFarland of Arizona, and served from 1951 to 1953.[45]
Senate Democratic leader
 Drawer from Senate Desk X, used by all Democratic leaders, including Johnson, since Joseph Taylor Robinson
In the 1952 general election, Republicans won a majority in both the House and Senate. Among defeated Democrats that year was McFarland, who lost to upstart Barry Goldwater. In January 1953, Johnson was chosen by his fellow Democrats to be Minority Leader; he became the most junior senator ever elected to this position. One of his first actions was to eliminate the seniority system in making appointments to committees while retaining it for chairmanships. In the 1954 election, Johnson was re-elected to the Senate and, since the Democrats won the majority in the Senate, then became majority leader. Former Majority Leader William Knowland of California became the Minority Leader. Johnson's duties were to schedule legislation and help pass measures favored by the Democrats. Johnson, Rayburn and President Dwight D. Eisenhower worked well together in passing Eisenhower's domestic and foreign agenda.[61]
During the Suez Crisis, Johnson tried to prevent the U.S. government from criticizing the Israeli invasion of the Sinai peninsula. Along with the rest of the nation, Johnson was appalled by the threat of possible Soviet domination of space flight implied by the launch of the first artificial Earth satellite Sputnik 1 and used his influence to ensure passage of the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act, which established the civilian space agency NASA.
Historians Caro and Dallek consider Lyndon Johnson the most effective Senate majority leader in history. He was unusually proficient at gathering information. One biographer suggests he was "the greatest intelligence gatherer Washington has ever known", discovering exactly where every senator stood on issues, his philosophy and prejudices, his strengths and weaknesses and what it took to get his vote.[62] Robert Baker claimed that Johnson would occasionally send senators on NATO trips to avoid their dissenting votes.[63] Central to Johnson's control was "The Treatment",[64] described by two journalists:
The Treatment could last ten minutes or four hours. It came, enveloping its target, at the Johnson Ranch swimming pool, in one of Johnson's offices, in the Senate cloakroom, on the floor of the Senate itself  wherever Johnson might find a fellow Senator within his reach.
Its tone could be supplication, accusation, cajolery, exuberance, scorn, tears, complaint, and the hint of threat. It was all of these together. It ran the gamut of human emotions. Its velocity was breathtaking and it was all in one direction. Interjections from the target were rare. Johnson anticipated them before they could be spoken. He moved in close, his face a scant millimeter from his target, his eyes widening and narrowing, his eyebrows rising and falling. From his pockets poured clippings, memos, statistics. Mimicry, humor, and the genius of analogy made The Treatment an almost hypnotic experience and rendered the target stunned and helpless.[65]
 Johnson giving "The Treatment" to Senator Richard Russell in 1963, shortly after becoming president.
In 1955, Johnson persuaded Oregon's Independent Wayne Morse to join the Democratic caucus.[66]
During his tenure as Majority Leader, Johnson did not sign the 1956 Southern Manifesto,[67][68] and shepherded the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1960 to passage the first civil rights bills to pass Congress since the Enforcement Acts and the Civil Rights Act of 1875 during Reconstruction (1865 1877).[69][70][71][72]
A 60-cigarette-per-day smoker, Johnson suffered a near-fatal heart attack on July 2, 1955, at age 46. He abruptly gave up smoking as a result and, with only a couple of exceptions, did not resume the habit until after he left the White House on January 20, 1969. Johnson announced he would remain as his party's leader in the Senate on New Year's Eve 1955, his doctors reporting he had made "a most satisfactory recovery" since his heart attack five months before.[73][74]
Campaigns of 1960
See also: 1960 United States presidential election
Johnson's success in the Senate rendered him a potential Democratic presidential candidate; he had been the "favorite son" candidate of the Texas delegation at the Party's national convention in 1956, and appeared to be in a strong position to run for the 1960 nomination. Jim Rowe repeatedly urged Johnson to launch a campaign in early 1959, but Johnson thought it better to wait, thinking that John Kennedy's efforts would create a division in the ranks which could then be exploited. Rowe finally joined the Humphrey campaign in frustration, another move that Johnson thought played into his own strategy.[75]
Candidacy for president
Johnson made a late entry into the campaign in July 1960 which, coupled with a reluctance to leave Washington, allowed the rival Kennedy campaign to secure a substantial early advantage among Democratic state party officials. Johnson underestimated Kennedy's endearing qualities of charm and intelligence, as compared to his reputation as the more crude and wheeling-dealing "Landslide Lyndon".[76] Caro suggests that Johnson's hesitancy was the result of an overwhelming fear of failure.[77]
Johnson attempted in vain to capitalize on Kennedy's youth, poor health, and failure to take a position regarding Joseph McCarthy and McCarthyism.[78] He had formed a "Stop Kennedy" coalition with Adlai Stevenson, Stuart Symington, and Hubert Humphrey, but it proved a failure. Despite Johnson having the support of established Democrats and the party leadership, this did not translate into popular approval.  Johnson received 409 votes on the only ballot at the Democratic convention to Kennedy's 806, and so the convention nominated Kennedy. Tip O'Neill was a representative from Kennedy's home state of Massachusetts at that time, and he recalled that Johnson approached him at the convention and said, "Tip, I know you have to support Kennedy at the start, but I'd like to have you with me on the second ballot." O'Neill replied, "Senator, there's not going to be any second ballot."[79]
Vice-presidential nomination
According to Kennedy's Special Counsel Myer Feldman and Kennedy himself, it is impossible to reconstruct the precise manner in which Johnson's vice-presidential nomination ultimately took place. Kennedy did realize that he could not be elected without the support of traditional Southern Democrats, most of whom had backed Johnson; nevertheless, labor leaders were unanimous in their opposition to Johnson. AFL-CIO President George Meany called Johnson "the arch-foe of labor", while Illinois AFL-CIO President Reuben Soderstrom asserted Kennedy had "made chumps out of leaders of the American labor movement".[80][81] After much back and forth with party leaders and others on the matter, Kennedy did offer Johnson the vice-presidential nomination at the Los Angeles Biltmore Hotel at 10:15 am on July 14, the morning after he was nominated, and Johnson accepted. From that point to the actual nomination that evening, the facts are in dispute in many respects. (Convention chairman LeRoy Collins' declaration of a two-thirds majority in favor by voice vote is even disputed.)[82]
Seymour Hersh stated that Robert F. Kennedy (known as Bobby) hated Johnson for his attacks on the Kennedy family, and later maintained that his brother offered the position to Johnson merely as a courtesy, expecting him to decline. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. concurred with Robert Kennedy's version of events, and put forth that John Kennedy would have preferred Stuart Symington as his running-mate, alleging that Johnson teamed with House Speaker Sam Rayburn and pressured Kennedy to favor Johnson.[83] Robert Kennedy wanted his brother to choose labor leader Walter Reuther.[84]
Biographer Robert Caro offered a different perspective; he wrote that the Kennedy campaign was desperate to win what was forecast to be a very close election against Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Johnson was needed on the ticket to help carry Texas and the Southern states. Caro's research showed that on July 14, John Kennedy started the process while Johnson was still asleep. At 6:30 am, John Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy to prepare an estimate of upcoming electoral votes "including Texas".[85] Robert called Pierre Salinger and Kenneth O'Donnell to assist him. Salinger realized the ramifications of counting Texas votes as their own and asked him whether he was considering a Kennedy Johnson ticket, and Robert replied "yes".[85] Caro contends that it was then that John Kennedy called Johnson to arrange a meeting; he also called Pennsylvania governor David L. Lawrence, a Johnson backer, to request that he nominate Johnson for vice president if Johnson were to accept the role. According to Caro, Kennedy and Johnson met and Johnson said that Kennedy would have trouble with Kennedy supporters who were anti-Johnson. Kennedy returned to his suite to announce the Kennedy Johnson ticket to his closest supporters, including northern political bosses. O'Donnell was angry at what he considered a betrayal by Kennedy, who had previously cast Johnson as anti-labor and anti-liberal. Afterward, Robert Kennedy visited labor leaders who were extremely unhappy with the choice of Johnson and, after seeing the depth of labor opposition to Johnson, Robert ran messages between the hotel suites of his brother and Johnson apparently trying to undermine the proposed ticket without John Kennedy's authorization.[85]
Caro continues in his analysis that Robert Kennedy tried to get Johnson to agree to be the Democratic Party chairman rather than the vice president. Johnson refused to accept a change in plans unless it came directly from John Kennedy. Despite his brother's interference, John Kennedy was firm that Johnson was who he wanted as running mate; he met with staffers such as Larry O'Brien, his national campaign manager, to say that Johnson was to be vice president. O'Brien recalled later that John Kennedy's words were wholly unexpected, but that after a brief consideration of the electoral vote situation, he thought "it was a stroke of genius".[85] When John and Robert Kennedy next saw their father Joe Kennedy, he told them that signing Johnson as running mate was the smartest thing they had ever done.[86]
Another account of how Johnson's nomination came about was told by Evelyn Lincoln, JFK's secretary (both before and during his presidency).  In 1993, in a videotaped interview, she described how the decision was made, stating she was the only witness to a private meeting between John and Robert Kennedy in a suite at the Biltmore Hotel where they made the decision. She said she went in and out of the room as they spoke and, while she was in the room, heard them say that Johnson had tried to blackmail JFK into offering him the vice-presidential nomination with evidence of his womanizing provided by FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. She also overheard them discuss possible ways to avoid making the offer, and ultimately conclude that JFK had no choice.[87][88]
Re-election to U.S. Senate
At the same time as his vice presidential run, Johnson also sought a third term in the U.S. Senate. According to Robert Caro, "On November 8, 1960, Lyndon Johnson won an election for both the vice presidency of the United States, on the Kennedy Johnson ticket, and for a third term as senator (he had Texas law changed to allow him to run for both offices). When he won the vice presidency, he made arrangements to resign from the Senate, as he was required to do under federal law, as soon as it convened on January 3, 1961."[89] In 1988, Lloyd Bentsen, the vice presidential running mate of Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis, and a senator from Texas, took advantage of "Lyndon's law", and was able to retain his seat in the Senate despite Dukakis's loss to George H. W. Bush.
Johnson was re-elected senator with 1,306,605 votes (58 percent) to Republican John Tower's 927,653 (41.1 percent). Fellow Democrat William A. Blakley was appointed to replace Johnson as senator, but Blakley lost a special election in May 1961 to Tower.
Vice presidency (1961 1963)
See also: Presidency of John F. Kennedy
After the election, Johnson was quite concerned about the traditionally ineffective nature of his new office and set about to assume authority not allotted to the position. He initially sought a transfer of the authority of Senate majority leader to the vice presidency, since that office made him president of the Senate, but faced vehement opposition from the Democratic Caucus, including members whom he had counted as his supporters.[90]
 President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson outside the White House prior to a ceremony
Johnson sought to increase his influence within the executive branch. He drafted an executive order for Kennedy's signature, granting Johnson "general supervision" over matters of national security, and requiring all government agencies to "cooperate fully with the vice president in the carrying out of these assignments". Kennedy's response was to sign a non-binding letter requesting Johnson to "review" national security policies instead.[91] Kennedy similarly turned down early requests from Johnson to be given an office adjacent to the Oval Office and to employ a full-time Vice Presidential staff within the White House.[92] His lack of influence was thrown into relief later in 1961 when Kennedy appointed Johnson's friend Sarah T. Hughes to a federal judgeship, whereas Johnson had tried and failed to garner the nomination for Hughes at the beginning of his vice presidency. House Speaker Sam Rayburn wrangled the appointment from Kennedy in exchange for support of an administration bill.
Moreover, many members of the Kennedy White House were contemptuous of Johnson, including the president's brother, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, and they ridiculed his comparatively brusque, crude manner. Congressman Tip O'Neill recalled that the Kennedy men "had a disdain for Johnson that they didn't even try to hide.... They actually took pride in snubbing him."[93]
 Vice President Johnson and Attorney General Robert Kennedy meeting with civil rights leaders at the White House on June 22, 1963.
Kennedy, however, made efforts to keep Johnson busy, informed, and at the White House often, telling aides, "I can't afford to have my vice president, who knows every reporter in Washington, going around saying we're all screwed up, so we're going to keep him happy."[94] Kennedy appointed him to jobs such as the head of the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities, through which he worked with African Americans and other minorities. Kennedy may have intended this to remain a more nominal position, but Taylor Branch contends in Pillar of Fire that Johnson pushed the Kennedy administration's actions further and faster for civil rights than Kennedy originally intended to go. Branch notes the irony of Johnson being the advocate for civil rights when the Kennedy family had hoped that he would appeal to conservative southern voters. In particular, he notes Johnson's Memorial Day 1963 speech at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, as being a catalyst that led to more action.[citation needed]
 Opening Day of the 1961 baseball season. President Kennedy throws out the first ball at Griffith Stadium, the home field of the Washington Senators, as LBJ and Hubert Humphrey look on.
Johnson took on numerous minor diplomatic missions, which gave him some insights into global issues, as well as opportunities for self-promotion in the name of showing the country's flag. During his visit to West Berlin on August 19 20, 1961, Johnson calmed Berliners who were outraged by the building of the Berlin Wall.[95] He also attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings. Kennedy gave Johnson control over all presidential appointments involving Texas, and appointed him chairman of the President's Ad Hoc Committee for Science.[96]
Kennedy also appointed Johnson Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. The Soviets beat the United States with the first crewed spaceflight in April 1961, and Kennedy gave Johnson the task of evaluating the state of the U.S. space program and recommending a project that would allow the United States to catch up or beat the Soviets.[97] Johnson responded with a recommendation that the United States gain the leadership role by committing the resources to embark on a project to land an American on the Moon in the 1960s.[98][99] Kennedy assigned priority to the space program, but Johnson's appointment provided potential cover in case of a failure.[100]
 Vice President Johnson visiting Finland in September 1963; here seen with Mrs. Johnson, while Urho Kekkonen, the President of Finland, welcomes them.
Johnson was touched by a Senate scandal in August 1963 when Bobby Baker, the Secretary to the Majority Leader of the Senate and a prot g  of Johnson's, came under investigation by the Senate Rules Committee for allegations of bribery and financial malfeasance. One witness alleged that Baker had arranged for the witness to give kickbacks for the Vice President. Baker resigned in October, and the investigation did not expand to Johnson. The negative publicity from the affair fed rumors in Washington circles that Kennedy was planning on dropping Johnson from the Democratic ticket in the upcoming 1964 presidential election. However, on October 31, 1963, a reporter asked if he intended and expected to have Johnson on the ticket the following year. Kennedy replied, "Yes to both those questions."[101] There is little doubt that Robert Kennedy and Johnson hated each other,[102] yet John and Robert Kennedy agreed that dropping Johnson from the ticket could produce heavy losses in the South in the 1964 election, and they agreed that Johnson would stay on the ticket.[103][104]
Presidency (1963 1969)
Main article: Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Lyndon B. Johnson presidency.
Further information: Foreign policy of the Lyndon B. Johnson administration
Johnson assumed the presidency amid a healthy economy with steady growth and low unemployment, and with no serious international crises. Therefore, he focused his attention on domestic policy, until escalation of the Vietnam War began in August 1964.
Succession
Main article: First inauguration of Lyndon B. Johnson
 LBJ is sworn in on Air Force One by Judge Sarah Hughes as Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Kennedy look on.
 Official White House Portrait, 1964
Johnson was quickly sworn in as president on Air Force One in Dallas on November 22, 1963, just two hours and eight minutes after John F. Kennedy was assassinated, amid suspicions of a conspiracy against the government.[105] He was sworn in by U.S. District Judge Sarah T. Hughes, a family friend.[106] In the rush, Johnson took the oath of office using a Roman Catholic missal from President Kennedy's desk,[107] despite not being Catholic,[108] due to the missal being mistaken for a Bible.[108] Cecil Stoughton's iconic photograph of Johnson taking the presidential oath of office as Mrs. Kennedy looks on is the most famous photo ever taken aboard a presidential aircraft.[108][109]
Johnson was convinced of the need to make an impression of an immediate transition of power after the assassination to provide stability to a grieving nation in shock.[110] He and the Secret Service were concerned that he could also be a target of a conspiracy,[111] and felt compelled to rapidly remove the new president from Dallas and return him to Washington.[111] This was greeted by some with assertions that Johnson was in too much haste to assume power.[112][113]
On November 27, 1963, the new president delivered his Let Us Continue speech to a joint session of Congress, saying that "No memorial oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedy's memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long."[114] The wave of national grief following the assassination gave enormous momentum to Johnson's promise to carry out Kennedy's plans and his policy of seizing Kennedy's legacy to give momentum to his legislative agenda.[113]
On November 29, 1963, just one week after Kennedy's assassination, Johnson issued an executive order to rename NASA's Apollo Launch Operations Center and the NASA/Air Force Cape Canaveral launch facilities as the John F. Kennedy Space Center.[115] Cape Canaveral was officially known as Cape Kennedy from 1963 until 1973.[116][117]
Also on November 29, Johnson established a panel headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, known as the Warren Commission, through executive order to investigate Kennedy's assassination and surrounding conspiracies.[118] The commission conducted extensive research and hearings and unanimously concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination. However, the report remains controversial among some conspiracy theorists.[119]
Johnson retained senior Kennedy appointees, some for the full term of his presidency. He even retained Attorney General Robert Kennedy, with whom he had a notoriously difficult relationship. Robert Kennedy remained in office for a few months until leaving in 1964 to run for the Senate.[120] Although Johnson had no official chief of staff, Walter Jenkins was the first among a handful of equals and presided over the details of daily operations at the White House. George Reedy, who was Johnson's second-longest-serving aide, assumed the post of press secretary when John F. Kennedy's own Pierre Salinger left that post in March 1964.[121] Horace Busby was another "triple-threat man", as Johnson referred to his aides. He served primarily as a speechwriter and political analyst.[122] Bill Moyers was the youngest member of Johnson's staff; he handled scheduling and speechwriting part-time.[123]
Legislative initiatives
The new president thought it advantageous to quickly pursue one of Kennedy's primary legislative goals a tax cut. Johnson worked closely with Harry F. Byrd of Virginia to negotiate a reduction in the budget below $100 billion in exchange for what became overwhelming Senate approval of the Revenue Act of 1964. Congressional approval followed at the end of February, and facilitated efforts to follow on civil rights.[124] In late 1963, Johnson also launched the initial offensive of his War on Poverty, recruiting Kennedy relative Sargent Shriver, then head of the Peace Corps, to spearhead the effort. In March 1964, LBJ sent to Congress the Economic Opportunity Act, which created the Job Corps and the Community Action Program, designed to attack poverty locally. The act also created VISTA, Volunteers in Service to America, a domestic counterpart to the Peace Corps.[125]
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Main article: Civil Rights Act of 1964
 Meeting with civil rights leaders Martin Luther King Jr. (left), Whitney Young, and James Farmer in the Oval Office in 1964
President Kennedy had submitted a civil rights bill to Congress in June 1963, which was met with strong opposition.[126][127] Johnson renewed the effort and asked Bobby Kennedy to spearhead the undertaking for the administration on Capitol Hill. This provided adequate political cover for Johnson should the effort fail; but if it were successful, Johnson would receive ample credit.[128] Historian Robert Caro notes that the bill Kennedy had submitted was facing the same tactics that prevented the passage of civil rights bills in the past: southern congressmen and senators used congressional procedure to prevent it from coming to a vote.[129] In particular, they held up all of the major bills Kennedy had proposed and that were considered urgent, especially the tax reform bill, to force the bill's supporters to pull it.[129]
Johnson was quite familiar with the procedural tactic, as he played a role in a similar tactic against a civil rights bill that Harry Truman had submitted to Congress fifteen years earlier.[129] In that fight, a rent-control renewal bill was held up until the civil rights bill was withdrawn.[129] Believing that the current course meant that the Civil Rights Act would suffer the same fate, he adopted a different strategy from that of Kennedy, who had mostly removed himself from the legislative process. By tackling the tax cut first, the previous tactic was eliminated.[130]
Passing the civil rights bill in the House required getting it through the Rules Committee, which had been holding it up in an attempt to kill it. Johnson decided on a campaign to use a discharge petition to force it onto the House floor.[131] Facing a growing threat that they would be bypassed, the House rules committee approved the bill and moved it to the floor of the full House, which passed it shortly thereafter by a vote of 290 110.[132] In the Senate, since the tax bill had passed three days earlier, the anti-civil rights senators were left with the filibuster as their only remaining tool. Overcoming the filibuster required the support of over twenty Republicans, who were growing less supportive because their party was about to nominate for president a candidate who opposed the bill.[133] According to Caro, Johnson ultimately could convince Republican leader Everett Dirksen to support the bill that amassed the necessary Republican votes to overcome the filibuster in March 1964; after 75 hours of debate, the bill passed the Senate by a vote of 71 29.[134][135] Johnson signed the fortified Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law on July 2.[135] The evening after signing the bill, Johnson told aide Bill Moyers, "I think we may have lost the south for your lifetime   and mine", anticipating a coming backlash from Southern whites against Johnson's Democratic Party.[136][137]
Biographer Randall B. Woods has argued that Johnson effectively used appeals to Judeo-Christian ethics to garner support for the civil rights law. Woods writes that Johnson undermined the Southern filibuster against the bill:
LBJ wrapped white America in a moral straitjacket. How could individuals who fervently, continuously, and overwhelmingly identified themselves with a merciful and just God continue to condone racial discrimination, police brutality, and segregation? Where in the Judeo-Christian ethic was there justification for killing young girls in a church in Alabama, denying an equal education to black children, barring fathers and mothers from competing for jobs that would feed and clothe their families? Was Jim Crow to be America's response to "Godless Communism"?[138]
Woods states that Johnson's religiosity ran deep: "At 15 he joined the Disciples of Christ, or Christian, church and would forever believe that it was the duty of the rich to care for the poor, the strong to assist the weak, and the educated to speak for the inarticulate."[139] Johnson shared the beliefs of his mentor, FDR, in that he paired liberal values to religious values, believing that freedom and social justice served both God and man.[140]
The Great Society
Johnson wanted a catchy slogan for the 1964 campaign to describe his proposed domestic agenda for 1965. Eric Goldman, who joined the White House in December of that year, thought Johnson's domestic program was best captured in the title of Walter Lippman's book, The Good Society. Richard Goodwin tweaked it to "The Great Society" and incorporated this in detail as part of a speech for Johnson in May 1964 at the University of Michigan. It encompassed movements of urban renewal, modern transportation, clean environment, anti-poverty, healthcare reform, crime control, and educational reform.[141]
1964 presidential election
Main article: 1964 United States presidential election
Further information: Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 presidential campaign
In Spring 1964, Johnson did not look optimistically upon the prospect of being elected president in his own right.[142] A pivotal change took place in April when he assumed personal management of negotiations between the railroad brotherhood and the railroad industry over the issue of featherbedding. Johnson emphasized to the parties the potential impact upon the economy of a strike. After considerable horse-trading, especially with the carriers who won promises from the president for greater freedom in setting rights and more liberal depreciation allowances from the IRS, Johnson got an agreement. This substantially boosted his self-confidence as well as his image.[143]
 President Lyndon Johnson (left), alongside Illinois AFL-CIO President Reuben Soderstrom (center) and Vice President Stanley Johnson (right), speaks to the delegates of the 1964 Illinois AFL-CIO convention.
That same year, Robert F. Kennedy was widely considered an impeccable choice to run as Johnson's vice presidential running mate but Johnson and Kennedy had never liked one another and Johnson, afraid that Kennedy would be credited with his election as president, abhorred the idea and opposed it at every turn.[144] Kennedy was himself undecided about the position and, knowing that the prospect rankled Johnson, was content to eliminate himself from consideration. Ultimately, Goldwater's poor polling numbers degraded any dependence Johnson might have had on Kennedy as his running mate.[145] Hubert Humphrey's selection as vice president then became a foregone conclusion and was thought to strengthen Johnson in the Midwest and industrial Northeast.[146] Johnson, knowing full well the degree of frustration inherent in the office of vice president, put Humphrey through a gauntlet of interviews to guarantee his absolute loyalty and having made the decision, he kept the announcement from the press until the last moment to maximize media speculation and coverage.[147]
In preparation for the Democratic convention, Johnson requested the FBI send a squad of thirty agents to cover convention activities; the objective of the squad was to inform the White House staff of any disruptive activities on the floor. The squad's focus narrowed upon the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) delegation, which sought to displace the white segregationist delegation regularly selected in the state. The squad's activities also included wiretaps of Martin Luther King's room as well as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE). From beginning to end, the squad's assignment was carefully couched in terms of the monitoring of disruptive activities that might endanger the president and other high-ranking officials.[148]
 1964 presidential election results
Johnson was very concerned about potential political damage from media coverage of racial tensions exposed by a credentials fight between the MFDP and the segregationist delegation, and he assigned Humphrey the job of managing the problem.[149] The convention's Credentials Committee declared that two MFDP delegates in the delegation be seated as observers and agreed to "bar future delegations from states where any citizens are deprived of the right to vote because of their race or color".[150] The MFDP rejected the committee's ruling. The convention became the apparent personal triumph that Johnson craved, but a sense of betrayal caused by the marginalization of the MFDP would trigger disaffection with Johnson and the Democratic Party from the left; SNCC chairman John Lewis would call it a "turning point in the civil rights movement".[151]
 "Daisy" advertisement
Early in the 1964 presidential campaign, Barry Goldwater appeared to be a strong contender, with strong support from the South, which threatened Johnson's position as he had predicted in reaction to the passage of the Civil Rights Act. However, Goldwater lost momentum as his campaign progressed. On September 7, 1964, Johnson's campaign managers broadcast the "Daisy ad". It portrayed a little girl picking petals from a daisy, counting up to ten. Then a baritone voice took over, counted down from ten to zero and the visual showed the explosion of a nuclear bomb. The message conveyed was that electing Goldwater president held the danger of a nuclear war. Goldwater's campaign message was best symbolized by the bumper sticker displayed by supporters claiming "In your heart, you know he's right". Opponents captured the spirit of Johnson's campaign with bumper stickers that said "In your heart, you know he might" and "In your guts, you know he's nuts".[152] CIA Director William Colby asserted that Tracy Barnes instructed the CIA of the United States to spy on the Goldwater campaign and the Republican National Committee to provide information to Johnson's campaign.[153] Johnson won the presidency by a landslide with 61.05 percent of the vote, making it the highest ever share of the popular vote.[154] At the time, this was also the widest popular margin in the 20th century more than 15.95 million votes this was later surpassed by incumbent President Nixon's victory in 1972.[155] In the Electoral College, Johnson defeated Goldwater by a margin of 486 to 52. Johnson won 44 states, compared to Goldwater's six. Voters also gave Johnson the largest majorities in Congress since FDR's election in 1936 a Senate with a 68 32 majority and a house with a 295 140 Democratic margin.[156]
Voting Rights Act
Main article: Voting Rights Act of 1965
Johnson began his elected presidential term with similar motives as he had upon succeeding to the office, ready to "carry forward the plans and programs of John Fitzgerald Kennedy. Not because of our sorrow or sympathy, but because they are right."[157] He was reticent to push southern congressmen even further after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and suspected their support may have been temporarily tapped out. Nevertheless, the Selma to Montgomery marches in Alabama led by Martin Luther King ultimately led Johnson to initiate a debate on a voting rights bill in February 1965.[158]
 President Lyndon B. Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and Rosa Parks at the signing of the Voting Rights Act on August 6, 1965
Johnson gave a congressional speech in which he said, "rarely at any time does an issue lay bare the secret heart of America itself [...] rarely are we met with the challenge [...] to the values and the purposes and the meaning of our beloved nation. The issue of equal rights for American Negroes is such an issue. And should we defeat every enemy, should we double our wealth and conquer the stars, and still be unequal to this issue, then we will have failed as a people and as a nation."[159] In 1965, he achieved passage of a second civil rights bill called the Voting Rights Act which outlawed discrimination in voting, thus allowing millions of southern blacks to vote for the first time. Under the act, several states "eight of the eleven southern states of the former confederacy" (Alabama, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Virginia) were subjected to the procedure of preclearance in 1965, while Texas, then home to the largest African American population of any state, followed in 1975.[160] The Senate passed the voting rights bill by a vote of 77 19 after 2 1/2 months, and it won passage in the house in July, 333 85. The results were significant: between the years of 1968 and 1980, the number of southern black elected state and federal officeholders nearly doubled. The act also made a large difference in the numbers of black elected officials nationally; a few hundred black office-holders in 1965 mushroomed to 6,000 in 1989.[159]
After the murder of civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo, Johnson went on television to announce the arrest of four Ku Klux Klansmen implicated in her death. He angrily denounced the Klan as a "hooded society of bigots," and warned them to "return to a decent society before it's too late". Johnson was the first President to arrest and prosecute members of the Klan since Ulysses S. Grant about 93 years earlier.[b][161] He turned to themes of Christian redemption to push for civil rights, thereby mobilizing support from churches North and South.[162] At the Howard University commencement address on June 4, 1965, he said that both the government and the nation needed to help achieve these goals: "To shatter forever not only the barriers of law and public practice but the walls which bound the condition of many by the color of his skin. To dissolve, as best we can, the antique enmities of the heart which diminish the holder, divide the great democracy, and do wrong great wrong to the children of God ..."[163]
In 1967, Johnson nominated civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to be the first African-American justice of the Supreme Court. To head the new Department of Housing and Urban Development, Johnson appointed Robert C. Weaver, the first African-American cabinet secretary in any U.S. presidential administration. In 1968, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which provided for equal housing opportunities regardless of race, creed, or national origin. The impetus for the law's passage came from the 1966 Chicago Open Housing Movement, the April 4, 1968, assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., and the civil unrest across the country following King's death.[164] On April 5, Johnson wrote a letter to the United States House of Representatives urging passage of the Fair Housing Act.[165] With newly urgent attention from legislative director Joseph Califano and Democratic Speaker of the House John McCormack, the bill (which was previously stalled) passed the House by a wide margin on April 10.[164][166]
Immigration
 President Johnson signs the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 as Sen. Edward Kennedy, Sen. Robert Kennedy, and others look on
With the passage of the sweeping Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, the country's immigration system was reformed and all national origins quotas dating from the 1920s were removed. The annual rate of inflow doubled between 1965 and 1970, and doubled again by 1990, with dramatic increases from Asia and Latin American countries including Mexico.[57] Scholars give Johnson little credit for the law, which was not one of his priorities; he had supported the McCarren Walter Act of 1952 that was unpopular with reformers.[167]
Federal funding for education
Johnson, whose own ticket out of poverty was a public education in Texas, fervently believed that education was a cure for ignorance and poverty, and was an essential component of the American dream, especially for minorities who endured poor facilities and tight-fisted budgets from local taxes.[168] He made education the top priority of the Great Society agenda, with an emphasis on helping poor children. After the 1964 landslide brought in many new liberal Congressmen, LBJ launched a legislative effort that took the name of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965. The bill sought to double federal spending on education from $4 billion to $8 billion;[169] with considerable facilitating by the White House, it passed the House by a vote of 263 to 153 on March 26, and then it remarkably passed without a change in the Senate, by 73 to 8, without going through the usual conference committee. This was a historic accomplishment by the president, with the billion-dollar bill passing as introduced just 87 days before.[170]
For the first time, large amounts of federal money went to public schools. In practice ESEA meant helping all public school districts, with more money going to districts that had large proportions of students from poor families (which included all the big cities).[171] For the first time, private schools (most of them Catholic schools in the inner cities) received services, such as library funding, comprising about 12 percent of the ESEA budget. Though federal funds were involved, they were administered by local officials, and by 1977 it was reported that less than half of the funds were applied toward the education of children under the poverty line. Dallek further reports that researchers cited by Hugh Davis Graham soon found that poverty had more to do with family background and neighborhood conditions than the quantity of education a child received. Early studies suggested initial improvements for poor children helped by ESEA reading and math programs, but later assessments indicated that benefits faded quickly and left pupils little better off than those not in the schemes. Johnson's second major education program was the Higher Education Act of 1965, which focused on funding for lower-income students, including grants, work-study money, and government loans.
Although ESEA solidified Johnson's support among K-12 teachers' unions, neither the Higher Education Act nor the new endowments mollified the college professors and students growing increasingly uneasy with the war in Vietnam.[172] In 1967, Johnson signed the Public Broadcasting Act to create educational television programs to supplement the broadcast networks.
In 1965, Johnson also set up the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts, to support academic subjects such as literature, history, and law, and arts such as music, painting, and sculpture (as the WPA once did).[173]
"War on Poverty" and healthcare reform
 Former president Truman and wife Bess at Medicare Bill signing in 1965, as Lady Bird and Hubert Humphrey look on
In 1964, at Johnson's request, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1964 and the Economic Opportunity Act, as part of the war on poverty. Johnson set in motion legislation creating programs such as Head Start, food stamps and Work Study.[174] During Johnson's years in office, national poverty declined significantly, with the percentage of Americans living below the poverty line dropping from 23 percent to 12 percent.[10]
Johnson took an additional step in the War on Poverty with an urban renewal effort, presenting to Congress in January 1966 the "Demonstration Cities Program". To be eligible a city would need to demonstrate its readiness to "arrest blight and decay and make a substantial impact on the development of its entire city". Johnson requested an investment of $400 million per year totaling $2.4 billion. In the fall of 1966 the Congress passed a substantially reduced program costing $900 million, which Johnson later called the Model Cities Program. Changing the name had little effect on the success of the bill; the New York Times wrote 22 years later that the program was, for the most part, a failure.[175]
Johnson's initial effort to improve healthcare was the creation of The Commission on Heart Disease, Cancer, and Strokes (HDCS). Combined, these diseases accounted for 71 percent of the nation's deaths in 1962.[176] To enact recommendations of the commission, Johnson asked Congress for funds to set up the Regional Medical Program (RMP), to create a network of hospitals with federally funded research and practice; Congress passed a significantly watered-down version.
As a back-up position, in 1965 Johnson turned his focus to hospital insurance for the aged under Social Security.[177] The key player in initiating this program, named Medicare, was Wilbur Mills, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. To reduce Republican opposition, Mills suggested that Medicare be fashioned as a three-layer cake: hospital insurance under Social Security; a voluntary insurance program for doctor visits; and an expanded medical welfare program for the poor, known as Medicaid.[178] The bill passed the house by a margin of 110 votes on April 8. The effort in the Senate was considerably more complicated; however, the Medicare bill passed Congress on July 28 after negotiation in a conference committee.[179] Medicare now covers tens of millions of Americans.[180] Johnson gave the first two Medicare cards to former President Harry S Truman and his wife Bess after signing the Medicare bill at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri.[181]
Transportation
In March 1965, Johnson sent to Congress a transportation message which included the creation of a new Transportation Department, which would include the Commerce Department's Office of Transportation, the Bureau of Public Roads, the Federal Aviation Agency, the Coast Guard, the Maritime Administration, the Civil Aeronautics Board, and the Interstate Commerce Commission. The bill passed the Senate after some negotiation over navigation projects; in the house, passage required negotiation over maritime interests and the bill was signed October 15, 1965.[182]
Gun control
Though Johnson had already introduced a gun control bill on June 6, 1968, after the assassination of Robert Kennedy, Lady Bird Johnson's press secretary Liz Carpenter, in a memo to the president, worried that the country had been "brainwashed by high drama," and that Johnson "need[ed] some quick dramatic actions" that addressed "the issue of violence." In October, Johnson signed the Gun Control Act of 1968 into law, but did not invoke the memory of Robert Kennedy as he had so often done with his brother an omission the historian Jeff Shesol has argued was motivated by Johnson's longstanding contempt for Robert.[183]
Space program
 Former President Lyndon B. Johnson (center left) and Vice President Spiro Agnew (center right) witness the liftoff of Apollo 11.
During Johnson's administration, NASA conducted the Gemini crewed space program, developed the Saturn V rocket and its launch facility, and prepared to make the first crewed Apollo program flights. On January 27, 1967, the nation was stunned when the entire crew of Apollo 1 was killed in a cabin fire during a spacecraft test on the launch pad, stopping Apollo in its tracks. Rather than appointing another Warren-style commission, Johnson accepted Administrator James E. Webb's request for NASA to do its investigation, holding itself accountable to Congress and the President.[184] Johnson maintained his staunch support of Apollo through Congressional and press controversy, and the program recovered. The first two crewed missions, Apollo 7 and the first crewed flight to the Moon, Apollo 8, were completed by the end of Johnson's term. He congratulated the Apollo 8 crew, saying, "You've taken ... all of us, all over the world, into a new era."[185][186] On July 16, 1969, Johnson attended the launch of the first Moon landing mission Apollo 11, becoming the first former or incumbent U.S. president to witness a rocket launch.[187]
Urban riots
 Aftermath from a race riot in Washington D.C., April 1968
Major riots in black neighborhoods caused a series of "long hot summers." They started with a violent disturbance in the Harlem riots in 1964, and the Watts district of Los Angeles in 1965, and extended to 1971. The momentum for the advancement of civil rights came to a sudden halt in the summer of 1965, with the riots in Watts. After 34 people were killed and $35 million (equivalent to $300.96 million in 2021) in the property was damaged, the public feared an expansion of the violence to other cities, and so the appetite for additional programs in LBJ's agenda was lost.[188]
Newark burned in 1967, where six days of rioting left 26 dead, 1,500 injured, and the inner city a burned-out shell. In Detroit in 1967, Governor George Romney sent in 7,400 national guard troops to quell fire bombings, looting, and attacks on businesses and police. Johnson finally sent in federal troops with tanks and machine guns. Detroit continued to burn for three more days until finally, 43 were dead, 2,250 were injured, 4,000 were arrested; property damage ranged into the hundreds of millions. The biggest wave of riots came in April 1968, in over a hundred cities after the assassination of Martin Luther King. Johnson called for even more billions to be spent in the cities and another federal civil rights law regarding housing, but this request had little Congressional support. Johnson's popularity plummeted as a massive white political backlash took shape, reinforcing the sense Johnson had lost control of the streets of major cities as well as his party.[189] Johnson created the Kerner Commission to study the problem of urban riots, headed by Illinois Governor Otto Kerner.[57] According to press secretary George Christian, Johnson was unsurprised by the riots, saying: "What did you expect? I don't know why we're so surprised. When you put your foot on a man's neck and hold him down for three hundred years, and then you let him up, what's he going to do? He's going to knock your block off."[190]
As a result of rioting in Washington D.C. after the murder of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,  President Johnson determined that "a condition of domestic violence and disorder" existed and issued a proclamation and executive order mobilizing combat-equipped troops. The New York Times reported that 4,000 regular Army and National Guard troops entered into the nation's capital "to try to end riotous looting, burglarizing and burning by roving bands of Negro youths".  Some of the troops were sent to guard the Capital and the White House.[191]
Backlash against Johnson (1966 1967)
 Lady Bird Johnson and LBJ with Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos on September 12, 1966
In 1966, the press sensed a "credibility gap" between what Johnson was saying in press conferences and what was happening on the ground in Vietnam, which led to much less favorable coverage.[192]
By year's end, the Democratic governor of Missouri, Warren E. Hearnes, warned that Johnson would lose the state by 100,000 votes, despite winning by a margin of 500,000 in 1964. "Frustration over Vietnam; too much federal spending and ... taxation; no great public support for your Great Society programs; and ... public disenchantment with the civil rights programs "had eroded the President's standing, the governor reported.[193] There were bright spots; in January 1967, Johnson boasted that wages were the highest in history, unemployment was at a 13-year low, and corporate profits and farm incomes were greater than ever; a 4.5 percent jump in consumer prices was worrisome, as was the rise in interest rates. Johnson asked for a temporary 6 percent surcharge in income taxes to cover the mounting deficit caused by increased spending. Johnson's approval ratings stayed below 50 percent; by January 1967, the number of his strong supporters had plunged to 16 percent, from 25 percent four months before. He ran about even with Republican George Romney in trial matchups that spring. Asked to explain why he was unpopular, Johnson responded, "I am a dominating personality, and when I get things done I don't always please all the people."[194] Johnson also blamed the press, saying they showed "complete irresponsibility and lie and misstate facts and have no one to be answerable to". He also blamed "the preachers, liberals and professors" who had turned against him.[195]
In the congressional elections of 1966, the Republicans gained three seats in the Senate and 47 in the House, reinvigorating the conservative coalition and making it more difficult for Johnson to pass any additional Great Society legislation. However, in the end, Congress passed almost 96 percent of the administration's Great Society programs, which Johnson then signed into law.[196]
Vietnam War
See also: Vietnam War
At Kennedy's death, there were 16,000 American military personnel stationed in Vietnam supporting South Vietnam in the war against North Vietnam.[197] Vietnam had been partitioned at the 1954 Geneva Conference into two countries, with North Vietnam led by a Communist government. Johnson subscribed to the Domino Theory in Vietnam and to a containment policy that required America to make a serious effort to stop all Communist expansion.[198] On taking office, Johnson immediately reversed Kennedy's order to withdraw 1,000 military personnel by the end of 1963.[199] In late summer 1964, Johnson seriously questioned the value of staying in Vietnam but, after meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D. Taylor, declared his readiness "to do more when we had a base" or when Saigon was politically more stable.[200] He expanded the numbers and roles of the American military following the Gulf of Tonkin Incident.[citation needed]
1964
 Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and Queen Farah Pahlavi with the Johnsons on their visit to the United States
In August 1964, allegations arose from the military that two U.S. destroyers had been attacked by some North Vietnamese torpedo boats in international waters 40 miles (64 km) from the Vietnamese coast in the Gulf of Tonkin; naval communications and reports of the attack were contradictory. Although Johnson very much wanted to keep discussions about Vietnam out of the 1964 election campaign, he felt forced to respond to the supposed aggression by the North Vietnamese, so he sought and obtained from the Congress the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on August 7. Johnson was determined to embolden his image on foreign policy, and also wanted to prevent criticism such as Truman had received in Korea by proceeding without congressional endorsement of military action. Responding to the purported attack would also blunt presidential campaign criticism of weakness from the hawkish Goldwater camp. The resolution gave congressional approval for use of military force by the commander-in-chief to repel future attacks and also to assist members of SEATO requesting assistance. Johnson later in the campaign expressed assurance that the primary U.S. goal remained the preservation of South Vietnamese independence through material and advice, as opposed to any U.S. offensive posture.[201] The public's reaction to the resolution at the time was positive 48 percent favored stronger measures in Vietnam and only 14 percent wanted to negotiate a settlement and leave.[146]
In the 1964 presidential campaign, Johnson restated his determination to provide measured support for Vietnam while avoiding another Korea; but privately he had a sense of foreboding about Vietnam a feeling that no matter what he did things would end badly. Indeed, his heart was on his Great Society agenda, and he even felt that his political opponents favored greater intervention in Vietnam to divert attention and resources away from his War on Poverty. The situation on the ground was aggravated in the fall by additional Viet Minh attacks on U.S. ships in the Tonkin Gulf, as well as an attack on Bien Hoa Air Base in South Vietnam.[202] Johnson decided against retaliatory action at the time after consultation with the Joint Chiefs, and also after public pollster Lou Harris confirmed that his decision would not detrimentally affect him at the polls.[203] By the end of 1964, there were approximately 23,000 military personnel in South Vietnam; U.S. casualties for 1964 totaled 1,278.[197]
In the winter of 1964 1965, Johnson was pressured by the military to begin a bombing campaign to forcefully resist a communist takeover in South Vietnam; moreover, a plurality in the polls at the time was in favor of military action against the communists, with only 26 to 30 percent opposed.[204] Johnson revised his priorities, and a new preference for stronger action came at the end of January with yet another change of government in Saigon. He then agreed with Mac Bundy and McNamara that the continued passive role would only lead to defeat and withdrawal in humiliation. Johnson said, "Stable government or no stable government in Saigon we will do what we ought to do. I'm prepared to do that; we will move strongly. General Nguy n Kh nh (head of the new government) is our boy".[205]
1965
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and General Westmoreland in Vietnam 1965
Johnson decided on a systematic bombing campaign in February after a ground report from Bundy recommending immediate U.S. action to avoid defeat; also, the Viet Cong had just killed eight U.S. advisers and wounded dozens of others in an attack at Pleiku Air Base. The eight-week bombing campaign became known as Operation Rolling Thunder. Johnson's instructions for public consumption were clear: there was to be no comment that the war effort had been expanded.[206] Long-term estimates of the bombing campaign ranged from an expectation that Hanoi would rein in the Viet Cong to one of provoking Hanoi and the Viet Cong into an intensification of the war. But the short-term expectations were consistent that the morale and stability of the South Vietnamese government would be bolstered. By limiting the information given out to the public, and even to Congress, Johnson maximized his flexibility to change course.[207]
In March, Bundy began to urge the use of ground forces air operations alone, he counseled, would not stop Hanoi's aggression against the South. Johnson approved an increase in logistical troops of 18,000 to 20,000 and the deployment of two additional Marine battalions and a Marine air squadron, in addition to planning for the deployment of two more divisions. More significantly, he also authorized a change in mission from defensive to offensive operations; he nevertheless continued to insist that this was not to be publicly represented as a change in existing policy.[208]
By the middle of June, the total U.S. ground forces in Vietnam had increased to 82,000 or by 150 percent.[209] That same month, Ambassador Taylor reported that the bombing offensive against North Vietnam had been ineffective and that the South Vietnamese army was outclassed and in danger of collapse.[210] General Westmoreland shortly thereafter recommended the president further increase ground troops from 82,000 to 175,000. After consulting with his principals, Johnson, desirous of a low profile, chose to announce at a press conference an increase to 125,000 troops, with additional forces to be sent later upon request. Johnson described himself at the time as boxed in by unpalatable choices between sending Americans to die in Vietnam and giving in to the communists. If he sent additional troops he would be attacked as an interventionist and if he did not he thought he risked being impeached. He continued to insist that his decision "did not imply any change in policy whatsoever". Of his desire to veil the decision, Johnson jested privately, "If you have a mother-in-law with only one eye, and she has it in the center of her forehead, you don't keep her in the living room".[211] By October 1965 there were over 200,000 troops deployed in Vietnam.[212]
Johnson underwent surgery on November 8, 1965, at the Bethesda Naval Hospital to remove his gallbladder and a kidney stone. Afterward, his doctors reported that the president had come through the surgery "beautifully as expected";[213] he was able to resume his duties the next day. He met with reporters a couple of days later and reassured the nation that he was recovering well. Although Johnson was incapacitated during surgery, there was no transfer of presidential power to Vice President Humphrey, as no constitutional procedure to do so existed at the time. The Twenty-fifth Amendment, which Congress had sent to the states for ratification four months earlier, included procedures for the orderly transfer of power in the case of presidential incapacity, but was not ratified until 1967.[214][215]
1966
 Awarding a medal to a U.S. soldier during a visit to Vietnam in 1966
Public and political impatience with the war began to emerge in the spring of 1966, and Johnson's approval ratings reached a new low of 41 percent. Sen. Richard Russell, Chairman of the Armed Services Committee, reflected the national mood in June 1966 when he declared it was time to "get it over or get out".[216] Johnson responded by saying to the press, "we are trying to provide the maximum deterrence that we can to communist aggression with a minimum of cost."[217] In response to the intensified criticism of the war effort, Johnson raised suspicions of communist subversion in the country, and press relations became strained.[218] Johnson's primary war policy opponent in Congress was the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, James William Fulbright,[219] who convened a series of public hearings in February to question a range of experts on the progress of the war.[220] The persistent Johnson began to seriously consider a more focused bombing campaign against petroleum, oil and lubrication facilities in North Vietnam, in hopes of accelerating victory.[221] Humphrey, Rusk, and McNamara all agreed, and the bombing began at the end of June.[222] In July, polling results indicated that Americans favored the bombing campaign by a five-to-one margin; however, in August a Defense Department study indicated that the bombing campaign had little impact on North Vietnam.[223]
 Philippines President Marcos hosting the leaders of SEATO nations during the Manila Conference on the Vietnam War
In the fall of 1966, multiple sources began to report that progress was being made against the North Vietnamese logistics and infrastructure; Johnson was urged from every corner to begin peace discussions. There was no shortage of peace initiatives; nevertheless, among protesters, English philosopher Bertrand Russell attacked Johnson's policy as "a barbaric aggressive war of conquest", and in June he initiated the International War Crimes Tribunal as a means to condemn the American effort.[224] The gap with Hanoi was an unbridgeable demand on both sides for a unilateral end to bombing and withdrawal of forces. In August, Johnson appointed Averell Harriman "Ambassador for Peace" to promote negotiations. Westmoreland and McNamara then recommended a concerted program to promote pacification; Johnson formally placed this effort under military control in October.[225] Also in October 1966, to reassure and promote his war effort, Johnson initiated a meeting with allies in Manila the South Vietnamese, Thais, South Koreans, Filipinos, Australians, and New Zealanders.[226] The conference ended with pronouncements to stand fast against communist aggression and to promote ideals of democracy and development in Vietnam and across Asia.[227] For Johnson it was a fleeting public relations success confirmed by a 63 percent Vietnam approval rating in November.[228] Nevertheless, in December, Johnson's Vietnam approval rating was again back down in the 40s; LBJ had become anxious to justify war casualties, and talked of the need for a decisive victory, despite the unpopularity of the cause.[229] In a discussion about the war with former President Dwight Eisenhower on October 3, 1966, Johnson said he was "trying to win it just as fast as I can in every way that I know how" and later stated that he needed "all the help I can get".[230]
 Johnson greeting a crowd, 1966
By year's end, it was clear that current pacification efforts were ineffectual, as had been the air campaign. Johnson then agreed to McNamara's new recommendation to add 70,000 troops in 1967 to the 400,000 previously committed. While McNamara recommended no increase in the level of bombing, Johnson agreed with CIA recommendations to increase them.[231] The increased bombing began despite initial secret talks being held in Saigon, Hanoi, and Warsaw. While the bombing ended the talks, North Vietnamese intentions were not considered genuine.[232]
1967
 Johnson talking with his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, 1967
In January and February 1967, probes were made to assess North Vietnamese's willingness to discuss peace, but they fell on deaf ears. Ho Chi Minh declared that the only solution was a unilateral withdrawal by the U.S.[233] A Gallup poll taken in the United States in July 1967 showed that 52 percent of the country disapproved of the president's handling of the war, and only 34 percent thought progress was being made.[234] Johnson's anger and frustration over the lack of a solution to Vietnam and its effect on him politically was exhibited in a statement to Robert F. Kennedy, who had become a prominent public critic of the war and loomed as a potential challenger in the 1968 presidential election.[235] Johnson had just received several reports predicting military progress by the summer, and warned Kennedy, "I'll destroy you and every one of your dove friends in six months", he shouted. "You'll be dead politically in six months".[236] McNamara offered Johnson a way out of Vietnam in May; the administration could declare its objective in the war South Vietnam's self-determination was being achieved and the upcoming September elections in South Vietnam would provide the chance for a coalition government. The United States could reasonably expect that country to then assume responsibility for the election outcome. But Johnson was reluctant, in light of some optimistic reports about the conflict that provided hope of improvement, though those were of questionable reliability. Meantime, the CIA was reporting wide food shortages in Hanoi and an unstable power grid, as well as military manpower reductions.[237]
By the middle of 1967, nearly 70,000 Americans had been killed or wounded in the war. In July, Johnson sent McNamara, Wheeler, and other officials to meet with Westmoreland and reach an agreement on plans for the immediate future. At that time the war was being commonly described by the press and others as a "stalemate". Westmoreland said such a description was pure fiction, and that "we are winning slowly but steadily and the pace can excel if we reinforce our successes".[238] Though Westmoreland sought many more, Johnson agreed to an increase of 55,000 troops bringing the total to 525,000.[239] In August Johnson, with the Joint Chiefs' support, decided to expand the air campaign and exempted only Hanoi, Haiphong and a buffer zone with China from the target list.[240] In September Ho Chi Minh and North Vietnamese premier, Pham Van Dong appeared amenable to French mediation, so Johnson ceased bombing in a 10-mile zone around Hanoi; this was met with dissatisfaction [from whom?]. In a Texas speech, Johnson agreed to halt all bombing if Ho Chi Minh would launch productive and meaningful discussions and if North Vietnam would not seek to take advantage of the halt; this was named the "San Antonio" formula. There was no response, but Johnson pursued the possibility of negotiations with such a bombing pause.[241]
 Vietnam War protestors march at the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. on October 21, 1967. Support for the war was dropping and the anti-Vietnam War movement strengthened.
With the war still arguably in a stalemate and in light of the widespread disapproval of the conflict, Johnson convened a group called the "Wise Men" for a fresh, in-depth look at the war Dean Acheson, General Omar Bradley, George Ball, Mac Bundy, Arthur Dean, Douglas Dillon, Abe Fortas, Averell Harriman, Henry Cabot Lodge, Robert Murphy and Max Taylor.[242] At that time McNamara, reversing his position on the war, recommended that a cap of 525,000 be placed on the number of forces deployed and that the bombing be halted since he could see no success. Johnson was quite agitated by this recommendation and McNamara's resignation soon followed.[243] Except for George Ball, the "Wise Men" all agreed the administration should "press forward".[244] Johnson was confident that Hanoi would await the 1968 U.S. election results before deciding to negotiate.[245]
On June 23, 1967, Johnson traveled to Los Angeles for a Democratic fundraiser. Thousands of anti-war protesters tried to march past the hotel where he was speaking. The march was led by a coalition of peace protestors. However, a small group of Progressive Labor Party and SDS protestors activists placed themselves at the head of the march and, when they reached the hotel, staged a sit-down. Efforts by march monitors to keep the main body of the marchers moving were only partially successful. Hundreds of LAPD officers were massed at the hotel and when the march slowed an order was given to disperse the crowd. The riot act was read and 51 protestors arrested.[246][247] This was one of the first massive war protests in the United States, and the first in Los Angeles. Ending in a clash with riot police, it set a pattern for the massive protests which followed.[248] Due to the size and violence of this event, Johnson attempted no further public speeches in venues outside military bases.[248][247]
In October, with the ever-increasing public protests against the war, Johnson engaged the FBI and the CIA to investigate, monitor and undermine anti-war activists.[249] In mid-October, there was a demonstration of 100,000 at the Pentagon; Johnson and Rusk were convinced that foreign communist sources were behind the demonstration, which was refuted by CIA findings.[250]
1968
 Walt Whitman Rostow shows President Lyndon B. Johnson a model of the Khe Sanh area in February 1968
On January 30, the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese launched the Tet Offensive against South Vietnam's five largest cities, including Saigon and the U.S. embassy there and other government installations. While the Tet Offensive failed militarily, it was a psychological victory, definitively turning American public opinion against the war effort. Iconically, Walter Cronkite of CBS News, voted the nation's "most trusted person" in February, opined on the air that the conflict was deadlocked and that additional fighting would change nothing. Johnson reacted, saying "If I've lost Cronkite, I've lost middle America".[251] Indeed, demoralization about the war was everywhere; 26 percent then approved of Johnson's handling of Vietnam; 63 percent disapproved. Johnson agreed to increase the troop level by 22,000, despite a recommendation from the Joint Chiefs for ten times that number.[252] By March 1968, Johnson was secretly desperate for an honorable way out of the war. Clark Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, described the war as "a loser" and proposed to "cut losses and get out".[253] On March 31, Johnson spoke to the nation of "Steps to Limit the War in Vietnam". He then announced an immediate unilateral halt to the bombing of North Vietnam and announced his intention to seek out peace talks anywhere at any time. At the close of his speech he also announced, "I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President".[254]
 Tens of thousands of civilians were killed during the American bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder.[255]
In March, Johnson decided to restrict future bombing with the result that 75 percent of North Vietnam's territory, containing 90 percent of its population, was off-limits to bombing. In April he succeeded in opening discussions of peace talks, and after extensive negotiations over the site, Paris was agreed to and talks began in May. When the talks failed to yield any results the decision was made to resort to private discussions in Paris.[256] Two months later it was apparent that private discussions proved to be no more productive.[257]
As casualties mounted and success seemed further away than ever, Johnson's popularity plummeted. College students and others protested, burned draft cards, and chanted, "Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?"[198] Johnson could scarcely travel anywhere without facing protests, and was not allowed by the Secret Service to attend the 1968 Democratic National Convention, where thousands of hippies, yippies, Black Panthers and other opponents of Johnson's policies both in Vietnam and in the ghettos converged to protest.[258] Thus by 1968, the public was polarized, with the "hawks" rejecting Johnson's refusal to continue the war indefinitely, and the "doves" rejecting his current war policies. Support for Johnson's middle position continued to shrink until he finally rejected containment and sought a peace settlement. By late summer, he realized that Nixon was closer to his position than Humphrey. He continued to support Humphrey publicly in the election, and personally despised Nixon. One of Johnson's well-known quotes was "the Democratic party at its worst, is still better than the Republican party at its best".[259]
Despite recommendations in August from Harriman, Vance, Clifford, and Bundy to halt bombing as an incentive for Hanoi to seriously engage in substantive peace talks, Johnson refused.[260] In October, when the parties came close to an agreement on a bombing halt, Republican presidential nominee Richard Nixon intervened with the South Vietnamese, making promises of better terms, to delay a settlement on the issue until after the election.[261] After the election, Johnson's primary focus on Vietnam was to get Saigon to join the Paris peace talks. Ironically, only after Nixon added his urging did they do so. Even then they argued about procedural matters until after Nixon took office.[262]
Six-Day War and Israel
 Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin (left) next to Johnson during the Glassboro Summit Conference
In a 1993 interview for the Johnson Presidential Library oral history archives, Johnson's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that a carrier battle group, the U.S. 6th Fleet, sent on a training exercise toward Gibraltar, was re-positioned back towards the eastern Mediterranean to be able to assist Israel during the Six-Day War of June 1967. Given the rapid Israeli advances following their strike on Egypt, the administration "thought the situation was so tense in Israel that perhaps the Syrians, fearing Israel would attack them, or the Soviets supporting the Syrians might wish to redress the balance of power and might attack Israel". The Soviets learned of this course correction and regarded it as an offensive move. In a hotline message from Moscow, Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin said, "If you want war you're going to get war."[263]
The Soviet Union supported its Arab allies.[264] In May 1967, the Soviets started a surge deployment of their naval forces into the East Mediterranean. Early in the crisis they began to shadow the U.S. and British carriers with destroyers and intelligence collecting vessels. The Soviet naval squadron in the Mediterranean was sufficiently strong to act as a major restraint on the U.S. Navy.[265] In a 1983 interview with The Boston Globe, McNamara claimed that "We damn near had war". He said Kosygin was angry that "we had turned around a carrier in the Mediterranean".[266]
Surveillance of Martin Luther King
Johnson continued the FBI's wiretapping of Martin Luther King Jr. that had been previously authorized by the Kennedy administration under Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy.[267] As a result of listening to the FBI's tapes, remarks on King's extramarital activities were made by several prominent officials, including Johnson, who once said that King was a "hypocritical preacher".[268] This was despite the fact that Johnson himself had multiple extramarital affairs.[41] Johnson also authorized the tapping of phone conversations of others, including the Vietnamese friends of a Nixon associate.[269]
International trips
Further information: List of international trips made by the President of the United States  Lyndon B. Johnson
 Countries visited by Johnson during his presidency
Johnson made eleven international trips to twenty countries during his presidency.[270] He flew five hundred twenty-three thousand miles (841,690 km) aboard Air Force One while in office. His October 1966 visit to Australia sparked demonstrations from anti-war protesters.[271] One of the most unusual international trips in presidential history occurred before Christmas in 1967. The President began the trip by going to the memorial service for Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt, who had disappeared in a swimming accident and was presumed drowned. The White House did not reveal in advance to the press that the President would make the first round-the-world presidential trip. The trip was twenty-six thousand nine hundred fifty-nine miles (43,386.3 km) completed in only 112.5 hours (4.7 days). Air Force One crossed the equator twice, stopped at Travis Air Force Base, in Honolulu, Pago Pago, Canberra, Melbourne, Vietnam, Karachi, and Rome.
1968 presidential election
Main article: 1968 United States presidential election
 President Johnson meets with Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the White House, July 1968.
As he had served less than 24 months of President Kennedy's term, Johnson was constitutionally permitted to run for a second full term in the 1968 presidential election under the provisions of the 22nd Amendment.[272][273]
Initially, no prominent Democratic candidate was prepared to run against a sitting president of the Democratic Party. Only Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota challenged Johnson as an anti-war candidate in the New Hampshire primary, hoping to pressure the Democrats to oppose the Vietnam War. On March 12, McCarthy won 42 percent of the primary vote to Johnson's 49 percent, an amazingly strong showing for such a challenger. Four days later, Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York entered the race. Internal polling by Johnson's campaign in Wisconsin, the next state to hold a primary election, showed the President trailing badly. Johnson did not leave the White House to campaign.
By this time Johnson had lost control of the Democratic Party, which was splitting into four generally antagonistic factions. The first consisted of Johnson (and Humphrey), labor unions, and local party bosses led by Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley. The second group consisted of students and intellectuals who were vociferously against the war and rallied behind McCarthy. The third group was Catholics, Hispanics, and African Americans, who rallied behind Robert Kennedy. The fourth group was traditionally segregationist white Southerners, who rallied behind George C. Wallace and the American Independent Party. Vietnam was one of many issues that splintered the party, and Johnson could see no way to win the war[198] and no way to unite the party long enough for him to win re-election.[274]
 Johnson in the Oval Office in 1969, a few days before Richard Nixon's inauguration
Also, although it was not made public at the time, Johnson had become more worried about his failing health and was concerned that he might not live through another four-year term. In 1967, he secretly commissioned an actuarial study that accurately predicted he would die at 64.[275]
In early January 1968, Johnson asked former speechwriter Horace Busby to draft a withdrawal statement that he could put into his upcoming State of the Union address, but the president did not include it. Two months later, however, spurred by his health concerns and by a growing realization that his political capital was all but gone, Johnson again considered withdrawing; discussing the possibility with Joseph Califano and Harry McPherson on March 28.[276] Three days later, he shocked the nation when he announced he would not run for re-election by concluding with the line: "I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President."[277] The next day, the president's approval ratings increased from 36 percent to 49 percent.[278]
Historians have debated the factors that led to Johnson's surprise decision. Shesol says Johnson wanted out of the White House but also wanted vindication; when the indicators turned negative he decided to leave.[279]  Gould says that Johnson had neglected the party, was hurting it by his Vietnam policies and underestimated McCarthy's strength until the last minute, when it was too late for Johnson to recover.[280] Woods says Johnson realized he needed to leave for the nation to heal.[281] Dallek says that Johnson had no further domestic goals, and realized that his personality had eroded his popularity. His health was not good, and he was preoccupied with the Kennedy campaign; his wife was pressing for his retirement and his base of support continued to shrink. Leaving the race would allow him to pose as a peacemaker.[282] Bennett, however, says Johnson "had been forced out of a reelection race in 1968 by outrage over his policy in Southeast Asia".[283]
After Robert Kennedy's assassination, Johnson rallied the party bosses and unions to give Humphrey the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Personal correspondences between the President and some in the Republican Party suggested Johnson tacitly supported Nelson Rockefeller's campaign. He reportedly said that if Rockefeller became the Republican nominee, he would not campaign against him (and would not campaign for Humphrey).[284] In what was termed the October surprise, Johnson announced to the nation on October 31, 1968, that he had ordered a complete cessation of "all air, naval and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam", effective November 1, should the Hanoi Government be willing to negotiate and citing progress with the Paris peace talks. In the end, Democrats did not fully unite behind Humphrey, enabling Republican candidate Richard Nixon to win the election.
Judicial appointments
See also: Lyndon B. Johnson judicial appointments and Lyndon B. Johnson judicial appointment controversies
 Johnson appointed Thurgood Marshall, the first African American justice, to the Supreme Court.
Johnson appointed Justices Abe Fortas (1965) and Thurgood Marshall (1967) to the Supreme Court of the United States. Johnson anticipated court challenges to his legislative measures in 1965 and thought it advantageous to have a "mole" in the Supreme Court who he thought could provide him with inside information, as he was able to get from the legislative branch. Abe Fortas in particular was the individual that Johnson thought could fill the bill. The opportunity arose when an opening occurred for ambassador to the UN, with Adlai Stevenson's death; Associate Justice Arthur Goldberg accepted Johnson's offer to transfer to the UN position. Johnson insisted on Fortas assuming Goldberg's seat, over Fortas's wife's objection that it was too early in his career. She expressed disapproval to Johnson personally afterward.[285] When Earl Warren announced his retirement in 1968, Johnson nominated Fortas to succeed him as Chief Justice of the United States, and nominated Homer Thornberry to succeed Fortas as associate justice. However, Fortas's nomination was filibustered by senators, and neither nominee was voted upon by the full Senate.
Post-presidency (1969 1973)
 Johnson with longer hair during an interview in August 1972, five months before his death
On Inauguration Day (January 20, 1969), Johnson saw Nixon sworn in, then got on the plane to fly back to Texas. When the front door of the plane closed, Johnson pulled out a cigarette his first cigarette he had smoked since his heart attack in 1955. One of his daughters pulled it out of his mouth and said, "Daddy, what are you doing? You're going to kill yourself." He took it back and said, "I've now raised you, girls. I've now been President. Now it's my time!" From that point on, he went into a very self-destructive spiral. Historian Michael Beschloss[286]
After leaving the presidency in January 1969, Johnson went home to his ranch in Stonewall, Texas, accompanied by a former aide and speechwriter Harry J. Middleton, who would draft Johnson's first book, The Choices We Face, and work with him on his memoirs entitled The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency 1963 1969, published in 1971.[287] That year, the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum opened on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin. He donated his Texas ranch in his will to the public to form the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park, with the provision that the ranch "remain a working ranch and not become a sterile relic of the past".[288]
Johnson gave Nixon high grades in foreign policy but worried that his successor was being pressured into removing U.S. forces too quickly from South Vietnam before the South Vietnamese were able to defend themselves. "If the South falls to the Communists, we can have a serious backlash here at home," he warned.[289]
During the 1972 presidential election, Johnson reluctantly endorsed Democratic presidential nominee George McGovern, a senator from South Dakota; McGovern had long opposed Johnson's foreign and defense policies. The McGovern nomination and presidential platform dismayed him. Nixon could be defeated, Johnson insisted, "if only the Democrats don't go too far left".[275] Johnson had felt Edmund Muskie would be more likely to defeat Nixon; however, he declined an invitation to try to stop McGovern receiving the nomination as he felt his unpopularity within the Democratic Party was such that anything he said was more likely to help McGovern. Johnson's prot g  John Connally had served as President Nixon's Secretary of the Treasury and then stepped down to head "Democrats for Nixon", a group funded by Republicans. It was the first time that Connally and Johnson were on opposite sides of a general election campaign.[290]
Heart issues
 Johnson wearing a cowboy hat at his ranch in Texas, 1972
In March 1970, Johnson suffered an attack of angina and was taken to Brooke Army General Hospital in San Antonio. He had gained more than 25 pounds (11 kg) since leaving the White House; he now weighed around 235 pounds (107 kg) and was urged to lose considerable weight. He had also resumed smoking after abstaining for nearly 15 years. The following summer, again gripped by chest pains, he lost 15 pounds (6.8 kg) in less than a month on a crash diet.
In April 1972, Johnson had a second heart attack while visiting his daughter, Lynda, in Virginia. "I'm hurting real bad",[275] he confided to friends. The chest pains returned nearly every afternoon a series of sharp, jolting pains that left him frightened and breathless. A portable oxygen tank was kept by his bed, and he periodically interrupted what he was doing to lie down and don the mask. He continued to smoke heavily and, although nominally living on a low-calorie, low-cholesterol diet, kept to it only intermittently. Meanwhile, he began to experience severe abdominal pains, diagnosed as diverticulosis. His heart condition rapidly worsened and surgery was recommended, so Johnson flew to Houston to consult with heart specialist Dr. Michael DeBakey, where he learned his condition was terminal. DeBakey found Johnson's heart to be in such poor condition that although two of his coronary arteries required coronary bypass surgery, the former president was not well enough to consider an attempt and would likely have died in surgery.[289]
Death and funeral
 Johnson's grave
Johnson recorded an hour-long television interview with newsman Walter Cronkite at his ranch on January 12, 1973, in which he discussed his legacy, particularly about the civil rights movement. He was still smoking heavily at the time, and told Cronkite that it was better for his heart "to smoke than to be nervous".[291]
Ten days later, at approximately 3:39 p.m. Central Time on January 22, 1973, Johnson suffered his third and final, fatal heart attack in his bedroom. He managed to telephone the Secret Service agents on the ranch, who found him still holding the telephone receiver, unconscious and not breathing. Johnson was airlifted in one of his planes to San Antonio and taken to Brooke Army Medical Center, where cardiologist and Army colonel George McGranahan pronounced him dead on arrival. He was 64 years old.[292]
The news of Johnson's death was dramatically communicated on CBS Evening News by Walter Cronkite, on live television, as he spoke with Tom Johnson, Lyndon B. Johnson's press secretary.[293]
State funeral
 Johnson lying in state in the United States Capitol rotunda
After lying in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol,[294] Johnson was honored with a state funeral in which Texas Congressman J. J. Pickle and former Secretary of State Dean Rusk eulogized him at the Capitol.[295] The final services took place on January 25. The funeral was held at the National City Christian Church in Washington, D.C., where he had often worshiped as president. The service was presided over by President Richard Nixon and attended by foreign dignitaries, led by Eisaku Sat , who had served as Japanese prime minister during Johnson's presidency.[296] Eulogies were given by George Davis, the church's pastor, and W. Marvin Watson, former postmaster general.[297] Nixon did not speak, though he attended, as is customary for presidents during state funerals, but the eulogists turned to him and lauded him for his tributes,[297] as Rusk did the day before, as Nixon mentioned Johnson's death in a speech he gave the day after Johnson died, announcing the peace agreement to end the Vietnam War.[298][299]
Johnson was buried in his family's private cemetery a few yards from the house in which he was born. Eulogies were given by former Texas governor Connally and the Reverend Billy Graham, the minister who officiated at the burial rites. The state funeral, the last for a president until Richard Nixon's in 1994, was part of an unexpectedly busy week in Washington, as the Military District of Washington (MDW) dealt with its second major task in less than a week, beginning with Richard Nixon's second inauguration, which followed Nixon's landslide victory in the 1972 election.[300] The inauguration affected the state funeral in various ways, because Johnson died only two days after the inauguration.[295][300] The MDW and the Armed Forces Inaugural Committee canceled the remainder of the ceremonies surrounding the inauguration, to allow for a full state funeral,[300] and many of the military men who participated in the inauguration took part in the funeral.[300] It also meant that Johnson's casket traveled the entire length of the Capitol, entering through the Senate wing when taken into the rotunda to lie in state and exiting through the House wing steps due to inauguration construction on the East Front steps.[295]
Personality and public image
 Johnson's image as it appears in the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C.
According to biographer Randall Woods, Johnson posed in many different roles. Depending on the circumstances, he could be:
"Johnson the Son of the Tenant Farmer, Johnson the Great Compromiser, Johnson the All-Knowing, Johnson the Humble, Johnson the Warrior, Johnson the Dove, Johnson the Romantic, Johnson the Hard-Headed Pragmatist, Johnson the Preserver of Traditions, Johnson the Crusader for Social Justice, Johnson the Magnanimous, Johnson the Vindictive or Johnson the Uncouth, LBJ the Hick, Lyndon the Satyr, and Johnson the Usurper".[301]
Other historians have noted how he played additional roles, as Kent Germany reports:
"the big daddy, the southerner-westerner-Texan, the American dreamer, the politician, the father's son, the rising star, the flawed giant, the Periclean paradox (domestic dreams undone by war), the very human, the tragedy, the pathbreaker, the ascender, and the master."[302]
Johnson was often seen as a wildly ambitious, tireless, and imposing figure who was ruthlessly effective at getting legislation passed. He worked 18- to 20-hour days without break and was absent of any leisure activities. "There was no more powerful majority leader in American history," biographer Robert Dallek writes. Dallek stated that Johnson had biographies on all the senators, knew what their ambitions, hopes, and tastes were and used it to his advantage in securing votes. Another Johnson biographer noted, "He could get up every day and learn what their fears, their desires, their wishes, their wants were and he could then manipulate, dominate, persuade and cajole them." As president, Johnson vetoed 30 bills; no other president in history vetoed so many bills and never had a single one overridden by Congress. At 6 feet 3.5 inches (1.918 m) tall,[303][304][305] Johnson had his particular brand of persuasion, known as "The Johnson Treatment".[306] A contemporary writes, "It was an incredible blend of badgering, cajolery, reminders of past favors, promises of future favors, predictions of gloom if something doesn't happen. When that man started to work on you, all of a sudden, you just felt that you were standing under a waterfall and the stuff was pouring on you."[306]
 Johnson with his family in the Yellow Oval Room, Christmas 1968
Johnson's cowboy hat and boots reflected his Texas roots and genuine love of the rural hill country. From 250 acres (100 ha) of land that he was given by an aunt in 1951, he created a 2,700-acre (1,100 ha) working ranch with 400 head of registered Hereford cattle. The National Park Service keeps a herd of Hereford cattle descended from Johnson's registered herd and maintains the ranch property.[307]
Biographer Randall Woods argues that Social Gospel themes Johnson learned from childhood allowed him to transform social problems into moral problems. This helps explain his longtime commitment to social justice, as exemplified by the Great Society and his commitment to racial equality. The Social Gospel explicitly inspired his foreign-policy approach to a sort of Christian internationalism and nation-building. For example, in a 1966 speech he quoted at length from the Social Creed of the Methodist Church issued in 1940, adding "It would be very hard for me to write a more perfect description of the American ideal."[308]
Legacy
See also: List of memorials to Lyndon B. Johnson
Historian Kent Germany explains Johnson's poor public image:The man who was elected to the White House by one of the widest margins in U.S. history and pushed through as much legislation as any other American politician now seems to be remembered best by the public for succeeding an assassinated hero, steering the country into a quagmire in Vietnam, cheating on his saintly wife, exposing his stitched-up belly, using profanity, picking up dogs by their ears, swimming naked with advisers in the White House pool, and emptying his bowels while conducting official business. Of all those issues, Johnson's reputation suffers the most from his management of the Vietnam War, something that has overshadowed his civil rights and domestic policy accomplishments and caused Johnson himself to regret his handling of "the woman I really loved the Great Society."[309]
Scholars, on the other hand, have viewed Johnson both through the lens of his historic legislative achievements, and his lack of success in the Vietnam War. His overall rating among historians has remained relatively steady over the past 35 years, and his average ranking is higher than any of the eight presidents who followed him, although similar to Reagan and Clinton.[310]
The Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston was renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973.[311] Texas created a legal state holiday to be observed on August 27 to mark Johnson's birthday, known as Lyndon Baines Johnson Day.[312] The Lyndon Baines Johnson Memorial Grove on the Potomac was dedicated on April 6, 1976.
The Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin was named in his honor, as is the Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland. Also named for him are Lyndon B. Johnson High School in Austin, Texas; Lyndon B. Johnson High School in Laredo, Texas; Lyndon B. Johnson Middle School in Melbourne, Florida; and Lyndon B. Johnson Elementary School in Jackson, Kentucky. Interstate 635 in Dallas, Texas, is named the Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway.
Johnson was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously in 1980.[313]
On March 23, 2007, President George W. Bush signed legislation naming the United States Department of Education headquarters after President Johnson.[314]
 Front view of the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum located on the campus of the University of Texas in Austin, Texas
 Entrance to the Lyndon Baines Johnson Memorial Grove on the Potomac
Major legislation signed
1963: Clean Air Act of 1963[315]
1963: Higher Education Facilities Act of 1963[316][317]
1963: Vocational Education Act of 1963[318]
1964: Civil Rights Act of 1964
1964: Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964
1964: Wilderness Act
1964: Nurse Training Act of 1964[319]
1964: Food Stamp Act of 1964
1964: Economic Opportunity Act
1964: Housing Act of 1964[320]
1965: Higher Education Act of 1965
1965: Older Americans Act
1965: Coinage Act of 1965
1965: Social Security Act of 1965
1965: Voting Rights Act of 1965
1965: Immigration and Nationality Services Act of 1965
1966: Animal Welfare Act of 1966
1966: Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
1967: Age Discrimination in Employment Act[321]
1967: Public Broadcasting Act of 1967
1968: Architectural Barriers Act of 1968
1968: Bilingual Education Act
1968: Civil Rights Act of 1968
1968: Gun Control Act of 1968
Significant regulatory changes
1968: FCC creates national emergency number 9-1-1
Works
National Aeronautics and Space Act (1962)[322]
Choices We Face (1969)[323]
The Vantage Point (1971)[324]
See also
Box 13 scandal
Family of Lyndon B. Johnson
Electoral history of Lyndon B. Johnson
History of the United States (1945 1964)
History of the United States (1964 1980)
Holocaust Museum Houston
Johnson Doctrine
List of presidents of the United States
List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum on the campus of the University of Texas in Austin
Lyndon B. Johnson in popular culture
Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps
Zephyr Wright
Notes
^ Johnson was vice president under John F. Kennedy and became president upon Kennedy's assassination on November 22, 1963. As this was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next ensuing election and inauguration.
^ President Grant, on October 17, 1871, suspended habeas corpus in nine South Carolina counties, sent in troops, and prosecuted the Klan in the federal district court.
References
^ "The Johnson Family Cemetery on the grounds of the LBJ Ranch near Stonewall, Texas. The two slightly larger middle stones mark the final resting places of First Lady Claudia Taylor 'Lady Bird' Johnson (somewhat more brightly illuminated by the sun) and President Lyndon B. Johnson". Library of Congress. Retrieved January 20, 2023.
^ "Lyndon Baines Johnson, 37th Vice President (1961 1963)". US Senate. Retrieved October 5, 2019.
^ "George Wallace and the 1968 Election". umich.edu. Retrieved May 27, 2021.
^ "The New Southern Strategy | Othering & Belonging Institute". belonging.berkeley.edu. Retrieved April 11, 2022.
^ Brown, Frank (2004). "Nixon's "Southern Strategy" and Forces against Brown". The Journal of Negro Education. 73 (3): 191 208. doi:10.2307/4129605. ISSN 0022-2984. JSTOR 4129605.
^ Meier, August (1956). "The Negro and the Democratic Party, 1875-1915". Phylon. 17 (2): 173 191. doi:10.2307/272592. ISSN 0885-6818. JSTOR 272592.
^ "Biographies of Presidents   Lyndon Johnson". The Presidents of the USA. Retrieved February 26, 2021.
^ Guderzo, Max (August 9, 2006). "Johnson and European integration: A missed chance for transatlantic power". Cold War History. 4 (2): 89 114. doi:10.1080/14682740412331391825. S2CID 154907129. Retrieved February 17, 2023.
^ "Medicare". Gallup.com. May 11, 2006. Retrieved May 28, 2021.
^ a b Dallek, Robert. "Presidency: How Do Historians Evaluate the Administration of Lyndon Johnson?". History News Network. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ "Survey of Presidential Leadership  Lyndon Johnson". C-SPAN. Archived from the original on February 9, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ "Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park: LBJ Ranch District" (PDF). National Park Service. Retrieved June 5, 2017.
^ "JOHNSON, REBEKAH BAINES". Texas State Historical Association. June 15, 2010. Retrieved June 5, 2017.
^ Johnson, Rebekah Baines (1965). A Family Album. McGraw Hill.
^ Newlon, Clarke (1970). L. B. J., the man from Johnson City. Dodd, Mead. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-396-04983-8.
^ "Profile for Johnson City, Texas, TX". ePodunk. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. Retrieved June 5, 2017.
^ Dallek 1991, p. 19.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 8 9
^ "Lyndon B. Johnson". The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ "George Washington Baines". Baylor University. Retrieved June 5, 2017.
^ "Religion and President Johnson". Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum. Archived from the original on December 5, 2000. Retrieved December 4, 2013.
^ Banta, Joseph (January 1964). "President Lyndon B. Johnson". The Christadelphian. 101: 26.
^ "Page 149 of Killing Kennedy: The End of Camelot by Bill O'Reilly & Martin Dugard
^ a b Braver, Rita (January 22, 2023). "LBJ and his monumental presidency". CBS News. Retrieved January 22, 2023.
^ Greenbaum, Patty; Lewis, Lisa; Drake, Anne; Loven, Zazel, eds. (1990). Yearbook. New York, NY: Dolphin. p. 89. ISBN 978-0-385-41625-2.
^ a b Caro 1982.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 44 48.
^ The Student Editorials of Lyndon Baines Johnson. LBJ Common Experience, Paper 1. 1968. Retrieved October 12, 2014.
^ Van Oudekerke, Rodney (2011). Historic San Marcos: An Illustrated History. San Antonio, TX: Historical Publishing Network. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-9353-7740-5   via Google Books.
^ Fredericks, Janet Patricia (1982). "I". The Educational Views of Lyndon Baines Johnson Prior to His Presidency (PhD). Loyola University Chicago. p. 6.
^ "President Lyndon B. Johnson's Biography". Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2013.
^ "Remarks at Southwest Texas State College Upon Signing the Higher Education Act of 1965". Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum. Archived from the original on July 14, 2007. Retrieved April 11, 2006.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 69, 73 75.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 76 80.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 87 88.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 89 90.
^ Tzatzev, Aleksi (September 8, 2012). "Six Law School Dropouts Who Went On To Become President". Business Insider. Retrieved October 22, 2020.
^ Caro, Robert A. (1982 2012). The years of Lyndon Johnson. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-40507-8. OCLC 8590268.
^ "A. R. McKinstry, 97   Ex-Episcopal Bishop". The New York Times. December 29, 1991. Retrieved July 25, 2017.
^ Steele, John (June 25, 1956). "A Kingmaker or a Dark Horse". Life. pp. 111 124. Retrieved June 23, 2015.
^ a b c Caro, Robert A. (January 28, 2019). "The Secrets of Lyndon Johnson's Archives". The New Yorker. Retrieved January 28, 2019.
^ Woods 2006, p. 131.
^ Caro 1982, p. 275.
^ Caro, Robert. The Path to Power. Location 15443 (Kindle edition).
^ a b "JOHNSON, Lyndon Baines  Biographical Information". Bioguide.congress.gov. Retrieved October 6, 2008.
^ LBJ Library Staff. "PRESIDENT LYNDON B. JOHNSON'S MILITARY SERVICE". University of Texas. Archived from the original on November 19, 2000. Retrieved August 7, 2015.
^ Dallek 1991, pp. 235 245.
^ a b "In-Depth Specials  The story behind Johnson's Silver Star". CNN. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008.
^ a b c LBJ's medal for valour 'was sham' The Guardian, July 6, 2001
^ Weintz, Steve (December 24, 2013). "War and Forgiveness". War Is Boring. Retrieved February 8, 2016.
^ Dallek 1991, p. 235.
^ Dallek 1991, p. 237.
^ Veterans Health Administration. "List of Presidents who were Veterans". va.gov. Retrieved February 8, 2016.
^ Beschloss, Michael Richard (April 29, 2021). "The Rachel Maddow Show for April 29, 2021". The Rachel Maddow Show. MSNBC. Retrieved April 30, 2021.
^ Dale Baum and James L. Hailey (Autumn 1994). "Lyndon Johnson's Victory in the 1948 Texas Senate Race: A Reappraisal". Political Science Quarterly. 109 (4): 595 613. doi:10.2307/2151840. JSTOR 2151840. To the east in neighboring Jim Wells County  home of the notorious Box 13, which happened to be the only box in the county dominated by Parr's operatives  LBJ managed to acquire, according to the estimates, a four-percentage-point net gain over Stevenson, or about only 387 votes (of which at least two hundred were patently fraudulent).
^ Caro 1990, pp. 360 361.
^ a b c d Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York City: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4.
^ Woods 2006, p. 217; Caro 1990.
^ Dallek 1991, p. 346.
^ Caro, Robert A. (December 18, 1989). "The Johnson Years: Buying And Selling". The New Yorker.
^ Goldfield, David (2014). "Border Men: Truman, Eisenhower, Johnson, and Civil Rights". The Journal of Southern History. 80 (1): 7 38. JSTOR 23796842   via JSTOR.
^ Woods 2006, p. 262.
^ "LBJ". American Experience. Retrieved October 12, 2014.
^ "The New York Times, The Johnson Treatment: Lyndon B. Johnson and Theodore F. Green". Afterimagegallery.com. Retrieved October 6, 2008.
^ Evans, Rowland; Novak, Robert (1966). Lyndon B. Johnson: The Exercise of Power. [New York] New American Library. p. 104.
^ "U.S. Senate: Wayne L. Morse: A Featured Biography". July 6, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2021.
^ Badger, Tony (1999). "Southerners Who Refused to Sign the Southern Manifesto". The Historical Journal. Cambridge University Press. 42 (2): 517 534. doi:10.1017/S0018246X98008346. JSTOR 3020998. S2CID 145083004.
^ "Senate   March 12, 1956" (PDF). Congressional Record. U.S. Government Printing Office. 102 (4): 4459 4461. Retrieved April 12, 2023.
^ "LBJ (Parts 1 2)". American Experience. Season 4. Episode 1. September 30, 1991. PBS. WGBH. Retrieved November 14, 2022.
^ "Senate   August 7, 1957" (PDF). Congressional Record. U.S. Government Printing Office. 103 (10): 13900. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ "Senate   August 29, 1957" (PDF). Congressional Record. U.S. Government Printing Office. 103 (12): 16478. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ "Senate   April 8, 1960" (PDF). Congressional Record. U.S. Government Printing Office. 106 (6): 7810 7811. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ "Lyndon Johnson To Retain Post". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. January 1, 1956.
^ "Johnson To Continue As Demo Leader". Times Daily. January 1, 1956.
^ Dallek 1991, pp. 544 545.
^ Dallek 1991, p. 560.
^ Caro 2012, Part I (passim).
^ Dallek 1991, p. 570.
^ Farrell, John A. (2001). Tip O'Neill and the Democratic Century: A Biography. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-26049-7.
^ Caro, Robert (2012). The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson. New York: Vintage Books. p. 406. ISBN 978-0-375-71325-5.
^ Soderstrom, Carl; Soderstrom, Robert; Stevens, Chris; Burt, Andrew (2018). Forty Gavels: The Life of Reuben Soderstrom and the Illinois AFL-CIO. 3. Peoria, IL: CWS Publishing. pp. 175 176. ISBN 978-0-9982575-3-2.
^ Dallek 1991, pp. 578 582.
^ Seymour M. Hersh, The Dark Side of Camelot, 1997, Chapter 12.
^ Cosgrave, Ben (May 24, 2014). "Head to Head: JFK and RFK, Los Angeles, July 1960". Time. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
^ a b c d Caro 2012, pp. 121 135.
^ Caro 2012, p. 142.
^ The History Channel (2003). The Men Who Killed Kennedy, Episode 9: The Guilty Men (television documentary series)
^ Germond, Jack; Witcover, Jules. "Dark Side of Camelot' takes liberties with the truth". The Baltimore Sun.
^ Caro 2002, p. 1035.
^ "Vice Presidents of the United States   Lyndon B. Johnson (1963)" (PDF). United States Senate. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
^ Caro 2012, pp. 170 171.
^ Caro 2012, p. 172.
^ O'Neill, Tip; Novak, William (1987). Man of the House: The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O'Neill. New York: Random House. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-394-55201-9.
^ Caro 2012, p. 176.
^ Andreas Daum, Kennedy in Berlin. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008, pp. 51 57.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 15.
^ Kennedy to Johnson, "Memorandum for Vice President", April 20, 1961.
^ Johnson to Kennedy, "Evaluation of Space Program", April 28, 1961.
^ Ben Evans, Foothold in the Heavens: The Seventies (2010) p. 193.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 16.
^ "Kennedy Denied Talk of Dropping Johnson". The New York Times, November 23, 1963, p. 9.
^ Jeff Shesol, Mutual Contempt: Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy and the Feud that Defined a Decade (1998).
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 42 44.
^ Sean J. Savage, JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party (2012). pp. 196 197.
^ "JFK Assassination Coverage   Part 2: Lyndon B. Johnson Sworn in". UPI. November 22, 1963. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
^ Walsh 2003, p. 74
^ Transcript, Lawrence F. O'Brien Oral History Interview XIII, 9/10/86, by Michael L. Gillette, Internet Copy, Johnson Library. See: Page 23 at "Lyndon Baines Johnson Library Oral History Collection" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 24, 2008. Retrieved July 5, 2008.
^ a b c terHorst, Jerald F.; Albertazzie, Col. Ralph (1979). The Flying White House: the story of Air Force One. Coward, McCann & Geoghegan. ISBN 978-0-698-10930-8.
^ Walsh 2003, pp. xv, 2, 17, 73 78
^ Walsh 2003, pp. 73 78
^ a b Hardesty, Von (2003). Air Force One: The Aircraft that Shaped the Modern Presidency. San Diego, CA: Tehabi Books. pp. 76 77.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 49 51
^ a b Walsh 2003, p. 78
^ "1963 Year in Review   Transition to Johnson". UPI. November 19, 1966. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
^ "The National Archives, Lyndon B. Johnson Executive Order 11129". Retrieved April 26, 2010.
^ Adams, Cecil (July 26, 1985). "Why did they change the name of Cape Kennedy back to Cape Canaveral?". The Straight Dope. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ "Canaveral Now Cape Kennedy; Johnson Announces Memorial Decision". The Blade. Toledo, OH. AP. November 29, 1963. p. 1. Retrieved July 20, 2014.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 51
^ Chapman, Robert D. (2014). "The Kennedy Assassination 50 Years Later". International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence. 27 (3): 615 619. Bibcode:2014AmJPh..82....5J. doi:10.1080/08850607.2014.900300. S2CID 153516704.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 58
^ Dallek 1998, p. 66
^ Dallek 1998, p. 67
^ Dallek 1998, p. 68
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 73 74.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 76 80.
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 521 523
^ Schlesinger, Arthur (2002) [1965]. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House. p. 973.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 115.
^ a b c d Caro, Robert. "The Passage of Power". p. 459.
^ Caro, Robert. "The Passage of Power". p. 460.
^ Caro, Robert. "The Passage of Power". p. 462.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 116.
^ Caro, Robert. "The Passage of Power". p. 463.
^ Caro, Robert. "The Passage of Power". p. 465
^ a b Schlesinger, Arthur Jr. (2002) [1978]. Robert Kennedy And His Times. pp. 644 645.
^ Kaiser, Charles (January 23, 2023). "'We may have lost the south': what LBJ really said about Democrats in 1964". The Guardian. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 120.
^ Randall B. Woods, "The Politics of Idealism: Lyndon Johnson, Civil Rights, and Vietnam". Diplomatic History 31#1 (2007): pp. 1 18, quote p. 5. The same text appears in Woods, Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (2016) p. 89.
^ Woods, "The Politics of Idealism", p. 3.
^ Woods, Prisoners of Hope, p. 90.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 81 82.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 127.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 124 126.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 135 137.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 140 142.
^ a b Dallek 1998, p. 157.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 157 159.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 161 163.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 164.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 165.
^ Lewis, John; D'Orso, Michael (1998). Walking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement. Harcourt Brace. ISBN 978-0-15-600708-5.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 170.
^ Usdin, Steve (May 22, 2018). "When the CIA Infiltrated a Presidential Campaign Politico". Politico.
^ Leip, David. Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections
^ Dallek 1998, p. 182.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 184.
^ "1964 Year in Review   New Moscow: Khrushchev Fired". UPI. November 19, 1966.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 215.
^ a b Dallek 1998, p. 218.
^ Davidson, C. & Grofman, B. (1994). Quiet Revolution in the South: The Impact Of The Voting Right Act, 1965 1990. p. 3, Princeton University Press.
^ McFeely (2002), Grant: A Biography, pp. 369 371.
^ Woods 2006, pp. 759 787.
^ Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965. Volume II, entry 301, pp. 635 640. (1966)
^ a b Kotz, Nick (2005). "14. Another Martyr". Judgment days : Lyndon Baines Johnson, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the laws that changed America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 417. ISBN 978-0-618-08825-6.
^ Johnson, Lyndon Baines (April 5, 1968). "182   Letter to the Speaker of the House Urging Enactment of the Fair Housing Bill". American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2012. We should pass the Fair Housing law when the Congress convenes next week.
^ Risen, Clay (April 2008). "The Unmaking of the President: Lyndon Johnson believed that his withdrawal from the 1968 presidential campaign would free him to solidify his legacy". Smithsonian Magazine. pp. 3, 5 and 6 in online version. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2012.
^ Lerner, Mitchell B. (2012). A Companion to Lyndon B. Johnson. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 211 17. ISBN 978-1-4443-3389-3. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
^ Bernstein 1996, pp. 183 213.
^ Dallek 1988, pp. 195 198.
^ Dallek 1988, pp. 200 201.
^ Bernstein 1996, p. 195.
^ Woods 2006, pp. 563 568.; Dallek 1988, pp. 196 202.
^ "National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965, 20 US Code   952". Cornell University Law School Legal Information Institute. Retrieved February 18, 2017.
^ Garson, G. David. "Economic Opportunity Act of 1964". Retrieved January 19, 2010.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 320 322.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 204.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 205.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 208.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 209.
^ "Medicare Celebrates 35 Years of Keeping Americans Healthy". Archived from the original on July 14, 2008. Retrieved January 19, 2010.
^ Patricia P. Martin and David A. Weaver. "Social Security: A Program and Policy History," Social Security Bulletin, volume 66, no. 1 (2005), see also online version.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 315 316.
^ Shesol, Jeff. Mutual Contempt. pp. 459 460.
^ "James E. Webb   NASA Administrator, February 14, 1961   October 7, 1968". History.NASA.gov. NASA. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009.
^ "Lyndon B. Johnson". Clinton White House. 1990s. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2009.
^ Freidel, Frank; Sidey, Hugh (2006). "Lyndon B. Johnson". The Presidents of the United States of America. White House Historical Association. Retrieved February 19, 2017   via The White House website.
^ Shribman, David (July 11, 2019). "Column One: 50 years after Apollo 11, the moon's allure still resonates". Los Angeles times. Retrieved January 22, 2021.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 222 223.
^ Woods, Randall (2006), pp. 790 795.; Michael W. Flamm. Law And Order: Street Crime, Civil Unrest, and the Crisis of Liberalism in the 1960s (2005).
^ Kotz, Nick (2005). "14. Another Martyr". Judgment days: Lyndon Baines Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and the laws that changed America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-618-08825-6.
^ FRANKLIN, BEN A. (April 6, 1968). "Army Troops in Capital as Negroes Riot". The New York Times. Retrieved July 24, 2020.
^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference   93 years young!". American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008.
^ Phillips, David (2007). On This Day. iUniverse. p. 177. ISBN 978-0-595-46288-9.
^ Nelson, Phillip (2014). LBJ: From Mastermind to the "colossus" : The Lies, Treachery, and Treasons Continue. New York: Skyhorse. ISBN 978-1-62873-692-2.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 391 396; quotes on pp. 391 and 396.
^ "The Impact of the Great Society Upon The Lives of Families and Young Children" (PDF). Infant & Toddler Coordinators Association. August 2005. Retrieved December 4, 2013.
^ a b "Brief Overview of Vietnam War". Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2013.
^ a b c "The Sixties". Junior Scholastic. February 11, 1994. p. 4.
^ Reeves 1993, p. 613.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 239.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 144 155.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 240.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 241.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 244.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 247.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 249.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 250 252.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 255.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 268.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 270.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 272 277.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 284.
^ Gilbert, Robert E. (2010). "Presidential Disability and the Twenty-Fifth Amendment: The Difficulties Posed By Psychological Illness". Fordham Law Review. 79 (3): 843 879.
^ Pappas, Theodore N. (July 1, 2017). "Politics and the president's gallbladder". Bulletin of the American College of Surgeons. 102 (7): 71 72. PMID 28885794. Retrieved October 5, 2019.
^ Gilbert, Robert E. (December 1995). "The Political Effects of Presidential Illness: The Case of Lyndon B. Johnson". Political Psychology. International Society of Political Psychology. 16 (4): 761 776. doi:10.2307/3791892. JSTOR 3791892.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 364.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 365.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 366.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 369.
^ "The 1966 Fulbright hearings on Vietnam parted the curtains on President Johnson's conduct of the war", September 28, 2017, PRI.org.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 372 373.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 373 374.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 376.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 380.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 381.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 383.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 384.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 385.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 386.
^ "LBJ Library releases telephone conversation recordings". Lbjlib.utexas.edu. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 386 388.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 390.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 445 447.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 474.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 461.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 447.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 463 464.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 470 471.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 473.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 477.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 482 484.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 494.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 495.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 496.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 501.
^ Hill, Gladwin (June 24, 1967). "51 Protesters Arrested". The New York Times. Retrieved December 12, 2016.
^ a b Jim Dann and Hari Dillon. "The Five Retreats: A History of the Failure of the Progressive Labor Party   Chapter 2: The retreat from the anti-war movement 1967 1968". Marxist.org. Marxist.org. Retrieved December 12, 2016. On June 23, 1967 President Johnson came to Century City, Los Angeles to speak. The Mobe got permission to march past his hotel without stopping. PLP, SDS, the War Resisters' League, and other left forces determined to stop in front of the hotel. The leadership of the march of 20,000 was wrested from the hands of the Mobe's marshals by the PL-led militants. A four-hour bloody battle ensued after the police attacked the march, with injuries on both sides and a partial victory for the anti-war movement because LBJ never dared speak in public again.
^ a b "Crowd Battles LAPD as War Protest Turns Violent"
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 486 487.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 489.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 505 506.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 509.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 511.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 513.
^ "Battlefield:Vietnam Timeline". Public Broadcasting Service (PBS).
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 538 541.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 564.
^ Frank Kusch, Battleground Chicago: The Police and the 1968 Democratic National Convention (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), p. 62.
^ Gould 2010, p. 98.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 569.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 584 585.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 597.
^ "LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON LIBRARY ORAL HISTORY COLLECTION" (PDF). Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 7, 2001. Retrieved October 8, 2005.
^ "Mediterranean Eskadra". Fas.org. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ Hattendorf, John B. (2000). Naval Strategy and Power in the Mediterranean: Past, Present and Future. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-7146-8054-5.
^ "McNamara: US Near War in '67" Archived May 14, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, The Boston Globe, Associated Press, September 16, 1983.
^ Garrow, David J. (July 8, 2002). "The FBI and Martin Luther King". The Atlantic.
^ Sidey, Hugh (February 10, 1975). "L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying". Time. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2008.
^ Sanchez, Julian (March 16, 2008). "Wiretapping's true danger". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved December 29, 2008.
^ "Travels of President Lyndon B. Johnson". U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian.
^ Humphries, David (November 12, 2011). "LBJ came all the way   but few followed". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved December 3, 2013.
^ "Johnson Can Seek Two Full Terms". The Washington Post. November 24, 1963. p. A2.
^ Moore, William (November 24, 1963). "Law Permits 2 Full Terms for Johnson". The Chicago Tribune. p. 7.
^ Gould 2010.
^ a b c Janos, Leo. "The Last Days of the President". The Atlantic. Retrieved February 16, 2017.
^ Risen, Clay (April 2008). "The Unmaking of the President". Smithsonian. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2021.
^ "Remarks on Decision not to Seek Re-Election (March 31, 1968)". The Miller Center, University of Virginia. October 20, 2016. Retrieved October 2, 2017.
^ Updegrove, Mark K. (2012). Indomitable will : LBJ in the presidency (1st ed.). New York: Crown. p. 272. ISBN 978-0-307-88771-9.
^ Shesol, Jeff (1998). Mutual Contempt: Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy, and the Feud that Defined a Decade. W W Norton. pp. 545 547. ISBN 978-0-393-31855-5. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
^ Gould 2010, pp. 16 18.
^ Woods 2007, pp. 834 835.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 518 525.
^ Bennett, Anthony J. (2013). The Race for the White House from Reagan to Clinton: Reforming Old Systems, Building New Coalitions. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 160. ISBN 978-1-137-26860-0. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
^ Perlstein, Rick (2008). Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5.
^ Dallek 1998, pp. 233 235.
^ Decisions That Shook the World, vol. 1, 38:18 47. Dir. Gerald Rafshoon. Camera Planet/Discovery Productions, 2004.
^ "Harry J. Middleton Curriculum Vitae". LBJ Presidential Library Reading Room. February 25, 1971.
^ Harris, Marvin (December 1999). "Taming the wild pecan at Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park". Park Science. 19 (2).
^ a b Janos, Leo (July 1973). "The Last Days of the President". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
^ Ashman, Charles R. (1974). Connally: The Adventures of Big Bad John. New York: Morrow. p. 271. ISBN 978-0-688-00222-0.
^ "In His Final Days, LBJ Agonized Over His Legacy". PBS NewsHour. December 4, 2012. Retrieved April 25, 2019.
^ The Age, January 23, 1973, p. 1.
^ Death of LBJ as it broke on YouTube
^ "Lying in State or in Honor". US Architect of the Capitol (AOC). Retrieved September 1, 2018.
^ a b c Foley, Thomas (January 25, 1973). "Thousands in Washington Brave Cold to Say Goodbye to Johnson". Los Angeles Times. p. A1.
^ United Press International (January 26, 1973). "LBJ buried near his Texas birthplace". The Boston Globe. p. 1. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2017.
^ a b Johnson, Haynes; Witcover, Jules (January 26, 1973). "LBJ Buried in Beloved Texas Hills". The Washington Post. p. A1.
^ Claffey, Charles (January 25, 1973). "Johnson lies in state at Capitol; burial is today at Texas ranch". The Boston Globe. p. 1.
^ Rusk, Dean (1990).  Rusk, Richard; Papp, Daniel S. (eds.). As I Saw It. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-02650-7.
^ a b c d Elsen, William A. (January 25, 1973). "Ceremonial Group Had Busy 5 Weeks". The Washington Post. p. D3.
^ Woods, LBJ, pp. 639, 644 645., quoted in Germany, "Historians and the Many Lyndon Johnsons." p. 1007.
^ Germany, "Historians and the Many Lyndon Johnsons." p. 1007.
^ Caro 1982, p. 146.
^ Dallek 1998, p. 12.
^ Dallek, Robert (2003). An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy. Little, Brown, and Co. p. 354. ISBN 978-0-316-17238-7.
^ a b Jardine, Lisa (January 21, 2009). "Lyndon B Johnson: The uncivil rights reformer". The Independent. London. Retrieved September 5, 2010.
^ "Ranching the LBJ Way". National Park Service. Retrieved June 18, 2013.
^ Randall B. Woods, LBJ: Architect of American Ambition (2006) pp. 27, 430, 465 466, 486 487.
^ Kent B. Germany,  "Historians and the Many Lyndon Johnsons: A Review Essay" Journal of Southern History (2009) 75#4 pp 1001 1028 at p. 1005. in JSTOR
^ "Siena College presidential surveys". Retrieved August 30, 2016.
^ McElheny, Victor K. (August 28, 1973). "Houston Space Center Is Rededicated to Johnson: New Stamp Issued". The New York Times. p. 24.
^ United Press International (May 30, 1973). "Birthday of Johnson Now Texas Holiday". The New York Times. p. 45.
^ Wolley, John T.; Peters, Gerhard (June 9, 1980). "Jimmy Carter, XXXIX President of the United States: 1977 1981, Presidential Medal of Freedom Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony, June 9, 1980". The American Presidency Project. www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2011.
^ "President Bush Signs H.R. 584, Designates U.S. Department of Education as the Lyndon Baines Johnson Federal Building". whitehouse.gov. Retrieved October 6, 2008   via National Archives.
^ "Remarks Upon Signing the Clean Air Act". John T. Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved November 22, 2010.
^ "Facilities Act of December 16, 1963". Higher-Ed.org. Retrieved November 22, 2010.
^ "Remarks Upon Signing the Higher Education Facilities Act". John T. Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved November 22, 2010.
^ "Remarks Upon Signing the Vocational Education Bill". John T. Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved November 22, 2010.
^ "Remarks Upon Signing the Nurse Training Act of 1964". John T. Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved February 25, 2011.
^ "Remarks Upon Signing the Housing Act". John T. Woolley and Gerhard Peters, The American Presidency Project. Retrieved November 22, 2010.
^ "Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967". Finduslaw.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2010.
^ Griffith, Allison (1962). "Lyndon B. Johnson (introduction)". National Aeronautics and Space Act: A Study of the Development of Public Policy. Public Affairs Press. LCCN 62014610. Retrieved October 18, 2020.
^ Johnson, Lyndon B. (1969). Choices We Face. A Bantam extra. Bantam. LCCN 68059614. Retrieved October 18, 2020.
^ Johnson, Lyndon B. (1971). The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963 1969. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. ISBN 978-0-03-084492-8. LCCN 74102146. Retrieved October 18, 2020.
Works cited
Bernstein, Irving (1996). Guns or Butter: The Presidency of Lyndon Johnson. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-506312-7.
Caro, Robert (1982). The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Path to Power. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-72945-7.
Caro, Robert (1990). The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Means of Ascent. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-394-52835-9.
Caro, Robert (2002). The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Master Of The Senate. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-394-72095-1.
Caro, Robert (2012). The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Passage of Power. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-71325-5.
Dallek, Robert (1991). Lone Star Rising: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908 1960. Oxford University Press.
Dallek, Robert (1998). Flawed Giant: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1961 1973. Oxford University Press. p. 524. ISBN 978-0-19-505465-1.
Gould, Lewis L. (2010). 1968: The Election That Changed America. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 978-1-56663-862-3. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
Reeves, Richard (1993). President Kennedy: Profile of Power. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4.
Walsh, Kenneth T. (2003). Air Force One: a history of the presidents and their planes. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-0004-3.
Woods, Randall (2006). LBJ: Architect of American Ambition. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-684-83458-0.
Further reading
Main article: Bibliography of Lyndon B. Johnson
Andrew, John A. (1999). Lyndon Johnson and the Great Society. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 978-1-56663-185-3. OCLC 37884743.
Berman, Larry. Lyndon Johnson's War: The Road to Stalemate in Vietnam (1991)
Bornet, Vaughn Davis (1983). The Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0242-1.
Brands, H.W. (1997). The Wages of Globalism: Lyndon Johnson and the Limits of American Power. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511377-8.
Cohen, Warren I., and Nancy Bernkopf Tuckerm, eds. Lyndon Johnson Confronts the World: American Foreign Policy 1963 1968 (Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Colman, Jonathan (2010). The Foreign Policy of Lyndon B. Johnson: The United States and the World, 1963 1969 (PDF). Edinburgh University Press.
Dallek, Robert (2004). Lyndon B. Johnson: Portrait of a President. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-1-280-50296-5., abridged version of his two-volume biography
Ellis, Sylvia (2013). Freedom's Pragmatist: Lyndon Johnson and Civil Rights. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Gavin, Francis J. and Mark Atwood Lawrence, eds. (2014) Beyond the Cold War: Lyndon Johnson and the New Global Challenges of the 1960s doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199790692.001.0001 online
Lichtenstein, Nelson, ed. Political Profiles: The Johnson Years. 1976. short biographies of 400+ key politicians
Schulman, Bruce J. (1995). Lyndon B. Johnson and American Liberalism: A Brief Biography with Documents. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-08351-9.
Schwarz, Jordan A. (2011). The New Dealers: Power politics in the age of Roosevelt. Vintage. pp. 364 284.
Vandiver, Frank E. Shadows of Vietnam: Lyndon Johnson's Wars (1997)
Woods, Randall B. Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (2016), 480pp.
Zarefsky, David. President Johnson's War on Poverty (1986).
Historiography
Catsam, Derek. "The Civil Rights Movement and the Presidency in the Hot Years of the Cold War: A Historical and Historiographical Assessment". History Compass 6#1 (2008): 314 344.
Germany, Kent B. "Historians and the Many Lyndon Johnsons: A Review Essay". Journal of Southern History (2009) 75#4 pp. 1001 1028. in JSTOR
Lerner, Mitchell B. A Companion to Lyndon B. Johnson (2012); scholarly essays on all aspects of Johnson's career.
External links
Lyndon B. Johnson  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
Presidential Library & Museum
White House biography
United States Congress. "Lyndon B. Johnson (id: J000160)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
The Presidential Recordings of Lyndon B. Johnson Digital Edition Archived May 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
Appearances on C-SPAN
"Life Portrait of Lyndon B. Johnson", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 12, 1999
Works by or about Lyndon B. Johnson at Internet Archive
Works by Lyndon B. Johnson at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Lyndon B. Johnson collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Lyndon Baines Johnson: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
Extensive essays on Lyndon Johnson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
LBJ Archived December 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, an American Experience documentary
Lyndon B. Johnson Personal Manuscripts
Lyndon B. Johnson at IMDb
vteLyndon B. Johnson
36th President of the United States (1963 1969)
37th Vice President of the United States (1961 1963)
U.S. Senator from Texas (1949 1961)
U.S. Representative for TX 10 (1937 1949)
Presidency
1963 inauguration
Let Us Continue
1965 inauguration
Great Society (Model Cities Program)
Architectural Barriers Act
Child Nutrition Act
Clean Air Act
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Coinage Act of 1965
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Department of Transportation
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964
Head Start Program
Job Corps
Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Fair Housing Act
Truth in Lending Act
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968
Food Stamp Act of 1964
Glassboro Summit
Gun Control Act of 1968
Higher Education Act of 1965
Upward Bound
TRIO
Teacher Corps
Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965
Johnson Doctrine
Dominican Republic occupation
Social Security Amendments of 1965
Medicare
Medicaid
Meritorious Service Medal
National Endowment for the Arts
National Endowment for the Humanities
Executive Order 11246
Executive Order 11375
Older Americans Act
Operation CHAOS
Outer Space Treaty
Public Broadcasting Act of 1967
Corporation for Public Broadcasting
PBS
NPR
Foreign policy
Vietnam War
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
"Credibility gap"
VISTA
24th Amendment & Voting Rights Act of 1965
War on poverty
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Cannabis policy
White House preservation
State of the Union Address, 1966
1968
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Thurgood Marshall Supreme Court nomination
controversies
Johnson desk
Presidential transition of Richard Nixon
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Life
Early years and career
Operation Texas
Texas Broadcasting Company
Johnson Amendment
Box 13 scandal
Bashir Ahmad
Legacy andmemorials
Bibliography
Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum
Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland
Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center
Lyndon Baines Johnson Day
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
Memorial Grove on the Potomac
U.S. Postage stamp
Elections
United States House of Representatives special elections, 1937
1938 United States House of Representatives elections
1940
1942
1944
1946
United States Senate special elections, 1941
1948 United States Senate elections
1954
1960
Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1960
1964
campaign
1968
Democratic National Convention 1956
1960
1964
1960 United States presidential election
1964
Public image
Lyndon B. Johnson in popular culture
Daisy advertisement
Johnson cult
The Years of Lyndon Johnson
LBJ (1991 television film)
Path to War (2002 film)
All the Way (2012 play, 2016 film)
Selma (2014 film)
LBJ (2017 film)
Family
Claudia "Lady Bird" Taylor Johnson (wife)
Lynda Bird Johnson Robb (daughter)
Luci Baines Johnson (daughter)
Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr. (father)
Sam Houston Johnson (brother)
Samuel Ealy Johnson, Sr. (grandfather)
Joseph Wilson Baines (grandfather)
George Washington Baines (great-grandfather)
Chuck Robb (son-in-law)
  John F. Kennedy
Richard Nixon  
  Richard Nixon
Hubert Humphrey  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJames Buchanan
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Texas's 10th congressional district 1937 1949
Succeeded byHomer Thornberry
Party political offices
Preceded byLee O'Daniel
 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Texas(Class 2) 1948, 1954, 1960
Succeeded byWilliam A. Blakley
Preceded byFrancis J. Myers
 Senate Democratic Whip 1951 1953
Succeeded byEarle Clements
Preceded byErnest McFarland
 Senate Democratic Leader 1953 1961
Succeeded byMike Mansfield
Preceded byEstes Kefauver
 Democratic nominee for Vice President of the United States 1960
Succeeded byHubert Humphrey
Preceded byJohn F. Kennedy
 Democratic nominee for President of the United States 1964
U.S. Senate
Preceded byLee O'Daniel
 U.S. Senator (Class 2) from Texas 1949 1961        Served alongside: Tom Connally, Price Daniel, William A. Blakley, Ralph Yarborough
Succeeded byWilliam A. Blakley
Preceded byFrancis J. Myers
 Senate Majority Whip 1951 1953
Succeeded byLeverett Saltonstall
Preceded byErnest McFarland
 Senate Minority Leader 1953 1955
Succeeded byWilliam F. Knowland
Preceded byWilliam F. Knowland
 Senate Majority Leader 1955 1961
Succeeded byMike Mansfield
New office
 Chair of the Senate Reception Room Committee 1955 1957
Position abolished 
 Chair of the Senate Space Committee 1958 1961
Succeeded byRobert S. Kerr
Political offices
Preceded byRichard Nixon
 Vice President of the United States 1961 1963
Succeeded byHubert Humphrey
Preceded byJohn F. Kennedy
 President of the United States 1963 1969
Succeeded byRichard Nixon
Awards and achievements
Preceded byMartin Luther King Jr.
 Time Person of the Year 1964
Succeeded byWilliam Westmoreland
Preceded byBaby boomers
 Time Person of the Year 1967
Succeeded byAstronauts of Apollo 8
Preceded byJ. Edgar Hoover
 Persons who have lain in state or honorin the United States Capitol rotunda 1973
Succeeded byHubert Humphrey
Articles related to Lyndon B. Johnson
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteCabinet of President Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)CabinetVice President
None (1963 1965)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Secretary of State
Dean Rusk (1963 1969)
Secretary of the Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon (1963 1965)
Henry H. Fowler (1965 1968)
Joseph W. Barr (1968 1969)
Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara (1963 1968)
Clark Clifford (1968 1969)
Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy (1963 1964)
Nicholas Katzenbach (1964 1966)
Ramsey Clark (1966 1969)
Postmaster General
John A. Gronouski (1963 1965)
Larry O'Brien (1965 1968)
W. Marvin Watson (1968 1969)
Secretary of the Interior
Stewart Udall (1963 1969)
Secretary of Agriculture
Orville Freeman (1963 1969)
Secretary of Commerce
Luther H. Hodges (1963 1965)
John T. Connor (1965 1967)
Alexander Trowbridge (1967 1968)
C. R. Smith (1968 1969)
Secretary of Labor
W. Willard Wirtz (1963 1969)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Anthony J. Celebrezze (1963 1965)
John W. Gardner (1965 1968)
Wilbur J. Cohen (1968 1969)
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
Robert C. Weaver (1966 1968)
Robert Coldwell Wood (1969)
Secretary of Transportation
Alan S. Boyd (1967 1969)
Cabinet-levelAmbassador to the United Nations
Adlai Stevenson II (1963 1965)
Arthur Goldberg (1965 1968)
George Ball (1968)
James Russell Wiggins (1968 1969)
vteDemocratic Party
History
Second Party System
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Nationalconventionsandpresidentialtickets
1828 (None): Jackson/Calhoun
1832 (Baltimore): Jackson/Van Buren
1835 (Baltimore): Van Buren/R. Johnson
1840 (Baltimore): Van Buren/None
1844 (Baltimore): Polk/Dallas
1848 (Baltimore): Cass/Butler
1852 (Baltimore): Pierce/King
1856 (Cincinnati): Buchanan/Breckinridge
1860 (Charleston/Baltimore): Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
1864 (Chicago): McClellan/Pendleton
1868 (New York): Seymour/Blair
1872 (Baltimore): Greeley/Brown
1876 (Saint Louis): Tilden/Hendricks
1880 (Cincinnati): Hancock/English
1884 (Chicago): Cleveland/Hendricks
1888 (Saint Louis): Cleveland/Thurman
1892 (Chicago): Cleveland/Stevenson I
1896 (Chicago): W. Bryan/Sewall
1900 (Kansas City): W. Bryan/Stevenson I
1904 (Saint Louis): Parker/H. Davis
1908 (Denver): W. Bryan/Kern
1912 (Baltimore): Wilson/Marshall
1916 (Saint Louis): Wilson/Marshall
1920 (San Francisco): Cox/Roosevelt
1924 (New York): J. Davis/C. Bryan
1928 (Houston): Smith/Robinson
1932 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Garner
1936 (Philadelphia): Roosevelt/Garner
1940 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Wallace
1944 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Truman
1948 (Philadelphia): Truman/Barkley
1952 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Sparkman
1956 (Chicago): Stevenson II/Kefauver
1960 (Los Angeles): Kennedy/L. Johnson
1964 (Atlantic City): L. Johnson/Humphrey
1968 (Chicago): Humphrey/Muskie
1972 (Miami Beach): McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
1976 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1980 (New York): Carter/Mondale
1984 (San Francisco): Mondale/Ferraro
1988 (Atlanta): Dukakis/Bentsen
1992 (New York): B. Clinton/Gore
1996 (Chicago): B. Clinton/Gore
2000 (Los Angeles): Gore/Lieberman
2004 (Boston): Kerry/Edwards
2008 (Denver): Obama/Biden
2012 (Charlotte): Obama/Biden
2016 (Philadelphia): H. Clinton/Kaine
2020 (Milwaukee/other locations): Biden/Harris
2024 (Chicago)
Presidentialadministrations
Jackson (1829 1837)
Van Buren (1837 1841)
Polk (1845 1849)
Pierce (1853 1857)
Buchanan (1857 1861)
A. Johnson (1868 1869)
Cleveland (1885 1889; 1893 1897)
Wilson (1913 1921)
Roosevelt (1933 1941; 1941 1945)
Truman (1945 1953)
Kennedy (1961 1963)
L. B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Carter (1977 1981)
Clinton (1993 2001)
Obama (2009 2017)
Biden (2021 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andCaucuschairs
A. Stevenson (1827 1834)
Bell (1834 1835)
Polk (1835 1839)
J. W. Jones (1843 1845)
Davis (1845 1847)
Cobb (1849 1851)
Boyd (1851 1855)
G. W. Jones (1855 1857)
Orr (1857 1859)
Houston (1859 1861)
Niblack/Randall (1869 1871)
Niblack (1873 1875)
Kerr (1875 1876)
Randall (1876 1881)
Carlisle (1883 1889)
Holman (1889 1891)
Crisp (1891 1895)
D. B. Culberson (1895 1897)
Richardson (1897 1903)
Williams (1903 1909)
Clark (1909 1921)
Kitchin (1921 1923)
Garrett (1923 1929)
Garner (1929 1933)
Rainey (1933 1934)
Byrns (1935 1936)
Bankhead (1936 1940)
Rayburn (1940 1961)
McCormack (1962 1971)
Albert (1971 1977)
O'Neill (1977 1987)
Wright (1987 1989)
Foley (1989 1995)
Gephardt (1995 2003)
Pelosi (2003 2023)
Jeffries (2023 )
U.S. SenateleadersandCaucuschairs
J. W. Stevenson (1873 1877)
Wallace (1877 1881)
Pendleton (1881 1885)
Beck (1885 1890)
Gorman (1890 1898)
Turpie (1898 1899)
J. K. Jones (1899 1903)
Gorman (1903 1906)
Blackburn (1906 1907)
C. A. Culberson (1907 1909)
Money (1909 1911)
Martin (1911 1913)
Kern (1913 1917)
Martin (1917 1919)
Hitchcock (1919 1920)
Underwood (1920 1923)
Robinson (1923 1937)
Barkley (1937 1949)
Lucas (1949 1951)
McFarland (1951 1953)
Johnson (1953 1961)
Mansfield (1961 1977)
Byrd (1977 1989)
Mitchell (1989 1995)
Daschle (1995 2005)
Reid (2005 2017)
Schumer (2017 )
Chairs ofthe DNC
Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez
Harrison
State andterritorialparties
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Democrats Abroad
AffiliatedgroupsCongress
Senate Caucus
Policy Committee
Steering and Outreach Committee
United States Senate Democratic Conference Secretary
House Caucus
Fundraising
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Democratic Redistricting Committee
Sectional
College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Stonewall Young Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America
Related
Primaries
Presidential candidates
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
2006 House Caucus leadership election
2018 House Caucus leadership election
2022 House Caucus leadership election
Weekly Democratic Address
vteVice presidents of the United States
John Adams (1789 1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797 1801)
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813 1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817 1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825 1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833 1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837 1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845 1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849 1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857 1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869 1873)
Henry Wilson (1873 1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877 1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889 1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893 1897)
Garret Hobart (1897 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905 1909)
James S. Sherman (1909 1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913 1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Charles Curtis (1929 1933)
John N. Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974 1977)
Walter Mondale (1977 1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981 1989)
Dan Quayle (1989 1993)
Al Gore (1993 2001)
Dick Cheney (2001 2009)
Joe Biden (2009 2017)
Mike Pence (2017 2021)
Kamala Harris (2021 present)
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteUnited States senators from TexasClass 1
Rusk
Henderson
Ward
Wigfall
Flanagan
Maxey
Reagan
Chilton
Mills
Culberson
Mayfield
Connally
Daniel
Blakley
Yarborough
Bentsen
Krueger
Hutchison
Cruz
Class 2
S. Houston
Hemphill
Hamilton
Coke
Chilton
Bailey
Johnston
Sheppard
A. Houston
O'Daniel
Johnson
Blakley
Tower
Gramm
Cornyn
vteUnited States Senate majority leaders
Lodge
Curtis
Watson
Robinson
Barkley
White
Lucas
McFarland
Taft
Knowland
Johnson
Mansfield
Byrd
Baker
Stevens (Acting)
Baker
Dole
Byrd
Mitchell
Dole
Lott
Daschle
Lott
Daschle
Frist
Reid
McConnell
Schumer
vteUnited States Senate minority leaders
Underwood
Robinson
McNary
Austin
McNary
White
Barkley
Wherry
Bridges
Johnson
Knowland
Dirksen
Scott
Baker
Byrd
Dole
Daschle
Lott
Daschle
Lott
Daschle
Reid
McConnell
Reid
Schumer
McConnell
vteDemocratic Party leaders in the United States Senate
Underwood
Robinson
Barkley
Lucas
McFarland
Johnson
Mansfield
Byrd
Mitchell
Daschle
Reid
Schumer
vteUnited States Senate majority whips
Lewis
Curtis
Jones
Fess
Lewis
Minton
Hill
Wherry
Myers
Johnson
Saltonstall
Clements
Mansfield
Humphrey
Long
Kennedy
Byrd
Cranston
Stevens
Simpson
Cranston
Ford
Lott
Nickles
Reid
Nickles
Reid
McConnell
Durbin
Cornyn
Thune
Durbin
vteDemocratic Party whips in the United States Senate
Lewis
Gerry
Sheppard
Lewis
Minton
Hill
Lucas
Myers
Johnson
Clements
Mansfield
Humphrey
Long
Kennedy
Byrd
Cranston
Ford
Reid
Durbin
vteCivil rights movement (1954 1968)Events(timeline)Prior to 1954
Journey of Reconciliation
Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore
Sweatt v. Painter (1950)
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950)
Baton Rouge bus boycott
1954 1959
Brown v. Board of Education
Bolling v. Sharpe
Briggs v. Elliott
Davis v. Prince Edward County
Gebhart v. Belton
Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company
Emmett Till
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle
Tallahassee bus boycott
Mansfield school desegregation
1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
"Give Us the Ballot"
Royal Ice Cream sit-in
Little Rock Nine
Cooper v. Aaron
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Ministers' Manifesto
Katz Drug Store sit-in
Kissing Case
Biloxi wade-ins
1960 1963
New Year's Day March
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Atlanta sit-ins
Sit-in movement
Greenville Eight
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Ax Handle Saturday
Gomillion v. Lightfoot
Boynton v. Virginia
University of Georgia desegregation riot
Rock Hill sit-ins
Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address
Freedom Rides
Anniston bombing
Birmingham attack
Garner v. Louisiana
Albany Movement
Cambridge movement
University of Chicago sit-ins
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot
Atlanta's Berlin Wall
"Segregation now, segregation forever"
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
1963 Birmingham campaign
Letter from Birmingham Jail
Children's Crusade
Birmingham riot
16th Street Baptist Church bombing
John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights
Detroit Walk to Freedom
March on Washington
"I Have a Dream"
Big Six
St. Augustine movement
1964 1968
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Chester school protests
Bloody Tuesday
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests
Freedom Summer
workers' murders
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States
Katzenbach v. McClung
1964 1965 Scripto strike
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches
"How Long, Not Long"
Voting Rights Act of 1965
Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections
March Against Fear
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement
Loving v. Virginia
Memphis sanitation strike
King assassination
funeral
riots
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Poor People's Campaign
Green v. County School Board of New Kent County
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.
Activistgroups
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
Atlanta Student Movement
Black Panther Party
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Committee for Freedom Now
Committee on Appeal for Human Rights
An Appeal for Human Rights
Council for United Civil Rights Leadership
Council of Federated Organizations
Dallas County Voters League
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Georgia Council on Human Relations
Highlander Folk School
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights
Lowndes County Freedom Organization
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
Montgomery Improvement Association
NAACP
Youth Council
Nashville Student Movement
Nation of Islam
Northern Student Movement
National Council of Negro Women
National Urban League
Operation Breadbasket
Regional Council of Negro Leadership
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Southern Regional Council
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
The Freedom Singers
United Auto Workers (UAW)
Wednesdays in Mississippi
Women's Political Council
Activists
Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Zev Aelony
Mathew Ahmann
Muhammad Ali
William G. Anderson
Gwendolyn Armstrong
Arnold Aronson
Ella Baker
James Baldwin
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
James Bevel
Claude Black
Gloria Blackwell
Randolph Blackwell
Unita Blackwell
Ezell Blair Jr.
Joanne Bland
Julian Bond
Joseph E. Boone
William Holmes Borders
Amelia Boynton
Bruce Boynton
Raylawni Branch
Stanley Branche
Ruby Bridges
Aurelia Browder
H. Rap Brown
Ralph Bunche
Guy Carawan
Stokely Carmichael
Johnnie Carr
James Chaney
J. L. Chestnut
Shirley Chisholm
Colia Lafayette Clark
Ramsey Clark
Septima Clark
Xernona Clayton
Eldridge Cleaver
Kathleen Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Abraham Lincoln Davis
Angela Davis
Joseph DeLaine
Dave Dennis
Annie Devine
Patricia Stephens Due
Joseph Ellwanger
Charles Evers
Medgar Evers
Myrlie Evers-Williams
Chuck Fager
James Farmer
Walter Fauntroy
James Forman
Marie Foster
Golden Frinks
Andrew Goodman
Robert Graetz
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Lawrence Guyot
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
Fred Hampton
William E. Harbour
Vincent Harding
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Oliver Hill
Donald L. Hollowell
James Hood
Myles Horton
Zilphia Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Ruby Hurley
Cecil Ivory
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Richie Jean Jackson
T. J. Jemison
Esau Jenkins
Barbara Rose Johns
Vernon Johns
Frank Minis Johnson
Clarence Jones
J. Charles Jones
Matthew Jones
Vernon Jordan
Tom Kahn
Clyde Kennard
A. D. King
C.B. King
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Martin Luther King Sr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
Sanford R. Leigh
Jim Letherer
Stanley Levison
John Lewis
Viola Liuzzo
Z. Alexander Looby
Joseph Lowery
Clara Luper
Danny Lyon
Malcolm X
Mae Mallory
Vivian Malone
Bob Mants
Thurgood Marshall
Benjamin Mays
Franklin McCain
Charles McDew
Ralph McGill
Floyd McKissick
Joseph McNeil
James Meredith
William Ming
Jack Minnis
Amzie Moore
Cecil B. Moore
Douglas E. Moore
Harriette Moore
Harry T. Moore
Queen Mother Moore
William Lewis Moore
Irene Morgan
Bob Moses
William Moyer
Elijah Muhammad
Diane Nash
Charles Neblett
Huey P. Newton
Edgar Nixon
Jack O'Dell
James Orange
Rosa Parks
James Peck
Charles Person
Homer Plessy
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Fay Bellamy Powell
Rodney N. Powell
Al Raby
Lincoln Ragsdale
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond
George Raymond Jr.
Bernice Johnson Reagon
Cordell Reagon
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Walter Reuther
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Bernice Robinson
Jo Ann Robinson
Angela Russell
Bayard Rustin
Bernie Sanders
Michael Schwerner
Bobby Seale
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Alexander D. Shimkin
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
Glenn E. Smiley
A. Maceo Smith
Kelly Miller Smith
Mary Louise Smith
Maxine Smith
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Charles Kenzie Steele
Hank Thomas
Dorothy Tillman
A. P. Tureaud
Hartman Turnbow
Albert Turner
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Hollis Watkins
Walter Francis White
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Kale Williams
Robert F. Williams
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Sammy Younge Jr.
Bob Zellner
James Zwerg
By region
Omaha, Nebraska
South Carolina
Movementsongs
"Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round"
"If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus"
"Kumbaya"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
"Oh, Freedom"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"We Shall Not Be Moved"
"We Shall Overcome"
""Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)"
Influences
Nonviolence
Padayatra
Sermon on the Mount
Mahatma Gandhi
Ahimsa
Satyagraha
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Mary McLeod Bethune
Related
Jim Crow laws
Lynching in the United States
Plessy v. Ferguson
Separate but equal
Buchanan v. Warley
Hocutt v. Wilson
Sweatt v. Painter
Hernandez v. Texas
Loving v. Virginia
African-American women in the movement
Fifth Circuit Four
16th Street Baptist Church
Kelly Ingram Park
A.G. Gaston Motel
Brown Chapel
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
Holt Street Baptist Church
Edmund Pettus Bridge
March on Washington Movement
African-American churches attacked
List of lynching victims in the United States
Freedom Schools
Freedom songs
Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"
Voter Education Project
1960s counterculture
African American founding fathers of the United States
Eyes on the Prize
Legacy
In popular culture
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument
Civil Rights Memorial
Civil Rights Movement Archive
Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument
Freedom Rides Museum
Freedom Riders National Monument
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
other King memorials
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum
National Civil Rights Museum
National Voting Rights Museum
St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument
Notedhistorians
Taylor Branch
Clayborne Carson
John Dittmer
Michael Eric Dyson
Chuck Fager
Adam Fairclough
David Garrow
David Halberstam
Vincent Harding
Steven F. Lawson
Doug McAdam
Diane McWhorter
Charles M. Payne
Thomas E. Ricks
Timothy Tyson
Akinyele Umoja
Movement photographers
 Civil rights movement portal
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vte(  1952)   1956 United States presidential election   (  1960)Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower
Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon
Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II
VP nominee: Estes Kefauver
Other candidates: John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton
VP nominee: Symon Gould
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick 
VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass
VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Party
Nominee: Darlington Hoopes
VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith
Other 1956 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1956)   1960 United States presidential election   (  1964)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: John F. Kennedy
campaign
VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson
Other candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson II
George Smathers
Stuart Symington
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Other candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee
Symon Gould
National States' Rights Party
Nominee
Orval Faubus
VP nominee
J. B. Stoner
Prohibition Party
Nominee
Rutherford Decker
VP nominee
E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee
Eric Hass
VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee
Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan
Other 1960 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1960)   1964 United States presidential election   (  1968)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Incumbent nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson
campaign
Daisy
Incumbent VP nominee: Hubert Humphrey
Other candidates: Daniel Brewster
Pat Brown
Robert F. Kennedy
Albert S. Porter
Jennings Randolph
John W. Reynolds Jr.
George Wallace
Matthew E. Welsh
Sam Yorty
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Barry Goldwater
campaign
VP nominee: William E. Miller
Other candidates: Hiram Fong
Walter Judd
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Jim Rhodes
Nelson Rockefeller
William Scranton
Margaret Chase Smith
Harold Stassen
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee: Symon Gould
National States' Rights Party
Nominee: John Kasper
VP nominee: J. B. Stoner
Prohibition Party
Nominee: E. Harold Munn
VP nominee: Mark R. Shaw 
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Eric Hass 
VP nominee: Henning A. Blomen
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Clifton DeBerry
VP nominee: Ed Shaw
Independents and other candidates
George Lincoln Rockwell
Other 1964 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial
vte(  1964) 1968 United States presidential election (1972  )Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
campaign
VP nominee: Spiro Agnew
Other candidates: Frank Carlson
Clifford P. Case
Hiram Fong
John Lindsay
Ronald Reagan
Jim Rhodes
Nelson Rockefeller
Winthrop Rockefeller
George W. Romney
campaign
Harold Stassen
John A. Volpe
Democratic Party
Convention
protests
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Hubert Humphrey
campaign
VP nominee: Edmund Muskie
Other candidates: Roger D. Branigin
John G. Crommelin
Paul C. Fisher
Lyndon B. Johnson
incumbent
Robert F. Kennedy
campaign
Thomas C. Lynch
Eugene McCarthy
campaign
George McGovern
Dan K. Moore
Channing E. Phillips
George Smathers
Stephen M. Young
American Independent PartyCandidates
Nominee: George Wallace
campaign
VP nominee: Curtis LeMay
Other third party and independent candidatesCommunist Party
Nominee: Charlene Mitchell
VP nominee: Michael Zagarell
Peace and Freedom Party
Nominee: Eldridge Cleaver
VP nominee: Douglas Fitzgerald Dowd
Prohibition Party
Nominee: E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Henning A. Blomen
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee: Fred Halstead
VP nominee: Paul Boutelle
Independents and other candidates
Dick Gregory
Pat Paulsen
Pigasus
Other 1968 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial
vteCabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)CabinetVice President
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Secretary of State
Dean Rusk (1961 1963)
Secretary of the Treasury
C. Douglas Dillon (1961 1963)
Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara (1961 1963)
Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Postmaster General
J. Edward Day (1961 1963)
John A. Gronouski (1963)
Secretary of the Interior
Stewart Udall (1961 1963)
Secretary of Agriculture
Orville Freeman (1961 1963)
Secretary of Commerce
Luther H. Hodges (1961 1963)
Secretary of Labor
Arthur Goldberg (1961 1962)
W. Willard Wirtz (1962 1963)
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
Abraham Ribicoff (1961 1962)
Anthony J. Celebrezze  (1962 1963)
Cabinet-levelAmbassador to the United Nations
Adlai Stevenson II (1961 1963)
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vteLain in state (United States)Lain in stateUS Capitol rotunda
Clay (1852)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
Stevens (1868)
Sumner (1874)
Wilson (1875)
Garfield (1881)
Logan (1886)
McKinley (1901)
L'Enfant (1909)
Dewey (1917)
Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921)
Harding (1923)
W. H. Taft (1930)
Pershing (1948)
R. A. Taft (1953)
Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
MacArthur (1964)
H. Hoover (1964)
Eisenhower (1969)
Dirksen (1969)
J. E. Hoover (1972)
Johnson (1973)
Humphrey (1978)
Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984)
Pepper (1989)
Reagan (2004, funeral)
Ford (2006 07, funeral)
Inouye (2012)
McCain (2018)
Bush (2018, funeral)
Lewis (2020)
Dole (2021)
Reid (2022)
National Statuary Hall
Cummings (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Young (2022)
House Chamber
Hooper (1875)
Herbert C. Hoover Building
Brown (1996)
Old Senate Chamber
Chase (1873)
Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda
Chestnut and Gibson (1998)
Parks (2005)
Graham (2018)
Sicknick (2021)
Evans (2021)
Williams (2022)
Lain in reposeEast Room
Harrison (1841)
Taylor (1850)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
McKinley (1901)
Harding (1923)
Roosevelt (1945)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
Great Hall of theUS Supreme Court
Warren (1974)
Marshall (1993)
Burger (1995)
Brennan (1997)
Blackmun (1999)
Rehnquist (2005)
Scalia (2016)
Stevens (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Senate Chamber
Byrd (2010)
Lautenberg (2013)
Bold: Presidents and chief justices
Portals: Biography 1960s Civil rights movement Liberalism Politics Texas World War II United States
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lyndon_B._Johnson&oldid=1149531199"