Electrical connector
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Mini-DIN connector" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (June 2021)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The plug or male connectors shown, as visible when unplugged looking into the connector. Pin numbering for the plugs is from left to right, bottom row to top row. Pin 1 is on the lower left, and the highest pin number is on the upper right
 PS/2 socket pin numbering: note that the male plug numbering is a mirror image, with numbers going from right to left.
The mini-DIN connectors are a family of multi-pin electrical connectors used in a variety of applications. Mini-DIN is similar to the larger, older DIN connector.
Design[edit]
 Color-coded PS/2 connection ports (purple for keyboards and green for mice) on the rear of a personal computer
 An S-video connector: because this is a female connector, Pin 1 is at lower right
Mini-DIN connectors are 9.5 millimetres (3 8 in) in diameter and come in seven patterns, with the number of pins from three to nine. Each pattern is keyed in such a way that a plug with one pattern cannot be mated with any socket of another pattern. They are each drastically different from the other, with no simultaneously and directly overlapping similarities in (1) pin arrangement, (2) square key size and position, (3) circular shielding metal skirt notches and metallic additions: in this they differ from the nonstandard mini-DIN connectors which may have directly overlapping characteristics to each other or to the standard mini-DIN connectors.[original research?]
Notable usage[edit]
Some notable examples of standard mini-DIN connectors include:
Mini-DIN-3 connectors were used in early implementations of Apple LocalTalk.
Mini-DIN-4 connectors are used for S-video, and were used for Apple Desktop Bus.
Mini-DIN-6 connectors were used for IBM PC compatible PS/2 keyboard and mouse ports and for Acorn Archimedes keyboards (prior to the A7000, these were proprietary, while A7000 and later devices were standardised PS/2).
Mini-DIN-8 connectors were used for Sun Microsystems[1] keyboard and mouse ports, as well as for serial printer, modem, and Apple[2] LocalTalk connections. It was also used as the game pad connector for the PC Engine video game system and its variants (except the TurboGrafx-16 USA variant, which used a full sized DIN-8). The connector was used by the controller peripheral for the Philips CD-i video game system.[3] Furthermore, some devices by Keithley Instruments feature it, too.
Mini-DIN-9 connectors were used for Acorn Archimedes Quadrature Mice and Microsoft InPort Bus Mice (not interchangeable). It is also used as the Audio/Video output port of Sega Genesis/Mega Drive gaming consoles on Model 2 variants, as well as their 32X addon.
Mini-DIN-7 and Mini-DIN-9 connectors have been used for a variety of audio and video applications. Also, iRobot Roomba Vacuum cleaning robots use a Mini-DIN-7 to expose an interface for custom sensing and control.
Mini-DIN-6 and Mini-DIN-8 connectors are frequently used in ham radio applications to interface with computers for data packet communications and radio programming.
Non-standard connectors[edit]
The plug or male connector are shown, as visible when unplugged; female sockets are mirror images
Several non-standard sockets are designed to mate with standard mini-DIN plugs. These connectors provide extra conductors, and are used to save space by combining functions in one connector that would otherwise require two standard connectors.
Other non-standard connectors mate only with their matching connectors, and are mini-DIN connectors only in the sense of sharing the 9.5 mm plug body. These mini-DIN style plugs are not approved by the Deutsches Institut f r Normung, the German standards body, and many applications could be considered proprietary. The Sega Saturn uses a 10-pin non-standard connector.
 A non-standard, 7-pin socket (female) variant compatible with an S-Video Mini-DIN-4 plug (male)
Other non-standard connectors[edit]
JVC Mini-DIN 8
Allen-Bradley Micrologix PLC Mini-DIN 8
Beyerdynamic microphone connector
Some 3-pin and 4-pin DC power connectors look similar enough to Mini-DIN connectors to be erroneously referred to as "Mini-DIN" connectors sometimes.
See also[edit]
DC connector#Snap and lock DC power connectors
References[edit]
^ Stokely, Celeste (2005). "Serial Port & Cable Pinouts". sunhelp.org. Archived from the original on 2013-05-15. Retrieved 2013-10-08.
^ "Mini DIN-8: Serial pinouts for Hayes modems". support.apple.com. Feb 19, 2012. Retrieved 2013-10-08.
^ The CD-i Controller Interface
vteAudio and video connectorsAnalog audio
Banana plug
Binding post
D-subminiature
Euroblock
DIN
Mini-DIN
Jack plug
RCA
Speaker spring terminal
Speakon
XLR
Digital audio
BNC
D-sub
S/PDIF
TOSLINK
XLR
Video
BNC
Component RGB
Component YPbPr
Composite video
D-Terminal
DB13W3
DFP
DIN
Mini-DIN
DMS-59
LFH
DVI
Mini-DVI
Micro-DVI
RCA
S-Video
UDI
VGA
Mini-VGA
Audio and video
ADC
Belling-Lee
EVC
Type F
HDBaseT
HDMI
DisplayPort
mDP
MHL (superMHL)
Minijack
P&D
PDMI
SCART
Visual charts
List of video connectors
General-purpose
Thunderbolt
USB
vteAudio and video interfaces and connectorsAudio onlyAnalog
Interface: PC System Design Guide
Connectors: TRS 3.5 mm
Interface: Balanced audio
Connectors: TRS 6.53 mm
XLR
Digital
Interface: S/PDIF
Connectors: RCA jack (coaxial)
TOSLINK (optical)
BNC
Interface: AES3 (AES/EBU)
Connectors: RCA jack
XLR
TOSLINK (optical)
BNC
Video onlyAnalog
Interface: VGA
Connectors: DB-15
DVI-A
Interface: Composite
Connectors: RCA jack yellow
Interface: S-Video
Connectors: Mini-DIN 4 Pin
Interface: Component
Connectors: RCA jacks   3
Interface: Composite
S-Video, and Component
Connectors: VIVO using Mini-DIN 9 Pin
Digital and  analog
Interface: DVI
Connectors: DVI-I/DVI-D
Video and audioDigital
Interface: HDMI
Connectors: HDMI connector
Interface: DisplayPort
Connectors: DisplayPort connector
Interface: HDBaseT
Connectors: 8P8C connector
vteDeutsches Institut f r NormungDIN standards
DIN 1025
DIN 1451
DIN 1530
DIN 5008
DIN 5009
DIN 31635
DIN 41612
DIN 43700
DIN 4420
DIN 47100
DIN 62056
DIN 72552
Engschrift
ISO 216
Committees
Municipal Services Standards Committee
Connectors
DIN connector
Mini-DIN connector
Multimedia extension connector
Rails
DIN rail
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mini-DIN_connector&oldid=1136809236"