Country in north-west Europe; part of the United Kingdom
This article is about the country. For other uses, see England (disambiguation).
England
Flag
Royal Arms
Anthem: VariousPredominantly "God Save the King"(National anthem of the United Kingdom)Location of England (dark green) in Europe (green & dark grey) in the United Kingdom (green)StatusCountryCapitaland largest cityLondon51 30 N 0 7 W  /  51.500 N 0.117 W  / 51.500; -0.117National languageEnglishRegional languagesCornishEthnic groups  (2021)81.0% White9.7% Asian4.2% Black2.9% Mixed2.2% OtherReligion  (2021)46.3% Christianity (official)36.7% No religion6.7% Islam1.8% Hinduism0.9% Sikhism0.5% Judaism0.6% Other6.0% Not statedDemonym(s)EnglishSovereign stateLegal jurisdictionUnited KingdomEngland and WalesGovernmentPart of a constitutional monarchy, direct government exercised by the government of the United Kingdom Monarch Charles IIIParliament of the United Kingdom House of Commons533 MPs (of 650)
Establishment Unification of Angles, Saxons and Danes 12 July 927 Union with Scotland 1 May 1707
Area  Land130,279 km2 (50,301 sq mi)[1]Population 2021 census 56,489,800[2] Density434/km2 (1,124.1/sq mi)GVA2020 estimate  Total 1.683 trillion[3]  Per capita 29,757
CurrencyPound sterling (GBP)Time zoneUTC+0 (Greenwich Mean Time) Summer (DST)UTC+1 (British Summer Time)Date formatdd/mm/yyyy (AD)Driving sideleftCalling code+44ISO 3166 codeGB-ENG
England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom.[4] It shares land borders with Wales to its west and Scotland to its north. The Irish Sea lies northwest and the Celtic Sea area of the Atlantic Ocean to the southwest. It is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.
The area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Paleolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century and has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century.[5]
The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law, which collectively served as the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world, developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations.[6] The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.[7] England is also home to the two oldest institutions of higher learning in the English-speaking world, the University of Cambridge, founded in 1209, and the University of Oxford, founded in 1096, both of which are routinely ranked among the most prestigious universities globally.[8]
England's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in the centre and south. Upland and mountainous terrain is mostly restricted to the north and west, including the Lake District, Pennines, Dartmoor and Shropshire Hills. The capital is London, whose greater metropolitan population of 14.2 million as of 2021 represents the United Kingdom's largest metropolitan area. England's population of 56.3 million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom,[9] largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.[10]
The Kingdom of England, which after 1535 included Wales, ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain.[11] In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland through another Act of Union to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922, the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.[12]
Toponymy
See also: Toponymy of England
The name "England" is derived from the Old English name Englaland, which means "land of the Angles".[13] The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes that settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages. The Angles came from the Anglia peninsula in the Bay of Kiel area (present-day German state of Schleswig-Holstein) of the Baltic Sea.[14] The earliest recorded use of the term, as "Engla londe", is in the late-ninth-century translation into Old English of Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English People. The term was then used in a different sense to the modern one, meaning "the land inhabited by the English", and it included English people in what is now south-east Scotland but was then part of the English kingdom of Northumbria. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded that the Domesday Book of 1086 covered the whole of England, meaning the English kingdom, but a few years later the Chronicle stated that King Malcolm III went "out of Scotlande into Lothian in Englaland", thus using it in the more ancient sense.[15]
The earliest attested reference to the Angles occurs in the 1st-century work by Tacitus, Germania, in which the Latin word Angliicode: lat promoted to code: la  is used.[16] The etymology of the tribal name itself is disputed by scholars; it has been suggested that it derives from the shape of the Angeln peninsula, an angular shape.[17] How and why a term derived from the name of a tribe that was less significant than others, such as the Saxons, came to be used for the entire country and its people is not known, but it seems this is related to the custom of calling the Germanic people in Britain Angli Saxones or English Saxons to distinguish them from continental Saxons (Eald-Seaxe) of Old Saxony between the Weser and Eider rivers in Northern Germany.[18] In Scottish Gaelic, another language which developed on the island of Great Britain, the Saxon tribe gave their name to the word for England (Sasunncode: gla promoted to code: gd );[19] similarly, the Welsh name for the English language is "Saesnegcode: cym promoted to code: cy ". A romantic name for England is Loegria, related to the Welsh word for England, Lloegrcode: cym promoted to code: cy , and made popular by its use in Arthurian legend. Albion is also applied to England in a more poetic capacity,[20] though its original meaning is the island of Britain as a whole.
History
Main article: History of England
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of English history.
Prehistory and antiquity
Main article: Prehistoric Britain
 Stonehenge, a Neolithic monument
 View of the ramparts of the developed hillfort of Maiden Castle, Dorset, as they look today
The earliest known evidence of human presence in the area now known as England was that of Homo antecessor, dating to approximately 780,000 years ago. The oldest proto-human bones discovered in England date from 500,000 years ago.[21] Modern humans are known to have inhabited the area during the Upper Paleolithic period, though permanent settlements were only established within the last 6,000 years.[22]
After the last ice age only large mammals such as mammoths, bison and woolly rhinoceros remained. Roughly 11,000 years ago, when the ice sheets began to recede, humans repopulated the area; genetic research suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula.[23] The sea level was lower than the present day and Britain was connected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia.[24]
As the seas rose, it was separated from Ireland 10,000 years ago and from Eurasia two millennia later.
The Beaker culture arrived around 2,500 BC, introducing drinking and food vessels constructed from clay, as well as vessels used as reduction pots to smelt copper ores.[25] It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments such as Stonehenge and Avebury were constructed. By heating together tin and copper, which were in abundance in the area, the Beaker culture people made bronze, and later iron from iron ores. The development of iron smelting allowed the construction of better ploughs, advancing agriculture (for instance, with Celtic fields), as well as the production of more effective weapons.[26]
During the Iron Age, Celtic culture, deriving from the Hallstatt and La T ne cultures, arrived from Central Europe. Brythonic was the spoken language during this time. Society was tribal; according to Ptolemy's Geographiacode: lat promoted to code: la  there were around 20 tribes in the area. Earlier divisions are unknown because the Britons were not literate. Like other regions on the edge of the Empire, Britain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans. Julius Caesar of the Roman Republic attempted to invade twice in 55 BC; although largely unsuccessful, he managed to set up a client king from the Trinovantes.
 Boudica led an uprising against the Roman Empire.
The Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius, subsequently conquering much of Britain, and the area was incorporated into the Roman Empire as Britannia province.[27] The best-known of the native tribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by Caratacus. Later, an uprising led by Boudica, Queen of the Iceni, ended with Boudica's suicide following her defeat at the Battle of Watling Street.[28] The author of one study of Roman Britain suggested that from 43 AD to 84 AD, the Roman invaders killed somewhere between 100,000 and 250,000 people from a population of perhaps 2,000,000.[29] This era saw a Greco-Roman culture prevail with the introduction of Roman law, Roman architecture, aqueducts, sewers, many agricultural items and silk.[30] In the 3rd century, Emperor Septimius Severus died at Eboracum (now York), where Constantine was subsequently proclaimed emperor a century later.[31]
There is debate about when Christianity was first introduced; it was no later than the 4th century, probably much earlier. According to Bede, missionaries were sent from Rome by Eleutherius at the request of the chieftain Lucius of Britain in 180 AD, to settle differences as to Eastern and Western ceremonials, which were disturbing the church. There are traditions linked to Glastonbury claiming an introduction through Joseph of Arimathea, while others claim through Lucius of Britain.[32] By 410, during the decline of the Roman Empire, Britain was left exposed by the end of Roman rule in Britain and the withdrawal of Roman army units, to defend the frontiers in continental Europe and partake in civil wars.[33] Celtic Christian monastic and missionary movements flourished: Patrick (5th-century Ireland) and in the 6th century Brendan (Clonfert), Comgall (Bangor), David (Wales), Aiden (Lindisfarne) and Columba (Iona). This period of Christianity was influenced by ancient Celtic culture in its sensibilities, polity, practices and theology. Local "congregations" were centred in the monastic community and monastic leaders were more like chieftains, as peers, rather than in the more hierarchical system of the Roman-dominated church.[34]
Middle Ages
Main article: England in the Middle Ages
 Replica of the 7th-century ceremonial Sutton Hoo helmet from the Kingdom of East Anglia
Roman military withdrawals left Britain open to invasion by pagan, seafaring warriors from north-western continental Europe, chiefly the Saxons, Angles, Jutes and Frisians who had long raided the coasts of the Roman province. These groups then began to settle in increasing numbers over the course of the fifth and sixth centuries, initially in the eastern part of the country.[33] Their advance was contained for some decades after the Britons' victory at the Battle of Mount Badon, but subsequently resumed, overrunning the fertile lowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brittonic control to a series of separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the 6th century. Contemporary texts describing this period are extremely scarce, giving rise to its description as a Dark Age. The nature and progression of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is consequently subject to considerable disagreement; the emerging consensus is that it occurred on a large scale in the south and east but was less substantial to the north and west, where Celtic languages continued to be spoken even in areas under Anglo-Saxon control.[35][36] Roman-dominated Christianity had, in general, been replaced in the conquered territories by Anglo-Saxon paganism, but was reintroduced by missionaries from Rome led by Augustine from 597 onwards.[37] Disputes between the Roman- and Celtic-dominated forms of Christianity ended in victory for the Roman tradition at the Council of Whitby (664), which was ostensibly about tonsures (clerical haircuts) and the date of Easter, but more significantly, about the differences in Roman and Celtic forms of authority, theology, and practice.[34]
During the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have been fragmented into numerous tribal territories, but by the 7th century, when substantial evidence of the situation again becomes available, these had coalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria, Mercia, Wessex, East Anglia, Essex, Kent and Sussex. Over the following centuries, this process of political consolidation continued.[38] The 7th century saw a struggle for hegemony between Northumbria and Mercia, which in the 8th century gave way to Mercian preeminence.[39] In the early 9th century Mercia was displaced as the foremost kingdom by Wessex. Later in that century escalating attacks by the Danes culminated in the conquest of the north and east of England, overthrowing the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and East Anglia. Wessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom, and under his successors, it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms of the Danelaw. This brought about the political unification of England, first accomplished under  thelstan in 927 and definitively established after further conflicts by Eadred in 953. A fresh wave of Scandinavian attacks from the late 10th century ended with the conquest of this united kingdom by Sweyn Forkbeard in 1013 and again by his son Cnut in 1016, turning it into the centre of a short-lived North Sea Empire that also included Denmark and Norway. However, the native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042.
 King Henry V at the Battle of Agincourt, fought on Saint Crispin's Day and concluded with an English victory against a larger French army in the Hundred Years' War
A dispute over the succession to Edward led to the Norman Conquest in 1066, accomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy.[40] The Normans themselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the late 9th and early 10th centuries.[41] This conquest led to the almost total dispossession of the English elite and its replacement by a new French-speaking aristocracy, whose speech had a profound and permanent effect on the English language.[42]
Subsequently, the House of Plantagenet from Anjou inherited the English throne under Henry II, adding England to the budding Angevin Empire of fiefs the family had inherited in France including Aquitaine.[43] They reigned for three centuries, some noted monarchs being Richard I, Edward I, Edward III and Henry V.[43] The period saw changes in trade and legislation, including the signing of the Magna Carta, an English legal charter used to limit the sovereign's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen. Catholic monasticism flourished, providing philosophers, and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were founded with royal patronage. The Principality of Wales became a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century[44] and the Lordship of Ireland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope.
During the 14th century, the Plantagenets and the House of Valois both claimed to be legitimate claimants to the House of Capet and with it France; the two powers clashed in the Hundred Years' War.[45] The Black Death epidemic hit England; starting in 1348, it eventually killed up to half of England's inhabitants.[46] From 1453 to 1487 civil war occurred between two branches of the royal family   the Yorkists and Lancastrians   known as the Wars of the Roses.[47] Eventually it led to the Yorkists losing the throne entirely to a Welsh noble family the Tudors, a branch of the Lancastrians headed by Henry Tudor who invaded with Welsh and Breton mercenaries, gaining victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field where the Yorkist king Richard III was killed.[48]
Early modern
King Henry VIII (1491 1547)Queen Elizabeth I (1558 1603)
During the Tudor period, the Renaissance reached England through Italian courtiers, who reintroduced artistic, educational and scholarly debate from classical antiquity.[49] England began to develop naval skills, and exploration to the West intensified.[50] Henry VIII broke from communion with the Catholic Church, over issues relating to his divorce, under the Acts of Supremacy in 1534 which proclaimed the monarch head of the Church of England. In contrast with much of European Protestantism, the roots of the split were more political than theological.[a] He also legally incorporated his ancestral land Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535 1542 acts. There were internal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry's daughters, Mary I and Elizabeth I. The former took the country back to Catholicism while the latter broke from it again, forcefully asserting the supremacy of Anglicanism. The Elizabethan era is the epoch in the Tudor age of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I ("the Virgin Queen"). Historians often depict it as the golden age in English history. Elizabethan England represented the apogee of the English Renaissance and saw the flowering of art, poetry, music and literature.[52] The era is most famous for its drama, theatre and playwrights. England during this period had a centralised, well-organised, and effective government as a result of vast Tudor reforms.[53]
Competing with Spain, the first English colony in the Americas was founded in 1585 by explorer Walter Raleigh in Virginia and named Roanoke. The Roanoke colony failed and is known as the lost colony after it was found abandoned on the return of the late-arriving supply ship.[54] With the East India Company, England also competed with the Dutch and French in the East. During the Elizabethan period, England was at war with Spain. An armada sailed from Spain in 1588 as part of a wider plan to invade England and re-establish a Catholic monarchy. The plan was thwarted by bad coordination, stormy weather and successful harrying attacks by an English fleet under Lord Howard of Effingham. This failure did not end the threat: Spain launched two further armadas, in 1596 and 1597, but both were driven back by storms. The political structure of the island changed in 1603, when the King of Scots, James VI, a kingdom which had been a long-time rival to English interests, inherited the throne of England as James I, thereby creating a personal union.[55] He styled himself King of Great Britain, although this had no basis in English law.[56] Under the auspices of James VI and I the Authorised King James Version of the Holy Bible was published in 1611. It was the standard version of the Bible read by most Protestant Christians for four hundred years until modern revisions were produced in the 20th century.
 The English Restoration restored the monarchy under King Charles II and peace after the English Civil War.
Based on conflicting political, religious and social positions, the English Civil War was fought between the supporters of Parliament and those of King Charles I, known colloquially as Roundheads and Cavaliers respectively. This was an interwoven part of the wider multifaceted Wars of the Three Kingdoms, involving Scotland and Ireland. The Parliamentarians were victorious, Charles I was executed and the kingdom replaced by the Commonwealth. Leader of the Parliament forces, Oliver Cromwell declared himself Lord Protector in 1653; a period of personal rule followed.[57] After Cromwell's death and the resignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector, Charles II was invited to return as monarch in 1660, in a move called the Restoration. With the reopening of theatres, fine arts, literature and performing arts flourished throughout the Restoration of ''the Merry Monarch'' Charles II.[58] After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, it was constitutionally established that King and Parliament should rule together, though Parliament would have the real power. This was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689. Among the statutes set down were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be suspended by the King, also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an army without the prior approval of Parliament.[59] Also since that time, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting, which is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch's messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch.[60] With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660, science was greatly encouraged.
In 1666, the Great Fire of London gutted the City of London but it was rebuilt shortly afterwards[61] with many significant buildings designed by Christopher Wren. In Parliament two factions had emerged   the Tories and Whigs. Though the Tories initially supported Catholic king James II, some of them, along with the Whigs, during the Revolution of 1688 invited Dutch Prince William of Orange to defeat James and ultimately to become William III of England. Some English people, especially in the north, were Jacobites and continued to support James and his sons. Under the Stuart dynasty England expanded in trade, finance and prosperity. Britain developed Europe's largest merchant fleet.[62] After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed,[63] the two countries joined in political union, to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707.[55] To accommodate the union, institutions such as the law and national churches of each remained separate.[64]
Late modern and contemporary
 The River Thames during the Georgian period from the Terrace of Somerset House looking towards St. Paul's, c. 1750
Under the newly formed Kingdom of Great Britain, output from the Royal Society and other English initiatives combined with the Scottish Enlightenment to create innovations in science and engineering, while the enormous growth in British overseas trade protected by the Royal Navy paved the way for the establishment of the British Empire. Domestically it drove the Industrial Revolution, a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural conditions of England, resulting in industrialised agriculture, manufacture, engineering and mining, as well as new and pioneering road, rail and water networks to facilitate their expansion and development.[65] The opening of Northwest England's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in Britain.[66] In 1825 the world's first permanent steam locomotive-hauled passenger railway   the Stockton and Darlington Railway   opened to the public.[66]
 The Battle of Trafalgar was a naval engagement between the British Royal Navy and the combined fleets of the French and Spanish Navies during the Napoleonic Wars.[67]
During the Industrial Revolution, many workers moved from England's countryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories, for instance at Birmingham and Manchester, dubbed "Workshop of the World" and "Warehouse City" respectively.[68] Manchester was the world's first industrial city.[69] England maintained relative stability throughout the French Revolution; William Pitt the Younger was British prime minister for the reign of George III. The Regency of George IV is noted for its elegance and achievements in the fine arts and architecture.[70] During the Napoleonic Wars, Napoleon planned to invade from the south-east. However, this failed to manifest and the Napoleonic forces were defeated by the British: at sea by Horatio Nelson, and on land by Arthur Wellesley. The major victory at the Battle of Trafalgar confirmed the naval supremacy Britain had established during the course of the eighteenth century.[71] The Napoleonic Wars fostered a concept of Britishness and a united national British people, shared with the English, Scots and Welsh.[72]
 The Victorian era is often cited as a Golden Age. Painting done by William Powell Frith to show cultural divisions.
London became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world during the Victorian era, and trade within the British Empire   as well as the standing of the British military and navy   was prestigious.[73] Technologically, this era saw many innovations that proved key to the United Kingdom's power and prosperity.[74] Political agitation at home from radicals such as the Chartists and the suffragettes enabled legislative reform and universal suffrage.[75] Samuel Hynes described the Edwardian era as a "leisurely time when women wore picture hats and did not vote, when the rich were not ashamed to live conspicuously, and the sun really never set on the British flag."[76]
Power shifts in east-central Europe led to World War I; hundreds of thousands of English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the Allies.[b] Two decades later, in World War II, the United Kingdom was again one of the Allies. At the end of the Phoney War, Winston Churchill became the wartime prime minister. Developments in warfare technology saw many cities damaged by air-raids during the Blitz. Following the war, the British Empire experienced rapid decolonisation, and there was a speeding-up of technological innovations; automobiles became the primary means of transport and Frank Whittle's development of the jet engine led to wider air travel.[78] Residential patterns were altered in England by private motoring, and by the creation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948. The UK's NHS provided publicly funded health care to all UK permanent residents free at the point of need, being paid for from general taxation. Combined, these prompted the reform of local government in England in the mid-20th century.[79]
Since the 20th century, there has been significant population movement to England, mostly from other parts of the British Isles, but also from the Commonwealth, particularly the Indian subcontinent.[80] Since the 1970s there has been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on the service industry.[81] As part of the United Kingdom, the area joined a common market initiative called the European Economic Community which became the European Union. Since the late 20th century the administration of the United Kingdom has moved towards devolved governance in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.[82] England and Wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction within the United Kingdom.[83] Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis on a more English-specific identity and patriotism.[84] There is no devolved English government, but an attempt to create a similar system on a sub-regional basis was rejected by referendum.[85]
Governance
Politics
Main article: Politics of England
 The Palace of Westminster, the seat of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
England is part of the United Kingdom, a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system.[86] There has not been a government of England since 1707, when the Acts of Union 1707, putting into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union, joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.[63] Before the union England was ruled by its monarch and the Parliament of England. Today England is governed directly by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, although other countries of the United Kingdom have devolved governments.[87] In the House of Commons which is the lower house of the British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster, there are 532 Members of Parliament (MPs) for constituencies in England, out of the 650 total.[88] As of the 2019 United Kingdom general election, England is represented by 345 MPs from the Conservative Party, 179 from the Labour Party, seven from the Liberal Democrats, one from the Green Party, and the Speaker of the House, Lindsay Hoyle.
Since devolution, in which other countries of the United Kingdom   Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland   each have their own devolved parliament or assemblies for local issues, there has been debate about how to counterbalance this in England. Originally it was planned that various regions of England would be devolved, but following the proposal's rejection by the North East in a 2004 referendum, this has not been carried out.[85]
One major issue is the West Lothian question, in which MPs from Scotland and Wales are able to vote on legislation affecting only England, while English MPs have no equivalent right to legislate on devolved matters.[89] This when placed in the context of England being the only country of the United Kingdom not to have free prescriptions and free top-up university fees,[90] has led to a steady rise in English nationalism.[91] Some have suggested the creation of a devolved English parliament,[92] while others have proposed simply limiting voting on legislation which only affects England to English MPs.[93]
Law
Main article: English law
 The Royal Courts of Justice
The English law legal system, developed over the centuries, is the basis of common law[94] legal systems used in most Commonwealth countries[95] and the United States (except Louisiana). Despite now being part of the United Kingdom, the legal system of the Courts of England and Wales continued, under the Treaty of Union, as a separate legal system from the one used in Scotland. The general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent   stare decisis   to the facts before them.[96]
The court system is headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice for civil cases, and the Crown Court for criminal cases.[97] The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and Wales. It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes, taking over the judicial functions of the House of Lords.[98] A decision of the Supreme Court is binding on every other court in the hierarchy, which must follow its directions.[99]
The Secretary of State for Justice is the minister responsible to Parliament for the judiciary, the court system and prisons and probation in England.[100] Crime increased between 1981 and 1995 but fell by 42% in the period 1995 2006.[101] The prison population doubled over the same period, giving it one of the highest incarceration rates in Western Europe at 147 per 100,000.[102] His Majesty's Prison Service, reporting to the Ministry of Justice, manages most prisons, housing 81,309 prisoners in England and Wales as of September 2022[update].[103]
Regions, counties, and districts
Main article: Subdivisions of England
See also: Regions of England, Counties of England, and Districts of England
Northumberland
Durham
Lancashire
 Cheshire
Derbs.
Notts.
 Lincolnshire
Leics.
Staffs.
 Shropshire
Warks.
Northants.
 Norfolk
 Suffolk
 Essex
Herts.
Beds.
Bucks.
Oxon.
Glos.
 Somerset
 Wiltshire
 Berkshire
 Kent
 Surrey
 Hampshire
 Dorset
 Devon
 Cornwall
Heref.
Worcs.
Bristol
East Ridingof Yorkshire
Rutland
Cambs.
GreaterLondon
Not shown: City of London
Tyne &Wear
Cumbria
North Yorkshire
SouthYorks.
WestYorkshire
GreaterManc.
Merseyside
EastSussex
WestSussex
 Isle ofWight
WestMidlands
Ceremonial counties of England
The subdivisions of England consist of up to four levels of subnational division controlled through a variety of types of administrative entities created for the purposes of local government. The highest tier of local government were the nine regions of England: North East, North West, Yorkshire and the Humber, East Midlands, West Midlands, East, South East, South West, and London. These were created in 1994 as Government Offices, used by the UK government to deliver a wide range of policies and programmes regionally, but there are no elected bodies at this level, except in London, and in 2011 the regional government offices were abolished.[104]
After devolution began to take place in other parts of the United Kingdom it was planned that referendums for the regions of England would take place for their own elected regional assemblies as a counterweight. London accepted in 1998: the London Assembly was created two years later. However, when the proposal was rejected by the 2004 North East England devolution referendum in the North East, further referendums were cancelled.[85] The regional assemblies outside London were abolished in 2010, and their functions transferred to respective regional development agencies and a new system of local authority leaders' boards.[105]
Below the regional level, all of England is divided into 48 ceremonial counties.[106] These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference and have developed gradually since the Middle Ages, with some established as recently as 1974.[107] Each has a lord lieutenant and high sheriff; these posts are used to represent the British monarch locally.[106] Outside Greater London and the Isles of Scilly, England is also divided into 83 metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties; these correspond to areas used for the purposes of local government[108] and may consist of a single district or be divided into several.
There are six metropolitan counties based on the most heavily urbanised areas, which do not have county councils.[108] In these areas the principal authorities are the councils of the subdivisions, the metropolitan boroughs. Elsewhere, 27 non-metropolitan "shire" counties have a county council and are divided into districts, each with a district council. They are typically, though not always, found in more rural areas. The remaining non-metropolitan counties are of a single district and usually correspond to large towns or sparsely populated counties; they are known as unitary authorities. Greater London has a different system for local government, with 32 London boroughs, plus the City of London covering a small area at the core governed by the City of London Corporation.[109] At the most localised level, much of England is divided into civil parishes with councils; in Greater London only one, Queen's Park, exists as of 2014[update] after they were abolished in 1965 until legislation allowed their recreation in 2007.
Geography
Main article: Geography of England
Landscape and rivers
 Skiddaw massif, seen from Walla Crag in the Lake District
Geographically, England includes the central and southern two-thirds of the island of Great Britain, plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and the Isles of Scilly. It is bordered by two other countries of the United Kingdom: to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales. England is closer than any other part of mainland Britain to the European continent. It is separated from France (Hauts-de-France) by a 21-mile (34 km)[110] sea gap, though the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near Folkestone.[111] England also has shores on the Irish Sea, North Sea and Atlantic Ocean.
The ports of London, Liverpool, and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames, Mersey and Tyne respectively. At 220 miles (350 km), the Severn is the longest river flowing through England.[112] It empties into the Bristol Channel and is notable for its Severn Bore (a tidal bore), which can reach 2 metres (6.6 ft) in height.[113] However, the longest river entirely in England is the Thames, which is 215 miles (346 km) in length.[114]
 The Malvern Hills located in the English counties of Worcestershire and Herefordshire. The hills have been designated by the Countryside Agency as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
There are many lakes in England; the largest is Windermere, within the aptly named Lake District.[115] Most of England's landscape consists of low hills and plains, with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the country. The northern uplands include the Pennines, a chain of uplands dividing east and west, the Lake District mountains in Cumbria, and the Cheviot Hills, straddling the border between England and Scotland. The highest point in England, at 978 metres (3,209 ft), is Scafell Pike in the Lake District.[115] The Shropshire Hills are near Wales while Dartmoor and Exmoor are two upland areas in the south-west of the country. The approximate dividing line between terrain types is often indicated by the Tees Exe line.[116]
In geological terms, the Pennines, known as the "backbone of England", are the oldest range of mountains in the country, originating from the end of the Paleozoic Era around 300 million years ago.[117] Their geological composition includes, among others, sandstone and limestone, and also coal. There are karst landscapes in calcite areas such as parts of Yorkshire and Derbyshire. The Pennine landscape is high moorland in upland areas, indented by fertile valleys of the region's rivers. They contain two national parks, the Yorkshire Dales and the Peak District. In the West Country, Dartmoor and Exmoor of the Southwest Peninsula include upland moorland supported by granite, and enjoy a mild climate; both are national parks.[118]
The English Lowlands are in the central and southern regions of the country, consisting of green rolling hills, including the Cotswold Hills, Chiltern Hills, North and South Downs; where they meet the sea they form white rock exposures such as the cliffs of Dover. This also includes relatively flat plains such as the Salisbury Plain, Somerset Levels, South Coast Plain and The Fens.
Climate
Main article: Climate of England
England has a temperate maritime climate: it is mild with temperatures not much lower than 0 C (32 F) in winter and not much higher than 32 C (90 F) in summer.[119] The weather is damp relatively frequently and is changeable. The coldest months are January and February, the latter particularly on the English coast, while July is normally the warmest month. Months with mild to warm weather are May, June, September and October.[119] Rainfall is spread fairly evenly throughout the year.
Important influences on the climate of England are its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean, its northern latitude and the warming of the sea by the Gulf Stream.[119] Rainfall is higher in the west, and parts of the Lake District receive more rain than anywhere else in the country.[119] Since weather records began, the highest temperature recorded was 40.3 C (104.5 F) on 19 July 2022 at Coningsby, Lincolnshire,[120] while the lowest was  26.1 C ( 15.0 F) on 10 January 1982 in Edgmond, Shropshire.[121]
Nature and wildlife
Main articles: Fauna of England and Fauna of Great Britain
 A Eurasian wren, the most numerous species of bird in England[122]
 Red deer in Richmond Park. The park was created by Charles I in the 17th century as a deer park.[123]
The fauna of England is similar to that of other areas in the British Isles with a wide range of vertebrate and invertebrate life in a diverse range of habitats.[124]
National nature reserves in England are designated by Natural England as key places for wildlife and natural features in England. They were established to protect the most significant areas of habitat and of geological formations. NNRs are managed on behalf of the nation, many by Natural England themselves, but also by non-governmental organisations, including the members of The Wildlife Trusts partnership, the National Trust, and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. There are 229 NNRs in England covering 939 square kilometres (363 square miles). Often they contain rare species or nationally important populations of plants and animals.[125]
The Environment Agency is a non-departmental public body, established in 1995 and sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs with responsibilities relating to the protection and enhancement of the environment in England.[126] The Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs is the minister responsible for environmental protection, agriculture, fisheries and rural communities in England.[127]
England has a temperate oceanic climate in most areas, lacking extremes of cold or heat, but does have a few small areas of subarctic and warmer areas in the South West. Towards the North of England the climate becomes colder and most of England's mountains and high hills are located here and have a major impact on the climate and thus the local fauna of the areas. Deciduous woodlands are common across all of England and provide a great habitat for much of England's wildlife, but these give way in northern and upland areas of England to coniferous forests (mainly plantations) which also benefit certain forms of wildlife. Some species have adapted to the expanded urban environment, particularly the red fox, which is the most successful urban mammal after the brown rat, and other animals such as common wood pigeon, both of which thrive in urban and suburban areas.[128]
Grey squirrels introduced from eastern America have forced the decline of the native red squirrel due to competition. Red squirrels are now confined to upland and coniferous-forested areas of England, mainly in the north, south west and Isle of Wight. England's climate is very suitable for lagomorphs and the country has rabbits and brown hares which were introduced in Roman times.[129] Mountain hares which are indigenous have now been re-introduced in Derbyshire. The fauna of England has to cope with varying temperatures and conditions, although not extreme they do pose potential challenges and adaptational measures. English fauna has however had to cope with industrialisation, human population densities amongst the highest in Europe and intensive farming, but as England is a developed nation, wildlife and the countryside have entered the English mindset more and the country is very conscientious about preserving its wildlife, environment and countryside.[130]
Major conurbations
See also: List of places in England
The Greater London Built-up Area is by far the largest urban area in England[131] and one of the busiest cities in the world. It is considered a global city and has a population larger than any other country in the United Kingdom besides England itself.[131] Other urban areas of considerable size and influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands.[131] There are 50 settlements which have designated city status in England, while the wider United Kingdom has 66.
While many cities in England are quite large, such as Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Newcastle, Bradford, Nottingham, population size is not a prerequisite for city status.[132] Traditionally the status was given to towns with diocesan cathedrals, so there are smaller cities like Wells, Ely, Ripon, Truro and Chichester.
vteLargest conurbations in England2011 census[131]
Rank
Conurbation
 Pop.
Principal settlement
1
Greater London
9,787,426
London
2
Greater Manchester
2,553,379
Manchester
3
West Midlands
2,440,986
Birmingham
4
West Yorkshire
1,777,934
Leeds
5
Liverpool
864,122
Liverpool
6
South Hampshire
855,569
Southampton
7
Tyneside
774,891
Newcastle upon Tyne
8
Nottingham
729,977
Nottingham
9
Sheffield
685,368
Sheffield
10
Bristol
617,280
Bristol
Economy
Main article: Economy of England
 The City of London is the financial capital of the United Kingdom and one of the largest financial centres in the world.[133]
 The Bentley Mulsanne. Bentley is a well-known English car company.
England's economy is one of the largest and most dynamic in the world, with an average GDP per capita of  28,100. HM Treasury, led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is responsible for developing and executing the government's public finance policy and economic policy.[134] Usually regarded as a mixed market economy, it has adopted many free market principles, yet maintains an advanced social welfare infrastructure.[135] The official currency in England is the pound sterling, whose ISO 4217 code is GBP. Taxation in England is quite competitive when compared to much of the rest of Europe   as of 2014[update] the basic rate of personal tax is 20% on taxable income up to  31,865 above the personal tax-free allowance (normally  10,000), and 40% on any additional earnings above that amount.[136]
The economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy,[137] which has the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world. England is a leader in the chemical[138] and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries, particularly aerospace, the arms industry, and the manufacturing side of the software industry. London, home to the London Stock Exchange, the United Kingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's financial centre, with 100 of Europe's 500 largest corporations being based there.[139] London is the largest financial centre in Europe, and as of 2014[update] is the second largest in the world.[140]
The Bank of England, founded in 1694, is the United Kingdom's central bank. Originally established as private banker to the government of England, since 1946 it has been a state-owned institution.[141] The bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales, although not in other parts of the United Kingdom. The government has devolved responsibility to the bank's Monetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and setting interest rates.[142]
England is highly industrialised, but since the 1970s there has been a decline in traditional heavy and manufacturing industries, and an increasing emphasis on a more service industry oriented economy.[81] Tourism has become a significant industry, attracting millions of visitors to England each year. The export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals, cars (although many English marques are now foreign-owned, such as Land Rover, Lotus, Jaguar and Bentley), crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil along with Wytch Farm, aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages.[143] The creative industries accounted for 7 per cent GVA in 2005 and grew at an average of 6 per cent per annum between 1997 and 2005.[144]
Most of the UK's  30 billion[145] aerospace industry is primarily based in England. The global market opportunity for UK aerospace manufacturers over the next two decades is estimated at  3.5 trillion.[146] GKN Aerospace, an expert in metallic and composite aerostructures involved in almost every civil and military fixed and rotary wing aircraft in production, is based in Redditch.[147]
BAE Systems makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter at its sub-assembly plant in Samlesbury and assembles the aircraft for the RAF at its Warton plant, near Preston. It is also a principal subcontractor on the F35 Joint Strike Fighter   the world's largest single defence project   for which it designs and manufactures a range of components including the aft fuselage, vertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system. It also manufactures the Hawk, the world's most successful jet training aircraft.[147]
Rolls-Royce PLC is the world's second-largest aero-engine manufacturer. Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft, and it has more 30,000 engines currently in service across both the civil and defence sectors. With a workforce of over 12,000 people, Derby has the largest concentration of Rolls-Royce employees in the UK. Rolls-Royce also produces low-emission power systems for ships; makes critical equipment and safety systems for the nuclear industry and powers offshore platforms and major pipelines for the oil and gas industry.[147][148] The pharmaceutical industry plays an important role in the economy, and the UK has the third-highest share of global pharmaceutical R&D expenditures.[149]
Much of the UK's space industry is centred on EADS Astrium, based in Stevenage and Portsmouth. The company builds the buses   the underlying structure onto which the payload and propulsion systems are built   for most of the European Space Agency's spacecraft, as well as commercial satellites. The world leader in compact satellite systems, Surrey Satellite Technology, is also part of Astrium.[147] Reaction Engines Limited, the company planning to build Skylon, a single-stage-to-orbit spaceplane using their SABRE rocket engine, a combined-cycle, air-breathing rocket propulsion system is based in Culham. The UK space industry was worth  9.1bn in 2011 and employed 29,000 people. It is growing at a rate of 7.5 per cent annually, according to its umbrella organisation, the UK Space Agency. In 2013, the British Government pledged  60 million to the Skylon project: this investment will provide support at a "crucial stage" to allow a full-scale prototype of the SABRE engine to be built.
Agriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards, producing 60% of food needs with only 2% of the labour force.[150] Two-thirds of production is devoted to livestock, the other to arable crops.[151] The main crops that are grown are wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, sugar beets. England retains a significant, though much reduced fishing industry. Its fleets bring home fish of every kind, ranging from sole to herring. It is also rich in natural resources including coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, and silica.[152]
Science and technology
Main articles: List of English inventions and discoveries and Royal Society
 Sir Isaac Newton is one of the most influential figures in the history of science.
Prominent English figures from the field of science and mathematics include Sir Isaac Newton, Michael Faraday, Charles Darwin, Robert Hooke, James Prescott Joule, John Dalton, Lord Rayleigh, J. J. Thomson, James Chadwick, Charles Babbage, George Boole, Alan Turing, Tim Berners-Lee, Paul Dirac, Stephen Hawking, Peter Higgs, Roger Penrose, John Horton Conway, Thomas Bayes, Arthur Cayley, G. H. Hardy, Oliver Heaviside, Andrew Wiles, Edward Jenner, Francis Crick, Joseph Lister, Joseph Priestley, Thomas Young, Christopher Wren and Richard Dawkins. Some experts claim that the earliest concept of a metric system was invented by John Wilkins, the first secretary of the Royal Society, in 1668.[153]
England was a leading centre of the Scientific Revolution from the 17th century.[154] As the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, England was home to many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Famous English engineers include Isambard Kingdom Brunel, best known for the creation of the Great Western Railway, a series of famous steamships, and numerous important bridges, hence revolutionising public transport and modern-day engineering.[155] Thomas Newcomen's steam engine helped spawn the Industrial Revolution.[156]
The Father of Railways, George Stephenson, built the first public inter-city railway line in the world, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, which opened in 1830. With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of the steam engine, and invention of modern coinage, Matthew Boulton (business partner of James Watt) is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in history.[157] The physician Edward Jenner's smallpox vaccine is said to have "saved more lives ... than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the beginning of recorded history."[158]
 King Charles II, a patron of the arts and sciences, supported the Royal Society, a scientific group whose early members included Robert Hooke, Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton.[159]
Inventions and discoveries of the English include: the jet engine, the first industrial spinning machine, the first computer and the first modern computer, the World Wide Web along with HTML, the first successful human blood transfusion, the motorised vacuum cleaner,[160] the lawn mower, the seat belt, the hovercraft, the electric motor, steam engines, and theories such as the Darwinian theory of evolution and atomic theory. Newton developed the ideas of universal gravitation, Newtonian mechanics, and calculus, and Robert Hooke his eponymously named law of elasticity. Other inventions include the iron plate railway, the thermosiphon, tarmac, the rubber band, the mousetrap, "cat's eye" road marker, joint development of the light bulb, steam locomotives, the modern seed drill and many modern techniques and technologies used in precision engineering.[161]
The Royal Society, formally The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge,[162] is a learned society and the United Kingdom's national academy of sciences. Founded on 28 November 1660, it was granted a royal charter by King Charles II as "The Royal Society".[162] It is the oldest national scientific institution in the world.[163] The society fulfils a number of roles: promoting science and its benefits, recognising excellence in science, supporting outstanding science, providing scientific advice for policy, fostering international and global co-operation, education and public engagement.[164]
The Royal Society started from groups of physicians and natural philosophers, meeting at a variety of locations, including Gresham College in London. They were influenced by the "new science", as promoted by Francis Bacon in his New Atlantis, from approximately 1645 onwards.[165] A group known as "The Philosophical Society of Oxford" was run under a set of rules still retained by the Bodleian Library.[166] After the English Restoration, there were regular meetings at Gresham College.[167] It is widely held that these groups were the inspiration for the foundation of the Royal Society.[166]
Scientific research and development remains important in the universities of England, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation with industry.[168] Between 2004 and 2008 the United Kingdom produced 7 per cent of the world's scientific research papers and had an 8 per cent share of scientific citations, the third and second-highest in the world (after the United States and China, respectively).[169] Scientific journals produced in England include Nature, the British Medical Journal and The Lancet. The Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology, and Minister of State for Science, Research and Innovation has responsibility for science in England.[170]
Transport
Main article: Transport in England
 London St Pancras International is the UK's 13th busiest railway terminus. The station is one of London's main domestic and international transport hubs providing both commuter rail and high-speed rail services across the UK and to Paris, Lille and Brussels.The Department for Transport is the government body responsible for overseeing transport in England. The department is run by the Secretary of State for Transport.
England has a dense and modern transportation infrastructure. There are many motorways in England, and many other trunk roads, such as the A1 Great North Road, which runs through eastern England from London to Newcastle[171] (much of this section is motorway) and onward to the Scottish border. The longest motorway in England is the M6, from Rugby through the North West up to the Anglo-Scottish border, a distance of 232 miles (373 km).[171] Other major routes include: the M1 from London to Leeds, the M25 which encircles London, the M60 which encircles Manchester, the M4 from London to South Wales, the M62 from Liverpool via Manchester to East Yorkshire, and the M5 from Birmingham to Bristol and the South West.[171]
Bus transport across the country is widespread; major companies include Arriva, FirstGroup, Go-Ahead Group, National Express, Rotala and Stagecoach Group. The red double-decker buses in London have become a symbol of England.
National Cycle Route offers cycling routes nationally. There is a rapid transit network in two English cities: the London Underground; and the Tyne and Wear Metro in Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead and Sunderland.[172] There are several tram networks, such as the Blackpool tramway, Manchester Metrolink, Sheffield Supertram and West Midlands Metro, and the Tramlink system centred on Croydon in South London.[172]
 Heathrow Airport is the UK's busiest airport.
Great British Railways is a planned state-owned public body that will oversee rail transport in Great Britain from 2023. The Office of Rail and Road is responsible for the economic and safety regulation of England's railways.[173]
Rail transport in England is the oldest in the world: passenger railways originated in England in 1825.[174] Much of Britain's 10,000 miles (16,000 km) of rail network lies in England, covering the country fairly extensively, although a high proportion of railway lines were closed in the second half of the 20th century. There are plans to reopen lines such as the Varsity Line between Oxford and Cambridge. These lines are mostly standard gauge (single, double or quadruple track) though there are also a few narrow gauge lines. There is rail transport access to France and Belgium through an undersea rail link, the Channel Tunnel, which was completed in 1994.
Crossrail was Europe's largest construction project with a  15 billion projected cost, opened in 2022.[175] High Speed 2, a new high-speed north south railway line, projected in 2015 to cost  56 billion is to start being built in 2020.[176]
England has extensive domestic and international aviation links. The largest airport is Heathrow, which is the world's busiest airport measured by number of international passengers.[177] Other large airports include Gatwick, Manchester, Stansted, Luton and Birmingham.[178]
By sea there is ferry transport, both local and international, including from Liverpool to Ireland and the Isle of Man, and Hull to the Netherlands and Belgium.[179] There are around 4,400 miles (7,100 km) of navigable waterways in England, half of which is owned by the Canal & River Trust,[179] however, water transport is very limited. The River Thames is the major waterway in England, with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the Thames Estuary, one of the United Kingdom's three major ports.[179]
Energy
Main article: Energy in the United Kingdom
 Wind turbines at Den Brook, Devon. The UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind energy, and wind power production is its fastest growing supply.[180][181]
Energy use in the United Kingdom stood at 2,249 TWh (193.4 million tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2014.[182] This equates to energy consumption per capita of 34.82 MWh (3.00 tonnes of oil equivalent) compared to a 2010 world average of 21.54 MWh (1.85 tonnes of oil equivalent).[183] Demand for electricity in 2014 was 34.42 GW on average[184] (301.7 TWh over the year) coming from a total electricity generation of 335.0 TWh.[185]
Successive UK governments have outlined numerous commitments to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Notably, the UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind energy, and wind power production is its fastest growing supply.[181] Wind power contributed 15% of UK electricity generation in 2017.[186][187] England is home to Hornsea 2, the largest offshore wind farm in the world, situated in waters roughly 89 kilometres off the coast of Yorkshire.[188]
The Climate Change Act 2008 was passed in Parliament with an overwhelming majority across political parties. It sets out emission reduction targets that the UK must comply with legally. It represents the first global legally binding climate change mitigation target set by a country.[189] UK government energy policy aims to play a key role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions, whilst meeting energy demand. Shifting availabilities of resources and development of technologies also change the country's energy mix through changes in costs.[190]
The current energy policy is the responsibility of the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero and Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero.[191] The Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth is responsible for green finance, climate science and innovation, and low carbon generation.[192] United Kingdom is ranked 4 out of 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index.[193] A law has been passed that UK greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by 2050.[194]
Tourism
Main article: Tourism in England
 The timber-framed street of The Shambles in York
English Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport.[195]
The National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty is a charity which also maintains multiple sites. Of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 17 are in England.[196]
Some of the best known of these include Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Palace of Westminster, Roman Baths, City of Bath, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and more recently the English Lake District. The northernmost point of the Roman Empire, Hadrian's Wall, is the largest Roman artefact anywhere: it runs for a total of 73 miles (117 kilometres) in northern England.[197]
The Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility for tourism, arts and culture, cultural property, heritage and historic environments, libraries, and museums and galleries.[198] The Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Arts, Heritage and Tourism is the minister with responsibility over tourism in England.[199]
A blue plaque, the oldest historical marker scheme in the world, is a permanent sign installed in a public place in England to commemorate a link between that location and a famous person or event. The scheme was the brainchild of politician William Ewart in 1863 and was initiated in 1866. It was formally established by the Royal Society of Arts in 1867, and since 1986 has been run by English Heritage. In 2011 there were around 1,600 museums in England.[200] Entry to most state-supported museums and galleries is free unlike in other countries.[201]
London is one of the world's most visited cities, regularly taking the top five most visited cities in Europe.[202] It is largely considered a global centre of finance, arts and culture.[203]
Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in England
 William Beveridge's 1942 report Social Insurance and Allied Services (known as the Beveridge Report) served as the basis for the post-World War II welfare state.
The National Health Service (NHS), is the publicly funded healthcare system responsible for providing the majority of healthcare in the country. The NHS began on 5 July 1948, putting into effect the provisions of the National Health Service Act 1946. It was based on the findings of the Beveridge Report, prepared by economist and social reformer William Beveridge.[204] The NHS is largely funded from general taxation including National Insurance payments,[205] and it provides most of its services free at the point of use, although there are charges for some people for eye tests, dental care, prescriptions and aspects of personal care.[206]
The government department responsible for the NHS is the Department of Health, headed by the Secretary of State for Health, who sits in the British Cabinet. Most of the expenditure of the Department of Health is spent on the NHS 98.6 billion was spent in 2008 2009.[207] In recent years the private sector has been increasingly used to provide more NHS services despite opposition by doctors and trade unions.[208]
When purchasing drugs, the NHS has significant market power that, based on its own assessment of the fair value of the drugs, influences the global price, typically keeping prices lower.[209] Several other countries either copy the UK's model or directly rely on its assessments for their own decisions on state-financed drug reimbursements.[210] Regulatory bodies such as the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council are organised on a UK-wide basis, as are non-governmental bodies such as the Royal Colleges.
The average life expectancy of people in England is 77.5 years for males and 81.7 years for females, the highest of the four countries of the United Kingdom.[211] The South of England has a higher life expectancy than the North; however, regional differences do seem to be slowly narrowing: between 1991 1993 and 2012 2014, life expectancy in the North East increased by 6.0 years and in the North West by 5.8 years, the fastest increase in any region outside London, and the gap between life expectancy in the North East and South East is now 2.5 years, down from 2.9 in 1993.[211]
Demography
Main article: Demography of England
Population
Main article: English people
See also: English diaspora, Cornish people, and List of urban areas in the United Kingdom
 The metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties, colour-coded to show population
 Population of England and Wales by administrative areas. Their size shows their population, with some approximation. Each group of squares in the map key is 20 % of total number of districts.
With over 56 million inhabitants, England is by far the most populous country of the United Kingdom, accounting for 84% of the combined total.[10]: 12 [212] England taken as a unit and measured against international states would be the 25th largest country by population in the world.[213]
The English people are British people.[214] Some genetic evidence suggests that 75 95% descend in the paternal line from prehistoric settlers who originally came from the Iberian Peninsula, as well as a 5% contribution from Angles and Saxons, and a significant Scandinavian (Viking) element.[215][216] However, other geneticists place the Germanic estimate up to half.[217] Over time, various cultures have been influential: Prehistoric, Brythonic,[218] Roman, Anglo-Saxon,[219] Viking (North Germanic),[220] Gaelic cultures, as well as a large influence from Normans. There is an English diaspora in former parts of the British Empire; especially the United States, Canada, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand.[c] Since the late 1990s, many English people have migrated to Spain.[225]
In 1086, when the Domesday Book was compiled, England had a population of two million. About 10% lived in urban areas.[226] By 1801, the population was 8.3 million, and by 1901 30.5 million.[227] Due in particular to the economic prosperity of South East England, it has received many economic migrants from the other parts of the United Kingdom.[214] There has been significant Irish migration.[228] The proportion of ethnically European residents totals at 87.50%, including Germans[229] and Poles.[214]
Other people from much further afield in the former British colonies have arrived since the 1950s: in particular, 6% of people living in England have family origins in the Indian subcontinent, mostly India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.[214][229] About 0.7% of people are Chinese.[214][229] 2.90% of the population are black, from Africa and the Caribbean, especially former British colonies.[214][229] In 2007, 22% of primary school children in England were from ethnic minority families,[230] and in 2011 that figure was 26.5%.[231] About half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001 was due to immigration.[232] Debate over immigration is politically prominent;[233] 80% of respondents in a 2009 Home Office poll wanted to cap it.[234] The ONS has projected that the population will grow by nine million between 2014 and 2039.[235]
England contains one indigenous national minority, the Cornish people, recognised by the UK government under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 2014.[236]
Language
Further information: Languages of the United Kingdom and English language in England
Language
Native speakers
(thousands) [237]
English
46,937
Polish
529
Punjabi
272
Urdu
266
Bengali
216
Gujarati
212
Arabic
152
French
145
Portuguese
131
Welsh
8
Cornish
0.6
Other
2,267
Population
51,006
English, today spoken by hundreds of millions of people around the world, originated in what is now England, where it remains the principal tongue. According to a 2011 census, it is spoken well or very well by 98% of the population.[238] It is an Indo-European language in the Anglo-Frisian branch of the Germanic family.[239] After the Norman conquest, the Old English language, brought to Britain by the Anglo-Saxon settlers, was confined to the lower social classes as Norman French and Latin were used by the aristocracy.
By the 15th century, English was back in fashion among all classes, though much changed; the Middle English form showed many signs of French influence, both in vocabulary and spelling. During the English Renaissance, many words were coined from Latin and Greek origins.[240] Modern English has extended this custom of flexibility when it comes to incorporating words from different languages. Thanks in large part to the British Empire, the English language is the world's unofficial lingua franca.[241]
English language learning and teaching is an important economic activity, and includes language schooling, tourism spending, and publishing. There is no legislation mandating an official language for England,[242] but English is the only language used for official business. Despite the country's relatively small size, there are many distinct regional accents, and individuals with particularly strong accents may not be easily understood everywhere in the country.
As well as English, England has two other indigenous languages, Cornish and Welsh. Cornish died out as a community language in the 18th century but is being revived,[243] and is now protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.[244] It is spoken by 0.1% of people in Cornwall,[245] and is taught to some degree in several primary and secondary schools.[246]
When the modern border between Wales and England was established by the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, many Welsh-speaking communities found themselves on the English side of the border. Welsh was spoken in Archenfield in Herefordshire into the nineteenth century,[247] and by natives of parts of western Shropshire until the middle of the twentieth century if not later.[248]
State schools teach students a second language or third language from the ages of seven, most commonly French, Spanish or German.[249] It was reported in 2007 that around 800,000 school students spoke a foreign language at home as a result of immigration among their family,[230] the most common languages being Punjabi and Urdu. However, following the 2011 census data released by the Office for National Statistics, figures now show that Polish is the main language spoken in England after English.[250]
Religion
Main article: Religion in England
Further information: History of Christianity in England
 Canterbury Cathedral, seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury
In the 2011 census, 59.4% of the population of England specified their religion as Christian, 24.7% answered that they had no religion, 5% specified that they were Muslim, while 3.7% of the population belongs to other religions and 7.2% did not give an answer.[251] Christianity is the most widely practised religion in England, as it has been since the Early Middle Ages, although it was first introduced much earlier in Gaelic and Roman times. This Celtic Church was gradually joined to the Catholic hierarchy following the 6th-century Gregorian mission to Kent led by St Augustine. The established church of England is the Church of England,[252] which left communion with Rome in the 1530s when Henry VIII was unable to annul his marriage to the aunt of the king of Spain. The church regards itself as both Catholic and Protestant.[253]
There are High Church and Low Church traditions and some Anglicans regard themselves as Anglo-Catholics, following the Tractarian movement. The monarch of the United Kingdom is the supreme governor of the Church of England, which has around 26 million baptised members (of whom the vast majority are not regular churchgoers). It forms part of the Anglican Communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury acting as its symbolic worldwide head.[254] Many cathedrals and parish churches are historic buildings of significant architectural importance, such as Westminster Abbey, York Minster, Durham Cathedral, and Salisbury Cathedral.
 Westminster Abbey is a notable example of English Gothic architecture. The coronation of the British monarch traditionally takes place at the Abbey.
The 2nd-largest Christian practice is the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church. Since its reintroduction after the Catholic Emancipation, the Church has organised ecclesiastically on an England and Wales basis where there are 4.5 million members (most of whom are English).[255] There has been one Pope from England to date, Adrian IV; while saints Bede and Anselm are regarded as Doctors of the Church.
A form of Protestantism known as Methodism is the third largest Christian practice and grew out of Anglicanism through John Wesley.[256] It gained popularity in the mill towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, and amongst tin miners in Cornwall.[257] There are other non-conformist minorities, such as Baptists, Quakers, Congregationalists, Unitarians and The Salvation Army.[258]
The patron saint of England is Saint George; his symbolic cross is included in the flag of England, as well as in the Union Flag as part of a combination.[259] There are many other English and associated saints; some of the best-known are: Cuthbert, Edmund, Alban, Wilfrid, Aidan, Edward the Confessor, John Fisher, Thomas More, Petroc, Piran, Margaret Clitherow and Thomas Becket. There are non-Christian religions practised. Jews have a history of a small minority on the island since 1070.[260] They were expelled from England in 1290 following the Edict of Expulsion, only to be allowed back in 1656.[260]
Especially since the 1950s, religions from the former British colonies have grown in numbers, due to immigration. Islam is the most common of these, now accounting for around 5% of the population in England.[261] Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism are next in number, adding up to 2.8% combined,[261] introduced from India and South East Asia.[261]
A small minority of the population practise ancient Pagan religions. Neopaganism in the United Kingdom is primarily represented by Wicca and Witchcraft religions, Druidry, and Heathenry. According to the 2011 UK Census, there are roughly 53,172 people who identify as Pagan in England,[d] and 3,448 in Wales,[d] including 11,026 Wiccans in England and 740 in Wales.[e]
24.7% of people in England declared no religion in 2011, compared with 14.6% in 2001. These figures are slightly lower than the combined figures for England and Wales as Wales has a higher level of irreligion than England.[262] Norwich had the highest such proportion at 42.5%, followed closely by Brighton and Hove at 42.4%.
Education
Main article: Education in England
Primary education
 The hall of Christ Church, University of Oxford
 Bridge of Sighs, St John's College, University of Cambridge
The Department for Education is the government department responsible for issues affecting people in England up to the age of 19, including education.[263] State-run and state-funded schools are attended by approximately 93% of English schoolchildren.[264] Education is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Education.[265]
Children who are between the ages of 3 and 5 attend nursery or an Early Years Foundation Stage reception unit within a primary school. Children between the ages of 5 and 11 attend primary school, and secondary school is attended by those aged between 11 and 16. State-funded schools are obliged by law to teach the National Curriculum; basic areas of learning include English literature, English language, mathematics, science, art & design, citizenship, history, geography, religious education, design & technology, computing, ancient & modern languages, music, and physical education.[266]
More than 90% of English schools require students to wear uniforms.[267] School uniforms are defined by individual schools, within the constraint that uniform regulations must not discriminate on the grounds of sex, race, disability, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, religion or belief. Schools may choose to permit trousers for girls or religious dress.[268]
The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of British 15-year-olds as 13th in the world in reading literacy, mathematics, and science with the average British student scoring 503.7, compared with the OECD average of 493, ahead of the United States and most of Europe.[269]
Although most English secondary schools are comprehensive, there are selective intake grammar schools to which entrance is subject to passing the eleven-plus exam. Around 7.2 per cent of English schoolchildren attend private schools, which are funded by private sources.[270] Standards in state schools are monitored by the Office for Standards in Education, and in private schools by the Independent Schools Inspectorate.[271]
After finishing compulsory education, students take GCSE examinations. Students may then opt to continue into further education for two years. Further education colleges (particularly sixth form colleges) often form part of a secondary school site. A-level examinations are sat by a large number of further education students, and often form the basis of an application to university. Further education (FE) covers a wide curriculum of study and apprenticeships, including T-levels, BTEC, NVQ and others. Tertiary colleges provide both academic and vocational courses.[272]
Higher education
Higher education students normally attend university from age 18 onwards, where they study for an academic degree. There are over 90 universities in England, all but one of which are public institutions. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is the government department responsible for higher education in England.[273] Students are generally entitled to student loans to cover the cost of tuition fees and living costs.[f] The first degree offered to undergraduates is the bachelor's degree, which usually takes three years to complete. Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate degree, which usually takes one year, or towards a doctorate, which takes three or more years.[274]
England's universities include some of the highest-ranked universities in the world. As of 2023, four England-based universities, the University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, Imperial College London, and University College London, are each ranked among the top ten universities in the world in the 2023 QS World University Rankings. The University of Cambridge, founded in 1209, and the University of Oxford, founded in 1096, are the two oldest universities in the English-speaking world.[275]
The London School of Economics has been described as the world's leading social science institution for both teaching and research.[276] The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the Financial Times.[277] Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first class (1st), upper second class (2:1), lower second class (2:2), third (3rd), and unclassified.[274]
The King's School, Canterbury and King's School, Rochester are the oldest schools in the English-speaking world.[278] Many of England's most well-known schools, such as Winchester College, Eton, St Paul's School, Harrow School and Rugby School are fee-paying institutions.[279]
Culture
Main article: Culture of England
Further information: English Renaissance
Architecture
 A red telephone box in front of St Paul's Cathedral, one of the most important buildings of the English Baroque period
Many ancient standing stone monuments were erected during the prehistoric period; amongst the best known are Stonehenge, Devil's Arrows, Rudston Monolith and Castlerigg.[280] With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas, baths, amphitheaters, triumphal arches, villas, Roman temples, Roman roads, Roman forts, stockades and aqueducts.[281] It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns such as London, Bath, York, Chester and St Albans. Perhaps the best-known example is Hadrian's Wall stretching right across northern England.[281] Another well-preserved example is the Roman Baths at Bath, Somerset.[281]
Early Medieval architecture's secular buildings were simple constructions mainly using timber with thatch for roofing. Ecclesiastical architecture ranged from a synthesis of Hiberno Saxon monasticism,[282][283] to Early Christian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster-strips, blank arcading, baluster shafts and triangular headed openings. After the Norman conquest in 1066 various castles in England were created so law lords could uphold their authority and in the north to protect from invasion. Some of the best-known medieval castles are the Tower of London, Warwick Castle, Durham Castle and Windsor Castle.[284]
 Bodiam Castle is a 14th-century moated castle near Robertsbridge in East Sussex.
Throughout the Plantagenet era, an English Gothic architecture flourished, with prime examples including the medieval cathedrals such as Canterbury Cathedral, Westminster Abbey and York Minster.[284] Expanding on the Norman base there was also castles, palaces, great houses, universities and parish churches. Medieval architecture was completed with the 16th-century Tudor style; the four-centred arch, now known as the Tudor arch, was a defining feature as were wattle and daub houses domestically. In the aftermath of the Renaissance a form of architecture echoing classical antiquity synthesised with Christianity appeared, the English Baroque style of architect Christopher Wren being particularly championed.[285]
Georgian architecture followed in a more refined style, evoking a simple Palladian form; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of this. With the emergence of romanticism during Victorian period, a Gothic Revival was launched. In addition to this, around the same time the Industrial Revolution paved the way for buildings such as The Crystal Palace. Since the 1930s various modernist forms have appeared whose reception is often controversial, though traditionalist resistance movements continue with support in influential places.[g]
Gardens
 The landscape garden at Stourhead. Inspired by the great landscape artists of the seventeenth century, the landscape garden was described as a "living work of art" when first opened in 1750s.[287]
Landscape gardening, as developed by Capability Brown, set an international trend for the English garden. Gardening, and visiting gardens, are regarded as typically English pursuits. The English garden presented an idealized view of nature. At large country houses, the English garden usually included lakes, sweeps of gently rolling lawns set against groves of trees, and recreations of classical temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape.[288]
By the end of the 18th century, the English garden was being imitated by the French landscape garden, and as far away as St. Petersburg, Russia, in Pavlovsk, the gardens of the future Emperor Paul. It also had a major influence on the form of the public parks and gardens which appeared around the world in the 19th century.[289] The English landscape garden was centred on the English country house and manor houses.[288]
English Heritage and the National Trust preserve great gardens and landscape parks throughout the country.[290] The RHS Chelsea Flower Show is held every year by the Royal Horticultural Society and is said to be the largest gardening show in the world.[291]
Folklore
Main article: English folklore
 Robin Hood and Maid Marian
English folklore developed over many centuries. Some of the characters and stories are present across England, but most belong to specific regions. Common folkloric beings include pixies, giants, elves, bogeymen, trolls, goblins and dwarves. While many legends and folk-customs are thought to be ancient, such as the tales featuring Offa of Angel and Wayland the Smith,[292] others date from after the Norman invasion. The legends featuring Robin Hood and his Merry Men of Sherwood, and their battles with the Sheriff of Nottingham, are among the best-known of these.[293]
During the High Middle Ages tales originating from Brythonic traditions entered English folklore and developed into the Arthurian myth.[294][295][296] These were derived from Anglo-Norman, Welsh and French sources,[295] featuring King Arthur, Camelot, Excalibur, Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table such as Lancelot. These stories are most centrally brought together within Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae (History of the Kings of Britain).[h] Another early figure from British tradition, King Cole, may have been based on a real figure from Sub-Roman Britain. Many of the tales and pseudo-histories make up part of the wider Matter of Britain, a collection of shared British folklore.
Some folk figures are based on semi or actual historical people whose story has been passed down centuries; Lady Godiva for instance was said to have ridden naked on horseback through Coventry, Hereward the Wake was a heroic English figure resisting the Norman invasion, Herne the Hunter is an equestrian ghost associated with Windsor Forest and Great Park and Mother Shipton is the archetypal witch.[298] On 5 November people make bonfires, set off fireworks and eat toffee apples in commemoration of the foiling of the Gunpowder Plot centred on Guy Fawkes. The chivalrous bandit, such as Dick Turpin, is a recurring character, while Blackbeard is the archetypal pirate. There are various national and regional folk activities, participated in to this day, such as Morris dancing, Maypole dancing, Rapper sword in the North East, Long Sword dance in Yorkshire, Mummers Plays, bottle-kicking in Leicestershire, and cheese-rolling at Cooper's Hill.[299] There is no official national costume, but a few are well established such as the Pearly Kings and Queens associated with cockneys, the Royal Guard, the Morris costume and Beefeaters.[300]
Cuisine
Main article: English cuisine
 Fish and chips is a traditionally popular dish in England.
Since the early modern period the food of England has historically been characterised by its simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high quality of natural produce.[301] During the Middle Ages and through the Renaissance period, English cuisine enjoyed an excellent reputation, though a decline began during the Industrial Revolution with the move away from the land and increasing urbanisation of the populace. The cuisine of England has, however, recently undergone a revival, which has been recognised by food critics with some good ratings in Restaurant's best restaurant in the world charts.[302] An early book of English recipes is the Forme of Cury from the royal court of Richard II.[303]
Traditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast, featuring a roasted joint (usually beef, lamb, chicken or pork) served with assorted vegetables, Yorkshire pudding and gravy.[304] Other prominent meals include fish and chips and the full English breakfast (generally consisting of bacon, sausages, grilled tomatoes, fried bread, black pudding, baked beans, mushrooms and eggs).[305] Various meat pies are consumed, such as steak and kidney pie, steak and ale pie, cottage pie, pork pie (usually eaten cold)[304] and the Cornish pasty.
Sausages are commonly eaten, either as bangers and mash or toad in the hole. Lancashire hotpot is a well-known stew originating in the northwest. Some of the more popular cheeses are Cheddar, Red Leicester, Wensleydale, Double Gloucester and Blue Stilton. Many Anglo-Indian hybrid dishes, curries, have been created, such as chicken tikka masala and balti. Traditional English dessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies; spotted dick   all generally served with custard; and, more recently, sticky toffee pudding. Sweet pastries include scones (either plain or containing dried fruit) served with jam or cream, dried fruit loaves, Eccles cakes and mince pies as well as a wide range of sweet or spiced biscuits.
Common non-alcoholic drinks include tea, the popularity of which was increased by Catherine of Braganza,[306] and coffee; frequently consumed alcoholic drinks include wine, ciders and English beers, such as bitter, mild, stout and brown ale.[307]
Visual arts
Main article: English art
See also: Arts Council England
 The Hay Wain by John Constable, 1821, is an archetypal English painting.
 The Lady of Shalott by John William Waterhouse, 1888, in the Pre-Raphaelite style
The earliest known examples are the prehistoric rock and cave art pieces, most prominent in North Yorkshire, Northumberland and Cumbria, but also feature further south, for example at Creswell Crags.[308] With the arrival of Roman culture in the 1st century, various forms of art such as statues, busts, glasswork and mosaics were the norm. There are numerous surviving artefacts, such as those at Lullingstone and Aldborough.[309] During the Early Middle Ages the style favoured sculpted crosses and ivories, manuscript painting, gold and enamel jewellery, demonstrating a love of intricate, interwoven designs such as in the Staffordshire Hoard discovered in 2009. Some of these blended Gaelic and Anglian styles, such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and Vespasian Psalter.[310] Later Gothic art was popular at Winchester and Canterbury, examples survive such as Benedictional of St.  thelwold and Luttrell Psalter.[311]
The Tudor era saw prominent artists as part of their court, portrait painting which would remain an enduring part of English art, was boosted by German Hans Holbein, natives such as Nicholas Hilliard built on this.[311] Under the Stuarts, Continental artists were influential especially the Flemish, examples from the period include Anthony van Dyck, Peter Lely, Godfrey Kneller and William Dobson.[311] The 18th century was a time of significance with the founding of the Royal Academy, a classicism based on the High Renaissance prevailed, with Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds becoming two of England's most treasured artists.[311]
In the 19th century, Constable and Turner were major landscape artists. The Norwich School continued the landscape tradition, while the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, led by artists such as Holman Hunt, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and John Everett Millais, revived the Early Renaissance style with their vivid and detailed style.[311] Prominent amongst 20th-century artists was Henry Moore, regarded as the voice of British sculpture, and of British modernism in general.[312] More recent painters include Lucian Freud, whose work Benefits Supervisor Sleeping in 2008 set a world record for sale value of a painting by a then-living artist.[313] The Royal Society of Arts is an organisation committed to the arts and culture.[314]
Literature, poetry, and philosophy
Main article: English literature
 Geoffrey Chaucer was an English author, poet and philosopher, best remembered for his unfinished frame narrative The Canterbury Tales.
Early authors such as Bede and Alcuin wrote in Latin.[315] The period of Old English literature provided the epic poem Beowulf and the secular prose of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,[316] along with Christian writings such as Judith, C dmon's Hymn and hagiographies.[315] Following the Norman conquest Latin continued amongst the educated classes, as well as an Anglo-Norman literature.
Middle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer, author of The Canterbury Tales, along with Gower, the Pearl Poet and Langland. William of Ockham and Roger Bacon, who were Franciscans, were major philosophers of the Middle Ages. Julian of Norwich, who wrote Revelations of Divine Love, was a prominent Christian mystic. With the English Renaissance literature in the Early Modern English style appeared. William Shakespeare, whose works include Hamlet, Romeo and Juliet, Macbeth, and A Midsummer Night's Dream, remains one of the most championed authors in English literature.[317]
Christopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, Philip Sydney, Thomas Kyd, John Donne, and Ben Jonson are other established authors of the Elizabethan age.[318] Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes wrote on empiricism and materialism, including scientific method and social contract.[318] Filmer wrote on the Divine Right of Kings. Marvell was the best-known poet of the Commonwealth,[319] while John Milton authored Paradise Lost during the Restoration.
This royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle, this earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, this other Eden, demi-paradise; this fortress, built by nature for herself. This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England.
William Shakespeare.[320]
Some of the most prominent philosophers of the Enlightenment were John Locke, Thomas Paine, Samuel Johnson and Jeremy Bentham. More radical elements were later countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of conservatism.[321] The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became well regarded. The English played a significant role in romanticism: Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, John Keats, Mary Shelley, Percy Bysshe Shelley, William Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures.[322]
In response to the Industrial Revolution, agrarian writers sought a way between liberty and tradition; William Cobbett, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were main exponents, while the founder of guild socialism, Arthur Penty, and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat related.[323] Empiricism continued through John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell, while Bernard Williams was involved in analytics. Authors from around the Victorian era include Charles Dickens, the Bront  sisters, Jane Austen, George Eliot, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy, H. G. Wells and Lewis Carroll.[324] Since then England has continued to produce novelists such as George Orwell, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, C. S. Lewis, Enid Blyton, Aldous Huxley, Agatha Christie, Terry Pratchett, J. R. R. Tolkien, and J. K. Rowling.[325]
Performing arts
Further information: Folk music of England
See also: Music of the United Kingdom
Thomas Tallis' "Lamentations I"
"Greensleeves"
Henry Purcell's "The Queen's Dolour (A Farewell)"
Elgar's "Pomp & Circumstance March No. 1"
Problems playing these files? See media help.
The traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to several genres prominently; mostly sea shanties, jigs, hornpipes and dance music. It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities. Ballads featuring Robin Hood, printed by Wynkyn de Worde in the 16th century, are an important artefact, as are John Playford's The Dancing Master and Robert Harley's Roxburghe Ballads collections.[326] Some of the best-known songs are Greensleeves, Pastime with Good Company, Maggie May and Spanish Ladies amongst others. Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary, Roses Are Red, Jack and Jill, London Bridge Is Falling Down, The Grand Old Duke of York, Hey Diddle Diddle and Humpty Dumpty.[327] Traditional English Christmas carols include "We Wish You a Merry Christmas", "The First Noel", "I Saw Three Ships" and "God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen".[328]
Early English composers in classical music include Renaissance artists Thomas Tallis and William Byrd, followed up by Henry Purcell from the Baroque period and Thomas Arne who was well known for his patriotic song Rule, Britannia!. German-born George Frideric Handel spent most of his composing life in London and became a national icon in Britain, creating some of the most well-known works of classical music, especially his English oratorios, The Messiah, Solomon, Water Music, and Music for the Royal Fireworks.[329] One of his four Coronation Anthems, Zadok the Priest, composed for the coronation of George II, has been performed at every subsequent British coronation, traditionally during the sovereign's anointing.
Classical music attracted much attention from 1784 with the formation of the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival, which was the longest running classical music festival of its kind until the final concerts in 1912. The English Musical Renaissance was a hypothetical development in the late 19th and early 20th century, when English composers, often those lecturing or trained at the Royal College of Music, were said to have freed themselves from foreign musical influences. There was a revival in the profile of composers from England in the 20th century led by Edward Elgar, Benjamin Britten, Frederick Delius, Gustav Holst, Ralph Vaughan Williams and others.[330] Present-day composers from England include Michael Nyman, best known for The Piano, and Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicals have achieved enormous success in the West End and worldwide.[331]
The Royal Albert Hall  is a concert hall on the northern edge of South Kensington, London. Since the hall's opening by Queen Victoria in 1871, the world's leading artists from many performance genres have appeared on its stage.The Beatles are the most commercially successful and critically acclaimed band in popular music.[332]
In popular music, many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the most influential and best-selling musicians of all time. Acts such as The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Elton John, Queen, Rod Stewart, David Bowie, The Rolling Stones and Def Leppard are among the highest-selling recording artists in the world.[333] Many musical genres have origins in (or strong associations with) England, such as British invasion, progressive rock, hard rock, Mod, glam rock, heavy metal, Britpop, indie rock, gothic rock, shoegazing, acid house, garage, trip hop, drum and bass and dubstep.[334]
Large outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular, such as Glastonbury, V Festival, and the Reading and Leeds Festivals. England was at the forefront of the illegal, free rave movement from the late 1980s, which led to pan-European culture of teknivals mirrored on the UK free festival movement and associated travelling lifestyle.[335] The Boishakhi Mela is a Bengali New Year festival celebrated by the British Bangladeshi community. It is the largest open-air Asian festival in Europe. After the Notting Hill Carnival, it is the second-largest street festival in the United Kingdom attracting over 80,000 visitors from across the country.[336]
The most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden.[337] The Proms   a season of orchestral classical concerts held primarily at the Royal Albert Hall in London   is a major cultural event in the English calendar, and takes place yearly.[337] The Royal Ballet is one of the world's foremost classical ballet companies, its reputation built on two prominent figures of 20th-century dance, prima ballerina Margot Fonteyn and choreographer Frederick Ashton. The Royal Academy of Music is the oldest conservatoire in England, founded in 1822. It received its royal charter in 1830 from King George IV.[338] England is home to numerous major orchestras such as the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the Philharmonia Orchestra, and the London Symphony Orchestra.[339]
The circus is a traditional form of entertainment in England. Chipperfield's Circus dates back more than 300 years, making it one of the oldest family circus dynasties.[340] Philip Astley is regarded as the father of the modern circus.[341] Following his invention of the circus ring in 1768, Astley's Amphitheatre opened in London in 1773.[341][342] As an equestrian master Astley had a skill for trick horse-riding, and when he added tumblers, tightrope-walkers, jugglers, performing dogs, and a clown to fill time between his own demonstrations   the modern circus was born.[343][344]
Pantomime is a British musical comedy stage production, designed for family entertainment. It is performed in theatres throughout England during the Christmas and New Year season. The art originated in the 18th century with John Weaver, a dance master and choreographer.[345] In 19th century England it acquired its present form, which includes songs, slapstick comedy and dancing, employing gender-crossing actors, combining topical humour with a story loosely based on a well-known fairy tale.[345]
Cinema
See also: Cinema of the United Kingdom
 Ridley Scott was among a group of English filmmakers, including Tony Scott, Alan Parker, Hugh Hudson and Adrian Lyne, who emerged from making 1970s UK television commercials.[346]
England (and the UK as a whole) has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema, producing some of the greatest actors, directors and motion pictures of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock, Charlie Chaplin, David Lean, Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, John Gielgud, Peter Sellers, Julie Andrews, Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Helen Mirren, Kate Winslet and Daniel Day-Lewis. Hitchcock and Lean are among the most critically acclaimed filmmakers.[347] Hitchcock's first thriller, The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog (1926), helped shape the thriller genre in film, while his 1929 film, Blackmail, is often regarded as the first British sound feature film.[348]
Major film studios in England include Pinewood, Elstree and Shepperton. Some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in England, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises (Harry Potter and James Bond).[349] Ealing Studios in London has a claim to being the oldest continuously working film studio in the world.[350] Famous for recording many motion picture film scores, the London Symphony Orchestra first performed film music in 1935.[351] The Hammer Horror films starring Christopher Lee saw the production of the first gory horror films showing blood and guts in colour.[352]
The BFI Top 100 British films includes Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979), a film regularly voted the funniest of all time by the UK public.[353] English producers are also active in international co-productions and English actors, directors and crew feature regularly in American films. The UK film council ranked David Yates, Christopher Nolan, Mike Newell, Ridley Scott and Paul Greengrass the five most commercially successful English directors since 2001.[354] Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes, Guy Ritchie and Richard Curtis. Current actors include Tom Hardy, Daniel Craig, Benedict Cumberbatch, Lena Headey, Felicity Jones, Emilia Clarke, Lashana Lynch, and Emma Watson. Acclaimed for his motion capture work, Andy Serkis opened The Imaginarium Studios in London in 2011.[355] The visual effects company Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically acclaimed special effects in modern film.[356] Many successful Hollywood films have been based on English people, stories or events. The 'English Cycle' of Disney animated films include Alice in Wonderland, The Jungle Book and Winnie the Pooh.[357]
Museums, libraries, and galleries
Further information: List of museums in England
 The Natural History Museum in London
English Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. The charity National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty holds a contrasting role. 17 of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites fall within England.[358] Some of the best-known of these are: Hadrian's Wall, Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and various others.[359]
There are many museums in England, but perhaps the most notable is London's British Museum. Its collection of more than seven million objects[360] is one of the largest and most comprehensive in the world,[361] sourced from every continent, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginning to the present. The British Library in London is the national library and is one of the world's largest research libraries, holding over 150 million items in almost all known languages and formats; including around 25 million books.[362][363] The most senior art gallery is the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square, which houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating from the mid-13th century to 1900.[364] The Tate galleries house the national collections of British and international modern art; they also host the famously controversial Turner Prize.[365]
Media
Main article: Media in the United Kingdom
The BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world.[366][367] It operates numerous television and radio stations in the UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence.[368][369] The BBC World Service is an international broadcaster owned and operated by the BBC. It is the world's largest of any kind.[370] It broadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than 40 languages.[371][372]
London dominates the media sector in England: national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although Manchester is also a significant national media centre. The UK publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around  20 billion and employs around 167,000 people.[373] National newspapers produced in England include The Times, The Guardian and the Financial Times.[374]
Magazines and journals published in England that have achieved worldwide circulation include Nature, New Scientist, The Spectator, Prospect, NME and The Economist. The Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility over media and broadcasting in England.[375]
Sport
Main article: Sport in England
 Queen Elizabeth II presenting the World Cup trophy to 1966 World Cup winning England captain Bobby Moore
England has a strong sporting heritage, and during the 19th century codified many sports that are now played around the world. Sports originating in England include association football,[376] cricket, rugby union, rugby league, tennis, boxing, badminton, squash,[377] rounders,[378] hockey, snooker, billiards, darts, table tennis, bowls, netball, thoroughbred horseracing, greyhound racing and fox hunting. It has helped the development of golf, sailing and Formula One.
Football is the most popular of these sports. The England national football team, whose home venue is Wembley Stadium, played Scotland in the first ever international football match in 1872.[379] Referred to as the "home of football" by FIFA, England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup, and won the tournament by defeating West Germany 4 2 in the final, with Geoff Hurst scoring a hat-trick.[380] With a British television audience peak of 32.30 million viewers, the final is the most watched television event ever in the UK.[381]
 Wembley Stadium, home of the England football team, has a 90,000 capacity. It is the biggest stadium in the UK.
At club level, England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, due to Sheffield F.C. founded in 1857 being the world's oldest club.[376] The Football Association is the oldest governing body in the sport, with the rules of football first drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley.[382] The FA Cup and The Football League were the first cup and league competitions respectively. In the modern day, the Premier League is the world's most-watched football league,[383] most lucrative,[384] and amongst the elite.[385]
As is the case throughout the UK, football in England is notable for the rivalries between clubs and the passion of the supporters, which includes a tradition of football chants.[386] The most successful English football team in the European Cup/UEFA Champions League is Liverpool F.C. who have won the competition on six occasions.[387] Other English success has come from Manchester United F.C., winning the competition on 3 occasions; Nottingham Forest F.C. and Chelsea F.C. on 2 occasions, Aston Villa F.C. have only won the trophy once.[388]
 England playing Australia at Lord's Cricket Ground in the 2009 Ashes series. After winning the 2019 Cricket World Cup, England became the first country to win the World Cups in football, rugby union and cricket.[389]
Cricket is generally thought to have been developed in the early medieval period among the farming and metalworking communities of the Weald.[390] The England cricket team is a composite England and Wales, team. One of the game's top rivalries is The Ashes series between England and Australia, contested since 1882. The climax of the 2005 Ashes was viewed by 7.4 million as it was available on terrestrial television.[391] England has hosted five Cricket World Cups (1975, 1979, 1983, 1999 and 2019), winning the 2019 edition in a final regarded as one of the greatest one day internationals ever played.[392] They hosted the ICC World Twenty20 in 2009, winning this format in 2010 beating rivals Australia in the final. In the domestic competition, the County Championship, Yorkshire are by far the most successful club having won the competition 32 times outright and sharing it on 1 other occasion.[393] Lord's Cricket Ground situated in London is sometimes referred to as the "Mecca of Cricket".[394]
William Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games. In 1994, then President of the IOC, Juan Antonio Samaranch, laid a wreath on Brooke's grave, and said, "I came to pay homage and tribute to Dr Brookes, who really was the founder of the modern Olympic Games".[395] London has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times, in 1908, 1948, and 2012. England competes in the Commonwealth Games, held every four years. Sport England is the governing body responsible for distributing funds and providing strategic guidance for sporting activity in England. The Minister for Sport and Civil Society has responsibility for sport in England.[396]
 The England rugby union team during their victory parade after winning the 2003 Rugby World Cup
Rugby union originated in Rugby School, Warwickshire in the early 19th century.[397] The England rugby union team won the 2003 Rugby World Cup, with Jonny Wilkinson scoring the winning drop goal in the last minute of extra time against Australia. England was one of the host nations of the competition in the 1991 Rugby World Cup and also hosted the 2015 Rugby World Cup.[398] The top level of club participation is the English Premiership. Leicester Tigers, London Wasps, Bath Rugby and Northampton Saints have had success in the Europe-wide Heineken Cup.
Rugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895. Since 2008, the England national rugby league team has been a full test nation in lieu of the Great Britain national rugby league team, which won three World Cups but is now retired. Club sides play in Super League, the present-day embodiment of the Rugby Football League Championship. Rugby League is most popular among towns in the northern English counties of Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cumbria.[399] The vast majority of English clubs in Super League are based in the north of England. Some of the most successful clubs include Wigan Warriors, Hull F.C. St. Helens, Leeds Rhinos and Huddersfield Giants; the former three have all won the World Club Challenge previously.
Golf has been prominent in England; due in part to its cultural and geographical ties to Scotland, the home of Golf.[400] There are both professional tours for men and women, in two main tours: the PGA and the European Tour. England has produced grand slam winners: Cyril Walker, Tony Jacklin, Nick Faldo, and Justin Rose in the men's and Laura Davies, Alison Nicholas, and Karen Stupples in the women's. The world's oldest golf tournament, and golf's first major is The Open Championship, played both in England and Scotland. The biennial golf competition, the Ryder Cup, is named after English businessman Samuel Ryder who sponsored the event and donated the trophy.[401] Nick Faldo is the most successful Ryder Cup player ever, having won the most points (25) of any player on either the European or US teams.[402]
 Centre Court at Wimbledon. First played in 1877, the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world.[403]
Tennis was created in Birmingham in the late 19th century, and the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely considered the most prestigious.[404][405] Wimbledon is a tournament that has a major place in the British cultural calendar. Fred Perry was the last Englishman to win Wimbledon in 1936. He was the first player to win all four Grand Slam singles titles[406] and helped lead the Great Britain team to four Davis Cup wins. English women who have won Wimbledon include: Ann Haydon Jones in 1969 and Virginia Wade in 1977.
In boxing, under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules, England has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the governing bodies. World champions include Bob Fitzsimmons, Ted "Kid" Lewis, Randolph Turpin, Nigel Benn, Chris Eubank, Frank Bruno, Lennox Lewis, Ricky Hatton, Naseem Hamed, Amir Khan, Carl Froch, and David Haye.[407] In women's boxing, Nicola Adams became the world's first woman to win an Olympic boxing gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Originating in 17th and 18th-century England, the thoroughbred is a horse breed best known for its use in horse racing. The National Hunt horse race the Grand National, is held annually at Aintree Racecourse in early April. It is the most watched horse race in the UK, attracting casual observers, and three-time winner Red Rum is the most successful racehorse in the event's history.[408] Red Rum is also the best-known racehorse in the country.[409]
 Former Formula One world champion Nigel Mansell driving at Silverstone in 1990. The circuit hosted the first ever Formula One race in 1950.
The 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly created Formula One World Championship.[410] Since then, England has produced some of the greatest drivers in the sport, including; John Surtees, Stirling Moss, Graham Hill (only driver to have won the Triple Crown), Nigel Mansell (only man to hold F1 and IndyCar titles at the same time), Damon Hill, Lewis Hamilton and Jenson Button.[411] It has manufactured some of the most technically advanced racing cars, and many of today's racing companies choose England as their base of operations for its engineering knowledge and organisation. McLaren Automotive, Williams F1, Team Lotus, Honda, Brawn GP, Benetton, Renault, and Red Bull Racing are all, or have been, located in the south of England. England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle racing, the premier championship of motorcycle road racing, and produced several World Champions across all the various class of motorcycle: Mike Hailwood, John Surtees, Phil Read, Geoff Duke, and Barry Sheene.
 Mo Farah is the most successful British track athlete in modern Olympic Games history, winning the 5000 m and 10,000 m events at two Olympic Games.
Darts is a widely popular sport in England; a professional competitive sport, darts is a traditional pub game. The sport is governed by the World Darts Federation, one of its member organisations is the British Darts Organisation (BDO), which annually stages the BDO World Darts Championship, the other being the Professional Darts Corporation (PDC), which runs its own world championship at Alexandra Palace in London. Phil Taylor is widely regarded as the best darts player of all time, having won 187 professional tournaments, and a record 16 World Championships.[412][413] Trina Gulliver is the ten-time Women's World Professional Darts Champion of the British Darts Organisation. Another popular sport commonly associated with pub games is Snooker, and England has produced several world champions, including Steve Davis and Ronnie O'Sullivan.
The English are keen sailors and enjoy competitive sailing; founding and winning some of the world's most famous and respected international competitive tournaments across the various race formats, including the match race, a regatta, and the America's Cup. England has produced some of the world's greatest sailors, including Francis Chichester, Herbert Hasler, John Ridgway, Robin Knox-Johnston, Ellen MacArthur, Mike Golding, Paul Goodison, and the most successful Olympic sailor ever Ben Ainslie.[414]
National symbols
Main article: National symbols of England
 The Royal Arms of England
The St George's Cross has been the national flag of England since the 13th century. Originally the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa. The English monarch paid a tribute to the Doge of Genoa from 1190 onwards so that English ships could fly the flag as a means of protection when entering the Mediterranean.
A red cross was a symbol for many Crusaders in the 12th and 13th centuries. It became associated with Saint George, along with countries and cities, which claimed him as their patron saint and used his cross as a banner.[415] Since 1606 the St George's Cross has formed part of the design of the Union Flag, a Pan-British flag designed by King James I.[259] During the English Civil War and Interregnum, the New Model Army's standards and the Commonwealth's Great Seal both incorporated the flag of Saint George.[416][417]
 The Tudor rose, England's national floral emblem
There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and unofficial, including the Tudor rose, the nation's floral emblem, and the Three Lions featured on the Royal Arms of England. The Tudor rose was adopted as a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a symbol of peace.[418] It is a syncretic symbol in that it merged the white rose of the Yorkists and the red rose of the Lancastrians cadet branches of the Plantagenets who went to war over control of the nation. It is also known as the Rose of England.[419] The oak tree is a symbol of England, representing strength and endurance. The Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate the escape of King Charles II from the grasp of the parliamentarians after his father's execution: he hid in an oak tree to avoid detection before safely reaching exile.
The Royal Arms of England, a national coat of arms featuring three lions, originated with its adoption by Richard the Lionheart in 1198. It is blazoned as gules, three lions passant guardant or and it provides one of the most prominent symbols of England; it is similar to the traditional arms of Normandy. England does not have an official designated national anthem, as the United Kingdom as a whole has God Save the King. However, the following are often considered unofficial English national anthems:
Jerusalem, Land of Hope and Glory (used for England during the 2002 Commonwealth Games),[420] and I Vow to Thee, My Country. England's National Day is 23 April which is Saint George's Day: Saint George is the patron saint of England.[421]
See also
England portalUnited Kingdom portal
Outline of England
Outline of the United Kingdom
Notes
^ As Roger Scruton explains, "The Reformation must not be confused with the changes introduced into the Church of England during the "Reformation Parliament" of 1529 36, which were of a political rather than a religious nature, designed to unite the secular and religious sources of authority within a single sovereign power: the Anglican Church did not make substantial change in doctrine until later."[51]
^ Figure of 550,000 military deaths is for England and Wales.[77]
^ For instance, in 1980 around 50 million Americans claimed English ancestry.[221] In Canada there are around 6.5 million Canadians who claim English ancestry.[222] Around 70% of Australians in 1999 denoted their origins as Anglo-Celtic, a category which includes all peoples from Great Britain and Ireland.[223] Chileans of English descent are somewhat of an anomaly in that Chile itself was never part of the British Empire, but today there are around 420,000 people of English origins living there.[224]
^ a b People who strictly identified as "Pagan". Other Pagan paths, such as Wicca or Druidism, have not been included in this number.[262]
^ People who strictly identified as "Wiccan". Other Pagan paths, such as Druidism, and general "Pagan" have not been included in this number.[262]
^ Students attending English universities now have to pay tuition fees towards the cost of their education, as do English students who choose to attend university in Scotland. Scottish students attending Scottish universities have their fees paid by the devolved Scottish Parliament.[90]
^ While people such as Norman Foster and Richard Rogers represent the modernist movement, Prince Charles since the 1980s has voiced strong views against it in favour of traditional architecture and put his ideas into practice at his Poundbury development in Dorset.[286] Architects like Raymond Erith, Francis Johnson and Quinlan Terry continued to practise in the classical style.
^ These tales may have come to prominence, at least in part, as an attempt by the Norman ruling elite to legitimise their rule of the British Isles, finding Anglo-Saxon history ill-suited to the task during an era when members of the deposed House of Wessex, especially Edgar the  theling and his nephews of the Scottish House of Dunkeld, were still active in the isles.[295][297] Also Michael Wood explains; "Over the centuries the figure of Arthur became a symbol of British history   a way of explaining the matter of Britain, the relationship between the Saxons and the Celts, and a way of exorcising ghosts and healing the wounds of the past."[294]
References
^ Region and Country Profiles, Key Statistics and Profiles, October 2013, ONS. Retrieved 9 August 2015.
^ "Phase one - Census 2021 first results". Census 2021.
^ Fenton, Trevor. "Regional gross value added (balanced) per head and income components". www.ons.gov.uk.
^ Office for National Statistics (United Kingdom). "The Countries of the UK". statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ "England  Culture". britainusa.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ "Country profile: United Kingdom". BBC News. news.bbc.co.uk. 26 October 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ "Industrial Revolution". Ace.mmu.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 27 April 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ "2022-2023 Best Global Universities Rankings", U.S. News & World Report
^ Park, Neil (24 June 2020). "Population estimates for UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland". www.ons.gov.uk. Office for National Statistics (United Kingdom).
^ a b 2011 Census   Population and household estimates for England and Wales, March 2011. Accessed 31 May 2013.
^ Burns, William E. A Brief History of Great Britain. p. xxi.; "Acts of Union 1707". parliament.uk. Retrieved 27 January 2011.
^ Phelan, Kate (4 October 2016). "The Partition Of Ireland: A Short History". Culture Trip. Retrieved 20 May 2019.
^ "England". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 21 July 2010.
^ Ripley 1869, p. 570.
^ Molyneaux 2015, pp. 6 7.
^ "Germania". Tacitus. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Angle". Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved 5 September 2009.[dead link]
^ Crystal 2004, pp. 26 27
^ Forbes, John (1848). The Principles of Gaelic Grammar. Edinburgh: Oliver, Boyd and Tweeddale.
^ Foster 1988, p. 9.
^ "500,000 BC  Boxgrove". Current Archaeology. Current Publishing. 24 May 2007. Retrieved 20 December 2010.
^ "Palaeolithic Archaeology Teaching Resource Box" (PDF). Palaeolithic Rivers of South-West Britain Project(2006). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2010.; "Chalk east". A Geo East Project. Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2010.
^ Oppenheimer 2006, p. 173.
^ "Tertiary Rivers: Tectonic and structural background". University of Cambridge. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ "Function and significance of Bell Beaker pottery according to data from residue analyses". Retrieved 21 December 2010.
^ Reid, Struan (1994). Inventions and Trade. P.8. ISBN 978-0-921921-30-1. Retrieved 23 December 2010.
^ Burke, Jason (2 December 2000). "Dig uncovers Boudicca's brutal streak". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 22 October 2003. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Cornelius Tacitus, The Annals". Alfred John Church, William Jackson Brudribh, Ed. Retrieved 22 December 2010.
^ Goldsworthy, Adrian (2016). Pax Romana: War, Peace and Conquest in the Roman World. Hachette UK. p. 276.
^ Bedoyere, Guy. "Architecture in Roman Britain". Heritage Key. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 23 December 2010.; Philip, Robert (1860). The History of Progress in Great Britain. Vol. 2. Retrieved 23 December 2010.; Rees, Bob; Shute, Paul; Kelly, Nigel (9 January 2003). Medicine through time. Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-435-30841-4. Retrieved 24 December 2010.
^ Rankov 1994, p. 16.
^ Wright 2008, p. 143.
^ a b James, Edward. "Overview: Anglo-Saxons, 410 to 800". BBC. Retrieved 3 December 2010.
^ a b Lehane, Brendan (1968). Early Christian Christianity. John Murray.
^ Dark, Ken R. (2003). "Large-scale population movements into and from Britain south of Hadrian's Wall in the fourth to sixth centuries AD" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2020.; Martin, Toby F. (2015). The Cruciform Brooch and Anglo-Saxon England. Boydell and Brewer Press. pp. 174 178.; Coates, Richard. "Celtic whispers: revisiting the problems of the relation between Brittonic and Old English".; Kortlandt, Frederik (2018). "Relative Chronology" (PDF).; Fox, Bethany. "The P-Celtic Place Names of North-East England and South-East Scotland".
^ H rke, Heinrich (2011). "Anglo-Saxon Immigration and Ethnogenesis". Medieval Archaeology. 55 (1): 1 28. doi:10.1179/174581711X13103897378311. S2CID 162331501.
^ "The Christian Tradition". PicturesofEngland.com. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Kirby 2000, p. 4.
^ Lyon 1960, p. 23.
^ "Overview: The Normans, 1066 1154". BBC. Retrieved 3 December 2010.
^ Crouch 2006, pp. 2 4
^ "Norman invasion word impact study". BBC News. 20 February 2008. Retrieved 3 December 2010.
^ a b Bartlett 1999, p. 124.
^ "Edward I (r. 1272 1307)". Royal.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 21 September 2009.
^ Fowler 1967, p. 208.
^ Ziegler 2003, p. 230; Goldberg 1996, p. 4.
^ Crofton 2007, p. 111.
^ "Richard III (r. 1483 1485)". Royal.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 10 July 2008. Retrieved 21 September 2009.
^ Hay, Denys (1988). Renaissance essays. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-907628-96-5. Retrieved 26 December 2010.
^ "Royal Navy History, Tudor Period and the Birth of a Regular Navy". Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 24 December 2010.; Smith, Goldwin. England Under the Tudors. p. 176. ISBN 978-1-60620-939-4. Retrieved 26 December 2010.
^ Scruton 1982, p. 470.
^ From the 1944 Clark lectures by C. S. Lewis; Lewis, English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (Oxford, 1954) p. 1, OCLC 256072
^ "Tudor Parliaments". Spartacus Educational. Retrieved 4 April 2021.
^ Ordahl, Karen (25 February 2007). Roanak:the abandoned colony. Rowman & Littlefield publishers Inc. ISBN 978-0-7425-5263-0. Retrieved 24 December 2010.
^ a b Colley 1992, p. 12.; "Making the Act of Union". Parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 9 June 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Hay, Denys. "The term "Great Britain" in the Middle Ages" (PDF). ads.ahds.ac.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2009.
^ "Oliver Cromwell (English statesman)". Encyclop dia Britannica. britannica.com. 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2009.
^ Lyndsey Bakewell, "Changing scenes and flying machines: re-examination of spectacle and the spectacular in Restoration theatre, 1660 1714" (PhD. Diss. Loughborough University, 2016) online.
^ Adler, Philip J.; Pouwels, Randall L. (27 November 2007). World Civilization. p. 340. ISBN 978-0-495-50262-3. Retrieved 24 December 2010.
^ "Democracy Live: Black Rod". BBC. Retrieved 6 August 2008; Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Black Rod" . Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
^ "London's Burning: The Great Fire". BBC News. Retrieved 25 September 2009.
^ "The History Press | The Stuarts". www.thehistorypress.co.uk. Retrieved 11 April 2021.
^ a b "The first Parliament of Great Britain". Parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Gallagher 2006, p. 14.
^ Hudson, Pat. "The Workshop of the World". BBC. Retrieved 10 December 2010.
^ a b Office for National Statistics 2000, p. 5; McNeil & Nevell 2000, p. 4.
^ "Department of History   Napoleonic Wars". 28 July 2014. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 8 April 2021.
^ McNeil & Nevell 2000, p. 9.; Birmingham City Council. "Heritage". visitbirmingham.com. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2009.
^ "Manchester   the first industrial city". Entry on Sciencemuseum website. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
^ "Regency | British Architectural Dates and Styles | Property | UK | Mayfair Office". www.mayfairoffice.co.uk. Retrieved 8 April 2021.
^ Bennet, Geoffrey (2004). The Battle of Trafalgar. England: Pen & Sword Books Limited, CPI UK, South Yorkshire.
^ Colley 1992, p. 1.
^ Haggard, Robert F. (2001). The persistence of Victorian liberalism:The Politics of Social Reform in Britain, 1870 1900. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-313-31305-9. Retrieved 26 December 2010.
^ Atterbury, Paul (17 February 2011). "Victorian Technology". BBC History. Retrieved 13 October 2020.
^ Crawford, Elizabeth. "Women: From Abolition to the Vote". BBC. Retrieved 10 December 2010.
^ "Manor House. Edwardian Life | PBS". www.pbs.org.
^ Cox 1970, p. 180.
^ Golley, John (10 August 1996). "Obituaries: Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle". The Independent. London. Retrieved 2 December 2010.
^ Clark, Steed & Marshall 1973, p. 1; Wilson & Game 2002, p. 55.
^ Gallagher 2006, pp. 10 11.
^ a b Reitan 2003, p. 50.
^ Keating, Michael (1 January 1998). "Reforging the Union: Devolution and Constitutional Change in the United Kingdom". Publius: The Journal of Federalism. 28 (1): 217. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.pubjof.a029948.
^ "The coming of the Tudors and the Act of Union". BBC Wales. BBC News. 2009. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ Kenny, English & Hayton 2008, p. 3; Ward 2004, p. 180.
^ a b c Sherman, Jill; Andrew Norfolk (5 November 2004). "Prescott's dream in tatters as North East rejects assembly". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 25 May 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "United Kingdom" CIA The World Factbook]. Retrieved 13 April 2021
^ Cabinet Office (26 March 2009). "Devolution in the United Kingdom". cabinetoffice.gov.uk. Retrieved 16 August 2009.
^ "Lists of MPs". Parliament.uk. Retrieved 21 May 2009.
^ "West Lothian question". BBC News. 31 October 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b "Are Scottish people better off?". MSN Money. Archived from the original on 17 April 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "English nationalism "threat to UK"". BBC News. 9 January 2000. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Davidson, Lorraine (3 June 2008). "Gordon Brown pressed on English parliament". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Grice, Andrew (1 July 2008). "English votes for English laws' plan by Tories". The Independent. London. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Common Law". The People's Law Dictionary. ALM Media Properties. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "The Common Law in the British Empire". H-net.msu.edu. 19 October 2000. Retrieved 20 August 2011.
^ Fafinski 2007, p. 60.
^ Fafinski 2007, p. 127.
^ "Constitutional reform: A Supreme Court for the United Kingdom" (PDF). DCA.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Fafinski 2007, p. 67.
^ "Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice   GOV.UK".
^ "Crime over the last 25 years" (PDF). HomeOffice.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "New record high prison population". BBC News. 8 February 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Offender management statistics quarterly: April to June 2022". GOV.UK. Retrieved 14 November 2022.
^ Cooper, Hilary (29 March 2011). "Tiers shed as regional government offices disappear". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 16 June 2011.
^ Department for Communities and Local Government. "Prosperous Places" (PDF). communities.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b Encyclop dia Britannica 2002, p. 100
^ Redcliffe-Maud & Wood 1974.
^ a b Singh 2009, p. 53.
^ Axford 2002, p. 315.
^ "English Channel". Encyclop dia Britannica. britannica.com. 2009. Retrieved 15 August 2009.
^ "History". EuroTunnel.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "The River Severn". BBC. Retrieved 5 December 2010.
^ "Severn Bore and Trent Aegir". Environment Agency. Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2010.
^ "River Thames and London (England)". London Evening Standard. London. Retrieved 17 August 2009.[dead link]
^ a b "North West England & Isle of Man: climate". Met Office. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 5 December 2010.
^ World Regional Geography. Joseph J. Hobbs. 13 March 2008. ISBN 978-0-495-38950-7. Retrieved 6 December 2017.
^ "Pennines". Smmit Post. Retrieved 8 September 2009.
^ "National Parks  About us". nationalparks.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 27 October 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2010.
^ a b c d "What is the Climate like in Britain?". Woodlands Kent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Record high temperatures verified". Met Office. Retrieved 22 March 2023.
^ "English Climate". MetOffice.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2008.
^ "It's official   the Wren is our commonest bird". BTO. 4 February 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2022.
^ Historic England (2015). "Richmond Park  (397979)". Research records (formerly PastScape). Retrieved 3 May 2015.
^ "Natural History Museum". Retrieved 7 July 2020.
^ "Natural England: Designated sites".
^ "Environment Agency". GOV.UK. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ "Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ "Mammals in Britain's cities: A spotter's guide   in pictures | Urban wildlife". The Guardian. 17 May 2012.
^ "BBC - Science & Nature - Pets - Rabbits". Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 18 April 2012.; "BBC Nature   Hare videos, news and facts". Bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018.
^ "All NNR condition summary". Natural England. 25 August 2021.
^ a b c d "2011 Census   Built-up areas". ONS. Retrieved 5 February 2014.
^ O'Brian, Harriet (24 November 2007). "The Complete Guide To: Cathedral cities in the UK". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 12 August 2009. Retrieved 8 September 2009.
^ Crespo, Juan Ignacio (September 2008). "London vs. New York, 2005 06". Cinco Dias. Retrieved 5 September 2009.; "Global Financial Centres Index, 2009 03" (PDF). City of London Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Fenton, Trevor (12 December 2018). Regional economic activity by gross value added (balanced), UK: 1998 to 2017 (PDF) (Report). Office for National Statistics.
^ "The Welfare State  Never Ending Reform". BBC News. Retrieved 17 September 2009.
^ Brignall, Miles (19 March 2014). "Personal allowance: Osborne's budget has been far from generous". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 June 2014.
^ Office for National Statistics. "Regional Accounts". statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2009.
^ "CIA   The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 27 April 2013.
^ "Financial Centre". London.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ City of London Policy; Resources Committee. "The Global Financial Centres Index" (PDF). cityoflondon.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009. {{cite web}}: |author= has generic name (help)
^ "The Bank's relationship with Parliament". BankofEngland.co.uk. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Monetary Policy Committee". BankofEngland.co.uk. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "England Exports". EconomyWatch.com. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "From the Margins to the Mainstream  Government unveils new action plan for the creative industries". DCMS. 9 March 2007. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
^ Tovey, Alan. "New aerospace technologies to get  365 million funding". Retrieved 11 June 2017.
^ "Born to fly: the real value of UK aerospace manufacture". The Telegraph. 30 September 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.
^ a b c d "Reasons to be cheerful about the UK aerospace sector". theengineer.co.uk. 14 October 2013. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. Retrieved 24 August 2014.
^ "About   Rolls-Royce". Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 7 October 2014.
^ "The Pharmaceutical sector in the UK". Department for Business, Innovation & Skills. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2015.; "Ministerial Industry Strategy Group  Pharmaceutical Industry: Competitiveness and Performance Indicators" (PDF). Department of Health. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
^ "World Guide  England  Economy Overview". World Guide. Intute. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ "Economy of the United Kingdom" (PDF). PTeducation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 November 2009. Retrieved 8 October 2009.
^ "Coal | Mines and quarries | MineralsUK". MineralsUK. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
^ "Metric system was British". BBC News. 13 July 2007. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Gascoin, J. "A reappraisal of the role of the universities in the Scientific Revolution", in Lindberg, David C. and Westman, Robert S., eds (1990), Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge University Press. p. 248. ISBN 0-521-34804-8.
^ Spratt, H. P. (1958). "Isambard Kingdom Brunel". Nature. 181 (4626): 1754 1755. Bibcode:1958Natur.181.1754S. doi:10.1038/1811754a0. S2CID 4255226.
^ Oakes 2002, p. 214
^ Ronald Shillingford (2010). "The History of the World's Greatest- Entrepreneurs: Biographies of Success". p. 64 69
^ Saunders 1982, p. 13; White 1885, p. 335; Levine 1960, p. 183
^ "Information on Royal Charters | Royal Society". royalsociety.org. Retrieved 9 April 2021.
^ Wohleber, Curt (Spring 2006). "The Vacuum Cleaner". Invention & Technology Magazine. American Heritage Publishing. Archived from the original on 13 March 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010.
^ "English Inventors and Inventions". English-Crafts.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b "The formal title as adopted in the royal charter" (PDF). royalsociety.org.
^ Hunter, Michael. "Royal Society". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
^ "Welcome to the Royal Society | Royal Society". royalsociety.org. Retrieved 9 April 2021.
^ Syfret (1948) p. 75
^ a b Syfret (1948) p. 78
^ "London Royal Society". University of St Andrews. Archived from the original on 14 April 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2009.
^ Castells, M.; Hall, P.; Hall, P.G. (2004). Technopoles of the World: the Making of Twenty-First-Century Industrial Complexes. London: Routledge. pp. 98 100. ISBN 0-415-10015-1.
^ "Knowledge, networks and nations: scientific collaborations in the twenty-first century" (PDF). Royal Society. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2011.
^ "Department for Science, Innovation and Technology". GOV.UK. Retrieved 12 February 2023.
^ a b c UK Parliament 2007, p. 175
^ a b White 2002, p. 63.
^ "Home page | Office of Rail and Road". www.orr.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2021.
^ "27 September 1825  Opening of the Stockton and Darlington Railway". The Stockton and Darlington Railway. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "Crossrail's giant tunnelling machines unveiled". BBC News. 2 January 2012.
^ "HS2: When will the line open and how much will it cost?". BBC. 11 February 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2020.
^ "Delta Expects New Slots To Foster Growth At Heathrow Airport". The Wall Street Journal. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 23 March 2011.
^ Misachi, John (25 April 2017). "The Busiest Airports In The United Kingdom By Passenger Traffic". WorldAtlas.
^ a b c Else 2007, p. 781.
^ "BBC   Weather Centre   Climate Change   Wind Power". bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 9 June 2015.
^ a b "UK Renewable Energy Roadmap Crown copyright, July 2011" (PDF).; "RenewableUK News website article". Archived from the original on 9 May 2015.
^ "Energy consumption in the UK (2015);" (PDF). UK Department of Energy & Climate Change. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2015.
^ "Energy use (kg of oil equivalent per capita) | Data | Table". Data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "Gridwatch". Gridwatch. Retrieved 26 December 2015.
^ "UK Energy Statistics, 2014 & Q4 2014" (PDF).
^ "Record year for wind energy   Government releases official figures". 29 March 2018. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 18 April 2018.
^ "UK Renewables Q3 2019" (PDF).
^ "The world's biggest offshore wind farm is now fully operational". CNBC. Retrieved 13 April 2023.
^ "What is the 2008 Climate Change Act?". Grantham Research Institute on climate change and the environment. Retrieved 1 April 2021.
^ Proctor, Darrell (24 November 2020). "UK Undergoing "Remarkable Shift" in Power Generation". POWER Magazine. Retrieved 11 April 2021.
^ "Department for Energy Security & Net Zero   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ "Minister of State (Minister for Business, Energy and Clean Growth)   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
^ "2020 EPI Results". Environmental Performance Index. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
^ "UK net zero target". Institute for Government. 20 April 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
^ "English Heritage: About..." Retrieved 13 July 2020.
^ "UNESCO World Heritage Sites". Retrieved 13 July 2020.
^ "Hadrian's Wall: A horde of ancient treasures make for a compelling new Cumbrian exhibition". The Independent. 8 November 2016
^ "Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport   GOV.UK".
^ "Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Arts, Heritage and Tourism   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 29 January 2020.
^ "A review of research and literature on museums and libraries" (PDF). Arts Council. September 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2013.
^ "Ten years of free museums". 1 December 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2020.
^ "These Are the World's Most Popular City Destinations in 2019". Bloomberg.com. 3 December 2019. Retrieved 3 December 2019.; "Top 100 City Destinations: 2019 Edition". Euromonitor International. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
^ "The UK is the world's global financial centre". www.theglobalcity.uk. Retrieved 10 April 2021.
^ "BBC History on William Beveridge". BBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "NHS Expenditure in England" (PDF). House of Commons Library. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 April 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "NHS costs and exemptions". Department of Health. Retrieved 5 September 2009.[dead link]
^ "Budget 2008, Chapter C" (PDF). HM Treasury. 3 March 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Private sector role in NHS". BBC News. 30 June 2006. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "The UK has much to fear from a US trade agreement". www.newstatesman.com. 3 June 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2019.
^ "US takes aim at the UK's National Health Service". POLITICO. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2019.
^ a b Office for National Statistics. "Life expectancy". statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 May 2009. Retrieved 20 July 2009.
^ Office for National Statistics (8 August 2013). "Population estimates for UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland  current datasets". statistics.gov.uk. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. "World Population Prospects: Analytical Report for the 2004". United Nations. Archived from the original on 7 August 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b c d e f Office for National Statistics (2011). "Ethnicity and National Identity in England and Wales 2011". Statistics.gov.uk. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ Oppenheimer 2006, p. 378.
^ "British and Irish, descendant of the Basques?". Eitb24.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 5 September 2009.; Oppenheimer, Stephen (10 October 2006a). "What does being British mean? Ask the Spanish". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 15 July 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Wade, Nicholas (6 March 2007). "A United Kingdom? Maybe". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 August 2009.; Thomas, M.G.; Stumpf, M.P.; H rke, H. (2006). "Evidence for an apartheid-like social structure in early Anglo-Saxon England". Proceedings: Biological Sciences. 273 (1601): 2651 7. doi:10.1098/rspb.2006.3627. PMC 1635457. PMID 17002951.
^ "Roman Britons after 410". Britarch.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 22 May 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Cameron, Keith (March 1994). Anglo-Saxon Origins: The Reality of the Myth. Malcolm Todd. ISBN 978-1-871516-85-2. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Legacy of the Vikings". BBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Shifting Identities  statistical data on ethnic identities in the US". Bnet. 2001. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2009.
^ "Ethnic origins, 2006 counts, for Canada, provinces and territories". Statistics Canada. 2 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009. Retrieved 29 July 2009.
^ Centre for Population and Urban Research, Monash University. "Australian Population: Ethnic Origins" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2009.
^ "Inmigraci n brit nica en Chile". Galeon.com. Archived from the original on 22 August 2009. Retrieved 29 July 2009.
^ Burke, Jason (9 October 2005). "An Englishman's home is his casa as thousands go south". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 September 2009.; Travis, Alan; Sarah Knapton (16 November 2007). "Record numbers leave the country for life abroad". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 8 August 2009.
^ University of Wisconsin. "Medieval English society". Archived from the original on 25 October 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
^ "Chapter 1   The UK population: past, present and future" (PDF). Focus on People and Migration (PDF) (Report). Office for National Statistics. 7 December 2005. Retrieved 16 February 2017.
^ "One in four Britons claim Irish roots". BBC News. 16 March 2001. Retrieved 26 November 2010.
^ a b c d "British Immigration Map Revealed". BBC News. 7 September 2005. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b Paton, Graeme (1 October 2007). "One fifth of children from ethnic minorities". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
^ Shepherd, Jessica (22 June 2011). "Almost a quarter of state school pupils are from an ethnic minority". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 17 January 2014.
^ Leppard, David (10 April 2005). "Immigration rise increases segregation in British cities". The Times. London. Retrieved 8 August 2009.
^ "Immigration debate hots up in England". The Independent News Service. 26 November 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
^ Milland, Gabriel (23 July 2009). "80% say cap immigration". Daily Express. London. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ National Population Projections: 2014-based Statistical Bulletin (Report). Office for National Statistics. 29 October 2015.
^ "Cornish people formally declared a national minority along with Scots, Welsh and Irish". The Independent. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ QS204EW   Main language, Office for National Statistics 2011 Census. Retrieved 21 July 2015.
^ "QS205EW   Proficiency in English". Office for National Statistics 2011 census. Retrieved 20 July 2015. Out of the 51,005,610 residents of England over the age of three, 50,161,765 (98%) can speak English "well" or "very well"
^ Arlotto 1971, p. 108.
^ Green 2003, p. 13.
^ Mujica, Mauro E. (19 June 2003). "English: Not America's Language?". The Globalist. Washington DC. Archived from the original on 17 January 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ "English language history". Yaelf. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Government Offices for the English Regions. "Cornish language". gos.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2009.; "The Cornish Language Development Project  Evaluation  Final Report, page 20". Hywel Evans, Aric Lacoste / ERS. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "South West  Cornish Language". Government Office South West. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2009.
^ "On being a Cornish "Celt": changing Celtic heritage and traditions" (PDF). University of Exeter. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ Dugan, Emily (6 September 2009). "The Cornish: They revolted in 1497, now they're at it again". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2009.; "Cornish in Schools". Cornish Language Partnership. 2009. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "Transactions of the Woolhope Naturalists' Field Club, 1886 1889". Woolhope Naturalists' Field Club. p. 137.
^ Jones, Mark Ellis (1999). "Little Wales beoynd England: the struggle of Selattyn, a Welsh parish in Shropshire". Journal of the National Library of Wales. 31 (1): 132 133.
^ Lipsett, Anthea (26 June 2008). "Number of primaries teaching foreign languages doubles". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 23 September 2009.
^ Booth, Robert (30 January 2013). "Polish becomes England's second language". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 January 2013.
^ "Table KS209EW 2011 Census: Religion, local authorities in England and Wales". Office for National Statistics. 11 December 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2017.
^ "Church of England". BBC. Retrieved 4 December 2010.
^ "In depth history of the Church of England". Church of England. Retrieved 25 January 2017. The religious settlement that eventually emerged in the reign of Elizabeth gave the Church of England the distinctive identity that it has retained to this day. It resulted in a Church that consciously retained a large amount of continuity with the Church of the Patristic and Medieval periods in terms of its use of the catholic creeds, its pattern of ministry, its buildings and aspects of its liturgy, but which also embodied Protestant insights in its theology and in the overall shape of its liturgical practice. The way that this is often expressed is by saying that the Church of England is both 'catholic and reformed.'
^ "Global Anglicanism at a Crossroads". PewResearch.org. 19 June 2008. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "People here "must obey the laws of the land"". The Daily Telegraph. London. 9 February 2008. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "The Methodist Church". BBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "AN INDEPENDENT ACADEMIC STUDY ON CORNISH" (PDF). p. 8. Retrieved 26 December 2010.
^ "Cambridge History of Christianity". Hugh McLeod. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b "United Kingdom  History of the Flag". FlagSpot.net. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b "From Expulsion (1290) to Readmission (1656): Jews and England" (PDF). Goldsmiths.ac.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ a b c Office for National Statistics. "Religion". Statistics.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 7 July 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b c "2011 ONS results". Retrieved 28 October 2017.
^ Gearon 2002, p. 246.
^ West 2003, p. 28.
^ "Secretary of State for Education   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk.
^ "National Curriculum". Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ Pike, Naomi (11 September 2018). "Don't Hate On School Uniform, It Matters So Much More Than You Think". Vogue. Cond  Nast. Retrieved 11 October 2020. The SA estimates that over 90 per cent of British schools have an uniform of some entity
^ "School uniform". gov.uk. Retrieved 15 February 2020.
^ "OECD: PISA 2018" (PDF).
^ "Independent Schools in the United Kingdom". Encarta. encarta.msn.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2009.
^ Gearon 2002, p. 102.
^ Watson, Judith; Church, Andrew (2009). "The Social Effects of Travel to Learn Patterns   A Case Study of 16-19 Year Olds in London". Local Economy: The Journal of the Local Economy Policy Unit. 24 (5): 389 414. doi:10.1080/02690940903166971. S2CID 145187656.
^ United Kingdom Parliamen. "Innovation, Universities, Science and Skills Committee Contents". publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 16 September 2009.
^ a b "The Frameworks for Higher Education Qualifications of UK Degree-Awarding Bodies" (PDF). November 2014. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016.
^ "QS World University Rankings 2023 | Top Universities". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. February 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2023.
^ Hoyle, Ben (23 September 2007). "The Sunday Times Good University Guide 2007  Profile for London School of Economics". The Times. London. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
^ "FT Global MBA Rankings". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 4 May 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
^ Webster 1937, p. 383.
^ Lowe 1971, p. 317.
^ "The Prehistoric Sites of Great Britain". Stone-Circles.org.uk. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b c "Ancient Roman architecture in England and Wales". Castles.me.uk. Archived from the original on 12 December 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Colgrave 1985, p. 326.
^ Pevsner 1942, p. 14.
^ a b Atkinson 2008, p. 189.
^ Downes 2007, p. 17.
^ "Architects to hear Prince appeal". BBC News. 12 May 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.
^ "The history of the house at Stourhead". National Trust. Retrieved 10 April 2021.
^ a b "Gardens through time". English Heritage. Retrieved 10 April 2021.
^ Lucia Impelluso, Jardins, potagers et labyrinthes, Mondatori Electra, Milan
^ "Gardens & parks". National Trust. Retrieved 10 April 2021.
^ "RHS Chelsea Flower Show". www.rhs.org.uk.
^ Keary 1882, p. 50.
^ Pollard 2004, p. 272.
^ a b Wood, Michael. "King Arthur, "Once and Future King"". BBC News. Retrieved 16 September 2009.
^ a b c Higham 2002, p. 25.
^ Koch 2006, p. 732.
^ Lacy 1986, p. 649.
^ Briggs 2004, p. 26.
^ Withington 2008, p. 224.
^ "What is England's national costume?". Woodlands-Junior.kent.sch.uk. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. Retrieved 24 June 2009.
^ Else 2007, p. 76.
^ "The S.Pellegrino World's 50 Best Restaurants". TheWorlds50Best.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Mart, Nicole (22 September 2008). "King Richard II's recipe book to go online". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b "Traditional English Food Specialities". TravelSignPosts.com. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "How to make the perfect full English breakfast". 25 June 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.
^ "Catherine of Braganza". Tea.co.uk. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Types of Beer". Icons of England. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "The Prehistoric Cave Art of England" (PDF). ArchaeologyDataService.ac.uk. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ English Heritage. "Aldborough Roman Site". english-heritage.org.uk. Archived from the original on 22 October 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Early Middle Ages Art". Tiscali.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ a b c d e "English art". Tiscali.co.uk. Archived from the original on 16 February 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Turner, Chris. "The Bronze Age: Henry Moore and his successors". Tate Magazine (6). Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ "Freud work sets new world record". BBC News. 14 May 2008. Retrieved 14 May 2008.
^ "About the RSA   RSA". www.thersa.org. Retrieved 8 May 2021.
^ a b Warner 1902, p. 35.
^ Rogers 2001, p. 17.
^ Rogers 2001, p. 135.
^ a b Rowse 1971, p. 48.
^ Norbrook 2000, p. 6.
^ "Richard II". William Shakespeare. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Heywood 2007, p. 74.
^ Watson 1985, p. 360.
^ Cole 1947, p. 268.
^ Hawkins-Dady 1996, p. 970.
^ Eccleshare 2002, p. 5.
^ Chappell 1966, p. 690.
^ Lax 1989, p. 7.
^ Richard Michael Kelly. A Christmas carol p. 10. Broadview Press, 2003 ISBN 1-55111-476-3
^ "The Birth of British Music: Handel   The Conquering Hero". BBC. 15 July 2019. Archived from the original on 14 May 2017.
^ Stradling 1993, p. 166.
^ "Sondheim and Lloyd-Webber: the new musical" The New York Times.. referred to Andrew Lloyd Webber as "the most commercially successful composer in history"
^ Kynaston, Nic (1998). "The Guinness Book of Records 1999". ISBN 9780851120706.
^ Recording Industry Association of America. "Top Selling Artists". riaa.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Else 2007, p. 65.
^ Matthew Collin, John Godfrey (2010). "Altered State: The Story of Ecstasy Culture and Acid House" p.258. Retrieved 18 February 2012
^ Andreou, Roza (25 May 2018). "Celebrate the Bengali New Year this summer in Tower Hamlets". East London Lines.
^ a b Foreman 2005, p. 371.
^ "Home". Royal Academy of Music. Retrieved 8 May 2021.
^ "- PPL". www.ppluk.com. Retrieved 1 May 2021.
^ Great dynasties of the world: The Chipperfields The Guardian Retrieved 18 February 2011.
^ a b "The circus comes to the Circus". BBC News. Retrieved 13 December 2014
^ Hamilton, John (2000) Entertainment: A Pictorial History of the Past One Thousand Years p.24. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
^ "Explore PA history.com   Historical Markers".
^ 'Popular Entertainments through the Ages', Samuel McKechnie. London; Sampson Low, Marston & Co Ltd., 1931
^ a b David Christopher (2002). "British Culture: An Introduction". p. 74. Routledge,
^ "Jets, jeans and Hovis". The Guardian. 12 June 2015.
^ "The Directors' Top Ten Directors". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012.
^ St. Pierre, Paul Matthew (1 April 2009). Music Hall Mimesis in British Film, 1895 1960: On the Halls on the Screen. New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-61147-399-5.
^ "Harry Potter becomes highest-grossing film franchise". The Guardian. London. 11 September 2007. Retrieved 2 November 2010.
^ "History of Ealing Studios". Ealing Studios. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
^ London Symphony Orchestra and Film Music Archived 30 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine LSO. Retrieved 30 June 2011
^ "Frankenstein: Behind the monster smash". BBC. 1 January 2018.
^ "Life of Brian tops comedy poll". BBC News (Total Film magazine poll: 29 September 2000) Retrieved 27 June 2015
^ Statistical Yearbook 2011: 7.3 UK directors Archived 15 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. UK Film Council.
^ "Does Andy Serkis's motion capture acting deserve an Oscar?". The Telegraph. Retrieves 11 January 2015
^ "Tim Webber: the man who put Sandra Bullock in space". Evening Standard. Retrieved 17 January 2014
^ Barry Ronge's Classic DVD : Alice in Wonderland, The Times, It was made under the personal supervision of Walt Disney, and he took special care when animating British fantasy. He called them his "English Cycle".
^ UNESCO. "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland". World Heritage. whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 8 September 2009.
^ "English World Heritage Sites to get strongest ever protections" (PDF). Institute of Historic Building Conservation. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Museum in London". BritishMuseum.org. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "250 Years of the British Museum". Time. 15 January 2009. Archived from the original on 17 January 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2009.
^ "British Library". Encyclop dia Britannica. britannica.com. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Facts and figures of the British Library". The British Library.
^ "The National Gallery". ArtInfo.com. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Youngs, Ian (31 October 2002). "The art of Turner protests". BBC News. Retrieved 10 August 2009.
^ "BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand". Media Newsline. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010. Retrieved 23 September 2010.
^ "About the BBC  What is the BBC". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 16 January 2010. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
^ Newswire7 (13 August 2009). "BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand". Media Newsline. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ "TV Licence Fee: facts & figures". BBC Press Office. April 2010. Archived from the original on 27 April 2011.
^ "Microsoft Word   The Work of the BBC World Service 2008 09 HC 334 FINAL.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 16 February 2011.
^ "News in your language   BBC News". Bbc.co.uk.
^ "BBC World Service". Facebook.com.
^ "Publishing". Department of Culture, Media and Sport. Archived from the original on 5 May 2011.
^ "ABCs: National daily newspaper circulation September 2008". The Guardian. UK. 10 October 2008. Retrieved 17 October 2008.
^ "Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 21 December 2020.
^ a b "Sheffield FC: 150 years of history". FIFA. 24 October 2007. Archived from the original on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "History of squash". WorldSquash2008.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "History of the Game". NRA-Rounders.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 February 2006.
^ Paul Mitchell. "The first international football match". BBC. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
^ "Hurst the hero for England in the home of football". FIFA.com. Retrieved 15 January 2015
^ "Tracking 30 years of TV's most watched programmes". BBC. Retrieved 25 June 2015
^ Rudd, Alyson (7 April 2008). "The father of football deserves much more". Times Online. London. Retrieved 15 January 2015.
^ "History and time are key to power of football, says Premier League chief". The Times. Retrieved 30 November 2013
^ "Premier League towers over world football, says Deloitte". sportbusiness.com. 31 May 2007. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2010.
^ "UEFA ranking of European leagues". UEFA. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "A Brief History Of Football Chants In England". Goalden Times. 19 April 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2021.
^ "Liverpool beat Spurs to become champions of Europe for sixth time". BBC. Retrieved 1 June 2019.
^ "List of Champions League winners"[permanent dead link]. Sport 24. Retrieved 15 July 2019
^ "England 1st country to win Cricket World Cup, Football World Cup and Rugby World Cup". India Today. Retrieved 15 July 2019.
^ Underdown 2000, p. 6.
^ Cricinfo staff (26 August 2009). Ashes climax watched by a fraction of 2005 audience. Cricinfo. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ "2019 Cricket World Cup final: England beat Black Caps in greatest ODI in history". New Zealand Herald. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ A brief history of Yorkshire. Cricinfo. 9 October 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ Fay, Stephen (21 June 1998). "Cricket: Flaw Lord's out of order". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2009.
^ "Father of the modern Olympics". BBC. 22 September 2017.
^ "Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Sport and Civil Society   GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 10 May 2021.
^ "Origins of Rugby  Codification "The innovation of running with the ball was introduced some time between 1820 and 1830."". Rugbyfootballhistory.com. Retrieved 15 August 2011.
^ "England will host 2015 Rugby World Cup". BBC News. 28 July 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ "Rugby League World Cup 2013 will provide the sport with a true test of its popularity". The Telegraph. Retrieved 23 September 2015
^ "Scotland is the home of golf". PGA Tour official website. Archived from the original on 28 August 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2008. Scotland is the home of golf ...
^ Fry, Peter (July 2000). Samuel Ryder: The Man Behind the Ryder Cup. Wright Press.
^ "Sir Nick Faldo drives on in business world". BBC. Retrieved 29 December 2013
^ 125 years of Wimbledon: From birth of lawn tennis to modern marvels CNN. Retrieved 28 September 2011
^ Clarey, Christopher (5 July 2008). "Traditional Final: It's Nadal and Federer". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
^ Kaufman & Macpherson 2005, p. 958.
^ Jackson, Peter (3 July 2009). "Who was Fred Perry?". BBC News. Retrieved 6 July 2012.
^ "Top 20 British Boxers". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 12 April 2011.
^ Red Rum: Aintree favourite BBC. Retrieved 11 October 2011
^ "Red Rum is UK's best-known horse". BBC. Retrieved 18 March 2016
^ "The History of British Motorsport and Motor Racing at Silverstone". Silverstone. Silverstone.co.uk. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
^ "F1 Champions: Dan Wheldon killed in Las Vegas". ESPN. Retrieved 15 December 2011.
^ BBC (6 January 2003). "Part relishes Taylor triumph". BBC. Retrieved 18 January 2010.
^ "Phil Taylor player profile". Dartsdatabase. Archived from the original on 18 January 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2010.
^ Benammar, Emily (22 May 2009). "The World Oldest Trans Atlantic Race". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2009.
^ "St. George  England's Patron Saint". Britannia.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
^ Good, Jonathan (2009). The Cult of Saint George in Medieval England. Boydell Press. p. 149. ISBN 978-1-84383-469-4.
^ "The Great Seal of the Commonwealth of England, 1651". Getty Images. Retrieved 27 October 2018.
^ "National flowers". Number10.gov.uk. 13 January 2003. Archived from the original on 9 September 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2009.
^ Smith, Jed (3 June 2005). "England's Rose  The Official History". Museum of Rugby, Twickenham. RugbyNetwork.net. Retrieved 8 August 2009.
^ "Jason Cowley loves the Commonwealth Games". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
^ "The Great Saint George Revival". BBC News. 23 April 1998. Retrieved 5 September 2009.
Bibliography
Ackroyd, Peter (2000). London: the biography. Chatto & Windus. ISBN 978-1-85619-716-8.
Arlotto, Anthony (1971). Introduction to historical linguistics. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-12615-8.
Atkinson, T.D. (2008). English Architecture. Read Books. ISBN 978-1-4097-2581-7.
Axford, Barrie (2002). Politics: an introduction. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-25181-5.
Ball, Martin (1993). The Celtic Languages. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-01035-1.
Bartlett, Robert (1999). England Under the Norman and Angevin Kings, 1075 1225. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925101-8.
Bennett, James (2004). The Anglosphere Challenge. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-3333-2.
Brewer, Ebenezer (2006). Wordsworth Dictionary of Phrase and Fable. Wordsworth Editions. ISBN 978-1-84022-310-1.
Briggs, Katharine (2004). A Dictionary of British Folk-tales in the English Language. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-39737-4.
Chappell, William (1966). The Roxburghe Ballads. New York: AMS Press. OCLC 488599560.
Clark, David M.; Steed, Michael; Marshall, Sally (1973). Greater Manchester Votes: A Guide to the New Metropolitan Authorities. Stockport: Redrose. ISBN 978-0-9502932-0-2.
Clemoes, Peter (2007). Anglo-Saxon England, Volume 12. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-03834-8.
Cole, George (1947). The Life of William Cobbett. Home & Van Thal. ISBN 978-0-8492-2139-2.
Colgrave, Bertram (1985). Two lives of Saint Cuthbert. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-31385-8.
Colley, Linda (1992). Britons: Forging the Nation, 1701 1837. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-05737-9.
Cox, Peter (1970). Demography. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-09612-6.
Crouch, David (2006). Normans: The History of a Dynasty. Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 978-1-85285-595-6.
Crofton, Ian (2007). The Kings and Queens of England. Quercus. ISBN 978-1-84724-065-1.
Crystal, David (2004). The Stories of English. The Overlook Press. ISBN 978-1-58567-601-9.
Downes, Kerry (2007). Christopher Wren. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-921524-9.
Eccleshare, Julia (2002). Beatrix Potter to Harry Potter. National Portrait Gallery. ISBN 978-1-85514-342-5.
Else, David (2007). Inghilterra. EDT srl. ISBN 978-88-6040-136-6.
Encyclop dia Britannica (2002). The New Encyclop dia Britannica. University of Michigan. ISBN 978-0-85229-787-2.
Encyclop dia Britannica (2009). Encyclop dia Britannica. BiblioBazaar. ISBN 978-0-559-09589-4.
Fafinski, Stefan (2007). English legal system. Pearson Education. ISBN 978-1-4058-2358-6.
Foreman, Susan (2005). London: a musical gazetteer. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10402-8.
Foster, Damon (1988). A Blake dictionary. UPNE. ISBN 978-0-87451-436-0.
Fowler, Kenneth (1967). The Age of Plantagenet and Valois: The Struggle for Supremacy, 1328 1498. Putnam. ISBN 978-0-236-30832-3.
Gallagher, Michael (2006). The United Kingdom Today. London: Franklin Watts. ISBN 978-0-7496-6488-6.
Gearon, Liam (2002). Education in the United Kingdom. David Fulton. ISBN 978-1-85346-715-8.
Goldberg, Jeremy (1996). "Introduction".  In Mark Ormrod & P.G. Lindley (ed.). The Black Death in England. Stamford: Paul Watkins. ISBN 978-1-871615-56-2.
Green, Tamara (2003). The Greek & Latin roots of English. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-1466-9.
Hawkins-Dady, Mark (1996). Reader's guide to literature in English. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-884964-20-6.
Heywood, Andrew (2007). Political Ideologies: An Introduction. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-52179-7.
Higham, NJ (2002). King Arthur: myth-making and history. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-21305-9.
Kaufman, Will; Macpherson, Heidi (2005). Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-431-8.
Kirby, D.P. (2000). The earliest English kings. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-24210-3.
Keary, Charles Francis (1882). Outlines of primitive belief among the Indo-European races. C Scribner's Sons. ISBN 978-0-7905-4982-8.
Kenny, Michael; English, Richard; Hayton, Richard (2008). Beyond the Constitution? Englishness in a post-devolved Britain. Institute for Public Policy Research.
Koch, John (2006). Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-440-0.
Lacy, Norris (1986). The Arthurian Encyclopedia. Garland Pub. ISBN 978-0-8240-8745-6.
Lax, Roger (1989). The Great Song Thesaurus. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505408-8.
Levine, Israel E. (1960). Conqueror of smallpox: Dr. Edward Jenner. Messner. ISBN 978-0-671-63888-7.
Lowe, Roy (1971). The English school. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-7100-6882-8.
Lyon, Bryce Dale (1960). A constitutional and legal history of medieval England. University of Michigan. ISBN 978-0-393-95132-5.
Major, John (2004). History in Quotations. Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-35387-3.
Marden, Orison (2003). Home Lover's Library. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7661-5324-0.
Massey, Gerald (2007). A Book of the Beginnings, Vol.1. Cosimo. ISBN 978-1-60206-829-2.
McNeil, Robina; Nevell, Michael (2000). A Guide to the Industrial Archaeology of Greater Manchester. Association for Industrial Archaeology. ISBN 978-0-9528930-3-5.
Molyneaux, George (2015). The Formation of the English Kingdom in the Tenth Century. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-871791-1.
Norbrook, David (2000). Writing the English Republic: Poetry, Rhetoric and Politics, 1627 1660. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-78569-3.
O'Hanlon, Ardal (2008). Global Airlines. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-7506-6439-4.
Oakes, Elizabeth H. (2002). A to Z of STS scientists. Facts on File Inc. ISBN 978-0-8160-4606-5.
Office for National Statistics (2000). Britain 2001: The Official Handbook of the United Kingdom. London: Stationery Office Books. ISBN 978-0-11-621278-8.
Oppenheimer, Stephen (2006). Origins of the British. Carroll & Graf. ISBN 978-0-7867-1890-0.
Pevsner, Nikolaus (1942). An outline of European architecture. University of Michigan. ISBN 978-0-14-061613-2.
Pollard, A.J. (2004). Imagining Robin Hood. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-22308-9.
Rankov, Boris (1994). The Praetorian Guard. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-361-2.
Redcliffe-Maud, John; Wood, Bruce (1974). English Local Government Reformed. London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-885091-5.
Reitan, Earl Aaron (2003). The Thatcher Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-2203-9.
Ripley, George (1869). The New American Cyclop dia. D. Appleton.
Rogers, Pat (2001). The Oxford illustrated history of English literature. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285437-7.
Room, Adrian (2006). Placenames of the World. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-2248-7.
Rowse, A. L. (1971). Elizabethan Renaissance. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-12682-1.
Saunders, Paul (1982). Edward Jenner, the Cheltenham years, 1795 1823. University Press of New England. ISBN 978-0-87451-215-1.
Scruton, Roger (1982). A dictionary of political thought. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-33439-3.
Singh, Udai (2009). Decentralized democratic governance in new millennium. Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 978-81-8069-540-7.
Stradling, R.A. (1993). The English musical Renaissance, 1860 1940. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-03493-7.
UK Parliament (2007). Department for Transport annual report 2007. Stationery Office. ISBN 978-0-10-170952-1.
Underdown, David (2000). Start of Play: Cricket and Culture in Eighteenth-Century England. Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9330-1.
Ward, Paul (2004). Britishness Since 1870. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-49472-1.
Warner, Charles (1902). Library of the world's best literature, ancient and modern. International society. ISBN 978-1-60520-202-0.
Watson, John (1985). English poetry of the Romantic period, 1789 1830. Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-49259-2.
Webster, Frederick A.M. (1937). Our great public schools: their traditions, customs and games. London: Ward, Lock. OCLC 638146843.
West, Anne (2003). Underachievement in schools. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-24132-8.
White, W. (1885). The Story of a Great Delusion in a Series of Matter-of-fact Chapters. E.W. Allen. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
White, Peter (2002). Public transport. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-25772-5.
Wilson, David; Game, Chris (2002). Local Government in the United Kingdom (3rd ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-333-94859-0.
Withington, Robert (2008). English Pageantry; An Historical Outline. Read Books. ISBN 978-1-4086-8062-9.
World Book (2007). The World Book Encyclopedia, Volume 6. University of Michigan. ISBN 978-0-7166-0102-9.
Wright, Kevin J (2008). The Christian Travel Planner. Thomas Nelson Inc. ISBN 978-1-4016-0374-8.
Young, Robert JC (2008). The Idea of English Ethnicity. Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-0129-5.
Ziegler, Philip (2003). The Black Death (New ed.). Sutton: Sutton Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7509-3202-8.
External links
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
England portal
England  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage
English Heritage  National body protecting English heritage
Natural England  Wildlife and the natural world of England
VisitEngland  English Tourist Board
BBC News   England  News items from BBC News relating to England
GOV.UK  The Official Website of the British Government
 Geographic data related to England at OpenStreetMap
vteEngland articlesHistoryOverviews
Timeline
History of England
Education
Local government
Maritime
Military
English society
British Isles
United Kingdom
Ancient
Prehistoric
Roman Britain
Lloegyr
History of Anglo-Saxons
Anglo-Saxon England
Heptarchy
Settlement of Britain
Middle Ages
Kingdom of England
Norman Conquest
Angevin Empire
Wars of the Roses
Early Modern
Tudor period
Stuart period
English Renaissance
English Reformation
Elizabethan era
Jacobean era
Civil War
Union with Scotland
Georgian era
Late Modern
Regency era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
The Blitz
Contemporary
Postwar Britain (1945 1979)
Political history of the United Kingdom (1979 present)
Social history of the United Kingdom (1979 present)
Prior Kingdoms
Kingdom of Essex
Kingdom of Northumbria
Kingdom of East Anglia
Kingdom of Mercia
Kingdom of Sussex
Related
House of Plantagenet
House of Lancaster
House of York
Geography
Counties
Districts
Gardens
Islands
Parishes
Places
Regions
Towns
Politics
Economy
Middle Ages
Elizabethan government
Independence
Monarchy
Parliament
Culture
Afternoon tea
Anglophilia
Art
Castles
Country clothing
Cuisine
Demographics
Education
Folklore
F te
Landscape garden
Identity
Innovations and discoveries
English language in England
Middle England
Museums
People
list
Religion
Church of England
Science education
Sunday Roast
Sport
Cricket
national team
Football
The Football Association
national team
Rugby league
Rugby Football League
national team
Rugby union
Rugby Football Union
national team
Wimbledon
Symbols
Anthem
Coat of arms
Flags
national flag
Heraldry
Oak tree
Royal standards
Royal supporters
Saint George
Saint George's Day
Tudor rose
Outline
Category
Portal
 Articles related to England
vteUnited Kingdom articlesHistoryChronology
Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
civilian
military
Postwar
political
social
Since 1979
political
social
By topic
Economic
Empire
Foreign relations
1814 1919
Maritime
Military
GeographyAdministrative
Counties of the United Kingdom
Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown Dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies
Physical
British Isles
terminology
Great Britain
Climate
change
Coastline
Geology
Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes
Resources
Agriculture
Energy/Renewable energy
biodiesel
coal
geothermal
hydraulic frac.
hydroelectricity
marine
North Sea oil
solar
wind
Fishing
English
Scottish
Welsh
Hunting
Materials
flora
forestry
mining
Politics
Constitution
Devolution
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Monarchy
monarchs
Nationality
Parliament
House of Commons
House of Lords
Political parties
Female party leaders
Political scandals
Shadow Cabinet
Government
Cabinet
list
Civil service
Departments
Ministers
list
Prime Minister
list
Military
His Majesty's Naval Service
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction
Economy
Banks
Bank of England
Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound sterling (currency)
Science and technology
Stock exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Society
Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Environmental issues
Ethnic groups
Health
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty
Prostitution
Public holidays
Racism
Social care
Social class
Culture
Art
Anthem
Cinema
Cuisine
Identity
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre
Stereotypes of the British
World Heritage Sites
Anglosphere
Countries of the United KingdomEngland
History
social
timeline
Geography
Politics
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Northern Ireland
History
Geography
Politics
Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Scotland
History
timeline
Geography
Politics
Parliament
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Wales
History
Geography
Politics
Senedd
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteCountries, territories and dependencies of the British CrownConstituent countries of the United Kingdom
England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Alderney
Guernsey
Sark
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
Overseas territories
Akrotiri and Dhekelia1
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory2
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Ascension Island
Saint Helena
Tristan da Cunha
Gough Island
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
Former colonies
List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom
1 Sovereign Base Areas. 2 Partial suspension of sovereignty due to the Antarctic Treaty.
vteBritish Isles
Terminology
Alba
Albion
Prydain
Britain
 ire
Hibernia
Naming dispute
PoliticsSovereign states
Ireland
United Kingdom (England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales)
Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Political cooperation
Ireland United Kingdom relations
British Irish Council
British Irish Intergovernmental Conference
British Irish Parliamentary Assembly
Common Travel Area
GeographyIsland groups
Channel Islands
Islands of the Clyde
Great Britain
Hebrides
Inner
Outer
Ireland
Isle of Man
Northern Isles
Orkney
Shetland
Isles of Scilly
Lists of islands of
Bailiwick of Guernsey
Ireland
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
United Kingdom
England
Scotland
Wales
History(outline)Island groups
Ireland
Current states
Ireland
United Kingdom
England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Former states
Irish Free State
Kingdom of England
Principality of Wales
Kingdom of Great Britain
Kingdom of Ireland
Kingdom of Scotland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
SocietyModern languagesGermanic
English
Scots
Celtic
Cornish
Scottish Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Welsh
Romance
Auregnais
French
Guern siais
J rriais
Sercquiais
Other
British Sign Language
Irish Sign Language
Northern Ireland Sign Language
Shelta
People
British
Cornish
English
English Gypsies
Irish
Irish Travellers
Kale
Manx
Northern Irish
Scottish
Ulster-Scots
Welsh
vte1974 1996  Ceremonial counties of England  current
Bedfordshire
Berkshire
Bristol
Buckinghamshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon
Dorset
Durham
East Riding of Yorkshire
East Sussex
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater London
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
City of London
Merseyside
Norfolk
Northamptonshire
Northumberland
North Yorkshire
Nottinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Somerset
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Tyne and Wear
Warwickshire
West Midlands
West Sussex
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire
Worcestershire
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
Other
NARA
IdRef
 sl m Ansiklopedisi
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=England&oldid=1149707439"