Major League Baseball franchise in Cincinnati, Ohio
For other uses, see Cincinnati Reds (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Cincinnati Red.
Cincinnati Reds 2023 Cincinnati Reds seasonEstablished in 1881
Team logoCap insignia
Major league affiliations
National League (1890 present)
Central Division (1994 present)
West Division (1969 1993)
American Association (1881 1889)
Current uniformRetired numbers1581011131418202442Colors
Red, black, white[1][2]     
Name
Cincinnati Reds (1959 present)
Cincinnati Redlegs (1954 1958)
Cincinnati Reds (1890 1953)
Cincinnati Red Stockings (1881 1889)
Other nicknames
Big Red Machine
Ballpark
Great American Ball Park (2003 present)
Riverfront Stadium (1970 2002)
Crosley Field (1912 1970)
Palace of the Fans (1902 1911)
League Park (II) (1894 1901)
League Park (I) (1884 1893)
Bank Street Grounds (1881 1883)
Major league titlesWorld Series titles (5)19191940197519761990NL Pennants (9)191919391940196119701972197519761990AA Pennants (1)1882NL Central Division titles (3)199520102012NL West Division titles (7)1970197219731975197619791990Wild card berths (2)20132020Front officePrincipal owner(s)Bob CastelliniPresident of baseball operationsNick KrallGeneral managerNick KrallManagerDavid Bell
The Cincinnati Reds are an American professional baseball team based in Cincinnati. They compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) Central division and were a charter member of the American Association in 1881 before joining the NL in 1890.  [3][4]
The Reds played in the NL West division from 1969 to 1993, before joining the Central division in 1994. For several years in the 1970s, they were considered the most dominant team in baseball, most notably winning the 1975 and 1976 World Series; the team was colloquially known as the "Big Red Machine" during this time, and it included Hall of Fame members Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan and Tony Perez. Overall, the Reds have won five World Series championships, nine NL pennants, one AA pennant and 10 division titles. The team plays its home games at Great American Ball Park, which opened in 2003. Bob Castellini has been the CEO of the Reds since 2006. From 1882 to 2022, the Reds' overall win loss record is 10,775 10,601 (a .504 winning percentage).[5]
Franchise history[edit]
Main article: History of the Cincinnati Reds
See also: List of Cincinnati Reds seasons
This section needs additional citations for verification. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The birth of the Reds and the American Association (1881 1889)[edit]
 The 1888 Cincinnati Reds
The origins of the modern Cincinnati Reds baseball team can be traced back to the expulsion from the National League of an earlier team bearing the same name. In 1876, Cincinnati became one of the charter members of the new National League (NL), but the club ran afoul of league organizer and longtime president William Hulbert for selling beer during games and renting out its ballpark on Sundays. Both were important in enticing the city's large German population to support the team. While Hulbert made clear his distaste for both beer and Sunday baseball at the founding of the league, neither practice was against league rules at the time. On October 6, 1880, however, seven of the eight team owners adopted a pledge to ban both beer and Sunday baseball at the regular league meeting in December. Only Cincinnati president W. H. Kennett refused to sign the pledge, so the other owners preemptively expelled Cincinnati from the league for violating the new rules even though they were not yet in effect.[6]
Cincinnati's expulsion incensed Cincinnati Enquirer sports editor O. P. Caylor, who made two attempts to form a new league on behalf of the receivers for the now-bankrupt Reds franchise. When these attempts failed, he formed a new independent ball club known as the Red Stockings in the spring of 1881 and brought the team to St. Louis for a weekend exhibition. The Reds' first game was a 12 3 victory over the St. Louis club. After the 1881 series proved successful, Caylor and former Reds president Justus Thorner received an invitation from Philadelphia businessman Horace Phillips to attend a meeting of several clubs in Pittsburgh, planning to establish a new league to compete with the NL. Upon arriving, however, Caylor and Thorner found that no other owners had accepted the invitation, while even Phillips declined to attend his own meeting. By chance, the duo met former pitcher Al Pratt, who paired them with former Pittsburgh Alleghenys president H. Denny McKnight. Together, the three hatched a scheme to form a new league by sending a telegram to each of the owners who were invited to attend the meeting stating that he was the only person who did not attend, and that everyone else was enthusiastic about the new venture and eager to attend a second meeting in Cincinnati. The ploy worked, and the American Association (AA) was officially formed at the Hotel Gibson in Cincinnati. The new Reds   with Thorner now serving as president   became a charter member of the AA.[7]
Led by the hitting of third baseman Hick Carpenter, the defense of future Hall of Fame second baseman Bid McPhee and the pitching of 40-game-winner Will White, the Reds won the inaugural AA pennant in 1882. With the establishment of the Union Association in 1884, Thorner left the club to finance the Cincinnati Outlaw Reds and managed to acquire the lease on the Reds' Bank Street Grounds playing field, forcing new president Aaron Stern to relocate three blocks away to the hastily built League Park. The club never placed higher than second or lower than fifth for the rest of its tenure in the American Association.
The National League returns to Cincinnati (1890 1911)[edit]
 Cincinnati Reds baseball team in 1909
The Cincinnati Red Stockings left the American Association on November 14, 1889, and joined the National League along with the Brooklyn Bridegrooms after a dispute with St. Louis Browns owner Chris Von Der Ahe over the selection of a new league president. The National League was happy to accept the teams in part due to the emergence of the new Player's League, an early failed attempt to break the reserve clause in baseball that threatened both existing leagues. Because the National League decided to expand while the American Association was weakening, the team accepted an invitation to join the National League. After shortening their name to the Reds, the team wandered through the 1890s, signing local stars and aging veterans. During this time, the team never finished above third place (1897) and never closer than 101 2 games to first (1890).
At the start of the 20th century, the Reds had hitting stars Sam Crawford and Cy Seymour. Seymour's .377 average in 1905 was the first individual batting crown won by a Red. In 1911, Bob Bescher stole 81 bases, which is still a team record. Like the previous decade, the 1900s were not kind to the Reds, as much of the decade was spent in the league's second division.
Redland Field to the Great Depression (1912 1932)[edit]
 Hall of famer Edd Roush led Cincinnati to the 1919 World Series.
In 1912, the club opened Redland Field (renamed Crosley Field in 1934), a new steel-and-concrete ballpark. The Reds had been playing baseball on that same site   the corner of Findlay and Western Avenues on the city's west side   for 28 years in wooden structures that had been occasionally damaged by fires. By the late 1910s, the Reds began to come out of the second division. The 1918 team finished fourth, and new manager Pat Moran led the Reds to an NL pennant in 1919, in what the club advertised as its "Golden Anniversary." The 1919 team had hitting stars Edd Roush and Heinie Groh, while the pitching staff was led by Hod Eller and left-hander Harry "Slim" Sallee. The Reds finished ahead of John McGraw's New York Giants and then won the world championship in eight games over the Chicago White Sox.
By 1920, the "Black Sox" scandal had brought a taint to the Reds' first championship. After 1926 and well into the 1930s, the Reds were second division dwellers. Eppa Rixey, Dolf Luque and Pete Donohue were pitching stars, but the offense never lived up to the pitching. By 1931, the team was bankrupt, the Great Depression was in full swing and Redland Field was in a state of disrepair.
Championship baseball and revival (1933 1940)[edit]
Powel Crosley, Jr., an electronics magnate who, with his brother Lewis M. Crosley, produced radios, refrigerators and other household items, bought the Reds out of bankruptcy in 1933 and hired Larry MacPhail to be the general manager. Crosley had started WLW radio, the Reds flagship radio broadcaster, and the Crosley Broadcasting Corporation in Cincinnati, where he was also a prominent civic leader. MacPhail began to develop the Reds' minor league system and expanded the Reds' fan base. Throughout the rest of the decade, the Reds became a team of "firsts." The now-renamed Crosley Field became the host of the first night game in 1935, which was also the first baseball fireworks night. (The fireworks at the game were shot by Joe Rozzi of Rozzi's Famous Fireworks.) Johnny Vander Meer became the only pitcher in major league history to throw back-to-back no-hitters in 1938. Thanks to Vander Meer, Paul Derringer and second baseman/third baseman-turned-pitcher Bucky Walters, the Reds had a solid pitching staff. The offense came around in the late 1930s. By 1938, the Reds, now led by manager Bill McKechnie, were out of the second division, finishing fourth. Ernie Lombardi was named the National League's Most Valuable Player in 1938. By 1939, the Reds were National League champions only to be swept in the World Series by the New York Yankees. In 1940, the Reds repeated as NL Champions, and for the first time in 21 years, they captured a world championship, beating the Detroit Tigers 4 games to 3. Frank McCormick was the 1940 NL MVP; other position players included Harry Craft, Lonny Frey, Ival Goodman, Lew Riggs and Bill Werber.
1941 1969[edit]
World War II and age finally caught up with the Reds, as the team finished mostly in the second division throughout the 1940s and early 1950s. In 1944, Joe Nuxhall (who was later to become part of the radio broadcasting team), at age 15, pitched for the Reds on loan from Wilson Junior High school in Hamilton, Ohio. He became the youngest player ever to appear in a major league game, a record that still stands today. Ewell "The Whip" Blackwell was the main pitching stalwart before arm problems cut short his career. Ted Kluszewski was the NL home run leader in 1954. The rest of the offense was a collection of over-the-hill players and not-ready-for-prime-time youngsters.
 Ted Kluszewski (1953)
In April 1953, the Reds announced a preference to be called the "Redlegs," saying that the name of the club had been "Red Stockings" and then "Redlegs." A newspaper speculated that it was due to the developing political connotation of the word "red" to mean Communism.[8] From 1956 to 1960, the club's logo was altered to remove the term "REDS" from the inside of the "wishbone C" symbol. The word "REDS" reappeared on the 1961 uniforms, but the point of the "C" was removed.[9] The traditional home uniform logo was reinstated in 1967.
In 1956, the Redlegs, led by National League Rookie of the Year Frank Robinson, hit 221 home runs to tie the NL record. By 1961, Robinson was joined by Vada Pinson, Wally Post, Gordy Coleman and Gene Freese. Pitchers Joey Jay, Jim O'Toole and Bob Purkey led the staff.
The Reds captured the 1961 National League pennant, holding off the Los Angeles Dodgers and San Francisco Giants, only to be defeated by the perennially powerful New York Yankees in the World Series.
The Reds had winning teams during the rest of the 1960s, but did not produce any championships. They won 98 games in 1962, paced by Purkey's 23 wins, but finished third. In 1964, they lost the pennant by one game to the St. Louis Cardinals after having taken first place when the Philadelphia Phillies collapsed in September. Their beloved manager Fred Hutchinson died of cancer just weeks after the end of the 1964 season. The failure of the Reds to win the 1964 pennant led to owner Bill DeWitt selling off key components of the team in anticipation of relocating the franchise. In response to DeWitt's threatened move, women of Cincinnati banded together to form the Rosie Reds to urge DeWitt to keep the franchise in Cincinnati. The Rosie Reds are still in existence, and are currently the oldest fan club in Major League Baseball. After the 1965 season, DeWitt executed what is remembered as the most lopsided trade in baseball history, sending former MVP Frank Robinson to the Baltimore Orioles for pitchers Milt Pappas and Jack Baldschun, and outfielder Dick Simpson. Robinson went on to win the MVP and Triple Crown in the American League in 1966, and led Baltimore to its first-ever World Series title in a sweep of the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Reds did not recover from this trade until the rise of the "Big Red Machine" in the 1970s.
 Crosley Field (pictured in 1969), the Reds' home stadium from 1912 to 1970
Starting in the early 1960s, the Reds' farm system began producing a series of stars, including Jim Maloney (the Reds' pitching ace of the 1960s), Pete Rose, Tony P rez, Johnny Bench, Lee May, Tommy Helms, Bernie Carbo, Hal McRae, Dave Concepci n and Gary Nolan. The tipping point came in 1967, with the appointment of Bob Howsam as general manager. That same year, the Reds avoided a move to San Diego when the city of Cincinnati and Hamilton County agreed to build a state-of-the-art, downtown stadium on the edge of the Ohio River. The Reds entered into a 30-year lease in exchange for the stadium commitment keeping the franchise in Cincinnati. In a series of strategic moves, Howsam brought in key personnel to complement the homegrown talent. The Reds' final game at Crosley Field, where they had played since 1912, was played on June 24, 1970, with a 5 4 victory over the San Francisco Giants.
Under Howsam's administration starting in the late 1960s, all players coming to the Reds were required to shave and cut their hair for the next three decades in order to present the team as wholesome in an era of turmoil. The rule was controversial, but persisted well into the ownership of Marge Schott. On at least one occasion, in the early 1980s, enforcement of this rule lost the Reds the services of star reliever and Ohio native Rollie Fingers, who would not shave his trademark handlebar mustache in order to join the team.[10] The rule was not officially rescinded until 1999, when the Reds traded for slugger Greg Vaughn, who had a goatee. The New York Yankees continue to have a similar rule today, although Yankees players are permitted to have mustaches. Much like when players leave the Yankees today, players who left the Reds took advantage with their new teams; Pete Rose, for instance, grew his hair out much longer than would be allowed by the Reds once he signed with the Philadelphia Phillies in 1979.
The Reds' rules also included conservative uniforms. In Major League Baseball, a club generally provides most of the equipment and clothing needed for play. However, players are required to supply their gloves and shoes themselves. Many players enter into sponsorship arrangements with shoe manufacturers, but until the mid-1980s, the Reds had a strict rule requiring players to wear only plain black shoes with no prominent logo. Reds players decried what they considered to be the boring color choice, as well as the denial of the opportunity to earn more money through shoe contracts. In 1985, a compromise was struck in which players could paint red marks on their black shoes and were allowed to wear all-red shoes the following year.[11]
The Big Red Machine (1970 1976)[edit]
 Riverfront Stadium (pictured in 1974), the home stadium of the Reds from 1970 to 2002
In 1970, little-known George "Sparky" Anderson was hired as manager of the Reds, and the team embarked upon a decade of excellence, with a lineup that came to be known as "the Big Red Machine." Playing at Crosley Field until June 30, 1970, when they moved into Riverfront Stadium, a new 52,000-seat multi-purpose venue on the shores of the Ohio River, the Reds began the 1970s with a bang by winning 70 of their first 100 games. Johnny Bench, Tony P rez, Pete Rose, Lee May and Bobby Tolan were the early offensive leaders of this era. Gary Nolan, Jim Merritt, Wayne Simpson and Jim McGlothlin led a pitching staff that also included veterans Tony Cloninger and Clay Carroll, as well as youngsters Pedro Borb n and Don Gullett. The Reds breezed through the 1970 season, winning the NL West and capturing the NL pennant by sweeping the Pittsburgh Pirates in three games. By the time the club got to the World Series, however, the pitching staff had run out of gas, and the veteran Baltimore Orioles, led by Hall of Fame third baseman and World Series MVP Brooks Robinson, beat the Reds in five games.
After the disastrous 1971 season   the only year in the decade in which the team finished with a losing record   the Reds reloaded by trading veterans Jimmy Stewart, May and Tommy Helms to the Houston Astros for Joe Morgan, C sar Ger nimo, Jack Billingham, Ed Armbrister and Denis Menke. Meanwhile, Dave Concepci n blossomed at shortstop. 1971 was also the year a key component of future world championships was acquired, when George Foster was traded to the Reds from the San Francisco Giants in exchange for shortstop Frank Duffy.
Hall of Famers (l-r): Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan, Tony Perez
The 1972 Reds won the NL West in baseball's first-ever strike-shortened season, and defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates in a five-game playoff series. They then faced the Oakland Athletics in the World Series, where six of the seven games were decided by one run. With powerful slugger Reggie Jackson sidelined by an injury incurred during Oakland's playoff series, Ohio native Gene Tenace got a chance to play in the series, delivering four home runs that tied the World Series record for homers, propelling Oakland to a dramatic seven-game series win. This was one of the few World Series in which no starting pitcher for either side pitched a complete game.
The Reds won a third NL West crown in 1973 after a dramatic second-half comeback that saw them make up 10+1 2 games on the Los Angeles Dodgers after the All-Star break. However, they lost the NL pennant to the New York Mets in five games in the NLCS. In Game 1, Tom Seaver faced Jack Billingham in a classic pitching duel, with all three runs of the 2 1 margin being scored on home runs. John Milner provided New York's run off Billingham, while Pete Rose tied the game in the seventh inning off Seaver, setting the stage for a dramatic game-ending home run by Johnny Bench in the bottom of the ninth. The New York series provided plenty of controversy surrounding the riotous behavior of Shea Stadium fans toward Pete Rose when he and Bud Harrelson scuffled after a hard slide by Rose into Harrelson at second base during the fifth inning of Game 3. A full bench-clearing fight resulted after Harrelson responded to Rose's aggressive move to prevent him from completing a double play by calling him a name. This also led to two more incidents in which play was stopped. The Reds trailed 9 3, and New York's manager Yogi Berra and legendary outfielder Willie Mays, at the request of National League president Warren Giles, appealed to fans in left field to restrain themselves. The next day the series was extended to a fifth game when Rose homered in the 12th inning to tie the series at two games each.
The Reds won 98 games in 1974 but finished second to the 102-win Los Angeles Dodgers. The 1974 season started off with much excitement, as the Atlanta Braves were in town to open the season with the Reds. Hank Aaron entered opening day with 713 home runs, one shy of tying Babe Ruth's record of 714. The first pitch Aaron swung at in the 1974 season was the record-tying home run off Jack Billingham. The next day, the Braves benched Aaron, hoping to save him for his record-breaking home run on their season-opening homestand. Then-commissioner Bowie Kuhn ordered Braves management to play Aaron the next day, where he narrowly missed a historic home run in the fifth inning. Aaron went on to set the record in Atlanta two nights later. The 1974 season also saw the debut of Hall of Fame radio announcer Marty Brennaman after Al Michaels left the Reds to broadcast for the San Francisco Giants.
With 1975, the Big Red Machine lineup solidified with the "Great Eight"[12][13] starting team of Johnny Bench (catcher), Tony P rez (first base), Joe Morgan (second base), Dave Concepci n (shortstop), Pete Rose (third base), Ken Griffey (right field), C sar Ger nimo (center field) and George Foster (left field). The starting pitchers included Don Gullett, Fred Norman, Gary Nolan, Jack Billingham, Pat Darcy and Clay Kirby. The bullpen featured Rawly Eastwick and Will McEnaney, who combined for 37 saves, and veterans Pedro Borb n and Clay Carroll. On Opening Day, Rose still played in left field and Foster was not a starter, while John Vukovich, an off-season acquisition, was the starting third baseman. While Vuckovich was a superb fielder, he was a weak hitter. In May, with the team off to a slow start and trailing the Dodgers, Sparky Anderson made a bold move by moving Rose to third base, a position where he had very little experience, and inserting Foster in left field. This was the jolt that the Reds needed to propel them into first place, with Rose proving to be reliable on defense and the addition of Foster to the outfield giving the offense some added punch. During the season, the Reds compiled two notable streaks: 1.) winning 41 out of 50 games in one stretch, and 2.) by going a month without committing any errors on defense.
 Pete Rose at bat in a game at Dodger Stadium during the 1970s
In the 1975 season, Cincinnati clinched the NL West with 108 victories before sweeping the Pittsburgh Pirates in three games to win the NL pennant. They went on to face the Boston Red Sox in the World Series, splitting the first four games and taking Game 5. After a three-day rain delay, the two teams met in Game 6, considered by many to be the best World Series game ever. The Reds were ahead 6 3 with five outs left when the Red Sox tied the game on former Red Bernie Carbo's three-run home run, his second pinch-hit, three-run homer in the series. After a few close calls both ways, Carlton Fisk hit a dramatic 12th-inning home run off the foul pole in left field to give the Red Sox a 7 6 win and force a decisive game 7. Cincinnati prevailed the next day when Morgan's RBI single won Game 7 and gave the Reds their first championship in 35 years. The Reds have not lost a World Series game since Carlton Fisk's home run, a span of nine straight wins.
1976 saw a return of the same starting eight in the field. The starting rotation was again led by Nolan, Gullett, Billingham and Norman, while the addition of rookies Pat Zachry and Santo Alcal  comprised an underrated staff in which four of the six had ERAs below 3.10. Eastwick, Borbon and McEnaney shared closer duties, recording 26, eight and seven saves, respectively. The Reds won the NL West by 10 games and went undefeated in the postseason, sweeping the Philadelphia Phillies (winning game 3 in their final at-bat) to return to the World Series, where they beat the Yankees at the newly renovated Yankee Stadium in the first Series held there since 1964. This was only the second-ever sweep of the Yankees in the World Series, and the Reds became the first NL team since the 1921 22 New York Giants to win consecutive World Series championships. To date, the 1975 and 1976 Reds were the last NL team to repeat as champions.
Beginning with the 1970 National League pennant, the Reds beat either of the two Pennsylvania-based clubs   the Philadelphia Phillies and the Pittsburgh Pirates   to win their pennants (they beat the Pirates in 1970, 1972, 1975 and 1990, and the Phillies in 1976), making the Big Red Machine part of the rivalry between the two Pennsylvania teams. In 1979, Pete Rose added further fuel to the Big Red Machine, being part of the rivalry when he signed with the Phillies and helped them win their first World Series in 1980.
The Machine dismantled (1977 1989)[edit]
The late 1970s brought turmoil and change to the Reds. Popular Tony P rez was sent to the Montreal Expos after the 1976 season, breaking up the Big Red Machine's starting lineup. Manager Sparky Anderson and general manager Bob Howsam later considered this trade to be the biggest mistake of their careers. Starting pitcher Don Gullett left via free agency and signed with the New York Yankees. In an effort to fill that gap, a trade with the Oakland Athletics for starting ace Vida Blue was arranged during the 1976 77 offseason. However, then-commissioner Bowie Kuhn vetoed the trade in order to maintain competitive balance in baseball; some have suggested that the actual reason had more to do with Kuhn's continued feud with Athletics owner Charlie Finley. On June 15, 1977, the Reds acquired pitcher Tom Seaver from the New York Mets for Pat Zachry, Doug Flynn, Steve Henderson and Dan Norman. In other deals that proved to be less successful, the Reds traded Gary Nolan to the California Angels for Craig Hendrickson; Rawly Eastwick to the St. Louis Cardinals for Doug Capilla; and Mike Caldwell to the Milwaukee Brewers for Rick O'Keeffe and Garry Pyka, as well as Rick Auerbach from Texas. The end of the Big Red Machine era was heralded by the replacement of general manager Bob Howsam with Dick Wagner.
In his last season as a Red, Rose gave baseball a thrill as he challenged Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak, tying for the second-longest streak ever at 44 games. The streak came to an end in Atlanta after striking out in his fifth at-bat in the game against Gene Garber. Rose also earned his 3,000th hit that season, on his way to becoming baseball's all-time hits leader when he rejoined the Reds in the mid-1980s. The year also witnessed the only no-hitter of Hall of Fame pitcher Tom Seaver's career, coming against the St. Louis Cardinals on June 16, 1978.
 George Foster slugged 52 home runs in 1977, earning the NL MVP award.
After the 1978 season and two straight second-place finishes, Wagner fired manager Anderson in a move that proved to be unpopular. Pete Rose, who had played almost every position for the team except pitcher, shortstop and catcher since 1963, signed with Philadelphia as a free agent. By 1979, the starters were Bench (catcher), Dan Driessen (first base), Morgan (second base), Concepci n (shortstop) and Ray Knight (third base), with Griffey, Foster and Geronimo again in the outfield. The pitching staff had experienced a complete turnover since 1976, except for Fred Norman. In addition to ace starter Tom Seaver, the remaining starters were Mike LaCoss, Bill Bonham and Paul Moskau. In the bullpen, only Borbon had remained. Dave Tomlin and Mario Soto worked middle relief, with Tom Hume and Doug Bair closing. The Reds won the 1979 NL West behind the pitching of Seaver, but were dispatched in the NL playoffs by the Pittsburgh Pirates. Game 2 featured a controversial play in which a ball hit by Pittsburgh's Phil Garner was caught by Reds outfielder Dave Collins but was ruled a trap, setting the Pirates up to take a 2 1 lead. The Pirates swept the series 3 games to 0 and went on to win the World Series against the Baltimore Orioles.
The 1981 team fielded a strong lineup, with only Concepci n, Foster and Griffey retaining their spots from the 1975 76 heyday.[14][15] After Johnny Bench was able to play only a few games as catcher each year after 1980 due to ongoing injuries, Joe Nolan took over as starting catcher. Driessen and Bench shared first base, and Knight starred at third. Morgan and Geronimo had been replaced at second base and center field by Ron Oester and Dave Collins, respectively. Mario Soto posted a banner year starting on the mound, only surpassed by the outstanding performance of Seaver's Cy Young runner-up season. La Coss, Bruce Berenyi and Frank Pastore rounded out the starting rotation. Hume again led the bullpen as closer, joined by Bair and Joe Price. In 1981, the Reds had the best overall record in baseball, but finished second in the division in both of the half-seasons that resulted from a mid-season players' strike, and missed the playoffs. To commemorate this, a team photo was taken, accompanied by a banner that read "Baseball's Best Record 1981."
By 1982, the Reds were a shell of the original Red Machine, having lost 101 games that year.[16] Johnny Bench, after an unsuccessful transition to third base, retired a year later.
After the heartbreak of 1981, general manager Dick Wagner pursued the strategy of ridding the team of veterans, including third baseman Knight and the entire starting outfield of Griffey, Foster and Collins. Bench, after being able to catch only seven games in 1981, was moved from platooning at first base to be the starting third baseman; Alex Trevi o became the regular starting catcher. The outfield was staffed with Paul Householder, C sar Cede o and future Colorado Rockies and Pittsburgh Pirates manager Clint Hurdle on Opening Day. Hurdle was an immediate bust, and rookie Eddie Milner took his place in the starting outfield early in the year. The highly touted Householder struggled throughout the year despite extensive playing time. Cedeno, while providing steady veteran play, was a disappointment, unable to recapture his glory days with the Houston Astros. The starting rotation featured the emergence of a dominant Mario Soto and featured strong years by Pastore and Bruce Berenyi, but Seaver was injured all year, and their efforts were wasted without a strong offensive lineup. Tom Hume still led the bullpen along with Joe Price, but the colorful Brad "The Animal" Lesley was unable to consistently excel, and former All-Star Jim Kern was also a disappointment. Kern was also publicly upset over having to shave off his prominent beard to join the Reds, and helped force the issue of getting traded during mid-season by growing it back. The season also saw the midseason firing of manager John McNamara, who was replaced as skipper by Russ Nixon.
The Reds fell to the bottom of the Western Division for the next few years. After the 1982 season, Seaver was traded back to the Mets. 1983 found Dann Bilardello behind the plate, Bench returning to part-time duty at first base, rookie Nick Esasky taking over at third base and Gary Redus taking over from Cedeno. Tom Hume's effectiveness as a closer had diminished, and no other consistent relievers emerged. Dave Concepci n was the sole remaining starter from the Big Red Machine era.
Wagner's tenure ended in 1983, when Howsam, the architect of the Big Red Machine, was brought back. The popular Howsam began his second term as the Reds' general manager by signing Cincinnati native Dave Parker as a free agent from Pittsburgh. In 1984, the Reds began to move up, depending on trades and some minor leaguers. In that season, Dave Parker, Dave Concepci n and Tony P rez were in Cincinnati uniforms. In August of the same year, Pete Rose was reacquired and hired to be the Reds player-manager. After raising the franchise from the grave, Howsam gave way to the administration of Bill Bergesch, who attempted to build the team around a core of highly regarded young players in addition to veterans like Parker. However, he was unable to capitalize on an excess of young and highly touted position players including Kurt Stillwell, Tracy Jones and Kal Daniels by trading them for pitching. Despite the emergence of Tom Browning as Rookie of the Year in 1985, when he won 20 games, the rotation was devastated by the early demise of Mario Soto's career to arm injury.
Under Bergesch, the Reds finished second four times from 1985 to 1989. Among the highlights, Rose became the all-time hits leader, Tom Browning threw a perfect game, Eric Davis became the first player in baseball history to hit at least 35 home runs and steal 50 bases, and Chris Sabo was the 1988 National League Rookie of the Year. The Reds also had a bullpen star in John Franco, who was with the team from 1984 to 1989. Rose once had Concepci n pitch late in a game at Dodger Stadium. In 1989, following the release of the Dowd Report, which accused Rose of betting on baseball games, Rose was banned from baseball by Commissioner Bart Giamatti, who declared him guilty of "conduct detrimental to baseball." Controversy also swirled around Reds owner Marge Schott, who was accused several times of ethnic and racial slurs.[17]
World championship and the end of an era (1990 2002)[edit]
In 1987, general manager Bergesch was replaced by Murray Cook, who initiated a series of deals that would finally bring the Reds back to the championship, starting with acquisitions of Danny Jackson and Jos  Rijo. An aging Dave Parker was let go after a revival of his career in Cincinnati following the Pittsburgh drug trials. Barry Larkin emerged as the starting shortstop over Kurt Stillwell, who, along with reliever Ted Power, was traded for Jackson. In 1989, Cook was succeeded by Bob Quinn, who put the final pieces of the championship puzzle together, with the acquisitions of Hal Morris, Billy Hatcher and Randy Myers.
 Eric Davis in 1990
In 1990, the Reds, under new manager Lou Piniella, shocked baseball by leading the NL West from wire-to-wire, making them the only NL team to do so. Winning their first nine games, they started 33 12 and maintained their lead throughout the year. Led by Chris Sabo, Barry Larkin, Eric Davis, Paul O'Neill and Billy Hatcher on the field, and by Jos  Rijo, Tom Browning and the "Nasty Boys"   Rob Dibble, Norm Charlton and Randy Myers   on the mound, the Reds took out the Pirates in the NLCS. The Reds swept the heavily favored Oakland Athletics in four straight and extended a winning streak in the World Series to nine consecutive games. This Series, however, saw Eric Davis severely bruise a kidney diving for a fly ball in Game 4, and his play was greatly limited the next year.
In 1992, Quinn was replaced in the front office by Jim Bowden. On the field, manager Lou Piniella wanted outfielder Paul O'Neill to be a power hitter to fill the void Eric Davis left when he was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers in exchange for Tim Belcher. However, O'Neill only hit .246 with 14 home runs. The Reds returned to winning after a losing season in 1991, but 90 wins was only enough for second place behind the division-winning Atlanta Braves. Before the season ended, Piniella got into an altercation with reliever Rob Dibble. In the offseason, Paul O'Neill was traded to the New York Yankees for outfielder Roberto Kelly, who was a disappointment for the Reds over the next couple of years, while O'Neill led a downtrodden Yankees franchise to a return to glory. Around this time, the Reds would replace their Big Red Machine era uniforms in favor of a pinstriped uniform with no sleeves.
For the 1993 season, Piniella was replaced by fan favorite Tony P rez, but he lasted only 44 games at the helm before being replaced by Davey Johnson. With Johnson steering the team, the Reds made steady progress. In 1994, the Reds were in the newly created National League Central Division with the Chicago Cubs, St. Louis Cardinals, and rivals Pittsburgh Pirates and Houston Astros. By the time the strike hit, the Reds finished a half-game ahead of the Houston Astros for first place in the NL Central. In 1995, the Reds won the division thanks to MVP Barry Larkin. After defeating the NL West champion Dodgers in the first NLDS since 1981, however, they lost to the Atlanta Braves.
 Opening day at Riverfront Stadium, 1995
Team owner Marge Schott announced mid-season that Johnson would be gone by the end of the year, regardless of the team's outcome, to be replaced by former Reds third baseman Ray Knight. Johnson and Schott had never gotten along, and she did not approve of Johnson living with his fianc e before they were married.[18] In contrast, Knight, along with his wife, professional golfer Nancy Lopez, were friends of Schott. The team took a dive under Knight, who was unable to complete two full seasons as manager and was subjected to complaints in the press about his strict managerial style.
In 1999, the Reds won 96 games, led by manager Jack McKeon, but lost to the New York Mets in a one-game playoff. Earlier that year, Schott sold controlling interest in the Reds to Cincinnati businessman Carl Lindner. Despite an 85 77 finish in 2000, and being named 1999 NL manager of the year, McKeon was fired after the 2000 season. The Reds did not have another winning season until 2010.
Contemporary era (2003 present)[edit]
 Great American Ball Park, the Reds' home stadium since 2003
Riverfront Stadium, by then known as Cinergy Field, was demolished in 2002. Great American Ball Park opened in 2003, with high expectations for a team led by local favorites, including outfielder Ken Griffey Jr., shortstop Barry Larkin and first baseman Sean Casey. Although attendance improved considerably with the new ballpark, the Reds continued to lose. Schott had not invested much in the farm system since the early 1990s, leaving the team relatively thin on talent. After years of promises that the club was rebuilding toward the opening of the new ballpark, general manager Jim Bowden and manager Bob Boone were fired on July 28. This broke up the father-son combo of manager Bob Boone and third baseman Aaron Boone, and the latter was soon traded to the New York Yankees. Tragedy struck in November when Dernell Stenson, a promising young outfielder, was shot and killed during a carjack. Following the season, Dan O'Brien was hired as the Reds' 16th general manager on October 27, 2003, succeeding Jim Bowden.[19]
The 2004 and 2005 seasons continued the trend of big-hitting, poor pitching and poor records. Griffey, Jr. joined the 500 home run club in 2004,[20] but was again hampered by injuries. Adam Dunn emerged as consistent home run hitter, including a 535-foot (163 m) home run against Jos  Lima. He also broke the major league record for strikeouts in 2004. Although a number of free agents were signed before 2005, the Reds were quickly in last place, and manager Dave Miley was forced out in the 2005 midseason and replaced by Jerry Narron. Like many other small-market clubs, the Reds dispatched some of their veteran players and began entrusting their future to a young nucleus that included Adam Dunn and Austin Kearns.
 Ken Griffey Jr. played in his hometown of Cincinnati from 2000 to 2008.
2004 saw the opening of the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame (HOF), which had been in existence in name only since the 1950s, with player plaques, photos and other memorabilia scattered throughout their front offices. Ownership and management desired a standalone facility where the public could walk through interactive displays, see locker room recreations, watch videos of classic Reds moments and peruse historical items, such as the history of Reds uniforms dating back to the 1920s or a baseball marking every hit Pete Rose had during his career.[21]
Robert Castellini took over as controlling owner from Lindner in 2006. Castellini promptly fired general manager Dan O'Brien and hired Wayne Krivsky. The Reds made a run at the playoffs, but ultimately fell short. The 2007 season was again mired in mediocrity. Midway through the season, Jerry Narron was fired as manager and replaced by Pete Mackanin. The Reds ended up posting a winning record under Mackanin, but finished the season in fifth place in the Central Division. Mackanin was manager in an interim capacity only, and the Reds, seeking a big name to fill the spot, ultimately brought in Dusty Baker. Early in the 2008 season, Krivsky was fired and replaced by Walt Jocketty. Although the Reds did not win under Krivsky, he is credited with revamping the farm system and signing young talent that could potentially lead the team to success in the future.
The Reds failed to post winning records in both 2008 and 2009. In 2010, with NL MVP Joey Votto and Gold Glovers Brandon Phillips and Scott Rolen, the Reds posted a 91 71 record and were NL Central champions.[22] The following week, the Reds became only the second team in MLB history to be no-hit in a postseason game when Philadelphia's Roy Halladay shut down the National League's No. 1 offense in Game 1 of the NLDS.[23] The Reds eventually lost in a three-game sweep of the NLDS to Philadelphia.
After coming off their surprising 2010 NL Central Division title, the Reds fell short of many expectations for the 2011 season. Multiple injuries and inconsistent starting pitching played a big role in their mid-season collapse, along with a less productive offense as compared to the previous year. The Reds ended the season at 79 83, and won the 2012 NL Central Division Title. On September 28, Homer Bailey threw a 1 0 no-hitter against the Pittsburgh Pirates, marking the first Reds no-hitter since Tom Browning's perfect game in 1988. Finishing with a 97 65 record, the Reds earned the second seed in the Division Series and a matchup with the eventual World Series champion, the San Francisco Giants. After taking a 2 0 lead with road victories at AT&T Park, they headed home looking to win the series. However, they lost three straight at their home ballpark, becoming the first National League team since the Chicago Cubs in 1984 to lose a division series after leading 2 0.
 Joey Votto, first baseman (2007 present)
In the offseason, the team traded outfielder Drew Stubbs   as part of a three-team deal with the Arizona Diamondbacks and Cleveland Indians   to the Indians, and in turn received right fielder Shin-Soo Choo. On July 2, 2013, Homer Bailey pitched a no-hitter against the San Francisco Giants for a 4 0 Reds victory, making him the third pitcher in Reds history with two complete-game no-hitters in their career.
Following six consecutive losses to close out the 2013 season, including a loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates at PNC Park in the National League wild-card playoff game, the Reds decided to fire Dusty Baker. During his six years as manager, Baker led the Reds to the playoff three times; however, they never advanced beyond the first round.[24]
On October 22, 2013, the Reds hired pitching coach Bryan Price to replace Baker as manager.[25] Under Price, the Reds were led by pitchers Johnny Cueto and the hard-throwing Aroldis Chapman. The offense was led by All-Star third baseman Todd Frazier, Joey Votto and Brandon Phillips, but although they had plenty of star power, the Reds never got off to a good start and ended the season in lowly fourth place in the division to go along with a 76 86 record. During the offseason, the Reds traded pitchers Alfredo Sim n to the Tigers and Mat Latos to the Marlins. In return, they acquired young talents such as Eugenio Su rez and Anthony DeSclafani. They also acquired veteran slugger Marlon Byrd from the Phillies to play left field.
The Reds' 2015 season wasn't much better, as they finished with the second-worst record in the league at 64 98, their worst finish since 1982. The Reds were forced to trade star pitchers Johnny Cueto and Mike Leake to the Kansas City Royals and San Francisco Giants, respectively, receiving minor league pitching prospects for both. Shortly after the season's end, the Reds traded Home Run Derby champion Todd Frazier to the Chicago White Sox and closing pitcher Aroldis Chapman to the New York Yankees.
In 2016, the Reds broke the then-record for home runs allowed during a single season, The Reds held this record until the 2019 season when it was broken by the Baltimore Orioles. The previous record holder was the 1996 Detroit Tigers with 241 home runs yielded to opposing teams.[26] The Reds went 68 94 and again were one of the worst teams in the MLB.[27] The Reds traded outfielder Jay Bruce to the Mets just before the July 31 non-waiver trade deadline in exchange for two prospects: infielder Dilson Herrera and pitcher Max Wotell.[28] During the offseason, the Reds traded Brandon Phillips to the Atlanta Braves in exchange for two minor league pitchers.[29]
On September 25, 2020, the Reds earned their first postseason berth since 2013,[30] ultimately earning the seventh seed in the expanded 2020 playoffs. The 2020 season had been shortened to 60 games as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Reds lost their first-round series against the Atlanta Braves two games to none.
The Reds finished the 2021 season with a record of 83 79, good for third in the NL Central.
In 2022, the Reds started out the regular season with a ghastly 3 22 record. Their three-game win total in 25 games had not seen since the 2003 Detroit Tigers and was tied for second-worst overall behind the 1988 Baltimore Orioles, who started 2 23 in their first 25 games.[31] They would finish the season with a record of 62-100.
Ballparks[edit]
Main article: Great American  Ball Park
 Great American Ball Park opened in 2003 along the Ohio River.
The Cincinnati Reds play their home games at Great American Ball Park, located at 100 Joe Nuxhall Way, in downtown Cincinnati. Great American Ball Park opened in 2003 at the cost of $290 million and has a capacity of 42,271. Along with serving as the home field for the Reds, the stadium also holds the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame, which was added as a part of Reds tradition allowing fans to walk through the history of the franchise as well as participating in many interactive baseball features.[32]
Great American Ball Park is the seventh home of the Cincinnati Reds, built immediately to the east of the site on which Riverfront Stadium, later named Cinergy Field, once stood. The first ballpark the Reds occupied was Bank Street Grounds from 1882 to 1883 until they moved to League Park I in 1884, where they would remain until 1893. Through the late 1890s and early 1900s, the Reds moved to two different parks, where they stayed for less than 10 years: League Park II was the third home field for the Reds from 1894 to 1901, and then they moved to the Palace of the Fans, which served as the home of the Reds in the 1910s. It was in 1912 that the Reds moved to Crosley Field, which they called home for 58 years. Crosley served as the home field for the Reds for two World Series titles and five National League pennants. Beginning June 30, 1970, and during the dynasty of the Big Red Machine, the Reds played in Riverfront Stadium, appropriately named due to its location right by the Ohio River. Riverfront saw three World Series titles and five National League pennants. It was in the late 1990s that the city agreed to build two separate stadiums on the riverfront for the Reds and the Cincinnati Bengals. Thus, in 2003, the Reds began a new era with the opening of the current stadium.
The Reds hold their spring training in Goodyear, Arizona, at Goodyear Ballpark. The Reds moved into this stadium and the Cactus League in 2010 after staying in the Grapefruit League for most of their history. The Reds share Goodyear Park with their rivals in Ohio, the Cleveland Guardians.
Logos and uniforms[edit]
Main article: Logos and uniforms of the Cincinnati Reds
Logo[edit]
 Logo (1915 1919)
Throughout the team's history, many different variations of the classic wishbone "C" logo have been introduced. In the team's early history, the Reds logo has been simply the wishbone "C" with the word "REDS" inside, the only colors used being red and white. However, during the 1950s, during the renaming and re-branding of the team as the Cincinnati Redlegs because of the connections to communism of the word "Reds," the color blue was introduced as part of the Reds color combination.[33] During the 1960s and 1970s, the Reds saw a move toward the more traditional colors, abandoning the navy blue. A new logo also appeared with the new era of baseball in 1972, when the team went away from the script "REDS" inside of the "C," instead putting their mascot, Mr. Redlegs, in its place as well as putting the name of the team inside of the wishbone "C." In the 1990s, the more traditional, early logos of Reds came back with the current logo reflecting more of what the team's logo was when they were founded.[34]
Uniforms[edit]
Along with the logo, the Reds' uniforms have been changed many different times throughout their history. Following their departure from being called the "Redlegs" in 1956, the Reds made a groundbreaking change to their uniforms with the use of sleeveless jerseys, seen only once before in the Major Leagues by the Chicago Cubs. At home and away, the cap was all-red with a white wishbone "C" insignia. The long-sleeved undershirts were red. The uniform was plain white with a red wishbone "C" logo on the left and the uniform number on the right. On the road, the wishbone "C" was replaced by the mustachioed "Mr. Redlegs" logo, the pillbox-hat-wearing man with a baseball for a head. The home stockings were red with six white stripes. The away stockings had only three white stripes.
 Scott Rolen wearing the current Reds away uniform, featuring classic lettering.
The Reds changed uniforms again in 1961, when they replaced the traditional wishbone "C" insignia with an oval-shaped "C" logo, but continued to use the sleeveless jerseys. At home, the Reds wore white caps with the red bill with the oval "C" in red, white sleeveless jerseys with red pinstripes, with the oval "C-REDS" logo in black with red lettering on the left breast and the number in red on the right. The gray away uniform included a gray cap with the red oval "C" and a red bill. Their gray away uniforms, which also included a sleeveless jersey, bore "CINCINNATI" in an arched block style across with the number below on the left. In 1964, players' last names were placed on the back of each set of uniforms, below the numbers. Those uniforms were scrapped after the 1966 season.
However, the Cincinnati uniform design most familiar to baseball enthusiasts is the one whose basic form, with minor variations, held sway for 25 seasons from 1967 to 1992. Most significantly, the point was restored to the "C" insignia, making it a wishbone again. During this era, the Reds wore all-red caps both at home and on the road. The caps bore the simple wishbone "C" insignia in white. The uniforms were standard short-sleeved jerseys and standard trousers   white at home and gray on the road. The home uniform featured the wishbone "C-REDS" logo in red with white type on the left breast and the uniform number in red on the right. The away uniform bore "CINCINNATI" in an arched block style across the front with the uniform number below on the left. Red, long-sleeved undershirts and plain red stirrups over white sanitary stockings completed the basic design. The Reds wore pinstriped home uniforms in 1967 only, and the uniforms were flannel through 1971, changing to double-knits with pullover jerseys and belt-less pants in 1972. Those uniforms lasted 20 seasons, and the 1992 Reds were the last MLB team to date whose primary uniforms featured pullover jerseys and belt-less pants.
The 1993 uniforms, which did away with the pullovers and brought back button-down jerseys, kept white and gray as the base colors for the home and away uniforms, but added red pinstripes. The home jerseys were sleeveless, showing more of the red undershirts. The color scheme of the "C-REDS" logo on the home uniform was reversed, now red lettering on a white background. A new home cap was created that had a red bill and a white crown with red pinstripes and a red wishbone "C" insignia. The away uniform kept the all-red cap, but moved the uniform number to the left to more closely match the home uniform. The only additional change to these uniforms was the introduction of black as a primary color of the Reds in 1999, especially on their road uniforms.[2]
The Reds' latest uniform change came in December 2006, which differed significantly from the uniforms worn during the previous eight seasons. The home caps returned to an all-red design with a white wishbone "C," lightly outlined in black. Caps with red crowns and a black bill became the new road caps. Additionally, the sleeveless jersey was abandoned for a more traditional design. The numbers and lettering for the names on the backs of the jerseys were changed to an early 1900s style typeface, and a handlebar-mustached "Mr. Redlegs"   reminiscent of the logo used by the Reds in the 1950s and 1960s   was placed on the left sleeve.[35]
Awards and accolades[edit]
Main article: Cincinnati Reds award winners and league leaders
See also: Cincinnati Reds team records
 Barry Larkin playing in Riverfront Stadium in 1990
 Frank Robinson
 Eppa Rixey
 Ernie Lombardi
Team captains[edit]
Tommy Corcoran   1900 1905
Joe Kelley   1906
John Ganzel   1907
Hans Lobert   1909
Mike Mitchell   1910 1912
Ivey Wingo   1916
Heinie Groh   1918 1921
Jake Daubert   1922 1924
Edd Roush   1925 1926
Bubbles Hargrave   1927 1928
14 Pete Rose   1970 1978
13 Dave Concepci n   1983 1988
11 Barry Larkin   1997 2004
Retired numbers[edit]
See also: List of Major League Baseball retired numbers
The Cincinnati Reds have retired 10 numbers in franchise history, as well as honor Jackie Robinson, whose number is retired league-wide around Major League Baseball.
All of the retired numbers are located at Great American Ball Park behind home plate on the outside of the press box. Along with the retired players' and managers' number, the following broadcasters are honored with microphones by the broadcast booth: Marty Brennaman, Waite Hoyt and Joe Nuxhall.[36]
FredHutchinsonMgrRetired October 19, 1964
JohnnyBenchCRetired August 11, 1984
JoeMorgan2BRetired June 6, 1998
SparkyAndersonMgrRetired May 28, 2005
BarryLarkinSSRetired August 25, 2012
DaveConcepci nSSRetired August 25, 2007
PeteRoseOF, IF, MgrRetired June 26, 2016
TedKluszewski1B, CoachRetired July 18, 1998
FrankRobinsonOFRetired May 22, 1998
TonyP rez1B, MgrRetired May 27, 2000
JackieRobinson Honored April 15, 1997
On April 15, 1997, No. 42 was retired throughout Major League Baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson.
Baseball Hall of Famers[edit]
Main article: National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum
Cincinnati Reds Hall of Famers
Affiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum
Sparky AndersonJake BeckleyJohnny Bench *Jim BottomleyMordecai BrownCharles ComiskeySam CrawfordKiki Cuyler
Leo DurocherBuck EwingWarren Giles *Ken Griffey Jr.Clark GriffithChick HafeyJesse HainesNed HanlonHarry Heilmann
Rogers HornsbyMiller HugginsJoe KelleyGeorge KellyBarry Larkin *Ernie Lombardi *Rube MarquardChristy Mathewson Bill McKechnie *
Bid McPhee *Joe Morgan *Hank O'DayTony P rez *Charles RadbournEppa Rixey *Frank Robinson *Scott Rolen Edd Roush *
Amos RusieTom SeaverAl SimmonsLee Smith Joe TinkerDazzy VanceLloyd WanerBobby Wallace
Players and managers listed in bold are depicted on their Hall of Fame plaques wearing a Reds cap insignia.
*Cincinnati Reds listed as primary team, according to the Hall of Fame
Ford C. Frick Award recipients[edit]
Cincinnati Reds Ford C. Frick Award recipients
Affiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum
Red Barber
Marty Brennaman
Al Helfer
Russ Hodges
Al Michaels
Names in bold received the award based primarily on their work as broadcasters for the Reds.
MLB All-Star Games[edit]
The Reds have hosted the Major League Baseball All-Star Game five times: twice at Crosley Field (1938, 1953), twice at Riverfront Stadium (1970, 1988) and once at Great American Ball Park (2015).
Rivalries[edit]
Ohio Cup[edit]
Main article: Ohio Cup
 The Ohio Cup trophy
The Ohio Cup was an annual pre-season baseball game, which pitted the Ohio rivals Cleveland Indians and Cincinnati Reds. In its first series it was a single-game cup, played each year at minor-league Cooper Stadium in Columbus, and was staged just days before the start of each new Major League Baseball season.
A total of eight Ohio Cup games were played, between 1989 to 1996, with the Indians winning six of them. The winner of the game each year was awarded the Ohio Cup in postgame ceremonies. The Ohio Cup was a favorite among baseball fans in Columbus, with attendances regularly topping 15,000.
The Ohio Cup games ended with the introduction of regular-season interleague play in 1997. Thereafter, the two teams competed annually in the regular-season Battle of Ohio or Buckeye Series. The Ohio Cup was revived in 2008 as a reward for the team with the better overall record in the Reds Indians series each year.
Pittsburgh Pirates[edit]
Main article: Pirates-Reds rivalry
The Pirates-Reds rivalry at one point in time was one of the fiercest matchups in the  National League during the 1970s; both teams often met in the postseason multiple times prior to both being realigned to the National League Central in 1993. The two teams date far into the infancy of the MLB, having both been founded in the 1880s, and first met during the 1900 MLB season. Both teams combine for 10 World Series championships and 18 pennants. The Pirates and Reds met 5 times during the NLCS in 1970, 1972, 1975, 1979, and 1990. Most recently; both teams met again during the 2013 NL Wild Card Game.
As of 2023, the Pirates currently lead the rivalry 1141 1113, However; the Reds lead in postseason wins 13-8.[37][38]
Los Angeles Dodgers[edit]
The Dodgers Reds rivalry was one of the most intense during the 1970s through the early 1990s.[39] They often competed for the NL West division title. From 1970 to 1990, they had eleven 1 2 finishes in the standings, with seven of them being within 5  games or fewer. Both teams also played in numerous championships during this span, combining to win 10 NL Pennants and 5 World Series titles from 1970 1990 Notably as the Big Red Machine teams clashed frequently with the Tommy Lasorda era Dodgers teams. Reds manager Sparky Anderson once said, "I don't think there's a rivalry like ours in either league. The Giants are supposed to be the Dodgers' natural rivals, but I don't think the feeling is there anymore. It's not there the way it is with us and the Dodgers."[40] The rivalry ended when division realignment moved the Reds to the NL Central. However, they did face one another in the 1995 NLDS.
Media[edit]
See also: Cincinnati Reds Radio Network and List of Cincinnati Reds broadcasters
Radio[edit]
 Marty Brennaman, the Hall of Fame "voice of the Reds"
The Reds' flagship radio station has been WLW, 700AM since 1969. Prior to that, the Reds were heard over WKRC, WCPO, WSAI and WCKY. WLW, a 50,000-watt station, is "clear channel" in more than one way, as iHeartMedia owns the "blowtorch" outlet, which is also known as "The Nation's Station." Reds games can be heard on over 100 local radio stations through the Reds on Radio Network.
Since 2020, the Reds broadcast team has been former Pensacola Blue Wahoos radio play-by-play announcer Tommy Thrall and retired relief pitcher Jeff Brantley on color commentary.
Marty Brennaman called Reds games from 1974 to 2019, most famously alongside former Reds pitcher and color commentator Joe Nuxhall through 2007. Brennaman has won the Ford C. Frick Award for his work, which includes his famous call of "... and this one belongs to the Reds!" after a win. Nuxhall preceded Brennaman in the Reds' booth, beginning in 1967 (the year after his retirement as an active player) until his death in 2007. (From 2004 to 2007, Nuxhall only called select home games.)
In 2007, Thom Brennaman, a veteran announcer seen nationwide on Fox Sports, joined his father Marty in the radio booth. Brantley, formerly of ESPN, also joined the network in 2007. Three years later in 2010, Brantley and Thom Brennaman's increased TV schedule led to more appearances for Jim Kelch, who had filled in on the network since 2008. Kelch's contract expired after the 2017 season.[41]
In 2019, Thrall was brought in to provide in-game and post-game coverage, as well as act as a fill-in play-by-play announcer.[42] He succeeded Marty Brennaman when the former retired at the end of the 2019 season.
Television[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Televised games are seen exclusively on Bally Sports Ohio and Bally Sports Indiana. In addition, Bally Sports South televises Bally Sports Ohio broadcasts of Reds games to Tennessee and western North Carolina. George Grande, who hosted the first SportsCenter on ESPN in 1979, was the play-by-play announcer, usually alongside Chris Welsh, from 1993 until his retirement during the final game of the 2009 season. Since 2009, Grande has worked part time for the Reds as play-by-play announcer in September when Thom Brennaman is covering the NFL for Fox Sports. He has also made guest appearances throughout each season. Brennaman had been the head play-by-play commentator since 2010, with Welsh and Brantley sharing time as the color commentators. Paul Keels, who left in 2011 to become the play-by-play announcer for the Ohio State Buckeyes Radio Network, was the Reds' backup play-by-play television announcer during the 2010 season. Jim Kelch served as Keels' replacement. The Reds also added former Reds first baseman Sean Casey   known as "The Mayor" by Reds fans   to do color commentary for approximately 15 games in 2011.[43]
NBC affiliate WLWT carried Reds games from 1948 to 1995. Among those that have called games for WLWT include Waite Hoyt, Ray Lane, Steve Physioc, Johnny Bench, Joe Morgan and Ken Wilson. Al Michaels, who established a long career with ABC and NBC, spent three years in Cincinnati early in his career. The last regularly scheduled, over-the-air broadcasts of Reds games were on WSTR-TV from 1996 to 1998. Since 2010, WKRC-TV has simulcast Opening Day games with Fox/Bally Sports Ohio, which it came into common ownership with in 2019.
On August 19, 2020, Thom Brennaman was caught uttering a homophobic slur during a game against the Kansas City Royals. Brennaman eventually apologized for the incident and was suspended, but on September 26, he resigned from his duties as the Reds' TV play-by-play announcer. This ended the Brennamans' 46-year association with the Reds franchise, dating back to Marty's first season in 1974.[44][45] Sideline reporter Jim Day served as the interim play-by-play voice for the remainder of the 2020 season, after which the Reds hired John Sadak to serve as its television play-by-play announcer.[46]
Community involvement[edit]
The Reds Community Fund, founded in 2001, is focused on the youth of the Greater Cincinnati area with the goal of improving the lives of participants by leveraging the traditions of the Reds. The fund sponsors the Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities (RBI) program with a goal of 30 50 young people graduating high school and attending college annually. It also holds an annual telethon, raising in excess of $120,000. An example of the fund's community involvement is its renovation of Hoffman Fields in the Evanston neighborhood of the city, upgrading the entire recreation complex, for a total of over 400 baseball diamonds renovated at 200 locations throughout the region.[47]
During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, since no spectators were allowed at MLB games, the Reds offered fans the opportunity to purchase paper cutouts of their own photographs in the stands at Great American Ball Park. The promotion raised over $300,000 for the fund, more than the fund's traditional events such as Redsfest, the Redlegs Run, an annual golf outing and the Fox Sports Ohio Telethon.[48]
Roster[edit]
Cincinnati Reds rostervte
Active roster
Inactive roster
Coaches/Other
Pitchers
Starting rotation
51 Graham Ashcraft
85 Luis Cessa
21 Hunter Greene
40 Nick Lodolo
71 Connor Overton
Bullpen
63 Fernando Cruz
46 Buck Farmer
79 Ian Gibaut
57 Kevin Herget
47 Derek Law
52 Reiver Sanmart n
48 Alex Young
Closer(s)
43 Alexis D az
Catchers
12 Curt Casali
22 Luke Maile
37 Tyler Stephenson
Infielders
 2 Jos  Barrero
 6 Jonathan India
28 Kevin Newman
 7 Spencer Steer
32 Jason Vosler
Outfielders
17 Stuart Fairchild
27 Jake Fraley
29 TJ Friedl
 4 Wil Myers
15 Nick Senzel
Pitchers
74 Ricky Karcher
66 Joel Kuhnel
65 Casey Legumina
72 Lyon Richardson
64 Tony Santillan 
39 Lucas Sims 
58 Levi Stoudt
34 Luke Weaver 
55 Brandon Williamson
Infielders
44 Elly De La Cruz
68 Noelvi Marte
19 Joey Votto 
Outfielders
30 Will Benson
38 Mike Siani
Manager
25 David Bell
Coaches
92 Kyle Arnsberg  (assistant coach)
45 Freddie Benavides (bench)
60 Terry Bradshaw (assistant hitting)
54 Collin Cowgill (first base)
91 Jose Duarte  (bullpen catcher)
56 J. R. House (third base/catching)
36 Derek Johnson (director of pitching)
88 Alon Leichman (assistant pitching)
62 Joel McKeithan (hitting/offensive coordinator)
61 Jeff Pickler (game planning/outfield)
90 Matt Tracy (bullpen)
60-day injured list
70 Tejay Antone
49 Justin Dunn
53 Vladimir Guti rrez
26 active, 14 inactive 7-, 10-, or 15-day injured list# Personal leaveRoster and coaches updated April 13, 2023Transactions
  Depth chart  All MLB rosters
Minor league affiliations[edit]
Main article: List of Cincinnati Reds minor league affiliates
The Cincinnati Reds farm system consists of six minor league affiliates.[49]
Level
Team
League
Location
Ballpark
Triple-A
Louisville Bats
International League
Louisville, Kentucky
Louisville Slugger Field
Double-A
Chattanooga Lookouts
Southern League
Chattanooga, Tennessee
AT&T Field
High-A
Dayton Dragons
Midwest League
Dayton, Ohio
Day Air Ballpark
Single-A
Daytona Tortugas
Florida State League
Daytona Beach, Florida
Jackie Robinson Ballpark
Rookie
ACL Reds
Arizona Complex League
Goodyear, Arizona
Goodyear Ballpark
DSL Reds
Dominican Summer League
Boca Chica, Santo Domingo
Baseball City Complex
References[edit]
^ Footer, Alyson (August 6, 2014). "Reds pay homage to past with 2015 All-Star logo". Reds.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on April 21, 2018. Retrieved April 21, 2018. The primary logo in the center of the illustration depicts the handlebar mustache and old-style square cap worn by the Reds' most traditional mascot, Mr. Redlegs. His perfectly round head sits on top of the Reds' classic oval-shaped "C." The crossed bats represent a traditional baseball design, while the addition of deep red creates dimension to the Reds' colors of red and black.
^ a b "Uniforms". Reds.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2021. For the first time in club history, black became a primary element of the Reds' uniform color scheme in 1999.
^ Sheldon, Mark (December 21, 2020). "History of the Reds' team name". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved April 12, 2021.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Reds Timeline". Reds.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on 2019-06-13. Retrieved April 12, 2021.
^ "Cincinnati Reds Team History & Encyclopedia". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved 2020-11-11.
^ "1869-1999". MLB.
^ Stewart, Wayne (2002). The History of the Cincinnati Reds. Creative Paperbacks.
^ DeGange, John (16 April 1953). "Ins and Outs". The Day (New London, Connecticut). p. 10. Retrieved 27 May 2015.
^ Sheldon, Mark (November 19, 2020). "How the Reds became the Redlegs". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved April 12, 2021.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Sports People; Fingers Won't Conform". The New York Times. February 22, 1986. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved April 30, 2010.
^ Rogers, Thomas (February 28, 1986). "SCOUTING; Times Change, But Reds Don't". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2018. Retrieved April 21, 2018. For years, the Reds were the only team that permitted no color other than the standard black on their uniform shoes. But last year they allowed the players to paint red stripes on the shoes, and this year they're going to all-red models. The shoes are all supposed to match our red stockings, says a cautious Mrs. Schott. I just hope they don't come out shocking pink.
^ Taylor, Kelly. "Big Red Machine's "Great Eight" to reunite at GABP". FOX 19. FOX19-WXIX. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2013.
^ Pahigian, Joshua; Kevin O'Connell (2004). The Ultimate Baseball Road-Trip: A Fan's Guide to Major League Stadiums. Guilford, Conn: Lyons Press. p. 208. ISBN 1592281591.
^ "1976 Cincinnati Reds Statistics and Roster". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on 2008-03-24. Retrieved 2008-03-30.
^ "1981 Cincinnati Reds Statistics and Roster". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on 2008-04-11. Retrieved 2008-03-30.
^ "1982 Cincinnati Reds Schedule, Box Scores and Splits". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on 2008-04-04. Retrieved 2008-03-30.
^ "BASEBALL; Call for Schott to Step Down". The New York Times. December 7, 1992. Retrieved 2008-03-30.
^ "Poor Communication at Heart of Feud". The Washington Post. May 12, 1998. Archived from the original on June 1, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2010.
^ Haft, Chris (October 27, 2003). "Reds tab Dan O'Brien as GM". MLB.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2010. Retrieved July 6, 2010.
^ "Ken Griffey Career Home Runs". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on February 18, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2017.
^ "2013-Present | Exhibits | Visit | Hall of Fame | Cincinnati Reds". MLB.com.
^ "Reds are NL Central Champs! | Cincinnati Reds". Cincinnati.com. 2010-09-28. Archived from the original on 2012-10-05. Retrieved 2012-06-19.
^ "MLB.com At Bat | MLB.com: Gameday". Mlb.mlb.com. 2010-10-06. Archived from the original on 2013-05-23. Retrieved 2012-06-19.
^ "Reds dismiss manager Dusty Baker". ESPN.com. October 4, 2013. Archived from the original on October 7, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2014.
^ "Reds set to promote Price to manager". 21 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2017-08-21. Retrieved 2017-12-19.
^ "The Reds just set a record that sums up just how bad they have been this year". Archived from the original on 2016-10-02. Retrieved 2016-09-27.
^ "Regular Season Standings". Major League Baseball. Archived from the original on 2017-01-06. Retrieved 2017-01-06.
^ "Cincinnati Reds 2016 Team Transactions: Trades, DL, Free Agents and Callups". ESPN. Archived from the original on 2017-01-06. Retrieved 2017-01-06.
^ "Braves, Reds close deal for Brandon Phillips". MLB.com. Archived from the original on 2017-12-22. Retrieved 2017-12-19.
^ //www.mlb.com/news/reds-clinch-2020-postseason-berth
^ Clark, Dave. "Cincinnati Reds' 3-22 start among worst in MLB history". USA TODAY. Retrieved 2022-08-14.
^ "Hall of Fame & Museum | reds.com: Ballpark". Mlb.mlb.com. 2010-07-18. Archived from the original on 2012-11-06. Retrieved 2012-06-19.
^ Yglesias, Matthew (20 March 2012). "Communist Bo Xilai gets ousted: Why do communists like red so much?". Slate Magazine. Archived from the original on 2012-06-18. Retrieved 2012-06-19.
^ "History of Reds Logos". Reds.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019.
^ Sheldon, Mark (December 1, 2006). "Reds unveil new-look uniforms". Major League Baseball Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2017.
^ See List of Major League Baseball retired numbers#Similar honors.
^ "MLB : Series records : Cincinnati Reds(H)  against  Pittsburgh Pirates(A)".
^ "Reds vs. Pirates: Is It a Big Brother vs. Little Brother Rivalry in the Making?".
^ Hagen, Paul (June 7, 2017). "Book Explores Reds-Dodgers Rivalry". MLB.com. Retrieved June 15, 2022.
^ Fimrite, Ron (April 28, 1975). "Where There's Smoke There's Ire". Sports Illustrated.
^ Rosecrans, Trent. "Reds don't renew Jim Kelch". Cincinnati Enquirer. Retrieved 11 July 2021.
^ "Tommy Thrall Reflects On Wahoos Career After Call-Up".
^ "FOX Sports Ohio announces 2011 Reds broadcast team | reds.com: Official Info". Cincinnati.reds.mlb.com. 2011-01-14. Archived from the original on 2011-01-18. Retrieved 2012-06-19.
^ Mitchell, Madeline (August 19, 2020). "Brennaman after using slur on air: 'I don't know if I'm going to be putting on this headset again.'". Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on August 29, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2020.
^ Russell, Jake (September 26, 2020). "Thom Brennaman resigns from Reds after being suspended for on-air homophobic slur". The Washington Post.
^ Sheldon, Mark. "'I was floored': Sadak Reds' new TV voice". Major League Baseball. Retrieved February 5, 2021.
^ Vorholt, Nick (September 2018). "Cincinnati Reds Community Fund quietly goes about its mission". BigRedMachine.com. Cincinnati OH: Fansided.
^ Underwood, Brad (25 August 2020). "No fans nets historic donations for Reds Community Fund in form of fan cutouts". Local 12 News. Cincinnati OH: WKRC-TV.
^ "Cincinnati Reds Minor League Affiliates". Baseball-Reference. Sports Reference. Retrieved May 15, 2020.
Further reading[edit]
Gitlin, Marty. Cincinnati Reds (ABDO, 2015).
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cincinnati Reds.
Cincinnati Reds official website
Reds Minor Leagues News
SCSR / 19th Century Cincinnati Base Ball
Voices of Oklahoma interview with Johnny Bench. First-person interview conducted on March 28, 2012, with Johnny Bench, Hall of Fame Catcher for the Cincinnati Reds.
Awards and achievements
Preceded byBoston Red Sox1918
 World Series champions 1919
Succeeded byCleveland Indians1920
Preceded byNew York Yankees1936 1939
 World Series champions 1940
Succeeded byNew York Yankees1941 1943
Preceded byOakland Athletics1972 1974
 World Series champions 1975 1976
Succeeded byNew York Yankees1977 1978
Preceded byOakland Athletics1989
 World Series champions 1990
Succeeded byMinnesota Twins1991
Preceded byChicago Cubs1918
 National League champions 1919
Succeeded byBrooklyn Dodgers1920
Preceded byChicago Cubs1938
 National League champions 1939 1940
Succeeded byBrooklyn Dodgers1941
Preceded byPittsburgh Pirates1960
 National League champions 1961
Succeeded bySan Francisco Giants1962
Preceded byNew York Mets1969
 National League champions 1970
Succeeded byPittsburgh Pirates1971
Preceded byPittsburgh Pirates1971
 National League champions 1972
Succeeded byNew York Mets1973
Preceded byLos Angeles Dodgers1974
 National League champions 1975 1976
Succeeded byLos Angeles Dodgers1977 1978
Preceded bySan Francisco Giants1989
 National League champions 1990
Succeeded byAtlanta Braves1991 1992
Preceded byNone (first season)
 American Association championsCincinnati Red Stockings 1882
Succeeded byPhiladelphia Athletics1883
vteCincinnati Reds
Established in 1882
Formerly the Cincinnati Red Stockings and the Cincinnati Redlegs
Based in Cincinnati, Ohio
Franchise
History
Seasons
Records
No-hitters
Awards
Players
Managers
Owners and executives
Opening Day starting pitchers
Hall of Fame
Logos and uniforms
First-round draft picks
Ballparks
Bank Street Grounds
League Park
League Park II
Palace of the Fans
Crosley Field
Riverfront Stadium
Great American Ball Park
Spring training
Majestic Park
Tinker Field
Sixto Escobar Stadium
Plant Field
Al Lopez Field
Plant City Stadium
Ed Smith Stadium
Goodyear Ballpark
Culture
Cincinnati Red Stockings
Rosie Reds
Mr. Red
Black Sox Scandal
Kitty Burke
Ritter Collett
The Big Red Machine
Dowd Report
The Nasty Boys
Hal McCoy
Hustle
W711-2 trading cards
Lore
Carlton Fisk waves it fair
Tom Browning's perfect game
1999 NL Wild Card tie-breaker game
2013 NL Wild Card Game
A drive into deep left field by Castellanos
MLB at Field of Dreams
Rivalries
Cleveland Guardians
Pittsburgh Pirates
Key personnel
Owner: Robert Castellini
President of Baseball Operations: Dick Williams
General Manager: Nick Krall
Manager: David Bell
World Series Championships (5)
1919
1940
1975
1976
1990
National League pennants (9)
1919
1939
1940
1961
1970
1972
1975
1976
1990
AA pennants (1)
1882
Division titles (10)
National League Central
1995
2010
2012
National League West
1970
1972
1973
1975
1976
1979
1990
Minor league affiliates
Louisville Bats (Triple-A)
Chattanooga Lookouts (Double-A)
Dayton Dragons (High-A)
Daytona Tortugas (Single-A)
ACL Reds (Rookie)
DSL Reds (Rookie)
Media
Broadcasters
Radio: WLW
Reds Radio Network
TV: Bally Sports Ohio
Seasons (142)1880s
1880   1881    1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890s
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900s
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910s
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920s
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930s
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940s
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950s
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960s
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970s
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980s
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990s
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000s
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010s
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020s
2020
2021
2022
2023
Links to related articles
vteCincinnati Reds managers
Pop Snyder (1882 1884)
Will White (1884)
O. P. Caylor (1885 1886)
Gus Schmelz (1887 1889)
Tom Loftus (1890 1891)
Charles Comiskey (1892 1894)
Buck Ewing (1895 1899)
Bob Allen (1900)
Bid McPhee (1901 1902)
Frank Bancroft (1902)
Joe Kelley (1902 1905)
Ned Hanlon (1906 1907)
John Ganzel (1908)
Clark Griffith (1909 1911)
Hank O'Day (1912)
Joe Tinker (1913)
Buck Herzog (1914 1916)
Ivey Wingo (1916)
Christy Mathewson (1916 1918)
Heinie Groh (1918)
Pat Moran (1919 1923)
Jack Hendricks (1924 1929)
Dan Howley (1930 1932)
Donie Bush (1933)
Bob O'Farrell (1934)
Burt Shotton (1934)
Chuck Dressen (1934 1937)
Bobby Wallace (1937)
Bill McKechnie (1938 1946)
Hank Gowdy (1946)
Johnny Neun (1947 1948)
Bucky Walters (1948 1949)
Luke Sewell (1949 1952)
Earle Brucker (1952)
Rogers Hornsby (1952 1953)
Buster Mills (1953)
Birdie Tebbetts (1954 1958)
Jimmy Dykes (1958)
Mayo Smith (1959) 
Fred Hutchinson (1959 1964)
Dick Sisler (1964 1965)
Don Heffner (1966)
Dave Bristol (1966 1969)
Sparky Anderson (1970 1978)
John McNamara (1979 1982)
Russ Nixon (1982 1983)
Vern Rapp (1984)
Pete Rose (1984 1989)
Tommy Helms (1988 1989)
Lou Piniella (1990 1992)
Tony P rez (1993)
Davey Johnson (1993 1995)
Ray Knight (1996 1997)
Jack McKeon (1997 2000)
Bob Boone (2001 2003)
Ray Knight (2003)
Dave Miley (2003 2005)
Jerry Narron (2005 2007)
Pete Mackanin (2007)
Dusty Baker (2008 2013)
Bryan Price (2014 2018)
Jim Riggleman (2018)
David Bell (2019 )
vteCincinnati Reds retired numbers
1 Fred Hutchinson
5 Johnny Bench
8 Joe Morgan
10 Sparky Anderson
11 Barry Larkin
13 Dave Concepci n
14 Pete Rose 
18 Ted Kluszewski
20 Frank Robinson
24 Tony P rez
vteMembers of the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame
Sparky Anderson 
Jake Beckley 
Gus Bell 
Johnny Bench
Jack Billingham 
Ewell Blackwell 
Pedro Borb n 
Rube Bressler 
Dave Bristol 
Tom Browning 
Smoky Burgess 
Leo C rdenas 
Clay Carroll 
Sean Casey
Gordy Coleman 
Dave Concepci n 
Harry Craft 
Sam Crawford 
Hughie Critz 
Jake Daubert 
Eric Davis
Paul Derringer 
Pete Donohue 
Dan Driessen 
Adam Dunn 
Bob Ewing 
George Foster 
Lonny Frey
C sar Ger nimo 
Warren Giles 
Ival Goodman 
Wayne Granger 
Ken Griffey Jr. 
Ken Griffey Sr. 
Heinie Groh 
Don Gullett 
Noodles Hahn 
Bubbles Hargrave 
Tommy Helms
August Herrmann 
Bob Howsam 
Dummy Hoy 
Fred Hutchinson 
Joey Jay
Ted Kluszewski 
Larry Kopf 
Barry Larkin
Brooks Lawrence 
Ernie Lombardi
Red Lucas 
Dolf Luque 
Jerry Lynch 
Jim Maloney 
Lee May
Frank McCormick 
Mike McCormick 
Bill McKechnie 
Roy McMillan 
Bid McPhee
Joe Morgan 
Tony Mullane 
Billy Myers 
Gary Nolan 
Fred Norman 
Joe Nuxhall
Jim O'Toole 
Ron Oester 
Dave Parker 
Tony P rez
Vada Pinson 
Wally Post 
Bob Purkey
John Reilly 
Jos  Rijo 
Eppa Rixey
Frank Robinson 
Pete Rose
Edd Roush
Chris Sabo
Tom Seaver
Cy Seymour
Mario Soto
Johnny Temple 
Johnny Vander Meer
Bucky Walters
Billy Werber 
Will White 
George Wright 
Harry Wright
Championship navigation boxes
vteCincinnati Red Stockings 1882 American Association champions
Hick Carpenter
Chick Fulmer
Harry Luff
Jimmy Macullar
Harry McCormick
Bid McPhee
Pop Snyder
Joe Sommer
Dan Stearns
Harry Wheeler
Will White
Manager: Pop Snyder
vteCincinnati Reds 1919 World Series champions
Jake Daubert
Pat Duncan
Hod Eller
Ray Fisher
Heinie Groh
Larry Kopf
Dolf Luque
Sherry Magee
Greasy Neale
Bill Rariden
Morrie Rath
Jimmy Ring
Edd Roush
Dutch Ruether
Slim Sallee
Jimmy Smith
Ivey Wingo
Manager
Pat Moran
Regular season
vteCincinnati Reds 1940 World Series champions
3 Jimmie Wilson
4 Ernie Lombardi
6 Bill Baker
10 Frank McCormick (NL MVP)
11 Lonny Frey
12 Billy Myers
15 Lew Riggs
17 Eddie Joost
18 Billy Werber
19 Lefty Guise
20 Mike McCormick
21 Morrie Arnovich
22 Jimmy Ripple
23 Harry Craft
24 Ival Goodman
30 Paul Derringer
31 Bucky Walters
33 Johnny Vander Meer
34 Jim Turner
35 Whitey Moore
37 Milt Shoffner
39 Junior Thompson
40 Johnny Hutchings
41 Elmer Riddle
43 Joe Beggs
Manager
1 Bill McKechnie
Coaches
2 Hank Gowdy
3 Jimmie Wilson
Regular season
vteCincinnati Reds 1975 World Series champions
5 Johnny Bench
8 Joe Morgan (NL MVP)
9 Bill Plummer
12 Darrel Chaney
13 Dave Concepci n
14 Pete Rose (World Series MVP)
15 George Foster
17 Terry Crowley
20 C sar Ger nimo
22 Dan Driessen
23 Doug Flynn
24 Tony P rez
26 Merv Rettenmund
30 Ken Griffey
31 Clay Kirby
32 Fred Norman
33 Ed Armbrister
34 Pedro Borb n
35 Don Gullett
36 Clay Carroll
37 Will McEnaney
38 Gary Nolan
43 Jack Billingham
44 Pat Darcy
49 Rawly Eastwick
Manager
10 Sparky Anderson
Coaches
2 Alex Grammas
3 George Scherger
4 Larry Shepard
18 Ted Kluszewski
Regular season
National League Championship Series
vteCincinnati Reds 1976 World Series champions
5 Johnny Bench (World Series MVP)
8 Joe Morgan (NL MVP)
9 Bill Plummer
11 Bob Bailey
13 Dave Concepci n
14 Pete Rose
15 George Foster
19 Joel Youngblood
20 C sar Ger nimo
21 Mike Lum
22 Dan Driessen
23 Doug Flynn
24 Tony P rez
30 Ken Griffey
32 Fred Norman
33 Ed Armbrister
34 Pedro Borb n
35 Don Gullett
37 Will McEnaney
38 Gary Nolan
40 Pat Zachry (NL ROY)
42 Santo Alcal 
43 Jack Billingham
45 Manny Sarmiento
49 Rawly Eastwick
Manager
10 Sparky Anderson
Coaches
2 Russ Nixon
3 George Scherger
4 Larry Shepard
18 Ted Kluszewski
Regular season
National League Championship Series
vteCincinnati Reds 1990 World Series champions
7 Mariano Duncan
9 Joe Oliver
10 Luis Qui ones
11 Barry Larkin
12 Billy Bates
15 Glenn Braggs
16 Ron Oester
17 Chris Sabo
20 Danny Jackson
21 Paul O'Neill
22 Billy Hatcher
23 Hal Morris
25 Todd Benzinger
26 Terry Lee
27 Jos  Rijo (World Series MVP)
28 Randy Myers (NLCS MVP)
29 Herm Winningham
32 Tom Browning
34 Jeff Reed
37 Norm Charlton
40 Jack Armstrong
42 Rick Mahler
44 Eric Davis
47 Scott Scudder
49 Rob Dibble (NLCS MVP)
Manager
41 Lou Piniella
Coaches
2 Sam Perlozzo
3 Larry Rothschild
4 Jackie Moore
24 Tony P rez
35 Stan Williams
Regular season
National League Championship Series
vteMajor League Baseball2023 seasonAmerican LeagueEast
Baltimore Orioles
Boston Red Sox
New York Yankees
Tampa Bay Rays
Toronto Blue Jays
Central
Chicago White Sox
Cleveland Guardians
Detroit Tigers
Kansas City Royals
Minnesota Twins
West
Houston Astros
Los Angeles Angels
Oakland Athletics
Seattle Mariners
Texas Rangers
National LeagueEast
Atlanta Braves
Miami Marlins
New York Mets
Philadelphia Phillies
Washington Nationals
Central
Chicago Cubs
Cincinnati Reds
Milwaukee Brewers
Pittsburgh Pirates
St. Louis Cardinals
West
Arizona Diamondbacks
Colorado Rockies
Los Angeles Dodgers
San Diego Padres
San Francisco Giants
Schedule
Spring training
Opening Day
Jackie Robinson Day
Civil Rights Game
All-Star Game
Interleague play
International games
Little League Classic
Field of Dreams Game
Players Weekend
World Baseball Classic
Postseason
World Series
Champions
AL
AL champions
ALCS
ALDS
NL
NL champions
NLCS
NLDS
Wild Card Game/Series
Appearances
Streaks
Droughts
Series
Business
Authentication Program
Business rules
Draft
Rule 5
Highest-paid players
Hot stove league
Luxury tax
Lockouts/strikes
Media
Logo
Radio
Television
MLB.com
MLB Advanced Media
MLB Network
Minor League Baseball
Players Association
World Baseball Classic Inc.
Transactions
Free agency
Valuations
Winter Meetings
Miscellaneous
Instant replay
Team uniforms
Stadiums
Mascots
Rivalries
History
History
AL
Seasons
Tie-breakers
Tie-breaking procedures
All-time win loss records
Records
Awards
Retired numbers
Hall of Fame
members
Players' League
Union Association
National Baseball Commission
Federal League
Continental League
Baseball color line
First black players in MLB
Negro leaguers who played in MLB
Steroid usage
Drug policy
suspensions
Mitchell Report
Biogenesis scandal
BALCO scandal
Barry Bonds perjury case
Timeline
Timeline of Major League Baseball
History of team nicknames
Dead-ball era
Live-ball era
Golden age of baseball
Defunct and relocated teams
Relocations of the 1950s 1960s
Expansion
1961
1962
1969
1977
1993
1998
Contraction attempt
Commissioner: Rob Manfred
League Presidents
AL
NL
vteNational LeagueOrganization
Parent league: Major League Baseball
Partner league: American League
Honorary president: Bill Giles
Current teamsEast
Atlanta Braves
Miami Marlins
New York Mets
Philadelphia Phillies
Washington Nationals
Central
Chicago Cubs
Cincinnati Reds
Milwaukee Brewers
Pittsburgh Pirates
St. Louis Cardinals
West
Arizona Diamondbacks
Colorado Rockies
Los Angeles Dodgers
San Diego Padres
San Francisco Giants
Former, relocated, and disestablished teams
19th-century National League teams
Boston Beaneaters/Braves (1883 1952)
Milwaukee Braves (1953 1965)
Brooklyn Dodgers (1883 1957)
New York Giants (1883 1957)
Houston Colt .45s/Astros (1962 2012)
Montreal Expos (1969 2004)
Championship play
Champions
Championship Series
Division Series
Wild Card Game
Wild Card winners
Related articles
Professional baseball
vteSports teams based in OhioBaseball
MLB
Cincinnati Reds
Cleveland Guardians
AAA
Columbus Clippers
Toledo Mud Hens
AA
Akron RubberDucks
A+
Dayton Dragons
Lake County Captains
MLBDL
Mahoning Valley Scrappers
FL
Lake Erie Crushers
PL
Champion City Kings
Chillicothe Paints
GLSCL
Cincinnati Steam
Grand Lake Mariners
Hamilton Joes
Licking County Settlers
Lima Locos
Lorain County Ironmen
Southern Ohio Copperheads
Xenia Scouts
Basketball
NBA
Cleveland Cavaliers
G League
Cleveland Charge
Football
NFL
Cincinnati Bengals
Cleveland Browns
WFA
Cincinnati Sizzle
Cleveland Fusion
Columbus Comets
Toledo Reign
Hockey
NHL
Columbus Blue Jackets
AHL
Cleveland Monsters
ECHL
Cincinnati Cyclones
Toledo Walleye
USHL
Youngstown Phantoms
USPHL
Toledo Cherokee
Wooster Oilers
Roller derby
WFTDA
Akron Roller Derby
Burning River Roller Derby
Cincinnati Rollergirls
Gem City Roller Derby
Glass City Rollers
Little Steel Derby Girls
Ohio Roller Derby
MRDA
Cincinnati Battering Rams
Rugby league
NARL
Cleveland Rugby League
Rugby union
USARNC
Columbus RFC
Dayton Area Rugby Club
Cincinnati Wolfhounds
Soccer
MLS
Columbus Crew
FC Cincinnati
MLS Next Pro
Columbus Crew 2
FC Cincinnati 2
USL2
Cincinnati Dutch Lions
Dayton Dutch Lions
Kings Hammer SC
Toledo Villa FC
NPSL
Akron City FC
Cleveland SC
FC Columbus
WPSL
Cleveland Ambassadors
Cincinnati Sirens
Columbus Eagles
Dayton Dutch Lions WFC
MLIS
Cincinnati Swerve
Cleveland Crunch
Australian rules football
USAFL
Cincinnati Dockers
College athletics(NCAA Division I)
Akron
Bowling Green
Cincinnati
Cleveland State
Dayton
Kent State
Miami
Ohio
Ohio State
Toledo
Wright State
Xavier
Youngstown State
vteLindner family
Carl Lindner Jr.
Carl Lindner III
Businesses
American Financial Group
FC Cincinnati
United Dairy Farmers
Philanthropy
Carl H. Lindner College of Business
Cincinnati Hills Christian Academy
Lindner Family Tennis Center
Portals: Baseball Ohio
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cincinnati_Reds&oldid=1149684029"