Entire range of frequencies of electromagnetic radiation
Class
 
Wave-length
 
{\displaystyle \lambda }
Freq-uency
f
{\displaystyle f}
Energy perphoton
E
{\displaystyle E}
Ionizingradiation
 
Gamma rays
 
1 pm
300 EHz
1.24 MeV
10 pm
30 EHz
124 keV
HX
Hard X-rays
100 pm
3 EHz
12.4 keV
SX
Soft X-rays
1 nm
300 PHz
1.24 keV
10 nm
30 PHz
124 eV
EUV
Extremeultraviolet
100 nm
3 PHz
12.4 eV
 
NUV
Near ultraviolet,visible
 
1  m
300 THz
1.24 eV
NIR
Near infrared
10   m
30  THz
124 meV
MIR
Mid infrared
100  m
3 THz
12.4 meV
FIR
Far infrared
1 mm
300  GHz
1.24 meV
Micro-waves
EHF
Extremely highfrequency
1  cm
30 GHz
124  eV
SHF
Super highfrequency
1 dm
3 GHz
12.4  eV
UHF
Ultra highfrequency
1  m
300 MHz
1.24  eV
Radiowaves
VHF
Very highfrequency
10 m
30 MHz
124 neV
HF
Highfrequency
100 m
3 MHz
12.4 neV
MF
Mediumfrequency
1 km
300 kHz
1.24 neV
LF
Lowfrequency
10 km
30 kHz
124 peV
VLF
Very lowfrequency
100 km
3 kHz
12.4 peV
ULF
Ultra lowfrequency
1 Mm
300 Hz
1.24 peV
SLF
Super lowfrequency
10 Mm
30 Hz
124 feV
ELF
Extremely lowfrequency
100 Mm
3 Hz
12.4 feV
Sources: File:Light spectrum.svg[1][2][3]
The electromagnetic spectrum is the range of frequencies (the spectrum) of electromagnetic radiation and their respective wavelengths and photon energies.
The electromagnetic spectrum covers electromagnetic waves with frequencies ranging from below one hertz to above 1025 hertz, corresponding to wavelengths from thousands of kilometers down to a fraction of the size of an atomic nucleus.  This frequency range is divided into separate bands, and the electromagnetic waves within each frequency band are called by different names; beginning at the low-frequency (long-wavelength) end of the spectrum these are: radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays at the high-frequency (short wavelength) end.  The electromagnetic waves in each of these bands have different characteristics, such as how they are produced, how they interact with matter, and their practical applications.  There is no known limit for long and short wavelengths. Extreme ultraviolet, soft X-rays, hard X-rays and gamma rays are  classified as ionizing radiation because their photons have enough energy to ionize atoms, causing chemical reactions. Exposure to ionizing radiation can be a health hazard, causing radiation sickness, DNA damage and cancer.  Radiation of visible light and longer wavelengths are classified as nonionizing radiation because they have insufficient energy to cause these effects.
Throughout most of the electromagnetic spectrum, spectroscopy can be used to separate waves of different frequencies, producing a spectrum of the constituent frequencies.  Spectroscopy is used to study the interactions of electromagnetic waves with matter.[4]
History and discovery[edit]
See also: History of electromagnetism, History of radio, History of electrical engineering, and History of optics
Humans have always been aware of visible light and radiant heat but for most of history it was not known that these phenomena were connected or were representatives of a more extensive principle. The ancient Greeks recognized that light traveled in straight lines and studied some of its properties, including reflection and refraction. Light was intensively studied from the beginning of the 17th century leading to the invention of important instruments like the telescope and microscope.  Isaac Newton was the first to use the term spectrum for the range of colours that white light could be split into with a prism.  Starting in 1666, Newton showed that these colours were intrinsic to light and could be recombined into white light.  A debate arose over whether light had a wave nature or a particle nature with Ren  Descartes, Robert Hooke and Christiaan Huygens favouring a wave description and Newton favouring a particle description.  Huygens in particular had a well developed theory from which he was able to derive the laws of reflection and refraction.  Around 1801, Thomas Young measured the wavelength of a light beam with his two-slit experiment thus conclusively demonstrating that light was a wave.
In 1800, William Herschel discovered infrared radiation.[5]  He was studying the temperature of different colours by moving a thermometer through light split by a prism. He noticed that the highest temperature was beyond red. He theorized that this temperature change was due to "calorific rays", a type of light ray that could not be seen.  The next year, Johann Ritter, working at the other end of the spectrum, noticed what he called "chemical rays" (invisible light rays that induced certain chemical reactions). These behaved similarly to visible violet light rays, but were beyond them in the spectrum.[6]  They were later renamed ultraviolet radiation.
The study of electromagnetism began in 1820 when Hans Christian  rsted discovered that electric currents produce magnetic fields (Oersted's law). Light was first linked to electromagnetism in 1845, when Michael Faraday noticed that the polarization of light traveling through a transparent material responded to a magnetic field (see Faraday effect). During the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell developed four partial differential equations (Maxwell's equations) for the electromagnetic field. Two of these equations predicted the possibility and behavior of waves in the field. Analyzing the speed of these theoretical waves, Maxwell realized that they must travel at a speed that was about the known speed of light. This startling coincidence in value led Maxwell to make the inference that light itself is a type of electromagnetic wave. Maxwell's equations predicted an infinite range of frequencies of electromagnetic waves, all traveling at the speed of light. This was the first indication of the existence of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Maxwell's predicted waves included waves at very low frequencies compared to infrared, which in theory might be created by oscillating charges in an ordinary electrical circuit of a certain type. Attempting to prove Maxwell's equations and detect such low frequency electromagnetic radiation, in 1886, the physicist Heinrich Hertz built an apparatus to generate and detect what are now called radio waves. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer (by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflected and refracted by various dielectric media, in the same manner as light. For example, Hertz was able to focus the waves using a lens made of tree resin. In a later experiment, Hertz similarly produced and measured the properties of microwaves. These new types of waves paved the way for inventions such as the wireless telegraph and the radio.
In 1895, Wilhelm R ntgen noticed a new type of radiation emitted during an experiment with an evacuated tube subjected to a high voltage. He called this radiation "x-rays" and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Before long, many uses were found for this radiography.
The last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery of gamma rays. In 1900, Paul Villard was studying the radioactive emissions of radium when he identified a new type of radiation that he at first thought consisted of particles similar to known alpha and beta particles, but with the power of being far more penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British physicist William Henry Bragg demonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, not particles, and in 1914, Ernest Rutherford (who had named them gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fundamentally different from charged alpha and beta particles) and Edward Andrade measured their wavelengths, and found that gamma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelengths.
The wave-particle debate was rekindled in 1901 when Max Planck discovered that light is absorbed only in discrete "quanta", now called photons, implying that light has a particle nature.  This idea was made explicit by Albert Einstein in 1905, but never accepted by Planck and many other contemporaries.  The modern position of science is that electromagnetic radiation has both a wave and a particle nature, the wave-particle duality. The contradictions arising from this position are still being debated by scientists and philosophers.
Range[edit]
Electromagnetic waves are typically described by any of the following three physical properties: the frequency f, wavelength  , or photon energy E. Frequencies observed in astronomy range from 2.4 1023 Hz (1 GeV gamma rays) down to the local plasma frequency of the ionized interstellar medium (~1 kHz). Wavelength is inversely proportional to the wave frequency,[4] so gamma rays have very short wavelengths that are fractions of the size of atoms, whereas wavelengths on the opposite end of the spectrum can be indefinitely long. Photon energy is directly proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma ray photons have the highest energy (around a billion electron volts), while radio wave photons have very low energy (around a femtoelectronvolt). These relations are illustrated by the following equations:
f
=
c
 
,
or
f
=
E
h
,
or
E
=
h
c
 
,
{\displaystyle f={\frac {c}{\lambda }},\quad {\text{or}}\quad f={\frac {E}{h}},\quad {\text{or}}\quad E={\frac {hc}{\lambda }},}
where:
c = 299792458 m/s is the speed of light in vacuum
h = 6.62607015 10 34 J s = 4.13566733(10) 10 15 eV s is the Planck constant.[7]
Whenever electromagnetic waves travel in a medium with matter, their wavelength is decreased. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, whatever medium they are traveling through, are usually quoted in terms of the vacuum wavelength, although this is not always explicitly stated.
Generally, electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength into radio wave, microwave, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays. The behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. When EM radiation interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) it carries.
Spectroscopy can detect a much wider region of the EM spectrum than the visible wavelength range of 400 nm to 700 nm in a vacuum. A common laboratory spectroscope can detect wavelengths from 2 nm to 2500 nm.[citation needed] Detailed information about the physical properties of objects, gases, or even stars can be obtained from this type of device. Spectroscopes are widely used in astrophysics. For example, many hydrogen atoms emit a radio wave photon that has a wavelength of 21.12 cm. Also, frequencies of 30 Hz and below can be produced by and are important in the study of certain stellar nebulae[8] and frequencies as high as 2.9 1027 Hz have been detected from astrophysical sources.[9]
Regions[edit]
 The electromagnetic spectrum
 A diagram of the electromagnetic spectrum, showing various properties across the range of frequencies and wavelengths
The types of electromagnetic radiation are broadly classified into the following classes (regions, bands or types):[4]
Gamma radiation
X-ray radiation
Ultraviolet radiation
Visible light
Infrared radiation
Microwave radiation
Radio waves
This classification goes in the increasing order of wavelength, which is characteristic of the type of radiation.[4]
There are no precisely defined boundaries between the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum; rather they fade into each other like the bands in a rainbow (which is the sub-spectrum of visible light). Radiation of each frequency and wavelength (or in each band) has a mix of properties of the two regions of the spectrum that bound it. For example, red light resembles infrared radiation in that it can excite and add energy to some chemical bonds and indeed must do so to power the chemical mechanisms responsible for photosynthesis and the working of the visual system.
The distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is partly based on sources: the photons generated from nuclear decay or other nuclear and subnuclear/particle process are always termed gamma rays, whereas X-rays are generated by electronic transitions involving highly energetic inner atomic electrons.[10][11][12] In general, nuclear transitions are much more energetic than electronic transitions, so gamma rays are more energetic than X-rays, but exceptions exist. By analogy to electronic transitions, muonic atom transitions are also said to produce X-rays, even though their energy may exceed 6 megaelectronvolts (0.96 pJ),[13] whereas there are many (77 known to be less than 10 keV (1.6 fJ)) low-energy nuclear transitions (e.g., the 7.6 eV (1.22 aJ) nuclear transition of thorium-229m), and, despite being one million-fold less energetic than some muonic X-rays, the emitted photons are still called gamma rays due to their nuclear origin.[14]
The convention that EM radiation that is known to come from the nucleus is always called "gamma ray" radiation is the only convention that is universally respected, however. Many astronomical gamma ray sources (such as gamma ray bursts) are known to be too energetic (in both intensity and wavelength) to be of nuclear origin. Quite often, in high-energy physics and in medical radiotherapy, very high energy EMR (in the > 10 MeV region) which is of higher energy than any nuclear gamma ray is not called X-ray or gamma ray, but instead by the generic term of "high-energy photons".
The region of the spectrum where a particular observed electromagnetic radiation falls is reference frame-dependent (due to the Doppler shift for light), so EM radiation that one observer would say is in one region of the spectrum could appear to an observer moving at a substantial fraction of the speed of light with respect to the first to be in another part of the spectrum. For example, consider the cosmic microwave background. It was produced when matter and radiation decoupled, by the de-excitation of hydrogen atoms to the ground state. These photons were from Lyman series transitions, putting them in the ultraviolet (UV) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Now this radiation has undergone enough cosmological red shift to put it into the microwave region of the spectrum for observers moving slowly (compared to the speed of light) with respect to the cosmos.
Rationale for names[edit]
Electromagnetic radiation interacts with matter in different ways across the spectrum. These types of interaction are so different that historically different names have been applied to different parts of the spectrum, as though these were different types of radiation. Thus, although these "different kinds" of electromagnetic radiation form a quantitatively continuous spectrum of frequencies and wavelengths, the spectrum remains divided for practical reasons arising from these qualitative interaction differences.
Electromagnetic radiation interaction with matter
Region of the spectrum
Main interactions with matter
Radio
Collective oscillation of charge carriers in bulk material (plasma oscillation). An example would be the oscillatory travels of the electrons in an antenna.
Microwave through far infrared
Plasma oscillation, molecular rotation
Near infrared
Molecular vibration, plasma oscillation (in metals only)
Visible
Molecular electron excitation (including pigment molecules found in the human retina), plasma oscillations (in metals only)
Ultraviolet
Excitation of molecular and atomic valence electrons, including ejection of the electrons (photoelectric effect)
X-rays
Excitation and ejection of core atomic electrons, Compton scattering (for low atomic numbers)
Gamma rays
Energetic ejection of core electrons in heavy elements, Compton scattering (for all atomic numbers), excitation of atomic nuclei, including dissociation of nuclei
High-energy gamma rays
Creation of particle-antiparticle pairs. At very high energies a single photon can create a shower of high-energy particles and antiparticles upon interaction with matter.
Types of radiation[edit]
Radio waves[edit]
Main articles: Radio frequency, Radio spectrum, and Radio waves
Radio waves are emitted and received by antennas, which consist of conductors such as metal rod resonators.  In artificial generation of radio waves, an electronic device called a transmitter generates an AC electric current which is applied to an antenna.  The oscillating electrons in the antenna generate oscillating electric and magnetic fields that radiate away from the antenna as radio waves.  In reception of radio waves, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields of a radio wave couple to the electrons in an antenna, pushing them back and forth, creating oscillating currents which are applied to a radio receiver.  Earth's atmosphere is mainly transparent to radio waves, except for layers of charged particles in the ionosphere which can reflect certain frequencies.
Radio waves are extremely widely used to transmit information across distances in radio communication systems such as radio broadcasting, television, two way radios,  mobile phones, communication satellites, and wireless networking.  In a radio communication system, a radio frequency current is modulated with an information-bearing signal in a transmitter by varying either the amplitude, frequency or phase, and applied to an antenna.  The radio waves carry the information across space to a receiver, where they are received by an antenna and the information extracted by demodulation in the receiver.     Radio waves are also used for navigation in systems like Global Positioning System (GPS) and navigational beacons, and locating distant objects in radiolocation and radar.  They are also used for remote control, and for industrial heating.
The use of the radio spectrum is strictly regulated by governments, coordinated by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) which allocates frequencies to different users for different uses.
Microwaves[edit]
Main article: Microwaves
 Plot of Earth's atmospheric opacity to various wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation. This is the surface-to-space opacity, the atmosphere is transparent to longwave radio transmissions within the troposphere but opaque to space due to the ionosphere.
 Plot of atmospheric opacity for terrestrial to terrestrial transmission showing the molecules responsible for some of the resonances
Microwaves are radio waves of short wavelength, from about 10 centimeters to one millimeter, in the SHF and EHF frequency bands.   Microwave energy is produced with klystron and magnetron tubes, and with solid state devices such as Gunn and IMPATT diodes.  Although they are emitted and absorbed by short antennas, they are also absorbed by polar molecules, coupling to vibrational and rotational modes, resulting in bulk heating.  Unlike higher frequency waves such as infrared and visible light which are absorbed mainly at surfaces, microwaves can penetrate into materials and deposit their energy below the surface.   This effect is used to heat food in microwave ovens, and for industrial heating and medical diathermy.    Microwaves are the main wavelengths used in radar, and are used for satellite communication, and wireless networking technologies such as Wi-Fi. The copper cables (transmission lines) which are used to carry lower-frequency radio waves to antennas have excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and metal pipes called waveguides are used to carry them.  Although at the low end of the band the atmosphere is mainly transparent, at the upper end of the band absorption of microwaves by atmospheric gases limits practical propagation distances to a few kilometers.
Terahertz radiation or sub-millimeter radiation is a region of the spectrum from about 100 GHz to 30 terahertz (THz) between microwaves and far infrared which can be regarded as belonging to either band. Until recently, the range was rarely studied and few sources existed for microwave energy in the so-called terahertz gap, but applications such as imaging and communications are now appearing. Scientists are also looking to apply terahertz technology in the armed forces, where high-frequency waves might be directed at enemy troops to incapacitate their electronic equipment.[15]  Terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by atmospheric gases, making this frequency range useless for long-distance communication.
Infrared radiation[edit]
Main article: Infrared radiation
The infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers the range from roughly 300 GHz to 400 THz (1 mm   750 nm). It can be divided into three parts:[4]
Far-infrared, from 300 GHz to 30 THz (1 mm   10  m). The lower part of this range may also be called microwaves or terahertz waves. This radiation is typically absorbed by so-called rotational modes in gas-phase molecules, by molecular motions in liquids, and by phonons in solids. The water in Earth's atmosphere absorbs so strongly in this range that it renders the atmosphere in effect opaque. However, there are certain wavelength ranges ("windows") within the opaque range that allow partial transmission, and can be used for astronomy. The wavelength range from approximately 200  m up to a few mm is often referred to as Submillimetre astronomy, reserving far infrared for wavelengths below 200  m.
Mid-infrared, from 30 to 120 THz (10 2.5  m). Hot objects (black-body radiators) can radiate strongly in this range, and human skin at normal body temperature radiates strongly at the lower end of this region. This radiation is absorbed by molecular vibrations, where the different atoms in a molecule vibrate around their equilibrium positions. This range is sometimes called the fingerprint region, since the mid-infrared absorption spectrum of a compound is very specific for that compound.
Near-infrared, from 120 to 400 THz (2,500 750 nm). Physical processes that are relevant for this range are similar to those for visible light. The highest frequencies in this region can be detected directly by some types of photographic film, and by many types of solid state image sensors for infrared photography and videography.
Visible light[edit]
Colour
Wavelength(nm)
Frequency(THz)
Photon energy(eV)
 violet
380 450
670 790
2.75 3.26
 blue
450 485
620 670
2.56 2.75
 cyan
485 500
600 620
2.48 2.56
 green
500 565
530 600
2.19 2.48
 yellow
565 590
510 530
2.10 2.19
 orange
590 625
480 510
1.98 2.10
 red
625 750
400 480
1.65 1.98
Main article: Visible spectrum
Above infrared in frequency comes visible light. The Sun emits its peak power in the visible region, although integrating the entire emission power spectrum through all wavelengths shows that the Sun emits slightly more infrared than visible light.[16] By definition, visible light is the part of the EM spectrum the human eye is the most sensitive to. Visible light (and near-infrared light) is typically absorbed and emitted by electrons in molecules and atoms that move from one energy level to another. This action allows the chemical mechanisms that underlie human vision and plant photosynthesis. The light that excites the human visual system is a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. A rainbow shows the optical (visible) part of the electromagnetic spectrum; infrared (if it could be seen) would be located just beyond the red side of the rainbow whilst ultraviolet would appear just beyond the opposite violet end.
Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 nm and 760 nm (400 790 terahertz) is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light. Other wavelengths, especially near infrared (longer than 760 nm) and ultraviolet (shorter than 380 nm) are also sometimes referred to as light, especially when the visibility to humans is not relevant. White light is a combination of lights of different wavelengths in the visible spectrum. Passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colours of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400 nm and 780 nm.
If radiation having a frequency in the visible region of the EM spectrum reflects off an object, say, a bowl of fruit, and then strikes the eyes, this results in visual perception of the scene. The brain's visual system processes the multitude of reflected frequencies into different shades and hues, and through this insufficiently-understood psychophysical phenomenon, most people perceive a bowl of fruit.
At most wavelengths, however, the information carried by electromagnetic radiation is not directly detected by human senses. Natural sources produce EM radiation across the spectrum, and technology can also manipulate a broad range of wavelengths. Optical fiber transmits light that, although not necessarily in the visible part of the spectrum (it is usually infrared), can carry information. The modulation is similar to that used with radio waves.
Ultraviolet radiation[edit]
Main article: Ultraviolet
 The amount of penetration of UV relative to altitude in Earth's ozone
Next in frequency comes ultraviolet (UV). The wavelength of UV rays is shorter than the violet end of the visible spectrum but longer than the X-ray.
UV is the longest wavelength radiation whose photons are energetic enough to ionize atoms, separating electrons from them, and thus causing chemical reactions.  Short wavelength UV and the shorter wavelength radiation above it (X-rays and gamma rays) are called ionizing radiation, and exposure to them can damage living tissue, making them a health hazard.  UV can also cause many substances to glow with visible light; this is called fluorescence.
At the middle range of UV, UV rays cannot ionize but can break chemical bonds, making molecules unusually reactive. Sunburn, for example, is caused by the disruptive effects of middle range UV radiation on skin cells, which is the main cause of skin cancer. UV rays in the middle range can irreparably damage the complex DNA molecules in the cells producing thymine dimers making it a very potent mutagen.
The Sun emits UV radiation (about 10% of its total power), including extremely short wavelength UV that could potentially destroy most life on land (ocean water would provide some protection for life there). However, most of the Sun's damaging UV wavelengths are absorbed by the atmosphere before they reach the surface. The higher energy (shortest wavelength) ranges of UV (called "vacuum UV") are absorbed by nitrogen and, at longer wavelengths, by simple diatomic oxygen in the air. Most of the UV in the mid-range of energy is blocked by the ozone layer, which absorbs strongly in the important 200 315 nm range, the lower energy part of which is too long for ordinary dioxygen in air to absorb. This leaves less than 3% of sunlight at sea level in UV, with all of this remainder at the lower energies. The remainder is UV-A, along with some UV-B. The very lowest energy range of UV between 315 nm and visible light (called UV-A) is not blocked well by the atmosphere, but does not cause sunburn and does less biological damage. However, it is not harmless and does create oxygen radicals, mutations and skin damage.
X-rays[edit]
Main article: X-rays
After UV come X-rays, which, like the upper ranges of UV are also ionizing. However, due to their higher energies, X-rays can also interact with matter by means of the Compton effect. Hard X-rays have shorter wavelengths than soft X-rays and as they can pass through many substances with little absorption, they can be used to 'see through' objects with 'thicknesses' less than that equivalent to a few meters of water. One notable use is diagnostic X-ray imaging in medicine (a process known as radiography). X-rays are useful as probes in high-energy physics. In astronomy, the accretion disks around neutron stars and black holes emit X-rays, enabling studies of these phenomena. X-rays are also emitted by stellar corona and are strongly emitted by some types of nebulae. However, X-ray telescopes must be placed outside the Earth's atmosphere to see astronomical X-rays, since the great depth of the atmosphere of Earth is opaque to X-rays (with areal density of 1000 g/cm2), equivalent to 10 meters thickness of water.[17] This is an amount sufficient to block almost all astronomical X-rays (and also astronomical gamma rays see below).
Gamma rays[edit]
Main article: Gamma rays
After hard X-rays come gamma rays, which were discovered by Paul Ulrich Villard in 1900. These are the most energetic photons, having no defined lower limit to their wavelength. In astronomy they are valuable for studying high-energy objects or regions, however as with X-rays this can only be done with telescopes outside the Earth's atmosphere. Gamma rays are used experimentally by physicists for their penetrating ability and are produced by a number of  radioisotopes. They are used for irradiation of foods and seeds for sterilization, and in medicine they are occasionally used in radiation cancer therapy.[18] More commonly, gamma rays are used for diagnostic imaging in nuclear medicine, an example being PET scans. The wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects of Compton scattering.
See also[edit]
Bandplan
Cosmic ray
Digital dividend after digital television transition
Electroencephalography
Infrared window
Ionizing radiation
List of international common standards
Optical window
Ozone layer
Radiant energy
Radiation
Radio window
Spectral imaging
Spectroscopy
V band
W band
Notes and references[edit]
^ What is Light? Archived December 5, 2013, at the Wayback Machine   UC Davis lecture slides
^ Elert, Glenn. "The Electromagnetic Spectrum". The Physics Hypertextbook. Retrieved 2022-01-21.
^ Stimac, Tomislav. "Definition of frequency bands (VLF, ELF... etc.)". vlf.it. Retrieved 2022-01-21.
^ a b c d e Mehta, Akul (25 August 2011). "Introduction to the Electromagnetic Spectrum and Spectroscopy". Pharmaxchange.info. Retrieved 2011-11-08.
^ "Herschel Discovers Infrared Light". Cool Cosmos Classroom activities. Archived from the original on 2012-02-25. Retrieved 4 March 2013. He directed sunlight through a glass prism to create a spectrum [ ] and then measured the temperature of each colour. [ ] He found that the temperatures of the colours increased from the violet to the red part of the spectrum. [ ] Herschel decided to measure the temperature just beyond the red of the spectrum in a region where no sunlight was visible. To his surprise, he found that this region had the highest temperature of all.
^ Davidson, Michael W. "Johann Wilhelm Ritter (1776 1810)". The Florida State University. Retrieved 5 March 2013. Ritter [ ] hypothesized that there must also be invisible radiation beyond the violet end of the spectrum and commenced experiments to confirm his speculation. He began working with silver chloride, a substance decomposed by light, measuring the speed at which different colours of light broke it down. [ ] Ritter [ ] demonstrated that the fastest rate of decomposition occurred with radiation that could not be seen, but that existed in a region beyond the violet. Ritter initially referred to the new type of radiation as chemical rays, but the title of ultraviolet radiation eventually became the preferred term.
^ Mohr, Peter J.; Taylor, Barry N.; Newell, David B. (2008). "CODATA Recommended Values of the Fundamental Physical Constants: 2006" (PDF). Reviews of Modern Physics. 80 (2): 633 730. arXiv:0801.0028. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80..633M. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.633. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-10-01.
Direct link to value.
^ Condon, J. J.; Ransom, S. M. "Essential Radio Astronomy: Pulsar Properties". National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Archived from the original on 2011-05-04. Retrieved 2008-01-05.
^ Abdo, A. A.; Allen, B.; Berley, D.; Blaufuss, E.; Casanova, S.; Chen, C.; Coyne, D. G.; Delay, R. S.; Dingus, B. L.; Ellsworth, R. W.; Fleysher, L.; Fleysher, R.; Gebauer, I.; Gonzalez, M. M.; Goodman, J. A.; Hays, E.; Hoffman, C. M.; Kolterman, B. E.; Kelley, L. A.; Lansdell, C. P.; Linnemann, J. T.; McEnery, J. E.; Mincer, A. I.; Moskalenko, I. V.; Nemethy, P.; Noyes, D.; Ryan, J. M.; Samuelson, F. W.; Saz Parkinson, P. M.;  et al. (2007). "Discovery of TeV Gamma-Ray Emission from the Cygnus Region of the Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal. 658 (1): L33 L36. arXiv:astro-ph/0611691. Bibcode:2007ApJ...658L..33A. doi:10.1086/513696. S2CID 17886934.
^ Feynman, Richard; Leighton, Robert; Sands, Matthew (1963). The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol.1. USA: Addison-Wesley. pp. 2 5. ISBN 978-0-201-02116-5.
^ L'Annunziata, Michael; Baradei, Mohammad (2003). Handbook of Radioactivity Analysis. Academic Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-12-436603-9.
^ Grupen, Claus; Cowan, G.; Eidelman, S. D.; Stroh, T. (2005). Astroparticle Physics. Springer. p. 109. ISBN 978-3-540-25312-9.
^ Corrections to muonic X-rays and a possible proton halo slac-pub-0335 (1967)
^ "Gamma-Rays". Hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu. Retrieved 2010-10-16.
^ "Advanced weapon systems using lethal Short-pulse terahertz radiation from high-intensity-laser-produced plasmas". India Daily. March 6, 2005. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 2010-09-27.
^ "Reference Solar Spectral Irradiance: Air Mass 1.5". Retrieved 2009-11-12.
^ Koontz, Steve (26 June 2012) Designing Spacecraft and Mission Operations Plans to Meet Flight Crew Radiation Dose. NASA/MIT Workshop. See pages I-7 (atmosphere) and I-23 (for water).
^ Uses of Electromagnetic Waves | gcse-revision, physics, waves, uses-electromagnetic-waves | Revision World
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Electromagnetic spectrum.
Australian Radiofrequency Spectrum Allocations Chart (from Australian Communications and Media Authority)
Canadian Table of Frequency Allocations Archived 2008-12-09 at the Wayback Machine (from Industry Canada)
U.S. Frequency Allocation Chart   Covering the range 3 kHz to 300 GHz (from Department of Commerce)
UK frequency allocation table (from Ofcom, which inherited the Radiocommunications Agency's duties, pdf format)
Flash EM Spectrum Presentation / Tool   Very complete and customizable.
Poster "Electromagnetic Radiation Spectrum" (992 kB)
vteElectromagnetic spectrum
Gamma rays
X-rays
Ultraviolet
Visible
Infrared
Microwave
Radio  higher frequencies longer wavelengths  
Gamma rays
Very-high-energy gamma ray
Ultra-high-energy gamma ray
X-rays
soft X-ray
hard X-ray
Ultraviolet
Extreme ultraviolet
Vacuum ultraviolet
Lyman-alpha
FUV
MUV
NUV
UVC
UVB
UVA
Visible (optical)
Violet
Blue
Cyan
Green
Yellow
Orange
Red
Infrared
NIR
SWIR
MWIR
LWIR
FIR
Microwaves
W band
V band
Q band
Ka band
K band
Ku band
X band
C band
S band
L band
Radio
THF
EHF
SHF
UHF
VHF
HF
MF
LF
VLF
ULF
SLF
ELF
Wavelength types
Microwave
Shortwave
Medium wave
Longwave
vteColor topicsColor scienceColor physics
Electromagnetic spectrum
Light
Rainbow
Visible
Spectral colors
Chromophore
Structural coloration
Animal coloration
Color of chemicals
Water
Spectral power distribution
Colorimetry
Color perception
Metamerism
Color blindness
Achromatopsia
Dichromacy
Evolution of color vision
Color vision test
Tetrachromacy
Opponent process
Afterimage
Unique hues
Impossible colors
Chromesthesia
Sonochromatism
Color task
Color code
Color constancy
Color temperature
The dress
Color psychology
Color symbolism
Color preferences
L scher color test
Kruithof curve
Political color
National colors
Chromophobia
Chromotherapy
Color reproduction
Color photography
Color balance
Color cast
Digital image processing
Color management
Color printing
Multi-primary color display
Quattron
Color model
additive
RGB
subtractive
CMYK
Color space
Color mapping
ColorphilosophyColor scheme
Color tool
Monochromatic colors
Complementary colors
Analogous colors
Achromatic colors (Neutral)
Polychromatic colors
Light-on-dark
Web colors
Tinctures in heraldry
Color theory
Color mixing
Primary color
Secondary color
Tertiary color
Chromaticity
Color solid
Color wheel
Color triangle
Color analysis (art)
Color realism (art style)
On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer)
Theory of Colours (Goethe)
Color termsBasic terms
Blue
Green
Red
Yellow
Pink
Purple
Orange
Black
Gray
White
Brown
Cultural differences
Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate
Blue green distinction in language
Color history
Blue in culture
Color in Chinese culture
Traditional colors of Japan
Human skin color
Color dimensions
Hue
Dichromatism
Colorfulness
Pastel colors
Luminance
Lightness
Darkness
Brightness
Iridescence
Fluorescence
Grayscale
Tint, shade and tone
Colororganizations
Pantone
Color Marketing Group
Color Association of the United States
International Colour Authority
International Commission on Illumination (CIE)
International Color Consortium
International Colour Association
Lists
List of colors: A F
List of colors: G M
List of colors: N Z
List of colors (compact)
List of colors by shade
List of color palettes
List of color spaces
List of Crayola crayon colors
history
Color chart
List of RAL colors
List of web colors
Shades of:
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Cyan
Blue
Violet
Purple
Magenta
Pink
Brown
White
Gray
Black
Related
Vision
Qualia
Lighting
 Category
 Index
Portals: Electronics Telecommunication
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electromagnetic_spectrum&oldid=1146886878"