Founding Father, third president of the United States
This article is about the third president of the United States. For other uses, see Thomas Jefferson (disambiguation).
Thomas JeffersonPortrait by Rembrandt Peale, 18003rd President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1801  March 4, 1809Vice President
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1809)
Preceded byJohn AdamsSucceeded byJames Madison2nd Vice President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1797  March 4, 1801PresidentJohn AdamsPreceded byJohn AdamsSucceeded byAaron Burr1st United States Secretary of StateIn officeMarch 22, 1790  December 31, 1793PresidentGeorge WashingtonPreceded byJohn Jay (acting)Succeeded byEdmund Randolph2nd United States Minister to FranceIn officeMay 17, 1785  September 26, 1789Appointed byConfederation CongressPreceded byBenjamin FranklinSucceeded byWilliam ShortMinister Plenipotentiary for Negotiating Treaties of Amity and CommerceIn officeMay 12, 1784  May 11, 1786Appointed byConfederation CongressPreceded byOffice establishedSucceeded byOffice abolishedDelegate from Virginia to the Congress of the ConfederationIn officeNovember 3, 1783  May 7, 1784Preceded byJames MadisonSucceeded byRichard Lee2nd Governor of VirginiaIn officeJune 1, 1779  June 3, 1781Preceded byPatrick HenrySucceeded byWilliam FlemingDelegate from Virginia to the Continental CongressIn officeJune 20, 1775  September 26, 1776Preceded byGeorge WashingtonSucceeded byJohn HarvieConstituencySecond Continental CongressMember of the Virginia House of BurgessesIn officeMay 11, 1769[1]  June 1, 1775[2]Preceded byEdward Carter[2]Succeeded byOffice abolishedConstituencyAlbemarle County
Personal detailsBorn(1743-04-13)April 13, 1743Shadwell, Virginia, British AmericaDiedJuly 4, 1826(1826-07-04) (aged 83)Charlottesville, Virginia, U.S.Resting placeMonticello, VirginiaPolitical partyDemocratic-RepublicanSpouseMartha Wayles
   (m. 1772; died 1782) Children
6 with Martha Wayles, including:
   Martha Jefferson Randolph
   Mary Jefferson Eppes
Up to 6 with Sally Hemings, including:
   Madison Hemings
   Eston Hemings
ParentsPeter Jefferson (father)Jane Randolph (mother)Alma materCollege of William & MaryOccupationPoliticianlawyerSignaturePhilosophy careerNotable work
Declaration of Independence (1776)
Notes on Virginia (1785)
Jefferson's Manual (1801)
Jefferson Bible (1820)
EraAge of EnlightenmentRegion
Western philosophy
American philosophy
School
Classical liberalism
radicalism[3]
deism
Jeffersonian democracy
republicanism
InstitutionsAmerican Philosophical SocietyMain interests
Politics
ethics
religion
philology
Notable ideas
See list
All men are created equalEmpire of LibertyEntangling alliancesLife, Liberty and the pursuit of HappinessNatural aristocracySeparation of church and stateStrict constructionismWard republicViews on educationViews on Native AmericansViews on slaveryViews on religion
Influences
Confucius
Epicurus
Jesus
Epictetus
Bacon
Locke
Newton
Bolingbroke
Montesquieu
Voltaire
Hume
Robertson
Wythe
Blackstone
Paine
Gibbon
Beccaria
Tracy
Influenced
Madison
Taylor
Monroe
Randolph
Tucker
Nock
Strauss
Hitchens[4]
Political culture of the United States in general
Thomas Jefferson (April 13, 1743[a]   July 4, 1826) was an American statesman, diplomat, lawyer, architect, philosopher, and Founding Father who served as the third president of the United States from 1801 to 1809.[5] Among the Committee of Five charged by the Second Continental Congress with authoring the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson was the primary author. Following the American Revolutionary War and prior to becoming president in 1801, Jefferson was the first United States secretary of state under George Washington and then the nation's second vice president under John Adams. 
Jefferson's writings and advocacy for human rights, including freedom of thought, speech, and religion, were a leading inspiration behind the American Revolution, which ultimately led to American independence and the United States Constitution.[6] He was a leading proponent of democracy, republicanism, and individual rights, and produced formative documents and decisions at the state, national, and international levels. 
During the American Revolution, Jefferson represented Virginia in the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, which adopted the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, and served as the second Governor of Virginia from 1779 to 1781. In 1785, Jefferson was appointed the United States Minister to France and subsequently the nation's first secretary of state under George Washington from 1790 to 1793. Jefferson and James Madison organized the Democratic-Republican Party to oppose the Federalist Party during the formation of the First Party System. With Madison, he anonymously wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions in 1798 and 1799, which sought to strengthen states' rights by nullifying the federal Alien and Sedition Acts.
Jefferson and Federalist John Adams became friends as well as political rivals, serving in the Continental Congress and drafting the Declaration of Independence together. In the 1796 presidential election between the two, Jefferson came in second, which according to electoral procedure at the time, made him Adams' vice president. Jefferson challenged Adams again in 1800 and won the presidency. After his term in office, Jefferson eventually reconciled with Adams and they shared a correspondence that lasted 14 years. He and Adams both died on the same day, July 4, 1826, the 50th anniversary of Declaration of Independence. 
As president, Jefferson pursued the nation's shipping and trade interests against Barbary pirates and aggressive British trade policies. Beginning in 1803, he promoted a western expansionist policy with the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the nation's claimed land area. To make room for settlement, Jefferson began the process of Indian tribal removal from the newly acquired territory. As a result of peace negotiations with France, his administration reduced military forces. He was re-elected in 1804, with his second term beset by difficulties at home, including the trial of former vice president Aaron Burr. In 1807, American foreign trade was diminished when Jefferson implemented the Embargo Act in response to British threats to U.S. shipping. The same year, Jefferson signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves.
Jefferson was a slave and plantation owner. Since the 1790s, he was rumored to have had children by his sister-in-law and slave Sally Hemings. According to scholarly consensus, Jefferson probably fathered at least six children with Hemings, including four that survived to adulthood.[7][8][9] After retiring from public office, Jefferson founded the University of Virginia. Presidential scholars and historians generally praise Jefferson's public achievements, including his advocacy of religious freedom and tolerance, his peaceful acquisition of the Louisiana Territory from France, and the successful Lewis and Clark Expedition. Jefferson is consistently ranked among the top ten presidents in American history.
Part of the Politics seriesRepublicanism
Central concepts
Anti-monarchism
Democracy
Democratization
Liberty as non-domination
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract
Schools
Classical
Federal
Kemalism
Nasserism
Neo-republicanism
Venizelism
Types of republics
Autonomous
Capitalist
Christian
Democratic
Federal
Federal parliamentary
Islamic
Parliamentary
People's
Revolutionary
Secular
Sister
Soviet
Important thinkers
Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
Niccol  Machiavelli
James Madison
Montesquieu
Polybius
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Algernon Sidney
Mary Wollstonecraft
History
Roman Republic
Ga asa gha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
5 October 1910 revolution
Chinese Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918 1919
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
11 September 1922 Revolution
1935 Greek coup d' tat attempt
Spanish Civil War
1946 Italian institutional referendum
1952 Egyptian revolution
14 July Revolution
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
1970 Cambodian coup d' tat
Metapolitefsi
Iranian Revolution
1987 Fijian coups d' tat
Nepalese Civil War
By country
Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
Scotland
Wales
United States
Related topics
Communitarianism
Criticism of monarchy
Egalitarianism
The Emperor's New Clothes
Liberalism
Monarchism
Primus inter pares
 Politics portalvte
Early life and career
Main article: Early life and career of Thomas Jefferson
Thomas Jefferson was born on April 13, 1743 (April 2, 1743, Old Style, Julian calendar), at the family's Shadwell Plantation in the British Colony of Virginia, the third of ten children.[10] He was of English, and possibly Welsh, descent and was born a British subject.[11] His father, Peter Jefferson, was a planter and surveyor who died when Jefferson was fourteen; his mother was Jane Randolph.[b] Peter Jefferson moved his family to Tuckahoe Plantation in 1745 upon the death of William Randolph III, the plantation's owner and Jefferson's friend, who in his will had named Peter guardian of Randolph's children. The Jeffersons returned to Shadwell in 1752. In 1753, Thomas attended the wedding of his uncle Field Jefferson to Mary Allen Hunt. Field became a close friend and early mentor.[13] Peter died in 1757; his estate was divided between his sons Thomas and Randolph.[14] John Harvie Sr. then became 13 year old Thomas' guardian.[15] Thomas inherited approximately 5,000 acres (2,000 ha; 7.8 sq mi) of land, including Monticello. He assumed full authority over his property at age 21.[16]
Education and early family life
 Thomas Jefferson's Coat of Arms
 The Wren Building at the College of William & Mary, where Jefferson studied
Jefferson began his education together with the Randolph children by tutors at Tuckahoe.[17] Thomas' father Peter was self-taught, regretted not having a formal education, and entered Thomas into an English school at age five. In 1752, at age nine, he attended a local school run by a Scottish Presbyterian minister and also began studying the natural world, which he grew to love. At this time he began studying Latin, Greek, and French, while also learning to ride horses. Thomas also read books from his father's modest library.[18] He was taught from 1758 to 1760 by the Reverend James Maury near Gordonsville, Virginia, where he studied history, science, and the classics while boarding with Maury's family.[19][18] Jefferson then befriended and came to know various American Indians, including the famous Cherokee chief Ostenaco, who often stopped at Shadwell to visit on their way to Williamsburg to trade.[20][21] During the two years Jefferson was with the Maury family, he traveled to Williamsburg and was a guest of Colonel John Dandridge, father of Martha Washington. In Williamsburg, the young Jefferson met and came to admire Patrick Henry, eight years his senior, and shared a common interest in violin playing.[22]
Jefferson entered the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia in 1761 at age 16 and studied mathematics, metaphysics, and philosophy with William Small. Under Small's tutelage, Jefferson encountered the ideas of the British Empiricists, including John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton. Small introduced Jefferson to George Wythe and Francis Fauquier. Small, Wythe, and Fauquier recognized Jefferson as a man of exceptional ability and included him in their inner circle, where he became a regular member of their Friday dinner parties where politics and philosophy were discussed. Jefferson later wrote that, while there, he "heard more common good sense, more rational & philosophical conversations than in all the rest of my life".[23] During his first year at the college he was given more to parties and dancing and was not very frugal with his expenditures; in his second year, regretting that he had squandered away much time and money, he dedicated himself to fifteen hours of study a day.[24] Jefferson improved his French and Greek and his skill at the violin. He graduated two years after starting, in 1762. He read the law under Wythe's tutelage to obtain his law license while working as a law clerk in his office.[25] He also read a wide variety of English classics and political works.[26] Jefferson was well-read in a broad variety of subjects, which, along with law and philosophy, included history, natural law, natural religion, ethics, and several areas in science, including agriculture. Overall, he drew very deeply on the philosophers. During the years of study under the watchful eye of Wythe, Jefferson authored a survey of his extensive readings in his Commonplace Book.[27] Wythe was so impressed with Jefferson that he later bequeathed his entire library to him.[28]
The year 1765 was an eventful one in Jefferson's family. In July, his sister Martha married his close friend and college companion Dabney Carr, which greatly pleased Jefferson. In October, he mourned his sister Jane's unexpected death at age 25 and wrote a farewell epitaph in Latin.[29]
Jefferson treasured his books and amassed three libraries in his lifetime. The first, a library of 200 volumes started in his youth included books inherited from his father and left to him by George Wythe,[30] was destroyed when his Shadwell home burned in a 1770 fire. Nevertheless, he had replenished his collection with 1,250 titles by 1773, and it grew to almost 6,500 volumes by 1814.[31] He organized his wide variety of books into three broad categories corresponding with elements of the human mind: memory, reason, and imagination.[32] After the British burned the Library of Congress during the Burning of Washington, he sold this second library to the U.S. government to jumpstart the Library of Congress collection for the price of $23,950. Jefferson used a portion of the money secured by the sale to pay off some of his large debt, remitting $10,500 to William Short and $4,870 to John Barnes of Georgetown. However he soon resumed collecting for his personal library, writing to John Adams, "I cannot live without books."[33][34] He began to construct a new library of his personal favorites and by the time of his death a decade later it had grown to almost 2,000 volumes.[35]
Lawyer and House of Burgesses
 House of Burgesses in Williamsburg, Virginia, where Jefferson served 1769 1775
Jefferson was admitted to the Virginia bar in 1767, and lived with his mother at Shadwell.[36] He represented Albemarle County as a delegate in the Virginia House of Burgesses from 1769 until 1775.[37] He pursued reforms to slavery, with legislation in 1769 to give masters control over the emancipation of slaves, taking discretion away from the royal governor and General Court. He persuaded his cousin Richard Bland to spearhead the legislation's passage, but opposition was strong.[38]
Jefferson took seven cases for freedom-seeking slaves[39] and waived his fee for one who claimed that he should be freed before his minimum statutory age.[40] Jefferson invoked natural law to argue, "everyone comes into the world with a right to his own person and using it at his own will ... This is what is called personal liberty, and is given him by the author of nature, because it is necessary for his own sustenance." The judge cut him off and ruled against his client. As a consolation, Jefferson gave his client some money, conceivably used to aid his escape shortly thereafter.[40] He later incorporated this sentiment into the Declaration of Independence.[41] He also took on 68 cases for the General Court of Virginia in 1767, in addition to three notable cases: Howell v. Netherland (1770), Bolling v. Bolling (1771), and Blair v. Blair (1772).[42]
The British Parliament passed the Intolerable Acts in 1774, and Jefferson wrote a resolution calling for a "Day of Fasting and Prayer" in protest, as well as a boycott of all British goods. His resolution was later expanded into A Summary View of the Rights of British America, in which he argued that people have the right to govern themselves.[43]
Monticello, marriage, and family
 Jefferson's home Monticello in Virginia
In 1768, Jefferson began constructing his primary residence, Monticello (Italian for "Little Mountain"), on a hilltop overlooking his 5,000-acre (20 km2; 7.8 sq mi) plantation.[c] He spent most of his adult life designing Monticello as architect and was quoted as saying, "Architecture is my delight, and putting up, and pulling down, one of my favorite amusements."[45] Construction was done mostly by local masons and carpenters, assisted by Jefferson's slaves.[46] He moved into the South Pavilion in 1770. Turning Monticello into a neoclassical masterpiece in the Palladian style was his perennial project.[47]
On January 1, 1772, Jefferson married his third cousin[48] Martha Wayles Skelton, the 23-year-old widow of Bathurst Skelton, and she moved into the South Pavilion.[49][50] She was a frequent hostess for Jefferson and managed the large household. Biographer Dumas Malone described the  marriage as the happiest period of Jefferson's life.[51] Martha read widely, did fine needlework, and was a skilled pianist; Jefferson often accompanied her on the violin or cello.[52] During their ten years of marriage, Martha bore six children: Martha "Patsy" (1772 1836); Jane (1774 1775); an unnamed son who lived for only a few weeks in 1777; Mary "Polly" (1778 1804); Lucy Elizabeth (1780 1781); and another Lucy Elizabeth (1782 1784).[53][d] Only Martha and Mary survived to adulthood.[56]
 Jefferson's daughter Martha Martha's father John Wayles died in 1773, and the couple inherited 135 slaves, 11,000 acres (45 km2; 17 sq mi), and the estate's debts. The debts took Jefferson years to satisfy, contributing to his financial problems.[49]
Martha later suffered from ill health, including diabetes, and frequent childbirth further weakened her. Her mother had died young, and Martha lived with two stepmothers as a girl. A few months after the birth of her last child, she died on September 6, 1782, with Jefferson at her bedside. Shortly before her death, Martha made Jefferson promise never to marry again, telling him that she could not bear to have another mother raise her children.[57] Jefferson was grief-stricken by her death, relentlessly pacing back and forth, nearly to the point of exhaustion. He emerged after three weeks, taking long rambling rides on secluded roads with his daughter Martha, by her description "a solitary witness to many a violent burst of grief".[56][58]
After working as secretary of state (1790 1793), he returned to Monticello and initiated a remodeling based on the architectural concepts which he had acquired in Europe. The work continued throughout most of his presidency and was completed in 1809.[59][60]
Revolutionary War
Declaration of Independence
 U.S. Declaration of Independence  1823 facsimile of the engrossed copy
Main article: United States Declaration of Independence
Jefferson was the primary author of the Declaration of Independence. The document's social and political ideals were proposed by Jefferson before the inauguration of Washington.[61] At age 33, he was one of the youngest delegates to the Second Continental Congress beginning in 1775 at the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War, where a formal declaration of independence from Britain was overwhelmingly favored.[62] Jefferson chose his words for the Declaration in June 1775, shortly after the war had begun; the idea of independence from Britain had long since become popular among the colonies. He was inspired by the Enlightenment ideals of the sanctity of the individual, as well as the writings of Locke and Montesquieu.[63]
He sought out John Adams, an emerging leader of the Congress.[64] They became close friends and Adams supported Jefferson's appointment to the Committee of Five formed to draft a declaration of independence in furtherance of the Lee Resolution passed by the Congress, which declared the United Colonies independent. The committee initially thought that Adams should write the document, but Adams persuaded the committee to choose Jefferson.[e]
Jefferson consulted with other committee members over the next seventeen days and drew on his proposed draft of the Virginia Constitution, George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and other sources.[66] The other committee members made some changes, and a final draft was presented to Congress on June 28, 1776.[67]
The declaration was introduced on Friday, June 28, and Congress began debate over its contents on Monday, July 1,[67] resulting in the omission of a fourth of the text,[68] including a passage critical of King George III and "Jefferson's anti-slavery clause".[69][70] Jefferson resented the changes, but he did not speak publicly about the revisions.[f] On July 4, 1776, the Congress ratified the Declaration, and delegates signed it on August 2; in doing so, they were committing an act of treason against the Crown.[72] Jefferson's preamble is regarded as an enduring statement of human rights, and the phrase "all men are created equal" has been called "one of the best-known sentences in the English language" containing "the most potent and consequential words in American history".[69][73]
Virginia state legislator and governor
 Governor's Palace, Governor Jefferson's residence in Williamsburg
At the start of the Revolution, Colonel Jefferson was named commander of the Albemarle County Militia on September 26, 1775.[74] He was then elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for Albemarle County in September 1776, when finalizing the state constitution was a priority.[75][76]
For nearly three years, he assisted with the constitution and was especially proud of his Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom, which prohibited state support of religious institutions or enforcement of religious doctrine.[77] The bill failed to pass, as did his legislation to disestablish the Anglican Church, but both were later revived by James Madison.[78]
In 1778, Jefferson was given the task of revising the state's laws. He drafted 126 bills in three years, including laws to streamline the judicial system. He proposed statutes that provided for general education, which he considered the basis of "republican government".[75] Jefferson also was concerned that Virginia's powerful landed gentry were becoming a hereditary aristocracy and he took the lead in abolishing what he called "feudal and unnatural distinctions."[79] He targeted laws such as entail and primogeniture by which a deceased landowner's oldest son was vested with all land ownership and power.[79] [g]
Jefferson was elected governor for one-year terms in 1779 and 1780.[81] He transferred the state capital from Williamsburg to Richmond, and introduced additional measures for public education, religious freedom, and inheritance.[82]
During General Benedict Arnold's 1781 invasion of Virginia, Jefferson escaped Richmond just ahead of the British forces, which razed the city.[83][84] He sent emergency dispatches to Colonel Sampson Mathews and other commanders in an attempt to repel Arnold's efforts.[85][86] Jefferson then visited with friends in the surrounding counties of Richmond, including William Fleming, a college friend of his in Chesterfield County.[87] General Charles Cornwallis that spring dispatched a cavalry force led by Banastre Tarleton to capture Jefferson and members of the Assembly at Monticello, but Jack Jouett of the Virginia militia thwarted the British plan. Jefferson escaped to Poplar Forest, his plantation to the west.[88] When the General Assembly reconvened in June 1781, it conducted an inquiry into Jefferson's actions which eventually concluded that Jefferson had acted with honor but he was not re-elected.[89]
In April of the same year, his daughter Lucy died at age one. A second daughter of that name was born the following year, but she died at age three.[90]
In 1782, Jefferson refused a partnership offer by North Carolina Governor Abner Nash, in a profiteering scheme involving the sale of confiscated Loyalist lands.[91] Unlike some Founders in pursuit of land, Jefferson was content with his Monticello estate and the land he owned in the vicinity of Virginia's Shenandoah Valley. Jefferson thought of Monticello as an intellectual gathering place for his friends James Madison and James Monroe.[92]
Notes on the State of Virginia
Main article: Notes on the State of Virginia
In 1780, Jefferson received from French diplomat Fran ois Barb -Marbois a letter of inquiry into the geography, history, and government of Virginia, as part of a study of the United States. Jefferson organized his responses in a book, Notes on the State of Virginia (1785).[93] He compiled the book over five years, including reviews of scientific knowledge, Virginia's history, politics, laws, culture, and geography.[94] The book explores what constitutes a good society, using Virginia as an exemplar. Jefferson included extensive data about the state's natural resources and economy and wrote at length about slavery and miscegenation; he articulated his belief that blacks and whites could not live together as free people in one society because of justified resentments of the enslaved.[95] He also wrote of his views on the American Indian, equating them to European settlers in body and mind.[96][97]
Notes was first published in 1785 in French and appeared in English in 1787.[98] Biographer George Tucker considered the work "surprising in the extent of the information which a single individual had been thus far able to acquire, as to the physical features of the state";[99] Merrill D. Peterson described it as an accomplishment for which all Americans should be grateful.[100]
Member of Congress
 Independence Hall Assembly Room where Jefferson served in the Continental Congress
Jefferson was appointed a Virginia delegate to the Congress of the Confederation organized following victory in the Revolutionary War and the peace treaty with Great Britain in 1783. He was a member of the committee setting foreign exchange rates and recommended an American currency based on the decimal system which was adopted.[101] He advised the formation of the Committee of the States to fill the power vacuum when Congress was in recess.[102] The Committee met when Congress adjourned, but disagreements rendered it dysfunctional.[103]
In the Congress' 1783 1784 session, Jefferson acted as chairman of committees to establish a viable system of government for the new Republic and to propose a policy for the settlement of the western territories. He was the principal author of the Land Ordinance of 1784, whereby Virginia ceded to the national government the vast area that it claimed northwest of the Ohio River. He insisted that this territory should not be used as colonial territory by any of the thirteen states, but that it should be divided into sections that could become states. He plotted borders for nine new states in their initial stages and wrote an ordinance banning slavery in all the nation's territories. Congress made extensive revisions, and rejected the ban on slavery.[104][105] The provisions banning slavery, known as the "Jefferson Proviso," were modified and implemented three years later in the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and became the law for the entire Northwest Territory.[104]
Minister to France
 Portrait of Thomas Jefferson while in London in 1786 at 43 by Mather Brown
On May 7, 1784, Jefferson was appointed by the Congress of the Confederation[h] to join Benjamin Franklin and John Adams in Paris as Minister Plenipotentiary for Negotiating Treaties of Amity and Commerce with Great Britain and other countries.[106][i] With his young daughter Patsy and two servants, he departed in July 1784, arriving in Paris the next month.[108][109] Jefferson had Patsy educated at the Pentemont Abbey. Less than a year later he was assigned the additional duty of succeeding Franklin as Minister to France. French foreign minister Count de Vergennes commented, "You replace Monsieur Franklin, I hear." Jefferson replied, "I succeed. No man can replace him."[110] During his five years in Paris, Jefferson played a leading role in shaping U.S. foreign policy.[111]
In 1786, he met and fell in love with Maria Cosway, an accomplished and married Italian-English musician of 27. They saw each other frequently over a period of six weeks. She returned to Great Britain, but they maintained a lifelong correspondence.[112]
During the summer of 1786, Jefferson arrived in London to meet with John Adams, the United States Ambassador to Britain. Adams had official access to George III and arranged a meeting between Jefferson and the king. Jefferson later described the king's reception of the men as "ungracious." According to Adams's grandson, George III turned his back on both Adams and Jefferson in a jesture of public insult. Jefferson returned to France in August.[113]
Jefferson sent for his youngest surviving child, nine-year-old Polly, in June 1787. She was accompanied on her voyage by a young slave from Monticello, Sally Hemings. Jefferson had taken her older brother, James Hemings, to Paris as part of his domestic staff and had him trained in French cuisine.[114] According to Sally's son, Madison Hemings, the 16-year-old Sally and Jefferson began a sexual relationship in Paris, where she became pregnant.[115] The son also indicated Hemings agreed to return to the United States only after Jefferson promised to free her children when they came of age.[115]
While in France, Jefferson became a regular companion of the Marquis de Lafayette, a French hero of the American Revolutionary War, and Jefferson used his influence to procure trade agreements with France.[116][117] As the French Revolution began, he allowed his Paris residence, the H tel de Langeac, to be used for meetings by Lafayette and other republicans. He was in Paris during the storming of the Bastille and consulted with Lafayette while the latter drafted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.[118] Jefferson often found his mail opened by postmasters, so he invented his own enciphering device, the "Wheel Cipher"; he wrote important communications in code for the rest of his career.[119][j] Unable to attend the 1787 Constitution Convention, Jefferson supported the Constitution but desired the addition of the promised bill of rights.[120] Jefferson left Paris for America in September 1789, intending to return to his home soon; however, President George Washington appointed him the country's first secretary of state, forcing him to remain in the nation's capital.[121] Jefferson remained a firm supporter of the French Revolution while opposing its more violent elements.[122] John Skey Eustace kept  Jefferson informed of the events of the French Revolution.[123]
Secretary of State
See also: First Party System
 Thomas Jefferson in 1791 at 48 by Charles Willson Peale
Soon after returning from France, Jefferson accepted President Washington's invitation to serve as Secretary of State.[124] Pressing issues at this time were the national debt and the permanent location of the capital. He opposed a national debt, preferring that each state retire its own, in contrast to Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, who desired consolidation of various states' debts by the federal government.[125] Hamilton also had bold plans to establish the national credit and a national bank, but Jefferson strenuously opposed this and attempted to undermine his agenda, which nearly led Washington to dismiss him from his cabinet. He later left the cabinet voluntarily.[126]
The second major issue was the capital's permanent location. Hamilton favored a capital close to the major commercial centers of the Northeast, while Washington, Jefferson, and other agrarians wanted it located to the south.[127] After lengthy deadlock, the Compromise of 1790 was struck, permanently locating the capital on the Potomac River, and the federal government assumed the war debts of all thirteen states.[127]
Jefferson's goals were to decrease American dependence on British commerce and to expand commercial trade with France. He sought to weaken Spanish colonialism of the trans-Appalachian West and British control in the North, believing this would aid in the pacification of Native Americans.[128]
While serving in the government in Philadelphia, Jefferson and political protegee Congressman James Madison founded the National Gazette in 1791, along with author Phillip Freneau, in an effort to counter Hamilton's Federalist policies, which Hamilton was promoting through the influential Federalist newspaper the Gazette of the United States. The National Gazette made particular criticism of the policies promoted by Hamilton, often through anonymous essays signed by the pen name Brutus at Jefferson's urging, which were actually written by Madison.[129] In the Spring of 1791, Jefferson and Madison took a vacation to Vermont. Jefferson had been suffering from migraines and he was tired of Hamilton in-fighting.[130]
In May 1792, Jefferson was alarmed at the political rivalries taking shape; he wrote to Washington, imploring him to run for re-election that year as a unifying influence.[131] He urged the president to rally the citizenry to a party that would defend democracy against the corrupting influence of banks and monied interests, as espoused by the Federalists. Historians recognize this letter as the earliest delineation of Democratic-Republican Party principles.[132] Jefferson, Madison, and other Democratic-Republican organizers favored states' rights and local control and opposed federal concentration of power, whereas Hamilton sought more power for the federal government.[133]
Jefferson supported France against Britain when the two nations fought in 1793, though his arguments in the Cabinet were undercut by French Revolutionary envoy Edmond-Charles Gen t's open scorn for President Washington.[134] In his discussions with British Minister George Hammond, he tried in vain to persuade the British to vacate their posts in the Northwest and to compensate the U.S. for slaves whom the British had freed at the end of the war. Jefferson sought a return to private life, and resigned the cabinet position in December 1793; he may also have wanted to bolster his political influence from outside the administration.[135]
After the Washington administration negotiated the Jay Treaty with Great Britain (1794), Jefferson saw a cause around which to rally his party and organized a national opposition from Monticello.[136] The treaty, designed by Hamilton, aimed to reduce tensions and increase trade. Jefferson warned that it would increase British influence and subvert republicanism, calling it "the boldest act [Hamilton and Jay] ever ventured on to undermine the government".[137] The Treaty passed, but it expired in 1805 during Jefferson's Presidential administration and was not renewed. Jefferson continued his pro-French stance; during the violence of the Reign of Terror, he declined to disavow the revolution: "To back away from France would be to undermine the cause of republicanism in America."[138]
Election of 1796 and vice presidency
Further information: 1796 United States presidential election and Democratic-Republican Party
 1796 election results
 Jefferson in 1799 at 56, painted by Charles Peale Polk
In the presidential campaign of 1796, Jefferson lost the electoral college vote to Federalist John Adams by 71 68 and was thus elected vice president. As presiding officer of the Senate, he assumed a more passive role than his predecessor John Adams. He allowed the Senate to freely conduct debates and confined his participation to procedural issues, which he called an "honorable and easy" role.[139] Jefferson had previously studied parliamentary law and procedure for 40 years, making him quite qualified to serve as presiding officer. In 1800, he published his assembled notes on Senate procedure as A Manual of Parliamentary Practice.[140] He cast only three tie-breaking votes in the Senate.
In four confidential talks with French consul Joseph L tombe in the spring of 1797, Jefferson attacked Adams and predicted that his rival would serve only one term. He also encouraged France to invade England, and advised L tombe to stall any American envoys sent to Paris by instructing him to "listen to them and then drag out the negotiations at length and mollify them by the urbanity of the proceedings."[141] This toughened the tone that the French government adopted toward the Adams administration. After Adams's initial peace envoys were rebuffed, Jefferson and his supporters lobbied for the release of papers related to the incident, called the XYZ Affair after the letters used to disguise the identities of the French officials involved.[142] However, the tactic backfired when it was revealed that French officials had demanded bribes, rallying public support against France. The U.S. began an undeclared naval war with France known as the Quasi-War.[143]
During the Adams presidency, the Federalists rebuilt the military, levied new taxes, and enacted the Alien and Sedition Acts. Jefferson believed these laws were intended to suppress Democratic-Republicans, rather than prosecute enemy aliens, and considered them unconstitutional.[144] To rally opposition, he and James Madison anonymously wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, declaring that the federal government had no right to exercise powers not specifically delegated to it by the states.[145] The resolutions followed the "interposition" approach of Madison, in which states may shield their citizens from federal laws that they deem unconstitutional. Jefferson advocated nullification, allowing states to invalidate federal laws altogether.[146][k] He warned that, "unless arrested at the threshold", the Alien and Sedition Acts would "necessarily drive these states into revolution and blood".[148]
Historian Ron Chernow claims that "the theoretical damage of the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions was deep and lasting, and was a recipe for disunion", contributing to the American Civil War as well as later events.[149] Washington was so appalled by the resolutions that he told Patrick Henry that, if "systematically and pertinaciously pursued", the resolutions would "dissolve the union or produce coercion."[150] Jefferson had always admired Washington's leadership skills but felt that his Federalist party was leading the country in the wrong direction. He decided not to attend Washington's funeral in 1799 because of acute differences with him while serving as secretary of state.[151]
Election of 1800
 1800 election results
Main article: 1800 United States presidential election
Jefferson contended for president once more against Adams in 1800. Adams's campaign was weakened by unpopular taxes and vicious Federalist infighting over his actions in the Quasi-War.[152] Democratic-Republicans pointed to the Alien and Sedition Acts and accused the Federalists of being secret pro-Britain monarchists, while Federalists charged that Jefferson was a godless libertine beholden to the French.[153] Historian Joyce Appleby said the election was "one of the most acrimonious in the annals of American history".[154]
The Democratic-Republicans ultimately won more electoral college votes, due in part to the electors that resulted from the addition of three-fifths of the South's slaves to the population calculation.[155] Jefferson and his vice-presidential candidate Aaron Burr unexpectedly received an equal total. Because of the tie, the election was decided by the Federalist-dominated House of Representatives.[156][l] Hamilton lobbied Federalist representatives on Jefferson's behalf, believing him a lesser political evil than Burr. On February 17, 1801, after thirty-six ballots, the House elected Jefferson president and Burr vice president. Jefferson became the second incumbent vice president to be elected president.[157]
The win was marked by Democratic-Republican celebrations throughout the country.[158] Some of Jefferson's opponents argued that he owed his victory over Adams to the South's inflated number of electors, due to the counting slaves under the Three-Fifths Compromise.[159] Others alleged that Jefferson secured James Asheton Bayard's tie-breaking electoral vote by guaranteeing the retention of various Federalist posts in the government.[157] Jefferson disputed the allegation, and the historical record is inconclusive.[160]
The transition proceeded smoothly, marking a watershed in American history. As historian Gordon S. Wood writes, "it was one of the first popular elections in modern history that resulted in the peaceful transfer of power from one 'party' to another."[157]
Presidency (1801 1809)
Main article: Presidency of Thomas Jefferson
 Thomas Jefferson, by Rembrandt Peale,  1805
Jefferson was sworn in by Chief Justice John Marshall at the new Capitol in Washington, D.C. on March 4, 1801. His inauguration was not attended by outgoing President Adams. In contrast to his predecessors, Jefferson exhibited a dislike of formal etiquette. Plainly dressed, he arrived alone, and walked to the Capitol with his friends.[161] His inaugural address struck a note of reconciliation and commitment to democratic ideology, declaring, "We have been called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists."[162][163] Ideologically, he stressed "equal and exact justice to all men", minority rights, and freedom of speech, religion, and press.[164] He said that a free and democratic government was "the strongest government on earth."[164] He nominated moderate Republicans to his cabinet: James Madison as secretary of state, Henry Dearborn as secretary of war, Levi Lincoln as attorney general, and Robert Smith as secretary of the navy.[163]
Widowed since 1782, Jefferson first used his two daughters as hostesses.[165] Starting in late May, 1801, he asked Dolley Madison, wife of his long-time friend James Madison, to be the permanent White House hostess. She accepted, realizing the diplomatic importance of the position. She was also in charge of the completion of the White House mansion. Dolley served as White House hostess for the rest of Jefferson's two terms and then eight more years as First Lady to President James Madison.[165]
Financial affairs
 Albert Gallatin Jefferson's Treasury Secretary.Stuart 1803
Jefferson's first official challenge was the $83 million national debt.[166] He began dismantling Hamilton's Federalist fiscal system with help from the Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin.[163] Gallatin devised a plan to eliminate the national debt in sixteen years by extensive annual appropriations and reduction in taxes.[167] The administration eliminated the whiskey excise and other taxes after closing "unnecessary offices" and cutting "useless establishments and expenses".[168][169]
Jefferson believed that the First Bank of the United States represented a "most deadly hostility" to republican government.[167] He wanted to dismantle the bank before its charter expired in 1811, but was dissuaded by Gallatin.[170] Gallatin argued that the national bank was a useful financial institution and set out to expand its operations.[171] Jefferson looked to other corners to address the growing national debt.[171] He shrank the Navy, for example, deeming it unnecessary in peacetime, and incorporated a fleet of inexpensive gunboats intended only for local defense to avoid provocation against foreign powers.[168] After two terms, he had lowered the national debt from $83 million to $57 million.[166]
Domestic affairs
Jefferson pardoned several of those imprisoned under the Alien and Sedition Acts.[172] Congressional Republicans repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801, which removed nearly all of Adams's "midnight judges" from office. A subsequent appointment battle led to the Supreme Court's landmark decision in Marbury v. Madison, asserting judicial review over executive branch actions.[173] Jefferson appointed three Supreme Court justices: William Johnson (1804), Henry Brockholst Livingston (1807), and Thomas Todd (1807).[174]
Jefferson strongly felt the need for a national military university, producing an officer engineering corps for a national defense based on the advancement of the sciences, rather than having to rely on foreign sources for top grade engineers with questionable loyalty.[175] He signed the Military Peace Establishment Act on March 16, 1802, thus founding the United States Military Academy at West Point. The Act documented in 29 sections a new set of laws and limits for the military. Jefferson was also hoping to bring reform to the Executive branch, replacing Federalists and active opponents throughout the officer corps to promote Republican values.[176]
Jefferson took great interest in the Library of Congress, which had been established in 1800.  He often recommended books to acquire.  In 1802, Congress authorized President Jefferson to name the first Librarian of Congress, and formed a committee to establish library rules and regulations. Congress also granted the president and vice president the right to use the library.[177]
Foreign affairs (1801 1805)
First Barbary War
Main article: First Barbary War
 Barbary Coast of North Africa 1806. Left is Morocco at Gibraltar, center is Tunis, and right is Tripoli.
American merchant ships had been protected from Barbary Coast pirates by the Royal Navy when the states were British colonies.[178] After independence, however, pirates often captured U.S. merchant ships, pillaged cargoes, and enslaved or held crew members for ransom. Jefferson had opposed paying tribute to the Barbary States since 1785. In 1801, he authorized a U.S. Navy fleet under Commodore Richard Dale to make a show of force in the Mediterranean, the first American naval squadron to cross the Atlantic.[179] Following the fleet's first engagement, he successfully asked Congress for a declaration of war.[179] The subsequent "First Barbary War" was the first foreign war fought by the U.S.[180]
Pasha of Tripoli Yusuf Karamanli captured the USS Philadelphia, so Jefferson authorized William Eaton, the U.S. Consul to Tunis, to lead a force to restore the pasha's older brother to the throne.[181] The American navy forced Tunis and Algiers into breaking their alliance with Tripoli. Jefferson ordered five separate naval bombardments of Tripoli, leading the pasha to sign a treaty that restored peace in the Mediterranean.[182] This victory proved only temporary, but according to Wood, "many Americans celebrated it as a vindication of their policy of spreading free trade around the world and as a great victory for liberty over tyranny."[183]
Louisiana Purchase
Main article: Louisiana Purchase
 The 1803 Louisiana Purchase totaled 827,987 square miles (2,144,480 square kilometers), doubling the size of the United States.
Spain ceded ownership of the Louisiana territory in 1800 to the more predominant France. Jefferson was greatly concerned that Napoleon's broad interests in the vast territory would threaten the security of the continent and Mississippi River shipping. He wrote that the cession "works most sorely on the U.S. It completely reverses all the political relations of the U.S."[184] In 1802, he instructed James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston to negotiate with Napoleon to purchase New Orleans and adjacent coastal areas from France.[185] In early 1803, Jefferson offered Napoleon nearly $10 million for 40,000 square miles (100,000 square kilometers) of tropical territory.[186]
Napoleon realized that French military control was impractical over such a vast remote territory, and he was in dire need of funds for his wars on the home front. In early April 1803, he unexpectedly made negotiators a counter-offer to sell 827,987 square miles (2,144,480 square kilometers) of French territory for $15 million, doubling the size of the United States.[186] U.S. negotiators seized this unique opportunity and accepted the offer and signed the treaty on April 30, 1803.[166] Word of the unexpected purchase did not reach Jefferson until July 3, 1803.[166] He unknowingly acquired the most fertile tract of land of its size on Earth, making the new country self-sufficient in food and other resources. The sale also significantly curtailed the European presence in North America, removing obstacles to U.S. westward expansion.[187]
Most thought that this was an exceptional opportunity, despite Republican reservations about the Constitutional authority of the federal government to acquire land.[188] Jefferson initially thought that a Constitutional amendment was necessary to purchase and govern the new territory; but he later changed his mind, fearing that this would give cause to oppose the purchase, and he therefore urged a speedy debate and ratification.[189] On October 20, 1803, the Senate ratified the purchase treaty by a vote of 24 7.[190] Jefferson personally was humble about acquiring the Louisiana Territory, but he resented complainers who called the vast domain a "howling wilderness".[191]
After the purchase, Jefferson preserved the region's Spanish legal code and instituted a gradual approach to integrating settlers into American democracy. He believed that a period of the federal rule would be necessary while Louisianans adjusted to their new nation.[192][m] Historians have differed in their assessments regarding the constitutional implications of the sale,[194] but they typically hail the Louisiana acquisition as a major accomplishment. Frederick Jackson Turner called the purchase the most formative event in American history.[187]
Lewis and Clark Expedition (1803 1806)
Main article: Lewis and Clark Expedition
 Lewis and Clark on the Lower Columbia, by Charles Marion Russell, 1905
Jefferson anticipated further westward settlements due to the Louisiana Purchase and arranged for the exploration and mapping of the uncharted territory. He sought to establish a U.S. claim ahead of competing European interests and to find the rumored Northwest Passage.[195] Jefferson and others were influenced by exploration accounts of Le Page du Pratz in Louisiana (1763) and Captain James Cook in the Pacific (1784),[196] and they persuaded Congress in 1804 to fund an expedition to explore and map the newly acquired territory to the Pacific Ocean.[197]
Jefferson appointed Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to be leaders of the Corps of Discovery (1803 1806).[198] In the months leading up to the expedition, Jefferson tutored Lewis in the sciences of mapping, botany, natural history, mineralogy, and astronomy and navigation, giving him unlimited access to his library at Monticello, which included the largest collection of books in the world on the subject of the geography and natural history of the North American continent, along with an impressive collection of maps.[199]
The expedition lasted from May 1804 to September 1806 (see timeline) and obtained a wealth of scientific and geographic knowledge, including knowledge of many Indian tribes.[200]
Other expeditions
Main articles: Dunbar Hunter Expedition, Red River Expedition (1806), and Pike Expedition
In addition to the Corps of Discovery, Jefferson organized three other western expeditions: the William Dunbar and George Hunter Expedition on the Ouachita River (1804 1805), the Thomas Freeman and Peter Custis Expedition (1806) on the Red River, and the Zebulon Pike Expedition (1806 1807) into the Rocky Mountains and the Southwest. All three produced valuable information about the American frontier.[201]
Native American affairs
Main article: Thomas Jefferson and Native Americans
 Black Hoof, leader of the Shawnee, accepted Jefferson's Indian assimilation policies.
Jefferson's experiences with the American Indians began during his boyhood in Virginia and extended through his political career and into his retirement. He refuted the contemporary notion that Indians were inferior people and maintained that they were equal in body and mind to people of European descent.[202]
As governor of Virginia during the Revolutionary War, Jefferson recommended moving the Cherokee and Shawnee tribes, who had allied with the British, to west of the Mississippi River. But when he took office as president, he quickly took measures to avert another major conflict, as American and Indian societies were in collision and the British were inciting Indian tribes from Canada.[203][204] In Georgia, he stipulated that the state would release its legal claims for lands to its west in exchange for military support in expelling the Cherokee from Georgia. This facilitated his policy of western expansion, to "advance compactly as we multiply".[205]
In keeping with his Enlightenment thinking, President Jefferson adopted an assimilation policy toward American Indians known as his "civilization program" which included securing peaceful U.S.   Indian treaty alliances and encouraging agriculture. Jefferson advocated that Indian tribes should make federal purchases by credit holding their lands as collateral for repayment. Various tribes accepted Jefferson's policies, including the Shawnees led by Black Hoof, the Creek, and the Cherokees. However, some Shawnees broke off from Black Hoof, led by Tecumseh, and opposed Jefferson's assimilation policies.[206]
Historian Bernard Sheehan argues that Jefferson believed that assimilation was best for American Indians; second best was removal to the west. He felt that the worst outcome of the cultural and resources conflict between American citizens and American Indians would be their attacking the whites.[204] Jefferson told Secretary of War General Henry Dearborn (Indian affairs were then under the War Department), "If we are constrained to lift the hatchet against any tribe, we will never lay it down until that tribe is exterminated or driven beyond the Mississippi."[207] Miller agrees that Jefferson believed that Indians should assimilate to American customs and agriculture. Historians such as Peter S. Onuf and Merrill D. Peterson argue that Jefferson's actual Indian policies did little to promote assimilation and were a pretext to seize lands.[208]
Re-election in 1804 and second term
Further information: 1804 United States presidential election
 1804 Electoral College vote
Jefferson's successful first term occasioned his re-nomination for president by the Republican party, with George Clinton replacing Burr as his running mate.[209] The Federalist party ran Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, John Adams's vice-presidential candidate in the 1800 election. The Jefferson-Clinton ticket won overwhelmingly in the electoral college vote, by 162 to 14, promoting their achievement of a strong economy, lower taxes, and the Louisiana Purchase.[209]
In March 1806, a split developed in the Republican party, led by fellow Virginian and former Republican ally John Randolph, who viciously accused President Jefferson on the floor of the House of moving too far in the Federalist direction. In so doing, Randolph permanently set himself apart politically from Jefferson. Jefferson and Madison had backed resolutions to limit or ban British imports in retaliation for British seizures of American shipping. Also, in 1808, Jefferson was the first president to propose a broad Federal plan to build roads and canals across several states, asking for $20 million, further alarming Randolph and believers of limited government.[210]
Jefferson's popularity further suffered in his second term due to his response to wars in Europe. Positive relations with Great Britain had diminished, due partly to the antipathy between Jefferson and British diplomat Anthony Merry. After Napoleon's decisive victory at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805, Napoleon became more aggressive in his negotiations over trading rights, which American efforts failed to counter. Jefferson then led the enactment of the Embargo Act of 1807, directed at both France and Great Britain. This triggered economic chaos in the U.S. and was strongly criticized at the time, resulting in Jefferson having to abandon the policy a year later.[211]
During the revolutionary era, the states abolished the international slave trade, but South Carolina reopened it. In his annual message of December 1806, Jefferson denounced the "violations of human rights" attending the international slave trade, calling on the newly elected Congress to criminalize it immediately. In 1807, Congress passed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves, which Jefferson signed.[212][213] The act established severe punishment against the international slave trade, although it did not address the issue domestically.[214]
In Haiti, Jefferson's neutrality had allowed arms to enable the slave independence movement during its Revolution, and blocked attempts to assist Napoleon, who was defeated there in 1803.[215] But he refused official recognition of the country during his second term, in deference to southern complaints about the racial violence against slave-holders; it was eventually extended to Haiti in 1862.[216]
Domestically, Jefferson's grandson, James Madison Randolph, became the first child born in the White House in 1806.[217]
Controversies
Burr conspiracy and trial
Further information: Burr Hamilton duel and Burr conspiracy
 1802 portrait of Aaron Burr by John Vanderlyn
Following the 1801 electoral deadlock, Jefferson's relationship with his vice president, former New York Senator Aaron Burr, rapidly eroded. Jefferson suspected Burr of seeking the presidency for himself, while Burr was angered by Jefferson's refusal to appoint some of his supporters to federal office. Burr was dropped from the Republican ticket in 1804.
The same year, Burr was soundly defeated in his bid to be elected New York governor. During the campaign, Alexander Hamilton publicly made callous remarks regarding Burr's moral character.[218] Subsequently, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, mortally wounding him on July 11, 1804. Burr was indicted for Hamilton's murder in New York and New Jersey, causing him to flee to Georgia, although he remained President of the Senate during Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase's impeachment trial.[219] Both indictments quietly died and Burr was not prosecuted.[220] Also during the election, certain New England separatists approached Burr, desiring a New England federation and intimating that he would be their leader.[221] However, nothing came of the plot, since Burr had lost the election and his reputation was ruined after killing Hamilton.[221] In August 1804, Burr contacted British Minister Anthony Merry offering to cede U.S. western territory in return for money and British ships.[222]
After leaving office in April 1805, Burr traveled west and conspired with Louisiana Territory governor James Wilkinson, beginning a large-scale recruitment for a military expedition.[223] Other plotters included Ohio Senator John Smith and an Irishman named Harmon Blennerhassett.[223] Burr discussed a number of plots seizing control of Mexico or Spanish Florida, or forming a secessionist state in New Orleans or the Western U.S. Historians remain unclear as to his true goal.[224][n]
In the fall of 1806, Burr launched a military flotilla carrying about 60 men down the Ohio River. Wilkinson renounced the plot, apparently from self-interested motives; he reported Burr's expedition to Jefferson, who immediately ordered Burr's arrest.[223][226][227] On February 13, 1807, Burr was captured in Louisiana's Bayou Pierre wilderness and sent to Virginia to be tried for treason.[222]
Burr's 1807 conspiracy trial became a national issue.[228] Jefferson attempted to preemptively influence the verdict by telling Congress that Burr's guilt was "beyond question", but the case came before his longtime political foe John Marshall, who dismissed the treason charge. Burr's legal team at one stage subpoenaed Jefferson, but Jefferson refused to testify, making the first argument for executive privilege. Instead, Jefferson provided relevant legal documents.[229] After a three-month trial, the jury found Burr not guilty, while Jefferson denounced his acquittal.[227][230][o][231] Jefferson subsequently removed Wilkinson as territorial governor but retained him in the U.S. military. Historian James N. Banner criticized Jefferson for continuing to trust Wilkinson, a "faithless plotter".[227]
General Wilkinson misconduct
Commanding General James Wilkinson was a holdover of the Washington and Adams administrations. Wilkinson was rumored to be a "skillful and unscrupolous plotter". In 1804, Wilkinson received 12,000 pesos from the Spanish for information on American boundary plans.[232] Wilkinson also received advances on his salary and payments on claims submitted to Secretary of War Henry Dearborn. This damaging information apparently was unknown to Jefferson. In 1805, Jefferson trusted Wilkinson and appointed him Louisiana Territory governor, admiring Wilkinson's work ethic. In January 1806, Jefferson received information from Kentucky U.S. Attorney Joseph Davies that Wilkinson was on the Spanish payroll. Jefferson took no action against Wilkinson, there being, at the time, a lack of evidence against Wilkinson.[233] An investigation by the House in December 1807 exonerated Wilkinson.[234] In 1808, a military court looked into Wilkinson but lacked evidence to charge him. Jefferson retained Wilkinson in the Army and he was passed on by Jefferson to Jefferson's successor James Madison.[235] Evidence found in Spanish archives in the 20th century proved Wilkinson was, in fact, on the Spanish payroll.[232]
Foreign affairs (1805 1809)
Attempted annexation of Florida
In the aftermath of the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson attempted to annex West Florida from Spain, a nation under the control of Emperor Napoleon and the French Empire after 1804. In his annual message to Congress, on December 3, 1805, Jefferson railed against Spain over Florida border depredations.[236][237] A few days later Jefferson secretly requested a two million dollar expenditure to purchase Florida. Representative and floor leader John Randolph, however, opposed annexation and was upset over Jefferson's secrecy on the matter, and believed the money would land in the coffers of Napoleon.[238][237] The Two Million Dollar bill passed only after Jefferson successfully maneuvered to replace Randolph with Barnabas Bidwell as floor leader.[238][237] This aroused suspicion of Jefferson and charges of undue executive influence over Congress. Jefferson signed the bill into law in February 1806. Six weeks later the law was made public. The two million dollars was to be given to France as payment, in turn, to put pressure on Spain to permit the annexation of Florida by the United States. France, however, was in no mood to allow Spain to give up Florida and refused the offer. Florida remained under the control of Spain.[239][237] The failed venture damaged Jefferson's reputation among his supporters.[240][237]
Chesapeake Leopard affair
Main article: Chesapeake Leopard affair
 HMS Leopard (right) firing upon USS Chesapeake
The British conducted seizures of American shipping to search for British deserters from 1806 to 1807; American citizens were thus impressed into the British naval service. In 1806, Jefferson issued a call for a boycott of British goods; on April 18, Congress passed the Non-Importation Acts, but they were never enforced. Later that year, Jefferson asked James Monroe and William Pinkney to negotiate with Great Britain to end the harassment of American shipping, though Britain showed no signs of improving relations. The Monroe Pinkney Treaty was finalized but lacked any provisions to end the British policies, and Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification.[241]
The British ship HMS Leopard fired upon the USS Chesapeake off the Virginia coast in June 1807, and Jefferson prepared for war.[242] He issued a proclamation banning armed British ships from U.S. waters. He presumed unilateral authority to call on the states to prepare 100,000 militia and ordered the purchase of arms, ammunition, and supplies, writing, "The laws of necessity, of self-preservation, of saving our country when in danger, are of higher obligation [than strict observance of written laws]". The USS Revenge was dispatched to demand an explanation from the British government; it also was fired upon. Jefferson called for a special session of Congress in October to enact an embargo or alternatively to consider war.[243]
Embargo (1807 1809)
Further information: Embargo Act of 1807
In December 1807, news arrived that Napoleon had extended the Berlin Decree, globally banning British imports. In Britain, King George III ordered redoubling efforts at impressment, including American sailors. But the war fever of the summer faded; Congress had no appetite to prepare the U.S. for war. Jefferson asked for and received the Embargo Act, an alternative that allowed the U.S. more time to build up defensive works, militias, and naval forces. Later historians have seen the irony in Jefferson's assertion of such federal power. Meacham said that the Embargo Act was a projection of power that surpassed the Alien and Sedition Acts, and R. B. Bernstein said that Jefferson "was pursuing policies resembling those he had cited in 1776 as grounds for independence and revolution".[244]
 A political cartoon showing merchants dodging the "Ograbme", which is "Embargo" spelled backward (1807)
In November 1807, Jefferson, for several days, met with his cabinet to discuss the deteriorating foreign situation.[245] Secretary of State James Madison supported the embargo with equal vigor to Jefferson,[246] while Treasury Secretary Gallatin opposed it, due to its indefinite time frame and the risk that it posed to the policy of American neutrality.[247] The U.S. economy suffered, criticism grew, and opponents began evading the embargo. Instead of retreating, Jefferson sent federal agents to secretly track down smugglers and violators.[248] Three acts were passed in Congress during 1807 and 1808, called the Supplementary, the Additional, and the Enforcement acts.[242] The government could not prevent American vessels from trading with the European belligerents once they had left American ports, although the embargo triggered a devastating decline in exports.[242]
Most historians consider Jefferson's embargo to have been ineffective and harmful to American interests.[249] Appleby describes the strategy as Jefferson's "least effective policy", and Joseph Ellis calls it "an unadulterated calamity".[250] Others, however, portray it as an innovative, nonviolent measure which aided France in its war with Britain while preserving American neutrality.[251] Jefferson believed that the failure of the embargo was due to selfish traders and merchants showing a lack of "republican virtue." He maintained that, had the embargo been widely observed, it would have avoided war in 1812.[252]
In December 1807, Jefferson announced his intention not to seek a third term. He turned his attention increasingly to Monticello during the last year of his presidency, giving Madison and Gallatin almost total control of affairs.[253] Shortly before leaving office in March 1809, Jefferson signed the repeal of the Embargo. In its place, the Non-Intercourse Act was passed, but it proved no more effective.[242] The day before Madison was inaugurated as his successor, Jefferson said that he felt like "a prisoner, released from his chains".[254]
Cabinet
The Jefferson cabinetOfficeNameTermPresidentThomas Jefferson1801 1809Vice PresidentAaron Burr1801 1805George Clinton1805 1809Secretary of StateJames Madison1801 1809Secretary of the TreasurySamuel Dexter1801Albert Gallatin1801 1809Secretary of WarHenry Dearborn1801 1809Attorney GeneralLevi Lincoln Sr.1801 1805John Breckinridge1805 1806Caesar Augustus Rodney1807 1809Secretary of the NavyBenjamin Stoddert1801Robert Smith1801 1809
Post-presidency (1809 1826)
Further information: Thomas Jefferson and education
 Portrait of Jefferson by Gilbert Stuart, 1821
Following his retirement from the presidency, Jefferson continued his pursuit of educational interests; after the British had burned the Library of Congress in 1814, he sold his vast collection of books (almost 6,500 books) to the get the library going again. He also founded and built the University of Virginia.[255] Jefferson continued to correspond with many of the country's leaders (including his two prot g es who succeeded him as president), and the Monroe Doctrine bears a strong resemblance to solicited advice that Jefferson gave to Monroe in 1823.[256] As he settled into private life at Monticello, Jefferson developed a daily routine of rising early. He would spend several hours writing letters, with which he was often deluged. In the midday, he would often inspect the plantation on horseback. In the evenings, his family enjoyed leisure time in the gardens; late at night, Jefferson would retire to bed with a book.[257] However, his routine was often interrupted by uninvited visitors and tourists eager to see the icon in his final days, turning Monticello into "a virtual hotel".[258]
University of Virginia
Main article: University of Virginia
 The University of Virginia, Jefferson's "Academical Village"
Jefferson envisioned a university free of church influences where students could specialize in many new areas not offered at other colleges. He believed that education engendered a stable society, which should provide publicly funded schools accessible to students from all social strata, based solely on ability.[259] He initially proposed his University in a letter to Joseph Priestley in 1800[260] and, in 1819, the 76-year-old Jefferson founded the University of Virginia. He organized the state legislative campaign for its charter and, with the assistance of Edmund Bacon, purchased the location. He was the principal designer of the buildings, planned the university's curriculum, and served as the first rector upon its opening in 1825.[261]
Jefferson was a strong disciple of Greek and Roman architectural styles, which he believed to be most representative of American democracy. Each academic unit, called a pavilion, was designed with a two-story temple front, while the library "Rotunda" was modeled on the Roman Pantheon. Jefferson referred to the university's grounds as the "Academical Village," and he reflected his educational ideas in its layout. The ten pavilions included classrooms and faculty residences; they formed a quadrangle and were connected by colonnades, behind which stood the students' rows of rooms. Gardens and vegetable plots were placed behind the pavilions and were surrounded by serpentine walls, affirming the importance of the agrarian lifestyle.[262] The university had a library rather than a church at its center, emphasizing its secular nature a controversial aspect at the time.[263]
When Jefferson died in 1826, James Madison replaced him as rector.[264] Jefferson bequeathed most of his reconstructed library of almost 2,000 volumes to the university.[265] Only one other ex-president has founded a university, namely Millard Fillmore who founded the University at Buffalo.[266]
Reconciliation with Adams
 In 1804, Abigail Adams attempted to reconcile Jefferson and Adams.
Jefferson and John Adams had been good friends in the first decades of their political careers, serving together in the Continental Congress in the 1770s and in Europe in the 1780s. The Federalist/Republican split of the 1790s divided them, however, and Adams felt betrayed by Jefferson's sponsorship of partisan attacks, such as those of James Callender. Jefferson, on the other hand, was angered at Adams for his appointment of "midnight judges".[267] The two men did not communicate directly for more than a decade after Jefferson succeeded Adams as president.[268] A brief correspondence took place between Abigail Adams and Jefferson after Jefferson's daughter Polly died in 1804, in an attempt at reconciliation unknown to Adams. However, an exchange of letters resumed open hostilities between Adams and Jefferson.[267]
As early as 1809, Benjamin Rush, signer of the Declaration of Independence, desired that Jefferson and Adams reconcile and began to prod the two through correspondence to re-establish contact.[267] In 1812, Adams wrote a short New Year's greeting to Jefferson, prompted earlier by Rush, to which Jefferson warmly responded. Thus began what historian David McCullough calls "one of the most extraordinary correspondences in American history".[269] Over the next fourteen years, the former presidents exchanged 158 letters discussing their political differences, justifying their respective roles in events, and debating the revolution's import to the world.[270] When Adams died, his last words included an acknowledgment of his longtime friend and rival: "Thomas Jefferson survives", unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before.[271][272]
Autobiography
In 1821, at the age of 77, Jefferson began writing his autobiography, in order to "state some recollections of dates and facts concerning myself".[273] He focused on the struggles and achievements he experienced until July 29, 1790, where the narrative stopped short.[274] He excluded his youth, emphasizing the revolutionary era. He related that his ancestors came from Wales to America in the early 17th century and settled in the western frontier of the Virginia colony, which influenced his zeal for individual and state rights. Jefferson described his father as uneducated, but with a "strong mind and sound judgement". His enrollment in the College of William and Mary and election to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia in 1775 were included.[273]
He also expressed opposition to the idea of a privileged aristocracy made up of large landowning families partial to the King, and instead promoted "the aristocracy of virtue and talent, which nature has wisely provided for the direction of the interests of society, & scattered with equal hand through all its conditions, was deemed essential to a well-ordered republic".[273]
Jefferson gave his insight into people, politics, and events.[273] The work is primarily concerned with the Declaration and reforming the government of Virginia. He used notes, letters, and documents to tell many of the stories within the autobiography. He suggested that this history was so rich that his personal affairs were better overlooked, but he incorporated a self-analysis using the Declaration and other patriotism.[275]
Greek War of Independence
Thomas Jefferson was a philhellene, lover of Greek culture, who sympathized with the Greek War of Independence.[276][277] He has been described as the most influential of the Founding Fathers who supported the Greek cause,[277][278] viewing it as similar to the American Revolution.[279] By 1823, Jefferson was exchanging ideas with Greek scholar Adamantios Korais.[277] Jefferson advised Korais on building the political system of Greece by using classical liberalism and examples from the American governmental system, ultimately prescribing a government akin to that of a U.S. state.[280] He also suggested the application of a classical education system for the newly founded First Hellenic Republic, where public education would be made available and pupils would be taught history, Latin, and Greek.[281] Jefferson's philosophical instructions were welcomed by the Greek people.[281] Korais became one of the designers of the Greek constitution and urged his associates to study Jefferson's works and other literature from the American Revolution.[281]
Lafayette's visit
Main article: Visit of the Marquis de Lafayette to the United States
 Lafayette in 1824, portrait by Ary Scheffer, hanging in U.S. House of Representatives
In the summer of 1824, the Marquis de Lafayette accepted an invitation from President James Monroe to visit the country. Jefferson and Lafayette had not seen each other since 1789. After visits to New York, New England, and Washington, Lafayette arrived at Monticello on November 4.[261]
Jefferson's grandson Randolph was present and recorded the reunion: "As they approached each other, their uncertain gait quickened itself into a shuffling run, and exclaiming, 'Ah Jefferson!' 'Ah Lafayette!', they burst into tears as they fell into each other's arms." Jefferson and Lafayette then retired to the house to reminisce.[282] The next morning Jefferson, Lafayette, and James Madison attended a tour and banquet at the University of Virginia. Jefferson had someone else read a speech he had prepared for Lafayette, as his voice was weak and could not carry. This was his last public presentation. After an 11-day visit, Lafayette bid Jefferson goodbye and departed Monticello.[283]
Final days, death, and burial
 Jefferson's gravesite
Jefferson's approximately $100,000 of debt weighed heavily on his mind in his final months, as it became increasingly clear that he would have little to leave to his heirs. In February 1826, he successfully applied to the General Assembly to hold a public lottery as a fundraiser.[284] His health began to deteriorate in July 1825, due to a combination of rheumatism from arm and wrist injuries, as well as intestinal and urinary disorders[261] and, by June 1826, he was confined to bed.[284] On July 3, Jefferson was overcome by fever and declined an invitation to Washington to attend an anniversary celebration of the Declaration.[285]
During the last hours of his life, he was accompanied by family members and friends. Jefferson died on July 4 at 12:50 p.m. at age 83, the same day as the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence. His last recorded words were "No, doctor, nothing more," refusing laudanum from his physician, but his final significant words are often cited as "Is it the Fourth?" or "This is the Fourth."[286] When John Adams died later that same day, his last words included an acknowledgment of his longtime friend and rival: "Thomas Jefferson survives," though Adams was unaware that Jefferson had died several hours before.[287][288][289][290] The sitting president was Adams's son, John Quincy Adams, and he called the coincidence of their deaths on the nation's anniversary "visible and palpable remarks of Divine Favor."[291]
Shortly after Jefferson had died, attendants found a gold locket on a chain around his neck, where it had rested for more than 40 years, containing a small faded blue ribbon that tied a lock of his wife Martha's brown hair.[292]
Jefferson's remains were buried at Monticello, under an epitaph that he wrote:
HERE WAS BURIED THOMAS JEFFERSON, AUTHOR OF THE DECLARATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, OF THE STATUTE OF VIRGINIA FOR RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, AND FATHER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA.[293]
In his advanced years, Jefferson became increasingly concerned that people understand the principles in, and the people responsible for writing, the Declaration of Independence, and he continually defended himself as its author. He considered the document one of his greatest life achievements, in addition to authoring the Statute of Virginia for Religious Freedom and his founding of the University of Virginia. Plainly absent from his epitaph were his political roles, including President of the United States.[294]
Jefferson died deeply in debt, unable to pass on his estate freely to his heirs.[295] He gave instructions in his will for disposal of his assets,[296] including the freeing of Sally Hemings's children;[297] but his estate, possessions, and slaves were sold at public auctions starting in 1827.[298] In 1831, Monticello was sold by Martha Jefferson Randolph and the other heirs.[299]
Political, social, and religious views
Jefferson subscribed to the political ideals expounded by John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton, whom he considered the three greatest men who ever lived.[300][301] He was also influenced by the writings of Gibbon, Hume, Robertson, Bolingbroke, Montesquieu, and Voltaire.[302] Jefferson thought that the independent yeoman and agrarian life were ideals of republican virtues. He distrusted cities and financiers, favored decentralized government power, and believed that the tyranny that had plagued the common man in Europe was due to corrupt political establishments and monarchies. He supported efforts to disestablish the Church of England,[303] wrote the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and he pressed for a wall of separation between church and state.[304] The Republicans under Jefferson were strongly influenced by the 18th-century British Whig Party, which believed in limited government.[305] His Democratic-Republican Party became dominant in early American politics, and his views became known as Jeffersonian democracy.[306][307]
Philosophy, society, and government
Part of a series onLiberalismin the United States
Schools
Classical
Conservative
Economic
Laissez-faire
Modern
Progressive
Social
Third Way
Principles
Civil rights
Due process
Economic freedom
Economic progressivism
Egalitarianism
Equal opportunity
Environmentalism
Fiscal conservatism
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Free market
Harm Principle
Individualism
Internationalism
Legal egalitarianism
Mixed economy
Republicanism
Rule of law
Separation of church and state
Social Democracy
Social equality
Social justice
Social welfare
Unalienable rights
Welfare state
History
American Revolutionary War
Civil rights movement
Fair Deal
Gilded Age
Great Society
Liberal Republicans
New Deal
New Deal coalition
Progressive Era
Third Way
Intellectuals
Abbott
Addams
Carson
Commager
Dewey
Douglass
Dworkin
Emerson
Frank
Franklin
Friedan
Friedman
Galbraith
Garrison
Hofstadter
Ireland
Jefferson
King (Coretta)
King Jr.
Maddow
McCarthy
McGovern
Mott
Murray
Nozick
Nussbaum
Paine
Pinker
Rawls
Rorty
Rush
Schlesinger
Sharpton
Skinner
Smith
Sontag
Stanton
Steinem
Sumner
Trilling
Trotter
Thoreau
Truth
Vidal
Ward
Warren
Wells
Wellstone
Politicians
Abzug
Abrams
Anthony
Baker
Biden
Bryan
Buttigieg
Carter
Chavez
Chisholm
Clay
Clinton (Bill)
Clinton (Hillary)
Clyburn
Cuomo (Andrew)
Cuomo (Mario)
Dean
Dukakis
Farmer
Feinstein
Frank
Glasser
Gompers
Gore
Hamer
Harlan
Harris
Hays
Huerta
Humphrey
Jackson (Andrew)
Jackson (Jesse)
Javits
Jefferson
Johnson
Jordan
Kaine
Kefauver
Kennedy (John)
Kennedy (Joseph)
Kennedy (Robert)
Kennedy (Ted)
Kerry
King (Coretta)
King Jr.
La Follette
La Guardia
Lewis
Lincoln
Lindsay
Madison
Markey
McCarthy
McGovern
Milk
Mondale
Murphy
Nelson
Newsom
O'Neill
Obama
Pelosi
Powell
Randolph
Reid
Reuther
Rockefeller
Roosevelt (Eleanor)
Roosevelt (Franklin)
Roosevelt (Theodore)
Rush
Schumer
Sharpton
Shriver
Smith
Stevenson
Truman
Wallace
Warren
Wellstone
Yarborough
Jurists
Blackmun
Brandeis
Brennan
Breyer
Darrow
Douglas
Dworkin
Ginsburg
Harlan
Houston
Jackson
Kagan
Marshall
Sotomayor
Souter
Stevens
Warren
Parties
Anti-Federalist Party
Democratic Party
Democratic-Republican Party
National Democratic Party
Progressive Party (1912)
Progressive Party (1924)
Progressive Party (1948)
Rockefeller Republicans (until the 1970s)
Think tanks
Center for American Progress
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities
Roosevelt Institute
Organizations
AFL CIO
American Civil Liberties Union
American Constitution Society
American Humanist Association
Americans United for Separation of Church and State
Brennan Center For Justice
Equal Justice Works
NAACP
National Organization for Women
People for the American Way
NARAL
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
Southern Center for Human Rights
SNCC
National Urban League
Media
The American Prospect
The Atlantic
CNN
HuffPost
Mother Jones
MSNBC
The Nation
The New Republic
The New York Times
Rolling Stone
Sojourners
Talking Points Memo
ThinkProgress
Salon
The Washington Post
See also
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal bias in the media
Liberal theorists
Modern liberalism in the United States
 Liberalism portal United States portalvte
Jefferson wrote letters and speeches prolifically, and these show him to be conversant and well-read in the philosophical literature of his day and of antiquity. Nevertheless, some scholars do not take Jefferson seriously as a philosopher mainly because he did not produce a formal work on philosophy. However, he has been described as one of the most outstanding philosophical figures of his time because his work provided the theoretical background to, and the substance of, the social and political events of the revolutionary years and the period of the development of the American Constitution in the 1770s and 1780s.[308] Jefferson continued to attend to more theoretical questions of natural philosophy and subsequently left behind a rich philosophical legacy in the form of presidential messages, letters to philosophically minded people, and public papers.[309]
Jefferson described himself as an Epicurean and, although he adopted the Stoic belief in intuition and found comfort in the Stoic emphasis on the patient endurance of misfortune, he rejected most aspects of Stoicism with the notable exception of Epictetus' works.[310][311] He rejected the Stoics' doctrine of a separable soul and their fatalism, and was angered by their misrepresentation of Epicureanism as mere hedonism.[311] Jefferson knew Epicurean philosophy from original sources, but also mentioned Pierre Gassendi's Syntagma philosophicum as an influential source for his ideas on Epicureanism.[312]
According to Jefferson's philosophy, citizens have "certain inalienable rights" and "rightful liberty is unobstructed action according to our will, within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others."[313] A staunch advocate of the jury system to protect people's liberties, he proclaimed in 1801, "I consider [trial by jury] as the only anchor yet imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the principles of its constitution."[314]
Jeffersonian government not only prohibited individuals in society from infringing on the liberty of others, but also restrained itself from diminishing individual liberty as a protection against tyranny from the majority.[315] Initially, Jefferson favored restricted voting to those who could actually have the free exercise of their reason by escaping any corrupting dependence on others. He advocated enfranchising a majority of Virginians, seeking to expand suffrage to include "yeoman farmers" who owned their own land while excluding tenant farmers, city day laborers, vagrants, most American Indians, and women.[316]
He was convinced that individual liberties were the fruit of political equality, which was threatened by the arbitrary government.[317] Excesses of democracy in his view were caused by institutional corruption rather than human nature. He was less suspicious of a working democracy than many contemporaries.[316] As president, Jefferson feared that the federal system enacted by Washington and Adams had encouraged corrupting patronage and dependence. He tried to restore a balance between the state and federal governments more nearly reflecting the Articles of Confederation, seeking to reinforce state prerogatives where his party was in a majority.[316]
Jefferson was steeped in the British Whig tradition of the oppressed majority set against a repeatedly unresponsive court party in the Parliament. He justified small outbreaks of rebellion as necessary to get monarchial regimes to amend oppressive measures compromising popular liberties. In a republican regime ruled by the majority, he acknowledged "it will often be exercised when wrong."[318] But "the remedy is to set them right as to facts, pardon and pacify them."[319] As Jefferson saw his party triumph in two terms of his presidency and launch into a third term under James Madison, his view of the U.S. as a continental republic and an "empire of liberty" grew more upbeat. On departing the presidency in 1809, he described America as "trusted with the destines of this solitary republic of the world, the only monument of human rights, and the sole depository of the sacred fire of freedom and self-government."[320]
Jefferson was a supporter of American expansionism, writing in 1801 that "it is impossible not to look forward to distant times when our rapid multiplication will expand itself beyond those limits, and cover the whole northern, if not the southern continent."[321]
Democracy
 Thomas Jefferson at age 78. Portrait by Thomas Sully hanging at West Point, commissioned by Faculty and Cadets, 1821.
Jefferson considered democracy to be the expression of society and promoted national self-determination, cultural uniformity, and education of all males of the commonwealth.[322] He supported public education and a free press as essential components of a democratic nation.[323]
After resigning as secretary of state in 1795, Jefferson focused on the electoral bases of the Republicans and Federalists. The "Republican" classification for which he advocated included "the entire body of landholders" everywhere and "the body of laborers" without land.[324] Republicans united behind Jefferson as vice president, with the election of 1796 expanding democracy nationwide at grassroots levels.[325] Jefferson promoted Republican candidates for local offices.[326]
Beginning with Jefferson's electioneering for the "revolution of 1800," his political efforts were based on egalitarian appeals.[327] In his later years, he referred to the 1800 election "as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of '76 was in its form," one "not effected indeed by the sword ... but by the ... suffrage of the people."[328] Voter participation grew during Jefferson's presidency, increasing to "unimaginable levels" compared to the Federalist Era, with turnout of about 67,000 in 1800 rising to about 143,000 in 1804.[329]
At the onset of the Revolution, Jefferson accepted William Blackstone's argument that property ownership would sufficiently empower voters' independent judgement, but he sought to further expand suffrage by land distribution to the poor.[330] In the heat of the Revolutionary Era and afterward, several states expanded voter eligibility from landed gentry to all propertied male, tax-paying citizens with Jefferson's support.[331] In retirement, he gradually became critical of his home state for violating "the principle of equal political rights" the social right of universal male suffrage.[332] He sought a "general suffrage" of all taxpayers and militia-men, and equal representation by population in the General Assembly to correct preferential treatment of the slave-holding regions.[333]
Religion
Main article: Religious views of Thomas Jefferson
 The Jefferson Bible featuring only the words of Jesus from the evangelists, in parallel Greek, Latin, French and English
 Jefferson by Gilbert Stuart in 1805
Baptized in his youth, Jefferson became a governing member of his local Episcopal Church in Charlottesville, which he later attended with his daughters.[334] Jefferson, however, spurned Biblical views of Christianity.[335] Influenced by Deist authors during his college years, Jefferson abandoned orthodox Christianity after his review of New Testament teachings.[336][337]  Jefferson has sometimes been portrayed as a follower of the liberal religious strand of Deism that values reason over revelation.[338] Nonetheless, in 1803, Jefferson asserted, "I am Christian, in the only sense in which [Jesus] wished any one to be."[213]
Jefferson later defined being a Christian as one who followed the simple teachings of Jesus. Influenced by Joseph Priestley,[338] Jefferson selected New Testament passages of Jesus' teachings into a private work he called The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth, known today as the Jefferson Bible, never published during his lifetime.[339][340] Jefferson believed that Jesus' message had been obscured and corrupted by Paul the Apostle, the Gospel writers and Protestant reformers.[338] Peterson states that Jefferson was a theist "whose God was the Creator of the universe ... all the evidences of nature testified to His perfection; and man could rely on the harmony and beneficence of His work."[341] In a letter to John Adams, Jefferson wrote that what he believed was genuinely Christ's, found in the Gospels, was "as easily distinguishable as diamonds in a dunghill".[335] By omitting miracles and the resurrection, Jefferson made the figure of Jesus more compatible with a worldview based on reason.[335]
Jefferson was firmly anticlerical, writing in "every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty ... they have perverted the purest religion ever preached to man into mystery and jargon."[342] The full letter to Horatio Spatford can be read at the National Archives.[343] Jefferson once supported banning clergy from public office but later relented.[344] In 1777, he drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. Ratified in 1786, it made compelling attendance or contributions to any state-sanctioned religious establishment illegal and declared that men "shall be free to profess ... their opinions in matters of religion."[345] The Statute is one of only three accomplishments he chose to have inscribed in the epitaph on his gravestone.[346][347] Early in 1802, Jefferson wrote to the Danbury Connecticut Baptist Association, "that religion is a matter which lies solely between Man and his God." He interpreted the First Amendment as having built "a wall of separation between Church and State."[348] The phrase 'Separation of Church and State' has been cited several times by the Supreme Court in its interpretation of the Establishment Clause.
Jefferson donated to the American Bible Society, saying the Four Evangelists delivered a "pure and sublime system of morality" to humanity. He thought Americans would rationally create "Apiarian" religion, extracting the best traditions of every denomination.[349] And he contributed generously to several local denominations near Monticello.[350] Acknowledging organized religion would always be factored into political life for good or ill, he encouraged reason over supernatural revelation to make inquiries into religion. He believed in a creator god, an afterlife, and the sum of religion as loving God and neighbors. But he also controversially rejected fundamental Christian beliefs, denying the conventional Christian Trinity, Jesus's divinity as the Son of God and miracles, the Resurrection of Christ, atonement from sin, and original sin.[351][352][340] Jefferson believed that the original sin was a gross injustice and that God did not condemn all of humanity by the transgression of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.[340]
Jefferson's unorthodox religious beliefs became an important issue in the 1800 presidential election.[353] Federalists attacked him as an atheist. As president, Jefferson countered the accusations by praising religion in his inaugural address and attending services at the Capitol.[353]
Banks
 Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, national bank proponent and Jefferson's adversary
Jefferson distrusted government banks and opposed public borrowing, which he thought created long-term debt, bred monopolies, and invited dangerous speculation as opposed to productive labor.[354] In one letter to Madison, he argued each generation should curtail all debt within 19 years, and not impose a long-term debt on subsequent generations.[355]
In 1791, President Washington asked Jefferson, then secretary of state, and Hamilton, the secretary of the treasury, if the Congress had the authority to create a national bank. While Hamilton believed Congress had the authority, Jefferson and Madison thought a national bank would ignore the needs of individuals and farmers, and would violate the Tenth Amendment by assuming powers not granted to the federal government by the states.[356] Hamilton successfully argued that the implied powers given to the federal government in the Constitution supported the creation of a national bank, among other federal actions.
Jefferson used agrarian resistance to banks and speculators as the first defining principle of an opposition party, recruiting candidates for Congress on the issue as early as 1792.[357] As president, Jefferson was persuaded by Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin to leave the bank intact but sought to restrain its influence.[358][p]
Slavery
Main article: Thomas Jefferson and slavery
 Jefferson's 1795 Farm Book, page 30, lists 163 slaves at Monticello.
Jefferson lived in a planter economy largely dependent upon slavery, and as a wealthy landholder, used slave labor for his household, plantation, and workshops. He first recorded his slaveholding in 1774, when he counted 41 enslaved people.[360] Over his lifetime he owned about 600 slaves; he inherited about 175 people while most of the remainder were people born on his plantations.[361] Jefferson purchased some slaves in order to reunite their families. He sold approximately 110 people for economic reasons, primarily slaves from his outlying farms.[361][362] In 1784 when the number of slaves he owned likely was approximately 200, he began to divest himself of many slaves, and by 1794 he had divested himself of 161 individuals.[363][q]
Approximately 100 slaves lived at Monticello at any given time. In 1817, the plantation recorded its largest slave population of 140 individuals.[364]
Jefferson once said, "My first wish is that the labourers may be well treated".[361] Jefferson did not work his slaves on Sundays and Christmas and he allowed them more personal time during the winter months.[365] Some scholars doubt Jefferson's benevolence,[366] however, noting cases of excessive slave whippings in his absence. His nail factory was staffed only by enslaved children. Many of the enslaved boys became tradesmen. Burwell Colbert, who started his working life as a child in Monticello's Nailery, was later promoted to the supervisory position of butler.[367]
Jefferson felt slavery was harmful to both slave and master but had reservations about releasing slaves from captivity, and advocated for gradual emancipation.[368][369][370] In 1779, he proposed gradual voluntary training and resettlement to the Virginia legislature, and three years later drafted legislation allowing slaveholders to free their own slaves.[67] In his draft of the Declaration of Independence, he included a section, stricken by other Southern delegates, criticizing King George III for supposedly forcing slavery onto the colonies.[371] In 1784, Jefferson proposed the abolition of slavery in all western U.S. territories, limiting slave importation to 15 years.[372] Congress, however, failed to pass his proposal by one vote.[372] In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance, a partial victory for Jefferson that terminated slavery in the Northwest Territory. Jefferson freed his slave Robert Hemings in 1794 and he freed his cook slave James Hemings in 1796.[373] Jefferson freed his runaway slave Harriet Hemings in 1822.[374] Upon his death in 1826, Jefferson freed five male Hemings slaves in his will.[375]
During his presidency, Jefferson allowed the diffusion of slavery into the Louisiana Territory hoping to prevent slave uprisings in Virginia and to prevent South Carolina secession.[376] In 1804, in a compromise on the slavery issue, Jefferson and Congress banned domestic slave trafficking for one year into the Louisiana Territory.[377] In 1806 he officially called for anti-slavery legislation terminating the import or export of slaves. Congress passed the law in 1807.[368][378][379]
In 1819, Jefferson strongly opposed a Missouri statehood application amendment that banned domestic slave importation and freed slaves at the age of 25 on grounds it would destroy the union.[380]  In Notes on the State of Virginia, he created controversy by calling slavery a moral evil for which the nation would ultimately have to account to God.[381] Jefferson wrote of his "suspicion" that Black people were mentally and physically inferior to Whites, but argued that they nonetheless had innate human rights.[368][382][383] He therefore supported colonization plans that would transport freed slaves to another country, such as Liberia or Sierra Leone, though he recognized the impracticability of such proposals.[384]
During his presidency, Jefferson was for the most part publicly silent on the issue of slavery and emancipation,[385] as the Congressional debate over slavery and its extension caused a dangerous north south rift among the states, with talk of a northern confederacy in New England.[386][r] The violent attacks on white slave owners during the Haitian Revolution due to injustices under slavery supported Jefferson's fears of a race war, increasing his reservations about promoting emancipation at that time.[368][387] After numerous attempts and failures to bring about emancipation,[388] Jefferson wrote privately in an 1805 letter to William A. Burwell, "I have long since given up the expectation of any early provision for the extinguishment of slavery among us." That same year he also related this idea to George Logan, writing, "I have most carefully avoided every public act or manifestation on that subject."[389]
Barbary Wars
The Barbary States had been taking Europeans as slaves for centuries before America's existence. Most captives were pressed into hard labor in the service of the Barbary pirates, and struggled under extremely poor conditions that exposed them to vermin and disease. As word of their treatment reached the United States, through freed captives' narratives and letters, Americans pushed for direct government action to stop the piracy against American ships. America's first war, after independence, was also America's first step in its history towards a later complete national and global push towards the abolition of slavery.[390] [391]
Historical assessment
Scholars remain divided on whether Jefferson truly condemned slavery and how he changed.[374][392] Francis D. Cogliano traces the development of competing emancipationist then revisionist and finally contextualist interpretations from the 1960s to the present. The emancipationist view, held by the various scholars at the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, Douglas L. Wilson, John Ferling, and others, maintains Jefferson was an opponent of slavery all his life, noting that he did what he could within the limited range of options available to him to undermine it, his many attempts at abolition legislation, the manner in which he provided for slaves, and his advocacy of their more humane treatment.[393][394][395][s][396]
One month before the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves came into effect, in his annual message to Congress, Jefferson denounced the "violations of human rights." He said:
I congratulate you, fellow-citizens, on the approach of the period at which you may interpose your authority constitutionally, to withdraw the citizens of the United States from all further participation in those violations of human rights which have been so long continued on the unoffending inhabitants of Africa, and which the morality, the reputation, and the best interests of our country, have long been eager to proscribe.[397]
The revisionist view, advanced by Paul Finkelman and others, criticizes him for holding slaves, and for acting contrary to his words. Jefferson never freed most of his slaves, and he remained silent on the issue while he was president.[385][398] Contextualists such as Joseph J. Ellis emphasize a change in Jefferson's thinking from his emancipationist views before 1783, noting Jefferson's shift toward public passivity and procrastination on policy issues related to slavery. Jefferson seemed to yield to public opinion by 1794 as he laid the groundwork for his first presidential campaign against Adams in 1796.[399]
Historian Henry Wiencek said Jefferson "rationalized an abomination to the point where an absolute moral reversal was reached and he made slavery fit into America's national enterprise."[400]
Jefferson Hemings controversy
Main article: Jefferson Hemings controversy
See also: Sally Hemings
 Jefferson depicted as a rooster, and Hemings as a hen
Claims that Jefferson fathered children with his sister-in-law and slave Sally Hemings's have been debated since 1802. That year James T. Callender, after being denied a position as postmaster, alleged Jefferson had taken Hemings as a concubine and fathered several children with her.[401] In 1998, a panel of researchers conducted a Y-DNA study of living descendants of Jefferson's uncle, Field, and of a descendant of Hemings's son, Eston Hemings. The results, released in November 1998, showed a match with the male Jefferson line.[402][403] Subsequently, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation (TJF) formed a nine-member research team of historians to assess the matter.[403] In January 2000 (revised 2011),[403] the TJF report concluded that "the DNA study ... indicates a high probability that Thomas Jefferson fathered Eston Hemings."[403][404][t] The TJF also concluded that Jefferson likely fathered all of Hemings's children listed at Monticello.[403][u]
In July 2017, the TJF announced that archeological excavations at Monticello had revealed what they believe to have been Sally Hemings's quarters, adjacent to Jefferson's bedroom.[406][407] In 2018, the TJF said that it considered the issue "a settled historical matter."[408] Since the results of the DNA tests were made public, the consensus among most historians has been that Jefferson had a sexual relationship with Sally Hemings and that he was the father of her son Eston Hemings.[409]
Still, a minority of scholars maintain the evidence is insufficient to prove Jefferson's paternity conclusively. Based on DNA and other evidence, they note the possibility that additional Jefferson males, including his brother Randolph Jefferson and any one of Randolph's four sons, or his cousin, could have fathered Eston Hemings or Sally Hemings's other children.[410] In 2002, historian Merrill Peterson said: "in the absence of direct documentary evidence either proving or refuting the allegation, nothing conclusive can be said about Jefferson's relations with Sally Hemings."[411] Concerning the 1998 DNA study Peterson said: "the results of the DNA testing of Jefferson and Hemings descendants provided support for the idea that Jefferson was the father of at least one of Sally Hemings's children."[411]
After Thomas Jefferson's death, although not formally manumitted, Sally Hemings was allowed by Jefferson's daughter Martha to live in Charlottesville as a free woman with her two sons until her death in 1835.[412][v] The Monticello Association refused to allow Sally Hemings' descendants the right of burial at Monticello.[414]
Interests and activities
 Virginia State Capitol, designed by Jefferson (wings added later)
Jefferson was a farmer, obsessed with new crops, soil conditions, garden designs, and scientific agricultural techniques. His main cash crop was tobacco, but its price was usually low and it was rarely profitable. He tried to achieve self-sufficiency with wheat, vegetables, flax, corn, hogs, sheep, poultry, and cattle to supply his family, slaves, and employees, but he lived perpetually beyond his means[415] and was always in debt.[416]
In the field of architecture, Jefferson helped popularize the Neo-Palladian style in the United States utilizing designs for the Virginia State Capitol, the University of Virginia, Monticello, and others.[417] It has been speculated that he was inspired by the Ch teau de Rastignac in south-west France the plans of which he saw during his ambassadorship to convince the architect of the White House to modify the South Portico to resemble the ch teau.[418] Jefferson mastered architecture through self-study, using various books and classical architectural designs of the day. His primary authority was Andrea Palladio's 1570 The Four Books of Architecture, which outlines the principles of classical design.[419]
He was interested in birds and wine, and was a noted gourmet; he was also a prolific writer and linguist, and spoke several languages.[420] As a naturalist, he was fascinated by the Natural Bridge geological formation, and in 1774 successfully acquired the Bridge by a grant from George III.[421]
American Philosophical Society
Jefferson was a member of the American Philosophical Society for 35 years, beginning in 1780. Through the society he advanced the sciences and Enlightenment ideals, emphasizing that knowledge of science reinforced and extended freedom.[422] His Notes on the State of Virginia was written in part as a contribution to the society.[423] He became the society's third president on March 3, 1797, a few months after he was elected Vice President of the United States.[423][424] In accepting, Jefferson stated: "I feel no qualification for this distinguished post but a sincere zeal for all the objects of our institution and an ardent desire to see knowledge so disseminated through the mass of mankind that it may at length reach even the extremes of society, beggars and kings."[422]
Jefferson served as APS president for the next eighteen years, including through both terms of his presidency.[423] He introduced Meriwether Lewis to the society, where various scientists tutored him in preparation for the Lewis and Clark Expedition.[423][425] He resigned on January 20, 1815, but remained active through correspondence.[426]
Linguistics
Jefferson had a lifelong interest in linguistics, and could speak, read, and write in a number of languages, including French, Greek, Italian, and German. In his early years, he excelled in classical language while at boarding school[427] where he received a classical education in Greek and Latin.[428] Jefferson later came to regard the Greek language as the "perfect language" as expressed in its laws and philosophy.[429] While attending the College of William & Mary, he taught himself Italian.[430] Here Jefferson first became familiar with the Anglo-Saxon language, especially as it was associated with English Common law and system of government and studied the language in a linguistic and philosophical capacity. He owned 17 volumes of Anglo-Saxon texts and grammar and later wrote an essay on the Anglo-Saxon language.[427]
Jefferson claimed to have taught himself Spanish during his nineteen-day journey to France, using only a grammar guide and a copy of Don Quixote.[431] Linguistics played a significant role in how Jefferson modeled and expressed political and philosophical ideas. He believed that the study of ancient languages was essential in understanding the roots of modern language.[432] He collected and understood a number of American Indian vocabularies and instructed Lewis and Clark to record and collect various Indian languages during their Expedition.[433] When Jefferson moved from Washington after his presidency, he packed 50 Native American vocabulary lists in a chest and transported them on a riverboat back to Monticello along with the rest of his possessions. Somewhere along the journey, a thief stole the heavy chest, thinking it was full of valuables, but its contents were dumped into the James River when the thief discovered it was only filled with papers. Subsequently, 30 years of collecting were lost, with only a few fragments rescued from the muddy banks of the river.[434]
Jefferson was not an outstanding orator and preferred to communicate through writing or remain silent if possible. Instead of delivering his State of the Union addresses himself, Jefferson wrote the annual messages and sent a representative to read them aloud in Congress. This started a tradition that continued until 1913 when President Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921) chose to deliver his own State of the Union address.[435]
Inventions
Jefferson invented many small practical devices and improved contemporary inventions, including a revolving book-stand and a "Great Clock" powered by the gravitational pull on cannonballs. He improved the pedometer, the polygraph (a device for duplicating writing),[436] and the moldboard plow, an idea he never patented and gave to posterity.[437] Jefferson can also be credited as the creator of the swivel chair, the first of which he created and used to write much of the Declaration of Independence.[438] He first opposed patents and later supported them. In 1790 1793, as Secretary of State, he was the ex officio head of the three-person patent review board (the Secretary of War and the Attorney General being the other two patent reviewers). He drafted reforms of US patent law which lead to him being relieved of this duty in 1793, and also drastically changed the patent system.[439]
As Minister to France, Jefferson was impressed by the military standardization program known as the Syst me Gribeauval, and initiated a program as president to develop interchangeable parts for firearms. For his inventiveness and ingenuity, he received several honorary Doctor of Law degrees.[440]
Legacy
Historical reputation
Jefferson is an icon of individual liberty, democracy, and republicanism, hailed as the author of the Declaration of Independence, an architect of the American Revolution, and a renaissance man who promoted science and scholarship.[441] The participatory democracy and expanded suffrage he championed defined his era and became a standard for later generations.[442] Meacham opined that Jefferson was the most influential figure of the democratic republic in its first half-century, succeeded by presidential adherents James Madison, James Monroe, Andrew Jackson, and Martin Van Buren.[443] Jefferson is recognized for having written more than 18,000 letters of political and philosophical substance during his life, which Francis D. Cogliano describes as "a documentary legacy ... unprecedented in American history in its size and breadth."[444]
Jefferson's reputation declined during the American Civil War, due to his support of states' rights. In the late 19th century, his legacy was widely criticized; conservatives felt that his democratic philosophy had led to that era's populist movement, while Progressives sought a more activist federal government than Jefferson's philosophy allowed. Both groups saw Alexander Hamilton as vindicated by history, rather than Jefferson, and President Woodrow Wilson even described Jefferson as "though a great man, not a great American".[445]
In the 1930s, Jefferson was held in higher esteem; President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945) and New Deal Democrats celebrated his struggles for "the common man" and reclaimed him as their party's founder. Jefferson became a symbol of American democracy in the incipient Cold War, and the 1940s and 1950s saw the zenith of his popular reputation.[446] Following the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, Jefferson's slaveholding came under new scrutiny, particularly after DNA testing in the late 1990s supported allegations that he had fathered multiple children with Sally Hemings.[447]
Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D.C.
Thomas Jefferson Memorial Statue, by Rudulph Evans (1947)
Jefferson on the $2 bill
Jefferson's Birthplace
Noting the huge output of scholarly books on Jefferson in recent years, historian Gordon Wood summarizes the raging debates about Jefferson's stature: "Although many historians and others are embarrassed about his contradictions and have sought to knock him off the democratic pedestal ... his position, though shaky, still seems secure."[448]
The Siena Research Institute poll of presidential scholars, begun in 1982, has consistently ranked Jefferson as one of the five best U.S. presidents,[449] and a 2015 Brookings Institution poll of American Political Science Association members ranked him as the fifth greatest president.[450]
Jefferson is portrayed in the popular Broadway musical Hamilton played by Daveed Diggs (Who also played the Marquis de Lafayette) for the Broadway opening in 2015. During the Broadway musical, the character of Jefferson is portrayed as being joined by Madison and Burr in confronting Hamilton about his affaire de c ur in the Reynolds affair and they together intone the rap lyrics to the song "We Know" aimed at Hamilton.[451]
In 2020, historian Annette Gordon-Reed said that Jefferson's "vision of equality" did not include all people, as it primarily excluded both blacks and women. Jefferson believed that Native peoples could be citizens, as long as they agreed to assimilate into white society. According to her, Jefferson put little effort into obtaining freedom for black slaves, as he did for white colonists from Britain. She also said that Jefferson was doubtful of the intellectual capacity of blacks, compared to whites and also was hesitant to advocate or examine the equality of women.[452]  The assertion in the Declaration of Independence that it was "self-evident" that "all men are created equal" inspired women, men, blacks, and whites to pursue equality.[452] Others contend that Jefferson included women as well as men when he wrote that "all men are created equal" and that he believed in women's natural equality as expressed in Notes on the State of Virginia.[453]
Memorials and honors
Further information: List of places named for Thomas Jefferson
 Mount Rushmore National Memorial by Gutzon Borglum, (left to right): George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln
Jefferson has been memorialized with buildings, sculptures, postage, and currency. In the 1920s, Jefferson, together with George Washington, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln, was chosen by sculptor Gutzon Borglum and approved by President Calvin Coolidge to be depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial.[454]
The Jefferson Memorial was dedicated in Washington, D.C. in 1943, on the 200th anniversary of Jefferson's birth. The interior of the memorial includes a 19-foot (6 m) statue of Jefferson by Rudulph Evans and engravings of passages from Jefferson's writings. Most prominent are the words inscribed around the monument near the roof: "I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man."[455]
In October 2021, in response to lobbying by activists, the New York City Public Design Commission voted unanimously to remove a statue of the former president from the New York City Council chamber where it had stood for more than a century.[456] The statue was taken down in November 2021.[457]
Writings
Library resources about  Thomas Jefferson 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Thomas Jefferson
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775)
Declaration of Independence (1776)
Memorandums taken on a journey from Paris into the southern parts of France and Northern Italy, in the year 1787
Notes on the State of Virginia (1781)
Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States A report submitted to Congress (1790)
"An Essay Towards Facilitating Instruction in the Anglo-Saxon and Modern Dialects of the English Language" (1796)
Manual of Parliamentary Practice for the Use of the Senate of the United States (1801)
Autobiography (1821)[458]
Jefferson Bible, or The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth
See also
List of presidents of the United States
List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
List of presidents of the United States who owned slaves
Declaration of independence
United States Declaration of Independence
Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence
Founders Online
List of abolitionist forerunners
Jefferson Monroe Levy
Clotel or The President's Daughter, an 1853 novel by William Wells Brown
Seconds pendulum
Notes
^ Old Style: April 2, 1743
^ Jefferson personally showed little interest in his ancestry; on his father's side, he only knew of the existence of his grandfather.[11][12] Malone writes that Jefferson vaguely knew that his grandfather "had a place on the Fluvanna River which he called Snowden after a mountain in Wales near which the Jeffersons were supposed to have once lived".[11] See also Peter Jefferson#Ancestry.
^ His other properties included Shadwell, Tufton, Lego, Pantops, and his retreat, Poplar Forest. He also owned the unimproved mountaintop Montalto, and the Natural Bridge.[44]
^ While the news from Francis Eppes, with whom Lucy was staying, did not reach Jefferson until 1785, in an undated letter,[54] it is clear that the year of her death was 1784 from another letter to Jefferson from  James Currie dated November 20, 1784.[55]
^ Adams recorded his exchange with Jefferson on the question. Jefferson asked, "Why will you not? You ought to do it." To which Adams responded, "I will not reasons enough." Jefferson replied, "What can be your reasons?" and Adams responded, "Reason first, you are a Virginian, and a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business. Reason second, I am obnoxious, suspected, and unpopular. You are very much otherwise. Reason third, you can write ten times better than I can." "Well," said Jefferson, "if you are decided, I will do as well as I can." Adams concluded, "Very well. When you have drawn it up, we will have a meeting."[65]
^ Franklin, seated beside the author, observed him "writhing a little under the acrimonious criticisms on some of its parts."[71]
^ The entail laws made it perpetual: the one who inherited the land could not sell it, but had to bequeath it to his oldest son. As a result, increasingly large plantations, worked by white tenant farmers and by black slaves, gained in size and wealth and political power in the eastern ("Tidewater") tobacco areas.[79] During the Revolutionary era, all such laws were repealed by the states that had them.[80]
^ the immediate successor to the Second Continental Congress
^ These included Russia, Austria, Prussia, Denmark, Saxony, Hamburg, Spain, Portugal, Naples, Sardinia, The Papal States, Venice, Genoa, Tuscany, the Sublime Porte, Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli.[107]
^ An example can be seen at the Library of Congress website.
^ Jefferson's Kentucky draft said: "where powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact, (casus non f deris) to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits."[147]
^ This electoral process problem was addressed by the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1804, which provided separate votes for presidential and vice-presidential candidates.[157]
^ Louisiana nevertheless gained statehood nine years later in 1812.[193]
^ Further complicating matters, Wilkinson was posthumously revealed to have been in the simultaneous pay of the British, French, and Spanish.[225]
^ Burr then left for Europe and eventually returned to practicing law.
^ The First Bank of the U.S. was eventually abolished in 1811 by a heavily Republican Congress.[359]
^ The 135 slaves, which included Betty Hemings and her ten children, that Jefferson acquired from Wayles's estate made him the second-largest slave owner in Albemarle County with a total of 187 slaves. The number fluctuated from around 200 slaves until 1784 when he began to give away or sell slaves. By 1794 he had gotten rid of 161 individuals.[363]
^ Aaron Burr was offered help in obtaining the governorship of New York by Timothy Pickering if he could persuade New York to go along, but the secession effort failed when Burr lost the election.
^ For examples of each historian's view, see Wilson, Douglas L., Thomas Jefferson and the Issue of Character, The Atlantic, November 1992. Finkelman, 1994  "Thomas Jefferson and Antislavery: The Myth Goes On" and Joseph J. Ellis, 1996, American Sphinx: the character of Thomas Jefferson
^ The minority report authored by White Wallenborn concluded "the historical evidence is not substantial enough to confirm nor for that matter to refute his paternity of any of the children of Sally Hemings. The DNA studies certainly enhance the possibility but ... do not prove Thomas Jefferson's paternity".[405]
^ Sally Heming's children recorded at Monticello included: "Harriet (born 1795; died in infancy); Beverly (born 1798); an unnamed daughter (born 1799; died in infancy); Harriet (born 1801); Madison (born 1805); and Eston (born 1808)".[403]
^ Annette Gordon-Reed notes that it would have been legally challenging to free Sally Hemings, due to Virginia laws mandating the support of older slaves and requiring special permission for freed slaves to remain within the state.[413]
References
^ McDonnell, Michael. "Jefferson, Thomas as Governor of Virginia". Encyclopedia Virginia. Retrieved October 13, 2022.
^ a b Virginia Historical Society (April 1897). "House of Burgesses, 1766 to 1775". Virginia Magazine of History and Biography. 4 (4): 380 86. JSTOR 4241983. Retrieved October 13, 2022.
^ Matthews, Richard K. (1984). The radical politics of Thomas Jefferson : a revisionist view. Lawrence, Kan.: University Press of Kansas. p. 18. ISBN 0-7006-0256-9. OCLC 10605658.
^ Hitchens, Christopher (October 13, 2009). Thomas Jefferson: Author of America. Harper Collins. ISBN 9780061753978. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021.
^ Morris, Richard B. (1973). Seven Who Shaped Our Destiny: The Founding Fathers as Revolutionaries. New York: Harper & Row. p. 1. ISBN 978-0060904548.
^ "Thomas Jefferson: The Versatile Founding Father", National Park Service]
^ Meacham 2013, p. 522.
^ "Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings A Brief Account". Retrieved October 28, 2020.
^ Gordon-Reed, Annette (1997). Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy. University of Virginia Press. pp. 111 112 ISBN 978-0813918334.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 18.
^ a b c Malone, 1948, pp. 5 6.
^ Brodie, 1974, pp. 33 34.
^ Bernstein, Richard B. (2003). Thomas Jefferson. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195169119. OCLC 51854624.
^ Malone, 1948, pp. 31 33.
^ Woods, Edgar (1901). Albemarle County in Virginia. Charlottesville, VA: The Michie Company, printers. p. 225.
^ Malone, 1948, pp. 437 440.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 19.
^ a b Bowers, 1945, pp. 12 13.
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 7 9.
^ Bowers, 1945, p. 13
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 36
^ Bowers, 1945, pp. 14 15
^ Bowers, 1945, p. 25; Boles, 2017, p. 17
^ Bowers, 1945, pp. 22 23; Boles, 2017, p. 18
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 29, 39.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 19, 28 29.
^ Chinard, 1926, book cover
^ Bowers, 1945, pp. 32 34; Boles, 2017, p. 19
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 37
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 42.
^ Ferling, 2000, p. 43.
^ Murray, S. (2009). The library: An illustrated history. Skyhorse Publishing. p. 163.
^ Library of Congress
^ Boles, 2017, p. 458
^ Root, Daniel (October 12, 2015). "I cannot live without books". UWIRE Text.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 11, 49.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 40.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 47 49.
^ Gordon-Reed, 2008, p. 348.
^ a b Gordon-Reed, 2008, pp. 99 100.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 49.
^ Konig, David T., Encyclopedia Virginia
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 71 73.
^ Bear, 1967, p. 51.
^ "Building Monticello". Retrieved April 21, 2020.
^ TJF: Monticello (House) FAQ   "Who built the house?"
^ Ellis, 1996, pp. 142 144.
^ "They Did What? 15 Famous People Who Actually Married Their Cousins". Retrieved August 24, 2019.
^ a b Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 47.
^ Roberts, 1993
^ Malone, 1948, p. 53.
^ Malone, 1948, pp. 47, 158.
^ "Lucy Jefferson (1782 1784)". Thomas Jefferson's Monticello. Retrieved February 17, 2020.
^ Boyd, Julian P., ed. (1953). "To Thomas Jefferson from Francis Eppes [14 October 1784]". The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 7, March 2, 1784   February 25, 1785. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 441 442. Retrieved September 29, 2019   via Founders Online, National Archives.
^ Boyd, Julian P., ed. (1953). "To Thomas Jefferson from James Currie, 20 November 1784". The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 7, March 2, 1784   February 25, 1785. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 538 539. Retrieved September 29, 2019   via Founders Online, National Archives.
^ a b White House Archives
^ Gordon-Reed, 2008, p. 145; Meacham, 2012, p. 53.
^ Halliday, 2009, pp. 48 53.
^ TJF:Monticello Construction
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 109.
^ Bowers, 1945, p. v
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 77.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 103 104.
^ Peterson, 1970, p. 87.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 102.
^ Maier, 1997, p. 104.
^ a b c Meacham, 2012, p. 105.
^ Shipler, David K., The Paragraph Missing From The Declaration of Independence, The Shipler Report, July 4, 2020
^ a b Ellis, 1996, p. 50.
^ Williams, Yohuru (June 29, 2020). "Why Thomas Jefferson's Anti-Slavery Passage Was Removed from the Declaration of Independence   Why was the Declaration's anti-slavery passage removed?". History. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020.
^ Tucker, 1837, p. 90.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 110.
^ Ellis, 2008, pp. 55 56.
^ Brodie, 1974, p. 112.
^ a b Peterson, 1970, pp. 101 102, 114, 140.
^ Ferling, 2004, p. 26.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 102; Bernstein, 2003, p. 42.
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 134, 142; Bernstein, 2003, pp. 68 69.
^ a b c Brewer, Holly (1997). "Entailing Aristocracy in Colonial Virginia: 'Ancient Feudal Restraints' and Revolutionary Reform". William and Mary Quarterly. 54 (2): 307 346. doi:10.2307/2953276. JSTOR 2953276.
^ Morris, Richard B. (1927). "Primogeniture and Entailed Estates in America". Columbia Law Review. 27 (1): 24 51. doi:10.2307/1113540. JSTOR 1113540.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 134.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 137.
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 234 238.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 66; Gordon-Reed, 2008, pp. 136 137; Meacham, 2012, pp. 133 135.
^ Boyd, Julian P., ed. (1951). "From Thomas Jefferson to Sampson Mathews, 12 January 1781". The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 4, October 1, 1780   February 24, 1781. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 343. Retrieved July 11, 2019   via Founders Online, National Archives.
^ Bryan, Charles (October 25, 2014). "Richmond's Benedict Arnold". Richmond Times Dispatch. Richmond, VA. Retrieved July 11, 2019.
^ Ethridge, Harrison M. (October 1988). "Summerville: A Vanished Plantation". The Messenger (14): 5.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 157.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 140 142.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 263.
^ "The Founders and the Pursuit of Land". The Lehrman Institute. Retrieved March 25, 2022.
^ The Founders and the Pursuit of Land
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 165 166.
^ Shuffelton, 1999
^ Notes on the State of Virginia, p. 149; Burstein, 2006, p. 146.
^ Notes on the State of Virginia, 1853, Query XI
^ TJF: Thomas Jefferson's Enlightenment and American Indians
^ Bernstein, 2004, p. 78.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 166.
^ Peterson, 1970, ch. 5.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 172 173.
^ Peterson, 1970, p. 275.
^ Rayner, 1834, p. 207.
^ a b Peterson, 1960, pp. 189 190.
^ Finkelman, 1989, pp. 21 51.
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 286.
^ Boyd, Julian P., ed. (1953). "Enclosure I: Commission for Negotiating Treaties of Amity and Commerce, 16 May 1784". The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, vol. 7, March 2, 1784   February 25, 1785. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 262 265. Retrieved June 13, 2018   via Founders Online, National Archives.
^ Stewart, 1997, p. 39.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 180.
^ McCullough, 2001, p. 330.
^ Bowers, 1945, pp. vii viii
^ TJF: Maria Cosway (Engraving)
^ "The Meeting of Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and George III". engagement.virginia.edu. July 7, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2022.
^ Gordon-Reed, 2008, pp. 156, 164 168.
^ a b "Memoirs of Madison Hemings". Frontline. Public Broadcasting Service   WGBH Boston. Retrieved November 29, 2011.
^ Bowers, 1945, p. 328.
^ Burstein, 2010, p. 120.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 222 223.
^ TJF: Coded Messages
^ Peterson (2002), pp. 40 41
^ Ellis, 1996, pp. 116 117.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 110; Wood, 2010, pp. 179 181.
^ The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, Volume 22: 6 August-31 December 1791
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 334.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, pp. 364 369.
^ Chernow, 2004, p. 427.
^ a b Cooke, 1970, pp. 523 545.
^ Peterson (2002), pp.40 41
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 96.
^ Randall (1996), p. 1.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 429.
^ Greider, 2010, p. 246.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 145 149.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 186 188.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 1, p. 523; Ellis, 1996, p. 119; Meacham, 2012, pp. 283 284.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 293 294.
^ Peterson, 1970, ch.8 [e-book].
^ Yarbrough, 2006, p. xx.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 305.
^ Bernstein, 2003, pp. 117 118.
^ Elkins, 1994, p. 566.
^ Chernow, 2004, p. 550.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 312.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 54.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 269 271.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 318.
^ Thomas Jefferson, Resolutions Relative to the Alien and Sedition Acts, 1798
^ Onuf, 2000, p. 73.
^ Chernow, 2004, p. 574.
^ Chernow, 2004, p. 587.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 323.
^ McCullough, 2001, p. 556; Bernstein, 2003, pp. 126 128.
^ McCullough, 2001, pp. 543 544.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 27 28.
^ The Corrupt Bargain, Eric Foner, The London Review of Books, Vol. 42 No. 10, May 21, 2020, accessed November 3, 2020
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 75; Wood, 2010, p. 278.
^ a b c d Wood, 2010, pp. 284 285.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 340 341.
^ Ferling, 2004, p. 208.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 337 338.
^ Peterson (2002), p. 39
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 348 350.
^ a b c Peterson, 2002, p. 41.
^ a b Peterson, 2002, p. 40.
^ a b Hendricks 2015, pp. 21 22.
^ a b c d Meacham, 2012, p. 387.
^ a b Peterson, 2002, pp. 43 44.
^ a b Wood, 2010, p. 293.
^ Bailey, 2007, p. 216.
^ Wills, 2002, pp. 50 51.
^ a b Peterson, 2002, p. 44.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 357.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 375.
^ Urofsky, 2006, p. viii.
^ Scythes, 2014, pp. 693 694.
^ Scythes, 2014, pp. 422 423.
^ Murray, Stuart (2009). The Library: An Illustrated History. Skyhorse Publishing. p. 156. ISBN 978-0838909911.
^ Fremont-Barnes, 2006, p. 32.
^ a b Meacham, 2012, pp. 364 365.
^ Herring, 2008, p. 97.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 638.
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 146.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 639.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 383 384.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 368.
^ a b Freehling, 2005, p. 69.
^ a b Ellis, 2008, pp. 207 208.
^ Wilentz, 2005, p. 108.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 389 390.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 152 154.
^ Peterson (2002), p. 47
^ Peterson, 1970, p. 777; Ellis, 2008, p. 230; Wood, 2010, p. 372.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 373.
^ Ellis, 2008, pp. 231 232.
^ Ambrose, 1996, pp. 76, 418.
^ Ambrose, 1996, p. 154.
^ Rodriguez, 2002, pp. xxiv, 162, 185.
^ Rodriguez, 2002, pp. 112, 186.
^ Ambrose, 1996, pp. 54, 80.
^ Ambrose, 1996, pp. 154, 409, 512.
^ Berry, 2006, p. xi.
^ TJF: American Indians
^ Miller, 2008, p. 90.
^ a b Sheehan, 1974, pp. 120 121.
^ Peterson, 1970, ch. 9.
^ TJF: President Jefferson and the Indian Nations
^ The Life and Writings of Thomas Jefferson, pp. 265 266.
^ Miller, 2008, p. 94.
^ a b Meacham, 2012, pp. 405 406.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 415 417.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 291 294.
^ Miller, 1980, pp. 145 146.
^ a b Randall, 1994, p. 583.
^ Kaplan, 1999, p. 407.
^ Jefferson, Haiti The Journal of Southern History 61, no. 2 (May 1995), p. 221.
^ Bernstein, 2003, pp. 146 147.
^ Malone, 1981, p. 11.
^ Chernow, 2004, p. 714.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 385 386.
^ Banner 1974, p. 34.
^ a b Banner 1974, pp. 34 35.
^ a b The Burr Conspiracy (2000)
^ a b c Peterson, 2002, p. 50.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 385 386; Meacham, 2012, pp. 420, 422.
^ Bernstein, 2003, pp. 161 162.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 420.
^ a b c Banner 1974, p. 37.
^ Appleby, 2003, p. 100; Bernstein, 2003, p. 162.
^ Bernstein, 2003, pp. 163 164; Meacham, 2012, pp. 422 423.
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 165.
^ Appleby, 2003, p. 101.
^ a b Banner 1974, p. 35.
^ Banner 1974, pp. 35 36.
^ Banner 1974, p. 36.
^ Banner 1974, pp. 36 37.
^ Banner 1974, pp. 37 38.
^ a b c d e Peterson, 2002, p. 49.
^ a b Banner 1974, p. 38.
^ Banner 1974, pp. 38 39.
^ Banner 1974, p. 39.
^ Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 505.
^ a b c d TJF: Embargo of 1807
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 425 429.
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 168; Meacham, 2012, p. 430.
^ Peterson (2002), pp. 52 53
^ Burstein, 2010, pp. 497 498.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 430.
^ Tucker, 1990, v. 1, pp. 204 209, 232.
^ Cogliano, 2008, p. 250; Meacham, 2012, p. 475.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 237; Appleby, 2003, p. 145.
^ Kaplan, 1999, pp. 166 168; Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 505.
^ Peterson, 1960, pp. 289 290; Hayes, 2008, pp. 504 505.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 238; Appleby, 2003, pp. 128 129.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 238.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 479.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 481 482.
^ TJF: I Rise with the Sun
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 232; Meacham, 2012, pp. 463 465.
^ U Va. Library
^ Adams, 1888, p. 48.
^ a b c Peterson, 1970, ch. 11 [e-book].
^ Hogan, 1987, pp. 28 29.
^ Gordon-Reed, 2008, p. 649.
^ TJF: James Madison
^ Crawford, 2008, p. 235.
^ "Millard Fillmore". University Of Buffalo. Retrieved November 24, 2022.
^ a b c Freeman, 2008, p.  12.
^ Ellis, 2003, pp. 207, 209.
^ McCullough, 2001, pp. 603 605.
^ Ellis, 2003, pp. 213, 230.
^ McCullough, 2001, p. 646.
^ Ellis, 2003, p. 248.
^ a b c d Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson, 1743 1790
^ Berstein, 2003, p. 179.
^ Hamelman, 2002, Journal
^ Kaufman & Macpherson 2005, p. 427.
^ a b c Jacavone 2017, p. 17.
^ Earle 1927, p. 49.
^ Jacavone 2017, p. 29.
^ Jacavone 2017, p. 18.
^ a b c Jacavone 2017, p. 19.
^ Mapp, 1991, p. 328.
^ Malone, 1981, pp. 403 404; Brodie, 1998, p. 460; Crawford, 2008, pp. 202 203.
^ a b Ellis, 1996, pp. 287 288.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 551.
^ Martin, Russell L. (June 7, 1988). "Jefferson's Last Words". Monticello. Retrieved February 2, 2019.
^ McCullough, 2001, p. 646
^ Ellis, 2003, p. 248
^ Rayner, 1834, pp. 428 429.
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. 189.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 496.
^ Donaldson, 1898, p. 49.
^ Thomas Jefferson Foundation: "Thomas Jefferson, A Brief Biography"
^ "Legacy: Thomas Jefferson". Library of Congress.gov. April 24, 2000. Retrieved June 15, 2019.
^ Bernstein, 2003, p. xii.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 556.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 495.
^ Ellis, 1996, p. 289.
^ Thomas Jefferson Foundation: "Sale of Monticello"
^ Hayes, 2008, p. 10.
^ Cogliano, 2008, p. 14.
^ Cogliano, 2008, p. 26.
^ Ferling, 2000, p. 158.
^ Mayer, 1994, p. 76.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 287.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, pp. 559 567.
^ Smith, 2003, p. 314.
^ Marsoobian, Armen T.; Ryder, John (2008). The Blackwell Guide to American Philosophy. John Wiley & Sons. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-4051-4296-0.
^ "Thomas Jefferson". stanford.edu. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. December 16, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2022.
^ Letter: Thomas Jefferson to William Short, Monticello, October 31, 1819
^ a b Richard, Carl J. (2006). The Battle for the American Mind: A Brief History of a Nation's Thought. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 94. ISBN 978-0-7425-3436-0.
^ Sanford, Charles B. (1984). The Religious Life of Thomas Jefferson. University of Virginia Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-8139-1131-1.
^ Bassani, 2010, p. 113.
^ Wilson, 2012, p. 584.
^ Mayer, 1994, p. 328.
^ a b c Wood, 2011, pp. 220 227.
^ Peterson, 1960, p. 340.
^ Golden & Golden, 2002, p. 60.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 213. The full letter to William S. Smith can be seen at the Library of Congress
^ Bober, 2008, p. 264.
^ Manifest Destiny and Mission in American History A Reinterpretation. Harvard University Press. 1995. p. 9.
^ Wood, 2010, p. 277.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 57 58, 84.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 298.
^ Wilentz, 2005, p. 85.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 308.
^ Wilentz, 2005, pp. 97 98.
^ Wilentz, 2005, p. 97.
^ Wilentz, 2005, p. 138.
^ Keyssar, 2009, p. 10.
^ Ferling, 2004, p. 286.
^ Keyssar, 2009, p. 37.
^ Wilentz, 2005, p. 200.
^ Randall, 1994, p. 203.
^ a b c Cunningham (December 28, 2020)
^ TJF: "Jefferson's Religious Beliefs"
^ Onuf, 2007, pp. 139 168.
^ a b c "People and Ideas: Early America's Formation". Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Like other Founding Fathers, Jefferson was considered a Deist, subscribing to the liberal religious strand of Deism that values reason over revelation and rejects traditional Christian doctrines, including the Virgin Birth, original sin and the resurrection of Jesus. While he rejected orthodoxy, Jefferson was nevertheless a religious man. [...] Influenced by the British Unitarian Joseph Priestley, Jefferson set his prodigious intellect and energy on the historical figure at the center of the Christian faith: Jesus of Nazareth. Jefferson became convinced that Jesus' message had been obscured and corrupted by the apostle Paul, the Gospel writers and Protestant reformers.
^ Jefferson Bible, 1820
^ a b c Thomas Jefferson's Religion
^ Peterson, 1970, ch. 2 [e-book].
^ Wood, 2010, p. 577.
^ U.S. Gov: National Archives
^ Finkelman, 2006, p. 921.
^ Yarbrough, 2006, p. 28.
^ Peterson, 2003, p. 315.
^ W. W. Hening, ed., Statutes at Large of Virginia, vol. 12 (1823): 84 86.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 369 370.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 472 473.
^ Randall, 1994, p. 555.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 471 473.
^ Sanford, 1984, pp. 85 86.
^ a b Wood, 2010, p. 586.
^ Malone, 1981, pp. 140 143.
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 224 225.
^ Bailey, 2007, p. 82; Wood, 2010, p. 144; Meacham, 2012, p. 249.
^ Ferling, 2013, pp. 221 222.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 293 295.
^ Wood, 2010, pp. 295 296.
^ Cogliano, 2006, p. 219; Onuf, 2007, p. 258.
^ a b c TJF: Slavery at Monticello   Property
^ Gordon-Reed, 2008, p. 292.
^ a b Stanton, Lucia Cinder. "The Slaves' Story   Jefferson's "family"   Jefferson's Blood   Frontline". www.pbs.org. Retrieved December 30, 2019.
^ Wiencek, 2012, p. 13
^ TJF: Slavery at Monticello   Work
^ Wiencek, 2012, pp. 114, 122.
^ TJF: Thomas Jefferson's Monticello   Nailery,Wiencek, 2012, p. 93.
^ a b c d TJF: Thomas Jefferson and Slavery
^ Ferling, 2000, p. 161.
^ Howe, 2009, p. 74.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. 475.
^ a b Ferling 2000, p. 287.
^ Finkelman, 1994, p. 215.
^ a b Finkelman, 1994, p. 215; Finkelman, 2012
^ Finkelman, 1994, pp. 220 221.
^ Freehling, 2005, p. 70.
^ Wiencek, 2012, pp. 257 258.
^ Du Bois, 1904, pp. 95 96.
^ Ferling, 2000, p. 288.
^ Ferling, 2000, pp. 286, 294.
^ Ellis, 1997, p. 87.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 139 140.
^ Walker, Clarence E. (2001). We Can't Go Home Again: An Argument About Afrocentrism. Oxford University Press. p. 38. ISBN 0195357302.
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 998 999; Meacham, 2012, p. 478; Helo, 2013, p. 105.
^ a b TJF:Jefferson's Antislavery Actions
^ DiLorenzo, 1998, Yankee Confederates
^ Meacham, 2012, pp. 255, 275 278.
^ Ferling, 2000, p. 287.
^ TJF: Quotations on slavery (May 11, 1805)
^ "First Barbary War".
^ ://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofEngland/Barbary-Pirates-English-Slaves/
^ Davis, 1999, p. 179; Alexander, 2010.
^ TJF   Thomas Jefferson's Monticello "Slave Dwellings"
^ Landscape of Slavery   Mulberry Row at Monticello: Treatment
^ Cogliano, 2008, p. 209.
^ Ferling, 2004, p. 161.
^ John Paul Kaminski (1995). A Necessary Evil?: Slavery and the Debate Over the Constitution. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 256. ISBN 9780945612339.
^ Finkelman, 2012
^ Cogliano, 2008, pp. 218 220.
^ Wiencek 2012, p. 11
^ In 1853, William Wells Brown published a novel called Clotel; or, The President's Daughter alluding to Jefferson. This is the first novel in America published by anyone of African descent.Hyland, 2009, pp. ix, 2 3.
^ Foster et al., 1998
^ a b c d e f Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings A Brief Account.
^ TJF: Report of the Research Committee on Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings   Conclusions
^ TJF: Minority Report of the Monticello Research Committee on Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings
^ Cottman, Michael (July 3, 2017). "Historians Uncover Slave Quarters of Sally Hemings at Thomas Jefferson's Monticello". NBC News. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
^ Thompson, Krissah (February 18, 2017). "For decades they hid Jefferson's relationship with her. Now Monticello is making room for Sally Hemings". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
^ "Monticello Affirms Thomas Jefferson Fathered Children with Sally Hemings". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. June 6, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
^ 
Wilkinson, A. B. (2019). "Slave Life at Thomas Jefferson's Monticello". American Quarterly. 71: 247 264. doi:10.1353/aq.2019.0017. S2CID 150519408. The general consensus among historians now agrees with Madison Hemings's version of the relationship between his mother and father ...
Lepore, Jill (September 22, 2008). "President Tom's Cabin: Jefferson, Hemings, and a Disclaimed Lineage". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 21, 2019. [T]oday most historians agree with the conclusion of a research committee convened by the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, at Monticello: Jefferson 'most likely was the father of all six of Sally Hemings's children.'
Ellis, Joseph J. (2000). "Jefferson: Post-DNA". The William and Mary Quarterly. 57 (1): 125 138. doi:10.2307/2674361. JSTOR 2674361. PMID 18271151. [T]he new scholarly consensus is that Jefferson and Hemings were sexual partners ... Whether Jefferson fathered all of Hemings's children is still unclear.
"Updating a Life: The Case of Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings". Library of America. December 9, 2011. Most historians now agree that a preponderance of evidence genetic, circumstantial, and oral historical suggests that Jefferson was the father of all of Sally Hemings's children.
^ Hyland, 2009, pp. 30 31, 79; Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society
^ a b Peterson (2002), p. 43
^ Gordon-Reed, 1997, pp. 657 660.
^ Gordon-Reed, 1997, pp. 658 659.
^ CBSNews2019.
^ "Debt". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved October 9, 2018.
^ Hayes, 2008, p. 100; McEwan, 1991, pp. 20 39.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 202; Berstein, 2003, p. 193.
^ Johnson, Michael (September 15, 2006). "A chateau fit for a president". The New York Times. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
^ Brodie, 1974, pp. 87 88; Bernstein, 2003, p. 9.
^ Hayes, 2008, pp. 135 136.
^ Kastning, 2014, p. 8.
^ a b Hayes, 2008, p. 432.
^ a b c d TJF: "American Philosophical Society"
^ Bernstein, 2003, pp. 118 119.
^ Ambrose, 1996, p. 126.
^ Tucker, 1837, v. 2, p. 399.
^ a b Univ. Virginia archives: Miller Center
^ Andresen, 2006, Chap. 1.
^ Bober, 2008, p. 16.
^ TJF: Italy   Language
^ TJF: Spanish Language
^ Hellenbrand, 1990, pp. 155 156.
^ Frawley, 2003, p. 96.
^ American Philosophical Society, 2016: Gathering voices
^ TJF: "Public speaking"
^ Univ. Virginia archives
^ Malone, 1962, pp. 213 215.
^ Kaplan, 1993, p. 315.
^ Martin, Russell L. (April 1989). "Patents". Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia. Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved September 20, 2022.; source also links to two related 21st-century sources
^ Peterson, 1970, pp. 335 336.
^ Peterson, 1960, pp. 5, 67 69, 189 208, 340.
^ Appleby, 2003, p. 149.
^ Meacham, 2012, p. xix.
^ Cogliano, 2008, p. 75.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 132 133; Bernstein, 2003, pp. 191 192.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 135 136; Bernstein, 2003, pp. 192 194.
^ Appleby, 2003, pp. 136, 140; Bernstein, 2003, pp. 194 197; Cogliano, 2008, p. 12.
^ Wood., Gordon S. (June 23, 2016). "Revealing the Total Jefferson". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved January 7, 2022.{{cite magazine}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ SRI, 2010.
^ Brookings, 2015
^ Kennedy, Mark (July 17, 2015). "3 presidents in 'Hamilton' put 'blood into the statues'". limaohio.com. Lima, Ohio: AIM Media Midwest Operating, LLC. AP. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2015.
^ a b Gordon-Reed (February 20, 2020)
^ Jayne 2014, p. 125.
^ NPS: Mt. Rushmore
^ Peterson, 1960, p. 378.
^ O'Brien, Brendan (October 19, 2021). "Thomas Jefferson Statue to be Removed from New York City Council Chamber". Reuters. Retrieved November 9, 2021.
^ Luscombe, Richard (November 23, 2021). "New York city hall removes Thomas Jefferson statue". The Guardian. Retrieved January 7, 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Jefferson, Thomas (1914). Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson, 1743-1790: Together with a Summary of the Chief Events in Jefferson's Life. G.P. Putnam's Sons. Retrieved January 9, 2023.
Bibliography
Main article: Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson
Scholarly studies
Adams, Herbert Baxter (1888). Thomas Jefferson and the University of Virginia. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Alexander, Leslie (2010). Encyclopedia of African American History (American Ethnic Experience). ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1851097692.
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1996). Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0684811079.
Andresen, Julie (2006). Linguistics in America 1769 1924: A Critical History. Routledge. ISBN 978-1134976119.
Andrews, Stuart. "Thomas Jefferson and the French Revolution" History Today (May 1968), Vol. 18 Issue 5, pp. 299 306.
Appleby, Joyce Oldham (2003). Thomas Jefferson: The American Presidents Series: The 3rd President, 1801 1809. Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-0805069242.
Bailey, Jeremy D. (2007). Thomas Jefferson and Executive Power. Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 978-1139466295.
Banner, James M. Jr. (1974).  C. Vann Woodward (ed.). Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. Delacorte Press Dell Publishing Co., Inc. ISBN 978-0440059233.
Banning, Lance. The Jeffersonian persuasion: evolution of a party ideology (1978) online
Bassani, Luigi Marco (2010). Liberty, State & Union: The Political Theory of Thomas Jefferson. Mercer University Press. ISBN 978-0881461862.
Bear, James Adam (1967). Jefferson at Monticello. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813900223.
  (1974). "The Last Few Days in the Life of Thomas Jefferson". Magazine of Albemarle County History. 32: 77.
Bernstein, Richard B. (2003). Thomas Jefferson. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195181302.
  (2004). The Revolution of Ideas. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195143683.
Berry, Trey; Beasley, Pam; Clements, Jeanne (2006). The Forgotten Expedition, 1804 1805: The Louisiana Purchase Journals of Dunbar and Hunter. LSU Press. ISBN 978-0807131657.
Bober, Natalie (2008). Thomas Jefferson: Draftsman of a Nation. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813927329.
Boles, John B. (2017). Jefferson: Architect of American Liberty. Basic Books,626 pages. ISBN 978-0465094691.
Brodie, Fawn (1974). Thomas Jefferson: An Intimate History. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393317527.
Bowers, Claude (1945). The Young Jefferson 1743 1789. Houghton Mifflin Company.
Burstein, Andrew (2006). Jefferson's Secrets: Death and Desire at Monticello. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0465008131.
 ; Isenberg, Nancy (2010). Madison and Jefferson. Random House. ISBN 978-1400067282.
  (2015). Democracy's Muse: How Thomas Jefferson Became an FDR Liberal, a Reagan Republican, and a Tea Party Fanatic, All the While Being Dead. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813937229.
Chernow, Ron (2004). Alexander Hamilton. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1594200090.
Jefferson, Thomas (1926).  Chinard, Gilbert (ed.). The Commonplace Book of Thomas Jefferson: A Repertory of His Ideas on Government, with an Introduction and Notes by Gilbert Chinard, Volume 2. ISBN 978-1400860098.
Cogliano, Francis D (2008). Thomas Jefferson: Reputation and Legacy. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0748624997.
Cooke, Jacob E. (1970). "The Compromise of 1790". William and Mary Quarterly. 27 (4): 523 545. doi:10.2307/1919703. JSTOR 1919703.
Cunningham, Vinson (December 28, 2020). "What Thomas Jefferson Could Never Understand About Jesus". newyorker.com. Retrieved April 28, 2022.
Crawford, Alan Pell (2008). Twilight at Monticello: The Final Years of Thomas Jefferson. Random House Digital. ISBN 978-1400060795.
Davis, David Brion (1999). The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770 1823. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199880836.
Du Bois, William Edward Burghardt (1904). The suppression of the African slave-trade to the United States of America. Longmans, Green and Co. ISBN 978-0722272848.
Earle, Edward Mead (1927). "American Interest in the Greek Cause, 1821 1827". The American Historical Review. 33 (1): 44 63. doi:10.2307/1838110. ISSN 0002-8762. JSTOR 1838110.
Elkins, Stanley M.; McKitrick, Eric L. (1993). The Age of Federalism. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195068900.
Ellis, Joseph J. (1996). American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0679444909. online free
  (2000). Thomas Jefferson: Genius of Liberty. Viking Studio. ISBN 978-0670889334.
  (2003). Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1400077687.
  (2008). American Creation: Triumphs and Tragedies in the Founding of the Republic. Random House LLC. ISBN 978-0307263698.
Ferling, John (2000). Setting the World Ablaze: Washington, Adams, Jefferson, and the American Revolution. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195134094.
  (2004). Adams vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election of 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195167719.
  (2013). Jefferson and Hamilton: the rivalry that forged a nation. Bloomsbury Press. ISBN 978-1608195428.
Finkelman, Paul (1989). "Evading the Ordinance: The Persistence of Bondage in Indiana and Illinois". Journal of the Early Republic. 9 (1): 21 51. doi:10.2307/3123523. JSTOR 3123523.
Finkelman, Paul, ed. (2006). The Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties A-F Index. Vol. 1. Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 978-1135947040.
Finkelman, Paul (April 1994). "Thomas Jefferson and Antislavery: The Myth Goes On" (PDF). The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography. Vol. 102, no. 2. Virginia Historical Society. pp. 193 228.
Foster, Eugene A.;  et al. (November 5, 1998). "Jefferson fathered slave's last child". Nature. 396 (6706): 27 28. Bibcode:1998Natur.396...27F. doi:10.1038/23835. PMID 9817200. S2CID 4424562.
Frawley, William J., ed. (2003). "International Encyclopedia of Linguistics: 4-Volume Set". International Encyclopedia of Linguistics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195139778.
Freehling, William W. (2005).  Levinson, Sanford; Sparrow, Bartholomew H. (eds.). The Louisiana Purchase and American Expansion, 1803 1898 The Louisiana Purchase and the Coming of the Civil War. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. pp. 69 82. ISBN 978-0742549838.
Freeman, Joanne B. (2008).  Shuffelton, Frank (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Thomas Jefferson. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521867313.
Gish, Dustin, and Daniel Klinghard. Thomas Jefferson and the Science of Republican Government: A Political Biography of Notes on the State of Virginia (Cambridge University Press, 2017) excerpt.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory (2006). The Wars of the Barbary Pirates: To the Shores of Tripoli   The Rise of the US Navy and Marines. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1846030307.
Golden, James L.; Golden, Alan L. (2002). Thomas Jefferson and the Rhetoric of Virtue. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0742520806.
Gordon-Reed, Annette (1997). Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy. University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813916989.
  (2008). The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393064773.
Gordon-Reed, Annette; Onuf, Peter S. (April 13, 2016). "Most Blessed of the Patriarchs": Thomas Jefferson and the Empire of the Imagination. ISBN 978-1631490781.; online review
Gordon-Reed, Annette (February 20, 2020). "Thomas Jefferson's Vision of Equality Was Not All-Inclusive. But It Was Transformative". Retrieved March 11, 2022.
Greider, William (2010). Who Will Tell the People. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1439128749.
Halliday, E. M. (2009). Understanding Thomas Jefferson. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0060197933.
Hamelman, Steven (January 1, 2002). "Autobiography and Archive: Franklin, Jefferson, and the Revised Self". Midwest Quarterly.
Harrison, John Houston (1935). Settlers by the Long Grey Trail: Some Pioneers to Old Augusta County, Virginia, and Their Descendants of the Family of Harrison and Allied Lines. Genealogical Publishing Com. ISBN 978-0806306643.
Hart, Charles Henry (1899). Browere's Life Masks of Great Americans. De Vinne Press for Doubleday and McClure Company.
Hayes, Kevin J. (2008). The Road to Monticello: The Life and Mind of Thomas Jefferson. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195307580.
Hellenbrand, Harold (1990). The Unfinished Revolution: Education and Politics in the Thought of Thomas Jefferson. Associated University Presse. ISBN 978-0874133707.
Helo, Ari (2013). Thomas Jefferson's Ethics and the Politics of Human Progress: The Morality of a Slaveholder. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1107435551.
Hendricks, Nancy (2015). America's First Ladies. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, LLC. ISBN 978-1610698832.
Herring, George C. (2008). From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations since 1776. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199743773.
Hogan, Pendleton (1987). The Lawn: A Guide to Jefferson's University. University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813911090.
Horton, Andrew S. (1976). "Jefferson and Korais: The American Revolution and the Greek Constitution". Comparative Literature Studies. 13 (4): 323 329. ISSN 0010-4132. JSTOR 40246007.
Howe, Daniel Walker (2009). Making the American Self: Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199740796.
Hyland, William G (2009). In Defense of Thomas Jefferson: The Sally Hemings Sex Scandal. Carolina Academic Press. ISBN 978-0890890851.
Jacavone, Jared (2017). The Paid Vote: America's Neutrality During the Greek War for Independence (MA thesis). University of Rhode Island. doi:10.23860/thesis-jacavone-jared-2017.
Jayne, Allen (2014). Jefferson's Declaration of Independence: Origins, Philosophy, and Theology. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-4836-6.
Johnson, Jeffrey K. (2010). "The Countryside Triumphant: Jefferson's Ideal of Rural Superiority in Modern Superhero Mythology". The Journal of Popular Culture. 43 (4): 720 737. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5931.2010.00767.x.
Kaplan, Lawrence S. (1999). Thomas Jefferson: Westward the Course of Empire. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0842026307.
Kaufman, Will; Macpherson, Heidi Slettedahl (2005). Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-431-8.
Keyssar, Alexander (2009). The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0465010141.
Maier, Pauline (1997). American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence. Knopf. ISBN 978-0679454922.
Malone, Dumas, ed. (1933). "Jefferson, Thomas". Dictionary of American Biography. Vol. 10. Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 17 35.
Malone, Dumas. Jefferson (6 vol. 1948 1981)
  (1948). Jefferson, The Virginian. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 1. Little Brown. OCLC 1823927., Ebook
  (1951). Jefferson and the Rights of Man. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 2. Little Brown.
  (1962). Jefferson and the Ordeal of Liberty. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 3. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0316544757.
  (1970). Jefferson the President: First Term, 1801 1805. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 4. Little Brown.
  (1974). Jefferson the President: Second Term, 1805 1809. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 5. Little Brown. OCLC 1929523.
  (1981). The Sage of Monticello. Jefferson and His Time. Vol. 6. Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316544788.
Mapp, Alf J. (1991). Jefferson: Passionate Pilgrim. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0517098882.
Mayer, David N. (1994). The Constitutional Thought of Thomas Jefferson (Constitutionalism and Democracy). University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813914855.
Mayer, David (2008). "Jefferson, Thomas (1743 1826)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 262 263. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n158. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
McCullough, David (2001). John Adams. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1471104527.
McDonald, Robert M. S. (2004). Thomas Jefferson's Military Academy: Founding West Point. Jeffersonian America. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813922980.
McEwan, Barbara (1991). Thomas Jefferson, Farmer. McFarland. ISBN 978-0899506333.
Meacham, Jon (2012). Thomas Jefferson: The Art of Power. Random House LLC. ISBN 978-0679645368.
  (2013). Thomas Jefferson: The Art of Power (Paperback). Random House Trade Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0812979480.
Miller, John Chester (1980). The Wolf by the Ears: Thomas Jefferson and Slavery. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0452005303.
Miller, Robert J. (2008). Native America, Discovered and Conquered: Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803215986.
Onuf, Peters S. (2000). Jefferson's Empire: The Language of American Nationhood. U of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813922041.
  (2007). The Mind of Thomas Jefferson. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813926117.
Peterson, Merrill D. (1960). The Jefferson Image in the American Mind. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813918518.
  (1970). Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation; a Biography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195000542.
  (2002). "Thomas Jefferson".  In Graff, Henry (ed.). The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 39 56.
Phillips, Julieanne (1997). "Northwest Ordinance (1787)".  In Rodriguez, Junius (ed.). The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery. ABC-CLIO. pp. 473 474. ISBN 978-0874368857.
Randall, Willard Sterne (1994). Thomas Jefferson: A Life. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0060976170.
Randall, Willard Sterne (1996). "Thomas Jefferson Takes A Vacation". American Heritage. Vol. 47, no. 4.
Rodriguez, Junius (2002). The Louisiana Purchase: a historical and geographical encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1576071885.
Stewart, John J. (1997). Thomas Jefferson: Forerunner to the Restoration. Cedar Fort. ISBN 978-0-88290-605-8.
Sheehan, Bernard (1974). Seeds of Extinction: Jeffersonian Philanthropy and the American Indian. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393007169.
Scythes, James (2014).  Tucker, Spencer C. (ed.). The Encyclopedia of the Wars of the Early American Republic, 1783 1812 A Political, Social, and Military History. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1598841565.
Shuffelton, Frank (1974). "Introduction".  In Jefferson, Thomas. (ed.). Notes on the State of Virginia. Penguin. ISBN 978-0140436679.
Smith, Robert C. (2003). Encyclopedia of African American Politics. Infobase Publishing, 433 pages. ISBN 978-1438130194.
Tucker, George (1837). The Life of Thomas Jefferson, Third President of the United States; 2 vol. Carey, Lea & Blanchard.
  (1990). Empire of Liberty: The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson. Cogliano Press. ISBN 978-0198022763.
Urofsky, Melvin I., ed. (2006). Biographical Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court: The Lives and Legal Philosophies of the Justices. CQ Press. ISBN 978-1452267289.
Wiencek, Henry (2012). Master of the Mountain: Thomas Jefferson and his slaves. Macmillan.
Wilentz, Sean (2005). The Rise of American Democracy. W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 108 111. ISBN 978-0393058208.
Wilson, Steven Harmon (2012). The U.S. Justice System: Law and constitution in early America. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1598843040.
Wood, Gordon S (2006). Revolutionary Characters: What Made the Founders Different. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1594200939.
  (2010). Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789 1815. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195039146.
  (2011). The Idea of America: Reflections on the Birth of the United States. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1594202902.
Thomas Jefferson Foundation sources
Thomas Jefferson Foundation (Main page and site-search)
"American Philosophical Society". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Coded Messages". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 22, 2016.
"Embargo of 1807". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 22, 2016.
"I Rise with the Sun". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 22, 2016.
"Italy   Language". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"James Madison". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 22, 2016.
"Jefferson's Antislavery Actions". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"Jefferson's Religious Beliefs". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved April 26, 2022.
"Landscape of Slavery   Mulberry Row at Monticello: Treatment". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Maria Cosway (Engraving)". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 21, 2016.
"Minority Report of the Monticello Research Committee on Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Monticello construction chronology". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 17, 2016.
"Monticello (House) FAQ   Who built the house?". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 17, 2016.
"Nailery". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"President Jefferson and the Indian Nations". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 22, 2016.
"Public Speaking". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Quotations on Slavery and Emancipation". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"Report of the Research Committee on Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings   Conclusions". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Sale of Monticello". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 16, 2016.
"Slave Dwellings". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016.
"Slavery at Monticello FAQ   Property". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"Slavery at Monticello FAQ   Work". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"Spanish Language". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson: A Brief Biography". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: A Brief Account". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 25, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson and Slavery". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved May 5, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson's Enlightenment and American Indians". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 20, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson's Religious Beliefs". Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Retrieved July 24, 2016.
Primary sources
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson,    the Princeton University Press edition of the correspondence and papers; vol 1 appeared in 1950; vol 41 (covering part of 1803) appeared in 2014.
"Founders Online," searchable edition
Jefferson, Thomas (November 10, 1798). "Thomas Jefferson, Resolutions Relative to the Alien and Sedition Acts". The Founder's Constitution. University of Chicago Press. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
Thomas, Jefferson (1914). Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson 1743 1790. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
"Thomas Jefferson". University of Virginia Library. Retrieved September 2, 2009.
Jefferson, Thomas (1900). The Life and Writings of Thomas Jefferson. pp. 265 266.
  (1853). Notes on the State of Virginia. J.W. Randolph. (Note: This was Jefferson's only book; numerous editions)
  (1977). The Portable Thomas Jefferson. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1101127667.
Yarbrough, Jean M.; Jefferson, Thomas (2006). The Essential Jefferson. Hackett Publishing. ISBN 978-1603843782.
Web site sources
"Gathering Voices: Thomas Jefferson and Native America". American Philosophical Society. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson to Horatio G. Spafford, 17 March 1814". U.S. Government: National Archives. Retrieved March 25, 2019.
"American President: A Reference Resource". University of Virginia: Miller Center. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 26, 2014.
Barger, Herbert (October 15, 2008). "The Jefferson-Hemings DNA Study". Jefferson DNA Study Group. Retrieved April 4, 2012.
"Carving History". Mount Rushmore National Memorial. National Park Service. Retrieved April 1, 2012.
Finkelman, Paul (November 30, 2012). "The Monster of Monticello". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2016.
Haimann, Alexander T. (May 16, 2006). "5-cent Jefferson". Arago, Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
"Jefferson's library". Library of Congress. April 24, 2000. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
"Jefferson Nickel". U.S. Mint. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
"Jefferson's Vision of the Academical Village". University of Virginia. October 14, 2010. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2015.
"Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson". whitehouse.gov. Retrieved October 3, 2011   via National Archives.
Roberts, Gary Boyd (April May 1993). "The Royal Descents of Jane Pierce, Alice and Edith Roosevelt, Helen Taft, Eleanor Roosevelt, and Barbara Bush". American Ancestors. New England Historic Genealogical Society. Retrieved October 29, 2015.
Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin S. (February 13, 2015). "Measuring Obama against the great presidents". Brookings Institution. Retrieved October 30, 2015.
"The Jefferson Hemings Controversy   Report of The Scholars Commission: Summary" (PDF). Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society. 2011 [2001]. pp. 8 9, 11, 15 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
"Siena Poll: American Presidents". Siena Research Institute. July 6, 2010. Archived from the original on July 6, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2015.
"Thomas Jefferson: Biography". National Park Service. Retrieved August 1, 2007.
"The Thomas Jefferson Papers Timeline: 1743 1827". Retrieved July 19, 2009.
"Thomas Jefferson Presidential $1 Coin". U.S. Mint. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
"U.S. Currency: $2 Note". U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
"The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth". 1820. Retrieved August 12, 2010.
"Bookquick/"The Autobiography of Thomas Jefferson, 1743 1790" | Penn Current". Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 12, 2015.
Konig, David T. "Jefferson Thomas and the Practice of_Law, Three cases". Retrieved January 28, 2016.
"The Burr Conspiracy". PBS American Experience. 2000. Retrieved May 23, 2016.
Wilson, Douglas L. (1992). "Thomas Jefferson and the Issue of Character". The Atlantic. Retrieved May 22, 2016.
"Thomas Jefferson's descendants unite over a troubled past". CBS News. February 14, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2020.
"Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings A Brief Account". monticello.org. Retrieved October 4, 2020.
Peter, Carlson (September 27, 2017). "The Bible According to Thomas Jefferson". historynet.com. Retrieved May 14, 2022.
Teaching methods
Smith, Mark A. (2009). "Teaching Jefferson". The History Teacher. 42 (3): 329 340. JSTOR 40543539.
External links
Listen to this article (1 hour and 41 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 2 March 2019 (2019-03-02), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
Thomas Jefferson  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Scholarly coverage of Jefferson at Miller Center, U of Virginia
United States Congress. "Thomas Jefferson (id: J000069)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Thomas Jefferson Papers: An Electronic Archive at the Massachusetts Historical Society
Thomas Jefferson collection at the University of Virginia Library
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives
Jefferson, Thomas (1774). Summary View of the Rights of British America. Printed by Clementina Rind   via World Digital Library.
The Thomas Jefferson Hour, a radio show about all things Thomas Jefferson The Thomas Jefferson Hour
"The Papers of Thomas Jefferson". Avalon Project.
Works by Thomas Jefferson at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas Jefferson at Internet Archive
Works by Thomas Jefferson at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
"Collection of Thomas Jefferson Manuscripts and Letters".
"Thomas Jefferson's Family: A Genealogical Chart". Jefferson Quotes & Family Letters.
vteThomas Jefferson
3rd President of the United States (1801 1809)
2nd Vice President of the United States (1797 1801)
1st United States Secretary of State (1790 1793)
U.S. Minister to France (1785 1789)
Delegate to the Congress of the Confederation (1783 1784)
2nd Governor of Virginia (1779 1781)
Delegate to the Second Continental Congress (1775 1776)
Foundingdocuments ofthe United States
A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
Olive Branch Petition (initial draft; 1775)
Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775)
Declaration of Independence (1776)
Committee of Five
authored
physical history
"All men are created equal"
"Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness"
"Consent of the governed"
Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, 1777 draft and 1786 passage
Freedom of religion
Land Ordinance of 1784
Land Ordinance of 1785
Northwest Ordinance (1787)
French Revolution
Co-author, Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789)
Presidency
Inaugural addresses
1801
1805
Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves
Louisiana Purchase
Lewis and Clark Expedition
Corps of Discovery
timeline
Empire of Liberty
Red River Expedition
Pike Expedition
Cumberland Road
Embargo Act of 1807
Chesapeake Leopard affair
Non-Intercourse Act
First Barbary War
Native American policy
Burr conspiracy
Marbury v. Madison
West Point Military Academy
State of the Union Addresses
1801
1802
1805
Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments
Other notedaccomplishments
Early life and career
Franco-American alliance
Founder, University of Virginia
history
Ratification Day
Anti-Administration party
Democratic-Republican Party
Jeffersonian democracy
First Party System
republicanism
Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States (1790)
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
A Manual of Parliamentary Practice (1801)
American Creed
Jefferson disk
Swivel chair
Jeffersonianarchitecture
Barboursville
Farmington
Monticello
gardens
Poplar Forest
University of Virginia
The Rotunda
The Lawn
Jefferson Hall
Virginia State Capitol
White House Colonnades
Other writings
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson
Notes on the State of Virginia (1785)
Proposals for concerted operation among the powers at war with the Pyratical states of Barbary (1786)
European journey memorandums (1787)
Indian removal letters
The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth (c. 1819)
Jefferson manuscript collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society
Founders Online
Related
Age of Enlightenment
American Enlightenment
American Philosophical Society
American Revolution
patriots
Member, Virginia Committee of Correspondence
Committee of the States
Founding Fathers of the United States
Jefferson and education
Religious views
Jefferson and slavery
Jefferson and the Library of Congress
Jefferson Pier
Pet mockingbird
National Gazette
Residence Act
Compromise of 1790
Sally Hemings
Jefferson Hemings controversy
Betty Hemings
Separation of church and state
The American Museum magazine
Tufton Farm
Virginia dynasty
Ward republic
Elections
Presidential elections
1796
1800
1804
Legacy andmemorials
Bibliography
Jefferson Memorial
Mount Rushmore
Birthday
Thomas Jefferson Building
Jefferson Territory
Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression
Jefferson Lecture
Jefferson National Expansion Memorial
Thomas Jefferson Star for Foreign Service
Statues
Karl Bitter statues
Columbia University statue
Louisville statue
University of Virginia statue
David d'Angers statue
Jefferson Literary and Debating Society
Thomas Jefferson Foundation
Jefferson Lab
Monticello Association
Jefferson City, Missouri
Jefferson College
Thomas Jefferson School of Law
Thomas Jefferson University
Washington and Jefferson National Forests
Peaks and mountains
Jefferson Rock
Other placenames
Jefferson Jackson Day
Currency depictions
Jefferson nickel
Two-dollar bill
Louisiana Purchase Exposition gold dollar
250th Anniversary silver dollar
U.S. postage stamps
Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence
Popular culture
The Patriots (1946 play)
Ben and Me (1953 short)
1776
1969 musical
1972 film
Jefferson in Paris (1995 film)
Thomas Jefferson (1997 film)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
John Adams (2008 miniseries)
Jefferson's Garden (2015 play)
Hamilton
2015 musical
2020 film
Washington (2020 miniseries)
Wine bottles controversy
Family
Martha Jefferson (wife)
Martha Jefferson Randolph (daughter)
Mary Jefferson Eppes (daughter)
Harriet Hemings (daughter)
Madison Hemings (son)
Eston Hemings (son)
Thomas J. Randolph (grandson)
Francis Eppes (grandson)
George W. Randolph (grandson)
John Wayles Jefferson (grandson)
Frederick Madison Roberts (great-grandson)
Peter Jefferson (father)
Jane Randolph Jefferson (mother)
Lucy Jefferson Lewis (sister)
Randolph Jefferson (brother)
Isham Randolph (grandfather)
William Randolph (great-grandfather)
  John Adams
James Madison  
  John Adams
Aaron Burr  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Political offices
Preceded byPatrick Henry
 Governor of Virginia 1779 1781
Succeeded byWilliam Fleming
Preceded byJohn JayActing
 United States Secretary of State 1790 1793
Succeeded byEdmund Randolph
Preceded byJohn Adams
 Vice President of the United States 1797 1801
Succeeded byAaron Burr
 President of the United States 1801 1809
Succeeded byJames Madison
Diplomatic posts
Preceded byBenjamin Franklin
 United States Minister to France 1785 1789
Succeeded byWilliam Short
Party political offices
New political party
 Democratic-Republican nominee for President of the United States 1796 , 1800, 1804
Succeeded byJames Madison
Notes and references
1. Prior to the passage of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804, each presidential elector would cast two ballots; the highest vote-getter would become president and the runner-up would become vice president. Thus, in 1796, the Democratic-Republican Party fielded Jefferson as a presidential candidate, but he came in second and therefore became vice president.
Articles related to Thomas Jefferson
vteSigners of the United States Declaration of IndependencePhysical history of the Declaration of Independence, Memorial to the 56 Signers, Founding Fathers, Syng inkstand
John Adams
Samuel Adams
Josiah Bartlett
Carter Braxton
Charles Carroll
Samuel Chase
Abraham Clark
George Clymer
William Ellery
William Floyd
Benjamin Franklin
Elbridge Gerry
Button Gwinnett
Lyman Hall
John Hancock
Benjamin Harrison V
John Hart
Joseph Hewes
Thomas Heyward Jr.
William Hooper
Stephen Hopkins
Francis Hopkinson
Samuel Huntington
Thomas Jefferson
Francis Lightfoot Lee
Richard Henry Lee
Francis Lewis
Philip Livingston
Thomas Lynch Jr.
Thomas McKean
Arthur Middleton
Lewis Morris
Robert Morris
John Morton
Thomas Nelson Jr.
William Paca
Robert Treat Paine
John Penn
George Read
Caesar Rodney
George Ross
Benjamin Rush
Edward Rutledge
Roger Sherman
James Smith
Richard Stockton
Thomas Stone
George Taylor
Matthew Thornton
George Walton
William Whipple
William Williams
James Wilson
John Witherspoon
Oliver Wolcott
George Wythe
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteVice presidents of the United States
John Adams (1789 1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797 1801)
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813 1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817 1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825 1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833 1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837 1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845 1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849 1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857 1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869 1873)
Henry Wilson (1873 1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877 1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889 1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893 1897)
Garret Hobart (1897 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905 1909)
James S. Sherman (1909 1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913 1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Charles Curtis (1929 1933)
John N. Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974 1977)
Walter Mondale (1977 1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981 1989)
Dan Quayle (1989 1993)
Al Gore (1993 2001)
Dick Cheney (2001 2009)
Joe Biden (2009 2017)
Mike Pence (2017 2021)
Kamala Harris (2021 present)
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteUnited States Secretaries of StateSecretary of Foreign Affairs1781 1789
R. Livingston
Jay
Secretary of State1789 present
Jefferson
Randolph
Pickering
J. Marshall
Madison
Smith
Monroe
Adams
Clay
Van Buren
E. Livingston
McLane
Forsyth
Webster
Upshur
Calhoun
Buchanan
Clayton
Webster
Everett
Marcy
Cass
Black
Seward
Washburne
Fish
Evarts
Blaine
Frelinghuysen
Bayard
Blaine
Foster
Gresham
Olney
Sherman
Day
Hay
Root
Bacon
Knox
Bryan
Lansing
Colby
Hughes
Kellogg
Stimson
Hull
Stettinius
Byrnes
G. Marshall
Acheson
Dulles
Herter
Rusk
Rogers
Kissinger
Vance
Muskie
Haig
Shultz
Baker
Eagleburger
Christopher
trips
Albright
trips
Powell
trips
Rice
tenure
trips
Clinton
tenure
trips
Kerry
trips
Tillerson
trips
Pompeo
trips
Blinken
trips
List of international trips made by secretaries of state of the United States
vteGovernors of VirginiaColony of Virginia 
Wingfield
Ratcliffe
Scrivener
Smith
Percy
Gates
De La Warr
Dale
Yeardley
Argall
Wyatt
West
Pott
Harvey
West
Reade (acting)
Berkeley
Jeffreys (acting)
Kemp (acting)
Bennett
Digges
Mathews
Colepeper
Chicheley (acting)
Howard of Effingham
Andros
Nicholson
Nott
Jenings
Hunter
Orkney (absentee)
Spotswood
Drysdale
"King" Carter
Gooch
Albemarle (absentee)
Gooch
Lee
Burwell (acting)
Dinwiddie
Loudoun
Fauquier
Amherst (absentee)
Fauquier
Botetourt
W. Nelson
Dunmore
Commonwealth of Virginia 
Henry
Jefferson
Fleming
T. Nelson
B. Harrison
Henry
E. Randolph
B. Randolph
H. Lee
Brooke
Wood
Monroe
Page
Cabell
Tyler Sr.
G. Smith
Monroe
G. Smith
P. Randolph
Barbour
Nicholas
Preston
T. Randolph
Pleasants
Tyler Jr.
Giles
J. Floyd
Tazewell
Robertson
Campbell
Gilmer
Patton
Rutherfoord
Gregory
McDowell
W. "EB" Smith
J. B. Floyd
Johnson
Wise
Letcher
W. "EB" Smith
Pierpont
Wells
Walker
Kemper
Holliday
Cameron
F. Lee
McKinney
O'Ferrall
J. H. Tyler
Montague
Swanson
Mann
Stuart
Davis
Trinkle
Byrd
Pollard
Peery
Price
Darden
Tuck
Battle
Stanley
Almond
A. Harrison
Godwin
Holton
Godwin
Dalton
Robb
Baliles
Wilder
Allen
Gilmore
Warner
Kaine
McDonnell
McAuliffe
Northam
Youngkin
vte United States Ambassadors to France Envoysto France(1776 1779)
Franklin, Lee & Deane/Adams
Ministers Plenipotentiaryto France(1778 1815)
Franklin
Jefferson
Short
Morris
Monroe
Pinckney
Livingston
Armstrong
Russell (charg  d'affaires)
Barlow
Crawford
Envoy Extraordinary andMinister Plenipotentiary to France(1816 1893)
Gallatin
Brown
Rives
Harris (charg  d'affaires)
Livingston
Barton (charg  d'affaires)
Cass
King
Rush
Rives
Mason
Faulkner
Dayton
Bigelow
Dix
Washburne
Noyes
Morton
McLane
Reid
Coolidge
Ambassador Extraordinaryand Plenipotentiaryto France(1893 present)
Eustis
Porter
McCormick
White
Bacon
Herrick
Sharp
Wallace
Herrick
Edge
Straus
Bullitt
Leahy
Tuck (charg  d'affaires)
Caffery
Bruce
Dunn
Dillon
Houghton
Gavin
Bohlen
Shriver
Watson
Irwin
Rush
Hartman
Galbraith
Rodgers
Curley
Harriman
Rohatyn
Leach
Stapleton
Rivkin
Hartley
McCourt
Bauer
vteDemocratic-Republican Party
Anti-Administration Party
First Party System
Jeffersonian democracy
Era of Good Feelings
Presidency of Thomas Jefferson
Presidency of James Madison
Presidency of James Monroe
Tertium quids
Presidentialtickets
1796: Jefferson/Burr
1800: Jefferson/Burr
1804: Jefferson/Clinton
1808: Madison/Clinton
1812: Madison/Gerry
1816: Monroe/Tompkins
1820: Monroe/Tompkins
1824: Adams/Calhoun
Jackson/Calhoun
Crawford/Macon
Clay/Sanford
U.S. Housespeakers
Frederick Muhlenberg (1793 1795)
Nathaniel Macon (1801 1807)
Joseph Bradley Varnum (1807 1811)
Henry Clay (1811 1814)
Langdon Cheves (1814 1815)
Henry Clay (1815 1820)
John W. Taylor (1820 1821)
Philip P. Barbour (1821 1823)
Henry Clay (1823 1825)
U.S. CabinetState
Thomas Jefferson (1790 1794)
Levi Lincoln Sr. (1801)
James Madison (1801 1809)
Robert Smith (1809 1811)
James Monroe (1811 1817)
John Graham (1817)
John Quincy Adams (1817 1825)
Treasury
Albert Gallatin (1801 1814)
George W. Campbell (1814)
Alexander J. Dallas (1814 1816)
William Jones (1816)
William H. Crawford (1816 1825)
War
Henry Dearborn (1801 1809)
William Eustis (1809 1813)
John Armstrong Jr. (1813 1814)
James Monroe (1814 1815)
Alexander J. Dallas (1815)
William H. Crawford (1815 1816)
George Graham (1816 1817)
John C. Calhoun (1817 1825)
Attorney General
Levi Lincoln Sr. (1801 1805)
John Breckinridge (1805 1806)
Caesar Augustus Rodney (1807 1811)
William Pinkney (1811 1814)
William Wirt (1817 1825)
Navy
Robert Smith (1801 1809)
Paul Hamilton (1809 1813)
William Jones (1813 1814)
Benjamin Williams Crowninshield (1815 1818)
Smith Thompson (1819 1823)
Samuel L. Southard (1823 1825)
vteUnsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States
Thomas Jefferson (1796)
John Adams (1800)
Charles C. Pinckney (1804, 1808)
DeWitt Clinton (1812)
Rufus King (1816)
Andrew Jackson (1824)
William H. Crawford (1824)
Henry Clay (1824, 1832, 1844)
John Quincy Adams (1828)
William Henry Harrison (1836)
Hugh Lawson White (1836)
Martin Van Buren (1840)
Lewis Cass (1848)
Winfield Scott (1852)
John C. Fr mont (1856)
Stephen A. Douglas (1860)
George B. McClellan (1864)
Horatio Seymour (1868)
Horace Greeley (1872)
Samuel J. Tilden (1876)
Winfield Scott Hancock (1880)
James G. Blaine (1884)
Grover Cleveland (1888)
Benjamin Harrison (1892)
William J. Bryan (1896, 1900, 1908)
Alton B. Parker (1904)
William Howard Taft (1912)
Charles Evans Hughes (1916)
James M. Cox (1920)
John W. Davis (1924)
Al Smith (1928)
Herbert Hoover (1932)
Alf Landon (1936)
Wendell Willkie (1940)
Thomas E. Dewey (1944, 1948)
Adlai Stevenson (1952, 1956)
Richard Nixon (1960)
Barry Goldwater (1964)
Hubert Humphrey (1968)
George McGovern (1972)
Gerald Ford (1976)
Jimmy Carter (1980)
Walter Mondale (1984)
Michael Dukakis (1988)
George H. W. Bush (1992)
Bob Dole (1996)
Al Gore (2000)
John Kerry (2004)
John McCain (2008)
Mitt Romney (2012)
Hillary Clinton (2016)
Donald Trump (2020)
 All presidential candidates
 Presidents
 Third party candidates
vteAge of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclop distes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Libert ,  galit , fraternit 
Lumi res
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Spanish America
Universality
Weimar Classicism
ThinkersEngland
Joseph Addison
Anthony Ashley-Cooper
Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Anthony Collins
Edward Gibbon
William Godwin
James Harrington
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
John Milton
Isaac Newton
Alexander Pope
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Joshua Reynolds
Algernon Sidney
Matthew Tindal
John Trenchard
Mary Wollstonecraft
France
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ren  Louis d'Argenson
Pierre Bayle
Pierre Beaumarchais
Nicolas Chamfort
 milie du Ch telet
 tienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
Ren  Descartes
Denis Diderot
Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle
Olympe de Gouges
Claude Adrien Helv tius
Baron d'Holbach
Louis de Jaucourt
Julien Offray de La Mettrie
Antoine Lavoisier
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Mar chal
Jean Meslier
Montesquieu
 tienne-Gabriel Morelly
Blaise Pascal
Fran ois Quesnay
Guillaume Thomas Fran ois Raynal
Marquis de Sade
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Firmin Abauzit
Charles Bonnet
Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui
Jean-Louis de Lolme
Pierre Pr vost
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Antoine-Jacques Roustan
Horace B n dict de Saussure
Jacob Vernes
Jacob Vernet
Germany
Justus Henning B hmer
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Immanuel Kant
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg
Moses Mendelssohn
Samuel von Pufendorf
Friedrich Schiller
Christian Thomasius
Gabriel Wagner
Christian Felix Wei e
Adam Weishaupt
Christoph Martin Wieland
Thomas Wizenmann
Christian Wolff
Greece
Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais
Ireland
George Berkeley
Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke
Jonathan Swift
John Toland
Italy
Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Ferdinando Galiani
Luigi Galvani
Antonio Genovesi
Francesco Mario Pagano
Giovanni Salvemini
Pietro Verri
Giambattista Vico
Netherlands
Balthasar Bekker
Pieter de la Court
Petrus Cunaeus
Hugo Grotius
Fran ois Hemsterhuis
Christiaan Huygens
Adriaan Koerbagh
Frederik van Leenhof
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Bernard Nieuwentyt
Baruch Spinoza
Jan Swammerdam
Hendrik Wyermars
Poland
Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Ko taj
Stanis aw Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanis aw August Poniatowski
J drzej  niadecki
Stanis aw Staszic
J zef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanis aw Za uski
J zef Andrzej Za uski
Portugal
Sebasti o Jos  de Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Ion Budai-Deleanu
Dinicu Golescu
Petru Maior
Samuil Micu-Klein
Gheorghe  incai
Russia
Catherine II
Denis Fonvizin
Antiochus Kantemir
Mikhail Kheraskov
Mikhail Lomonosov
Nikolay Novikov
Alexander Radishchev
Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Dositej Obradovi 
Avram Mrazovi 
Spain
Jos  Cadalso
Charles III
Benito Jer nimo Feij o y Montenegro
Leandro Fern ndez de Morat n
Valentin de Foronda
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos
Mart n Sarmiento
Diego de Torres Villarroel
Scotland
James Beattie
Joseph Black
Hugh Blair
James Boswell
James Burnett
Robert Burns
William Cullen
Adam Ferguson
Thomas Gordon
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
James Hutton
James Mill
John Millar
Isaac Newton
William Ogilvie
John Playfair
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Dugald Stewart
United States
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine
Romanticism  
 Category
vteLiberalismIdeas
Civil and political rights
Democracy
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural rights and legal rights
Natural law
Negative/Positive liberty
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state
SchoolsClassical
Economic
Fiscal
Neo
Equity feminism
Georgist
Radical
Anti-clerical
Civic nationalism
Republican
Utilitarian
Conservative
Democratic
Liberal conservatism
National
Ordo
Social
Green
Liberal feminism
Ecofeminism
Liberal socialism
Social democracy
Progressivism
Third Way
Other
Constitutional
Constitutional patriotism
Cultural
Corporate
International
Libertarianism
Left-libertarianism
Geolibertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Right-libertarianism
Radical centrism
Religious
Christian
Islamic
Secular
Techno
By regionAfrica
Egypt
Nigeria
Senegal
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe
Asia
China
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Israel
Japan
South Korea
Progressive
Philippines
Turkey
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Orl anist
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Berlusconism
Liberism
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Gladstonian
Libertarian
Manchester
Muscular
Radical
Whiggist
Latin America andthe Caribbean
Bolivia
Brazil
Lulism
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
North America
Canada
United States
Arizona School
Jacksonian
Jeffersonian
Libertarian
Modern
Progressive
Oceania
Australia
Small-l
New Zealand
Key FiguresSee also:History ofLiberalism
Acton
Alberdi
Allais
Arnold
Aron
Artigas
Badawi
B lcescu
Barante
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Betances
Beveridge
Blum
Bobbio
Brentano
Bright
Broglie
Burke
 apek
Cassirer
Cavour
Chicherin
Chu
Chydenius
Cobden
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Croly
Cuoco
De k
Deakin
Dewey
Dickens
Diderot
Dongsun
Dworkin
Einaudi
Emerson
E tv s
Fukuyama
Friedman
Galbraith
Garrett
Garrison
Gladstone
Gobetti
Gokhale
Gray
Green
Grundtvig
Gu
Guizot
Harrison
Havl ek
Hayek
Herbert
Herder
Hobbes
Hobhouse
Hobson
Hu
Humboldt
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jovanovi 
Ju rez
Jubani
Kairis
Kant
Kelsen
Kemal
Keynes
King
Ko taj
Korais
Kossuth
Kymlicka
Lamartine
La Mennais
Larra
Lastarria
Latifiyan
Lelewel
Levski
Li
Lincoln
List
Lloyd George
Locke
Lufti
Macaulay
Madariaga
Madero
Madison
Mart 
Martineau
Masterman
Ma urani 
Mazzini
Menzies
Michelet
Mill (James)
Mill (John Stuart)
Milton
Milyukov
Molteno
Mommsen
Montalembert
Montesquieu
Mora
Nakae
Naoroji
Naumann
Nitti
Ohlin
Ortega
Ozaki
Paine
Paton
Pino Su rez
Pearson
Popper
Price
Priestley
Prieto
Qin
Quinet
Radishchev
Ram rez
Rathenau
Rawls
Raz
Renan
Renouvier
Ricardo
Rogers
R pke
Rorty
Roosevelt
Rosetti
Rosmini
Rosselli
Rousseau
Ruggiero
Sarmiento
Say
Sen
Shaftesbury
Shklar
Sidney
Siey s
 inasi
Sismondi
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Sta l
St hlberg
Stein
Tahtawi
Tao
Tav ar
Thierry
Thorbecke
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tracy
Treub
Troeltsch
Turgot
Venizelos
Voltaire
Ward
Weber
Wollstonecraft
Zambrano
Organisations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network
Liberalism Portal
vteSocial and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Bo tie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
M ntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Su rez
18th 19th-century
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cort s
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helv tius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Sta l
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
20th 21st-century
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Gu non
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Ko akowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Latifiyan
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nurs 
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
R pke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
 i ek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
vteCabinet of President George Washington (1789 1797)Secretary of State
John Jay (1789 1790)
Thomas Jefferson (1790 1793)
Edmund Randolph (1794 1795)
Timothy Pickering (1795 1797)
Secretary of the Treasury
Alexander Hamilton (1789 1795)
Oliver Wolcott Jr. (1795 1797)
Secretary of War
Henry Knox (1789 1794)
Timothy Pickering (1795)
James McHenry (1796 1797)
Attorney General
Edmund Randolph (1789 1794)
William Bradford (1794 1795)
Charles Lee (1795 1797)
vteCabinet of President Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)Secretary of State
James Madison (1801 1809)
Secretary of the Treasury
Samuel Dexter (1801)
Albert Gallatin (1801 1809)
Secretary of War
Henry Dearborn (1801 1809)
Attorney General
Levi Lincoln Sr. (1801 1805)
John Breckinridge (1805 1806)
Caesar Augustus Rodney (1807 1809)
Secretary of the Navy
Benjamin Stoddert (1801)
Robert Smith (1801 1809)
vte(  1792)   1796 United States presidential election   (1800  )Federalist PartyNominees
President: John Adams
Vice President: Thomas Pinckney
Other candidates
Oliver Ellsworth
John Jay
James Iredell
Samuel Johnston
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Democratic-Republican PartyNominees
President: Thomas Jefferson (elected Vice President)
Vice President: Aaron Burr
Other candidates
Samuel Adams
George Clinton
Other 1796 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1796)   1800 United States presidential election   (1804  )Democratic-Republican PartyNominees
President: Thomas Jefferson
Vice President: Aaron Burr
Federalist PartyNominees
President: John Adams (incumbent)
Vice President: Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Other 1800 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1800)   1804 United States presidential election   (1808  )Democratic-Republican PartyNominees
President: Thomas Jefferson (incumbent)
Vice President: George Clinton
Other candidates
Vice President: John Breckinridge
Levi Lincoln
John Langdon
Gideon Granger
William Maclay
Federalist PartyNominees
President: Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Vice President: Rufus King
Other 1804 elections: House
Senate
vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright
vteUniversity of VirginiaLocated in: Charlottesville, VirginiaAcademicsSchools
School of Architecture
Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
College of Arts & Sciences
School of Continuing and Professional Studies
Darden School of Business
McIntire School of Commerce
Curry School of Education
School of Engineering and Applied Science
School of Law
School of Medicine
School of Nursing
College at Wise
The Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School
Scholarship programs
Echols Scholars
Jefferson Scholars
Rodman Scholars
Research
Association of American Universities
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities
Japanese Text Initiative
Universitas 21
Mid Atlantic Terascale Partnership
Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository Architecture
Applied Research in Patacriticism
Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship
Legion
Mentat
Real-time Cmix
Research publications
University of Virginia Press
Virginia Law Review
Virginia Journal of International Law
Journal of Law & Politics
Other
Rare Book School
Semester at Sea
University of Virginia Demographics and Workforce Group
Sorensen Institute for Political Leadership
Miller Center of Public Affairs
University of Virginia Center for Politics
Sabato's Crystal Ball
AthleticsTeams and music
Virginia Cavaliers
Virginia Pep Band
Cavalier Marching Band
Wahoos
The Good Old Song
The Cavalier Song
Sports
Baseball
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Football
Men's lacrosse
Women's lacrosse
Men's soccer
Women's soccer
Swimming and diving
Men's tennis
Rivalries
Virginia Tech (overall, football, and men's basketball)
Johns Hopkins
Maryland Terrapins
lacrosse
North Carolina Tar Heels
Facilities
Davenport Field at Disharoon Park
John Paul Jones Arena
Kl ckner Stadium
Lake Monticello
Memorial Gym
Scott Stadium
Sheridan Snyder Tennis Center
University Hall
University Hall Turf Field
Grounds
The Lawn
The Range
The Rotunda
Thomas Jefferson statue
McIntire Amphitheatre
The Corner
Fan Mountain Observatory
Hereford College
Jefferson Hall
McCormick Observatory
Memorial to Enslaved Laborers
Rugby Road
University of Virginia Cemetery
Student lifePublications
The Cavalier Daily
The Hedgehog Review
Virginia Law Weekly
Virginia Quarterly Review
The Yellow Journal
Radio stations
WTJU
WXTJ-LP
Greek life
University of Virginia Greek life
Debating societies
Jefferson Literary and Debating Society
Washington Literary Society and Debating Union
Performing arts
The Academical Village People
Hullabahoos
Sil'hooettes
The Virginia Belles
Virginia Film Festival
Virginia Gentlemen
Virginia Glee Club
Residential colleges
Brown College at Monroe Hill
Hereford College
International Residential College
First-year living areas
Alderman Road
McCormick Road
Secret societies
IMP Society
Seven Society
Z Society
Other
People
Alumni and faculty
Thomas Jefferson (founder)
Enslaved laborers
University Presidents
Established: 1819   Endowment: $7.53 billion   Students: 22,391
 Commons
 Category
Portals: Biography American Revolutionary War Virginia Philosophy Politics Law United States
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
2
Artists
MusicBrainz
Museum of Modern Art
RKD Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
RISM
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Jefferson&oldid=1149788813"