Apotropaic tradition believed to ward off evil
For other uses, see Knock on Wood (disambiguation).
Knocking on wood (also phrased touching wood) is an apotropaic tradition of literally touching, tapping, or knocking on wood, or merely stating that one is doing or intending to do so, in order to avoid "tempting fate" after making a favorable prediction or boast, or a declaration concerning one's own death or another unfavorable situation.
Origin[edit]
A common explanation traces the phenomenon to ancient Celtic peoples, who believed it called on spirits or gods of the trees,[1][2] while Christians tie the practice to the wood of the cross of crucifixion.[2] A more modern theory from folklore researcher Steve Roud suggests it derives from a form of tag called "Tiggy Touchwood" in which players are safe from being tagged if they are touching wood.[2] The British version of the phrase "touch wood" has been traced back as far as the 17th century.[3]
Similar traditions across the world[edit]
 Knocking on wood in the Oval Office (2015)
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia there is also the habit of knocking on wood when saying something positive or affirmative about someone or something and not wanting that to change. Frequently the movement of knocking on nearby wood is followed by da kucnem u drvo /         ("I will knock on wood"), or sometimes by da ne ureknem /       ("I don't want to jinx it").[4]
In Brazil and Portugal, bater na madeira ("knock on wood") is something actually done physically, three knocks are required after giving an example of a bad thing eventually happening. No verbalization is required, just the three knocks on the closest piece or object of wood. In the absence of wood, someone can say bate na madeira, to prevent the bad thing to happen. People do not actually believe knocking three times on a piece of wood will really protect them, but it is a social habit and it is polite to do so to demonstrate that one doesn't want that bad thing one is talking about to actually happen.[citation needed][5]
In Bulgaria the superstition of "knock on wood" (      chukam na d rvo) is reserved for protection against the evil, and is not typically used for attracting good luck. Usually people engage in the practice in reaction to bad news, actual or merely imagined. In most cases the nearest wooden object is used (in some areas, however, tables are exempt); if there are no such objects within immediate reach, a common tongue-in-cheek practice is to knock on one's head. Knocking on wood is often followed by lightly pulling one's earlobe with the same hand. Common phrases to accompany the ritual are "God guard us" (        Bog da ni pazi) and "may the Devil not hear" (        da ne chue Djavol t).
In Denmark the saying is 7, 9, 13 / syv, ni, tretten (usually accompanied by knocking under a table), as these numbers have traditionally been associated with magic.
In Egypt,     emsek el-khashab ("hold the wood") is said when mentioning either good luck one has had in the past or hopes one has for the future. When referring to past good luck the expression is usually used in hopes of the good thing continuing to occur via its spoken acknowledgment, as well as preventing envy. (Citation)
In old English folklore, "knocking on wood" also referred to when people spoke of secrets   they went into the isolated woods to talk privately and "knocked" on the trees when they were talking to hide their communication from evil spirits who would be unable to hear when they knocked.[citation needed] Another version holds that the act of knocking was to perk up the spirits to make them work in the requester's favor.[6] Yet another version holds that a sect of monks who wore large wooden crosses around their necks would tap or "knock" on them to ward away evil.
In Medieval England knights being sent into battle would visit the wooden effigy of a knight in Southwark Cathedral and touch its nose for luck. The Knight's Tale in The Canterbury Tales begins in Southwark for this reason. The effigy can still be seen in the cathedral to this day.
In modern day England the expression "touch wood" is more commonly heard than "knock on wood".
In Georgia, a     kheze da a uneba ("knocking on wood") is performed when one mentions a bad possibility that could take place in future. Usually the person knocks three times. It is also done when one experiences a bad Omen.
In Greece the saying     cht pa x lo ("knock on wood") is said when hearing someone say something negative in order to prevent it from happening.
In India, the 'touch wood' is used to promote continued good luck and/or prevent bad omens.
In Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand, when someone is saying bad things, the one that hears it would knock on wood (or other suitable surface) and knock on their forehead while saying amit-amit or amit-amit jabang bayi (Indonesia), choi or tak cun tak cun (Malaysia).
In Iran,  when one says something good about something or somebody, he or she might knock on wood and say           bezan-am be taxteh, cheshm naxoreh ("[I] am knocking on wood to prevent he/she/it from being jinxed"). The evil eye and the concept of being jinxed are common phobias and superstitious beliefs in Iranian culture, and Iranians traditionally believe knocking on wood wards off evil spirits. (Citation)
In Israel the saying       b'l  ' yin har ' ("without the evil eye") is said when someone mentions good things happening to himself or someone else, or even when mentioning a valuable things he owns. This expression is a superstition that is used in the hope that a good thing will continue to occur even after it is mentioned, and as a way to prevent envy (hasad  ) also known as the Evil Eye, as they believe that Envy can harm other people.
In Italy, tocca ferro ("touch iron") is used, especially after seeing an undertaker or something related to death.[unreliable source?][7]
In Latin America, it is also tradition to physically knock a wooden object. A variant requires that the object does not have feet (tocar madera sin patas), which rules out chairs, tables and beds.[8]
In Lebanon and Syria the saying     duqq  al-khashab ("knock on [the] wood") is said when hearing someone say something negative in order to prevent it from happening. It is also largely observed when saying something positive or affirmative about someone or something and not wanting that to change.
In North Macedonia, "knocking on wood" is a folk belief and people usually do that after someone says something bad to make sure nothing bad happens.
In Norway the saying is bank i bordet ("knock on the table"), which usually was made of wood.
In Poland, there is a habit of knocking on (unpainted) wood (which may be preceded by saying odpuka  w niemalowane drewno; st k vneakr shenn  drevis n , or simply odpuka ;   literally meaning "to knock on unpainted wood.") when saying something negative   to prevent it from happening   or, more rarely, something positive   in order not to "spoil it". In the Czech Republic, this is often accompanied for stronger effect by knocking on one's teeth, a piece of building stone, or metal, reasoning that these (as opposed to wood) survive even fire.
In Romania, there is also a superstition that one can avoid bad things aforementioned by literally knocking on wood (Romanian: a bate  n lemn). Wood tables are exempted. One of the possible reasons could be that there is a monastery practice to call people to pray by playing / knocking the simantron.[9]
In Spain tocar madera and in France toucher du bois ("to touch wood") is something that you say when you want your luck or a good situation to continue, e.g. Ha ido bien toda la semana y, toco madera, seguir  bien el fin de semana ("It's been good all week and, touching wood, the weekend will stay good").
In Sweden, a common expression is "pepper, pepper, touch wood" (peppar, peppar, ta i tr ), referring to throwing pepper over one's shoulder and touching a wooden object.
In Turkey, when someone hears about a bad experience someone else had, he/she may gently pull one earlobe, and knock on a wood twice, which means "God save me from that thing".
In the United States in the eighteenth century, men used to knock on the wood stock of their muzzle-loading rifles to settle the black powder charge, ensuring the weapon would fire cleanly.[citation needed]
In Vietnam a common expression is "tr m v a". It is said when a speaker wants the good/positive aforementioned thing will continue, especially when saying some good things about a newborn because they believe if they did not say the words, negative things would happen later.
In Assam in Northeast India as well as in Russia, the expression "thu thu thu" -- the onomatopoeic phrase to represent the sound of spitting -- is used after making a favourable prediction or commenting on an ongoing favourable occurrence in order to deter misfortune befalling these favourable circumstances. Its use is similar to the use of the phrase "touchwood" in Western traditions.
In Russia and Ukraine, "     " ("To knock on wood") has the same meaning.[10] There is also an expression "     " ("Tfu Tfu Tfu") phrase to represent the sound of spitting similar with Assam in Northeast India. The difference, however, is that the person would have to "spit" with his head turned to the left shoulder which represents "spitting away" bad fortune because it is situated on the left (unstable) side of life"[11]
In South Korea, when you take back what you said, you say, "Grab the wood and do 'tweetweetwee-The sound of spitting-'". This means that in connection with the saying, "Be careful with your words" if you don't want anything bad to happen.
References[edit]
^ Ray (2017-05-18). "Why do we knock on wood?". TED-Ed Blog. Retrieved 2022-08-26.
^ a b c Andrews, Evan (August 29, 2016). "Why do people knock on wood for luck?". History.
^ "Knock on wood and touch wood". 2015-11-20. Retrieved 2022-08-26.
^  ,  . "       ".
^ Fernanes de Melo Santos, Jair (2020). Christ Meets Culture: The influence of Sociocultural Factors on Translation of Gospel in Brazil. Wipf & Sock. ISBN 978-1-7252-7460-0.
^ Firestone, Allie. "Knock on Wood: Superstitions and Their Origins". Divine Caroline. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2014.
^ "Superstitions in Italy". Lifeinitaly.com. 2007-01-20. Retrieved 2011-12-03.
^ Supersticiones arraigadas - Selecciones
^ MB T (26 September 2009). "St. Catherine's Monastery Semantron". Archived from the original on 2021-12-22   via YouTube.
^ "     ,      ".
^ "                       ?". 22 May 2017.
See also[edit]
Look up knock on wood or touch wood in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Alomancy, related to throwing salt over the left shoulder
Crossed fingers
Evil eye
Jinx
vteSuperstitionMain topics
Amulet
Evil eye
Luck
Omen
Talismans
Myth and ritual
Lists
List of superstitions
List of lucky symbols
List of bad luck signs
Sailors' superstitions
Theatrical superstitions
Africa
Buda
Gris-gris
Sampy
Sleeping child
Americas
Ascalapha odorata
Bermuda Triangle
Brujer a
Carranca
Cooties
Curse of Tippecanoe
Curupira
Djucu
Fortune cookie
Groundhog Day
I'noGo tied
Oscar love curse
Susto
Veve
White lighter myth
Witch window
Asia
Superstition in India
Superstition in Pakistan
Superstition in the Philippines
Japanese superstitions
Superstition in Korea
Bhoot (ghost)
Chhaupadi
Churel
Ghosts in Bengali culture
Jackal's horn
Kuai Kuai culture
Muhurta
Navaratna
Nazar
Nazar battu
Pichal Peri
Puppy pregnancy syndrome
Akabeko
Kanai Anzen
Maneki-neko
Okiagari-koboshi
Ofuda
Omamori
Fan death
Agimat
Albularyo
Barang
Kulam
Lihi
Pagtatawas
Pasma
Usog
Kuman Thong
Palad khik
Takrut
Nang Kwak
White elephant
Jin Chan
Numbers in Chinese culture
Europe
August curse
Barbary macaques in Gibraltar
Bayern-luck
Blarney Stone
Cimaruta
Cornicello
The Goodman's Croft
Himmelsbrief
Icelandic magical staves
In bocca al lupo
Kitchen witch
Klabautermann
Mooncalf
Need-fire
Painted pebbles
Powder of sympathy
Rabbit rabbit rabbit
Ravens of the Tower of London
Russian traditions and superstitions
Superstition in Britain
Spilling water for luck
The Scottish Play
Troll cross
Tycho Brahe days
Witch post
Wolfssegen
General
1 (Ace of spades, Henophobia)
11:11
4 (Four-leaf clover, Tetraphobia)
7 (Seventh son of a seventh son, Heptaphobia)
13 (Friday the 13th, The Thirteen Club, Thirteenth floor, Triskaidekaphobia)
17 (Heptadecaphobia)
27 (27 Club, Eikosiheptaphobia)
39 (Curse of 39)
108 (Hekatoctophobia)
111 (Hekatohendecaphobia)
666 (Number of the Beast)
Auspicious wedding dates
Baseball superstition
Beginner's luck
Black cat
Bread and butter
Break a leg
Bullroarer
Chain letter
Cramp-ring
Curse
Davy Jones' Locker
Dead man's hand
End-of-the-day betting effect
Fear of frogs
Fear of ghosts
Fertility rite
First-foot
Flying Dutchman
Four Eleven Forty Four
Gambler's conceit
Good luck charm
Human sacrifice
Jinx
Hex
Knocking on wood
Law of contagion
Literomancy
Lock of hair
Maternal impression
Miasma theory
Nelson
Numerophobia
Numismatic charm
Penny
Rabbit's foot
Rainmaking
Ship sponsor
Shoes on a table
Sign of the horns
Something old
Spilling salt
Statue rubbing
Three on a match
Threshold
Toi toi toi
Wishing well
Witch ball
Witching hour
Related
Apophenia
Apotropaic magic
Astrology and science
Coincidence
Debunker
Divination
Folk religion
Fortune-telling
Magic and religion
Magical thinking
Numerology
Perceptions of religious imagery in natural phenomena
Post hoc ergo propter hoc
Traditional medicine
Urban legend
Superstition in Judaism
Superstitions in Muslim societies
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knocking_on_wood&oldid=1142887967"