Allied landing operations in French North Africa during World War II
Operation TorchPart of the North African campaign of the Second World warLandings during the operationDate8 16 November 1942 (1942-11-08  1942-11-16)LocationFrench Morocco, French AlgeriaResult
Allied victoryTerritorialchanges
Anglo-American occupation of Morocco and Algeria
Free French control of French West Africa
Case Anton (Axis occupation of southern France)Belligerents
 United States United Kingdom
 India
 Free France[1]Naval only: Canada Netherlands Australia
 Vichy France
 Algeria
 Morocco
 Germany ItalyCommanders and leaders
 Dwight D. Eisenhower George S. Patton Henry Kent Hewitt Lloyd Fredendall Andrew Cunningham Kenneth Anderson
 Fran ois Darlan Alphonse Juin Charles Nogu s Ernst KalsStrength
Ground forces:107,000 troops35,000 in Morocco39,000 near Algiers33,000 near OranNaval activity:350 warships500 transportsTotal: 850
Ground forces:125,000 troops210 tanks500 aircraftmany shore batteries and artillery piecesNaval activity:1 battleship (partially armed)10 other warships11 submarinesGermany: 14 submarinesItaly: 14 submarines[2]Casualties and losses
United States:526 deadUnited Kingdom:574 deadAll Other Allies:756 total wounded[3]1 escort carrier (HMS Avenger) sunk with loss of 516 men 4 destroyers lost2 sloops lost6 troopships lost1 minesweeper lost1 auxiliary anti-aircraft ship lost
Vichy France:1,346+ dead1,997 woundedseveral shore batteries destroyedall artillery pieces captured1 light cruiser lost5 destroyers lost6 submarines lost2 flotilla leaders lostGermany: 8 submarines lost by 17 NovemberItaly: 2 submarines lost by 17 November[4]
vteFree French campaigns
Africa & Middle East
Dakar
Gabon
Keren
Exporter
Kufra
Bir Hakeim
Run for Tunis
Torch
Tunisia
Europe
Eastern Front
Husky
Corsica
Monte Cassino
Gli res
Ist
Mont Mouchet
Overlord
Paris
Elba
Saint-Marcel
Vercors
Dragoon
Toulon
Marseilles
Lorraine
Dompaire
Strasbourg
Nordwind
Colmar Pocket
Alps
Indian Ocean & Asia
R union
Crimson
Indochina
North America
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
vteMilitary actions of Vichy France during World War II1940
Mers-el-K bir
Gibraltar
Dakar
Gabon
Indochina
Franco-Thai War
Ko Chang
1941
Syria Lebanon
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
1942
Madagascar
Wallis and Futuna
Torch
Anton
Toulon
R union
1944
Gli res
Mont Mouchet
Vercors
Paris
vteBattle of the Mediterranean1940
Vado
Malta
Club Run 
Espero 
Mers-el-K bir
Calabria 
Cape Spada
Hurry 
Cape Passero 
MB8 
Taranto
Strait of Otranto 
White 
Cape Spartivento 
1941
Excess 
Convoy AN 14 
Genoa
Abstention
Souda Bay
Matapan
Tarigo 
Crete 
Substance 
Grand Harbour
Halberd 
Duisburg 
Bon 
1st Sirte 
Alexandria
1942
2nd Sirte 
Calendar 
Bowery 
Albumen
Harpoon 
Vigorous 
Pedestal 
Agreement
Torch
Stoneage 
Toulon
Portcullis 
Skerki 
Olterra 
Algiers 
1943
Zuwarah
Cigno 
Campobasso 
Pantelleria
Sicily
Gela
Scylla 
Bastia
Strait of Bonifacio
Dodecanese
Rhodes
Leros
Kos
Cape Bougaroun 
1944
Ist
Santorini
Symi
Port Cros
La Ciotat
1945
Ligurian Sea 
Allied convoys
Malta convoys
U-boat Campaign    Involved an Allied convoy or delivery mission
    Involved an Axis convoy or delivery mission
vteNorth African campaignWestern Desert campaign
Invasion of Egypt
Compass
Fort Capuzzo
Nibeiwa
Sidi Barrani
Bardia
Mechili
Beda Fomm
Kufra
Giarabub
Sonnenblume
Tobruk
Raid on Bardia
Twin Pimples
Brevity
Skorpion
Battleaxe
Crusader
Flipper
1st Bir el Gubi
Battle of Point 175
2nd Bir el Gubi
Fort Lamy
Gazala
Bir Hakeim
Mersa Matruh
1st Alamein
Alam Halfa
Agreement
Bigamy
Caravan
Nicety
Camouflage
Bertram
Braganza
2nd Alamein
Outpost Snipe
El Agheila
Torch
Kingpin
Flagpole
Blackstone
Casablanca
Reservist
Terminal
Port Lyautey
Brushwood
Tunisia
Run for Tunis
Sidi Bou Zid
Kasserine Pass
Ochsenkopf
Medenine
Mareth Line
El Guettar
Wadi Akarit
Longstop Hill
Hill 609
Vulcan
Flax
Retribution
Strike
Operation Torch (8 November 1942   16 November 1942) was an Allied invasion of French North Africa during the Second World War.[5] Torch was a compromise operation that met the British objective of securing victory in North Africa while allowing American armed forces the opportunity to engage in the fight against Nazi Germany on a limited scale.[6][page needed] It was the first mass involvement of US troops in the European North African Theatre, and saw the first major airborne assault carried out by the United States.
While the French colonies were formally aligned with Germany via Vichy France, the loyalties of the population were mixed. Reports indicated that they might support the Allies. American General Dwight D. Eisenhower, supreme commander of the Allied forces in Mediterranean Theater of Operations, planned a three-pronged attack on Casablanca (Western), Oran (Center) and Algiers (Eastern), then a rapid move on Tunis to catch Axis forces (Afrika Korps) in North Africa from the west in conjunction with Allied advance from Egypt.
Operation Torch's Western Task Force encountered unexpected resistance and bad weather, but Casablanca, the principal French Atlantic naval base, was captured after a short siege. The Center Task Force suffered some damage to its ships when trying to land in shallow water but the French ships were sunk or driven off; Oran surrendered after bombardment by British battleships. The French Resistance had successfully attempted a coup in Algiers and, even through the late alert raised in the Vichy forces, the Eastern Task Force met less opposition and were able to push inland and compel surrender on the first day.
The success of Torch caused Admiral Fran ois Darlan, commander of the Vichy French forces, who was in Algiers, to order co-operation with the Allies, in return for being installed as High Commissioner, with many other Vichy officials keeping their jobs. Darlan was assassinated soon afterwards, and the Free French gradually came to dominate the government.
Background[edit]
The Allies planned an Anglo-American invasion of French North Africa/Maghreb Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia, territory nominally in the hands of the Vichy French government. With British forces advancing from Egypt, this would eventually allow the Allies to carry out a pincer operation against Axis forces in North Africa. The Vichy French had around 125,000 soldiers in the territories as well as coastal artillery, 210 operational but out-of-date tanks and about 500 aircraft, half of which were Dewoitine D.520 fighters equal to many British and U.S. fighters.[7] These forces included 60,000 troops in Morocco, 15,000 in Tunisia, and 50,000 in Algeria, with coastal artillery, and a small number of tanks and aircraft.[8] In addition, there were 10 or so warships and 11 submarines at Casablanca.
Political situation on the ground[edit]
The Allies believed that the Vichy French Armistice Army would not fight, partly because of information supplied by the American Consul Robert Daniel Murphy in Algiers. The French were former members of the Allies and the American troops were instructed not to fire unless they were fired upon.[9]
However, they harbored suspicions that the Vichy French Navy would bear a grudge over the actions of the British in June 1940 to prevent French ships being taken by the Germans; the attack on the French Navy in harbour at Mers-el-K bir, near Oran, killed almost 1,300 French sailors.
An assessment of the sympathies of the French forces in North Africa was essential, and plans were made to secure their cooperation, rather than resistance. German support for the Vichy French came in the shape of air support. Several Luftwaffe bomber wings undertook anti-shipping strikes against Allied ports in Algiers and along the North African coast.
Operational command[edit]
The operation was originally scheduled to be led by General Joseph Stilwell, but he was reassigned after the Arcadia Conference revealed his vitriolic Anglophobia and skepticism over the operation.[10] Lt. General Dwight D. Eisenhower was given command of the operation, and he set up his headquarters in Gibraltar. The Allied Naval Commander of the Expeditionary Force was Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham; his deputy was Vice-Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, who planned the amphibious landings.[citation needed]
Strategic debate among the Allies[edit]
Senior U.S. commanders remained strongly opposed to the landings and after the western Allied Combined Chiefs of Staff (CCS) met in London on 30 July 1942, General George Marshall and Admiral Ernest King declined to approve the plan. Marshall and other U.S. generals advocated the invasion of northern Europe later that year, which the British rejected.[11][12] After Prime Minister Winston Churchill pressed for a landing in French North Africa in 1942, Marshall suggested instead to President Franklin D. Roosevelt that the U.S. abandon the Germany first strategy and take the offensive in the Pacific. Roosevelt said it would do nothing to help the Russians.[13] With Marshall unable to persuade the British to change their minds,[14] President Roosevelt gave a direct order that Torch was to have precedence over other operations and was to take place at the earliest possible date, one of only two direct orders he gave to military commanders during the war.[citation needed]
In conducting their planning, Allied military strategists needed to consider the political situation on the ground in North Africa, which was complex, as well as external diplomatic political aspects. The Americans had recognized P tain and the Vichy government in 1940, whereas the British did not and had recognized General Charles de Gaulle's French National Committee as a government-in-exile instead, and agreed to fund them. North Africa was part of France's colonial empire and nominally in support of Vichy, but that support was far from universal among the population.[15]
Political events on the ground contributed to, and in some cases were even primary over, military aspects. The French population in North Africa were divided into three groups:[15]
Gaullists  De Gaulle was the rallying point for the French National Committee[a] This comprised French refugees who escaped metropolitan France rather than succumb to the German occupation, or those who stayed and joined the French Resistance. One acolyte, General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque, organized a fighting force and conducted raids in 1943 along a 1,600 miles (2,600 km) path from Lake Chad to Tripoli and joined with General Bernard Montgomery's British Eighth Army on 25 January 1943.[15]
French Liberation Movement   some Frenchmen living in North Africa and operating in secret under German surveillance organized an underground "French Liberation Movement", whose aim was to liberate France. General Henri Giraud, recently escaped from Germany, later became its leader. The personal clash between de Gaulle and Giraud prevented the Free French Forces and the French Liberation Movement groups from unifying during the North African campaign (Torch).[15]
Loyal pro-Vichy French   there were those who remained loyal to Marshal Philippe P tain and believed collaboration with the Axis powers was the best method of ensuring the future of France. Fran ois Darlan was P tain's designated successor.[15]
American strategy in planning the attack had to take into account these complexities on the ground. The planners assumed that if the leaders were given Allied military support they would take steps to liberate themselves, and the U.S. embarked on detailed negotiations under American Consul General Robert Murphy in Rabat with the French Liberation Movement. Since Britain was already diplomatically and financially committed to de Gaulle, it was clear that negotiations with the French Liberation Movement would have to be conducted by the Americans, and the invasion as well. Because of divided loyalties among the groups on the ground their support was uncertain, and due to the need to maintain secrecy, detailed plans could not be shared with the French.[15]
Allied plans[edit]
 Allied convoys heading from the British Isles to North Africa
Planners identified Oran, Algiers and Casablanca as key targets. Ideally there would also be a landing at Tunis to secure Tunisia and facilitate the rapid interdiction of supplies traveling via Tripoli to Erwin Rommel's Afrika Korps forces in Italian Libya. However, Tunis was much too close to the Axis airfields in Sicily and Sardinia for any hope of success. A compromise would be to land at B ne in eastern Algeria, some 300 miles (480 km) closer to Tunis than Algiers. Limited resources dictated that the Allies could only make three landings and Eisenhower who believed that any plan must include landings at Oran and Algiers had two main options: either the western option, to land at Casablanca, Oran and Algiers and then make as rapid a move as possible to Tunis some 500 miles (800 km) east of Algiers once the Vichy opposition was suppressed; or the eastern option, to land at Oran, Algiers and B ne and then advance overland to Casablanca some 500 miles (800 km) west of Oran. He favored the eastern option because of the advantages it gave to an early capture of Tunis and also because the Atlantic swells off Casablanca presented considerably greater risks to an amphibious landing there than would be encountered in the Mediterranean.
The Combined Chiefs of Staff, however, were concerned that should Operation Torch precipitate Spain to abandon neutrality and join the Axis, the Straits of Gibraltar could be closed cutting the entire Allied force's lines of communication. They therefore chose the Casablanca option as the less risky since the forces in Algeria and Tunisia could be supplied overland from Casablanca (albeit with considerable difficulty) in the event of closure of the straits.[16]
Marshall's opposition to Torch delayed the landings by almost a month, and his opposition to landings in Algeria led British military leaders to question his strategic ability; the Royal Navy controlled the Strait of Gibraltar, and Spain was unlikely to intervene as Francisco Franco was hedging his bets. The Morocco landings ruled out the early occupation of Tunisia. Marshall did convince the Allies to abandon the planned invasions of Madeira and Tangier in preparation for the landings, which he maintained would lose the element of surprise and draw large Spanish military contingents in Spanish Morocco and the Canary Islands into the war. However, Harry Hopkins convinced President Franklin D. Roosevelt to agree to the general plan.[17] Eisenhower told Patton that the past six weeks were the most trying of his life.[18] In Eisenhower's acceptance of landings in Algeria and Morocco, he pointed out that the decision removed the early capture of Tunis from the probable to only the remotely possible because of the extra time it would afford the Axis to move forces into Tunisia.[19]
Intelligence gathering[edit]
In July 1941, Mieczys aw S owikowski (using the codename "Rygor" Polish for "Rigor") set up "Agency Africa", one of the Second World War's most successful intelligence organizations.[20] His Polish allies in these endeavors included Lt. Col. Gwido Langer and Major Maksymilian Ci ki. The information gathered by the Agency was used by the Americans and British in planning the amphibious November 1942 Operation Torch[21][22] landings in North Africa.
Preliminary contact with Vichy French[edit]
Further information: Operation Kingpin (World War II) and Henri Giraud
See also: French Civil and Military High Command
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
To gauge the feeling of the Vichy French forces, Murphy was appointed to the American consulate in Algeria. His covert mission was to determine the mood of the French forces and to make contact with elements that might support an Allied invasion. He succeeded in contacting several French officers, including General Charles Mast, the French commander-in-chief in Algiers.
These officers were willing to support the Allies but asked for a clandestine conference with a senior Allied General in Algeria. Major General Mark W. Clark one of Eisenhower's senior commanders was dispatched to Cherchell in Algeria aboard the British submarine HMS Seraph and met with these Vichy French officers on 21 October 1942.
With help from the Resistance, the Allies also succeeded in slipping French General Henri Giraud out of Vichy France on HMS Seraph passing itself off as an American submarine[23] to Gibraltar, where Eisenhower had his headquarters, intending to offer him the post of commander in chief of French forces in North Africa after the invasion. However, Giraud would take no position lower than commander in chief of all the invading forces, a job already given to Eisenhower.[24] When he was refused, he decided to remain "a spectator in this affair".[25]
Battle[edit]
The Allies organised three amphibious task forces to simultaneously seize the key ports and airports in Morocco and Algeria, targeting Casablanca, Oran and Algiers. Successful completion of these operations was to be followed by an eastwards advance into Tunisia.
A Western Task Force (aimed at Casablanca) was composed of American units, with Major General George S. Patton in command and Rear Admiral Henry Kent Hewitt heading the naval operations. This Western Task Force consisted of the U.S. 3rd and 9th Infantry Divisions, and two battalions from the U.S. 2nd Armored Division 35,000 troops in a convoy of over 100 ships. They were transported directly from the United States in the first of a new series of UG convoys providing logistic support for the North African campaign.[26]
 A shipment of 116 Supermarine Spitfires sent by sea was assembled in just 11 days at RAF North Front, Gibraltar. Many of these Spitfires served with the United States Army Air Forces, including the aircraft in the foreground, EP 365 (308th FS, 31st Fighter Group).[citation needed]
The Center Task Force, aimed at Oran, included the U.S. 2nd Battalion 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment, the U.S. 1st Infantry Division, and the U.S. 1st Armored Division a total of 18,500 troops. They sailed from the United Kingdom and were commanded by Major General Lloyd Fredendall, the naval forces being commanded by Commodore Thomas Troubridge.
Torch was, for propaganda purposes, a landing by U.S. forces, supported by British warships and aircraft, under the belief that this would be more palatable to French public opinion, than an Anglo-American invasion. For the same reason, Churchill suggested that British soldiers might wear U.S. Army uniforms, and No.6 Commando did so.[27] (Fleet Air Arm aircraft did carry US "star" roundels during the operation,[28] and two British destroyers flew the Stars and Stripes.[27]) In reality, the Eastern Task Force aimed at Algiers was commanded by Lieutenant-General Kenneth Anderson and consisted of a brigade from the British 78th and the U.S. 34th Infantry Divisions, along with two British commando units (No. 1 and No. 6 Commandos), together with the RAF Regiment providing 5 squadrons of infantry and 5 Light anti-aircraft flights, totalling 20,000 troops. During the landing phase, ground forces were to be commanded by U.S. Major General Charles W. Ryder, Commanding General (CG) of the 34th Division and naval forces were commanded by Royal Navy Vice-Admiral Sir Harold Burrough.
U-boats, operating in the eastern Atlantic area crossed by the invasion convoys, had been drawn away to attack trade convoy SL 125.[29]
Aerial operations were split into two commands, with Royal Air Force aircraft under Air Marshal Sir William Welsh operating east of Cape Tenez in Algeria, and all United States Army Air Forces aircraft under Major General Jimmy Doolittle, who was under the direct command of Major General Patton, operating west of Cape Tenez. P-40s of the 33rd Fighter Group were launched from U.S. Navy escort carriers and landed at Port Lyautey on 10 November. Additional air support was provided by the carrier USS Ranger, whose squadrons intercepted Vichy aircraft and bombed hostile ships.
Casablanca[edit]
 American ships preparing to land off Safi, Morocco, during Operation Blackstone
The Western Task Force landed before daybreak on 8 November 1942, at three points in Morocco: Safi (Operation Blackstone), Fedala (Operation Brushwood, the largest landing with 19,000 men), and Mehdiya-Port Lyautey (Operation Goalpost). Because it was hoped that the French would not resist, there were no preliminary bombardments. This proved to be a costly error as French defenses took a toll on American landing forces. On the night of 7 November, pro-Allied General Antoine B thouart attempted a coup d'etat against the French command in Morocco, so that he could surrender to the Allies the next day. His forces surrounded the villa of General Charles Nogu s, the Vichy-loyal high commissioner. However, Nogu s telephoned loyal forces, who stopped the coup. In addition, the coup attempt alerted Nogu s to the impending Allied invasion, and he immediately bolstered French coastal defenses.
 A flyer in French and Arabic that was distributed by Allied forces in the streets of Casablanca, calling on citizens to cooperate with the Allied forces. At Fedala, a small port with a large beach close to Casablanca, weather disrupted the landings. The landing beaches again came under French fire after daybreak. Patton landed at 08:00, and the beachheads were secured later in the day. The Americans surrounded the port of Casablanca by 10 November, and the city surrendered an hour before the final assault was due to take place. Casablanca was the principal French Atlantic naval base after German occupation of the European coast. The Naval Battle of Casablanca resulted from a sortie of French cruisers, destroyers, and submarines opposing the landings. A cruiser, six destroyers, and six submarines were destroyed by American gunfire and aircraft. The incomplete French battleship Jean Bart which was docked and immobile fired on the landing force with her one working gun turret until disabled by the 16-inch calibre American naval gunfire of USS Massachusetts, the first such heavy-calibre shells fired by the U.S. Navy anywhere in World War II. Many of her one ton shells didn't explode, linked to poor detonators, and aircraft bombers sank the Jean Bart. Two U.S. destroyers were damaged.
At Safi, the objective being capturing the port facilities to land the Western Task Force's medium tanks, the landings were mostly successful.[30] The landings were begun without covering fire, in the hope that the French would not resist at all. However, once French coastal batteries opened fire, Allied warships returned fire. By the time the 3rd Battalion, 67th Armored Regiment arrived, French snipers had pinned the assault troops (most of whom were in combat for the first time) on Safi's beaches. Most of the landings occurred behind schedule. Carrier aircraft destroyed a French truck convoy bringing reinforcements to the beach defenses. Safi surrendered on the afternoon of 8 November. By 10 November, the remaining defenders were pinned down, and the bulk of Harmon's forces raced to join the siege of Casablanca.
At Port-Lyautey, the landing troops were uncertain of their position, and the second wave was delayed. This gave the French defenders time to organize resistance, and the remaining landings were conducted under artillery bombardment. A former French pilot of the port on board a US destroyer led her up the shallow river to take over the artillery battery, clearing the way to the air-base. With the assistance of carrier air support, the troops pushed ahead, and the objectives were captured.
Oran[edit]
 USS Lakehurst (formerly Seatrain New Jersey), after discharging medium tanks at Safi, Morocco.
The Center Task Force was split between three beaches, two west of Oran and one east. Landings at the westernmost beach were delayed because of a French convoy which appeared while the minesweepers were clearing a path. Some delay and confusion, and damage to landing ships, was caused by the unexpected shallowness of water and sandbars; although periscope observations had been carried out, no reconnaissance parties had landed on the beaches to determine the local maritime conditions. This helped inform subsequent amphibious assaults such as Operation Overlord in which considerable weight was given to pre-invasion reconnaissance.
 American troops on board a Landing Craft Assault heading into Oran, Algeria, November 1942
The U.S. 1st Ranger Battalion landed east of Oran and quickly captured the shore battery at Arzew. An attempt was made to land U.S. infantry at the harbour directly, in order to quickly prevent destruction of the port facilities and scuttling of ships. Operation Reservist failed, as the two Banff-class sloops were destroyed by crossfire from the French vessels there. The Vichy French naval fleet broke from the harbor and attacked the Allied invasion fleet but its ships were all sunk or driven ashore.[31] The commander of Reservist, Captain Frederick Thornton Peters, was awarded the Victoria Cross for valour in pushing the attack through Oran harbour in the face of point blank fire.[b][32] French batteries and the invasion fleet exchanged fire throughout 8 9 November, with French troops defending Oran and the surrounding area stubbornly; bombardment by the British battleships brought about Oran's surrender on 10 November.
Airborne landings[edit]
Torch was the first major airborne assault carried out by the United States. The 2nd Battalion, 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment, aboard 39 C-47 Dakotas, flew all the way from Cornwall in England, over Spain, to drop near Oran and capture airfields at Tafraoui and La S nia, respectively 15 miles (24 km) and 5 miles (8 km) south of Oran.[33] The operation was marked by communicational and navigational problems owing to the anti-aircraft and beacon ship HMS Alynbank broadcasting on the wrong frequency.[34] Poor weather over Spain and the extreme range caused the formation to scatter and forced 30 of the 37 air transports to land in the dry salt lake to the west of the objective.[35] Of the other aircraft, one pilot became disoriented and landed his plane in Gibraltar. Two others landed in French Morocco and three in Spanish Morocco, where another Dakota dropped its paratroopers by mistake. A total of 67 American troops were interned by Franco's forces until February 1943. Tafraoui and La S nia were eventually captured but the role played by the airborne forces in Operation Torch was minimal.[34][36]
Algiers[edit]
For other battles in the same place, see Battle of Algiers.
Resistance and coup[edit]
As agreed at Cherchell, in the early hours of 8 November, the 400 mainly Jewish French Resistance fighters of the G o Gras Group staged a coup in the city of Algiers.[37] Starting at midnight, the force under the command of Henri d'Astier de la Vigerie and Jos  Aboulker seized key targets, including the telephone exchange, radio station, governor's house and the headquarters of the 19th Corps.
Robert Murphy took some men and then drove to the residence of General Alphonse Juin, the senior French Army officer in North Africa. While they surrounded his house (making Juin a hostage) Murphy attempted to persuade him to side with the Allies. Juin was treated to a surprise: Admiral Fran ois Darlan the commander of all French forces was also in Algiers on a private visit. Juin insisted on contacting Darlan and Murphy was unable to persuade either to side with the Allies. In the early morning, the local Gendarmerie arrived and released Juin and Darlan.
Invasion[edit]
 American soldiers land near Algiers. The soldier at the dune line is carrying a flag because it was hoped the French would be less likely to fire on Americans.
On 8 November 1942, the invasion commenced with landings on three beaches two west of Algiers and one east. The landing forces were under the overall command of Major-General Charles W. Ryder, commanding general of the U.S. 34th Infantry Division. The 11th Brigade Group from the British 78th Infantry Division landed on the right hand beach; the US 168th Regimental Combat Team, from the 34th Infantry Division, supported by 6 Commando and most of 1 Commando, landed on the middle beach; and the US 39th Regimental Combat Team, from the US 9th Infantry Division, supported by the remaining 5 troops from 1 Commando, landed on the left hand beach. The 36th Brigade Group from the British 78th Infantry Division stood by in floating reserve.[38] Though some landings went to the wrong beaches, this was immaterial because of the lack of French opposition. All the coastal batteries had been neutralized by the French Resistance and one French commander defected to the Allies. The only fighting took place in the port of Algiers, where in Operation Terminal, two British destroyers attempted to land a party of US Army Rangers directly onto the dock, to prevent the French destroying the port facilities and scuttling their ships. Heavy artillery fire prevented one destroyer from landing but the other was able to disembark 250 Rangers before it too was driven back to sea.[31] The US troops pushed quickly inland and General Juin surrendered the city to the Allies at 18:00.
Aftermath[edit]
Political results[edit]
 A plaque commemorating Operation Torch at the American War Memorial in Gibraltar.
See also: Fran ois Darlan  Darlan's deal in North Africa
It quickly became clear that Giraud lacked the authority to take command of the French forces. He preferred to wait in Gibraltar for the results of the landing. However, Darlan in Algiers had such authority. Eisenhower, with the support of Roosevelt and Churchill, made an agreement with Darlan, recognizing him as French "High Commissioner" in North Africa. In return, Darlan ordered all French forces in North Africa to cease resistance to the Allies and to cooperate instead. The deal was made on 10 November, and French resistance ceased almost at once. The French troops in North Africa who were not already captured submitted to and eventually joined the Allied forces.[39] Men from French North Africa would see much combat under the Allied banner as part of the French Expeditionary Corps (consisting of 112,000 troops in April 1944) in the Italian campaign, where Maghrebis (mostly Moroccans) made up over 60% of the unit's soldiers.[40]
When Adolf Hitler learned of Darlan's deal with the Allies, he immediately ordered the occupation of Vichy France and sent Wehrmacht troops to Tunisia. 
The American press protested, immediately dubbing it the "Darlan Deal", pointing out that Roosevelt had made a brazen bargain with Hitler's puppets in France. If a main goal of Torch had originally been the liberation of North Africa, hours later that had been jettisoned in favor of safe passage through North Africa. Giraud ended up taking over the post when Darlan was assassinated six weeks later.[41]
The Eisenhower/Darlan agreement meant that the officials appointed by the Vichy regime would remain in power in North Africa. No role was provided for Free France, which was supposed to be France's government-in-exile and had taken charge in other French colonies. That deeply offended Charles de Gaulle, the head of Free France. It also offended much of the British and American public, who regarded all Vichy French as Nazi collaborators and Darlan as one of the worst. Eisenhower insisted, however, that he had no real choice if his forces were to move on against the Axis in Tunisia, rather than fight the French in Algeria and Morocco.
Though de Gaulle had no official power in Vichy North Africa, much of its population now publicly declared Free French allegiance, putting pressure on Darlan. On 24 December, Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle, a French resistance fighter and anti-fascist monarchist, assassinated Darlan. (Bonnier de La Chapelle was arrested on the spot and executed two days later.)
Giraud succeeded Darlan but, like him, replaced few of the Vichy officials. He even ordered the arrest of the leaders of the Algiers coup of 8 November, with no opposition from Murphy.
The French North African government gradually became active in the Allied war effort. The limited French troops in Tunisia did not resist German troops arriving by air; Admiral Esteva, the commander, obeyed orders to that effect from Vichy. The Germans took the airfields there and brought in more troops. The French troops withdrew to the west and, within a few days, began to skirmish against the Germans, encouraged by small American and British detachments who had reached the area. While that was of minimal military effect, it committed the French to the Allied side. Later, all French forces were withdrawn from action and properly reequipped by the Allies.
Giraud supported that but also preferred to maintain the old Vichy administration in North Africa. Under pressure from the Allies and de Gaulle's supporters, the French r gime shifted, with Vichy officials gradually replaced and its more offensive decrees rescinded. In June 1943, Giraud and de Gaulle agreed to form the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN), with members from both the North African government and from de Gaulle's French National Committee. In November 1943, de Gaulle became head of the CFLN and de jure head of government of France and was recognized by the U.S. and Britain.
In another political outcome of Torch (and at Darlan's orders), the previously-Vichyite government of French West Africa joined the Allies.
Military consequences[edit]
Toulon[edit]
Main article: Scuttling of the French fleet in Toulon
One of the terms of the Second Armistice at Compi gne agreed to by the Germans was that the "zone libre" of southern France would remain free of German occupation and governed by Vichy. The lack of determined resistance by the Vichy French to the Allied invasions of North Africa and the new policies of de Gaulle in North Africa convinced the Germans that France could not be trusted. Moreover, the Anglo-American presence in French North Africa invalidated the only real rationale for not occupying the whole of France since it was the only practical means to deny the Allies use of the French colonies. The Germans and the Italians immediately occupied southern France, and the German Army moved to seize the French fleet in the port of Toulon from 10 November. The naval strength of the Axis in the Mediterranean would have been greatly increased if the Germans had succeeded in seizing the French ships, but every important ship was scuttled at dock by the French Navy before the Germans could take them.
Tunisia[edit]
Main articles: Tunisia Campaign and Run for Tunis
 Italian prisoners of war in Tunisia
After the German and Italian occupation of Vichy France and their failed attempt to capture the French fleet at Toulon (Operation Lila), the French Arm e d'Afrique sided with the Allies, providing a third corps (XIX Corps) for Anderson. Elsewhere, French warships, such as the battleship Richelieu, rejoined the Allies.
On 9 November, Axis forces started to build up in French Tunisia, unopposed by the local French forces under General Barr . Wracked with indecision, Barr  moved his troops into the hills and formed a defensive line from Teboursouk through Medjez el Bab and ordered that anyone trying to pass through the line would be shot. On 19 November, the German commander, Walter Nehring, demanded passage for his troops across the bridge at Medjez and was refused. The Germans attacked the poorly-equipped French units twice and were driven back. The French had suffered many casualties and lacking artillery and armour, Barr  was forced to withdraw.[42]
After consolidating in Algeria, the Allies began the Tunisia Campaign. Elements of the First Army (Lieutenant-General Kenneth Anderson), came to within 40 mi (64 km) of Tunis before a counterattack at Djedeida thrust them back. In January 1943, German and Italian troops under Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel, retreating westward from Libya, reached Tunisia.
 Winston Churchill salutes allied troops in the Roman amphitheatre at Carthage, during a visit to troops near Tunis, June 1943
The Eighth Army (Lieutenant-General Bernard Montgomery) advancing from the east, stopped around Tripoli while the port was repaired to disembark reinforcements and build up the Allied advantage. In the west, the forces of the First Army came under attack at the end of January, were forced back from the Fa d Pass and suffered a reversal at the Battle of Sidi Bou Zid on 14 15 February. Axis forces pushed on to Sbeitla and then fought the Battle of Kasserine Pass on 19 February, where the US II Corps retreated in disarray until Allied reinforcements halted the Axis advance on 22 February. Fredendall was sacked and replaced by George Patton.
General Sir Harold Alexander arrived in Tunisia in late February to take charge of the new 18th Army Group headquarters, which had been created to command the Eighth Army and the Allied forces already fighting in Tunisia. The Axis forces attacked eastward at the Battle of Medenine on 6 March but were easily repulsed by the Eighth Army. Rommel advised Hitler to allow a full retreat to a defensible line but was denied and on 9 March, Rommel left Tunisia to be replaced by J rgen von Arnim, who had to spread his forces over 100 mi (160 km) of northern Tunisia.
The setbacks at Kasserine forced the Allies to consolidate their forces, develop their lines of communication and administration before another offensive. The First and Eighth Armies attacked again in April. Hard fighting followed but the Allies cut off the Germans and Italians from support by naval and air forces between Tunisia and Sicily. On 6 May, as the culmination of Operation Vulcan, the British took Tunis and American forces reached Bizerte. By 13 May, the Axis forces in Tunisia had surrendered, opening the way for the Allied invasion of Sicily in July.
Later influence[edit]
Despite Operation Torch's role in the war and logistical success, it has been largely overlooked in many popular histories of the war and in general cultural influence.[43] The Economist speculated that this was because French forces were the initial enemies of the landing, making for a difficult fit into the war's overall narrative in general histories.[43]
The operation was America's first armed deployment in the Arab world since the Barbary Wars and, according to The Economist, laid the foundations for America's postwar Middle East policy.[43]
Orders of battle[edit]
Western Task Force   Morocco[edit]
Ground and naval commanders for Western Task ForceMaj. Gen. George S. Patton, USA and Rear Adm. H. Kent Hewitt, USN aboard CA Augusta
 A half track and anti-tank gun are loaded onto a landing craft during Operation Torch.
 British sailors and British and American soldiers on the beach near Algiers.
Vice Admiral H. Kent Hewitt, USN[44]
 US I Armored Corps
Major General George S. Patton, USA
Northern Attack Group (Mehedia)
Brig. Gen. Lucian K. Truscott (9,099 officers and enlisted)
60th Infantry Regiment (Reinforced) of 9th Infantry Division
1st Battalion of 66th Armored Regiment of 2nd Armored Division
1st Battalion of 540th Engineers
Center Attack Group (Fedhala)
Maj. Gen. J. W. Anderson (18,783 officers and enlisted)
3rd Infantry Division
7th Infantry Regiment (Reinforced)
15th Infantry Regiment (Reinforced)
30th Infantry Regiment (Reinforced)
Southern Attack Group (Safi)
Maj. Gen. Ernest N. Harmon (6,423 officers and enlisted)
47th Regimental Combat Team of 9th Infantry Division
3rd and elements of 2nd Battalion of 67th Armored Regiment of 2nd Armored Division
 French Army in Morocco
Fez Division (Maj. Gen. Maurice-Marie Salbert)
4th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
5th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
11th Algerian Rifle Regiment
1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment
Mekn s Division (Maj. Gen. Andre-Marie-Fran ois Dody)
7th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
8th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
3rd Moroccan Spahis Regiment
Casablanca Division (Brig. Gen. Antoine B thouart)
1st Moroccan Rifle Regiment
6th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
Colonial Moroccan Infantry Regiment
1st Hunters of Africa Regiment
Marrakech Division (Brig. Gen. Henry Jules Jean Maurice Martin)
2nd Moroccan Rifle Regiment
2nd Foreign infantry Regiment
4th Moroccan Spahis Regiment
Central Task Force   Oran[edit]
Ground and naval commanders for Central Task ForceMaj. Gen. Lloyd R. Fredendall, USACommodore Thomas Hope Troubridge, RN
 A Royal Air Force Spitfire that suffered landing gear failure upon landing near B ne, Algeria.
Commodore Thomas Hope Troubridge, RN[45]
 US II Corps
Major General Lloyd R. Fredendall, USA
Approx. 39,000 officers and enlisted
1st Infantry "Big Red One" Division (Maj. Gen. Terry Allen)
16th Infantry Regiment
18th Infantry Regiment
26th Infantry Regiment
1st Armored Division (Maj. Gen. Orlando Ward)
Combat Command B
6th Armored Infantry Regiment
1st Ranger Battalion
 French Army in Algeria
Algiers Division (Maj. Gen. Charles Mast)
1st Algerian Rifle Regiment
9th Algerian Rifle Regiment
3rd Zouaves Regiment
2nd Hunters of Africa Regiment
1st Algerian Spahis Regiment
Oran Division (Maj. Gen. Robert Boissau)
2nd Algerian Rifle Regiment
6th Algerian Rifle Regiment
15th Senegalese Rifle Regiment
1st Foreign Regiment
Moroccan Division
7th Moroccan Rifle Regiment
3rd Algerian Rifle Regiment
4th Tunisian Rifle Regiment
3rd Foreign Rifle Regiment
Eastern Task Force   Algiers[edit]
Ground and naval commanders for Eastern Task ForceMaj. Gen. Charles W. Ryder, USARear Adm. Sir Harold M. Burrough, RN
Rear Admiral Sir Harold Burrough, RN[46]
Allied Landing Forces
Major General Charles W. Ryder, USA[c]
Approx. 33,000 officers and enlisted
 British (approx. 23,000)
78th Infantry Division (Maj. Gen. Vyvyan Evelegh)
11th Infantry Brigade
36th Infantry Brigade
No. 1 Commando
No. 6 Commando
5 squadrons of RAF Regiment
 United States (approx. 10,000)
9th Infantry Division (Maj. Gen. Manton S. Eddy)
39th Infantry Regiment
34th Infantry Division (Maj. Gen. Charles W. Ryder)
135th Infantry Regiment
168th Infantry Regiment
See also[edit]
List of equipment of the United States Army during World War II
World War II portalUnited States portal
List of British military equipment of World War II
List of French military equipment of World War II
List of World War II Battles
Mieczys aw Zygfryd S owikowski
RMS Mooltan Troopship
North African campaign timeline
Operation Flagpole (World War II)
Operation Husky
Operation Kingpin (World War II)
17th Armored Engineer Battalion
Marching Regiment of the Foreign Legion
Atlantic Theater aircraft carrier operations during World War II#Allied Invasion of North Africa (1942)
References[edit]
Notes
^ also known as the "Free French", later, per de Gaulle's appellation, the "Fighting French").
^ The award was posthumously as he was killed in an aircraft crash returning to the UK
^ CG, US 34th Infantry Division
Reflist
^ Op ration Torch   Les d barquements alli s en Afrique du Nord
^ I sommergibili dell'Asse e l'Operazione Torch.
^ Atkinson 2002, p. 159.
^ Granito and Emo. Navi militari perdute, Italian Navy Historical Branch, pp. 61 62.
^ Walker, David A. (1987). "OSS and Operation Torch". Journal of Contemporary History. 22 (4): 667 79. doi:10.1177/002200948702200406. ISSN 0022-0094. JSTOR 260815. S2CID 159522532. Archived from the original on 22 October 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2020.
^ Willmott 1984.
^ Watson 2007, p. 50.
^ ""The Stamford Historical Society Presents: Operation Torch and the Invasion of North Africa"". Archived from the original on 4 September 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2015.
^ Playfair et al. 2004, pp. 126, 141 42.
^ Roberts, Andrew (2009). Masters and Commanders: The Military Geniuses Who Led the West to Victory in World War II (1 ed.). London: Penguin Books. pp. 82 84. ISBN 978-0-141-02926-9   via Archive Foundation.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)
^ Husen (1999).  Zabecki, David T.; Schuster, Carl O.; Rose, Paul J.; Van, William H. (eds.). World War II in Europe : an encyclopedia. Garland Pub. p. 1270. ISBN 9780824070298. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2020.
^ Mackenzie, S.P. (2014). The Second World War in Europe: Second Edition. Routledge. pp. 54 55. ISBN 978-1317864714. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2020.
^ Ward, Geoffrey C.; Burns, Ken (2014). "The Common Cause: 1939 1944". The Roosevelts: An Intimate History. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 402. ISBN 978-0385353069. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2020.
^ Routledge Handbook of US Military and Diplomatic History. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis. 2013. p. 135. ISBN 9781135071028.
^ a b c d e f United States Military Academy. Department of Military Art and Engineering (1947). The War in North Africa Part 2   The Allied Invasion. West Point, NY: Department of Military Art and Engineering, United States Military Academy. pp. 4 5. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2021.
^ Eisenhower 1948, pp. 88 89.
^ Roberts, Andrew (2009). Masters and Commanders: The Military Geniuses Who Led the West to Victory in World War II (1 ed.). London: Penguin Books. pp. 84 86. ISBN 978-0-141-02926-9   via Archive Foundation.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)
^ Smith, Jean Edward (2012). Eisenhower in War and Peace. New York: Random House. pp. 214 15. ISBN 9780679644293.
^ Eisenhower 1948, p. 90.
^ Stirling, Tessa;  et al. (2005). Intelligence Co-operation between Poland and Great Britain during World War II. Vol. I: The Report of the Anglo-Polish Historical Committee. London: Vallentine Mitchell.
^ Churchill 1951b, p. 643.
^ Slowikowski, Rygor (1988). In the Secret Service: The Lightning of the Torch. London: The Windrush Press. p. 285.
^ Churchill 1951a, p. 544.
^ Groom 2006, p. 354.
^ Atkinson 2002, p. 66.
^ Hague 2000, pp. 179 80.
^ a b Mangold, Peter (2012). Britain and the Defeated French: From Occupation to Liberation, 1940 1944. London: I.B. Tauris. p. 159.
^ Brown 1968, p. 93.
^ Edwards 1999, p. 115.
^ Howe 1993, pp. 97, 102.
^ a b Rohwer & Hummelchen 1992, p. 175
^ "Frederick Thornton Peters   the Canadian Virtual War Memorial   Veterans Affairs Canada". 20 February 2019.
^ Playfair et al. 2004, pp. 146 47, map 19.
^ a b Lane Herder, Brian (2017). Operation Torch 1942: The invasion of French North Africa. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 42. ISBN 9781472820556.
^ Playfair et al. 2004, p. 149.
^ Haskew, Michael E. (2017). The Airborne in World War II: An Illustrated History of America's. McMillan. p. 44. ISBN 9781250124470.
^ Documentary film presenting the dominant role of Jewish resistance fighters in Algiers
^ Playfair et al. 2004, pp. 126, 140 41, map 18.
^ Eisenhower 1948, pp. 99 105, 107 10.
^ Gaujac, Paul (2003). Le Corps exp ditionnaire fran ais en Italie (in French). Histoire et collections. p. 31.
^ Satloff, Robert (9 October 2017). "Operation Torch and the Birth of American Middle East Policy, 75 Years On". Washington D.C.: Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Retrieved 12 February 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Watson 2007, p. 60.
^ a b c R.B.S. (9 November 2017). "Remembering Operation Torch on its 75th anniversary". The Economist. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2017.
^ Morison 1947, pp. 36 39.
^ Morison 1947, p. 223.
^ Morison 1947, p. 190.
Bibliography[edit]
Allen, Bruce (2007) [1999]. Exit Rommel: The Tunisian Campaign, 1942 43. Stackpole Military History Series. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3381-6.
Anderson, Charles R. (1993). Algeria-French Morocco 8 November 1942   11 November 1942. WWII Campaigns. Washington: United States Army Center of Military History. ISBN 0-16-038105-3. CMH Pub 72-11. Archived from the original on 5 April 2009. Retrieved 9 June 2010.
Atkinson, Rick (2002). An Army at Dawn. Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-6288-2   via Archive Foundation.
Breuer, William B. (1985). Operation Torch: The Allied Gamble to Invade North Africa. New York: St.Martins Press.
Brown, J. D. (1968). Carrier Operations in World War II: The Royal Navy. London: Ian Allan.
Churchill, Winston (1951a). The Second World War, Vol 3: The Hinge of Fate.
Churchill, Winston Spencer (1951b). The Second World War, Vol 5: Closing the Ring. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Danan, Professeur Yves Maxime (2019). R publique Fran aise Capitale Alger, 1940 1944 Souvenirs. Paris: L'Harmattan.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1948). Crusade in Europe. London: William Heinemann. OCLC 559866864   via Archive Foundation.
Edwards, Bernard (1999). D nitz and the Wolf Packs. Brockhampton Press. ISBN 1-86019-927-5   via Archive Foundation.
Funk, Arthur L. (1974). The Politics of Torch. University Press of Kansas.
Groom, Winston (3 April 2006). 1942: The Year That Tried Men's Souls. New York: Grove Press. p. 354. ISBN 978-0-8021-4250-4.
Hague, Arnold (2000). The Allied Convoy System 1939 1945. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-55750-019-3.
Howe, George F. (1993) [1957]. North West Africa: Seizing the Initiative in the West. The United States Army in World War II. Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History. LCCN 57060021. CMH Pub 6-1. Archived from the original on 28 May 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2014.
Meyer, Leo J. (2000) [1960]. "Chapter 7: The Decision to Invade North Africa (Torch)".  In Roberts Greenfield, Kent (ed.). Command Decisions. United States Army Center of Military History. CMH Pub 70-7. Archived from the original on 30 December 2007. Retrieved 18 June 2010.
Morison, Samuel Eliot (1947). Operations in North African Waters. History of United States Naval Operations in World War II. Vol. II. Boston: Little, Brown and Co. ISBN 0-7858-1303-9.
Moses, Sam (November 2006). At All Costs; How a Crippled Ship and Two American Merchant Mariners Turned the Tide of World War II. Random House.
O'Hara, Vincent P. (2015). Torch: North African and the Allied Path to Victory. Annapolis: Naval Institute.
Playfair, Major-General I. S. O.; Molony, Brigadier C. J. C.; Flynn R.N., Captain F. C. & Gleave, Group Captain T. P. (2004) [1st HMSO 1966].  Butler, J. R. M. (ed.). The Mediterranean and Middle East: The Destruction of the Axis Forces in Africa. History of the Second World War United Kingdom Military Series. Vol. IV. Uckfield, UK: Naval & Military Press. ISBN 1-84574-068-8.
Rohwer, J.; Hummelchen, G. (1992). Chronology of the War at Sea 1939 1945. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-55750-105-X.
Watson, Bruce Allen (2007) [1999]. Exit Rommel: The Tunisian Campaign, 1942 43. Stackpole Military History Series. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3381-6. OCLC 40595324.
Willmott, H.P. (1984). June, 1944. Poole, Dorset: Blandford Press. ISBN 0-7137-1446-8   via Archive Foundation.
External links
The Decision to Invade North Africa (TORCH) Archived 15 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine part of Command Decisions Archived 30 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine a publication of the United States Army Center of Military History
Algeria-French Morocco Archived 5 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine a book in the U.S. Army Campaigns of World War II series of the United States Army Center of Military History
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Operation Torch.
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
US Army Campaigns of World War II Series/Algeria-French Morocco
A detailed history of 8 November 1942
Combined Ops
History and photos of the operations of the USS Ranger and its Air Group during Operation Torch
(North African Jewish Resistance to Nazis and the Holocaust)
The accord Franco-Am rican of Messelmoun (in French)
Royal Engineers Museum Royal Engineers and Second World War (Operation Torch)[dead link]
Report of the Commander-in-Chief Allied Forces to the Combined Chief of Staff on Operations in North Africa
Operation Torch: Allied Invasion of North Africa Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine article by Williamson Murray
Eisenhower's report on operation Torch
Operation TORCH Motion Pictures from the National Archives
Operation Torch
Operation Torch World War II
vte   Liberation of France
Belgium
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Forces
Army of Africa
Commando Kieffer
First Army
Cavalry Corps
3rd Army Corps
4th
5th
1st Armored
32nd Infantry
Francs-Tireurs et Partisans
Free French Forces
French Forces of the Interior
French Liberation Army
French Expeditionary Corps Divisions:
1st Free French
2nd Moroccan Infantry
3rd Algerian Infantry
4th Moroccan Mountain
Second Army
Leaders
Charles de Gaulle
Jean Moulin
Winston Churchill
Bernard Montgomery
Henri Giraud
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Raymond O. Barton
George Patton
Philippe Leclerc
Jean de Lattre de Tassigny
Philippe Kieffer
Administration
Empire Defense Council
French Civil and Military High Command
French National Committee
French Committee of National Liberation
Provisional Consultative Assembly
Provisional Government
FrenchcampaignNov 1940
Battle of Gabon
Jun 1941
Syria Lebanon campaign
Nov 1942
Operation Torch
Tunisian campaign
Battle of R union
Sept 1943
Liberation of Corsica
Jan 1944
Battle of Vercors
Battle of Gli res
March 1944
Liberation of Limousin
May 1944
Battle of Mont Mouchet
Jun 1944
Battle of Normandy
Battle of Carentan
Battle of Cherbourg
Battle of Caen
Liberation of Limousin
Tulle massacre
Liberation of Gu ret [fr]
Oradour-sur-Glane massacre
Maquis de Saint-Marcel
Maquis de Saffr 
Battle of Ushant
July 1944
Liberation of Saint-L 
Battle of Mont Gargan [fr]
Operation Cobra
Aug 1944
Battle for Brittany
Rennes
Saint-Malo
Liberation of Brest
Atlantic pockets:
Lorient
Saint-Nazaire
Lioran [fr]
 gletons [fr]
Battle of Port Cros
Battle of La Ciotat
Provence landings
Liberation of Toulon
Liberation of Marseille
Liberation of Paris
Maill  massacre
Liberation of Gu ret [fr]
Battle of Mont limar [fr]
Liberation of Nice [fr]
Sept 1944
Liberation of Nancy
Operation Astonia
Operation Undergo
Atlantic pockets:
La Rochelle
Pointe de Grave
Royan
Dunkirk
Battle of Arracourt
Battle of Meximieux [fr]
Nov 1944 -March 1945
Battle of Alsace
Liberation of Strasbourg
Colmar Pocket
Bitche [fr]
Apr 1945
Atlantic pockets:
Royan
Pointe de Grave
May 1945
Atlantic pockets:
Dunkirk
La Rochelle
Lorient
Saint-Nazaire
Aftermath
End of Vichy
1945 municipal elections
Advance to the Rhine
Invasion of Germany
End of World War II in Europe
Victory in Europe Day
Victory Day
Provisional Government
 puration l gale
 puration sauvage
Tripartisme
1946 legislative election
Fourth Republic
Trente Glorieuses
Trial of Philippe P tain
Klaus Barbie trial
WW II theatres:
Atlantic
Western Front
Eastern Front
Mediterranean and Middle East
Pacific
Sino Japanese
vteFrance topicsHistoryOverviews
History
Timeline
Military history
Language
Economic
Foreign relations
Journalism
Liberalism and radicalism in France
Regions
History of Brittany
History of Normandy
Ancient
Prehistory
Greek colonies
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Middle Ages
Visigothic Kingdom
Francia
West Francia
Middle Ages
Early Modern
Early modern era
House of Bourbon
Absolute monarchy
Ancien R gime
French Wars of Religion
Thirty Years' War
Peace of Westphalia
Second Hundred Years' War
Louis XIV
War of the Spanish Succession
Diplomatic Revolution of 1756
Seven Years' War
Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic era
First Republic
First Empire
Late Modern
Long nineteenth century
Kingdom of France
Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy
French Revolution of 1848
Second Republic
1851 French coup d' tat
Second Empire
Government of National Defense
Third Republic
Belle  poque
France in World War I
France in World War II
Vichy France
Free France
Liberation of France
Post-liberation 1944-1946
Contemporary
Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic
1900 to present
May 68
2005 French riots
2021 French labor protests
Geography
Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate change
Borders
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National parks
Rivers
World Heritage Sites
Politics
Constitutions
Elections
presidential
Foreign relations
Politics
Human rights
Intersex
LGBT
Judiciary
Law
history
enforcement
criminal law
Military
Parliament
Political parties
Economy
Agriculture
Automotive industry
Banking
Central bank
Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Science and technology
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport
Society
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
Homelessness
People
Poverty
Religion
secularism
Racism
Social class
Welfare
Culture
Anthem
Architecture
Art
Coat of arms
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural icons
Fashion
Flag
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre
Outline
Category
Portal
WikiProject
vteWorld War II
Outline
Military engagements
Battles
Operations
Leaders
Allied
Axis
Commanders
Casualties
Conferences
GeneralTopics
Air warfare of World War II
In Europe
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Declarations of war
Diplomacy
Governments in exile
Home front
Australian
United Kingdom
United States
Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
British contribution
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Naval history
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology
Allied cooperation
Mulberry harbour
Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II
Theaters
Asia and Pacific
China
South-East Asia
Pacific
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific
Indian Ocean
Europe
Western Front
Eastern Front
Mediterranean and Middle East
North Africa
East Africa
Italy
West Africa
Atlantic
timeline
Americas
Aftermath
Chinese Civil War
Cold War
Decolonization
Division of Korea
First Indochina War
Expulsion of Germans
Greek Civil War
Indonesian National Revolution
Keelhaul
Marshall Plan
Occupation of Germany
Occupation of Japan
Osoaviakhim
Paperclip
Soviet occupations
Baltic
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Territorial changes of Germany
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
United Nations
War crimes
Allied war crimes
Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes
German war crimes
forced labour
Wehrmacht war crimes
The Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Nuremberg trials
Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes
Nanjing Massacre
Unit 731
Prosecution
Croatian war crimes
Genocide of Serbs
Persecution of Jews
Romanian war crimes
Sexual violence
German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Ianjo
Rape of Manila
Marocchinate
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland
ParticipantsAllies
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria (from September 1944)
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
Finland (from September 1944)
France
Free France
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
Newfoundland
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania (from August 1944)
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
Tuva
United Kingdom
British Empire
United States
Puerto Rico
Yugoslavia
Axis
Albania protectorate
Bulgaria (until September 1944)
Wang Jingwei regime
Croatia
Finland (until September 1944)
Germany
Hungary
Free India
French Indochina
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines
Romania (until August 1944)
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France
Neutral powers
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Vatican City
Resistance
Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Dutch East Indies
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jews
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Qu c d n  ng
 ng minh H i
Vi t Minh
Yugoslavia
POWs
Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
German prisoners
Soviet Union
Azerbaijan
United States
United Kingdom
Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners
Soviet Union
Soviet prisoners
Finland
atrocities by Germans
Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
TimelinePrelude
Africa
Asia
Europe
1939
Poland
Phoney War
Battle of South Guangxi
Winter War
Atlantic
First Battle of Changsha
1939 1940 Winter Offensive
1940
German invasion of Denmark (1940)
Norwegian campaign
German invasion of Luxembourg
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Battle of Zaoyang Yichang
Battle of Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
Hundred Regiments Offensive
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass
1941
Battle of South Henan
Battle of South Shanxi
East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union
Summer War
Finland (Silver Fox)
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor
Hong Kong
Philippines
Second Battle of Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941 1942)
Greek famine of 1941 1944
1942
Burma
Third Battle of Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
 Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
St Nazaire
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch
Chinese famine of 1942 1943
1943
Tunisia
Battle of West Hubei
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
 Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy
Armistice of Cassibile
Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde
Bengal famine of 1943
1944
Monte Cassino / Anzio
Narva
Korsun Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Philippines (1944 1945)
Leyte
Syrmian Front
Hungary
Budapest
Burma (1944 1945)
Ardennes
Bodenplatte
Dutch famine of 1944 1945
1945
Vistula Oder
Manila
Iwo Jima
Project Hula
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Guangxi
West Hunan
Italy (Spring 1945)
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Surrender of Germany
document
Borneo
Taipei
Naval bombardment of Japan
Manchuria
Atomic bombings
Debate
South Sakhalin
Kuril Islands
Shumshu
Vietnamese famine of 1945
Surrender of Japan
Potsdam Declaration
document
End of World War II in Asia
 World War II portal
 World portal
Bibliography
Category
Portal
vteDwight D. Eisenhower
34th President of the United States (1953 1961)
Supreme Allied Commander Europe (1951 1952)
Chief of Staff of the Army (1945 1948)
Commander, Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (1943 1945)
Militarycareer
Military career
1919 Motor Transport Corps convoy
Louisiana Maneuvers
Operation Torch
European Theater of Operations
Allied invasion of Sicily
June 6, 1944, order of the day
People of Western Europe speech
Normandy landings
Operation Veritable
Berlin Declaration
Military Governor, U.S. Occupation Zone in Germany
Disarmed Enemy Forces
European Advisory Commission
Supreme Commander of NATO, 1951-1952
Presidency
Presidency
Foreign policy
Transition
1953 inauguration
1957 inauguration
Korean War Armistice
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
"Chance for Peace" speech
"Atoms for Peace" speech
Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act of 1954
Air Pollution Control Act of 1955
Bank Holding Company Act
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Cold War
Domino theory
Khrushchev, Eisenhower and De-Stalinization
New Look policy
1955 Geneva Summit
1960 U-2 incident
DARPA
National Defense Education Act
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956
Interstate Highway System
National Aeronautics and Space Act
NASA
Suez Crisis
Eisenhower Doctrine
Little Rock Nine intervention
Operation 40
Farewell address / "Military industrial complex"
Office of Food for Peace
President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
People to People Student Ambassador Program
State of the Union Address (1955
1956
1960)
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Books
Crusade in Europe (1948)
Elections
Draft Eisenhower movement
Republican Party presidential primaries (1948
1952
1956)
Republican National Convention (1952
1956)
United States Presidential election (1952
1956)
Legacy
Bibliography
Birthplace
Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, gravesite
Boyhood home
Eisenhower National Historic Site
Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial
Eisenhower Executive Office Building
Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport
Eisenhower Fellowships
Eisenhower Institute
Eisenhower Monument
Eisenhower dollar
commemorative
U.S. Postage stamps
Dwight D. Eisenhower Army Medical Center
Eisenhower Medical Center
Eisenhower Trophy
Eisenhower Golf Club
Eisenhower Theater
Statue of Dwight D. Eisenhower (U.S. Capitol)
Mount Eisenhower
Places named for Eisenhower
Other tributes and memorials
Popularculture
Eisenhower jacket
Eisenhower Tree
Crusade in Europe (1949 television series)
Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries)
Ike (1979 miniseries)
Ike: Countdown to D-Day (2004 film)
Pressure (2014 play)
Family
 Mary "Mamie" Geneva Doud Eisenhower (wife)
John Eisenhower (son)
David Eisenhower (grandson)
Anne Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Susan Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Mary Jean Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Jennie Eisenhower (great-granddaughter)
Ida Stover Eisenhower (mother)
Arthur Eisenhower (brother)
Edgar N. Eisenhower (brother)
Roy Eisenhower (brother)
Earl D. Eisenhower (brother)
Milton S. Eisenhower (brother)
Related
Eisenhower baseball controversy
Camp David
"And I don't care what it is"
Atoms for Peace Award
Introduction to Outer Space
Eddie Slovik
Kay Summersby
  Harry S. Truman
John F. Kennedy  
 Category
Authority control National
Germany
Israel
United States
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Operation_Torch&oldid=1149524505"