International organization of states in the Americas
Organization of American States
3 other official names
Organisation des  tats am ricains (French)
Organiza o dos Estados Americanos (Portuguese)
Organizaci n de los Estados Americanos (Spanish)
Flag
Emblem
Motto: "Democracy for peace, security and development" Member states Former member states Disputed member statesHeadquarters17th Street and Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, D.C., U.S.38 53 34 N 77 02 25 W  /  38.8929138 N 77.0403734 W  / 38.8929138; -77.0403734  (OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.)Coordinates: 38 53 34 N 77 02 25 W  /  38.8929138 N 77.0403734 W  / 38.8929138; -77.0403734  (OAS headquarters, Washington, D.C.)Official languagesEnglishFrench PortugueseSpanishMember states
35 states
Antigua and BarbudaArgentinaBahamasBarbadosBelizeBoliviaBrazilCanadaChileColombiaCosta RicaCubaDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEl SalvadorGrenadaGuatemalaGuyanaHaitiHondurasJamaicaMexicoNicaragua[Note 1]PanamaParaguayPeruSaint Kitts and NevisSaint LuciaSaint Vincent and the GrenadinesSurinameTrinidad and TobagoUnited StatesUruguayVenezuela[Note 2]
Leaders Secretary General Luis Almagro Assistant Secretary General Nestor Mendez
Establishment Charter 30 April 1948
Area Total40,275,678 km2 (15,550,526 sq mi)Population 2008 estimate980,457,921 Density24/km2 (62.2/sq mi)Time zoneUTC 10 to +0Websitewww.oas.org/en/ 
 A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational organisations in the Americas.v   d   e 
The Organization of American States (OAS; Spanish: Organizaci n de los Estados Americanos; Portuguese: Organiza o dos Estados Americanos; French: Organisation des  tats am ricains; OEA) is an international organization that was founded on 30 April 1948 for the purposes of solidarity and co-operation among its member states within the Americas. Headquartered in the United States capital, Washington, D.C., the OAS has 35 members, which are independent states in the Americas.[2] Since the 1990s, the organization has focused on election monitoring. The secretary general of the OAS is Uruguayan Luis Almagro.[3]
History[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Organization of American States" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (April 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 The Pan American Union Building shortly after its construction in Washington, D. C., 1910
Background[edit]
The notion of an international union in the New World was first put forward during the liberation of the Americas by Jos  de San Mart n and Sim n Bol var[4] who, at the 1826 Congress of Panama (still being part of Colombia), proposed creating a league of American republics, with a common military, a mutual defense pact, and a supranational parliamentary assembly. This meeting was attended by representatives of Gran Colombia (comprising the modern-day countries of Colombia, Ecuador, Panama and Venezuela), Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, The United Provinces of Central America, and Mexico but the grandly titled "Treaty of Union, League, and Perpetual Confederation" was ultimately ratified only by Gran Colombia. Bol var's dream soon floundered with civil war in Gran Colombia, the disintegration of Central America, and the emergence of national rather than New World outlooks in the newly independent American republics. Bol var's dream of inter-American unity was meant to unify Hispanic American nations against external powers.
 Logo in 1909 publication[5]
The pursuit of regional solidarity and cooperation again came to the forefront in 1889 1890, at the First International Conference of American States. Gathered together in Washington, D.C., 18 nations resolved to found the International Union of American Republics, served by a permanent secretariat called the Commercial Bureau of the American Republics (renamed the International Commercial Bureau at the Second International Conference in 1901 1902). These two bodies, in existence as of 14 April 1890, represent the point of inception to which the OAS and its General Secretariat trace their origins.
At the fourth International Conference of American States (Buenos Aires, 1910), the name of the organization was changed to the Union of American Republics and the Bureau became the Pan American Union. The Pan American Union Building was constructed in 1910, on Constitution Avenue, Northwest, Washington, D.C.
Foundation[edit]
 Pan American Union headquarters building in Washington, D.C., 1943.
In the mid-1930s, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt organized an inter-American conference in Buenos Aires. One of the items at the conference was a "League of Nations of the Americas", an idea proposed by Colombia, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic.[6] At the subsequent Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, 21 nations pledged to remain neutral in the event of a conflict between any two members.[7] The experience of World War II convinced hemispheric governments that unilateral action could not ensure the territorial integrity of the American nations in the event of external aggression. To meet the challenges of global conflict in the postwar world and to contain conflicts within the hemisphere, they adopted a system of collective security, the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) signed in 1947 in Rio de Janeiro.
The ninth International Conference of American States was held in Bogot  between March and May 1948 and led by United States Secretary of State George Marshall, a meeting which led to a pledge by members to fight communism in the western hemisphere.[8] This was the event that saw the birth of the OAS as it stands today, with the signature by 21 American countries of the Charter of the Organization of American States on 30 April 1948 (in effect since December 1951). The meeting also adopted the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, the world's first general human rights instrument.
The transition from the Pan American Union to OAS would have been smooth if it had not been for the assassination of Colombian leader Jorge Eli cer Gait n. The Director General of the former, Alberto Lleras Camargo, became the Organization's first Secretary General. The current Secretary General is former Uruguayan minister of foreign affairs Luis Almagro.
Modern day[edit]
The OAS conducted an audit of the 2019 Bolivian general election, which opposition supporters argued was fraudulent. The OAS report contended that the results were marred by "clear manipulation" and significant irregularities leading to the 2019 Bolivian political crisis. Bolivian president Evo Morales resigned soon after, having lost the confidence of the country's military in what he described as a coup.[9] Some media outlets debated whether it should be referred to as a coup.[10] On 21 December, the Technical Mission of Electoral Experts sent by the European Union published a 67-page report made similar observations and conclusions to that of the OAS. They noted that "there were minutes with an unusually high number of null votes, blank votes and a hundred percent participation of voters in a series of polling stations" and highlighted the general failure of the TSE to declare these irregularities.[11][12] Studies commissioned by the American left-leaning[13][14][15] think tank CEPR, argued that the OAS report's statistical analysis was inaccurate and unreliable.[16] The author of the OAS's vote return analysis stated that the CEPR's explanation of the results was implausible.[17] The organization has been criticized by Mexico[18] and the CEPR[19][better source needed] for their perception of interference into the internal affairs of Bolivia.[20] The OAS observed the subsequent 2020 Bolivian general election stating there was no evidence of fraud.[21] The New York Times concluded that there was some fraud, but that it was unclear how much or if it was sufficient to change the result of the election, and suggested the initial analysis by the OAS was flawed.[22]
 Seal  with the official name in English.
In April 2022, Nicaragua reported the completion of its withdrawal process from the OAS initiated in November 2021. The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023.[23]
Milestones[edit]
Significant milestones in the history of the OAS since the signing of the Charter have included the following:
1959: Inter-American Commission on Human Rights created.
1959: Inter-American Development Bank created.
1960: First application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance against the regime of Rafael Trujillo in Dominican Republic
1961: Charter of Punta del Este signed, launching the Alliance for Progress.
1962: OAS suspends Cuba.
1969: American Convention on Human Rights signed (in force since 1978).
1970: OAS General Assembly established as the Organization's supreme decision-making body.
1979: Inter-American Court of Human Rights created.
1991: Adoption of Resolution 1080, which requires the Secretary General to convene the Permanent Council within ten days of a coup d' tat in any member country.
1994: First Summit of the Americas (Miami), which resolved to establish a Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005.
2001: Inter-American Democratic Charter adopted.
2009: OAS revokes 1962 suspension of Cuba.
2009: OAS suspends Honduras due to the coup which ousted president Manuel Zelaya.
2010: The OAS intervened in the Haiti 2010 presidential election, demanding that the third-place candidate be permitted to participate in a runoff election with the first-place candidate,[24] using flawed statistics to suggest the second place showing of the left-wing candidate, Jude C lestin, was invalid.[25]
2011: OAS lifts the suspension of Honduras with the return of Manuel Zelaya from exile.
2017: Venezuela announces it will begin the process to leave the OAS in response to what it alleged was OAS interference in Venezuela's political crisis.
2019: During the Venezuelan presidential crisis, the President of the National Assembly Juan Guaid , recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, expressed his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.[26] the OAS voted to recognize Gustavo Tarre Brice o as Venezuela's delegate in April, the National Assembly's representative to the OAS.[27][28][29]
2020: OAS concluded that the 2019 Bolivian general election was fraudulent.[30][31][32]
Goals and purpose[edit]
In the words of Article 1 of the Charter, the goal of the member nations in creating the OAS was "to achieve an order of peace and justice, to promote their solidarity, to strengthen their collaboration, and to defend their sovereignty, their territorial integrity, and their independence." Article 2 then defines eight essential purposes:
To strengthen the peace and security of the continent.
To promote and consolidate representative democracy, with due respect for the principle of non-intervention.
To prevent possible causes of difficulties and to ensure the pacific settlement of disputes that may arise among the member states.
To provide for common action on the part of those states in the event of aggression.
To seek the solution of political, judicial, and economic problems that may arise among them.
To promote, by cooperative action, their economic, social, and cultural development.
To eradicate extreme poverty, which constitutes an obstacle to the full democratic development of the peoples of the hemisphere.
To achieve an effective limitation of conventional weapons that will make it possible to devote the largest amount of resources to the economic and social development of the member states.
Over the course of the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War, the return to democracy in Latin America, and the thrust toward globalization, the OAS made major efforts to reinvent itself to fit the new context. Its stated priorities now include the following:
Strengthening democracy: Between 1962 and 2002, the Organization sent multinational observation missions to oversee free and fair elections in the member states on more than 100 occasions. The OAS also works to strengthen national and local government and electoral agencies, to promote democratic practices and values, and to help countries detect and defuse official corruption.
Working for peace: Special OAS missions have supported peace processes in Nicaragua, Suriname, Haiti, and Guatemala. The Organization has played a leading part in the removal of landmines deployed in member states and it has led negotiations to resolve the continents' remaining border disputes (Guatemala/Belize; Peru/Ecuador). Work is also underway on the construction of a common inter-American counter-terrorism front.
Defending human rights: The agencies of the inter-American human rights system provide a venue for the denunciation and resolution of human rights violations in individual cases. They also monitor and report on the general human rights situation in the member states.
Fostering free trade: The OAS is one of the three agencies currently engaged in drafting a treaty aiming to establish an inter-continental free trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego.
Fighting the drugs trade: The Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission was established in 1986 to coordinate efforts and crossborder cooperation in this area.
Promoting sustainable development: The goal of the OAS's Inter-American Council for Integral Development is to promote economic development and combating poverty. OAS technical cooperation programs address such areas as river basin management, the conservation of biodiversity, preservation of cultural diversity, planning for global climate change, sustainable tourism, and natural disaster mitigation.
Organizational structure[edit]
 US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks at the OAS Permanent Council in January 2019.
The Organization of American States is composed of an Organization of American States General Secretariat, the Permanent Council, the Inter-American Council for Integral Development, and a number of committees.
The General Secretariat of the Organization of American States consists of six secretariats.
Secretariat for Political Affairs
Executive Secretariat for Integral Development
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
Secretariat for Administration and Finance
Secretariat for Legal Affairs
Secretariat for External Relations
The various committees of the Organization of American States include:
The Committee on Juridical and Political Affairs
The Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Affairs
The Committee on Hemispheric Security
The Committee on Inter-American Summits Management and Civil Society Participation in OAS Activities
The various commissions of the Organization of American States include: 
Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM)
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (CIDH)
Inter-American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL)
Funding[edit]
The OAS has two funds, one for the General Secretariat, and one for specific programs and initiatives. The General Assembly asks for contributions from each member country based on its capacity to pay. In 2018 the General Secretariat's budget was $85 million of which the US contributed $50 million. In 2017 the US contributed $17 million to the fund for specific programmes which was almost a third of the total contributions for that year.[33]
General Assembly[edit]
Main article: General Assembly of the Organization of American States
 A session of the OAS's thirty-fifth General Assembly in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, United States, June 2005
The General Assembly is the supreme decision-making body of OAS. It convenes once every year in a regular session. In special circumstances, and with the approval of two-thirds of the member states, the Permanent Council can convene special sessions.
The Organization's member states take turns hosting the General Assembly on a rotating basis. The states are represented at its sessions by their chosen delegates: generally, their ministers of foreign affairs, or their appointed deputies. Each state has one vote, and most matters except for those for which the Charter or the General Assembly's own rules of procedure specifically require a two-thirds majority are settled by a simple majority vote.
The General Assembly's powers include setting the OAS's general course and policies by means of resolutions and declarations; approving its budget and determining the contributions payable by the member states; approving the reports and previous year's actions of the OAS's specialized agencies; and electing members to serve on those agencies.
Membership and adhesions[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see Member states of the Organization of American States.
Upon its foundation in 1948, the OAS had 21 members, most of them in Latin America:
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras[Note 3]
Mexico
Nicaragua[Note 1][needs update]
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela[Note 2]
The later expansion of the OAS included Canada and the newly independent nations of the Caribbean. Members with later admission dates (sorted chronologically):
Barbados (member since 1967)
Trinidad and Tobago (1967)
Jamaica (1969)
Grenada (1975)
Suriname (1977)
Dominica (1979)
Saint Lucia (1979)
Antigua and Barbuda (1981)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (1981)
Bahamas (1982)
Saint Kitts and Nevis (1984)
Canada (1990)
Belize (1991)
Guyana (1991)
Canada and the OAS[edit]
Although admission into OAS' predecessor, the Pan American Union, was initially restricted to republics, several overtures were still made for Canada to join the organization in 1928, 1933, 1936, and 1938. During the 1936 Pan American Union Conference, the organization extended its membership from only "American republics" to "American states" to accommodate Canada's admission as a constitutional monarchy.[35] However, U.S. opposition to Canadian membership prevented their admittance, with the U.S. fearing the admittance of Canada to the OAS would bring with it British influence that could impede its freedom of action within the organization. The U.S. reversed its position on Canadian membership in 1947.[36] However, by that time, Canadian foreign policy had adopted an Atlanticist position with a European focus;[37] resulting in the Canadian government seeing little value in pursuing OAS membership.[36]
From the 1960s to the 1980s, the Canadian government expressed some interest to join the OAS, having successfully applied for permanent observer status in 1972 to evaluate potential membership.[38] In the 1980s, the Canadian government incrementally increased its participation in OAS activities.[39] Canada signed the Charter of the Organization of American States in 1989. Canada's membership in the OAS was formalized when the decision was ratified in 1990.[40]
In 2004 2005, Canada was the second largest contributor to the OAS, with an annual assessed contribution representing 12.36 percent of the OAS Regular Budget (US$9.2 million) and an additional C$9 million in voluntary contributions to specific projects.[41][42] Shortly after joining as a full member, Canada was instrumental in the creation of the Unit for the Promotion of Democracy, which provides support for the strengthening and consolidation of democratic processes and institutions in OAS member states.[43][non-primary source needed]
Sanctions against the Dominican Republic during Trujillo regime[edit]
See also: Assassination attempt of R mulo Betancourt
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
During the 6th Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States (OAS) in Costa Rica, from 16 to 20 August 1960, a conviction against the State of the Dominican Republic was agreed to unanimously. The penalty was motivated because the foreign ministers checked the veracity of the claim that the Rafael Trujillo regime had sponsored an attack against R mulo Betancourt, at that time, constitutional president of Venezuela. The meeting was attended by foreign ministers from 21 American nations, including Cuba, which at that time had not yet been expelled from the inter-American system.
All countries, including the United States and Haiti, broke off diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic. Additionally an economic blockade that affected the exports of sugar was applied, which at that time was the pillar of the Dominican economy.
It was the first application of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, which had been adopted at the OAS on 29 July 1960.
Status of Cuba[edit]
Further information: Cuba OAS relations
The current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este, Uruguay, on 31 January 1962. The vote was passed by 14 in favor, with one against (Cuba) and six abstentions (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico). The operative part of the resolution reads as follows:
That adherence by any member of the Organization of American States to Marxism-Leninism is incompatible with the inter-American system and the alignment of such a government with the communist bloc breaks the unity and solidarity of the continents.
That the present Government of Cuba, which has officially identified itself as a Marxist-Leninist government, was incompatible with the principles and objectives of the inter-American system.
That this incompatibility excluded the present Government of Cuba from participation in the inter-American system.[44]
This meant that the Cuban nation was still technically a member state, but that the current government was denied the right of representation and attendance at meetings and of participation in activities. The OAS's position was that although Cuba's participation was suspended, its obligations under the Charter, the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, etc. still hold: for instance, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights continued to publish reports on Cuba's human rights situation and to hear individual cases involving Cuban nationals. However, this stance was occasionally questioned by other individual member states.
The resolution to exclude Cuba was controversial when it was adopted, and the reintegration of Cuba into the Inter-American system has remained a frequent source of contention among the countries of the hemisphere ever since.[45] Cuba's position was stated in an official note sent to the Organization "merely as a courtesy" by Minister of Foreign Affairs Ra l Roa on 4 November 1964: "Cuba was arbitrarily excluded ... The Organization of American States has no juridical, factual, or moral jurisdiction, nor competence, over a state which it has illegally deprived of its rights."[46] The reincorporation of Cuba as an active member regularly arose as a topic within the inter-American system   for instance, it was intimated by the outgoing ambassador of Mexico in 1998[47]  but most observers did not see it as a serious possibility while the present government remained in power. Since 1960, the Cuban administration had repeatedly characterized the OAS as the "Ministry of Colonies" of the United States of America.[48][49] Fidel Castro and his brother Ra l attacked the OAS as a "Yankee bordello" and "instrument of imperialist domination" and vowed that Cuba would never join, although OAS rescinded the nation's expulsion in 2009 and invited it to apply for readmission.[50][51] Venezuelan President Hugo Ch vez promised to veto any final declaration of the 2009 Summit of the Americas due to Cuba's exclusion.[52]
On 17 April 2009, after a "trading of warm words" between the administrations of U.S. President Barack Obama and Cuban leader Ra l Castro, OAS Secretary General Jos  Miguel Insulza said he would ask the 2009 General Assembly to annul the 1962 resolution excluding Cuba.[53]
On 3 June 2009, foreign ministers assembled in San Pedro Sula, Honduras, for the OAS's 39th General Assembly, passed a vote to lift Cuba's suspension from the OAS. The United States had been pressuring the OAS for weeks to condition Cuba's readmission to the group on democratic principles and commitment to human rights. Ecuador's Foreign Minister Fander Falcon  said there will be no such conditions. "This is a new proposal, it has no conditions of any kind," Falcon  said. "That suspension was made in the Cold War, in the language of the Cold War. What we have done here is fix a historic error."[54] The suspension was lifted at the end of the General Assembly, but, to be readmitted to the Organization, Cuba will need to comply with all the treaties signed by the Member States, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter of 2001.[55]  A statement issued by the Cuban government on 8 June 2009 stated that while Cuba welcomed the Assembly's gesture, in light of the Organization's historical record "Cuba will not return to the OAS."[56]
Suspension of Honduras (2009 2011)[edit]
 Those attending the Extraordinary Assembly of the OAS voted to suspend Honduras.
Following the expulsion of its President Manuel Zelaya, Honduras' membership of the Organization was suspended unanimously at midnight on 5 July 2009.[57] The de facto government had already announced it was leaving the OAS hours earlier; this was not, however, taken into account by the OAS, which did not recognize that government as legitimate.[58] An extraordinary meeting had been conducted by the OAS in Washington, D.C., with Zelaya in attendance.[57][59][60] The suspension of Honduras was approved unanimously with 33 votes (Honduras did not vote).[57][60] This was the first suspension carried out by the OAS since that of Cuba in 1962.[57][60]
After Zelaya's return to Honduras in 2011, the country was re-admitted to the Organization on 1 June 2011 with 32 votes in favor and 1 (Ecuador) against. Venezuela expressed some reservations.[61]
Status of Venezuela[edit]
On 28 April 2017, Venezuela notified the OAS of its denunciation of the Charter of the OAS, which as per Article 143 would lead to the withdrawal of Venezuela from the OAS effective two years from the date of notification.[26]  During this period, the country did not plan on participating in the OAS.[62]
During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela Juan Guaid , who was recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, sent a letter to the OAS Secretary General annulling the previous denunciation of the OAS Charter, and expressing his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.[26] The National Assembly designated a special envoy as representative to the OAS, lawyer Gustavo Tarre Brice o, who the OAS voted to recognize as Venezuela's delegate in April.[27][28][29] In October 2022, a bloc of leftist OAS member states led a motion to remove Tarre's representation in the organization. Out of 35 members, 19 nations voted in favor of the motion and 4 against. The motion fell short of the 24 votes required for a two-thirds majority.[63]
Status of Nicaragua[edit]
On 7 November 2021, Nicaragua held a general election which saw President Daniel Ortega re-elected to a fourth term in office.[64] In a vote by the OAS Permanent Council, 25 member states voted in favour of a resolution condemning the election. Seven countries, including Mexico, Honduras and Bolivia, abstained. The motion stated that the election was "not free, fair or transparent and lack[s] democratic legitimacy" and also instructed the Permanent Council to undertake an assessment of the situation and "take appropriate action".[65]
In response to this statement, Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Denis Moncada announced on 19 November that Nicaragua would leave the OAS.[1] Moncada called the bloc "an instrument of interference and intervention" and accused it of "facilitating the hegemony of the United States with its interventionism over the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean."[66][67] According to Article 143 of the Founding Charter of the OAS, the process to withdraw from the organization takes two years after its announcement.[68]
In April 2022, Nicaragua announced that it had completed its withdrawal from the OAS. It said the OAS' offices in Managua had been closed.  The OAS stated that, due to the terms of treaty, the withdrawal would not take effect until 2023.[69]
Permanent observers[edit]
As of 31 January 2014, there are 69 permanent observer countries including the four countries with territory or territories in the Americas Denmark, France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom; as well as the European Union and India.[70][71][72]
In March 2022, the OAS voted to suspend Russia as a permanent observer due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.[73]
Official languages[edit]
 Statue of Isabella I the Catholic Queen in front of the seat of the Organization of American States in Washington, D.C.
The Organization's official languages are Spanish, Portuguese, French, and English. The Charter, the basic instrument governing OAS, makes no reference to the use of official languages. These references are to be found in the Rules of Procedure governing the various OAS bodies. Article 51 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly,[74] the supreme body of the OAS, which meets once a year, states that English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish are the four official languages. Article 28 stipulates that a Style Committee shall be set up with representatives of the four official languages to review the General Assembly resolutions and declarations. Article 53 states that proposals shall be presented in the four official languages. The Rules of Procedure and Statutes of other bodies, such as the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CIDI), the Permanent Executive Committee of the Inter-American Council for Integral Development (CEPCIDI), the Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the Inter-American Juridical Committee (CJI), technical bodies of the OAS, also mention the four official languages in which their meetings are to be conducted. Policy is therefore dictated through these instruments that require use of the four official languages at meetings.[75]
Although a number of other languages have official status in one or more member states of OAS (Dutch in Suriname; Haitian Creole alongside French in Haiti; Quechua and Aymara in Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia; Guaran  in Paraguay), they are not official languages of the Organization.
Specialized agencies[edit]
The OAS has five specialized agencies:[76]
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
Inter-American Children s Institute [es] (IIN)
Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM)
Pan-American Institute of Geography and History (PAIGH)
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture [es] (IICA)
See also[edit]
North America portalCentral America portalMesoamerica portalCaribbean portalSouth America portalLatin America portalPolitics portal
African Union
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
European Union
Flag of the Organization of American States
Organization of Ibero-American States
Regional integration
Rio Group
Rio Pact
Statues of the Liberators
Union of South American Nations
Young Americas Business Trust
Notes[edit]
^ a b On 19 November 2021, Nicaragua announced its intention to withdraw from the OAS. Per the terms of the charter, the process will be effective 2 years following notification, in 2023.[1] See Status of Nicaragua below.
^ a b On 28 April 2017, Venezuela notified the OAS of its denunciation of the Charter of the OAS, which as per Article 143 would lead to the withdraw of Venezuela from the OAS effective two years from the date of notification.[26]  During the 2019 Venezuelan presidential crisis, the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela Juan Guaid , who was recognized by the National Assembly as the acting president, sent a letter to the OAS Secretary General annulling the previous denuncation of the OAS Charter, and expressing his desire for Venezuela to remain a member of the OAS.[26]  The National Assembly designated a special envoy as representative to the OAS, who the OAS voted to recognize as Venezuela's delegate in April.[27][28]
^ Suspended between 2009 2011.[34] See Suspension of Honduras below.
References[edit]
^ a b "Nicaragua says it will leave Organization of American States". The Washington Post. Associated Press. 19 November 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2021.[permanent dead link]
^ "The Organization of American States". Council on Foreign Relations.
^ Wyss, Jim. "As a Uruguayan is poised to head the OAS, questions swirl about Venezuela". Miami Herald. Retrieved 18 March 2015.
^ "Panama: A Country Study". Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress. 1987.
^ catalog, International bureau of the American republics, Washington, D. C. [from old; Book, Start this, Cacao (PDF), retrieved 2021-10-13
^ Special to the New York Times. "League of Nations in Americas urged by 3 Latin states", The New York Times. April 13, 1936. p. 1.
^ "Americas adopt neutrality pact", The New York Times. December 20, 1936.
^ "Organization of American States". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2019-09-04.
^ Faiola, Anthony; Krygier, Rachelle. "Bolivia's Morales resigns amid scathing election report, rising protests". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2021-03-18.
^ "AP Explains: Did a coup force Bolivia's Evo Morales out?". Associated Press. 11 November 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Whether the events Sunday in Bolivia constitute a coup d' tat is now the subject of debate in and outside the nation. ... Bolivia's "coup" is largely a question of semantics
^ "Uni n Europea Misi nde Expertos Electorales Bolivia 2019 Informe Final" (PDF) (in Spanish). European Union in Bolivia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2020.
^ "Informe de la UE detect  "numerosos errores" en elecciones de Bolivia | Voice of America - Spanish". www.voanoticias.com (in Spanish). Voice of America Spanish. 21 December 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2020.
^ Rosenberg, Tina (4 November 2007). "The Perils Of Petrocracy". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 October 2014.   Mark Weisbrot, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, a left-wing Washington policy group.
^ Sussman, Anna Louie (7 September 2015). "Are Women the New Face of Organized Labor?". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 20 September 2015.
^ Fox, Maggie (24 July 2013). "Obamacare won't slash workers' hours, report finds". NBC News. Retrieved 31 October 2014.
^ "Data from Bolivia's Election Add More Evidence That OAS Fabricated Last Year's Fraud Claims". October 21, 2020.
^ Nooruddin, Irfan. "Analysis | Yes, Bolivia's 2019 election was problematic. Here's why". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2021-03-18.
^ Garcia, David Alire (March 17, 2021).  Esposito, Anthony (ed.). "Mexico to OAS: Stop interfering in Bolivia's internal affairs". Associated Press. Thomson Reuters. Retrieved February 14, 2022.
^ Williams, Jack R.; Curiel, John. "Analysis of the 2019 Bolivia Election" (PDF). Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR). Retrieved February 14, 2022.
^ Hetland, Gabriel (March 7, 2020). "Opinion: The OAS helped undermine, not restore, democracy in Bolivia". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 February 2022.
^ Tancara Castillo, C ndido (23 October 2020). "ONU, OEA y Uniore descartan fraude en elecciones generales". Pagina Siete (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 June 2021.
^ Kurmanaev, Anatoly (June 7, 2020). "A Bitter Election. Accusations of Fraud. And Now Second Thoughts". The New York Times.
^ "Nicaragua announces withdrawal from Organization of American States despite bloc's objections". france24.com. 25 April 2022.
^ Rosnick, David (September 2020). "The OAS Accusation of Electoral Fraud Against Evo Morales Is Bullshit   And Now We Have the Data to Prove It". Jacobin.
^ Rosnick, David (August 2011). "The Organization of American States in Haiti: Election Monitoring or Political Intervention?". Center for Economic and Policy Research.  This article incorporates text available under the CC BY 4.0 license.
^ a b c d e "CHARTER OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (A-41)". Organization of American States. Retrieved 2019-04-29.
^ a b c "Resolution on the Situation in Venezuela". Organization of American States. 2019-04-09. Retrieved 2019-04-29.
^ a b c "OAS recognises Guaido's envoy until new Venezuela elections held". Al Jazeera. 2019-04-09. Retrieved 2019-04-27.
^ a b "Tarre Brice o, primera designaci n gubernamental de la AN". Efecto Cocuyo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2019.
^ Kurmanaev, Anatoly (June 7, 2020). "A Bitter Election. Accusations of Fraud. And Now Second Thoughts". The New York Times.
^ Greenwald, Glenn (June 8, 2020). "The New York Times Admits Key Falsehoods That Drove Last Year's Coup in Bolivia: Falsehoods Peddled by the U.S., Its Media, and the Times". The Intercept.
^ Resnick, David (September 5, 2020). "The OAS Accusation of Electoral Fraud Against Evo Morales is Bullshit   And Now We Have the Data to Prove It". Jacobin.
^ "The Organization of American States". Council on Foreign Relations. Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 12 November 2019.
^ "OAS readmits Honduras to its ranks". CNN. 2011-06-01. Retrieved 2012-11-01.
^ Pharand 1986, p. 432.
^ a b Pharand 1986, p. 433.
^ Pharand 1986, p. 454.
^ Pharand 1986, p. 436.
^ McKenna, Peter (1995). Canada and the OAS: From Dilettante to Full Partner. McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 144. ISBN 0886292581.
^ OAS (August 2009). "Charter of the Organization of American States (a-41): Signatories and Ratifications". OAS. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ Canada and the Organization of American States Archived 2009-01-23 at the Wayback Machine, Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada (DFAIT), 2005.
^ Canada and the Organization of American States Archived 2007-11-23 at the Wayback Machine by Dr. Ludwil J. Kos-Rabcewicz-Zubkowski, Air University Review, September October 1967.
^ Canada and the OAS: A Vigorous Partnership Archived 2005-02-19 at the Wayback Machine, Canada World View, Issue 8, Summer 2000.
^ "Six Report on the Situation of Political Prisoners in Cuba". Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Organization of American States. 1979-12-14.
^  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain: "Organization of American States: Background and Issues for Congress" (PDF).
^ "The Situation of Human Rights in Cuba: Seventh Report". Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Organization of American States. 1983-10-04.
^ "Mexico Calls for Cuba's Reinstatement into the OAS" (Press release). Organization of American States. 1998-02-04. Organization of American States.
^ "The Testing of the OAS". Time. 1960-08-22. Archived from the original on June 24, 2009.
^ Solis, Marta (1972-04-26). "Castro admits problems in education". Siempre. Latin American Network Information Center, University of Texas at Austin. pp. 40 41.
^ Lino Gutierrez (June 9, 2009). "Why Cuba won't join the OAS". Foreign Policy.
^ "Cuba will never rejoin 'imperialist' OAS, says Castro". Deutsche Welle. June 5, 2016.
^ "Chavez threatens veto over Cuba". BBC News Online. 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ "U.S., Cuba trade warm words ahead of summit". NBC News. 2009-04-17. Retrieved 2009-04-17.
^ "OAS votes to lift suspension of Cuba". The Miami Herald. 2009-06-03. Retrieved 2009-06-03.[dead link]
^ "Proceedings Volume 1". Retrieved 2019-12-28.
^ "Declaration of the Revolutionary Government". Granma. 2009-06-08. Archived from the original on 2012-02-19. Retrieved 2009-06-15.
^ a b c d "Americas group suspends Honduras". BBC. 2009-07-05. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ "Honduras leaders pull out of OAS". RT . 2009-07-04. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ "OAS expels Honduras' membership over coup". China Daily. 2009-07-05. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ a b c Hipwell, Deirdre (2009-07-05). "Organisation of American States suspends Honduras over coup". The Times. London. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ Press Releases :: E-698/11. OAS. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ "Venezuela says it will quit Organization of American States". Washington Post. Retrieved 2017-04-27.
^ Aquino, Marco; Rochabrun, Marcelo (2022-10-07). "Latin America's left raises pressure on Venezuela's Guaido at OAS summit". Reuters. Retrieved 2022-10-07.
^ "Biden calls Nicaragua's election a 'pantomime' that's 'neither free nor fair'". France 24. 8 November 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
^ "OAS members condemn Nicaragua elections, urge action". Reuters. 13 November 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2021.
^ "Nicaragua decides to leave OAS after election criticism". Deutsche Welle. 19 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021.
^ Kawsachun News [@KawsachunNews] (November 19, 2021). "Nicaragua's condemns the OAS as "an instrument of interference and intervention" adding that "it has as its mission to facilitate the hegemony of the United States with its interventionism against the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean."" (Tweet). Retrieved 20 November 2021   via Twitter.
^ Maldonado, Carlos Salinas (19 November 2021). "Ortega anuncia la salida de la OEA tras el rechazo a las elecciones de Nicaragua". El Pa s (in Spanish). Retrieved 21 November 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Nicaragua withdraws from regional bloc OAS after election row". MSN. 25 April 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022.
^ "OAS - Organization of American States: Democracy for peace, security, and development". www.oas.org. August 1, 2009.
^ SER :: DIA :: Permanent Observers. OAS. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ "Montenegro Gains Observer Status to Organisation of American States". February 4, 2014. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2014.
^ ""Preg ntense a qui n hubiera apoyado Sim n Bol var", dijo Zelenski en un emotivo discurso ante la OEA". 6 October 2022.
^ General Assembly of the OAS, Amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly, 5 June 2000
^ Marguerite Groves (Coordinator, Division of Language Services, OAS), Information on the use of language at the OAS: multilingualism Archived February 3, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Inter-American Languages Management Seminar, Conseil sup rieur de la langue fran aise (Quebec), Quebec City, 20 to 22 August  2002
^ "OAS :: Our Structure : Specialized Organizations". OAS - Organization of American States. 1996-01-29. Retrieved 2021-10-18.
Further reading[edit]
Pharand, Donat (1986). "Canada and the OAS: the Vacant Chair Revisited". Revue g n rale de droit. 17 (3): 429 454. doi:10.7202/1059251ar. ISSN 0035-3086.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Organization of American States.
Official website 
The Organization of American States in Haiti: Election Monitoring or Political Intervention?, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, October 2011.
vteOrganization of American States (OAS)Members
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Barbados
Brazil
Belize
Bahamas
Bolivia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Organization
General Assembly
Secretariat for Political Affairs
Secretariat for Integral Development
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
Inter-American Commission of Women
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Inter-American Telecommunication Commission
Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Pan American Union Building
Politics
Charter
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
American Convention on Human Rights
Pan-American Conference
Summit of the Americas
vtePan-AmericanismHistory
Spanish American wars of independence
Decolonization of the Americas
Latin American integration
North American integration
Patria Grande
Sim n Bol var
Jos  de San Mart n
Lucas Alam n
Inter-American Commission of Women
United States involvement in regime change in Latin America
Organizations
Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO)
Andean Community of Nations (CAN)
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Central American Integration System (SICA)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC)
Contadora group
Contadora support group
Forum for the Progress and Integration of South Americaa (PROSUR)
Latin American Economic System (SELA)
Latin American Integration Association (ALADI)
Lima Group (LG)
Mercosur
Organization of American States (OAS)
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI)
Pacific Alliance
Petrocaribe
Rio Group
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR)
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, CEPAL)
United States Pirate Party (USPP)
Projects
Andean passport
CARICOM passport
CARICOM Single Market and Economy
CARIPASS
Central America-4 Border Control Agreement
Central America-4 passport
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union
Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA)
Interoceanic Highway
SUCRE
Institutions
Andean Parliament
Bank of the South
Caribbean Court of Justice
Caribbean Development Bank
Central American Parliament
Development Bank of Latin America
Inter-American Development Bank
Latin American Parliament
Mercosur Parliament
South American Parliament
Free trade areas
Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA)
CARIFORUM
Dominican Republic Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR)
Economic Partnership Agreements
Free Trade Area of the Americas
G3 Free Trade Agreement
United States Mexico Canada Agreement (USMCA)
vteRegional organizationsBodies
African Union
Arab League
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Asia Cooperation Dialogue
Asia Council
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Association of Caribbean States
AUKUS
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America   Peoples' Trade Treaty
British Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Central European Free Trade Agreement
Commonwealth of Independent States
Commonwealth of Nations
Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Council of the Baltic Sea States
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
East African Community
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Cooperation Organization
Eurasian Economic Union
European Political Community
European Union
Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America
GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development
Gulf Cooperation Council
Indian Ocean Rim Association
Latin American Integration Association
Latin American Parliament
Lublin Triangle
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Mercosur
Nordic Council
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Open Balkan
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Organization of American States
Organization of Ibero-American States
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Pacific Alliance
Pacific Islands Forum
Paneuropean Union
Polynesian Leaders Group
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
Southern African Development Community
TAKM
Three Seas Initiative
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat
Organization of Turkic States
Union of South American Nations
Visegr d Group
West Nordic Council
Western Balkans Quad
Topics
Regional integration
Regional organizations by population
Regionalism (international relations)
vtePower in international relationsTypes
Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Politics
Realpolitik
Sharp
Smart
Soft
Status
Small
Middle
Regional
Emerging
Least Great
Great
Potential
Super
Hyper
Geopolitics
American (Pax)
Asian
British
Soviets
Chinese
Indian
Pacific
History
List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations (1814 1919)
Theory
Balance of power
European
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement
Studies
Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power
Organizations and groups by regionAfrica
African Union
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa Asia
Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
Americas
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR)
Asia
Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC)
China Japan South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
Europe
Council of Europe (CoE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegr d Group (V4)
Eurasia
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Organization of Turkic States
North America Europe
Arctic Council
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Africa Asia Europe
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa South America
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
Oceania Pacific
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Australia New Zealand United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)
Non regional
Brazil Russia India China South Africa (BRICS)
Colombia Indonesia Vietnam Egypt Turkey South Africa (CIVETS)
Commonwealth of Nations
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India Brazil South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico Indonesia Nigeria Turkey (MINT)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)
Uniting for Consensus
Global
United Nations (UN)
Links to related articles
vteInternational organizations with Denmark as memberGeographical andgeopolitical
Arctic Council
European Union (EU)
EEA
Schengen
Council of Europe (CE)
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
Nordic Council
Organization of American States (OAS)
Historical andcultural
International Olympic Committee (IOC)
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
Economic and socialdevelopment
African Development Bank (AfDB)
Asian Development Bank (AsDB)
Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (ICRM)
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCS)
International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC)
Nordic Investment Bank (NIB)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Paris Club
World Customs Organization (WCO)
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Security
Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC)
International Criminal Court (ICCt)
Interpol
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA)
Western European Union (WEU)
Zangger Committee (ZC)
Technology andresearch
Australia Group
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
European Investment Bank (EIB)
European Space Agency (ESA)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Energy Agency (IEA)
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA)
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
United Nations (UN)Branches
MONUSCO
UNCTAD
UNHCR
UNMEE
UNMIL
UNMOGIP
UNOMIG
UNTSO
Specializedagencies
FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMF
IMO
ITU
UNESCO
UNIDO
UPU
WHO
WIPO
WMO
World Bank Group
IBRD
IDA
IFC
MIGA
Italics indicates observer status
vteInternational organizations with the Kingdom of Norway as a memberGeographical andgeopolitical
Arctic Council
European Free Trade Association
EEA
Schengen
Council of Europe (CE)
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
Nordic Council
Organization of American States (OAS)
Historical andcultural
International Olympic Committee (IOC)
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
Economic and socialdevelopment
African Development Bank (AfDB)
Asian Development Bank (ADB)
Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF)
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (ICRM)
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCS)
International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC)
Nordic Investment Bank (NIB)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Paris Club
World Customs Organization (WCO)
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Security
Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS)
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC)
International Criminal Court (ICCt)
Interpol
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA)
Zangger Committee (ZC)
Technology andresearch
Australia Group
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
European Space Agency (ESA)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Energy Agency (IEA)
International Mobile Satellite Organization (IMSO)
International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO)
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA)
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
United Nations (UN)Branches
UNCTAD
UNHCR
UNTSO
Specializedagencies
FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMF
IMO
ITU
MINUSMA
UNESCO
UNIDO
UPU
UNITAR
UNMISS
UNRWA
UNWTO
WHO
WIPO
WMO
World Bank Group
IBRD
IDA
IFC
MIGA
Italics indicates observer status
vteUnited States membership in international organizations
AfDB
ANZUS
APEC
ARF
AsDB
ASEAN (dialogue partner)
Australia Group
BIS
CE (observer)
CERN (observer)
CP
EAPC
EBRD
FAO
G5
G7
G8
G10
IADB
IAEA
IBRD
ICAO
ICC
ICCt (signatory)
ICFTU
ICRM
IDA
IEA
IFAD
IFC
IFRCS
IHO
ILO
IMF
IMO
Interpol
IOC
IOM
ISO
ITU
MIGA
MINUSTAH
NAM (guest)
NATO
NEA
NSG
OAS
OECD
OPCW
OSCE
Paris Club
PCA
United Nations
United Nations Security Council (permanent member)
UNCTAD
UNESCO
UNHCR
UNITAR
UNMEE
UNMIK
UNMIL
UNMOVIC
UNOMIG
UNRWA
UNTSO
UPU
WCL
WCO
WHO
WIPO
WMO
World Trade Organization
ZC
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Portugal
2
Academics
CiNii
People
Trove
Other
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organization_of_American_States&oldid=1149530796"