Flags used by the British Monarchy
 The Royal Standard used outside Scotland
 The Royal Standard used in Scotland[1]
The Royal Standards of the United Kingdom refers to either one of two similar flags used by King Charles III in his capacity as Sovereign of the United Kingdom, the Crown dependencies, and the British Overseas Territories. Two versions of the flag exist, one for general use in Scotland and the other for use elsewhere.
Although almost universally called a standard, such flags when used in the United Kingdom are banners of arms, as they comprise the shield of the Royal Arms. From the 1960s until her death in 2022, Queen Elizabeth II had several personal flags designed for her use as sovereign of certain Commonwealth realms. These heraldic flags are similar to those of the British "Royal Standard" in being banners of the nation's arms but feature a device found in the Queen's general personal flag (a blue disc containing a wreath of gold roses encircling a crowned letter 'E').
The Royal Standard of the United Kingdom is flown when the Monarch is in residence in one of the royal palaces and on his car, ship, or aeroplane.  It may be flown on any building, official or private, during a visit by the Monarch, if the owner or proprietor so requests. It famously replaces the Union Flag over the Palace of Westminster when the Monarch visits during the State Opening of Parliament. The Royal Standard was flown aboard the royal yacht when it was in service and Queen Elizabeth II was on board. The only church that may fly a Royal Standard, even without the presence of the Sovereign, is Westminster Abbey, a Royal Peculiar.[2]
List of UK flags
English flagsNorthern Irish flagsScottish flagsWelsh flagsCornish flagsRoyal StandardsCity, town and village flagsFormer British Empire
When the Queen visited the United States in 1991, she was provided with a Cadillac limousine that flew both her standard and the Stars and Stripes, an acknowledgement of the "special relationship" that exists between the two nations.[3][4][5][failed verification]
The Royal Standard is flown at royal residences only when the sovereign is present. If the Union Flag flies above Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle or Sandringham House, it signals that the King is not in residence. In 1934, King George V permitted his subjects in Scotland to display the ancient Royal Standard of Scotland as part of his silver jubilee.  Today, it flies above Holyrood Palace and Balmoral Castle when the Monarch is not in residence.[1]
When the Monarch attends Parliament at the Palace of Westminster, the Royal Standard flies from Victoria Tower.[6]
Unlike the Union Flag, the Royal Standard should never be flown at half-mast, even after the demise of the Crown, as there is always a sovereign on the throne.[2] It flew at half-mast for several hours from the death of Edward VII until George V discovered the error.[7]
Controversy arose regarding the lack of a flag at half-mast over Buckingham Palace following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, in 1997. The Queen was then in summer residence at Balmoral; and according to established custom, no flag was displayed over Buckingham Palace, as the monarch was not present. The Queen proposed a compromise whereby the Union Flag would be flown at half-mast on the day of Diana's funeral.[8]   The Union Flag was also flown at half-mast over Buckingham Palace as a mark of respect on the first anniversary of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, on Bank Holiday, Monday, 31 August 1998.[9] Since then, the Union Flag has flown regularly in the monarch's absence and has been lowered to half-mast to mark several occasions such as the death of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother,[10] the September 11 attacks, the 7 July 2005 London bombings[11] and the death of Elizabeth II.
England, Northern Ireland, Wales, the Crown dependencies and the British Overseas Territories[edit]
 The Royal Standard flying above Buckingham Palace
In England, Northern Ireland, Wales, the Crown dependencies and the British Overseas Territories, the flag is divided into four quadrants. The first and fourth quadrants represent the ancient Kingdom of England and contain three gold lions (or "leopards"), passant guardant on a red field; the second quadrant represents the ancient Kingdom of Scotland and contains a red lion rampant on a gold field; the third quadrant represents the ancient Kingdom of Ireland and contains a version of the gold harp from the coat of arms of Ireland on a blue field. The inclusion of the harp remains an issue for some in Ireland. In 1937  amon de Valera, then Taoiseach, asked Dominions Secretary Malcolm MacDonald if the harp quarter could be removed from the Royal Standard on the grounds that the Irish people had not given their consent to the Irish emblem being included. The request was denied and the harp remains.[12]
The modern Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, apart from minor changes (notably to the form of harp used to represent Ireland), dates to the reign of Queen Victoria. Earlier Royal Standards of the United Kingdom incorporated the Arms of Hanover and of the Kingdom of France, representing the title of Elector (later King) of Hanover and the theoretical claim to the throne of France, a claim dropped in 1800).  The Hanoverian association terminated in 1837 with the accession of Queen Victoria who, being a female, could not accede to Hanover.
Famous Royal Standards of former British Monarchs include the Scotland Impaled Royal Standard of Queen Anne, the Hanover Quartered Royal Standards of King George I to George III, and the Hanover crowned Royal Standards of George III to William IV. The latter contained the Royal coat of arms of Hanover superimposed over what became the modern Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, although this particular standard's artistic representations of the banners of England, Ireland and Scotland in their respective quadrants was marginally different from the versions used today.
Scotland[edit]
 Royal Standard for Scotland flying above the Palace of Holyroodhouse.
In Scotland a separate version of the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom is used, whereby the red Lion Rampant of the Kingdom of Scotland appears in the first and fourth quadrants, displacing the three gold lions passant guardant of England, which occur only in the second quadrant. The third quadrant, displaying the gold harp of Ireland, remains unaltered from that version used throughout the remainder of the United Kingdom and overseas.
The Scottish version of the Royal Standard was used to cover the coffin of Queen Elizabeth II during the procession on the Royal Mile from the Palace of Holyroodhouse to St. Giles' Cathedral on 12 September 2022.[13]
Other members of the Royal Family also use this Scottish version when in Scotland, with the only exceptions to this protocol being the consort of a queen regnant and the heir apparent, the Duke of Rothesay, each of whom has his own individual standard.
The Royal Standard of the United Kingdom used in Scotland differs from the current, traditional Royal Standard of Scotland in that the latter portrays the Lion Rampant in its entirety. As the banner of the Royal Coat of Arms of Scotland, the Royal Standard of Scotland remains a personal banner of the monarch [14] and, despite being commonly used as an unofficial second flag of Scotland, its use is restricted under an act passed in 1672 by the Parliament of Scotland.[15]
The historic Royal Standard of Scotland is used officially at Scottish royal residences, when the monarch is not in residence, and by representatives of the Crown, including the First Minister, Lord Lieutenants in their lieutenancies, the Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, and Lord Lyon King of Arms. A variation of the Royal Standard of Scotland is used by the heir apparent to the King of Scots, the Duke of Rothesay, whose personal Royal Standard is the Royal Standard of Scotland defaced with an azure-coloured label of three points. (The banner of the Duke of Rothesay also features the same, displayed upon an inner shield).
Heir to the Throne[edit]
The direct heir to the Throne has several distinct standards and banners for use throughout the United Kingdom in representation of this position. William, Prince of Wales has five standards at use for his various roles and titles.
Standard
Title
Description
Prince of Wales
The Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, defaced with a three-point label. Superimposed is the arms of Llywelyn the Great   four quadrants, the first and fourth with a red lion on a gold field, and the second and third with a gold lion on a red field   crowned with the prince's coronet.
Used in England and Northern Ireland, this standard was created in 1917.
Prince of Wales
The arms of Llywelyn the Great. Superimposed is a green shield bearing the Prince's coronet.
Used in Wales, this standard was created in 1962 at the suggestion of Prince Philip.
Prince and Great Steward of Scotland,  Lord of the Isles
Quartered, the first and fourth a gold field defaced by a white and blue checkerboard band, the second and third a ship on a white background. Superimposed is the coat of arms of the heir apparent to the King of Scots.
Used in Scotland, this standard was created in 1974 at the suggestion of Prince Charles.
Duke of Rothesay
The Royal Standard of Scotland, defaced with a three-point label in blue.
Used in Scotland, this is the ancient banner of the heir apparent to the King of Scots.[16]
Duke of Cornwall
The flag is "sable fifteen bezants Or", that is, a black field bearing fifteen gold coins.
Used in Cornwall, this is the ancient banner of the Duke of Cornwall. 
Historic
Standard
Title
Description
Prince of Wales
The Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, defaced with a three-point label. Superimposed is the coat of arms of the Royal House of Saxony. This standard was designated for the Prince of Wales from 1859 to 1917, at which time King George V renamed the Royal Family from the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha to the House of Windsor and renounced all German titles and claims in an act of British patriotism related to the ongoing First World War.
Other members of the Royal Family[edit]
Other members of the Royal Family have personal standards of their own. These are variants of the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom (including that which is used in Scotland), defaced with a white label and either three points or pendants (for children of a sovereign), or five points (grandchildren of a sovereign). Traditionally all princes and princesses of royal blood (i.e. descendants of the sovereign) are granted arms on their 18th birthday, thus giving them a banner to fly from their residences.
The following members of the Royal Family have personal standards, listed according to the line of succession:
Standard
Member of the Royal Family
Description
Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with a red escallop taken from the arms of his mother Diana, Princess of Wales
Scottish Variant
Prince Andrew, Duke of York
A three-point label, the second point charged with a blue anchor
Scottish Variant
Princess Beatrice
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with a bee
Scottish Variant
Princess Eugenie
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with a Scottish thistle
Scottish Variant
Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh
A three-point label, the second point charged with a Tudor rose
Scottish Variant
Princess Anne, Princess Royal
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second point charged with red heart
Scottish Variant
Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second and fourth points charged with a lion passant guardant
Scottish Variant
Prince Edward, Duke of Kent
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with a blue anchor, the second and fourth points charged with the Cross of St. George
Scottish Variant
Prince Michael of Kent
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second and fourth points charged with a blue anchor
Scottish Variant
Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy
A five-point label, the first and fifth points charged with a red heart, the second and fourth points charged with a blue anchor, the third point charged with the Cross of St. George
Scottish Variant
Consorts of the British monarch[edit]
Queens consort of the British monarch are granted arms based on the Royal Standard and their own personal arms from before their marriage, or the arms of their family. In Scotland, a queen consort will use the Scottish version of the Royal Standard. They do not have different standards for the Commonwealth realms that have their own Royal Standards.
Consorts of a queen regnant are not granted use of the British Royal Standard. They use standards based on their own family arms. However, Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha used a  standard of the royal arms (with a label for difference) quartered with his own family arms.
Standard
Consort
Details
Queen CamillaConsort of Charles III(2022 present)
The Royal Standard, impaled with the arms of her father, Bruce Shand.
Scottish variant
Prince PhilipConsort of Elizabeth II(1952 2021)
The Standard is based on his Greek and Danish roots. The flag is divided into four quarters:
The first quarter, representing Denmark, consists of three blue lions passant and nine red hearts on a yellow field. The second quarter, representing Greece, consists of a white cross on a blue field. The third quarter, representing the duke's surname, Mountbatten, contains five black and white vertical stripes. The fourth quarter, which alludes to his title as Duke of Edinburgh, includes a black and red castle, which is also part of the city of Edinburgh's arms.
Queen ElizabethConsort of George VI(1936 2002)
The Royal Standard, impaled with the arms of her father, Claude Bowes-Lyon, Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne.
Scottish variant
Queen MaryConsort of George V(1910 1953)
The Royal Standard, impaled with the arms of her father, Francis, Duke of Teck, quartered with the Hanoverian coat of arms as used by her grandfather, Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge.
Scottish variant
Queen AlexandraConsort of Edward VII(1901 1925)
The Royal Standard, impaled with the royal coat of arms of Denmark.
Scottish variant
Prince AlbertConsort of Victoria(1840 1861)
The Royal Standard defaced with a three-point label (with the second point charged with the Cross of St. George), quartered with the arms of Saxony.
Queen AdelaideConsort of William IV(1830 1849)
The Royal Standard from 1816 to 1837, impaled with the arms of her father, Duke Georg I of Saxe-Meiningen.
Queen CarolineConsort of George IV(1820 1821)
The Royal Standard from 1816 to 1837, impaled with the arms of her father, Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick.
Queen CharlotteConsort of George III(1761 1818)
The Royal Standard from 1816 to 1837, impaled with the arms of her father, Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.
The Royal Standard from 1801 to 1816, impaled with the arms of her father, Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.
The Royal Standard from 1714 to 1801, impaled with the arms of her father, Duke Charles Louis Frederick of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.
Queen CarolineConsort of George II(1727 1737)
The Royal Standard from 1714 to 1801, impaled with the arms of her father, John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach.
Recent historical royal standards[edit]
Standard
Member of the Royal Family
Description
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge
A three-point label, signifying a direct heir to the Throne, the second point charged with a red escallop taken from the arms of his mother, Diana, Princess of Wales.
Scottish Variant
Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second point charged with a Tudor rose.
Scottish variant
Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with a Tudor Rose, the second point charged with a Scottish thistle.
Scottish variant
Prince Albert, Duke of York
A three-point label, the second point charged with a blue anchor
Scottish variant
Princess Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood
A three-point label, the first, second and third points charged with the Cross of St. George.
Scottish variant
Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second point charged with a lion passant guardant.
Scottish variant
Prince George, Duke of Kent
A three-point label, the first, second and third points charged with a blue anchor.
Scottish variant
Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone
A five-point label, the first, second, fourth and fifth points charged with a red heart, the third point charged with the Cross of St. George.
Scottish variant
Prince Edward, Duke of Windsor
A three-point label, the second point charged with the Crown of Saint Edward.
Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with fleurs-de-lis, the second point charged with the Cross of St. George.  Superimposed is the coat of arms of the Royal House of Saxony.
Scottish variant
A three-point label, the first and third points charged with fleurs-de-lis, the second point charged with the Cross of St. George.
Scottish variant
Prince Arthur
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second and fourth points charged with fleurs-de-lis. Superimposed is the coat of arms of the Royal House of Saxony.
Scottish variant
A five-point label, the first, third and fifth points charged with the Cross of St. George, the second and fourth points charged with fleurs-de-lis.
Scottish variant
Royal standards 1198 1837[edit]
Flag
Date
Use
Description
1198   1340
Royal Banner of King Richard I
Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or armed and langued Azure,[17][18] meaning three gold lions with blue tongues and claws, walking and facing the observer, arranged in a column on a red background. It forms the first and fourth quarters of the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom.
1340   13951399   1406
Royal Banner of King Edward III
The Coat of Arms of England quartered with the Royal Standard of France, the fleurs-de-lis representing the English claim to the French throne.
1395   1399
Royal Banner of King Richard II
The Coat of Arms of England impaled with attributed Arms of King Edward The Confessor (symbolising mystical union).
1406   14221461   14701471   15541558   1603
Royal Banner of King Henry IV
The French quartering has been altered to three fleurs-de-lis.
1422   14611470   1471
Royal Banner of King Henry VI
The Coat of Arms of France impaled with the Coat of Arms of England.
1554   1558
Royal Banner of Queen Mary I
The Coat of Arms of Habsburg Spain impaled with the Coat of Arms of England.
1603   16891702   1707
Royal Standard of the House of Stuart, used first by James VI and I
A banner of the Royal Coat of Arms of James I, first and fourth quarters representing England and the English claim to the French throne, second quarter representing Scotland, third quarter representing Ireland. This was the last royal banner of the Kingdom of England.
1689 1694
Royal Standard of King William III and II and Queen Mary II
A banner of the joint Royal Coat of Arms of William III and Mary II, consisting of the Coat of Arms of England defaced with an inescutcheon for the House of Nassau (representing William) and impaled with another undefaced version of the same Coat of Arms (representing Mary).
1694 1702
Royal Standard of King William III and II
A banner of the Royal Coat of Arms of William III, first and fourth quarters representing England and the English claim to the French throne, second quarter representing Scotland, third quarter representing Ireland, with an inescutcheon for the House of Nassau.
1707 1714
Royal Standard of Queen Anne, after the Acts of Union 1707
A banner of the Royal Coat of Arms of Queen Anne, first and fourth quarters representing (newly unified) England and Scotland, second quarter representing the British claim to the French throne, third quarter representing Ireland.
1714 1801
Royal Standard of the House of Hanover, first used by King George I
A banner of the Royal Coat of Arms of Great Britain, first quarter representing England and Scotland, second quarter representing the British claim to the French throne, third quarter representing Ireland, fourth quarter representing the Electorate of Hanover.
1801 1816
Royal Standard of the House of Hanover, used by King George III
A banner of the Royal Arms from the creation of the United Kingdom on 1 January 1801; first and fourth quarters for England and Wales, second Scotland, third Ireland, with an inescutcheon for the Electorate of Hanover.
1816 1837
Royal Standard of the House of Hanover, first used by King George III
The Royal Arms after Hanover had become a kingdom.
Others[edit]
 Royal Standard for other members of the Royal Family who do not have a personal standard.
 Royal Standard for other members of the Royal Family who do not have a personal standard, Scottish variant.
 Funeral carriage of Diana, Princess of Wales, with the coffin draped with an ermine-bordered standard.[19]
Other members of the Royal Family may use the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, but within an ermine border (a white border with black "tails" representing the ermine fur). This standard is mainly used for the wives of British princes, or members of the Royal Family who have not yet been granted their own arms. Diana, Princess of Wales, and more recently, Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, had this standard draped over their coffins at their funerals.[20][21]
Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, also enjoyed the right to use this version of the Royal Standard although she rarely exercised it on her own.  She received a grant of arms on 17 July 2005, which, based on past practice, could form the basis for her own standard.[22]Since her husband ascended to the throne she has used a different version, pictured above.
Uses of Standards[edit]
 Royal Banners in St Giles' Cathedral: The Royal Standard of the United Kingdom used in Scotland and (clockwise) those of the Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Royal and Duke of Rothesay.
The Royal Standard is reserved only for the monarch, and is the most used. Most famously it signals the presence of the monarch at a royal residence, and is also used on official vehicles, primarily the Bentley State Limousine, but also on other road vehicles at home or abroad, often a Range Rover. The Royal Standard is also flown from aircraft and water vessels, including HMY Britannia and MV Spirit of Chartwell[23] during the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant. When the monarch is aboard a British naval ship, the flag is flown from the main mast of the ship and is lowered upon his/her departure.[24] The flag is also draped over the coffin of the Monarch upon his/her death.
 When Edward VII acceded to the throne in 1901, he proposed that a special version of the Royal Standard (which was widely used at the time) be created for his own specific use; "a Royal Standard differenced with an oval shield in the centre carrying HM's cypher and crown on a purple ground, for the King's exclusive and personal use alone... The cypher to be changed to that of the new sovereign on the demise of the previous sovereign." However, such a proposal was considered impractical, given that the use of this alternate Standard by the King would effectively make it the new Royal Standard (despite the retention of the main version), and thus such a change would have required legislation. It was instead decided that new rules for the Royal Standard be laid down, making it so that it should not be flown anywhere other than on a royal palace, or to denote the monarch's presence.[25]
In some situations, personal standards are displayed within the UK, such as within St Giles' Cathedral, Edinburgh (site of the Chapel of the Order of the Thistle), and St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle home of Banners of Knights of the Order of the Garter,[26][27][28] at the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant Prince Andrew's standard flew from MV Havengore.[29] However, the use of personal standards of other members of the Royal Family varies in frequency. Prior to his accession, the then-Prince of Wales flew his standard at Clarence House in the same way the Royal Standard is used over Buckingham Palace, but other members of the family tend not to fly theirs from their respective residences (though this may be due to the fact that many share official London Residences, as is the case at Kensington Palace).
 Funeral carriage of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, with the coffin draped with her personal standard.
Family members also do not use their standards on road vehicles, either privately or during official engagements (when more discreet cars are used, such as Jaguar) or state occasions (when the Liveried cars of the Royal Mews are used), this seems reserved for the Queen only, although when Prince Philip traveled alone at state occasions, his standard flew from the roof of his car, as seen with the funerals of Diana, Princess of Wales (when the Queen Mother also flew her personal standard from her car) and that of the Queen Mother, also, when a visiting Head of State on a state visit uses a car from the Royal Mews, his/her own flag is displayed.[30][31] That said, when abroad, the standards of members of the family may well be flown: examples include Prince Charles,[32][33] the Duchess of Cornwall[34] and Prince William.[35][36]
Personal Standards have been used to cover the coffins of the Queen Mother, the Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Margaret[37][38] and the Duke of Windsor.
Position of Honour[edit]
According to the Flag Institute, the order of precedence of flags in the United Kingdom is: the Royal Standards, the Union Flag, the flag of the host country (England, Scotland and Wales etc.), the flags of other nations (in alphabetical order), the Commonwealth Flag, the Flag of Europe, the county flags, the flags of cities or towns, the banners of arms, and the house flags.[39]
See also[edit]
Heraldry portalMonarchy portalUnited Kingdom portal
Banners of the members of Knights of the Garter
Flags of the English Interregnum
Flags of Elizabeth II
Royal standards of Canada
Royal Standards
References[edit]
^ a b "Rules for hoisting flags on buildings of the Scottish Government" (PDF). gov.scot. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2018. Retrieved 10 April 2016.
^ a b "Royal Standard". The Royal Household. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Outbound State Visits Since 1952" (PDF). The Royal Household. Retrieved 27 July 2020.
^ deWitt, Karen (17 May 1991). "Queen's Address to Congress Celebrates Mutual Respect". The New York Times. p. A10. Retrieved 27 July 2020.
^ Graham, Tim (26 February 1983). "The Stars And Stripes Flag Fly Along Side The Queen's Royal Standard". Getty Images. Retrieved 16 September 2022.
^ "The Victoria Tower". Parliament.UK. Retrieved 14 May 2019.
^ Windsor, Edward, Duke of (1951). A King's Story: The memoirs of the Duke of Windsor. New York: Putnam. p. 72.
^ "Blair Defends Royal Family Against Criticism". BBC News. 4 September 1997. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Flags at half mast for Diana". BBC News. 23 July 1998. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
^ "Crowds Grieve for Queen Mother". BBC News. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "London bombings toll rises to 37". BBC News. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Media Factsheet: Queen Elizabeth II's State Visit to Ireland". Discover Ireland. 17 May 2011. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Thousands line Edinburgh's streets to see Queen's coffin". BBC News. 12 September 2022.
^ "Days for Hoisting Flags on Buildings of the Scottish Government 2010" (PDF). Scottish Government. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2018.
^ "Lyon King of Arms Act 1672". The National Archives. 8 January 1995.
^ Griffith, John (4 August 2003). "Standard of the Duke of Rothesay and Lord of the Isles for Scotland". Flags of the World. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ Fox-Davies 2008, p. 607 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFFox-Davies2008 (help).
^ "Coat of Arms of King George III". The First Foot Guards. Retrieved 4 February 2010.
^ "British Flags - Royal and vice-regal flags". World Flag Database. Retrieved 29 December 2011.
^ "Final Royal farewell to princess". BBC News. 5 November 2004. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Funeral for Princess Alice". Getty Images. Retrieved 25 August 2017.
^ "The Coat of Arms of HRH The Duchess of Cornwall". College of Arms. 17 July 2005. Retrieved 21 March 2014.
^ Mbiyu, David (3 June 2012). "Diamond Jubilee flotilla adds color on the Thames". Demotix.com. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "91: Standards, Flags and Colours". The Queen's Regulations for the Royal Navy (PDF). UK Ministry of Defence (3 ed.). April 2017. Retrieved 27 July 2020. The Royal Standard, being the personal flag of the Sovereign, is to be hoisted on board HM ships and on official buildings and enclosures only when The Sovereign is present. It is to be hauled down at the moment of departure.
^ David Prothero (12 April 2007). "British Royal Flags, Reign of Edward VII: Proposal for a Personal Royal Standard of King Edward VII". Flags of the World. Retrieved 3 October 2022.
^ "Prince William and St George's Chapel". College of St. George. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Tour: The Quire". College of St. George. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Gallery of Wanamaker Flags". Flag Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Diamond Jubilee: Thames River Pageant". Zimbio.com. 2 June 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Pomp and ceremony for Amir of Kuwait". The Daily Telegraph. London. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 27 December 2013   via YouTube.
^ kenjonbro (23 November 2011). "Bentley State Limousine". Flickr. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "A Brush With Royal-tea! Prince of Wales: A Tea Review I". Alice and the teacup. 17 November 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ Campion, Vikki; Matheson, Melissa (9 November 2012). "Foul weather follows Prince Charles and Camilla". The Daily Telegraph. Sydney. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "The Prince Of Wales And Duchess Of Cornwall Visit Australia - Day 5". Getty Images. Retrieved 25 August 2017.
^ "William and Kate jet off on Canada trip". BBC News. 1 July 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Magic moments from William and Kate's headline-making tropical tour". Hello!. 19 September 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2021.
^ "Princess's coffin moved to Windsor". BBC News. 14 February 2002. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Princess Margaret Funeral". Getty Images. Retrieved 25 August 2017.
^ "UK Flag Protocol: Appendix B Precedence of Flags". Flag Institute. Retrieved 30 November 2021.
Further reading[edit]
Davies, Norman (1999). The Isles: A History. Palgrave Macmillan.
External links[edit]
UK Flag Protocol
vteRoyal heraldry in the United KingdomUnited Kingdom
Royal coat of arms
Royal Standard
Cadency labels of the Royal Family
Imperial State Crown
The Lion and the Unicorn
The Queen's Beasts
England
Royal arms
Standards
Honi soit qui mal y pense
Dieu et mon droit
St Edward's Crown
Tudor Crown
Badges (Tudor rose)
Supporters
College of Arms
Scotland
Royal arms
Royal Banner
Nemo me impune lacessit
In My Defens God Me Defend
Crown of Scotland
Honours of Scotland
Heraldic Thistle
Order of the Thistle
Unicorn Supporters
Court of the Lord Lyon
Wales
Royal Badge
Coat of arms of the Prince of Wales
Prince of Wales's feathers
Welsh Dragon
Monarchy of the United Kingdom
Heraldry
vteFlags, Banners and Standards of Heads of State and Government
Heads of State
Heads of Government
Commonwealth (Current)
Whole Commonwealth
Australia
Governor-General
State governors
Canada
King
Governor-General
Lieutenant governors
New Zealand
Governor-General
United Kingdom
Commonwealth (Former)
Australian (1962 2022)
Barbados (1975-2021)
Jamaica (1962 2022)
Malta (1967 1974)
Mauritius (1968 1992)
New Zealand (1962 2022)
Trinidad and Tobago (1966 1976)
Sierra Leone (1961 1971)
Other countries
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Colombia
France
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Russia
President
Sakha
Spain
Sweden
Thailand
Ukraine
United States
President
Vice President
State governors
vteFlags of the United KingdomUnited Kingdom
  United Kingdom (1801 present)
Countries of theUnited Kingdom
  England
  Scotland
  Wales
  Northern Ireland
Banners
  Royal Standard of the United Kingdom (1801 present)
  Royal Standard of the United Kingdom in Scotland (1801 present)
  Royal Banner of Scotland (1222 present)
Historic
  Royal Banner of England (1198 1707)
  Royal standards of England (1327 1547)
  Flags used during the Interregnum (1649 1660)
  Flag of Great Britain (1707 1801)
  Royal Standard of Great Britain (1707 1801)
  Royal Standard of Ireland (1541 1800)
  Ireland within the UK (1801 1922)
  Northern Ireland (1953 1972)
Ensigns
  Blue Ensign
  Red Ensign
  White Ensign
  Green Ensign
  Royal Air Force Ensign
  Civil Air Ensign
 Diplomatic Ensign
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Standard_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=1147245896"