Lateral apertureAnimation showing the fourth ventricle (in red). The little points sticking out on the left and right are the two parts of the lateral recess, which end in the foramen of Luschka.Human caudal brainstem posterior view (Lateral aperture is #18)DetailsIdentifiersLatinapertura lateralis ventriculi quartiAcronym(s)LA4VNeuroNames640TA98A14.1.05.718TA25969FMA78473Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy[edit on Wikidata]
The lateral aperture is a paired structure in human anatomy. It is an opening in each lateral extremity of the lateral recess of the fourth ventricle of the human brain, which also has a single median aperture. The two lateral apertures provide a conduit for cerebrospinal fluid to flow from the brain's ventricular system into the subarachnoid space; specifically into the pontocerebellar cistern at the cerebellopontine angle. The structure is also called the lateral aperture of the fourth ventricle or the foramen of Luschka after anatomist Hubert von Luschka.[1]
Gross total resection of tumours that extend through foramen of Lushka is sometimes not possible due to bradycardia.[2]
References[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lateral aperture.
 This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 798 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918)
^ Hubert Von Luschka at whonamedit.com
^ Greenberg, Mark (2010). Handbook of Neurosurgery (Seventh ed.). Thieme publishers. p. 684. ISBN 978-1-60406-326-4.
vteVentricular system of the human brainLateral ventricles
Body
Lamina affixa
Stria terminalis
Collateral eminence
Occipital horn
Calcar avis
Septum pellucidum
Third ventricle
Recesses
Optic recess
Infundibular recess
Suprapineal recess
Pineal recess
Hypothalamic sulcus
Tela choroidea
Subfornical organ
Posterior commissure
Fourth ventricleRoof
Superior medullary velum
Frenulum
Inferior medullary velum
Taenia
Fastigium
Floor
Upper
Facial colliculus
Locus coeruleus
Lower
Vagal trigone
Hypoglossal trigone
Area postrema
Obex
Medial eminence
Sulcus limitans
Apertures
Median/Magendie
Lateral recess to Lateral/Luschka
Other
Rhomboid fossa
Tela choroidea
Cerebrospinal fluid
Blood brain barrier
Cerebral aqueduct
Interventricular foramina
Perilymphatic duct
Related
Ventriculomegaly
Portal: Anatomy
Authority control 
Terminologia Anatomica
This neuroanatomy article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lateral_aperture&oldid=1074399577"