Church in London, England
For other uses, see Westminster Abbey (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Westminster Cathedral or Westminster Chapel.
Church in  London, EnglandWestminster AbbeyCollegiate Church of Saint Peter at WestminsterWestminster Abbey's western fa adeWestminster AbbeyLocationDean's Yard,London, SW1CountryEnglandDenominationChurch of EnglandPrevious denominationRoman Catholic ChurchChurchmanshipHigh ChurchWebsitewww.westminster-abbey.org HistoryStatusCollegiate churchFounded960; 1063 years ago (960)DedicationSaint PeterConsecrated28 December 1065, 13 October 1269ArchitectureFunctional statusActiveArchitect(s)Surveyor of the Fabric of Westminster AbbeyArchitectural typeChurchStyleGothicYears built960106513th century (rebuilt in Gothic style)1517 Henry VII's Chapel1722 (towers)SpecificationsNave width85 feet (26 m)[1]Height101 feet (31 m)[1]Floor area32,000 square feet (3,000 m2)[1]Number of towers2Tower height225 feet (69 m)[1]Bells10AdministrationDioceseExtra-diocesan (royal peculiar)ClergyDeanDavid HoyleCanon(s)see Dean and ChapterLaityDirector of musicAndrew Nethsingha(Organist and Master of the Choristers)Organist(s)Peter Holder[2](sub-organist)Matthew Jorysz[2](assistant)Organ scholarDewi Rees[2]Location within Central LondonCoordinates51 29 58 N 00 07 39 W  /  51.49944 N 0.12750 W  / 51.49944; -0.12750Coordinates: 51 29 58 N 00 07 39 W  /  51.49944 N 0.12750 W  / 51.49944; -0.12750Founded10th century[3]
UNESCO World Heritage SiteOfficial namePalace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey and Saint Margaret's ChurchTypeCulturalCriteriai, ii, ivDesignated1987 (11th session)Reference no.426CountryUnited KingdomRegionEurope and North America
Listed Building   Grade IOfficial nameWestminster Abbey (The Collegiate Church of St Peter)Designated24 February 1958Reference no.1291494[4]
Westminster Abbey, formally titled the Collegiate Church of Saint Peter at Westminster, is an Anglican church in the City of Westminster, London, England. Since 1066, it has been the location of the coronations of 39 English and British monarchs,[5] and a burial site for 18 English, Scottish and British monarchs.[6] At least 16 royal weddings have occurred at the abbey since 1100.[7]
Although the origins of the church are obscure, there was certainly an abbey operating on the site by the mid-10th century, housing Benedictine monks.[8] The church got its first grand building in the 1060s under the auspices of the English king Edward the Confessor, who is still buried inside.[9] Construction of the present church began in 1245 on the orders of Henry III.[10] The monastery was dissolved in 1559 and the church was made a royal peculiar a Church of England church responsible directly to the sovereign by Elizabeth I.[11] In 1987, the abbey, together with the Palace of Westminster and St. Margaret's Church, was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site because of its outstanding universal value.[12]
The Gothic architecture of the church is chiefly inspired by French and English styles from the 13th century,[13] although some sections of the church show earlier Romanesque styles[14] or later Baroque[15] and modern styles.[16] The Henry VII chapel at the east end of the church is a typical example of Perpendicular Gothic architecture, and was called by John Leland the orbis miraculum (the wonder of the world).[17]
The abbey is the burial site of more than 3,300 people, many of prominence in British history: monarchs, prime ministers, poets laureate, actors, scientists, military leaders, and the Unknown Warrior.[18] The fame of the figures buried there has led to the abbey being called a "National Valhalla".[19]
History[edit]
Although historians agree that there was a monastery dedicated to St. Peter on the site prior to the 11th century, its exact origin is somewhat obscure. One legend claims that it was founded by the Saxon king Sebert, and another that its founder was the fictional 2nd-century British king Lucius.[20] One tradition claims that a young fisherman on the River Thames had a vision of Saint Peter near the site. This seems to have been quoted as the origin of the salmon that Thames fishermen offered to the abbey, a custom still observed annually by the Fishmongers' Company.[21] The recorded origins of the abbey date to the 960s or early 970s, when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site.[8] At that time, the location was an island in the middle of the River Thames called Thorn Ey.[22] The buildings from this time would have been wooden, and have not survived.[23]
11th century: Edward the Confessor's abbey[edit]
Between 1042 and 1052, Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St. Peter's Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church. It was built in the Romanesque style and was the first church in England built on a cruciform floorplan.[24] The master stonemason for the project was Leofsi Duddason,[25] with Godwin and Wendelburh Gretsyd (meaning "fat purse") as patrons, and Teinfrith as "churchwright", probably meaning someone who worked on the carpentry and roof.[26] Increased endowments supported a community that increased from a dozen monks during Dunstan's time, up to as many as eighty monks.[27] The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065, only a week before Edward's death on 5 January 1066.[9] A week later, he was buried in the church; nine years later, his wife Edith was buried alongside him.[28] His successor, Harold Godwinson, was probably crowned here, although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later that year.[29]
The only extant depiction of Edward's abbey is in the Bayeux Tapestry. The foundations still survive under the present church, and above ground, some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory survive in the undercroft, including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey. It was a little smaller than the current church, with a central tower.[30]
In 1103, thirty-seven years after his death, Edward's tomb was re-opened by Abbot Gilbert Crispin and Henry I, who discovered that his body was still in perfect condition. This was considered proof of his saintliness, and he was canonised in 1161. Two years later he was moved to a new shrine, during which time his ring was removed and placed in the abbey's collection.[31]
Westminster Abbey at the time of Edward the Confessor's funeral, as depicted in the Bayeux TapestryPlan showing relative positions of the 11th-century church (in red) and the present church (in blue)The Chamber of the Pyx, one of the few remaining 11th-century sections of the church
13th-14th centuries: Construction of the present church[edit]
The abbot and monks, being adjacent to the Palace of Westminster (the seat of government from the late 13th century), became a powerful force in the centuries after the Norman Conquest, with the Abbot of Westminster taking a seat in the House of Lords. The abbot remained Lord of the manor of Westminster as a town of two to three thousand people grew around the abbey: as a consumer and employer on a grand scale, the abbey helped fuel the town's economy, and relations with the town remained unusually cordial, but no enfranchising charter was issued during the Middle Ages.[32]
Westminster Abbey became the coronation site of Norman kings, but none were buried there until Henry III began to rebuild it in the Gothic style as a shrine to venerate King Edward the Confessor, as a competitor to match the great French churches such as Rheims Cathedral and Sainte-Chapelle,[33] and as a burial place for himself and his family.[34] Edward's shrine subsequently played a great part in his canonisation.[8] Construction began on 6 July 1245 under Henry's master mason, Henry of Reynes.[25] The first building stage included the entire eastern end, the transepts, and the easternmost bay of the nave. The Lady Chapel, built from around 1220 at the extreme eastern end, was incorporated into the chevet of the new building, but has since been replaced by the Henry VII Chapel. Around 1253, Henry of Reynes was replaced by John of Gloucester, who was replaced by Robert of Beverley around 1260.[10] During the summer, there were up to 400 workers on the site at a time,[35] including stonecutters, marblers, stone-layers, carpenters, painters and their assistants, marble polishers, smiths, glaziers, plumbers, and general labourers.[36] From 1257, Henry III held assemblies of local representatives in Westminster Abbey's chapter house, which were a precursor to the House of Commons. Henry III also commissioned the Cosmati pavement in front of the High Altar.[37] Further building work carried the nave on an additional five bays, bringing it to one bay west of the choir. Here, construction stopped in about 1269. By 1261 alone Henry had spent  29,345 19s 8d on the abbey, and the final sum may have been in the region of  50,000.[38] A consecration ceremony was held on 13 October 1269, during which the remains of Edward the Confessor were moved to their present location at the shrine behind the main altar,[39] but after Henry's death and burial in the abbey in 1272, construction did not resume and Edward the Confessor's old Romanesque nave remained attached to the new building for over a century.[10]
In 1296, Edward I captured the Scottish coronation artefact, the Stone of Scone, and had a Coronation Chair made to hold it, which he entrusted to the abbot at Westminster Abbey.[40] In 1303, the small crypt underneath the chapter house was broken into and a great deal of the king's treasure stolen. It was thought that the thieves must have been helped by the abbey monks, fifty of whom were subsequently imprisoned in the Tower of London.[41]
From 1376, Abbot Nicholas Litlyngton[42] and Richard II donated large sums to finish the church, and the remainder of the old nave was pulled down and rebuilding recommenced, with his mason, Henry Yevele, closely following the original (and by then outdated) design.[43] During the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, Richard prayed at Edward the Confessor's shrine for "divine aid when human counsel was altogether wanting" before meeting the rebels at Smithfield. To this day, the abbey holds his full-length portrait, the earliest of an English king, on display near the west door.[44] However, building work was not to be fully completed for many years. Henry V, disappointed with the abbey's unfinished state, gave extra funds towards the rebuilding, and in his will left instructions for a chantry chapel to be built over his tomb, which can still be viewed from ground level today.[45] Building work finally reached the end of the nave, finishing with the west window, in 1495.[46]
Under Henry VII, the 13th-century Lady Chapel was demolished and rebuilt in a Perpendicular style, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1503 (known as the "Henry VII Chapel" or the "Lady Chapel"). The chapel was finished c.1519.[43] Henry's original reason for building such a grand chapel was to have a place suitable for the burial of another saint alongside the Confessor, as he planned on having Henry VI canonised. The Pope asked Henry VII for a large sum of money to achieve sainthood for his predecessor, which he was not willing to hand over, and so instead Henry VII is buried in the centre of the chapel with his wife, Elizabeth of York.[47]
A view of the abbey dated 1532 shows a lantern tower above the crossing,[48] but it is not shown in any later depiction. It is unlikely that the loss of this feature was caused by any catastrophic event, but structural failure seems more likely.[49] However, other sources maintain that a lantern tower was never built. The current squat pyramid dates from the 18th century and the painted wooden ceiling below it was installed during repairs to wartime bomb damage.[50]
In the early 16th century, a project began under Abbot John Islip to add two towers to the western end of the church. These were partially built up to the roof level of the church when building work stopped because of the uncertainty caused by the English Reformation.[51]
The north transept, completed in the 13th century during the reign of Henry IIIThe west end of the nave, designed by Henry Yevele and completed in 1495The vault of the nave, looking west from the crossingCoronation portrait of Richard II, on display in the abbey
16th-17th centuries: Dissolution and Reformation[edit]
In the 1530s, Henry VIII broke away from the authority of the Catholic Church in Rome and seized control of England's monasteries, including Westminster Abbey, beginning the English Reformation and seizing control of monasteries across the country.[52] In 1535, when the king's officers assessed the abbey's funds, their annual income was  3,000.[53] Henry's agents removed many relics, saints' images, and treasures from the abbey: the golden feretory that housed the coffin of Edward the Confessor was melted down, and the monks even hid his bones to save them from destruction.[54] Henry VIII assumed direct control of the abbey in 1539 and granted it the status of a cathedral by charter in 1540, simultaneously issuing letters patent establishing the Diocese of Westminster. By granting the abbey cathedral status, Henry VIII gained an excuse to spare it from the destruction or dissolution which he inflicted on most English abbeys during this period.[55] The abbot, William Benson, instead became dean of the cathedral, while the prior and five of the monks were among the twelve newly created canons.[56]
The Westminster diocese was dissolved in 1550, but the abbey was recognised (in 1552, retroactively to 1550) as a second cathedral of the Diocese of London until 1556.[57] The already-old expression "robbing Peter to pay Paul" may have been given a new lease of life when money meant for the abbey, which is dedicated to Saint Peter, was diverted to the treasury of St. Paul's Cathedral.[58]
The abbey saw the return of Benedictine monks under the Catholic Mary I, but they were again ejected under Elizabeth I in 1559.[11] In 1560, Elizabeth re-established Westminster as a "royal peculiar"   a church of the Church of England responsible directly to the sovereign, rather than to a diocesan bishop   and made it the Collegiate Church of St. Peter (that is, a non-cathedral church with an attached chapter of canons, headed by a dean). From this date onwards, although the building is still called an abbey, it is, strictly speaking, simply a church.[59] Elizabeth also re-founded Westminster School, providing for 40 students known as the King's (or Queen's) Scholars and their schoolmasters. The King's Scholars have the duty of shouting Vivat Rex or Vivat Regina ("Long live the King/ Queen") during the coronation of a new monarch.To this day, the Dean of Westminster Abbey remains the chair of the school governors.[39]
In the early 17th century, the abbey hosted two of the six companies of churchmen, led by Lancelot Andrewes, Dean of Westminster, who translated the King James Version of the Bible.[60]
In 1642, the English Civil War broke out between Charles I and his own Parliament. The Dean and Chapter fled the abbey at the outbreak of war, and were replaced by priests loyal to Parliament.[61] The abbey itself suffered damage during the war, when altars, stained glass, the organ and the crown jewels were damaged or destroyed.[62] Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell was given an elaborate funeral there in 1658, only for a body thought to be Cromwell's to be disinterred in January 1661 and posthumously hanged from a gibbet at Tyburn.[63] In 1669, the abbey was visited by the diarist Samuel Pepys, who saw the body of the 15th-century queen Catherine de Valois. She had been buried in the 13th-century Lady Chapel in 1437, but was exhumed during building work for the Henry VII Chapel and not reburied in the intervening 150 years. Pepys leaned into the coffin and kissed her on the mouth, writing "This was my birthday, thirty-six years old and I did first kiss a queen." She has since been re-interred close to her husband, Henry V.[64] In 1685, during preparations for the coronation of James II, a workman accidentally put a scaffolding pole through the coffin of Edward the Confessor. A chorister, Charles Taylour, pulled a cross on a chain out of the coffin and gave it to the king, who then gave it to the Pope. Its whereabouts today are unknown.[65]
18th-19th centuries: Western towers constructed[edit]
The west front, before and after the construction of the western towers
At the end of the 17th century, the architect Sir Christopher Wren was appointed the abbey's first Surveyor of the Fabric, and began a project to restore the exterior of the church,[51] which was continued by his successor, William Dickinson.[62] After over two hundred years, the abbey's two western towers were finally built between 1722 and 1745 by Nicholas Hawksmoor and John James, constructed from Portland stone to an early example of a Gothic Revival design. Purbeck marble was used for the walls and the floors, although the various tombstones are made of different types of marble.[66]
During an earthquake in 1750, the top of one of the piers on the north side fell down, with the iron and lead that had fastened it. Several houses fell in, and many chimneys were damaged. Another shock had been felt during the preceding month.[67]
On 11 November 1760, the funeral of George II was held at the abbey and the king was interred next to his late wife, Caroline of Ansbach. He left instructions for the sides of his and his wife's coffins to be removed so that their remains could mingle.[68] He was the last monarch to be buried in the abbey.[69] Similarly, during this period the tomb of Richard II had developed a hole through which visitors could put their hand. Several of his bones went missing, including a jawbone, which was taken by a boy from Westminster School and kept in the family until 1906, when it was returned to the abbey.[70]
In the 1830s, the previous screen dividing the nave from the choir, which had been designed by Nicholas Hawksmoor, was replaced by one designed by Edward Blore. The screen contains the monuments for the scientist Isaac Newton and the military general James Stanhope.[71]
Further rebuilding and restoration occurred in the 19th century under the architect George Gilbert Scott, who rebuilt the facade of the north transept, changing the rose window and porches on that side,[72] and designed a new altar and reredos for the crossing.[73] A narthex (a portico or entrance hall) for the west front was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens in the mid-20th century but was not built.[74]
20th century[edit]
 Replica of the Stone of Scone at Scone Palace. In 1914, the historic Stone was broken in half by a suffragette bombing.
The abbey saw "Prayers For Prisoners" suffragette protests in 1913 and 1914. Protesters attended services and interrupted proceedings by chanting "God Save Mrs. Pankhurst" and praying for suffragette prisoners. In one protest, a woman chained herself to her chair during a sermon by the Archbishop of Canterbury.[15] On 11 June 1914, a bomb planted by suffragettes of the Women's Social and Political Union exploded inside the abbey.[75] The abbey was busy with visitors, with around 80 100 people in the building at the time of the explosion.[76][77] Some were as close as 20 yards (18 m) from the bomb and the explosion caused a panic for the exits, but no serious injuries were reported.[77] The bomb blew off a corner of the Coronation Chair.[75] It also caused the Stone of Scone to break in half, although this was not discovered until 1950, when four Scottish nationalists broke into the church to steal the stone and return it to Scotland.[75] The bomb had been packed with nuts and bolts to act as shrapnel.[77] The event was part of a campaign of bombing and arson attacks carried out by suffragettes nationwide between 1912 and 1914.[78] Churches were a particular target, as it was believed that the Church of England was complicit in reinforcing opposition to women's suffrage   32 churches were attacked nationwide between 1913 and 1914.[77][79] Coincidentally, at the time of the explosion, the House of Commons only 100 yards (90 m) away was debating how to deal with the violent tactics of the suffragettes.[77] Many in the Commons heard the explosion and rushed to the scene.[77] Two days after the Westminster Abbey bombing, a second suffragette bomb was discovered before it could explode in St. Paul's Cathedral.[78]
Westminster suffered minor damage during the Blitz on 15 November 1940. On 10/11 May 1941, the Westminster Abbey precincts and roof were hit by incendiary bombs.[80] Although the Auxiliary Fire Service and the abbey's own fire-watchers were able to stop the fire spreading to the whole of the church, the deanery and three residences of abbey clergy and staff were badly damaged, and the lantern tower above the crossing collapsed, leaving the abbey open to the sky.[81] The cost of the damage was estimated at  135,000.[82] Some damage can still be seen in the RAF Chapel, where a small hole in the wall was created by a bomb that fell outside the chapel.[83]
Because of its outstanding universal value, the abbey was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, together with the nearby Palace of Westminster and St. Margaret's Church.[12]
In 1997, the abbey, which was then receiving approximately 1.75 million visitors each year, began charging admission fees to visitors at the door[84] (although a fee for entering the eastern half of the church had existed prior to 1600).[85]
21st century[edit]
In June 2009 the first major building work in 250 years was proposed.[86] A corona   a crown-like architectural feature   was suggested to be built around the lantern over the central crossing, replacing an existing pyramidal structure dating from the 1950s.[87] This was part of a wider  23m development of the abbey completed in 2013.[86] On 4 August 2010, the Dean and Chapter announced that, "[a]fter a considerable amount of preliminary and exploratory work", efforts toward the construction of a corona would not be continued.[88]
 Conservators carrying out work on the Cosmati pavement, 2009
The Cosmati pavement was re-dedicated by the Dean at a service on 21 May 2010 after undergoing a major cleaning and conservation programme.[89] On 17 September 2010, Pope Benedict XVI became the first pope to set foot in the abbey,[90] and on 29 April 2011, the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton took place at the abbey.[91]
In 2018, the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries were created in the medieval triforium. This is a display area for the abbey's treasures in the galleries high up around the sanctuary. A new Gothic access tower with lift was designed by the abbey architect and Surveyor of the Fabric, Ptolemy Dean.[92][16]
In 2020, a 13th-century sacristy was uncovered in the grounds of the abbey as part of an archaeological excavation. The sacristy was used by the monks of the abbey to store objects used in the Mass, such as vestments and chalices. Also on the site were hundreds of burials, mostly of abbey monks.[93]
On 10 March 2021, a vaccination centre opened in Poets' Corner to administer doses of COVID-19 vaccines.[94]
Architecture[edit]
 Plan of the abbey, showing side chapels and key royal tombs
The building is chiefly Reigate stone, and is mostly built in a Geometric Gothic style. The church has an eleven-bay nave with aisles, transepts, and a chancel with ambulatory and radiating chapels. The height of the building is supported with two tiers of flying buttresses. The western end of the nave and the west front were designed by Henry Yevele in a Perpendicular Gothic style. The Henry VII Chapel was built in a late Perpendicular style, probably by Robert and William Vertue. The west towers were designed by Nicholas Hawksmoor and blend Gothic with Baroque style.[15]
The present Westminster Abbey is largely based on French Gothic styles, especially those found at Reims Cathedral, rather than the contemporaneous English Gothic styles. For example, the English Gothic style favours large and elaborate towers, while Westminster Abbey did not have any towers at all until the 18th century. It is also more similar to French churches than English ones in terms of its ratio of height to width: Westminster Abbey has the highest nave of any Gothic church in England, and the nave is much narrower than any medieval English church of a similar height. Instead of a short, square, eastern end, as was the English fashion, Westminster Abbey has a long, rounded apse, and it also has chapels radiating from the ambulatory, which is typical of a French Gothic style. However, there are also distinctively English elements, such as the use of materials of contrasting colours, like Purbeck marble and white stone in the crossing.[13]
The northern door features an elaborately-carved tympanum, leading it to acquire the nickname "Solomon's porch" as a reference to the legendary temple in Jerusalem.[95]
The abbey still retains its 13th- and 14th-century cloisters, which would have been one of the busiest parts of the church when it was a monastery. The west cloister was used for the teaching of novice monks; the north for private study. The south cloister led to the refectory, and the east to the chapter house and dormitory.[14] In the south-west corner of the cloisters is a cellarium used by the monks to store food and wine, which is today the abbey caf .[96] The abbey also contains a smaller Little Cloister, on the site of the monks' infirmary. The Little Cloister dates from the end of the 17th century and contains a small garden with a fountain in the centre.[97] A passageway from the Little Cloister leads to College Garden, which has been in continuous use for 900 years, beginning as the medicine garden for the monks of the abbey and now overlooked by canon's houses and the dormitory for Westminster School.[98]
The newest part of the abbey is the Weston Tower, finished in 2018 and designed by Ptolemy Dean. It sits between the chapter house and the Henry VII Chapel, and contains a lift shaft and spiral staircase to allow public access to the triforium, which contains the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries.[99] The tower has a star-shaped floorplan and leaded windows with an elaborate crown rooftop. The lift shaft inside is faced with 16 kinds of stone from the abbey's history, including Purbeck marble, Reigate stone, and Portland stone. The project took five years and cost  22.9m. The galleries themselves were designed by McInnes Usher McKnight.[16]
North door of the abbey, with rose window and flying buttresses aboveThe Weston Tower, tucked behind a flying buttressThe Little Cloister of the abbeyThe north cloister of the abbey, once used by monks for private study
Interior[edit]
Inside, the church has Purbeck marble piers and shafting. The vaulting of the roof is quadripartite, with ridge ribs and bosses,[15] and at 102 feet (31 m), it is one of the highest church vaults in Britain.[24] In order to fit in as many guests as possible during coronations,the transepts were designed to be unusually long[100] and the choir placed to the east of the crossing rather than to the west- a feature also seen in Rheims Cathedral.[101]
The nave was built slowly over the course of many centuries from the east end to the west end, and yet, because generations of builders stuck to the original design, it has a very unified style. The only marker to show the long gap in building work between 1269 and 1376 is on the spandrels above the arches, which towards the earlier east end are decorated with diaper-work, and towards the west end, built later, are plain.[102] Above the crossing, in the centre of the church, is a roof lantern, destroyed by a bomb in 1941 and restored by the architect Stephen Dykes Bower in 1958.[103] In the choir aisles, shields of donors to the 13th- and 14th-century rebuilding are carved and painted in the spandrels of the arcade.[104] At the eastern end of the nave is a large screen separating the nave from the choir, made of 13th-century stone but totally reworked by the architect Edward Blore in 1834 and with paintwork and gilding by Bower in the 1960s.[102]
 Audio description of the shrine of Edward the Confessor by John Hall
Behind the main altar, in the holiest part of the church, lies the shrine and tomb of Edward the Confessor. Saints' shrines were once common in English medieval churches, but most were destroyed during the English Reformation, and Edward is the only major English saint whose body still occupies his shrine.[105] Arranged around him in a horseshoe shape are a series of tombs of medieval kings and their queens: Henry III, Eleanor of Castile, Edward I, Philippa of Hainault, Edward III, Anne of Bohemia, Richard II, and finally, Henry V in the centre of the horseshoe, at the eastern end.[106] Henry III's tomb was originally covered in gold mosaic and coloured stone,[107] but these have since been picked off by generations of tourists below the level of hand height.[108] Above Henry V's tomb, at a mezzanine level hanging over the ambulatory, is a chantry chapel built by the mason John Thirske, decorated with many sculpted figures, including Henry V riding a horse, and being crowned in the abbey itself.[109] At the western end, the shrine is totally separated from the main church by a stone reredos, closing off the shrine as a semi-private space.[106] The screen depicts episodes from the saint's life, including his birth and the building of the abbey.[110] The shrine is closed to the public except for special events.[111]
The abbey includes side chapels radiating from the ambulatory. Many were originally included in the 13th-century rebuilding as special altars dedicated to individual saints, and many of the chapels still bear saints' names, e.g. St. Nicholas, St. Paul, etc. From the time of the English Reformation, saints' cults were no longer orthodox, and so instead the chapels were repurposed as places for extra burials and monuments.[112] In the north ambulatory are the Islip Chapel, the Nurses' Memorial Chapel (sometimes called the "Nightingale Chapel"), the Chapel of Our Lady of the Pew,[113] the Chapel of St. John the Baptist, and St. Paul's Chapel.[114] The Islip Chapel is named after Abbot John Islip, who commissioned it in the 16th century. The screen inside is decorated with a visual pun on his name, showing an eye and a boy falling from a tree (eye-slip).[115] There are further chapels within the eastern aisle of the north transept, named after (from south to north) St. John the Evangelist, St. Michael, and St. Andrew.[116] In the south ambulatory are the chapels of St. Nicholas, St. Edmund, and St. Benedict.[117]
The footprint of the south transept is by necessity a little smaller than the northern one, because the 13th-century builders butted up against the pre-existing 11th-century cloisters. Instead, to make the transepts match, the south transept is built hanging over the western cloister. This allowed the creation of a room above the cloisters used to store the abbey muniments.[118] In the south transept is the chapel of St. Faith, built c.1250 to serve as the vestry for the abbey monks. On the east wall is a painting of her, made c.1290 1310, showing her holding the grid-iron she was roasted to death on.[119]
The nave, showing the vault's tall height in relation to its relatively narrow widthThe lantern roof over the crossingThe shrine of Edward the ConfessorMonuments in the side chapel of St. Edmund
Chapter house and Pyx Chamber[edit]
The chapter house was used by the abbey monks for daily meetings where they would hear a chapter of the Rule of St. Benedict and be given their instructions for the day from the abbot.[120] It was also used by the King's Great Council and the House of Commons as a meeting chamber during the 14th century.[121] The chapter house was built concurrently with the eastern parts of the abbey under Henry III, between about 1245 and 1253,[72] and is one of the largest in Britain, measuring nearly 60 feet (18 m) across.[120] For 300 years after the English Reformation, it was used to store state records, until these were moved to the Public Record Office in 1863.[122] It was restored by George Gilbert Scott in 1872. The entrance is approached from the east cloister and includes a double doorway with a large tympanum above.[72] Inner and outer vestibules lead to the octagonal chapter house. It is built in a Geometrical Gothic style with an octagonal crypt below and a pier of eight shafts carrying the vaulted ceiling. Around the sides are blind arcading and numerous stone benches, above which are large, four-light, quatre-foiled windows.[72] The exterior includes flying buttresses added in the 14th century and a leaded tent-lantern roof on an iron frame designed by Scott.[121]
The walls of the chapter house are decorated with 14th- and 15th-century paintings representing the Apocalypse, the Last Judgement, and birds and animals.[123] The depiction of the Apocalypse is the only example in England.[124] The chapter house also has an original mid-13th-century tiled floor. A wooden door within the vestibule was made with a tree felled 1032-1064 and is one of the oldest in Britain.[123] It may have been the door to the 11th-century chapter house in Edward the Confessor's abbey, and was re-used as the door to the Pyx Chamber in the 13th century. Today it leads to an office.[120]
The adjoining Pyx Chamber formed the undercroft of the monks' dormitory. It dates to the late 11th century and was used as a monastic and royal treasury. The outer walls and circular piers date from the 11th-century; several of the capitals were enriched in the 12th century, and the stone altar added in the 13th century. The term pyx refers to the boxwood chest in which coins were held and presented to a jury during the Trial of the Pyx, in which newly minted coins were presented to ensure they conformed to the required standards.[14]
The chapter house and Pyx Chamber at Westminster Abbey are in the guardianship of English Heritage, but under the care and management of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster.[121]
Interior of the chapter houseUmbrella vault ceiling of the chapter houseMedieval wall paintings inside the chapter houseAn 11th-century door in the undercroft of the chapter house, possibly Britain's oldest door
Henry VII Chapel[edit]
Main article: Henry VII Chapel
External video Henry VII Chapel, Smarthistory[125]
The Henry VII Lady Chapel, also known simply as the Henry VII Chapel, is a large Lady chapel at the far eastern end of Westminster Abbey, paid for by the will of King Henry VII.[126] The chapel is built in a very late Perpendicular Gothic style, the magnificence of which caused the English poet John Leland to call it the orbis miraculum (the wonder of the world).[17] The tombs of several monarchs, including Edward V, Henry VII, Edward VI, Mary I, Elizabeth I, James I, Charles II, George II and Mary, Queen of Scots, are found in the chapel.[127]
The chapel is noted for its pendant and fan vault ceiling, probably designed by William Vertue, which the writer Washington Irving said was "achieved with the wonderful minuteness and airy security of a cobweb". The interior walls are densely decorated with carvings, including 95 statues of saints. Many statues of saints in England were destroyed in the 17th century, so these are a rare survival.[83] From the outside, the chapel is surrounded by flying buttresses, each taking the form of a polygonal tower topped with a cupola. At the centre of the chapel is the tomb of Henry VII and his wife, Elizabeth of York, made by the sculptor Pietro Torregiano,[17] who fled to England from Italy after getting into a fight with the artist Michaelangelo and breaking his nose.[83]
The chapel has within it further sub-chapels radiating from the main structure. One of these to the north contains the tombs of Mary I and Elizabeth I, both coffins being within Elizabeth's monument; and another to the south contains the tomb of Mary, Queen of Scots. Both monuments were commissioned by James I, the successor of Elizabeth to the English throne and the son of Mary, Queen of Scots.[128] At the far eastern end is the RAF Chapel, with a stained-glass window dedicated to those who died in the Battle of Britain in 1940.[83]
The chapel has also been the mother church of the Order of the Bath since 1725, and the banners of members hang above the stalls.[129] The stalls themselves retain their medieval misericords   small ledges for monks to perch on during services, often decorated with varied and humorous carvings.[130]
Monastic buildings[edit]
 The Jerusalem Chamber circa 1914
Many of the rooms used by the monks still exist, only repurposed. The dormitory was turned into a library and a school room, and their offices have been converted into houses for the clergy.[131] The abbot had his own lodgings and ate separately from the rest of the monks. The abbot's lodgings still exist, but are instead used by the dean of the church, and are probably the oldest continuously occupied residence in London.[132] They include the Jericho Parlour, built c.1520 and covered in wooden linenfold panelling, and the Jerusalem Chamber, which was the abbot's drawing room. The windows in the Jerusalem Chamber are stained glass and may have come from the original Lady Chapel which existed prior to the building of the Henry VII Chapel. The abbot also had a grand dining hall complete with minstrels' gallery, now used by Westminster School.[133] The prior also had his own household separate from the monks, the remains of which form the core of Ashburnham House in Little Dean's Yard, now also part of Westminster School.[134]
Artworks and treasures[edit]
In the nave and transepts are sixteen crystal chandeliers made of handblown Waterford glass. They were designed by A. B. Read and Stephen Dykes Bower, and donated by the Guinness family in 1965 to commemorate the abbey's 900th anniversary.[135] The choir stalls were designed by Edward Blore in 1848.[103] Some stalls are assigned to high commissioners of countries in the Commonwealth of Nations.[136]
Beyond the crossing to the west is the sacrarium, which contains the high altar. The abbey holds the 13th-century Westminster Retable, which is thought to be the altarpiece from Henry III's 13th-century church, in its collections. The present high altar and screen were designed by George Gilbert Scott between 1867 and 1873, and contain sculptures of Moses, St. Peter, St. Paul and King David made by the sculptor H. H. Armistead, and a mosaic of the Last Supper by the designer J. R. Clayton and the mosaic-maker Antonio Salviati.[137]
The south transept contains wall paintings, made c.1300, which Richard Jenkyns calls "the grandest of their time remaining in England".[138] They depict the apostle Thomas viewing Christ's stigmata and St. Christopher carrying the Christ child, and were discovered in 1934 behind two monuments.[139] 14th-century paintings were also discovered during cleaning in 1923 on the backs of the sedilia, or seats used by priests on either side of the high altar. On the south side, there are three figures: Edward the Confessor, the angel Gabriel and the Virgin Mary; and on the north side there are two kings, possibly Henry III and Edward I.[140] They were walled off during the Commonwealth period by order of Parliament.[141]
Over the Great West Door are ten statues of 20th-century Christian martyrs of various denominations, made by the abbey's craftsmen in 1998.[142] Those commemorated are Maximilian Kolbe, Manche Masemola, Janani Luwum, Grand Duchess Elizabeth Feodorovna, Martin Luther King Jr.,  scar Romero, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Esther John, Lucian Tapiedi, and Wang Zhiming.[143][144]
From the chapter house is a doorway leading to the abbey's library, built as a dormitory for the monks and used as a library since the 16th century. The collection consists of around 16,000 volumes. Next to the library is the Muniment Room, where the abbey's store of historic archives is kept.[122]
The abbey choir, with stalls designed by Edward BloreMedieval wall paintings in the south transept, depicting St. Thomas and St. ChristopherA painting of a king on the abbey sedilia, possibly Edward IStatues of 20th-century martyrs above the west doorThe high altar and altar screen, designed by George Gilbert Scott
Cosmati pavement[edit]
 The Cosmati pavement at Westminster Abbey is depicted in Hans Holbein's painting The Ambassadors, which can be seen nearby in the National Gallery
At the crossing, in front of Edward the Confessor's shrine and the main altar, is the Cosmati pavement, a 700-year-old tiled floor made of almost 80,000 pieces of coloured glass and stone set in Purbeck marble. As opposed to traditional mosaic work, the pieces are not cut to a uniform size, being instead made with a technique known as opus sectile ("cut work").[145] The floor is named after the Cosmati family in Rome who were known for such work.[37] It was commissioned by Richard Ware, who travelled to Rome in 1258 when he became Abbot, and returned with stone and artists. The porphyry used was originally quarried as far away as Egypt, and was presumably brought to Italy during the days of the Roman Empire. When it was made, it was surrounded by an inscription in brass letters, since lost, written in Latin, giving the name of the artist as Odericus,[146] probably referring to designer Pietro di Oderisio or his son.[147] The inscription also predicts the end of the world 19,863 years after the creation of the world.[148] The pavement is depicted in the 16th-century painting The Ambassadors by Hans Holbein.[107]
Stained glass[edit]
 The Queen's Window, designed by David Hockney
The 13th century abbey's windows would have been filled with stained glass, but much of this was destroyed in the English Civil War and the Blitz and replaced with clear, plain glass. Since the 19th century, new stained glass has replaced clear, designed by artists such as Ninian Comper (on the north side of the nave), Hugh Easton and Alan Younger (in the Henry VII Chapel).[149]
The north rose window was designed by James Thornhill and made by Joshua Price in 1722 and shows Christ, the apostles (not including Judas Iscariot), and the four Evangelists. In the centre is the Bible. The window was restored by J. L. Pearson in the 19th century, during which the figures of the feet were cut off.[150] Thornhill also designed the great west window, which shows the Biblical figures of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with representatives of the twelve Tribes of Israel underneath.[151]
In the Henry VII Chapel, the west window was designed by John Lawson and unveiled in 1995. It depicts coats of arms and cyphers of Westminster Abbey's benefactors, in particular John Templeton, whose coat of arms is depicted prominently in the lower panel. In the centre are shown the arms of Elizabeth II. The central east window is designed by Alan Younger and was unveiled in 2000. It is dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It depicts the Hale Bopp comet, which was passing over the artist's house at the time, as the star of Bethlehem. The donors of the window, Lord and Lady Harris of Peckham, are shown kneeling at the bottom.[152]
In 2018, the artist David Hockney unveiled a new stained-glass window for the north transept, designed to celebrate the reign of Elizabeth II. It shows a countryside scene inspired by his native Yorkshire, with hawthorn blossoms and blue skies. Hockney used an iPad to design the window to replicate the backlight that comes through stained glass.[153]
Burials and memorials[edit]
Main article: Burials and memorials in Westminster Abbey
Henry III rebuilt the abbey partly in honour of a royal saint, Edward the Confessor   whose relics were placed in a shrine in the sanctuary   and partly to serve as a burial place for himself and his family. He was interred near to the shrine, as were many of the Plantagenet kings of England, their wives and other relatives. From the death of Henry III in 1272 until the death of George II in 1760, most kings and queens were buried in the abbey. They include Edward the Confessor, Henry III, Edward I, Edward III, Richard II, Henry V, Edward V, Henry VII, Edward VI, Mary I, Mary Queen of Scots, Elizabeth I, James I, Charles II, Mary II, William III, Queen Anne, and George II.[6] Elizabeth and Mary, Queen of Scots were the last monarchs to be buried with full tomb effigies; monarchs buried after them are commemorated in the abbey with simple inscriptions.[154] Most monarchs after George II have been buried either in St. George's Chapel, Windsor or at the Frogmore Royal Burial Ground to the east of Windsor Castle.[155][156]
For much of the abbey's history, most of the people buried there besides monarchs were people with a connection to the church   either ordinary locals or the monks of the abbey itself, who were generally buried without surviving markers.[157] Since the 18th century, it has become one of Britain's most significant honours to be buried or commemorated in the abbey.[158] The practice of burying national figures in the abbey began under Oliver Cromwell with the burial of Admiral Robert Blake in 1657 (although he was subsequently reburied outside).[159] The practice spread to include generals, admirals, politicians, doctors and scientists, and was much boosted by the lavish funeral and monument of Isaac Newton, who died in 1727.[158]
In 1864, Arthur Penrhyn Stanley was appointed dean of the abbey, and was very influential in turning it into a "national church". He invited popular preachers to draw in large congregations, and attracted crowds by arranging for celebrities of the day to be buried in the abbey, such as writer Charles Dickens, explorer David Livingstone, and scientist Charles Darwin even when those people had expressed wishes to be buried elsewhere.[160]
Politicians buried in the abbey include Pitt the Elder, Charles James Fox, Pitt the Younger, William Gladstone, and Clement Attlee. A cluster of scientists surrounds the tomb of Isaac Newton, including Charles Darwin and Stephen Hawking. Actors include David Garrick, Henry Irving, and Laurence Olivier. Musicians tend to be buried in the north aisle of the nave, and include Muzio Clementi, Henry Purcell, and Ralph Vaughan Williams. George Frideric Handel is buried in Poets Corner.[161]
During the early 20th century, it became increasingly common to bury cremated remains rather than coffins in the abbey. In 1905, the actor Sir Henry Irving was cremated and his ashes buried in Westminster Abbey, thereby becoming the first person to be cremated before interment at the abbey.[162] The majority of modern interments are of cremated remains, but some burials still take place   Frances Challen, wife of Sebastian Charles, Canon of Westminster, was buried alongside her husband in the south choir aisle in 2014.[163] Members of the Percy family have a family vault, the Northumberland Vault, in St Nicholas' Chapel within the abbey.[164]
Poets' Corner[edit]
Main article: Poets' Corner
The south transept of the church is nicknamed Poets' Corner because of its high concentration of burials and memorials to poets and writers. The first was Geoffrey Chaucer, buried around 1400, who was employed as master of the King's Works and had apartments in the abbey. Nearly 200 years later in 1599, a second poet, Edmund Spenser, who was local to the abbey, was buried nearby. However, the idea of a poets' corner did not fully crystallise until the 18th century, when memorials were established to writers buried elsewhere, such as William Shakespeare and John Milton. Since then, writers buried in Poets' Corner include John Dryden, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Charles Dickens, and Rudyard Kipling. However, not all writers buried in the abbey are in the south transept: Ben Jonson is buried standing upright in the north aisle of the nave, and Aphra Behn in the cloisters.[165]
The Unknown Warrior[edit]
Main article: The Unknown Warrior
On the floor, just inside the Great West Door, in the centre of the nave, is the grave of The Unknown Warrior, an unidentified British soldier killed on a European battlefield during the First World War. Although many countries have adopted the tradition of a Tomb of the Unknown Soldier or Warrior, the one in Westminster Abbey was the first, and came about as a response to the unprecedented death rate of the war.[166] The idea came from an army chaplain called David Railton, who first suggested the idea in 1920.[167] The funeral was held on the second anniversary of the end of the war,  11 November 1920.[166] The Unknown Warrior lay in state for a week afterwards, and an estimated 1.25 million people queued to see him in that time. This grave is the only one in the abbey on which it is forbidden to walk,[168] and every visit by a foreign head of state begins with a visit to the tomb.[167]
Tomb of Elizabeth I, containing the remains of Elizabeth and her half-sister Mary IThe grave of scientist Stephen Hawking in the nave of the abbeySome of the memorials to writers in Poets' CornerTomb of the Unknown Warrior at the west end of the nave
Royal occasions[edit]
The abbey has strong connections with the royal family, being patronised by various monarchs; as the location for coronations, royal weddings and funerals; and where several monarchs have attended services. In addition, one monarch was born and one died at Westminster Abbey. In 1413, Henry IV collapsed while praying at the shrine of Edward the Confessor. He was moved into the Jerusalem Chamber and died shortly afterwards.[169] Between 1470 and 1471, because of fallout from the Wars of the Roses, Elizabeth Woodville, the wife of Edward IV, took sanctuary at Westminster Abbey while her husband was deposed, and gave birth to the future Edward V in the abbot's house.[170]
 Queen Victoria's golden jubilee celebrations in Westminster Abbey in 1887; she is shown enthroned centre leftThe first jubilee celebration held at the abbey was for Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee in 1887. Rather than wearing the full regalia that she had worn at her coronation, instead she wore her ordinary black mourning clothes topped with the insignia of the Order of the Garter and a miniature crown. She sat in the Coronation Chair, which was given a coat of dark varnish for the occasion which afterwards had to be painstakingly removed,[171] making her the only monarch to have sat in the chair twice.[172] Queen Elizabeth II and her husband, Prince Philip, also marked their silver, gold, and diamond wedding anniversaries with services at the abbey,  and regularly attended annual observances there for Commonwealth Day.[166]
The monarch participates in the Office of the Royal Maundy on Maundy Thursday each year, during which selected elderly people receive alms consisting of coins, given out to as many people of each sex as the monarch has years of their life. Since 1952, the service moved to various churches around the country, returning to the abbey every 10 years.[173]
Coronations[edit]
Main articles: Coronation of the British monarch and List of British coronations
Since the coronation in 1066 of William the Conqueror, a total of 39 English and British monarchs[174] (not counting Edward V, Lady Jane Grey, and Edward VIII, who were never crowned) have been crowned in Westminster Abbey.[39] In 1216, Henry III could not be crowned in the abbey, as London was captured by hostile forces at the time. He was crowned in Gloucester Cathedral and later had a second coronation at Westminster Abbey in 1220.[175] When he had the abbey rebuilt in the 13th century, it was designed with future coronations in mind, with long transepts in order to accommodate many guests.[100] On 11 October 2022, it was announced that the coronation of King Charles III would also take place at the abbey on 6 May 2023.[176]
The area of the church used is the crossing, known in the abbey as the theatre because of its particular suitability for such grand events. Rather than being filled with immovable pews as in many similar churches, the space in the crossing is clear, allowing for temporary seating to be installed in the transepts.[174]
The Coronation Chair, the throne on which English and British sovereigns have been seated at the moment of crowning, is housed within the abbey in St. George's Chapel near the west door, and has been used at coronations since the 14th century.[177] From 1301 to 1996 (except for a short time in 1950 when the stone was temporarily stolen by Scottish nationalists), the chair also housed the Stone of Scone upon which the kings of Scots were crowned. Although it has been kept in Scotland, at Edinburgh Castle, since 1996, it is intended that the stone will be returned temporarily to the Coronation Chair for use during future coronation ceremonies.[178] In the 18th and 19th centuries, the chair was freely accessible to the public, who were able to sit in it, and even carve initials into the woodwork.[179]
Much of the order of service still derives from an illuminated manuscript called the Liber Regalis, made in 1377 for the coronation of Richard II and held in the abbey's collections.[180]
Prior to the 17th century, when a king married after his coronation, he would hold a separate coronation for his new queen. The last of these to take place in the abbey was the coronation of Anne Boleyn in 1533, after her marriage to Henry VIII.[52] There have been a total of 15 separate coronations for queen consorts in the abbey. A coronation for Henry VIII's third wife, Jane Seymour, was planned, but she died before it took place, and no coronations were planned for his subsequent wives. Mary I's husband, Philip of Spain, was not given a separate coronation for fear that he would attempt to rule alone after Mary's death. Since then, there have been few opportunities for a second coronation, as monarchs have generally come to the throne already married.[174] In 1170, Henry II held a separate coronation at Westminster Abbey for his son, known as Henry the Young King, while he, Henry II, was still alive, in an attempt to secure the succession. However, the Young King died before his father, so never took the throne.[174]
Many new monarchs have presented the abbey with a gift of fine fabric at their coronation. Some have given as little as a symbolic scrap, but some give more: George V donated new altar cloths, and George VI and Elizabeth II each gave enough to make new vestments for the abbey clergy.[171]
The Coronation Chair, built with a slot underneath the seat to hold the Scottish Stone of SconeThe coronation of Charles II in the abbey, 1661The coronation of George IV in the abbey, 1822Portrait photograph of Elizabeth II on her coronation day, with the interior of the abbey's Henry VII Chapel visible in the backdrop
Royal weddings[edit]
 The 1947 wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Phillip Mountbatten in Westminster Abbey
Prior to the 20th century, royal weddings at the abbey were relatively rare, with royals often being married in a Chapel Royal or at Windsor Castle instead. This changed with the 1922 wedding of Princess Mary at the abbey, which successfully started a trend. In 1923, Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon became the first royal bride to leave her bouquet on the Grave of the Unknown Warrior, a practice continued by many royal brides since.[181]
Royal weddings have included:[182]
Date
Groom
Bride
11 November 1100
Henry I of England
Matilda of Scotland
4 January 1243
Richard, Earl of Cornwall
Sanchia of Provence
8 or 9 April 1269
Edmund, Earl of Leicester and Lancaster
Aveline de Forz
30 April 1290
Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester
Joan of Acre
8 July 1290
John II, Duke of Brabant
Margaret of England
20 January 1382
Richard II of England
Anne of Bohemia
18 January 1486
Henry VII of England
Elizabeth of York
27 February 1919
Captain The Hon. Alexander Ramsay
Princess Patricia of Connaught
28 February 1922
Henry Lascelles, Viscount Lascelles
The Princess Mary
26 April 1923
Prince Albert, Duke of York
Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon
29 November 1934
Prince George, Duke of Kent
Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark
20 November 1947
Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten
The Princess Elizabeth
6 May 1960
Antony Armstrong-Jones
The Princess Margaret
24 April 1963
The Hon. Angus Ogilvy
Princess Alexandra of Kent
14 November 1973
Captain Mark Phillips
The Princess Anne
23 July 1986
The Prince Andrew
Sarah Ferguson
29 April 2011[91]
Prince William of Wales
Catherine Middleton
Royal funerals[edit]
Many royal funerals have taken place at the abbey, dating back to that of Edward the Confessor in 1066. Until the 18th century, many English and British monarchs were buried here.[39]
 The tomb of two children in the Henry VII Chapel, thought to be the Princes in the Tower
In 1290, Eleanor of Castile, queen of Edward I, died in Nottinghamshire. Over the course of several days, the body was brought to Westminster Abbey, and at each of the places the cort ge rested, an Eleanor Cross was erected in memory. The most famous of these is Charing Cross, the last stop before the funeral. Eleanor of Castile is buried in the abbey alongside her husband.[40]
In 1483, the child king Edward V and his brother, Richard (known collectively as the Princes in the Tower), disappeared while preparing for Edward's coronation at the Tower of London. Although it is not known for sure what happened to the boys, historians have suspected their uncle, who became Richard III, of having them murdered. In 1674, the remains of two children were discovered at the Tower, and were buried in Westminster Abbey with royal honours. In 1933, the bones were studied by an anatomist who suggested that they might indeed be the remains of the two princes.[183] Requests to test the DNA of the bones to determine their provenance have been refused, both by the abbey and Queen Elizabeth II, with a spokesperson for the abbey saying, "the mortal remains of two young children [...] should not be disturbed".[184]
Although not a royal funeral, the burial of Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell took place at the abbey in 1658 with full honours normally only given to monarchs. On top of the coffin lay an effigy of Cromwell complete with crown.[185]
In 1926, the body of Queen Alexandra lay in state in the abbey.[186] On 6 September 1997 the formal, though not state funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, was held at the abbey. It was a royal ceremonial funeral including royal pageantry and Anglican funeral liturgy. In the run-up to the funeral, the railings of the abbey were swamped with flowers and tributes, and the event was more widely witnessed than any previous occasion in the abbey's history, with 2 billion television viewers worldwide.[187] A second public service was held on the following Sunday. The burial occurred privately on 6 September on the grounds of her family estate, Althorp, on a private island.[188]
On 19 September 2022, the state funeral of Elizabeth II took place at the abbey before her burial at St George's Chapel, Windsor.[189] It was the first funeral of a monarch at Westmister Abbey for more than 260 years.[190]
Dean and Chapter[edit]
Main article: Dean and Chapter of Westminster
Westminster Abbey is a collegiate church governed by the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, as established by royal charter of Elizabeth I dated 21 May 1560,[191] which created it as the Collegiate Church of St. Peter Westminster, a royal peculiar under the personal jurisdiction of the sovereign.[59] The members of the Chapter are the dean and four canons residentiary;[192] they are assisted by the Receiver General and Chapter Clerk.[193] One of the canons is also Rector of St. Margaret's Church, Westminster, and often also holds the post of Chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons.[194] In addition to the dean and canons, there are at present three full-time minor canons: the precentor, the sacrist and the chaplain.[195] A series of priests vicar assist the minor canons.[195]
King's Almsmen[edit]
An establishment of six King's (or Queen's) Almsmen and women is supported by the abbey; they are appointed by royal warrant on the recommendation of the dean and the Home Secretary, attend Matins and Evensong on Sundays and do such duties as may be requested (in return for which they receive a small stipend); when on duty they wear a distinctive red gown with a crowned rose badge on the left shoulder.[196] From the late 18th until the late 20th century the almsmen were usually ex-servicemen, but today they are mostly retired employees of the abbey. Historically, the King's Almsmen and women were retired Crown servants residing in the Royal Almshouse at Westminster, which had been established by Henry VII in connection with his building of the new Lady Chapel, to support the priests of his chantry by offering daily prayer. The Royal Almshouse survived the Dissolution of the Monasteries, but was demolished for road-widening in 1779.[196]
Schools[edit]
Main articles: Westminster School and Westminster Abbey Choir School
Westminster School is located in the precincts of the abbey. Teaching certainly took place from the fourteenth century, alongside the monks of the abbey, but the school regards its founder as Elizabeth I, who dissolved the monastery for the final time and provided for the establishment of the school[197] alongside a dean of the abbey, canons, and assistant clergy and lay officers.[198] The schoolboys themselves have added to the history of the abbey, often with their rambunctiousness: Westminster boys have defaced the Coronation Chair, disrupted services, and once interrupted a consecration of four bishops by starting a bare-knuckle fight in the cloisters.[197] One schoolboy carved upon the Coronation Chair that he had slept in it overnight, making him probably its longest inhabitant.[199] In 1868, Westminster School became independent of the abbey Dean and Chapter, although the two institutions are still closely connected.[198]
Separately, Westminster Abbey Choir School is also located within the abbey grounds and exclusively educates the choirboys who sing for abbey services.[200]
Music[edit]
 Westminster Abbey choir
Westminster Abbey has its own choir which has sung at daily services since the 14th century.[201] The abbey choir consists of 12 professional adults and up to thirty boy choristers who attend Westminster Abbey Choir School.[136]
Organ[edit]
See also: List of Westminster Abbey organists
The organ was built by Harrison & Harrison in 1937, then with four manuals and 84 speaking stops, and was used for the first time at the coronation of George VI. Some pipework from the previous Hill organ of 1848 was revoiced and incorporated in the new scheme. The two organ cases, designed and built in the late 19th century by J. L. Pearson, were reinstated and coloured in 1959.[202]
In 1982 and 1987, Harrison & Harrison enlarged the organ under the direction of the abbey organist Simon Preston to include an additional Lower Choir Organ and a Bombarde Organ. The full instrument has five manuals and 109 speaking stops. In 2006, the console of the organ was refurbished by Harrison & Harrison, and space was prepared for two additional 16 ft stops on the Lower Choir Organ and the Bombarde Organ.[202]
Andrew Nethsingha was announced as Organist and Master of the choristers in December 2022, taking up the post in 2023.[201]
Bells[edit]
The bells at the abbey were installed in the north-west tower in 1971.[203] The ring is made up of ten bells, hung for change ringing, cast in 1971 by the Whitechapel Bell Foundry, tuned to the notes: F#, E, D, C#, B, A, G, F#, E and D. The Tenor bell in D (588.5 Hz) has a weight of 30 cwt, 1 qtr, 15 lb (3403 lb or 1544 kg).[204]
In addition there are two service bells cast by Robert Mot in 1585 and 1598, a Sanctus bell cast in 1738 by Richard Phelps and Thomas Lester, and two unused bells one cast about 1320, and a second cast in 1742, by Thomas Lester.[204] The two service bells and the 1320 bell, along with a fourth small silver "dish bell", kept in the refectory, have been noted as being of historical importance by the Church Buildings Council of the Church of England.[205]
Order of the Bath[edit]
Main article: Order of the Bath
The Most Honourable Order of the Bath is a British order of chivalry whose spiritual home is the Henry VII Chapel in Westminster Abbey. It was founded by George I on 18 May 1725 and devised by Robert Walpole and John Anstis. The name derives from the elaborate medieval ceremony for appointing a knight, which involved bathing (as a symbol of purification) as one of its elements.[69]
 Banners of members of the Order of the Bath in the Henry VII Chapel
The Order consists of the monarch, the Great Master, and three Classes of members:
Knight Grand Cross (GCB) or Dame Grand Cross (GCB)
Knight Commander (KCB) or Dame Commander (DCB)
Companion (CB) [206]
The Order of the Bath is the fourth-most senior of the British Orders of Chivalry, after The Most Noble Order of the Garter, The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and The Most Illustrious Order of St Patrick (dormant).[207]
Members are given stalls, complete with their banner, crest and stallplate, at installation ceremonies at the abbey every four years. The ceremonies were stopped in 1847 and recommenced during the reign of George V. There are far many more members than stalls, and so some members wait many years for their installation.[208]
The Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries[edit]
The Westminster Abbey Museum was located in the 11th-century vaulted undercroft beneath the former monks' dormitory. This was one of the oldest areas of the abbey, dating back almost to the foundation of the church by Edward the Confessor in 1065. This space had been used as a museum since 1908[209] but was closed to the public in June 2018, when it was replaced as a museum by the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries, high up in the abbey's triforium.[92]
The exhibits include a set of life-size effigies of English and British monarchs and their consorts, originally made to lie on the coffin in the funeral procession or to be displayed over the tomb. The effigies date from the 14th to the 18th century, and some even include original clothes.[210]
On display in the galleries is a portrait of the Queen called The Coronation Theatre, Westminster Abbey: A Portrait of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, painted by the artist Ralph Heimans, depicting the monarch standing on the Cosmati pavement of Westminster Abbey, where she was crowned in 1953.[211] Other exhibits include a model of an unbuilt tower, designed by architect Christopher Wren; a paper model of the abbey showing Queen Victoria's 1837 coronation; and the wedding licence of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, who were married in the abbey in 2011.[16]
In popular culture[edit]
 Fibreboard prop copies of marble Westminster Abbey monuments made for the filming of The Da Vinci Code, on display in Lincoln Cathedral
The abbey is mentioned in the play Henry VIII written by William Shakespeare and John Fletcher, when a gentleman describes the scene of Anne Boleyn's coronation.[212]
The abbey has been mentioned in poetry as early as 1598, in a sonnet by Thomas Bastard, which begins "When I behold, with deep astonishment/ To famous Westminster how there restort/ Living in brass or stony monument/ The princes and the worthies of all sort". Poetry about the abbey has also been written by Francis Beaumont[213] and John Betjeman.[214]
The abbey has appeared in paintings by artists such as Canaletto,[69] Wenceslaus Hollar,[215] William Bruce Ellis Ranken,[216] and J. M. W. Turner.[217]
Key scenes in the book and film The Da Vinci Code take place in Westminster Abbey. In 2005, the abbey refused filming permission to the crew of the film, calling the book "theologically unsound". Instead, the film uses Lincoln Cathedral as a stand-in for the abbey.[218] The abbey issued a factsheet to their staff to allow them to answer questions from fans that debunked several claims made in the book.[219]
In 2022, it was announced that the abbey had given rare permission for filming inside the church for the film Mission: Impossible   Dead Reckoning Part Two.[220]
See also[edit]
Christianity portalLondon portal
Archdeacon of Westminster
Dean of Westminster
List of churches in London
The Abbey (a three-part BBC TV documentary written and hosted by playwright Alan Bennett)
Notes and references[edit]
Notes[edit]
^ a b c d "Dimensions of Westminster Abbey" (PDF). westminster-abbey.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
^ a b c "The Abbey Choir and musicians". Westminster Abbey. Retrieved 9 September 2022.
^ Newcomb, Rexford (1997). "Abbey".  In Johnston, Bernard (ed.). Collier's Encyclopedia. Vol. I A to Ameland (First ed.). New York, NY: P.F. Collier. pp. 8 11.
^ Historic England. "Westminster Abbey (The Collegiate Church of St Peter) (1291494)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 9 July 2015.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 69.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010.
^ Hassan, Jennifer (8 January 2023). "Royal Treatment". Richmond Times-Dispatch. Archived from the original on 30 January 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2023.
^ a b c Page 1909.
^ a b Fernie 2009, p. 139 143.
^ a b c Jenkyns 2004, p. 12.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, pp. 45 47.
^ a b "Palace of Westminster and Westminster Abbey including Saint Margaret's Church". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2023.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, p. 23.
^ a b c Carr 1999, p. 24.
^ a b c d "Westminster Abbey (The Collegiate Church of St Peter), Non Civil Parish   1291494 | Historic England". Historic England. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2023.
^ a b c d Wainwright, Oliver (29 May 2018). "'A gothic space rocket to a secret realm'   Westminster Abbey's new  23m tower". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ a b c Jenkyns 2004, pp. 48 53.
^ Castle, Stephen (15 June 2018). "Stephen Hawking Enters 'Britain's Valhalla,' Where Space Is Tight". The New York Times. New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2019.
^ Morris 1900, p. 37.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 10.
^ Cavendish, Richard (12 December 2015). "The consecration of Westminster Abbey". History Today. Retrieved 7 February 2023.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 11.
^ Westlake 1927, pp. 51 52.
^ a b Wilkinson 2013, p. 6.
^ a b Corrigan 2018, p. 148.
^ Corrigan 2018, p. 159.
^ Harvey 1993, p. 2.
^ Stafford 2009, p. 137.
^ Carr 1999, p. 2.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 8.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 11.
^ Harvey 1993, p. 6.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 27.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 16.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 17.
^ Corrigan 2018, p. 56.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, pp. 17 18.
^ Corrigan 2018, p. 41.
^ a b c d Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 7.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 23.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 41.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 10.
^ a b Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England) 1924.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, pp. 27 29.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, pp. 30 33.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 11.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 53.
^ Rodwell 2010, p. 17.
^ Rodwell 2010, pp. 23 28.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 34.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, p. 13.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 43.
^ Harvey 2007.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 44.
^ Dixon 1908.
^ Horn 1992, p. 65-67.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 56.
^ Brewer 2001, p. 923.
^ a b "England by Diocese". Anglicans online. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ "HM The Queen attends King James Bible Service". Westminster Abbey. 16 November 2011. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 53.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, p. 64.
^ Ashley, Maurice; Morrill, John S. "Oliver Cromwell: Administration As Lord Protector". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 February 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2023.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 19.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 16.
^ "Nicholas Hawksmoor". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ Thornbury 1878, p. 401-411.
^ Black 2007, p. 253.
^ a b c Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 57.
^ Wilkinson 2013, pp. 16 18.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 113.
^ a b c d Scott 1863, pp. 41 43, 56 58.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 154.
^ Lutyens, Edwin Landseer (1943). "Preliminary designs for a proposed narthex for Westminster Abbey". Royal Institute of British Architects. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022.
^ a b c Webb 2014, p. 148.
^ Walker, Rebecca (2020). "Deeds, Not Words: The Suffragettes and Early Terrorism in the City of London". The London Journal. 45 (1): 59. doi:10.1080/03058034.2019.1687222. ISSN 0305-8034. S2CID 212994082.
^ a b c d e f Jones 2016, p. 65.
^ a b Riddell, Fern (6 February 2018). "Suffragettes, violence and militancy". The British Library. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2021.
^ Bearman, C. J. (2005). "An Examination of Suffragette Violence". The English Historical Review. 120 (486): 378. doi:10.1093/ehr/cei119. ISSN 0013-8266. JSTOR 3490924.
^ "General Structure of the Abbey Intact". The Scotsman. 13 May 1941. p. 5. Retrieved 31 January 2023.
^ "Famous London buildings severely damaged". Irish Independent. 12 May 1941. p. 5. Retrieved 31 January 2023.
^ "Westminster Abbey:  135,000 Damage in Raids". Belfast News-Letter. 17 May 1941. p. 6. Retrieved 31 January 2023.
^ a b c d Wilkinson 2013, p. 22.
^ "Westminster Abbey now example of how to handle tourists". Episcopal News Service. 6 March 2002. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 112.
^ a b "Building work announced for Abbey". BBC News. 28 June 2009. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2009.
^ Kennedy, Maev (29 June 2009). "Dean lines up new crown shaped roof for Westminster Abbey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2009.
^ "Abbey Development Plan Update". Westminster Abbey. 4 August 2010. Archived from the original on 9 August 2010. Retrieved 7 September 2010.
^ "Cosmati pavement". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013.
^ Schjonberg, Mary Frances (17 September 2010). "Benedict becomes first pope to visit Lambeth, Westminster Abbey". Episcopal Life Online. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 17 September 2010.
^ a b "Newsbeat   Royal wedding: Prince William and Kate Middleton marry". BBC. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 2 May 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2012.
^ a b "The Queen opens The Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries with the Prince of Wales". Royal.UK. 8 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ Brown, Mark (23 August 2020). "Lost medieval sacristy uncovered at Westminster Abbey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ Vanderhoof, Erin (23 March 2021). "Kate and William Visit One of the U.K.'s Most Surprising Vaccination Clinics". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 24 June 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 45.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 43.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 160.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 161.
^ Kennedy, Maev (14 December 2016). "New tower will reveal hidden world of Westminster Abbey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ a b Wilkinson 2013, p. 10.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 24.
^ a b Trowles 2008, p. 99.
^ a b Trowles 2008, p. 31.
^ Trowles 2008, pp. 31 32.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 15.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, pp. 43 44.
^ a b Westlake 1927, p. 169.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 18.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 71.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 17.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 190.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 57.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 20.
^ Trowles 2008, pp. 60 66.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 61.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 53.
^ Trowles 2008, pp. 75 79.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 80.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 97.
^ a b c Wilkinson 2013, p. 40.
^ a b c "Chapter house and Pyx Chamber". English Heritage. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ a b Trowles 2008, p. 154.
^ a b Historic England. "The Chapter House and Pyx Chamber in the abbey cloisters, Westminster Abbey (1003579)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 20 January 2017.
^ Noppen, J. G. (1932). "The Westminster Apocalypse and Its Source". The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs. 61 (355): 146 159. ISSN 0951-0788. JSTOR 865080.
^ "Henry VII Chapel". Smarthistory. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 5 February 2023.
^ Trowles (2008); p. 126
^ Lindley 2003, p. 208.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 60 61.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 127.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 25.
^ Carr 1999, p. 4.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 159.
^ Westlake 1927, pp. 50 55.
^ Westlake 1927, p. 56.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 120.
^ a b Carr 1999, p. 21.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 23.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 35.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 96.
^ Westlake 1927, pp. 162 164.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 9.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 149.
^ Heller, Jenny E. (22 September 1998). "Westminster Abbey Elevates 10 Foreigners". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016.
^ Streeter, Michael (17 October 1997). "Heritage: Westminster Abbey prepares modern martyrs' corner". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016.
^ Trowles 2008, pp. 27 28.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 36 39.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 16.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 7.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 148.
^ Reynolds 2002, p. 4.
^ Reynolds 2002, p. 24.
^ Reynolds 2002, p. 10.
^ Brown, Mark (26 September 2018). "David Hockney unveils iPad-designed window at Westminster Abbey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 52.
^ Zakir-Hussain, Maryam (20 September 2022). "Royal Vault: Inside the Burial Chamber That Houses 25 Royals". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 March 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023.
^ McCabe, Sophie (2 March 2023). "Frogmore Cottage, the hideaway long used to shelter embattled royals". Express.co.uk. Archived from the original on 3 March 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 63.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, p. 83.
^ Murray Smith 1906.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 150 154.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 75 78.
^ "History of Modern Cremation in Great Britain from 1874: The First Hundred Years". The Cremation Society of Great Britain. 1974. Archived from the original on 3 August 2010. Retrieved 28 November 2010.
^ "Sebastian Charles". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 19 September 2015.
^ "Elizabeth, Duchess of Northumberland & Percy family". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 30 September 2013.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 78 81.
^ a b c Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 79.
^ a b Wilkinson 2013, p. 37.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 171 172.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 29.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 35.
^ a b Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 65.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 167.
^ Robinson 1992, p. ix.
^ a b c d Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 61.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 15.
^ Dunn, Charlotte (11 October 2022). "The Coronation of His Majesty The King". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023.
^ Wilkinson 2013, p. 11.
^ "The Stone still waiting for its final destiny". BBC. 28 November 2016. Archived from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 68.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 62.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 174.
^ "HRH Prince William of Wales and Miss Catherine Middleton to Wed at Abbey". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 26 March 2011. Retrieved 25 December 2018.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 36.
^ Travis, Alan (5 February 2013). "Why the Princes in the Tower are staying six feet under". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 April 2023.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 54.
^ "A History of Royal Burials and Funerals". www.westminster-abbey.org. Dean and Chapter of Westminster. Retrieved 9 April 2023.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 80.
^ "Diana Returns Home". BBC News. 1997. Archived from the original on 25 October 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016.
^ Foster, Max; McGee, Luke; Owoseje, Toyin (19 September 2022). "Who's on the guest list for Queen Elizabeth II's state funeral?". CNN. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022.
^ Hirwani, Peoni (19 September 2022). "The significance of Westminster Abbey, where the Queen's funeral service is taking place". www.independent.co.uk. Independent Digital News and Media Limited. Retrieved 9 April 2023.
^ Westminster Abbey and Saint Margaret Westminster Act 1972. London, UK: HMSO. 1972. p. 1.
^ "John Hall to be Dean of Westminster". Church Times. 2 November 2006. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ "Sir Stephen Lamport". Asian Women of Achievement. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ "Interview: Robert Wright, Sub-dean of Westminster Abbey, Rector of St Margaret's". Church Times. 26 May 2009. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ a b "Royal Appointments". Crockfords Clerical Directory. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ a b Fox, Christine Merie (2012). The Royal Almshouse at Westminster c.1500-c.1600 (PDF). pp. 248 250. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2022.
^ a b Jenkyns 2004, pp. 56 57.
^ a b Trowles 2008, p. 12.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 65.
^ "Making all the right noises: An Interview with Jonathan Milton, headmaster of the Westminster Abbey Choir School". KCW Today. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ a b Sawer, Patrick; Gatten, Emma (23 December 2022). "Westminster Abbey organist who oversaw late Queen's funeral music to become Yale professor". MSN. Archived from the original on 30 January 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2023.
^ a b "Westminster Abbey (St. Peter), Broad Sanctuary, Westminster, Middlesex [N00646]". The National Pipe Organ Register. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2012.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 123.
^ a b "Westminster, Greater London, Collegiate Ch of S Peter". Dove's Guide for Church Bell Ringers. Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2023.
^ "Westminster Abbey Church Heritage Record". Church of England. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 6 March 2023.
^ Statutes of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath. Harrison and Sons. 1925.
^ Squibb, George Drewry (1981). Precedence in England and Wales. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 393 394. ISBN 9780198253891.
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, p. 78.
^ Trowles 2008, p. 156
^ Wilkinson & Knighton 2010, pp. 51 52.
^ "Queen portrait unveiled in Australia". BBC News. 29 September 2012. Retrieved 23 January 2023.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 170 171.
^ Jenkyns 2004, p. 125.
^ Jenkyns 2004, pp. 190 191.
^ "Wenceslaus Hollar (1607 77)   Westminster Abbey". www.rct.uk. Retrieved 5 February 2023.
^ "Interior of Westminster Abbey, Arranged for the Coronation, 1937 | Art UK". artuk.org. Retrieved 5 February 2023.
^ "The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons, October 16, 1834". philamuseum.org. Retrieved 5 February 2023.
^ "Westminster Abbey closes doors to Da Vinci Code". The Guardian. 1 June 2005. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ "Westminster Abbey counters Da Vinci Code". The Guardian. 31 May 2005. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ Duff, Seamus (9 July 2022). "Mission Impossible makes history for being allowed to film in Westminster Abbey". mirror. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
References[edit]
Black, Jeremy (2007). George II: Puppet of the Politicians?. Exeter: University of Exeter Press. ISBN 978-0859898072.
Bradley, Simon; Pevsner, Nikolaus (2003). The Buildings of England   London 6: Westminster. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0711710678.
Brewer, Ebenezer Cobham (2001). Wordsworth Dictionary of Phrase and Fable. Ware, Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Editions. ISBN 978-1840223101.
Carr, Wesley (1999). Westminster Abbey. Norwich: Jarrold. ISBN 0300095953.
Corrigan, Imogen (2018). Stone on Stone: The Men Who Built The Cathedrals. Ramsbury, Marlborough: Robert Hale. ISBN 978-0719827983.
Dixon, H. Claiborne (1908). The Abbeys of Great Britain. London: T. W. Laurie. OCLC 778287774.
Fernie, Eric (2009). "Edward the Confessor's Westminster Abbey".  In Mortimer, Richard (ed.). Edward the Confessor: The Man and the Legend. Suffolk: Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 978-1-84615-716-5.
Gem, Richard (2009). "Craftsmen and Administrators in the Building of the Confessor's Abbey".  In Mortimer, Richard (ed.). Edward the Confessor: The Man and the Legend. Suffolk: Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 978-1-84615-716-5.
Harvey, Barbara (1993). Living and Dying in England 1100 1540: The Monastic Experience. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-1861976482.
Harvey, Barbara (22 November 2007). The Dissolution and Westminster Abbey. Special Centenary Conference of the English Benedictine Congregation. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 2 March 2023.
Horn, Joyce M. (1992). Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae 1541 1857. Vol. 7: Ely, Norwich, Westminster and Worcester Dioceses. London: Institute of Historical Research. OCLC 940336626. Retrieved 2 March 2023.
Jenkyns, Richard (2004). Westminster Abbey: A Thousand Years of National Pageantry. London: Profile Books. ISBN 1846685346.
Jones, Ian (2016). London: Bombed Blitzed and Blown Up: The British Capital Under Attack Since 1867. Barnsley, South Yorkshire: Frontline Books. ISBN 978-1473879010.
Lindley, Phillip (2003). "Henry VII Chapel, Westminster Abbey". In Making Medieval Art. Donington: Shaun Tyas. ISBN 1-900289-59-8.
Morris, William (1900). Architecture and History and Westminster Abbey. London: Longmans & Co. OCLC 898997220. Retrieved 2 March 2023.
Morton, Henry Vollam (1988) [1951]. In Search of London. London: Methuen. ISBN 978-0711724365.
Murray Smith, Mrs A. (1906). Westminster Abbey. London: Cassell. OCLC 3382350. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 5 March 2023.
Page, William (1909). "Benedictine Monks: St Peter's Abbey, Westminster". A History of the County of London: Volume 1, London Within the Bars, Westminster and Southwark. London: Victoria County History. ISBN 0413184706.
Reynolds, Christine (2002). Stained Glass of Westminster Abbey. Great Britain: Jarrold. ISBN 0413184706.
Robinson, Brian (1992). Silver Pennies & Linen Towels: The Story of the Royal Maundy. London: Spink & Sons Ltd. ISBN 978-0907605355.
Rodwell, Warwick (2009). "New Glimpses of Edward the Confessor's Abbey at Westminster".  In Mortimer, Richard (ed.). Edward the Confessor: The Man and the Legend. Suffolk: Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 978-1-84615-716-5.
Rodwell, Warwick (2010). The Lantern Tower of Westminster Abbey, 1060-2010: Reconstructing its History and Architecture. Oxford: Oxbow Books. ISBN 978-1842179796. JSTOR j.ctt1cfr93k.
Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England) (1924). An Inventory of the Historical Monuments in London. Vol. 1, Westminster Abbey. London: His Majesty's Stationery Office. OCLC 59377442. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2023.
Scott, George Gilbert (1863). Gleanings from Westminster Abbey. Oxford: J. Henry and J. Parker. OCLC 256101.
Stafford, Pauline (2009). "Edith, Edward's Wife and Queen".  In Mortimer, Richard (ed.). Edward the Confessor: The Man and the Legend. Suffolk: Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 978-1-84615-716-5.
Thornbury, Walter (1878). "Westminster Abbey: Historical Ceremonies". Old and New London. Vol. 3. London: Cassell, Petter & Galpin. OCLC 10552904. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022.
Trowles, Tony (2008). Treasures of Westminster Abbey. London: Scala. ISBN 978-1857594546.
Webb, Simon (2014). The Suffragette Bombers: Britain's Forgotten Terrorists. Barnsley, South Yorkshire: Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-1783400645.
Westlake, Herbert Francis (1927). Story of Westminster Abbey. London: Philip Allan & Co. OCLC 3251401.
Wilkinson, James; Knighton, Charles S. (2010). Crown and Cloister: The Royal Story of Westminster Abbey. London: Scala Publishers. ISBN 9781857596281.
Wilkinson, James (2013). Westminster Abbey: A Souvenir Guide (Revised ed.). London: Scala Arts & Heritage Publishers. ISBN 978-1857598216.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Westminster Abbey.
Listen to this article (15 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 21 April 2005 (2005-04-21), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
Official website
Westminster Abbey on Twitter
The Choir of Westminster Abbey on Twitter
vteWestminster AbbeyDeansEarly modern
William Benson
Richard Cox
Hugh Weston
William Bill
Gabriel Goodman
Lancelot Andrewes
Richard Neile
George Montaigne
Robert Tounson
John Williams
Richard Steward
John Earle
John Dolben
Thomas Sprat
Francis Atterbury
Samuel Bradford
Joseph Wilcocks
Zachary Pearce
John Thomas
Samuel Horsley
Late modern
William Vincent
John Ireland
Thomas Turton
Samuel Wilberforce
William Buckland
Richard Chenevix Trench
Arthur Penrhyn Stanley
George Granville Bradley
Armitage Robinson
Herbert Edward Ryle
William Foxley Norris
Paul de Labilliere
Alan Don
Eric Abbott
Edward Carpenter
Michael Mayne
Wesley Carr
John Hall
David Hoyle
Canons (current)
David Stanton (Sub-Dean and Canon Treasurer)
Anthony Ball (Rector of St Margaret's)
Jamie Hawkey (Canon Theologian and Almoner)
Tricia Hillas (Canon Steward and Archdeacon, and Speaker's Chaplain)
Mark Birch (Minor Canon and Precentor)
Robert Latham (Minor Canon and Sacrist)
Minor Canon and Chaplain (vacant)
Topics
Coronation of the British monarch
Liber Regalis
Edward the Confessor (patron saint)
Burials and Memorials
Poets' Corner
Henry VII Chapel
St Margaret's, Westminster
Henry Yevele (architect)
Surveyor of the Fabric of Westminster Abbey
Diocese of Westminster (1540 1550)
Westminster Abbey Muniments
Westminster Abbey Museum
Westminster School
Westminster Abbey Choir School
Dean's Yard
Jerusalem Chamber
 Category
 Commons
vteBenedictine abbeys and priories in medieval England and WalesIndependenthouses
Abbotsbury
Abergavenny
Abingdon
Alcester
Athelney
Bardney
Bath
Battle
Bedford
Birkenhead
Bradwell
Brewood (Black Ladies)
Buckfast
Burton
Bury St Edmunds
Canterbury (Christ Church)
Canterbury (St Augustine's)
Canwell
Cerne
Chertsey
Chester
Cholsey
Colchester
Coventry
Crowland
Durham
Ely
Evesham
Eynsham
Farewell Priory
Faversham
Glastonbury
Gloucester
Humberston
Luffield
Malmesbury
Milton
Monk Bretton
Muchelney
Molycourt
Norwich (Holy Trinity)
Pershore
Peterborough
Ramsey
Reading
Repton
Rochester
St Albans
St Benet of Hulme
Sandwell
Selby
Sherborne
Shrewsbury
Snelshall
Tavistock
Tewkesbury
Thorney
Upholland
Walden
Westminster
Whitby
Winchcombe
Winchester (New Minster)
Winchester (St Swithun)
Worcester
York (St Mary's)
Dependenthouses
Aldeby
Alkborough
Alcester
Alvecote
Beadlow
Bedemans Berg
Belvoir
Binham
Breedon
Brecon
Bristol
Bromfield
Cardiff
Cardigan
Cranborne
Darenth
Deeping
Dover
Dunster
Earls Colne
Ewenny
Ewyas Harold
Exeter
Farne
Felixstowe
Finchale
Freiston
Great Malvern
Hatfield Peverel
Henes (Sandtoft)
Hereford
Hertford
Holy Island
Horton
Hoxne
Hurley
Jarrow
Kidwelly
Kilpeck 
King's Mead
Kings Lynn
Lammana
Langley
Leominster
Leonard Stanley
Lincoln
Little Malvern
Littlemore
Lytham
Middlesbrough
Monkwearmouth
Morville
Norwich (St Leonard's)
Oxford (of Canterbury)
Oxford (of Durham)
Oxford (of Gloucester)
Penwortham
Pilton
Redbourne
Richmond
Rumburgh
St Bees
St Ives
Scilly
Snaith
Snape
Stamford
Studley (Oxfordshire)
Studley (Warwickshire)
Tickhill
Tynemouth
Wallingford
Westbury-on-Trym
Wetheral
Wymondham
Yarmouth
Alienpriories
Allerton Mauleverer
Andover
Andwell
Appuldurcombe
Arundel
Astley 
Aston Priors
Atherington 
Avebury
Axmouth
Blyth
Boxgrove
Brimpsfield
Burstall
Burwell
Caldy
Carisbrooke
Chepstow
Clatford
Cogges
Corsham
Covenham
Cowick
Creeting (St. Mary)
Creeting (St. Olave)
Debden
Deerhurst
Dunwich
Ecclesfield
Edith Weston
Ellingham
Everdon
Eye
Folkestone
Frampton
Goldcliff
Grovebury
Hamble
Harmondsworth
Hatfield Regis
Haugham
Hayling
Headley
Hinckley
Holbeck
Horsham St Faith
Horsley
Lancaster
Lapley
Lewisham
Isleham
Livers Ocle
Llangennith
Llangua
Loders
Minster
Minster Lovell
Minting
Modbury
Monks Kirby
Monk Sherborne (Pamber)
Monmouth
Newent
Ogbourne
Otterton
Panfield
Pembroke
Pill
Ruislip
Runcton
St Cross
St Dogmells
St Michael's Mount
St Neots
Sele
Spalding
Sporle
Standon
Steventon
Stogursey
Stoke-by-Clare
Stratfield Saye
Swavesey
Takeley
Throwley
Tickford
Titley
Toft Monks
Totnes
Tutbury
Tywardreath
Upavon
Ware
Wareham
Warminghurst
Warmington
Wath
Weedon Beck
Weedon Lois
West Mersea
Wilsford
Wing
Winghale
Wolston
Wootton Wawen
York (Holy Trinity)
vteHistory of LondonEvolution
Londinium
Lundenwic
City of London
City of Westminster
Middlesex
County of London
Greater London
Timeline
Periods
Roman London
Anglo-Saxon London
Norman and Medieval London
Tudor London
Stuart London
18th-century London
19th-century London
1900 1939
World War II (The Blitz)
1945 2000
21st century
Events
Coronations
Peasants' Revolt
Black Death
Great Plague
Great Fire
1854 cholera outbreak
Great Stink
Great Exhibition
1908 Franco-British Exhibition
The Battle of Cable Street
Festival of Britain
Great Smog
Abdication of Edward VIII
Swinging London
London Plan
1966 FIFA World Cup Final
Hyde Park and Regent's Park bombings
Anti-war protests
7/7 bombings
Olympic Games (1908
1948
2012)
2012 Summer Paralympics
Grenfell Tower fire
COVID-19 pandemic
Government
Historic
Metropolitan Board of Works
London County Council
Greater London Council
Current
Greater London Authority
London Assembly
Mayor of London
Politics
Parties
Labour
Conservatives
Liberal Democrats
London independence
Services
Bow Street Runners
Metropolitan Police
London Ambulance Service
London Fire Brigade
Port of London Authority
London sewer system
London Underground
London Metropolitan Archives
City of London
City of London Corporation
Lord Mayor of the City of London
Wards of the City of London
Guildhall
Livery Companies
Lord Mayor's Show
City of London Police
Bank of England
Structures
St Paul's Cathedral
Tower of London
Palace of Whitehall
Westminster Hall
London Bridge
Tower Bridge
Westminster Abbey
Big Ben
The Monument
Fortifications
 Category
vteWorld Heritage Sites in the United KingdomEngland
Bath
as part of Great Spa Towns of Europe
Blenheim Palace
Canterbury Cathedral, St Augustine's Abbey and St Martin's Church
Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape
Derwent Valley Mills
Durham Castle and Cathedral
Frontiers of the Roman Empire
Hadrian's Wall
Ironbridge Gorge
Jodrell Bank Observatory
Jurassic Coast
Kew Royal Botanic Gardens
Lake District
Maritime Greenwich
Palace of Westminster and Westminster Abbey including St Margaret's Church
Saltaire
Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites
Studley Royal Park and Fountains Abbey
Tower of London
Scotland
Edinburgh Old Town and New Town
Forth Bridge
Frontiers of the Roman Empire
Antonine Wall
Heart of Neolithic Orkney
New Lanark
St Kilda
Wales
Blaenavon Industrial Landscape
Castles and Town Walls of King Edward I in Gwynedd
Beaumaris Castle
Caernarfon Castle and Town Walls
Conwy Castle and Town Walls
Harlech Castle
Pontcysyllte Aqueduct and Canal
The Slate Landscape of Northwest Wales
Northern Ireland
Giant's Causeway
British Overseas Territories
Gorham's Cave Complex
Gough Island
Inaccessible Island
Henderson Island
Town of St George and Related Fortifications
Former
Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City
vteLondon landmarksBuildings andstructuresBridges
Albert Bridge
Barnes Railway Bridge
Battersea Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Chelsea Bridge
Chiswick Bridge
Fulham Railway Bridge
Hammersmith Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Kew Bridge
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Bridge
Putney Bridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Wandsworth Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge
EntertainmentvenuesCinemas
BFI IMAX
Empire, Leicester Square
Odeon Luxe Leicester Square
Football stadia
Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
London Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
Tottenham Hotspur Stadium (Tottenham Hotspur)
Other majorsports venues
All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)
Theatres
Adelphi
Apollo Victoria
Coliseum
Criterion
Dominion
Lyceum
Old Vic
Palladium
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket
Vaudeville
Other
Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
The O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena
Government
10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall (Southwark)
City Hall (Newham)
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
The National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building
Thames House
Museums andgalleries
British Museum
Churchill War Rooms
Courtauld Gallery
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
Guildhall Art Gallery
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum
Wallace Collection
Young V&A
Places of worship
All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Clement Danes
St Margaret's, Westminster
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral
RetailingShops
Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Harvey Nichols
Hatchards
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges
Shopping centresand markets
Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Camden Market
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City
Royal buildingsPartly occupied bythe royal family
Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace
Unoccupied
Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace
Skyscrapers
One Canada Square
One Churchill Place
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
122 Leadenhall Street
Broadgate Tower
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
The Shard
St George Wharf Tower
Tower 42
Structures
Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Big Ben
The Cenotaph
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire of London
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch
Transport
City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Blackfriars station
Cannon Street station
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
Fenchurch Street station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Stratford station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
London Cable Car
Victoria Coach Station
Other
Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
BT Tower
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
Lloyd's building
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
Smithfield Market
Somerset House
St Bartholomew's Hospital
ParksRoyal Parks
Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St James's Park
Other
Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Kew Gardens
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common
Squares andpublic spaces
Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square
Streets
Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Carnaby Street
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall
vteThe Westminster AssemblyDocuments
Westminster Confession of Faith
Westminster Larger Catechism
Westminster Shorter Catechism
Directory for Public Worship
Form of Presbyterial Church Government
People
John Arrowsmith
Simeon Ashe
Robert Baillie
Thomas Baylie
Robert Blair
Samuel Bolton
John Bond
William Bridge
Ralph Brownrigg
Anthony Burges
Cornelius Burges
Jeremiah Burroughs
Adoniram Byfield
Richard Byfield
Edmund Calamy
Archibald Campbell
John Campbell
Richard Capel
Joseph Caryl
Thomas Case
Daniel Cawdry
William Cecil
Francis Cheynell
John Clotworthy
Thomas Coleman
John Conant
Edward Conway
John Cook
Edward Corbet
Robert Crosse
Robert Devereux
Robert Douglas
Calybute Downing
John Dury
John Earle
John Elphinstone
Daniel Featley
Basil Feilding
Nathaniel Fiennes
William Fiennes
Thomas Ford
Thomas Gataker
George Gillespie
John Glynne
Thomas Goodwin
William Gouge
William Greenhill
William Grey
John Hacket
Matthew Hale
Henry Hammond
Robert Harley
John Harris
Robert Harris
Arthur Haselrig
Alexander Henderson
Philip Herbert
Charles Herle
Thomas Hill
Richard Holdsworth
Edward Howard
Joshua Hoyle
Archibald Johnston
John Ley
John Lightfoot
Richard Love
William Lyford
John Maitland
Stephen Marshall
John Maynard
William Mew
Edward Montagu
George Morley
Matthew Newcomen
William Nicholson
Philip Nye
Herbert Palmer
Algernon Percy
Andrew Perne
William Pierrepont
John Pym
Edward Reynolds
Robert Reynolds
Henry Rich
Francis Rous
Benjamin Rudyerd
Samuel Rutherford
Robert Sanderson
Henry Scudder
Lazarus Seaman
Obadiah Sedgwick
John Selden
Josias Shute
Sidrach Simpson
William Spurstowe
Edmund Staunton
Peter Sterry
Oliver St John (1580 1646)
Oliver St John (1598 1673)
William Strode
William Strong
Zouch Tate
Henry Tozer
Anthony Tuckney
William Twisse
Henry Vane the Elder
Henry Vane the Younger
Richard Vines
George Walker
Samuel Ward
Thomas Westfield
Philip Wharton
Jeremiah Whitaker
John White
Bulstrode Whitelocke
John Wilde
Henry Wilkinson
Walter Yonge
Thomas Young
Westminster Abbey
Jerusalem Chamber
vteChurches in the City of Westminsterancient parishchurches(pre-1800)
St Anne, Soho
St Clement Danes
St George, Hanover Square
St James, Piccadilly
St Margaret, Westminster
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Marylebone
St Mary le Strand
St Paul, Covent Garden
deconsecratedSt John the Evangelist, Smith Square
Anglicandaughterchurches
All Saints, Margaret Street
All Souls, Langham Place
Annunciation, Marble Arch
Grosvenor Chapel, Mayfair
Guards Chapel, Wellington Barracks
Holy Trinity, South Kensington
St Augustine, Kilburn
St Cyprian, Clarence Gate
St Gabriel, Pimlico
St James, Paddington
St James the Less, Pimlico
St John's Wood Church
St Mark, Hamilton Terrace
St Mary, Bourne Street
St Mary, Bryanston Square
St Mary, Paddington Green
St Mary Magdalene, Paddington
St Matthew, Bayswater
St Matthew, Westminster
St Paul, Knightsbridge
St Peter, Eaton Square
St Saviour, Pimlico
St Stephen, Rochester Row
St Stephen, Westbourne Park
deconsecrated
Christ Church, Marylebone
Holy Trinity, Marylebone
St Peter, Vere Street
Royal Peculiars
Henry VII Chapel
Queen's Chapel, St James's Palace
Savoy Chapel
St Mary Undercroft
Westminster Abbey
RomanCatholicchurches
Westminster Cathedral
Corpus Christi, Maiden Lane
Immaculate Conception, Farm Street
Notre Dame de France
Our Lady of the Assumption and St Gregory, Warwick Street
St Charles Borromeo, Westminster
St James, Spanish Place
St Mary of the Angels, Bayswater
St Patrick, Soho Square
otherdenominations
Crown Court Church, Covent Garden
Dormition Cathedral
Emmanuel Evangelical Church
Enon Chapel
French Protestant Church, Soho
Hinde Street Methodist Church
St Mark's, Mayfair
Regent Hall
St John's Wood Road Baptist Church
St Sophia's Cathedral, Bayswater
Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Family in Exile, Mayfair
Ulrika Eleonora
Welsh Church of Central London
West London Methodist Mission
West Street Chapel
Methodist Central Hall
Westminster Chapel
see alsoFitzrovia Chapel
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz place
Artists
ULAN
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Westminster_Abbey&oldid=1149653332"