American Founding Father, philosopher, and political activist (1737 1809)
For other people with the same name, see Thomas Paine (disambiguation).
Thomas PainePortrait by Laurent Dabos, c. 1792BornThomas Pain(1737-02-09)February 9, 1737 (N.S.)Thetford, Norfolk, EnglandDiedJune 8, 1809(1809-06-08) (aged 72)Greenwich Village, New York CitySpousesMary Lambert
   (m. 1759; died 1760) Elizabeth Ollive
   (m. 1771; separated 1774) EraAge of EnlightenmentSchoolLiberalism(Radicalism)RepublicanismSecular humanismMain interestsPoliticsethicsreligion
Influences
JacobinDavid HumeEdward GibbonVoltaireJean-Jacques RousseauJohn LockeReligious Society of FriendsMontesquieuBenjamin Franklin
Influenced
Thomas JeffersonWilliam GodwinMary WollstonecraftPierre Victurnien VergniaudAbraham LincolnThomas EdisonKarl MarxSigmund FreudCharles DarwinFriedrich NietzscheMark TwainJyotirao PhuleMoncure D. ConwayBertrand RussellChristopher HitchensRobert G. Ingersoll
Signature
Part of a series onRadicalism
History
Age of Enlightenment
Atlantic Revolutions
American Revolution
French Revolution
Belgian Revolution
Chartism
History of liberalism
Progressive Era
Ideas
Anti-clericalism
Civic nationalism
Civil liberties
Classical liberalism
Cultural radicalism
Direct democracy
Egalitarianism
Freedom of movement
Jacobinism
Labor movement
Liberal socialism
Social democracy
Libertarianism
Left-libertarianism
Libert ,  galit , fraternit 
Modernity
Populism
Left-wing populism
Progressivism
Rationalism
Reform movement
Republicanism
Revolution
Secularism
Laicit 
Social change
Social justice
Social liberalism
Suffrage
Women's suffrage
Utilitarianism
Utopian socialism
Welfare
People
Alem
Atat rk
Bentham
Bol var
Cartwright
Clemenceau
Cobbett
Dewey
Fox
Garibaldi
George
Godwin
Green
H bert
Hobhouse
Jefferson
Lloyd George
Mazzini
Mend s France
Mill (James)
Mill (John)
Mommsen
Mossadegh
Paine
Papanastasiou
Papandreou
Plastiras
Robespierre
Roosevelt
Rosselli
Roux
Saint-Just
Stevens
Venizelos
Virchow
Wilkes
Wilson
Wollstonecraft
Groups
Action Party
1853
1942
Alfarista Radical Front
Alsatian Progress Party
Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe
Authentic Radical Liberal Party
Blue Party
Centre Union
Centre Union   New Forces
Union of the Democratic Centre
Civic Workers' Party
Colombian Liberal Party
Cordeliers
H bertists
Clear Grits
Czech National Social Party
Czech Realist Party
Democrat Party
Democratic Left of Catalonia
Democratic-Republican Party
Democratic Socialist Party of Greece
Georgios Papandreou Party
Democratic Union
Democratic Union-Agricultural and Labour Party
Democrats 66
Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party
European Radical Alliance
European Republicans Movement
Fabian Society (elements)
German Free-minded Party
German People's Party
FDP.The Liberals
Far Left
Federal Democratic Republican Party
Free Democratic Party/Radical Democratic Party
Free-minded People's Party
Free-minded Union
Free-thinking Democratic League
Foxite
Giustizia e Libert 
GroenLinks
Historical Far Left
Independent Radicals
International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties
Italian Democratic Liberal Party
Italian Radical Party
Italian Radicals
Italian Republican Party
Jacksonian Democrats
Jacobin
The Mountain
Labour Democratic Party
Left Centre
Left Liberals
Liberal Democratic Party of Afghanistan
Liberals, Democrats and Radicals
Liberal Party
Liberal Reformers
Liberal Swedish Party
Manhood Suffrage League
Mexican Liberal Party
More Europe
Movement for Constitutional Freedoms
National and Social Liberation
National Radical Party
National Progressive Center Union
National Reform Union
National Union
New Liberals
Opportunist Republicans
Parti rouge
Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente
Party of Democratic Socialism
Party of Independence and '48
People's Party
People's Radical Party
1881
1919
1990
Political Party of Radicals
Popular Councils
Portuguese Republican Party
Democratic Party
Progressive Democratic Party of the North
Progressive Party
Belgium
South Korea
United States
Progressive People's Party
Radical Cause
Radical Change
Radical Civic Union
Radicales K
Radical Democracy
Radical Democracy Party
Radical Democratic Party
Bulgaria
Estonia
India
Spain
Ukraine
Radical Federative Movement
Radical League
Radical Liberal Party
Luxembourg
Paraguay
Radical Left Party
Radical Left
Radical Movement
Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance
Radical Party
Bolivia
France
Hungary
Italy
Luxembourg
Radical Party of Chile
1863
2018
Radical Party of the Left
Radical People's Party
Finland
Norway
Turkey
Radical Republican Party
Radical Republicans
Radical Socialist Party
Luxembourg
Estonia
Radical Socialist Republican Party
Radical Whigs
Radicals of the Left
Radicals (UK)
Reform League
Republican Action
Republican Democratic Concentration
Republican Left
Spain (1934)
Spain (1977)
Italy
Republican Union
Resolution Party
Rose in the Fist
Rose Street Club
ROSSEM
Social Democracy
Social Democratic Party
Socialist Radical Party
Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club
Transnational Radical Party
Ultra-radicals
Union, Progress and Democracy
Universal League for the Material Elevation of the Industrious Classes
By region
Bulgaria
Chile
Denmark
Ecuador
France
Hungary
Italy
Paraguay
Romania
Spain
Switzerland
United States
Related
Conservative liberalism
History of socialism
Liberalism in Europe
 History portal
 Liberalism portalvte
Thomas Paine (born Thomas Pain;[1] February 9, 1737 [O.S. January 29, 1736][Note 1]    June 8, 1809) was an English-born American Founding Father, political activist, philosopher, political theorist, and revolutionary.[2][3] He authored Common Sense (1776) and The American Crisis (1776 1783), two of the most influential pamphlets at the start of the American Revolution, and he helped to inspire the Patriots in 1776 to declare independence from Great Britain.[4] His ideas reflected Enlightenment-era ideals of human rights.[5]
Paine was born in Thetford, Norfolk and emigrated to the British American colonies in 1774 with the help of Benjamin Franklin, arriving just in time to participate in the American Revolution. Virtually every American Patriot read his 47-page pamphlet Common Sense,[6][7] which catalyzed the call for independence from Great Britain. The American Crisis was a pro-independence pamphlet series. Paine lived in France for most of the 1790s, becoming deeply involved in the French Revolution. While in England, he wrote Rights of Man (1791), in part a defense of the French Revolution against its critics. His attacks on Anglo-Irish conservative writer Edmund Burke led to a trial and conviction in absentia in England in 1792 for the crime of seditious libel.
The British government of William Pitt the Younger was worried by the possibility that the French Revolution might spread to Britain and had begun suppressing works that espoused radical philosophies. Paine's work advocated the right of the people to overthrow their government and was therefore targeted with a writ for his arrest issued in early 1792. Paine fled to France in September, despite not being able to speak French, but he was quickly elected to the French National Convention. The Girondins regarded him as an ally; consequently, the Montagnards regarded him as an enemy, especially Maximilien Robespierre. In December 1793, he was arrested and was taken to Luxembourg Prison in Paris. While in prison, he continued to work on The Age of Reason (1793 1794). James Monroe used his diplomatic connections to get Paine released in November 1794.
Paine became notorious because of his pamphlets and attacks on his former allies, who he felt had betrayed him. In The Age of Reason and other writings, he advocated Deism, promoted reason and freethought, and argued against religion in general and Christian doctrine in particular.[8][9][10][11] In 1796, he published a bitter open letter to George Washington, whom he denounced as an incompetent general and a hypocrite. He published the pamphlet Agrarian Justice (1797), discussing the origins of property and introducing the concept of a guaranteed minimum income through a one-time inheritance tax on landowners. In 1802, he returned to the U.S. He died on June 8, 1809, and only six people attended his funeral, as he had been ostracized for his ridicule of Christianity[12] and his attacks on the nation's leaders.
Early life and education[edit]
Thomas Paine was born on January 29, 1736 (NS February 9, 1737),[Note 1]  the son of Joseph Pain, a tenant farmer and stay-maker,[13] and Frances (n e Cocke) Pain, in Thetford, Norfolk, England. Joseph was a Quaker and Frances an Anglican.[14] Despite claims that Thomas changed the spelling of his family name upon his emigration to America in 1774,[1] he was using "Paine" in 1769, while still in Lewes, Sussex.[15]
 Old School at Thetford Grammar School, where Paine was educated
He attended Thetford Grammar School (1744 1749), at a time when there was no compulsory education.[16] At the age of 13, he was apprenticed to his father.[17][18] Following his apprenticeship, aged 19, Paine enlisted and briefly served as a privateer,[19] before returning to Britain in 1759. There, he became a master staymaker, establishing a shop in Sandwich, Kent.[20]
On September 27, 1759, Paine married Mary Lambert. His business collapsed soon after. Mary became pregnant; and, after they moved to Margate, she went into early labour, in which she and their child died.[21]
In July 1761, Paine returned to Thetford to work as a supernumerary officer. In December 1762, he became an Excise Officer in Grantham, Lincolnshire; in August 1764, he was transferred to Alford, also in Lincolnshire, at a salary of  50 per annum. On August 27, 1765, he was dismissed as an Excise Officer for "claiming to have inspected goods he did not inspect". On July 31, 1766, he requested his reinstatement from the Board of Excise, which they granted the next day, upon vacancy. While awaiting that, he worked as a staymaker.[22]
 Thomas Paine's house in Lewes
In 1767, he was appointed to a position in Grampound, Cornwall. Later he asked to leave this post to await a vacancy, and he became a schoolteacher in London.[23]
On February 19, 1768, he was appointed to Lewes in Sussex, a town with a tradition of opposition to the monarchy and pro-republican sentiments since the revolutionary decades of the 17th century.[24] Here he lived above the 15th-century Bull House, the tobacco shop of Samuel Ollive and Esther Ollive.[25]
Paine first became involved in civic matters when he was based in Lewes. He appears in the Town Book as a member of the Court Leet, the governing body for the town. He was also a member of the parish vestry, an influential local Anglican church group whose responsibilities for parish business would include collecting taxes and tithes to distribute among the poor. On March 26, 1771, at age 34, Paine married Elizabeth Ollive, the daughter of his recently deceased landlord, whose business as a grocer and tobacconist he then entered into.[26]
 Plaque at the White Hart Hotel, Lewes, East Sussex, south east England
From 1772 to 1773, Paine joined excise officers asking Parliament for better pay and working conditions, publishing, in summer of 1772, The Case of the Officers of Excise, a 12-page article, and his first political work, spending the London winter distributing the 4,000 copies printed to the Parliament and others. In spring 1774, he was again dismissed from the excise service for being absent from his post without permission. The tobacco shop failed. On April 14, to avoid debtors' prison, he sold his household possessions to pay debts. He formally separated from his wife Elizabeth on June 4, 1774, and moved to London. In September, mathematician, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Commissioner of the Excise George Lewis Scott introduced him to Benjamin Franklin,[27] who was there as a voice for colonial opposition to British colonial rule, especially as it related to the Stamp Act, and the Townshend Acts. He was publisher and editor of the largest American newspaper, The Pennsylvania Gazette and suggested emigration to Philadelphia. He handed out a letter of recommendation to Paine, who emigrated in October to the American colonies, arriving in Philadelphia on November 30, 1774.[28]
In Pennsylvania Magazine[edit]
Paine barely survived the transatlantic voyage. The ship's water supplies were bad and typhoid fever killed five passengers. On arriving at Philadelphia, he was too sick to disembark. Benjamin Franklin's physician, there to welcome Paine to America, had him carried off ship; Paine took six weeks to recover. He became a citizen of Pennsylvania "by taking the oath of allegiance at a very early period".[29] In March 1775, he became editor of the Pennsylvania Magazine, a position he conducted with considerable ability.[30]
Before Paine's arrival in America, sixteen magazines had been founded in the colonies and ultimately failed, each featuring substantial content and reprints from England. In late 1774, Philadelphia printer Robert Aitken announced his plan to create what he called an "American Magazine" with content derived from the colonies.[30] Paine contributed two pieces to the magazine's inaugural issue dated January 1775, and Aitken hired Paine as the Magazine's editor one month later. Under Paine's leadership, the magazine's readership rapidly expanded, achieving a greater circulation in the colonies than any American magazine up until that point.[30] While Aitken had conceived of the magazine as nonpolitical, Paine brought a strong political perspective to its content, writing in its first issue that "every heart and hand seem to be engaged in the interesting struggle for American Liberty."[30]
Paine wrote in the Pennsylvania Magazine that such a publication should become a "nursery of genius" for a nation that had "now outgrown the state of infancy," exercising and educating American minds, and shaping American morality.[30] On March 8, 1775, the Pennsylvania Magazine published an unsigned abolitionist essay titled African Slavery in America.[31] The essay is often attributed to Paine on the basis of a letter by Benjamin Rush, recalling Paine's claim of authorship to the essay.[31] The essay attacked slavery as an "execrable commerce" and "outrage against Humanity and Justice."[31]
Consciously appealing to a broader and more working-class audience, Paine also used the magazine to discuss worker rights to production. This shift in the conceptualization of politics has been described as a part of "the 'modernization' of political consciousness," and the mobilization of ever greater sections of society into political life.[30][32]
American Revolution[edit]
 Common Sense, published in 1776
Common Sense (1776)[edit]
Main article: Common Sense
Paine has a claim to the title The Father of the American Revolution,[33][34] which rests on his pamphlets, especially Common Sense, which crystallized sentiment for independence in 1776. It was published in Philadelphia on January 10, 1776, and signed anonymously "by an Englishman". It was an immediate success, quickly spreading 100,000 copies in three months to the two million residents of the 13 colonies. During the course of the American Revolution, a total of about 500,000 copies were sold, including unauthorized editions.[6][35] Paine's original title for the pamphlet was Plain Truth, but Paine's friend, pro-independence advocate Benjamin Rush, suggested Common Sense instead.[36] Finding a printer who was daring enough to commit his print shop to the printing of Common Sense was not easy. At the advice of Rush, Paine commissioned Robert Bell to print his work.[37][38]
The pamphlet came into circulation in January 1776,[39] after the Revolution had started. It was passed around and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to spreading the idea of republicanism, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Britain, and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army. Paine provided a new and convincing argument for independence by advocating a complete break with history. Common Sense is oriented to the future in a way that compels the reader to make an immediate choice. It offers a solution for Americans disgusted with and alarmed at the threat of tyranny.[40]
Paine's attack on monarchy in Common Sense is essentially an attack on George III. Whereas colonial resentments were originally directed primarily against the king's ministers and Parliament, Paine laid the responsibility firmly at the king's door. Common Sense was the most widely read pamphlet of the American Revolution. It was a clarion call for unity against the corrupt British court, so as to realize America's providential role in providing an asylum for liberty. Written in a direct and lively style, it denounced the decaying despotisms of Europe and pilloried hereditary monarchy as an absurdity. At a time when many still hoped for reconciliation with Britain, Common Sense demonstrated to many the inevitability of separation.[41]
Paine was not on the whole expressing original ideas in Common Sense, but rather employing rhetoric as a means to arouse resentment of the Crown. To achieve these ends, he pioneered a style of political writing suited to the democratic society he envisioned, with Common Sense serving as a primary example. Part of Paine's work was to render complex ideas intelligible to average readers of the day, with clear, concise writing unlike the formal, learned style favored by many of Paine's contemporaries.[42] Scholars have put forward various explanations to account for its success, including the historic moment, Paine's easy-to-understand style, his democratic ethos, and his use of psychology and ideology.[43]
Common Sense was immensely popular in disseminating to a very wide audience ideas that were already in common use among the elite who comprised Congress and the leadership cadre of the emerging nation, who rarely cited Paine's arguments in their public calls for independence.[44] The pamphlet probably had little direct influence on the Continental Congress' decision to issue a Declaration of Independence, since that body was more concerned with how declaring independence would affect the war effort.[45] One distinctive idea in Common Sense is Paine's beliefs regarding the peaceful nature of republics; his views were an early and strong conception of what scholars would come to call the democratic peace theory.[46]
Loyalists vigorously attacked Common Sense; one attack, titled Plain Truth (1776), by Marylander James Chalmers, said Paine was a political quack[47] and warned that without monarchy, the government would "degenerate into democracy".[48] Even some American revolutionaries objected to Common Sense; late in life John Adams called it a "crapulous mass". Adams disagreed with the type of radical democracy promoted by Paine (that men who did not own property should still be allowed to vote and hold public office) and published Thoughts on Government in 1776 to advocate a more conservative approach to republicanism.[49]
Sophia Rosenfeld argues that Paine was highly innovative in his use of the commonplace notion of "common sense". He synthesized various philosophical and political uses of the term in a way that permanently impacted American political thought. He used two ideas from Scottish Common Sense Realism: that ordinary people can indeed make sound judgments on major political issues, and that there exists a body of popular wisdom that is readily apparent to anyone. Paine also used a notion of "common sense" favored by philosophes in the Continental Enlightenment. They held that common sense could refute the claims of traditional institutions. Thus, Paine used "common sense" as a weapon to de-legitimize the monarchy and overturn prevailing conventional wisdom. Rosenfeld concludes that the phenomenal appeal of his pamphlet resulted from his synthesis of popular and elite elements in the independence movement.[50]
According to historian Robert Middlekauff, Common Sense became immensely popular mainly because Paine appealed to widespread convictions. Monarchy, he said, was preposterous and it had a heathenish origin. It was an institution of the devil. Paine pointed to the Old Testament, where almost all kings had seduced the Israelites to worship idols instead of God. Paine also denounced aristocracy, which together with monarchy were "two ancient tyrannies." They violated the laws of nature, human reason, and the "universal order of things," which began with God. That was, Middlekauff says, exactly what most Americans wanted to hear. He calls the Revolutionary generation "the children of the twice-born".[51] because in their childhood they had experienced the Great Awakening, which, for the first time, had tied Americans together, transcending denominational and ethnic boundaries and giving them a sense of patriotism.[52][53]
Possible involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence[edit]
 Committee of Five working draft of the Declaration of Independence, dated June 24, 1776, copied from the original draft by John Adams for Roger Sherman's review and approval
 Inscription on reverse of Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence referencing "T.P." during the drafting processWhile there is no historical record of Paine's involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence, some scholars of Early American History have suspected Thomas Paine's involvement over the past two centuries.  As noted by the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, multiple authors have hypothesized and written on the subject, including Moody (1872), Van der Weyde (1911), Lewis (1947), and more recently, Smith & Rickards (2007).[54]
In 2018, the Thomas Paine National Historical Association introduced an early draft of the Declaration that contained evidence of Paine's involvement based on an inscription of "T.P." on the back of the document. During the early deliberations of the Committee of Five members chosen by Congress to draft the Declaration of Independence, John Adams made a hastily written manuscript copy of the original draft of the Declaration of Independence on June 24, 1776, known as the Sherman Copy. Adams made this copy shortly before preparing another neater, fair copy that is held in the Adams Family Papers collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society. The Sherman copy of the Declaration of Independence is one of several working drafts of the Declaration, made for Roger Sherman's review and approval before the Committee of Five submitted a finalized draft to Congress. The Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence contains an inscription on the back of the document that states: "A beginning perhaps-Original with Jefferson-Copied from Original with T.P.'s permission." According to the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, the individual referenced as "T.P." in the inscription appears to be Thomas Paine.[54]
The degree to which Paine was involved in formulating the text of the Declaration is unclear, as the original draft referenced in the Sherman Copy inscription is presumed lost or destroyed. However, John Adams' request for permission of "T.P." to copy the original draft may suggest that Paine had a role either assisting Jefferson with organizing ideas within the Declaration, or contributing to the text of the original draft itself.[original research?][55]
The American Crisis (1776)[edit]
In late 1776, Paine published The American Crisis pamphlet series to inspire the Americans in their battles against the British army. He juxtaposed the conflict between the good American devoted to civic virtue and the selfish provincial man.[56] To inspire his soldiers, General George Washington had The American Crisis, first Crisis pamphlet, read aloud to them.[57] It begins:
These are the times that try men's souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like Hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly: it is dearness only that gives every thing its value. Heaven knows how to put a proper price upon its goods; and it would be strange indeed if so celestial an article as freedom should not be highly rated.
Foreign affairs[edit]
In 1777, Paine became secretary of the Congressional Committee on Foreign Affairs. The following year, he alluded to secret negotiation underway with France in his pamphlets. His enemies denounced his indiscretions. There was scandal; together with Paine's conflict with Robert Morris and Silas Deane it led to Paine's expulsion from the Committee in 1779.[58]
However, in 1781, he accompanied John Laurens on his mission to France. Eventually, after much pleading from Paine, New York State recognized his political services by presenting him with an estate at New Rochelle, New York and Paine received money from Pennsylvania and from Congress at Washington's suggestion. During the Revolutionary War, Paine served as an aide-de-camp to the important general, Nathanael Greene.[59]
Silas Deane Affair[edit]
In what may have been an error, and perhaps even contributed to his resignation as the secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs, Paine was openly critical of Silas Deane, an American diplomat who had been appointed in March 1776 by the Congress to travel to France in secret. Deane's goal was to influence the French government to finance the colonists in their fight for independence. Paine largely saw Deane as a war profiteer who had little respect for principle, having been under the employ of Robert Morris, one of the primary financiers of the American Revolution and working with Pierre Beaumarchais, a French royal agent sent to the colonies by King Louis to investigate the Anglo-American conflict. Paine uncovered the financial connection between Morris, who was Superintendent for Finance of the Continental Congress, and Deane.[60] Paine labeled Deane as unpatriotic, and demanded that there be a public investigation into Morris' financing of the Revolution, as he had contracted with his own company for around $500,000.[citation needed]
Wealthy men, such as Robert Morris, John Jay and powerful merchant bankers, were leaders of the Continental Congress and defended holding public positions while at the same time profiting off their own personal financial dealings with governments.[60] Amongst Paine's criticisms, he had written in the Pennsylvania Packet that France had "prefaced [their] alliance by an early and generous friendship," referring to aid that had been provided to American colonies prior to the recognition of the Franco-American treaties. This was alleged to be effectively an embarrassment to France, which potentially could have jeopardized the alliance. John Jay, the President of the Congress, who had been a fervent supporter of Deane, immediately spoke out against Paine's comments. The controversy eventually became public, and Paine was then denounced as unpatriotic for criticizing an American revolutionary. He was even physically assaulted twice in the street by Deane supporters. This much-added stress took a large toll on Paine, who was generally of a sensitive character and he resigned as secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs in 1779.[61] Paine left the Committee without even having enough money to buy food for himself.[62]
Much later, when Paine returned from his mission to France, Deane's corruption had become more widely acknowledged. Many, including Robert Morris, apologized to Paine and Paine's reputation in Philadelphia was restored.[63]
"Public Good"[edit]
In 1780, Paine published a pamphlet entitled "Public Good," in which he made the case that territories west of the 13 colonies that had been part of the British Empire belonged after the Declaration of Independence to the American government, and did not belong to any of the 13 states or to any individual speculators. A royal charter of 1609 had granted to the Virginia Company land stretching to the Pacific Ocean. A small group of wealthy Virginia land speculators, including the Washington, Lee, and Randolph families, had taken advantage of this royal charter to survey and to claim title to huge swaths of land, including much land west of the 13 colonies. In "Public Good," Paine argued that these lands belonged to the American government as represented by the Continental Congress. This angered many of Paine's wealthy Virginia friends, including Richard Henry Lee of the powerful Lee family, who had been Paine's closest ally in Congress, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, all of whom had claims to huge wild tracts that Paine was advocating should be government owned. The view that Paine had advocated eventually prevailed when the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 was passed.
The animosity Paine felt as a result of the publication of "Public Good" fueled his decision to embark with Lieutenant Colonel John Laurens on a mission to travel to Paris to obtain funding for the American war effort.[64]
Funding the Revolution[edit]
Paine accompanied Col. John Laurens to France and is credited with initiating the mission.[65] It landed in France in March 1781 and returned to America in August with 2.5 million livres in silver, as part of a "present" of 6 million and a loan of 10 million. The meetings with the French king were most likely conducted in the company and under the influence of Benjamin Franklin. Upon returning to the United States with this highly welcomed cargo, Thomas Paine and probably Col. Laurens, "positively objected" that General Washington should propose that Congress remunerate him for his services, for fear of setting "a bad precedent and an improper mode". Paine made influential acquaintances in Paris and helped organize the Bank of North America to raise money to supply the army.[66] In 1785, he was given $3,000 by the U.S. Congress in recognition of his service to the nation.[67]
Henry Laurens (father of Col. John Laurens) had been the ambassador to the Netherlands, but he was captured by the British on his return trip there. When he was later exchanged for the prisoner Lord Cornwallis in late 1781, Paine proceeded to the Netherlands to continue the loan negotiations. There remains some question as to the relationship of Henry Laurens and Thomas Paine to Robert Morris as the Superintendent of Finance and his business associate Thomas Willing who became the first president of the Bank of North America in January 1782. They had accused Morris of profiteering in 1779 and Willing had voted against the Declaration of Independence. Although Morris did much to restore his reputation in 1780 and 1781, the credit for obtaining these critical loans to "organize" the Bank of North America for approval by Congress in December 1781 should go to Henry or John Laurens and Thomas Paine more than to Robert Morris.[68]
 In Fashion before Ease;   or,   A good Constitution sacrificed for a Fantastick Form (1793), James Gillray caricatured Paine tightening the corset of Britannia and protruding from his coat pocket is a measuring tape inscribed "Rights of Man".
Paine bought his only house in 1783 on the corner of Farnsworth Avenue and Church Streets in Bordentown City, New Jersey and he lived in it periodically until his death in 1809. This is the only place in the world where Paine purchased real estate.[69] In 1785, Paine was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.[70]
In 1787, a bridge of Paine's design was built across the Schuylkill River at Philadelphia. At this time his work on single-arch iron bridges led him back to Paris, France.[71] Because Paine had few friends when arriving in France aside from Lafayette and Jefferson, he continued to correspond heavily with Benjamin Franklin, a long time friend and mentor. Franklin provided letters of introduction for Paine to use to gain associates and contacts in France.[72]
Later that year, Paine returned to London from Paris. He then released a pamphlet on August 20 called Prospects on the Rubicon: or, an investigation into the Causes and Consequences of the Politics to be Agitated at the Meeting of Parliament. Tensions between England and France were increasing, and this pamphlet urged the British Ministry to reconsider the consequences of war with France. Paine sought to turn the public opinion against the war to create better relations between the countries, avoid the taxes of war upon the citizens, and not engage in a war he believed would ruin both nations.[73]
Rights of Man[edit]
 Thomas Paine Author of the Rights of Man from John Baxter's Impartial History of England, 1796
Main article: Rights of Man
See also: Revolution Controversy and Trial of Thomas Paine
Back in London by 1787, Paine would become engrossed in the French Revolution that began two years later, and decided to travel to France in 1790. Meanwhile, conservative intellectual Edmund Burke launched a counterrevolutionary blast against the French Revolution, entitled Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790), which strongly appealed to the landed class, and sold 30,000 copies. Paine set out to refute it in his Rights of Man (1791). He wrote it not as a quick pamphlet, but as a long, abstract political tract of 90,000 words which tore apart monarchies and traditional social institutions. On January 31, 1791, he gave the manuscript to publisher Joseph Johnson. A visit by government agents dissuaded Johnson, so Paine gave the book to publisher J. S. Jordan, then went to Paris, on William Blake's advice. He charged three good friends, William Godwin, Thomas Brand Hollis, and Thomas Holcroft, with handling publication details. The book appeared on March 13, 1791, and sold nearly a million copies. It was "eagerly read by reformers, Protestant dissenters, democrats, London craftsmen, and the skilled factory-hands of the new industrial north".[74]
 English satirist James Gillray ridicules Paine in Paris awaiting sentence of execution from three hanging judges.
Undeterred by the government campaign to discredit him, Paine issued his Rights of Man, Part the Second, Combining Principle and Practice in February 1792. Detailing a representative government with enumerated social programs to remedy the numbing poverty of commoners through progressive tax measures, Paine went much farther than such contemporaries as James Burgh, Robert Potter, John Scott, John Sinclair or Adam Smith.[75] Radically reduced in price to ensure unprecedented circulation, it was sensational in its impact and gave birth to reform societies. An indictment for seditious libel followed, for both publisher and author, while government agents followed Paine and instigated mobs, hate meetings, and burnings in effigy. A fierce pamphlet war also resulted, in which Paine was defended and assailed in dozens of works.[76] The authorities aimed, with ultimate success, to chase Paine out of Great Britain. He was then tried in absentia and found guilty, although never executed. The French translation of Rights of Man, Part II was published in April 1792. The translator, Fran ois Lanthenas, eliminated the dedication to Lafayette, as he believed Paine thought too highly of Lafayette, who was seen as a royalist sympathizer at the time.[77]
 The Friends of the People caricatured by Isaac Cruikshank, November 15, 1792. Joseph Priestley and Thomas Paine are surrounded by incendiary items.
In summer of 1792, he answered the sedition and libel charges thus: "If, to expose the fraud and imposition of monarchy ... to promote universal peace, civilization, and commerce, and to break the chains of political superstition, and raise degraded man to his proper rank; if these things be libellous ... let the name of libeller be engraved on my tomb."[78]
Paine was an enthusiastic supporter of the French Revolution, and was granted honorary French citizenship alongside prominent contemporaries such as Alexander Hamilton, George Washington, Benjamin Franklin and others. Paine's honorary citizenship was in recognition of the publishing of his Rights of Man, Part II and the sensation it created within France.[79] Despite his inability to speak French, he was elected to the National Convention, representing the district of Pas-de-Calais.[80]
Several weeks after his election to the National Convention, Paine was selected as one of nine deputies to be part of the Convention's Constitutional Committee, who were charged to draft a suitable constitution for the French Republic.[81] He subsequentially participated in the Constitutional Committee in drafting the Girondin constitutional project. He voted for the French Republic, but argued against the execution of Louis XVI, saying the monarch should instead be exiled to the United States: firstly, because of the way royalist France had come to the aid of the American Revolution; and secondly, because of a moral objection to capital punishment in general and to revenge killings in particular.[82] However, Paine's speech in defense of Louis XVI was interrupted by Jean-Paul Marat, who claimed that as a Quaker, Paine's religious beliefs ran counter to inflicting capital punishment and thus he should be ineligible to vote. Marat interrupted a second time, stating that the translator was deceiving the convention by distorting the meanings of Paine's words, prompting Paine to provide a copy of the speech as proof that he was being correctly translated.[83]
Regarded as an ally of the Girondins, he was seen with increasing disfavor by the Montagnards, who were now in power; and in particular by Maximilien Robespierre. A decree was passed at the end of 1793 excluding foreigners from their places in the Convention (Anacharsis Cloots was also deprived of his place). Paine was arrested and imprisoned in December 1793.[84]
Paine wrote the second part of Rights of Man on a desk in Thomas 'Clio' Rickman's house, with whom he was staying in 1792 before he fled to France. This desk is currently on display in the People's History Museum in Manchester.[85]
The Age of Reason[edit]
Main article: The Age of Reason
 Title page from the first English edition of Part I
 Oil painting by Laurent Dabos, circa 1791
Paine was arrested in France on December 28, 1793. Joel Barlow was unsuccessful in securing Paine's release by circulating a petition among American residents in Paris.[86] Sixteen American citizens were allowed to plead for Paine's release to the Convention, yet President Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier of the Committee of General Security refused to acknowledge Paine's American citizenship, stating he was an Englishman and a citizen of a country at war with France.[87]
Paine himself protested and claimed that he was a citizen of the U.S., which was an ally of Revolutionary France, rather than of Great Britain, which was by that time at war with France. However, Gouverneur Morris, the American minister to France, did not press his claim, and Paine later wrote that Morris had connived at his imprisonment. Paine narrowly escaped execution. A chalk mark was supposed to be left by the gaoler on the door of a cell to denote that the prisoner inside was due to be removed for execution. In Paine's case, the mark had accidentally been made on the inside of his door rather than the outside; this was due to the fact that the door of Paine's cell had been left open whilst the gaoler was making his rounds that day, since Paine had been receiving official visitors. But for this quirk of fate, Paine would have been executed the following morning. He kept his head and survived the few vital days needed to be spared by the fall of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor (July 27, 1794).[88]
Paine was released in November 1794 largely because of the work of the new American Minister to France, James Monroe,[89] who successfully argued the case for Paine's American citizenship.[90] In July 1795, he was re-admitted into the Convention, as were other surviving Girondins. Paine was one of only three d put s to oppose the adoption of the new 1795 constitution because it eliminated universal suffrage, which had been proclaimed by the Montagnard Constitution of 1793.[91]
In 1796, a bridge he designed was erected over the mouth of the Wear River at Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, England.[92] This bridge, the Sunderland arch, was after the same design as his Schuylkill River Bridge in Philadelphia and it became the prototype for many subsequent voussoir arches made in iron and steel.[93][94]
In addition to receiving a British patent for the single-span iron bridge, Paine developed a smokeless candle[95] and worked with inventor John Fitch in developing steam engines.
In 1797, Paine lived in Paris with Nicholas Bonneville and his wife. As well as Bonneville's other controversial guests, Paine aroused the suspicions of authorities. Bonneville hid the Royalist Antoine Joseph Barruel-Beauvert at his home. Beauvert had been outlawed following the coup of 18 Fructidor on September 4, 1797. Paine believed that the United States under President John Adams had betrayed revolutionary France.[96] Bonneville was then briefly jailed and his presses were confiscated, which meant financial ruin.[citation needed]
In 1800, still under police surveillance, Bonneville took refuge with his father in Evreux. Paine stayed on with him, helping Bonneville with the burden of translating the "Covenant Sea". The same year, Paine purportedly had a meeting with Napoleon. Napoleon claimed he slept with a copy of Rights of Man under his pillow and went so far as to say to Paine that "a statue of gold should be erected to you in every city in the universe".[97] Paine discussed with Napoleon how best to invade England. In December 1797, he wrote two essays, one of which was pointedly named Observations on the Construction and Operation of Navies with a Plan for an Invasion of England and the Final Overthrow of the English Government,[98] in which he promoted the idea to finance 1,000 gunboats to carry a French invading army across the English Channel. In 1804, Paine returned to the subject, writing To the People of England on the Invasion of England advocating the idea.[96] However, upon noting Napoleon's progress towards dictatorship, he condemned him as "the completest charlatan that ever existed".[99] Paine remained in France until 1802, returning to the United States only at President Jefferson's invitation.[100]
Criticism of George Washington[edit]
Upset that U.S. President George Washington, a friend since the Revolutionary War, did nothing during Paine's imprisonment in France, Paine believed Washington had betrayed him and conspired with Robespierre. While staying with Monroe, Paine planned to send Washington a letter of grievance on the president's birthday. Monroe stopped the letter from being sent, and after Paine's criticism of the Jay Treaty, which was supported by Washington, Monroe suggested that Paine live elsewhere.[101]
Paine then sent a stinging letter to George Washington, in which he described him as an incompetent commander and a vain and ungrateful person. Having received no response, Paine contacted his longtime publisher Benjamin Bache, the Jeffersonian democrat, to publish his Letter to George Washington of 1796 in which he derided Washington's reputation by describing him as a treacherous man who was unworthy of his fame as a military and political hero. Paine wrote that "the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an impostor; whether you have abandoned good principles or whether you ever had any".[102] He declared that without France's aid Washington could not have succeeded in the American Revolution and had "but little share in the glory of the final event". He also commented on Washington's character, saying that Washington had no sympathetic feelings and was a hypocrite.[103]
Later years[edit]
 Portrait by John Wesley Jarvis, c. 1806 1807
In 1802 or 1803, Paine left France for the United States, also paying the passage for Bonneville's wife Marguerite Brazier and the couple's three sons, Benjamin, Louis and Thomas Bonneville, to whom Paine was godfather. Paine returned to the United States in the early stages of the Second Great Awakening and a time of great political partisanship. The Age of Reason gave ample excuse for the religiously devout to dislike him, while the Federalists attacked him for his ideas of government stated in Common Sense, for his association with the French Revolution, and for his friendship with President Jefferson. Also still fresh in the minds of the public was his Letter to Washington, published six years before his return. This was compounded when his right to vote was denied in New Rochelle on the grounds that Gouverneur Morris did not recognize him as an American and Washington had not aided him.[104]
Brazier took care of Paine at the end of his life and buried him after his death. In his will, Paine left the bulk of his estate to Marguerite, including 100 acres (40.5 ha) of his farm so she could maintain and educate Benjamin and his brother Thomas.[105] In 1814, the fall of Napoleon finally allowed Bonneville to rejoin his wife in the United States where he remained for four years before returning to Paris to open a bookshop.[citation needed]
Death[edit]
 Paine's death mask
On the morning of June 8, 1809, Paine died, aged 72, at 59 Grove Street in Greenwich Village, New York City.[106] Although the original building no longer exists, the present building has a plaque noting that Paine died at this location.[107]
After his death, Paine's body was brought to New Rochelle, but the Quakers would not allow it to be buried in their graveyard as per his last will, so his remains were buried under a walnut tree on his farm. In 1819, English agrarian radical journalist William Cobbett, who in 1793 had published a hostile continuation[108] of Francis Oldys (George Chalmer)'s The Life of Thomas Paine,[109] dug up his bones and transported them back to England with the intention to give Paine a heroic reburial on his native soil, but this never came to pass. The bones were still among Cobbett's effects when he died over fifteen years later, but were later lost. There is no confirmed story about what happened to them after that, although various people have claimed throughout the years to own parts of Paine's remains, such as his skull and right hand.[110][111][112]
At the time of his death, most American newspapers reprinted the obituary notice from the New York Evening Post that was in turn quoting from The American Citizen,[113] which read in part: "He had lived long, did some good, and much harm". Only six mourners came to his funeral, two of whom were black, most likely freedmen. Months later appeared a hostile biography by James Cheetham, who had admired him since the latter's days as a young radical in Manchester, and who had been friends with Paine for a short time before the two fell out. Many years later the writer and orator Robert G. Ingersoll wrote:
Thomas Paine had passed the legendary limit of life. One by one most of his old friends and acquaintances had deserted him. Maligned on every side, execrated, shunned and abhorred   his virtues denounced as vices   his services forgotten   his character blackened, he preserved the poise and balance of his soul. He was a victim of the people, but his convictions remained unshaken. He was still a soldier in the army of freedom, and still tried to enlighten and civilize those who were impatiently waiting for his death. Even those who loved their enemies hated him, their friend   the friend of the whole world   with all their hearts. On the 8th of June 1809, death came   Death, almost his only friend. At his funeral no pomp, no pageantry, no civic procession, no military display. In a carriage, a woman and her son who had lived on the bounty of the dead   on horseback, a Quaker, the humanity of whose heart dominated the creed of his head   and, following on foot, two negroes filled with gratitude   constituted the funeral cortege of Thomas Paine.[114]
Ideas[edit]
Biographer Eric Foner identifies a utopian thread in Paine's thought, writing: "Through this new language he communicated a new vision  a utopian image of an egalitarian, republican society".[115]
Paine's utopianism combined civic republicanism, belief in the inevitability of scientific and social progress and commitment to free markets and liberty generally. The multiple sources of Paine's political theory all pointed to a society based on the common good and individualism. Paine expressed a redemptive futurism or political messianism.[116] Writing that his generation "would appear to the future as the Adam of a new world", Paine exemplified British utopianism.[117]
Later, his encounters with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas made a deep impression. The ability of the Iroquois to live in harmony with nature while achieving a democratic decision-making process helped him refine his thinking on how to organize society.[118]
 Portrait of Thomas Paine by Matthew Pratt, 1785 1795
Slavery[edit]
According to Christopher Hitchens, Paine was a strong critic of slavery and declared himself to be an abolitionist.[119] As secretary to the Pennsylvania legislature, he helped draft legislation to outlaw Patriot involvement in the international slave trade.[120] Paine's statement, "Man has no property in man", although used by him in Rights of Man to deny the right of any generation to bind future ones, has also been interpreted as an argument against slavery.[121][122] In the book, Paine also describes his mission, among other things, as to "break the chains of slavery and oppression".[123]
On March 8, 1775, one month after Paine became the editor of The Pennsylvania Magazine, the magazine published an anonymous article titled "African Slavery in America," the first prominent piece in the colonies proposing the emancipation of African-American slaves and the abolition of slavery.[124] Paine is often credited with writing the piece,[124] on the basis of later testimony by Benjamin Rush, cosigner of the Declaration of Independence.[31] Citing a lack of further evidence of Paine's authorship, however, Eric Foner and Alfred Owen Aldridge no longer consider it to be one of his works.[citation needed]
During the American Revolutionary War, the British implemented several policies which allowed fugitive slaves fleeing from American enslavers to find refuge within British lines. Writing in response to these policies, Paine wrote in Common Sense that Britain "hath stirred up the Indians and the Negroes to destroy us".[125] Paine, together with Joel Barlow, unsuccessfully tried to convince President Thomas Jefferson to not import the institution of slavery to the territory acquired in the Louisiana Purchase, suggesting he rather settle it with free Black families and German immigrants.[126]
State funded social programs[edit]
In his Rights of Man, Part Second, Paine advocated a comprehensive program of state support for the population to ensure the welfare of society, including state subsidy for poor people, state-financed universal public education, and state-sponsored prenatal care and postnatal care, including state subsidies to families at childbirth. Recognizing that a person's "labor ought to be over" before old age, Paine also called for a state pension to all workers starting at age 50, which would be doubled at age 60.[127]
Agrarian Justice[edit]
His last pamphlet, Agrarian Justice, published in the winter of 1795, opposed agrarian law and agrarian monopoly and further developed his ideas in the Rights of Man about how land ownership separated the majority of people from their rightful, natural inheritance and means of independent survival. The U.S. Social Security Administration recognizes Agrarian Justice as the first American proposal for an old-age pension and basic income or citizen's dividend. Per Agrarian Justice:
In advocating the case of the persons thus dispossessed, it is a right, and not a charity ... [Government must] create a national fund, out of which there shall be paid to every person, when arrived at the age of twenty-one years, the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, as a compensation in part, for the loss of his or her natural inheritance, by the introduction of the system of landed property. And also, the sum of ten pounds per annum, during life, to every person now living, of the age of fifty years, and to all others as they shall arrive at that age.
In this pamphlet he argued "All accumulation of personal property, beyond what a man's own hands produce, is derived to him by living in society; and he owes on every principle of justice, of gratitude, and of civilization, a part of that accumulation back again to society from whence the whole came".[128]
In 2011,  10 and  15 would be worth about  800 and  1,200 ($1,200 and $2,000) when adjusted for inflation.[129]
Lamb argues that Paine's analysis of property rights marks a distinct contribution to political theory. His theory of property defends a libertarian concern with private ownership that shows an egalitarian commitment. Paine's new justification of property sets him apart from previous theorists such as Hugo Grotius, Samuel von Pufendorf and John Locke. Lamb says it demonstrates Paine's commitment to foundational liberal values of individual freedom and moral equality.[130] In response to Paine's "Agrarian Justice", Thomas Spence wrote "The Rights of Infants" wherein Spence argues that Paine's plan was not beneficial to impoverished people because landlords would just keep raising land prices, further enriching themselves rather than giving the commonwealth an equal chance.[131]
Religious views[edit]
Before his arrest and imprisonment in France, knowing that he would probably be arrested and executed, following in the tradition of early 18th-century British Deism Paine wrote the first part of The Age of Reason (1793 1794). Paine's religious views as expressed in The Age of Reason caused quite a stir in religious society, effectively splitting the religious groups into two major factions: those who wanted church disestablishment, and the Christians who wanted Christianity to continue having a strong social influence.[132]
About his own religious beliefs, Paine wrote in The Age of Reason:
I believe in one God, and no more; and I hope for happiness beyond this life.
I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish church, by the Roman church, by the Greek church, by the Turkish church, by the Protestant church, nor by any church that I know of. My own mind is my own church. All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian or Turkish, appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit.
Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and tortuous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness with which more than half the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we call it the word of a demon than the word of God. It is a history of wickedness that has served to corrupt and brutalize mankind; and, for my part, I sincerely detest it, as I detest everything that is cruel.[133]
Though there is no definitive evidence Paine himself was a Freemason,[134][135] upon his return to America from France he penned "An Essay on the Origin of Free-Masonry" (1803 1805) about Freemasonry being derived from the religion of the ancient Druids.[134] Marguerite de Bonneville published the essay in 1810 after Paine's death, but she chose to omit certain passages from it that were critical of Christianity, most of which were restored in an 1818 printing.[134] In the essay, Paine stated that "the Christian religion is a parody on the worship of the Sun, in which they put a man whom they call Christ, in the place of the Sun, and pay him the same adoration which was originally paid to the Sun."[134] Paine also had a negative attitude toward Judaism.[136] While never describing himself as a Deist, he openly advocated Deism in his writings,[8] and called Deism "the only true religion":The opinions I have advanced ... are the effect of the most clear and long-established conviction that the Bible and the Testament are impositions upon the world, that the fall of man, the account of Jesus Christ being the Son of God, and of his dying to appease the wrath of God, and of salvation, by that strange means, are all fabulous inventions, dishonorable to the wisdom and power of the Almighty; that the only true religion is Deism, by which I then meant, and mean now, the belief of one God, and an imitation of his moral character, or the practice of what are called moral virtues  and that it was upon this only (so far as religion is concerned) that I rested all my hopes of happiness hereafter. So say I now  and so help me God.[68]
Legacy[edit]
Historian Jack P. Greene stated:
In a fundamental sense, we are today all Paine's children. It was not the British defeat at Yorktown, but Paine and the new American conception of political society he did so much to popularize in Europe that turned the world upside down.[137]
 In 1969, a Prominent Americans series stamp honoring Paine was issued.
Harvey J. Kaye wrote that through Paine, through his pamphlets and catchphrases such as "The sun never shined on a cause of greater worth," "We have it in our power to begin the world over again," and "These are the times that try men's souls" did more than move Americans to declare their independence:
[H]e also imbued the nation they were founding with democratic impulse and aspiration and exceptional   indeed, world-historic   purpose and promise. For 230 years Americans have drawn ideas, inspiration, and encouragement from Paine and his work.[138]
John Stevenson argues that in the early 1790s, numerous radical political societies were formed throughout England and Wales in which Paine's writings provided "a boost to the self-confidence of those seeking to participate in politics for the first time."[139] In its immediate effects, Gary Kates argues, "Paine's vision unified Philadelphia merchants, British artisans, French peasants, Dutch reformers, and radical intellectuals from Boston to Berlin in one great movement."[140]
 Since its founding in 1873, the American freethought periodical   The Truth Seeker   has championed Thomas Paine.
His writings in the long term inspired philosophic and working-class radicals in Britain and United States. Liberals, libertarians, left-libertarians, feminists, democratic socialists, social democrats, anarchists, free thinkers and progressives often claim him as an intellectual ancestor. Paine's critique of institutionalized religion and advocacy of rational thinking influenced many British freethinkers in the 19th and 20th centuries, such as William Cobbett, George Holyoake, Charles Bradlaugh, Christopher Hitchens and Bertrand Russell.[141]
The quote "Lead, follow, or get out of the way" is widely but incorrectly attributed to Paine. It can be found nowhere in his published works.[142]
Abraham Lincoln[edit]
In 1835, when he was 26 years old, Abraham Lincoln wrote a defense of Paine's deism.[143] A political associate, Samuel Hill, burned the manuscript to save Lincoln's political career.[144] Historian Roy Basler, the editor of Lincoln's papers, said Paine had a strong influence on Lincoln's style:
No other writer of the eighteenth century, with the exception of Jefferson, parallels more closely the temper or gist of Lincoln's later thought. In style, Paine above all others affords the variety of eloquence which, chastened and adapted to Lincoln's own mood, is revealed in Lincoln's formal writings.[145]
Thomas Edison[edit]
The inventor Thomas Edison said:
I have always regarded Paine as one of the greatest of all Americans. Never have we had a sounder intelligence in this republic.... It was my good fortune to encounter Thomas Paine's works in my boyhood... it was, indeed, a revelation to me to read that great thinker's views on political and theological subjects. Paine educated me, then, about many matters of which I had never before thought. I remember, very vividly, the flash of enlightenment that shone from Paine's writings, and I recall thinking, at that time, 'What a pity these works are not today the schoolbooks for all children!' My interest in Paine was not satisfied by my first reading of his works. I went back to them time and again, just as I have done since my boyhood days.[146]
South America[edit]
In 1811, Venezuelan translator Manuel Garcia de Sena published a book in Philadelphia that consisted mostly of Spanish translations of several of Paine's most important works.[147] The book also included translations of the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the U.S. Constitution and the constitutions of five U.S. states.[147]
It subsequently circulated widely in South America and through it Uruguayan national hero Jos  Gervasio Artigas became familiar with and embraced Paine's ideas. In turn, many of Artigas's writings drew directly from Paine's, including the Instructions of 1813, which Uruguayans consider to be one of their country's most important constitutional documents, and was one of the earliest writings to articulate a principled basis for an identity independent of Buenos Aires.[147]
 Monument, Kings Street, Thetford
Memorials[edit]
Main article: Memorials to Thomas Paine
 The Thomas Paine Monument
The first and longest-standing memorial to Paine is the carved and inscribed 12-foot marble column in New Rochelle, New York, organized and funded by publisher, educator and reformer Gilbert Vale (1791 1866) and raised in 1839 by the American sculptor and architect John Frazee, the Thomas Paine Monument (see image below).[148]
New Rochelle is also the original site of Thomas Paine's Cottage, which along with a 320-acre (130 ha) farm were presented to Paine in 1784 by act of the New York State Legislature for his services in the American Revolution.[149] The same site is the home of the Thomas Paine Memorial Museum.[150]
 Statue of Thomas Paine in Parc Montsouris, Paris, dedicated in 1948
In the 20th century, Joseph Lewis, longtime president of the Freethinkers of America and an ardent Paine admirer, was instrumental in having larger-than-life-sized statues of Paine erected in each of the three countries with which the revolutionary writer was associated. The first, created by Mount Rushmore sculptor Gutzon Borglum, was erected in the Parc Montsouris, Paris, just before World War II began but not formally dedicated until 1948. It depicts Paine standing before the French National Convention to plead for the life of King Louis XVI. The second, sculpted in 1950 by Georg J. Lober, was erected near Paine's one-time home in Morristown, New Jersey. It shows a seated Paine using a drum-head as a makeshift table. The third, sculpted by Sir Charles Wheeler, President of the Royal Academy, was erected in 1964 in Paine's birthplace, Thetford, England. With a quill pen in his right hand and an inverted copy of The Rights of Man in his left, it occupies a prominent spot on King Street. Thomas Paine was ranked No. 34 in the 100 Greatest Britons 2002 extensive Nationwide poll conducted by the BBC.[151]
In popular culture[edit]
The 1982 French-Italian film That Night in Varennes is about a fictional meeting of Casanova, Chevalier de Seingalt (played by Italian actor Marcello Mastroianni), Nicolas Edm  Restif de la Bretonne, Countess Sophie de la Borde and Thomas Paine (played by American actor Harvey Keitel) as they ride in a carriage a few hours behind the carriage carrying the King and Queen of France, Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, on their attempt to escape from revolutionary France in 1791.
In 1987, Richard Thomas appeared on stage in Philadelphia and Washington, DC, in the one-man play Citizen Tom Paine, playing Paine "like a star-spangled tiger, ferocious about freedom and ready to savage anyone who stands in his way," in a staging of Howard Fast's play in the bicentennial year of the United States Constitution.[152]
Jack Shepherd's 1989 stage play In Lambeth dramatized a visit by Thomas Paine to the Lambeth home of William and Catherine Blake in 1789.
In 1995, the English folk singer Graham Moore released a song called Tom Paine's Bones on an album of the same name.[153] The song has since been covered by a number of other artists, including Dick Gaughan, Grace Petrie and Trials of Cato.
In 2005, Trevor Griffiths published These are the Times: A Life of Thomas Paine, originally written as a screenplay for Richard Attenborough Productions. Although the film was not made, the play was broadcast as a two-part drama on BBC Radio 4 in 2008,[154] with a repeat in 2012.[155] In 2009, Griffiths adapted the screenplay for a production entitled A New World at Shakespeare's Globe theatre on London's South Bank.[citation needed]
In 2009, Paine's life was dramatized in the play Thomas Paine Citizen of the World,[156] produced for the "Tom Paine 200 Celebrations" festival[157]
Paine is referenced in "The Schuyler Sisters", a song from the 2015 musical Hamilton.
See also[edit]
American Revolution portalHistory portalLiberalism portalLibertarianism portalPhilosophy portalPolitics portalUnited States portal
Asset-based egalitarianism
British philosophy
Contributions to liberal theory
Liberty
List of American philosophers
List of British philosophers
List of civil rights leaders
Society of the Friends of Truth
Early American publishers and printers
Notes[edit]
^ a b Conway, Moncure D. (1908). The Life of Thomas Paine. Vol. 1. Cobbett, William, Illustrator. G. P. Putnam's Sons. p. 3. Archived from the original on June 12, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2013.   In the contemporary record as noted by Conway, Paine's birth date is given as January 29, 1736 37. Common practice was to use a dash or a slash to separate the old-style year from the new-style year. In the old calendar, the new year began on March 25, not January 1. Paine's birth date, therefore, would have been before New Year, 1737. In the new style, his birth date advances by eleven days and his year increases by one to February 9, 1737. The O.S. link gives more detail if needed.
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ a b Ayer, Alfred Jules (1990). Thomas Paine. University of Chicago Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0226033396. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
^ Kreitner, Richard (February 9, 2015). "February 9, 1737: Thomas Paine Is Born". The Almanac.
^ Van Doren, Carl (February 8, 1922). "Book critic: Religion and Belief by Thomas Paine, The Roving Critic". The Nation.
^ Henretta, James A.;  et al. (2011). America's History, Volume 1: To 1877. Macmillan. p. 165. ISBN 978-0312387914. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ Solinger, J.D. (2010). "Thomas Paine's Continental Mind Archived February 24, 2021, at the Wayback Machine." Early American Literature 45 (3), 593-617.
^ a b Hitchens, Christopher (2008). Thomas Paine's Rights of Man. Grove Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-0802143839.
^ Kaye, Harvey J. (2005). Thomas Paine and the Promise of America. New York City: Hill & Wang. p. 43. ISBN 978-0809093441. Within just a few months 150,000 copies of one or another edition were distributed in America alone. The equivalent sales today would be fifteen million, making it, proportionally, the nation's greatest best-seller ever.
^ a b Paine, Thomas (2014). "Of the Religion of Deism Compared with the Christian Religion, and the Superiority of the Former over the Latter (1804)".  In Calvert, Jane E.; Shapiro, Ian (eds.). Selected Writings of Thomas Paine. Rethinking the Western Tradition. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 568 574. doi:10.12987/9780300210699-018. ISBN 978-0300167450. S2CID 246141428. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 7, 2021.
^ Fischer, Kirsten (2010).  Manning, Nicholas; Stefani, Anne (eds.). "'Religion Governed by Terror': A Deist Critique of Fearful Christianity in the Early American Republic". Revue Fran aise d' tudes Am ricaines. Paris: Belin. 125 (3): 13 26. doi:10.3917/rfea.125.0013. eISSN 1776-3061. ISSN 0397-7870. LCCN 80640131   via Cairn.info.
^ Gelpi, Donald L. (2007) [2000]. "Part 1: Enlightenment Religion   Chapter 3: Militant Deism". Varieties of Transcendental Experience: A Study in Constructive Postmodernism. Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock. pp. 47 48. ISBN 9781725220294.
^ Claeys, Gregory (1989). "Revolution in heaven: The Age of Reason (1794 95)". Thomas Paine: Social and Political Thought (1st ed.). New York and London: Routledge. pp. 177 195. ISBN 978-0044450900.
^ Conway, Moncure D. (1892). The Life of Thomas Paine Archived September 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Vol. 2, pp. 417 418.
^ "Paine, Thomas (1737 1809), author and revolutionary". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/21133. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Crosby, Alan (1986). A History of Thetford (1st ed.). Chichester, Sussex: Phillimore & Co. pp. 44 84. ISBN 978-0850336047.
^ "National Archives". UK National Archives. Archived from the original on December 15, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2009Acknowledgement dated March 2, 1769, document NU/1/3/3 {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: postscript (link)
^ School History Archived December 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Thetford Grammar School; accessed January 3, 2008,
^ Keane, John (1995). Tom Paine, A Political Life (First ed.). London: Bloomsbury. p. 30. ISBN 0802139647.
^ Bell, J.L. "The Evidence for Paine as a Staymaker". Boston 1775. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ Keane, John (1995). Tom Paine, A Political Life (First ed.). London: Bloomsbury. p. 38. ISBN 0802139647.
^ "Thomas Paine". Sandwich People & History. Open Sandwich. Archived from the original on April 11, 2009. Retrieved April 2, 2010.
^ "Thomas Paine, 1737 1809". historyguide.org. Archived from the original on March 17, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019.
^ Conway, Moncure Daniel (1892). "The Life of Thomas Paine: With a History of Literary, Political, and Religious Career in America, France, and England". Thomas Paine National Historical Association. p. 20, vol. I. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009. Retrieved July 18, 2009.
^ Conway, Moncure Daniel. "The Life Of Thomas Paine, Vol. I. (of II) With A History of His Literary, Political and Religious Career in America France, and England". Retrieved October 25, 2021.
^ Kaye, Harvey J. (2000). Thomas Paine: Firebrand of the Revolution. Oxford University Press. p. 36. ISBN 978-0195116274.
^ Martin, David; Clubb, Jane (2009). "An Archaeological Interpretative Survey of Bull House, 92 High Street, Lewes, East Sussex" (PDF). Sussex Archaeological Society. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2019.
^ Rickman, Thomas Clio (1899). The Life of Thomas Paine, Author of "Common Sense," "Rights of Man," "Age of Reason," "Letters to the Addresser[!]," &c., &c. B.D. Cousins. OCLC 424874. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
^ "Letter to the Honorable Henry Laurens" in Philip S. Foner's The Complete Writings of Thomas Paine (New York: Citadel Press, 1945), 2:1160 1165.
^ "Thomas Paine | British-American author". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017.
^ Conway, Moncure Daniel, 1892. The Life of Thomas Paine vol. 1, p. 209.
^ a b c d e f Larkin, Edward (2005). Thomas Paine and the Literature of Revolution. Cambridge University Press. pp. 31 40. ISBN 978-1139445986. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ a b c d American Antislavery Writings: Colonial Beginnings to Emancipation. Library of America. 2012. ISBN 978-1598532142. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ Green, Jack (1978). "Paine, America, and the "Modernization" of Political Consciousness". Political Science Quarterly. 93 (1): 73 92. doi:10.2307/2149051. JSTOR 2149051.
^ K. M. Kostyal. Funding Fathers: The Fight for Freedom and the Birth of American Liberty (2014) ch. 2
^ David Braff, "Forgotten Founding Father: The Impact of Thomas Paine," in Joyce Chumbley, ed., Thomas Paine: In Search of the Common Good (2009).
^ Oliphant, John. "Paine, Thomas". Encyclopedia of the American Revolution: Library of Military History. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2007   via Gale Virtual Library.
^ Scharf, T. History of Philadelphia.    . p. 310. ISBN 978-5883517104. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
^ Butterfield (ed.), 2019, Vol II, p. 1008
^ Conway & Cobbett, 1892, Vol I, p. 68
^ Ferguson, Robert A. (July 2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense". The William and Mary Quarterly. 57 (3): 465 504. doi:10.2307/2674263. JSTOR 2674263.
^ Robert A. Ferguson (July 2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense". William and Mary Quarterly. 57 (3): 465 504. doi:10.2307/2674263. JSTOR 2674263.
^ Philp, Mark (2013). "Thomas Paine".  In Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2013 Edition). Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2015.
^ Merrill Jensen, The Founding of a Nation: A History of the American Revolution, 1763 1776 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1968), 668.
^ David C. Hoffman, "Paine and Prejudice: Rhetorical Leadership through Perceptual Framing in Common Sense." Rhetoric and Public Affairs, Fall 2006, Vol. 9, Issue 3, pp. 373 410.
^ Pauline Maier, American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence (New York: Knopf, 1997), 90 91.
^ Jack N. Rakove, The Beginnings of National Politics: An Interpretive History of the Continental Congress (New York: Knopf, 1979), 89.
^ Jack S. Levy, William R. Thompson, Causes of War (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
^ New, M. Christopher. "James Chalmers and Plain Truth A Loyalist Answers Thomas Paine". Archiving Early America. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007.
^ Jensen, Founding of a Nation, 669.
^ "Adams Papers Digital Edition   Massachusetts Historical Society". www.masshist.org. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 5, 2018.
^ Rosenfeld, Sophia (2008). "Tom Paine's Common Sense and Ours". The William and Mary Quarterly. 65 (4): 633 668. JSTOR 40212021.
^ Robert Middlekauff (2005). The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763 1789, Revised and Expanded Edition, Oxford University Press, New York; ISBN 978-0195315882, pp. 30 53.
^ Robert Middlekauff, The Glorious Cause, pp. 4 5, 324 326. ISBN 978-0195315882
^ Cf. Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United States, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, p. 178.[ISBN missing]
^ a b "Thomas Paine National Historical Association". www.thomaspaine.org. Archived from the original on April 3, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021.
^ Jonathan Scheick. "The Roger Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence". thomaspaine.org. Retrieved September 30, 2022.
^ Martin Roth, "Tom Paine and American Loneliness." Early American Literature, September 1987, Vol. 22, Issue 2, pp. 175 182.
^ "Thomas Paine. The American Crisis. Philadelphia, Styner and Cist, 1776 77". Indiana University. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2007.
^ Nelson, Craig (2007). Thomas Paine: Enlightenment, Revolution, and the Birth of Modern Nations. Penguin. pp. 174 175. ISBN 978-1101201787. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ Blakemore, Steve (1997). Crisis in representation: Thomas Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, Helen Maria Williams, and the rewriting of the French Revolution. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
^ a b Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence," (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 89
^ Craig Nelson (2006). Thomas Paine. New York : Viking. pp. 134 138. ISBN 978-0670037889.
^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence," (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 93
^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence," (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), pp. 102 103
^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence," (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), pp. 100 101
^ Daniel Wheeler's Life and Writings of Thomas Paine Vol. 1 (1908) pp. 26 27.
^ Daniel Wheeler, Life and Writings of Thomas Paine Vol. 1 (1908), p. 314.
^ Paine, Thomas (2005). Common Sense and Other Writings. Barnes & Noble Classics. p. xiii. ISBN 978-0672600043.
^ a b Thomas Paine (1824), The Theological Works of Thomas Paine, R. Carlile, p. 138, archived from the original on October 16, 2015, retrieved July 1, 2015
^ Chaplin, Philippa J. (August 1, 2004). "Revolution Echoes Yet in Bordentown: The Place Patriot Thomas Paine Once Called Home Still Honors Him". The Philadelphia Inquirer   via ProQuest.
^ "APS Member History". search.amphilsoc.org. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2020.
^ Aldridge, Alfred (1959). Man Of Reason: The Life Of Thomas Paine. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company. p. 109.
^ Ziesche, Philipp (2013). Paine and Jefferson in the Age of Revolutions. University of Virginia Press. p. 124.[ISBN missing]
^ Aldridge, Alfred (1959). Man Of Reason: The Life Of Thomas Paine. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company. pp. 120 121.
^ George Rud , Revolutionary Europe: 1783 1815 (1964), p. 183.[ISBN missing]
^ Chiu, Frances A. The Routledge Guidebook to Paine's Rights of Man. Routledge, 2020, pp. 203-247. 
^ Many of these are reprinted in Political Writings of the 1790s, ed. G. Claeys (8 vols, London: Pickering and Chatto, 1995).[ISBN missing]
^ Ziesche, Phillipp (2010). Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution. University of Virginia Press. p. 63.
^ Thomas Paine, Letter Addressed To The Addressers On The Late Proclamation, in Michael Foot, Isaac Kramnick (ed.), The Thomas Paine Reader, p. 374[ISBN missing]
^ Ziesche, Philipp (2010). Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution. University of Virginia Press. p. 62.
^ Fruchtman, Jack (2009). The Political Philosophy of Thomas Paine. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 192. ISBN 978-0801892844.
^ Munck, Thomas (2013). Paine and Jefferson in the Age of Revolutions. University of Virginia Press. p. 165.
^ Vincent, Bernard (2005). The transatlantic republican : Thomas Paine and the age of revolutions. Amsterdam: Rodopi. ISBN 1417591021. OCLC 60158208. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Hawke, David (1974). Paine. New York: Harper & Row Publishers. pp. 275 276.
^ Vikki Vickers (2008). My Pen and My Soul Have Ever Gone Together: Thomas Paine and the American Revolution. Routledge. pp. 2 . ISBN 978-1135921576. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2018.
^ Collection highlights, Tom Paine's Desk, People's History Museum
^ Ziesche, Philipp (2010). Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution. University of Virginia Press. p. 86.
^ Hawke, David (1974). Paine. New York: Harper & Row Publishers. pp. 297 298.
^ Paine, Thomas; Rickman, Thomas Clio (1908). The Life and Writings of Thomas Paine: Containing a Biography. Vincent Parke & Co. pp. 261 262. Retrieved February 21, 2008. thomas paine jailer door.
^ Foot, Michael, and Kramnick, Isaac. 1987. The Thomas Paine Reader, p. 16
^ Eric Foner, 1976. Tom Paine and Revolutionary America, p. 244.
^ Aulard, Alphonse. 1901. Histoire politique de la R volution fran aise, p. 555.
^ Yorkshire Stingo
^ History of Bridge Engineering, H.G. Tyrrell, Chicago, 1911.
^ A biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers in Great Britain and Ireland at 753 755, A. W. Skempton and M. Chrimes, ed., Thomas Telford, 2002; ISBN 978-0727729392
^ See Thomas Paine Archived September 29, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, Independence Hall Association; accessed online November 4, 2006.
^ a b Mark Philp (2004). "Paine, Thomas (1737 1809)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/21133. Retrieved July 26, 2008. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ O'Neill, Brendan (June 8, 2009). "Who was Thomas Paine?". BBC. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018.
^ Papers of James Monroe ... from the original manuscripts in the Library of Congress. Washington : Government Printing Office. 1904.
^ Craig Nelson (2006). Thomas Paine. New York : Viking. p. 299. ISBN 978-0670037889.
^ "Founders Online: From Thomas Jefferson to Thomas Paine, 18 March 1801". founders.archives.gov. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019.
^ Craig Nelson (2006). Thomas Paine. New York: Viking. p. 291. ISBN 978-0670037889.
^ Paine, Thomas. "Letter to George Washington, July 30, 1796: "On Paine's Service to America"". Archived from the original on September 27, 2006. Retrieved November 4, 2006.
^ Craig Nelson (2006). Thomas Paine. New York: Viking. pp. 292 294. ISBN 978-0670037889.
^ Claeys, Gregory, 1989. Thomas Paine, Social and Political Thought.[ISBN missing][page needed]
^ Paine, T.; Wheeler, D.E.; Rickman, T.C. (1908). "The Will of Thomas Paine". The Life and Writings of Thomas Paine: Containing a Biography. The Life and Writings of Thomas Paine: Containing a Biography. Vincent Parke. p. 368. Retrieved April 21, 2022.
^ "Thomas Paine". ushistory.org. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017.
^ Walsh, Kevin (May 1999). "A Paine in the Village   Forgotten New York". Archived from the original on April 17, 2020. Retrieved March 12, 2019.
^ William Cobbett, The Life of Thomas Paine, Interspersed with Remarks and Reflections (London: J. Wright, 1797)
^ "Francis Oldys" [George Chalmers], The Life of Thomas Paine. One Penny-Worth of Truth, from Thomas Bull to His Brother John (London: Stockdale, 1791)
^ "The Paine Monument at Last Finds a Home". The New York Times. October 15, 1905. Archived from the original on February 26, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
^ Chen, David W. "Rehabilitating Thomas Paine, Bit by Bony Bit". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 16, 2007. Retrieved February 23, 2008.
^ Burrows, Edwin G. and Wallace, Mike. Gotham: A History of New York City to 1898. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, p. 510.[ISBN missing]
^ "Paine's Obituary (click the "1809" link; it is 1/3 way down the 4th column)". New York Evening Post. June 10, 1809. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2013.
^ Robert G. Ingersoll (1892). Thomas Paine (1892). Thomas Paine National Historical Association. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017.
^ Eric Foner (2005). Tom Paine and Revolutionary America. Oxford University Press, 2nd edition. pp. xxxii, 16. ISBN 978-0195174861. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ Jendrysik, Mark (2007). "Tom Paine: Utopian?". Utopian Studies. 18 (2): 139 157. doi:10.5325/utopianstudies.18.2.0139. S2CID 149860226.
^ Gregory Claeys, ed. (2010). The Cambridge Companion to Utopian Literature. Cambridge University Press. pp. 11 12. ISBN 978-1139828420. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ Weatherford, Jack (2010). Indian givers : how Native Americans transformed the world. New York, N.Y: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-307-71715-3. OCLC 656265477.
^ Hitchens (2007), pp. 28 29
^ Hitchens (2007), pp. 43 44
^ Hitchens, Christopher (2012). Arguably. Hachette. p. 162. ISBN 978-1-4555-0278-3.
^ Kaye, Harvey J. (2007). Thomas Paine and the Promise of America: A History & Biography. p. 147. ISBN 9780374707064.
^ Paine, Thomas (2008). Rights of Man, Common Sense, and Other Political Writings. Oxford University Press. p. 324. ISBN 9780199538003.
^ a b Rodriguez, Junius P. (2007). Slavery in the United States: A Social, Political, and Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 279. ISBN 978-1851095445. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ Common Sense & the Rights of Man: Words of a Visionary That Sparked the Revolution and Remained the Core of American Democratic Principles. E-artnow. March 21, 2018. ISBN 9788027241521.
^ Hitchens (2007), p. 139.
^ Harlow Giles Unger, "Thomas Paine and the Clarion Call for American Independence" (New York: Da Capo Press, 2019), p. 154
^ Thomas Paine: Collected Writings. Library of America. 1995. p. 408.
^ "Purchasing Power of British Pounds from 1264 to Present". Measuringworth.com. February 15, 1971. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved December 26, 2011.
^ Lamb, Robert. "Liberty, Equality, and the Boundaries of Ownership: Thomas Paine's Theory of Property Rights." Review of Politics (2010), 72#3, pp. 483 511.
^ Marangos, John (April 11, 2008). "Thomas Paine (1737 1809) and Thomas Spence (1750 1814) on land ownership, land taxes and the provision of citizens' dividend". International Journal of Social Economics. 35 (5): 313 325. doi:10.1108/03068290810861576. ISSN 0306-8293. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021.
^ Noll, Mark A. (November 2017). "Religion in the Early Republic: A Second Tom Paine Effect". Modern Intellectual History. 14 (3): 883 898. doi:10.1017/S1479244316000287. ISSN 1479-2443. S2CID 152274951. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021.
^ Thomas Paine;  et al. (1824). The Theological Works of Thomas Paine. R. Carlile. p. 31. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ a b c d Shai Afsai, "Thomas Paine, Deism, and the Masonic Fraternity" Archived April 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Journal of the American Revolution, November 7, 2016.
^ United States. Congress (June 14, 1956). Congressional Record. Proceedings and Debates of the ... Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 4791. Quote: "Tom Paine, Patrick Henry, James Otis, and John Paul Jones were all Masons."
^ Michael, Robert. A Concise History of American Antisemitism Archived May 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, p. 70 (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2005).
^ Jack P. Greene, "Paine, America, and the 'Modernization' Of Political Consciousness," Political Science Quarterly 93#1 (1978) pp. 73 92 [92] Online Archived December 2, 2018, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Harvey J. Kaye (2007). Thomas Paine and the Promise of America: A History & Biography. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 258. ISBN 978-0374707064. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2019.
^ Stevenson, John (1989). "'Paineites to a Man'? The English Popular Radical Societies in the 1790s". Bulletin   Society for the Study of Labour History. 54 (1): 14 25.
^ Gary Kates. "From Liberalism to Radicalism " (1989) p. 569.
^ Kates, Gary (1989). "From liberalism to radicalism: Tom Paine's Rights of Man". Journal of the History of Ideas. 50 (4): 569 587. doi:10.2307/2709798. JSTOR 2709798.
^ Gray, Rosie (February 1, 2012). "Mitt Romney Misquoted Thomas Paine In Victory Speech". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019.
^ Robert Havlik, "Some Influences of Thomas Paine's Age of Reason Upon
Abraham Lincoln," Lincoln Herald, 104 (Summer 2002): 61 70.
^ Michael Burlingame, Abraham Lincoln: a Life (2008), vol. 2, p. 83.
^ Roy P. Basler (ed.), Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings (1946), p. 6.
^ Thomas Edison, Introduction to The Life and Works of Thomas Paine, New York: Citadel Press, 1945, Vol. I, pp. vii ix. Reproduced online Archived November 10, 2004, at the Wayback Machine on thomaspaine.org, accessed November 4, 2006.
^ a b c John Street, Artigas and the Emancipation of Uruguay (London: Cambridge University Press, 1959), 178 186.
^ See Frederick S. Voss, John Frazee 1790 1852 Sculptor (Washington City and Boston: The National Portrait Gallery and The Boston Athenaeum, 1986), pp. 46 47.[ISBN missing]
^ See Alfred Owen Aldridge, Man of Reason (Philadelphia: J. P. Lippincott Company, 1959), p. 103.[ISBN missing]
^ "Academics: Libraries". Iona College. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013.
^ "BBC   100 Great British Heroes". BBC News. August 21, 2002. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved December 26, 2011.
^ Louise Sweeney (1987). "On stage: reliving historic turning points. Howard Fast's 'Citizen Tom Paine'." The Christian Science Monitor. March 12, 1987.
^ "Tom Paine's Bones [Graham Moore]". mainlynorfolk.info. Retrieved August 9, 2021.
^ "BBC Radio 4   Saturday Drama   Episodes by". Bbc.co.uk. August 2008. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2014.
^ "BBC Radio 4   Saturday Drama   Episodes by". Bbc.co.uk. August 2012. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2014.
^ "Thomas Paine   "Citizen Of The World"". Keystage-company.co.uk. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved May 7, 2014.
^ Tom Paine Legacy Archived January 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Programme for bicentenary celebrations in Thetford, the town of his birth.
Sources[edit]
Afsai, Shai (November 7, 2016). "Thomas Paine, Deism, and the Masonic Fraternity". Journal of the American Revolution.
Aldridge, A. Owen (1959). Man of Reason: The Life of Thomas Paine. Lippincott.. Regarded by British authorities as the standard biography.
Aldridge, A. Owen (1984). Thomas Paine's American Ideology. University of Delaware Press. ISBN 978-0874132601. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
Ayer, A. J. (1988). Thomas Paine. University of Chicago Press.
Bailyn, Bernard (1990).  Bailyn (ed.). Common Sense. Faces of Revolution: Personalities and Themes in the Struggle for American Independence. Alfred A. Knopf.
Bernstein, R. B. (1994). "Review Essay: Rediscovering Thomas Paine". New York Law School Law Review.. Valuable blend of historiographical essay and biographical/analytical treatment.
Butler, Marilyn (1984). Burke Paine and Godwin and the Revolution Controversy..
Chiu, Frances (2020). The Routledge Guidebook to Paine's Rights of Man. Routledge. ISBN 978-0415703925.. Most comprehensive study of Rights of Man.
Claeys, Gregory (1989). Thomas Paine, Social and Political Thought. London: Unwin Hyman. ISBN 978-0203193204. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.. Excellent analysis of Paine's thought.
Conway, Moncure Daniel (1892). The Life of Thomas Paine. G.P. Putnam's Sons.. Long hailed as the definitive biography, and still valuable.
Ferguson, Robert A. (July 2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense". William and Mary Quarterly. 57 (3): 465 504. doi:10.2307/2674263. JSTOR 2674263.
Fitzsimons, David (2008). "Paine, Thomas (1737 1809)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, Cato Institute. pp. 369 370. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n226. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Foner, Eric (1976). Tom Paine and Revolutionary America. Oxford University Press.. The standard monograph treating Paine's thought and work with regard to America.
Foner, Eric (2000). Thomas Paine. American National Biography Online. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved November 6, 2016.
Rush, Benjamin (2019).  Butterfield, Lyman Henry (ed.). Letters of Benjamin Rush. Vol. II. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691655918.
Greene, Jack P. "Paine, America, and the 'Modernization' Of Political Consciousness," Political Science Quarterly 93#1 (1978) pp. 73 92 Online Archived December 2, 2018, at the Wayback Machine.
Griffiths, Trevor (2005). These Are the Times: A Life of Thomas Paine. Spokesman Books.
Hawke, David Freeman (1974). Paine. Philadelphia. Regarded by many American authorities as the standard biography.
Hitchens, Christopher (2007). Thomas Paine's Rights of Man: A Biography. London: Atlantic Books. ISBN 978-1843546283.
Kates, Gary (1989). "From Liberalism to Radicalism: Tom Paine's Rights of Man". Journal of the History of Ideas. 50 (4): 569 587. doi:10.2307/2709798. JSTOR 2709798.
Kaye, Harvey J. (2005). Thomas Paine and the Promise of America. New York City: Hill & Wang.
Keane, John (1995). Tom Paine: A Political Life. London: Bloomsbury.. One of the most valuable recent studies.
Lamb, Robert (2010). "Liberty, Equality, and the Boundaries of Ownership: Thomas Paine's Theory of Property Rights". Review of Politics. 72 (3): 483 511. doi:10.1017/S0034670510000331. hdl:10871/9896. S2CID 55413082.
Larkin, Edward (2005). Thomas Paine and the Literature of Revolution. Cambridge University Press.
Lessay, Jean (1987). L'am ricain de la Convention, Thomas Paine: Professeur de r volutions [The National Convention's American, Thomas Paine, professor of revolution] (in French). Paris:  ditions Perrin. p. 241.
Levin, Yuval (2013). The Great Debate: Edmund Burke, Thomas Paine, and the Birth of Right and Left. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0465062980.. Their debate over the French Revolution.
Lewis, Joseph L. (1947). Thomas Paine: The Author of the Declaration of Independence. New York: Freethought Press Association.
Nelson, Craig (2006). Thomas Paine: Enlightenment, Revolution, and the Birth of Modern Nations. Viking. ISBN 978-0670037889.
Phillips, Mark (May 2008). "Paine, Thomas (1737 1809)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/21133. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Powell, David (1985). Tom Paine, The Greatest Exile. Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0367271343.
Russell, Bertrand (1934). "The Fate of Thomas Paine". Thomas Paine National Historical Association.
Solinger, Jason D. (November 2010). "Thomas Paine's Continental Mind". Early American Literature. 45 (3).
Vincent, Bernard (2005). The Transatlantic Republican: Thomas Paine and the age of revolutions. ISBN 978-9042016149. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
Wilensky, Mark (2008). The Elementary Common Sense of Thomas Paine. An Interactive Adaptation for All Ages. Casemate. ISBN 978-1932714364.
Washburne, E. B. (May 1880). "Thomas Paine and the French Revolution". Scribner's Monthly. XX.
Fiction[edit]
Fast, Howard (1946). Citizen Tom Paine. (historical novel, though sometimes mistaken as biography).
Primary sources[edit]
Paine, Thomas (1896).  Conway, Moncure Daniel (ed.). The Writings of Thomas Paine, Volume 4. New York: G. P. Putnam's sons. p. 521. E'book
Foot, Michael; Kramnick, Isaac (1987). The Thomas Paine Reader. Penguin Classics. ISBN 978-0140444964.
Paine, Thomas (1993).  Foner, Eric (ed.). Writings. Philadelphia: Library of America.. Authoritative and scholarly edition containing Common Sense, the essays comprising the American Crisis series, Rights of Man, The Age of Reason, Agrarian Justice, and selected briefer writings, with authoritative texts and careful annotation.
Paine, Thomas (1944).  Foner, Philip S. (ed.). The Complete Writings of Thomas Paine. Citadel Press. A complete edition of Paine's writings, on the model of Eric Foner's edition for the Library of America, is badly needed. Until then Philip Foner's two-volume edition is a serviceable substitute. Volume I contains the major works, and volume II contains shorter writings, both published essays and a selection of letters, but confusingly organized; in addition, Foner's attributions of writings to Paine have come in for some criticism in that Foner may have included writings that Paine edited but did not write and omitted some writings that later scholars have attributed to Paine.
Thomas Clio Rickman (1819) The Life of Thomas Paine via Internet Archive
External links[edit]
Thomas Paine  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Thomas Paine Society (UK)
Thomas Paine Society (US)
The Thomas Paine National Historical Association (TPNHA)
"Archival material relating to Thomas Paine". UK National Archives. 
Portraits of Thomas Paine at the National Portrait Gallery, London 
Office location while in Alford
Works by Thomas Paine[edit]
Works by Thomas Paine in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Thomas Paine at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas Paine at Internet Archive
Writings and Timeline from the TPNHA
Works by Thomas Paine at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Deistic and Religious Works of Thomas Paine Archived March 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
The theological works of Thomas Paine
The theological works of Thomas Paine to which are appended the profession of faith of a savoyard vicar by J.J. Rousseau
vteThomas PaineWritings
Common Sense (January 1776)
The American Crisis (December 1776)
Rights of Man (March 1791, February 1792)
The Age of Reason (1794, 1795, 1807)
Agrarian Justice (1797)
Life
1792 Rights of Man trial
Wearmouth Bridge
Thomas Paine Cottage
Legacy
Thomas Paine National Historical Association
Thomas Paine Monument, New Rochelle, New York
Institute of Thomas Paine Studies
That Night in Varennes
In Lambeth
Liberty!
A New World: A Life of Thomas Paine
Related
Headstrong Club
Articles related to Thomas Paine
vteAge of EnlightenmentTopics
Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclop distes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Libert ,  galit , fraternit 
Lumi res
Methodological skepticism
Midlands
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Spanish America
Universality
Weimar Classicism
ThinkersEngland
Joseph Addison
Anthony Ashley-Cooper
Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Anthony Collins
Edward Gibbon
William Godwin
James Harrington
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
John Milton
Isaac Newton
Alexander Pope
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Joshua Reynolds
Algernon Sidney
Matthew Tindal
John Trenchard
Mary Wollstonecraft
France
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ren  Louis d'Argenson
Pierre Bayle
Pierre Beaumarchais
Nicolas Chamfort
 milie du Ch telet
 tienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
Ren  Descartes
Denis Diderot
Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle
Olympe de Gouges
Claude Adrien Helv tius
Baron d'Holbach
Louis de Jaucourt
Julien Offray de La Mettrie
Antoine Lavoisier
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Mar chal
Jean Meslier
Montesquieu
 tienne-Gabriel Morelly
Blaise Pascal
Fran ois Quesnay
Guillaume Thomas Fran ois Raynal
Marquis de Sade
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Geneva
Firmin Abauzit
Charles Bonnet
Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui
Jean-Louis de Lolme
Pierre Pr vost
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Antoine-Jacques Roustan
Horace B n dict de Saussure
Jacob Vernes
Jacob Vernet
Germany
Justus Henning B hmer
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Immanuel Kant
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Georg Christoph Lichtenberg
Moses Mendelssohn
Samuel von Pufendorf
Friedrich Schiller
Christian Thomasius
Gabriel Wagner
Christian Felix Wei e
Adam Weishaupt
Christoph Martin Wieland
Thomas Wizenmann
Christian Wolff
Greece
Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais
Ireland
George Berkeley
Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke
Jonathan Swift
John Toland
Italy
Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Ferdinando Galiani
Luigi Galvani
Antonio Genovesi
Francesco Mario Pagano
Giovanni Salvemini
Pietro Verri
Giambattista Vico
Netherlands
Balthasar Bekker
Pieter de la Court
Petrus Cunaeus
Hugo Grotius
Fran ois Hemsterhuis
Christiaan Huygens
Adriaan Koerbagh
Frederik van Leenhof
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Bernard Nieuwentyt
Baruch Spinoza
Jan Swammerdam
Hendrik Wyermars
Poland
Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Ko taj
Stanis aw Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanis aw August Poniatowski
J drzej  niadecki
Stanis aw Staszic
J zef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanis aw Za uski
J zef Andrzej Za uski
Portugal
Sebasti o Jos  de Carvalho e Melo
Romania
Ion Budai-Deleanu
Dinicu Golescu
Petru Maior
Samuil Micu-Klein
Gheorghe  incai
Russia
Catherine II
Denis Fonvizin
Antiochus Kantemir
Mikhail Kheraskov
Mikhail Lomonosov
Nikolay Novikov
Alexander Radishchev
Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova
Serbia
Dositej Obradovi 
Avram Mrazovi 
Spain
Jos  Cadalso
Charles III
Benito Jer nimo Feij o y Montenegro
Leandro Fern ndez de Morat n
Valentin de Foronda
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos
Mart n Sarmiento
Diego de Torres Villarroel
Scotland
James Beattie
Joseph Black
Hugh Blair
James Boswell
James Burnett
Robert Burns
William Cullen
Adam Ferguson
Thomas Gordon
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
James Hutton
James Mill
John Millar
Isaac Newton
William Ogilvie
John Playfair
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Dugald Stewart
United States
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine
Romanticism  
 Category
vteSocial and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Bo tie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
M ntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Su rez
18th 19th-century
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cort s
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helv tius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Sta l
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
20th 21st-century
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Gu non
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Ko akowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Latifiyan
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nurs 
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
R pke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
 i ek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
vteLiberalismIdeas
Civil and political rights
Democracy
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural rights and legal rights
Natural law
Negative/Positive liberty
Natural monopoly
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state
SchoolsClassical
Economic
Fiscal
Neo
Equity feminism
Georgist
Radical
Anti-clerical
Civic nationalism
Republican
Utilitarian
Conservative
Democratic
Liberal conservatism
National
Ordo
Social
Green
Liberal feminism
Ecofeminism
Liberal socialism
Social democracy
Progressivism
Third Way
Other
Constitutional
Constitutional patriotism
Cultural
Corporate
International
Libertarianism
Left-libertarianism
Geolibertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Right-libertarianism
Radical centrism
Religious
Christian
Islamic
Secular
Techno
By regionAfrica
Egypt
Nigeria
Senegal
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe
Asia
China
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Israel
Japan
South Korea
Progressive
Philippines
Turkey
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Orl anist
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Berlusconism
Liberism
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Gladstonian
Libertarian
Manchester
Muscular
Radical
Whiggist
Latin America andthe Caribbean
Bolivia
Brazil
Lulism
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
North America
Canada
United States
Arizona School
Jacksonian
Jeffersonian
Libertarian
Modern
Progressive
Oceania
Australia
Small-l
New Zealand
Key FiguresSee also:History ofLiberalism
Acton
Alberdi
Allais
Arnold
Aron
Artigas
Badawi
B lcescu
Barante
Bastiat
Bentham
Berlin
Betances
Beveridge
Blum
Bobbio
Brentano
Bright
Broglie
Burke
 apek
Cassirer
Cavour
Chicherin
Chu
Chydenius
Cobden
Collingwood
Condorcet
Constant
Croce
Croly
Cuoco
De k
Deakin
Dewey
Dickens
Diderot
Dongsun
Dworkin
Einaudi
Emerson
E tv s
Fukuyama
Friedman
Galbraith
Garrett
Garrison
Gladstone
Gobetti
Gokhale
Gray
Green
Grundtvig
Gu
Guizot
Harrison
Havl ek
Hayek
Herbert
Herder
Hobbes
Hobhouse
Hobson
Hu
Humboldt
Itagaki
Jefferson
Jovanovi 
Ju rez
Jubani
Kairis
Kant
Kelsen
Kemal
Keynes
King
Ko taj
Korais
Kossuth
Kymlicka
Lamartine
La Mennais
Larra
Lastarria
Latifiyan
Lelewel
Levski
Li
Lincoln
List
Lloyd George
Locke
Lufti
Macaulay
Madariaga
Madero
Madison
Mart 
Martineau
Masterman
Ma urani 
Mazzini
Menzies
Michelet
Mill (James)
Mill (John Stuart)
Milton
Milyukov
Molteno
Mommsen
Montalembert
Montesquieu
Mora
Nakae
Naoroji
Naumann
Nitti
Ohlin
Ortega
Ozaki
Paine
Paton
Pino Su rez
Pearson
Popper
Price
Priestley
Prieto
Qin
Quinet
Radishchev
Ram rez
Rathenau
Rawls
Raz
Renan
Renouvier
Ricardo
Rogers
R pke
Rorty
Roosevelt
Rosetti
Rosmini
Rosselli
Rousseau
Ruggiero
Sarmiento
Say
Sen
Shaftesbury
Shklar
Sidney
Siey s
 inasi
Sismondi
Smith
Spencer
Spinoza
Sta l
St hlberg
Stein
Tahtawi
Tao
Tav ar
Thierry
Thorbecke
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tracy
Treub
Troeltsch
Turgot
Venizelos
Voltaire
Ward
Weber
Wollstonecraft
Zambrano
Organisations
Africa Liberal Network
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party
Arab Liberal Federation
Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats
European Democratic Party
European Liberal Youth
European Party for Individual Liberty
International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
International Federation of Liberal Youth
Liberal International
Liberal Network for Latin America
Liberal parties
Liberal South East European Network
Liberalism Portal
vteFrench Revolution
Causes
Timeline
Ancien R gime
Revolution
Constitutional monarchy
Republic
Directory
Consulate
Glossary
Journals
Museum
Significant civil and political events by year1788
Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788)
Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)
1789
What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789)
R veillon riots (28 Apr 1789)
Convocation of the Estates General (5 May 1789)
Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789)
National Assembly (17 Jun   9 Jul 1790)
Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789)
National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul   30 Sep 1791)
Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789)
Great Fear (20 Jul   5 Aug 1789)
Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789)
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789)
Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)
Nationalization of the Church properties (2 Nov 1789)
1790
Abolition of the Parlements (Feb Jul 1790)
Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790)
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790)
F te de la F d ration (14 Jul 1790)
1791
Flight to Varennes (20 21 Jun 1791)
Champ de Mars massacre (17 Jul 1791)
Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791)
The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791)
National Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791   Sep 1792)
1792
France declares war (20 Apr 1792)
Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792)
Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792)
10th of August (10 Aug 1792)
September Massacres (Sep 1792)
National Convention (20 Sep 1792   26 Oct 1795)
First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)
1793
Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793)
Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793   31 May 1795)
Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793   27 Jul 1794)
Committee of Public Safety
Committee of General Security
Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793)
Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793)
Lev e en masse (23 Aug 1793)
The Death of Marat (painting)
Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793)
Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793)
Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)
1794
Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794)
Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794)
Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794)
Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794)
White Terror (Fall 1794)
Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)
1795 6
Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III (1 Apr 1795)
Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795)
Directoire (1795 99)
Council of Five Hundred
Council of Ancients
13 Vend miaire 5 Oct 1795
Conspiracy of the Equals (May 1796)
1797
Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797)
Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)
1798
Law of 22 Flor al Year VI (11 May 1798)
1799
Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799)
Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799)
Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799)
Consulate
Revolutionary campaigns1792
Verdun
Thionville
Valmy
Royalist Revolts
Chouannerie
Vend e
Dauphin 
Lille
Siege of Mainz
Jemappes
Namur [fr]
1793
First Coalition
War in the Vend e
Battle of Neerwinden)
Battle of Famars (23 May 1793)
Expedition to Sardinia (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793)
Battle of Kaiserslautern
Siege of Mainz
Battle of Wattignies
Battle of Hondschoote
Siege of Bellegarde
Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees)
Siege of Toulon (18 Sep   18 Dec 1793)
First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793)
Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees)
Second Battle of Wissembourg (26 27 Dec 1793)
1794
Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794)
Second Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr   1 May 1794)
Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794)
Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794)
Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794)
Chouannerie
Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
1795
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
Peace of Basel
1796
Battle of Lonato (3 4 Aug 1796)
Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796)
Battle of Theiningen
Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796)
Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796)
Battle of W rzburg (3 Sep 1796)
Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796)
First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796)
Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796)
Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796)
Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796)
Battle of Calliano (6 7 Nov 1796)
Battle of Arcole (15 17 Nov 1796)
Ireland expedition (Dec 1796)
1797
Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797)
Battle of Rivoli (14 15 Jan 1797)
Battle of the Bay of C diz (25 Jan 1797)
Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797)
Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797)
Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)
1798
French invasion of Switzerland (28 January   17 May 1798)
French Invasion of Egypt (1798 1801)
Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May   23 Sep 1798)
Quasi-War (1798 1800)
Peasants' War (12 Oct   5 Dec 1798)
1799
Second Coalition (1798 1802)
Siege of Acre (20 Mar   21 May 1799)
Battle of Ostrach (20 21 Mar 1799)
Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799)
Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799)
Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799)
First Battle of Zurich (4 7 Jun 1799)
Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799)
Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799)
Second Battle of Zurich (25 26 Sep 1799)
1800
Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800)
Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800)
Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800)
League of Armed Neutrality (1800 02)
1801
Treaty of Lun ville (9 Feb 1801)
Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801)
Algeciras campaign (8 Jul 1801)
1802
Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)
Treaty of Paris (25 Jun 1802)
Military leaders FranceFrench Army
Eustache Charles d'Aoust
Pierre Augereau
Alexandre de Beauharnais
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Jean-Baptiste Bessi res
Guillaume Brune
Jean Fran ois Carteaux
Jean- tienne Championnet
Chapuis de Tourville
Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Louis Desaix
Jacques Fran ois Dugommier
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas
Charles Fran ois Dumouriez
Pierre Marie Barth lemy Ferino
Louis-Charles de Flers
Paul Grenier
Emmanuel de Grouchy
Jacques Maurice Hatry
Lazare Hoche
Jean-Baptiste Jourdan
Fran ois Christophe de Kellermann
Jean-Baptiste Kl ber
Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
Jean Lannes
Charles Leclerc
Claude Lecourbe
Fran ois Joseph Lefebvre
 tienne Macdonald
Jean-Antoine Marbot
Marcellin Marbot
Fran ois S verin Marceau
Auguste de Marmont
Andr  Mass na
Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey
Jean Victor Marie Moreau
 douard Mortier, Duke of Tr vise
Joachim Murat
Michel Ney
Pierre-Jacques Osten [fr]
Nicolas Oudinot
Catherine-Dominique de P rignon
Jean-Charles Pichegru
J zef Poniatowski
Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr
Barth lemy Louis Joseph Sch rer
Jean-Mathieu-Philibert S rurier
Joseph Souham
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Louis-Gabriel Suchet
Belgrand de Vaubois
Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno
French Navy
Charles-Alexandre Linois
Opposition Austria
J zsef Alvinczi
Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen
Count of Clerfayt (Walloon)
Karl Aloys zu F rstenberg
Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss)
Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth
P l Kray (Hungarian)
Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French)
Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon)
Karl Mack von Leiberich
Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon)
Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich
Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen
Johann M sz ros von Szoboszl  (Hungarian)
Karl Philipp Sebottendorf
Dagobert von Wurmser
 Britain
Sir Ralph Abercromby
James Saumarez, 1st Baron de Saumarez
Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth
Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
 Netherlands
William V, Prince of Orange
 Prussia
Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick
Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
 Russia
Alexander Korsakov
Alexander Suvorov
 Spain
Luis Firmin de Carvajal
Antonio Ricardos
Other significant figures and factionsPatriotic Society of 1789
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette
Fran ois Alexandre Fr d ric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt
Isaac Ren  Guy le Chapelier
Honor  Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau
Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P rigord
Nicolas de Condorcet
Feuillantsand monarchiens
Grace Elliott
Arnaud de La Porte
Jean-Sifrein Maury
Fran ois-Marie, marquis de Barth lemy
Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas
Antoine Barnave
Lafayette
Alexandre-Th odore-Victor, comte de Lameth
Charles Malo Fran ois Lameth
Andr  Ch nier
Jean-Fran ois Rewbell
Camille Jordan
Madame de Sta l
Boissy d'Anglas
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard
Bertrand Bar re de Vieuzac
Girondins
Jacques Pierre Brissot
Jean-Marie Roland de la Plati re
Madame Roland
Father Henri Gr goire
 tienne Clavi re
Marquis de Condorcet
Charlotte Corday
Marie Jean H rault
Jean Baptiste Treilhard
Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
J r me P tion de Villeneuve
Jean Debry
Olympe de Gouges
Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet
Louis Marie de La R velli re-L peaux
The Plain
Abb  Siey s
de Cambac r s
Charles-Fran ois Lebrun
Pierre-Joseph Cambon
Bertrand Bar re
Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot
Philippe  galit 
Louis Philippe I
Mirabeau
Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville
Jean Joseph Mounier
Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours
Fran ois de Neufch teau
Montagnards
Maximilien Robespierre
Georges Danton
Jean-Paul Marat
Camille Desmoulins
Louis Antoine de Saint-Just
Paul Barras
Louis Philippe I
Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau
Jacques-Louis David
Marquis de Sade
Georges Couthon
Roger Ducos
Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois
Jean-Henri Voulland
Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai
Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville
Philippe-Fran ois-Joseph Le Bas
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
Jean-Pierre-Andr  Amar
Prieur de la C te-d'Or
Prieur de la Marne
Gilbert Romme
Jean Bon Saint-Andr 
Jean-Lambert Tallien
Pierre Louis Prieur
Antoine Christophe Saliceti
H bertistsand Enrag s
Jacques H bert
Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne
Pierre Gaspard Chaumette
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Antoine-Fran ois Momoro
Fran ois-Nicolas Vincent
Fran ois Chabot
Jean Baptiste No l Bouchotte
Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel
Fran ois Hanriot
Jacques Roux
Stanislas-Marie Maillard
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Jean-Fran ois Varlet
Theophile Leclerc
Claire Lacombe
Pauline L on
Gracchus Babeuf
Sylvain Mar chal
OthersFigures
Charles X
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
Louis XVIII
Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien
Louis Henri, Prince of Cond 
Louis Joseph, Prince of Cond 
Marie Antoinette
Napol on Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Joseph Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Jos phine de Beauharnais
Joachim Murat
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Jacques-Donatien Le Ray
Guillaume-Chr tien de Malesherbes
Talleyrand
Th r sa Tallien
Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target
Catherine Th ot
Madame de Lamballe
Madame du Barry
Louis de Breteuil
de Chateaubriand
Jean Chouan
Lom nie de Brienne
Charles Alexandre de Calonne
Jacques Necker
Jean-Jacques Duval d'Epr mesnil
List of people associated with the French Revolution
Factions
Jacobins
Cordeliers
Panth on Club
Social Club
Influential thinkers
Les Lumi res
Beaumarchais
Edmund Burke
Anacharsis Cloots
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Pierre Claude Fran ois Daunou
Diderot
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
Antoine Lavoisier
Montesquieu
Thomas Paine
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Abb  Siey s
Voltaire
Mary Wollstonecraft
Cultural impact
La Marseillaise
Cockade of France
Flag of France
Libert ,  galit , fraternit 
Marianne
Bastille Day
Panth on
French Republican calendar
Metric system
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
Cult of the Supreme Being
Cult of Reason
Temple of Reason
Sans-culottes
Phrygian cap
Women in the French Revolution
Incroyables and merveilleuses
Symbolism in the French Revolution
Historiography of the French Revolution
Influence of the French Revolution
Films
vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright
vteUniversal basic income topicsTopics
Basic income models
Basic income pilots
Citizen's dividend
Guaranteed minimum income
Jobless recovery
Negative income tax
Real freedom
Right to an adequate standard of living
Technological unemployment
Organizations
Basic Income Alliance
Basic Income Earth Network
Basic Income Party
De Basis
Enhet
Forward Party
Green Party
Left Alliance
LIVRE
Pirate Party
Party of Humanists
ReCivitas
Vivant
AdvocatesHistoric
Tony Atkinson
C. H. Douglas
Milton Friedman
Stephen Hawking
Ailsa McKay
James Meade
Thomas Paine
Juliet Rhys-Williams
Anthony Barber
Contemporary
Rutger Bregman
 tienne Chouard
Harry F. Dahms
Uffe Elb k
Andr  Gorz
Sepp Kusstatscher
Guy Standing
Eduardo Suplicy
Philippe Van Parijs
Carole Pateman
Christopher Pissarides
Claus Offe
Katja Kipping
G tz Werner
Richard David Precht
Valter Mutt
Annika Lillemets
Osmo Soininvaara
Li Andersson
Susanne Wiest
Birger Schlaug
Christian Engstr m
Beno t Hamon
Bj rn Wahlroos
Andrew Yang
Related programs
Alaska Permanent Fund
Asignaci n Universal por Hijo
Brazil (Bolsa Fam lia, Aux lio Brasil)
Iranian subsidy reform plan
Omitara
Quatinga Velho
By region
Brazil
Canada
Germany
India
Japan
Netherlands
Nordic countries
United Kingdom
United States
Global
Works
Agrarian Justice (pamphlet)
Bullshit Jobs (book)
Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work (monograph)
The War on Normal People (book)
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
2
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Netherlands
Deutsche Biographie
Sycomore
Trove
Other
NARA
RISM
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Paine&oldid=1149808938"