This article is about the bones in the human ear. For elements embedded in the body wall of echinoderms, see Ossicle (echinoderm).
Three bones in each middle ear that are among the smallest bones in the human body
This article is one of a series documenting the anatomy of theHuman ear
Outer ear
Auricle
Ear canal
Middle ear
Tympanic membrane
Ossicles
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Inner ear
Vestibules
Utricle
Saccule
Cochlea
Semicircular canals
vte
The ossicles (also called auditory ossicles) are three bones in either middle ear that are among the smallest bones in the human body. They serve to transmit sounds from the air to the fluid-filled labyrinth (cochlea). The absence of the auditory ossicles would constitute a moderate-to-severe hearing loss. The term "ossicle" literally means "tiny bone". Though the term may refer to any small bone throughout the body, it typically refers to the malleus, incus, and stapes (hammer, anvil, and stirrup) of the middle ear.
Structure[edit]
See also: Malleus, Incus, and Stapes
 Anatomy of the three ossicles
The ossicles are, in order from the eardrum to the inner ear (from superficial to deep): the malleus, incus, and stapes, terms that in Latin are translated as "the hammer, anvil, and stirrup".[1]
The malleus (Latin: "hammer") articulates with the incus through the incudomalleolar joint and is attached to the tympanic membrane (eardrum), from which vibrational sound pressure motion is passed.
The incus (Latin: "anvil") is connected to both the other bones.
The stapes (Latin: "stirrup") articulates with the incus through the incudostapedial joint and is attached to the membrane of the fenestra ovalis, the elliptical or oval window or opening between the middle ear and the vestibule of the inner ear. It is the smallest bone in the body.[2]
Development[edit]
Studies have shown that ear bones in mammal embryos are attached to the dentary, which is part of the lower jaw. These are ossified portions of cartilage called Meckel's cartilage that are attached to the jaw. As the embryo develops, the cartilage hardens to form bone. Later in development, the bone structure breaks loose from the jaw and migrates to the inner ear area. The structure is known as the middle ear, and is made up of the stapes, incus, malleus, and tympanic membrane. These correspond to the columella, quadrate, articular, and angular structures in the amphibian, bird or reptile jaw.[3]
Evolution[edit]
Main article: Evolution of mammalian auditory ossicles
Function[edit]
As sound waves vibrate the tympanic membrane (eardrum), it in turn moves the nearest ossicle, the malleus, to which it is attached. The malleus then transmits the vibrations, via the incus, to the stapes, and so ultimately to the membrane of the fenestra ovalis (oval window), the opening to the vestibule of the inner ear.
Sound traveling through the air is mostly reflected when it comes into contact with a liquid medium; only about 1/30 of the sound energy moving through the air would be transferred into the liquid.[4] This is observed from the abrupt cessation of sound that occurs when the head is submerged underwater. This is because the relative incompressibility of a liquid presents resistance to the force of the sound waves traveling through the air. The ossicles give the eardrum a mechanical advantage via lever action and a reduction in the area of force distribution; the resulting vibrations are stronger but don't move as far. This allows more efficient coupling than if the sound waves were transmitted directly from the outer ear to the oval window. This reduction in the area of force application allows a large enough increase in pressure to transfer most of the sound energy into the liquid. The increased pressure will compress the fluid found in the cochlea and transmit the stimulus. Thus, the lever action of the ossicles changes the vibrations so as to improve the transfer and reception of sound, and is a form of impedance matching.
However, the extent of the movements of the ossicles is controlled (and constricted) by two muscles attached to them (the tensor tympani and the stapedius). It is believed that these muscles can contract to dampen the vibration of the ossicles, in order to protect the inner ear from excessively loud noise (theory 1) and that they give better frequency resolution at higher frequencies by reducing the transmission of low frequencies (theory 2) (see acoustic reflex). These muscles are more highly developed in bats and serve to block outgoing cries of the bats during echolocation (SONAR).
Clinical relevance[edit]
Occasionally the joints between the ossicles become rigid. One condition, otosclerosis, results in the fusing of the stapes to the oval window. This reduces hearing and may be treated surgically using a passive middle ear implant.[further explanation needed]
History[edit]
There is some doubt as to the discoverers of the auditory ossicles and several anatomists from the early 16th century have the discovery attributed to them with the two earliest being Alessandro Achillini and Jacopo Berengario da Carpi.[5] Several sources, including Eustachi and Casseri,[6] attribute the discovery of the malleus and incus to the anatomist and philosopher Achillini.[7] The first written description of the malleus and incus was by Berengario da Carpi in his Commentaria super anatomia Mundini (1521),[8] although he only briefly described two bones and noted their theoretical association with the transmission of sound.[9] Niccolo Massa's Liber introductorius anatomiae[10] described the same bones in slightly more detail and likened them both to little hammers.[9] A much more detailed description of the first two ossicles followed in Andreas Vesalius' De humani corporis fabrica[11] in which he devoted a chapter to them. Vesalius was the first to compare the second element of the ossicles to an anvil although he offered the molar as an alternative comparison for its shape.[12] The first published description of the stapes came in Pedro Jimeno's Dialogus de re medica (1549)[13] although it had been previously described in public lectures by Giovanni Filippo Ingrassia at the University of Naples as early as 1546.[14]
The term ossicle derives from ossiculum, a diminutive of "bone" (Latin: os; genitive ossis).[15] The malleus gets its name from Latin malleus, meaning "hammer",[16] the incus gets its name from Latin incus meaning "anvil" from incudere meaning "to forge with a hammer",[17] and the stapes gets its name from Modern Latin "stirrup", probably an alteration of Late Latin stapia related to stare "to stand" and pedem, an accusative of pes "foot", so called because the bone is shaped like a stirrup   this was an invented Modern Latin word for "stirrup", for which there was no classical Latin word, as the ancients did not use stirrups.[18]
See also[edit]
This article uses anatomical terminology.
Incudomalleolar joint  Synovial joint between malleus and incus
Incudostapedial joint  Small joint between the incus and the stapes
Otolith  Inner-ear structure in vertebrates which detects acceleration
References[edit]
^ Hilal, Fathi; Liaw, Jeffrey; Cousins, Joseph P.; Rivera, Arnaldo L.; Nada, Ayman (2023-04-01). "Autoincudotomy as an uncommon etiology of conductive hearing loss: Case report and review of literature". Radiology Case Reports. 18 (4): 1461 1465. doi:10.1016/j.radcr.2022.10.097. ISSN 1930-0433. PMC 9925837. PMID 36798057.
^ "Your Bones". kidshealth.org.
^ Meng, Jin (2003). "The Journey From Jaw to Ear". Biologist. 50 (4): 154 158. OCLC 108462086.
^ Hill, R.W., Wyse, G.A. & Anderson, M. (2008). Animal Physiology, 2nd ed..
^ O'Malley, C. D.; Clarke, E (1961). "The discovery of the auditory ossicles". Bulletin of the History of Medicine. 35: 419 41. PMID 14480894.
^ Alidosi, GNP. I dottori Bolognesi di teologia, filosofia, medicina e d'arti liberali dall'anno 1000 per tutto marzo del 1623, Tebaldini, N., Bologna, 1623. http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k51029z/f35.image#
^ Lind, L. R. Studies in pre-Vesalian anatomy. Biography, translations, documents, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1975. p.40
^ Jacopo Berengario da Carpi,Commentaria super anatomia Mundini, Bologna, 1521. https://archive.org/details/ita-bnc-mag-00001056-001
^ a b O'Malley, C.D. Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, 1514 1564. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964. p. 120
^ Niccolo Massa, Liber introductorius anatomiae, Venice, 1536. p.166. https://www.digitale-sammlungen.de/en/view/bsb10151904?page=1
^ Andreas Vesalius, De humani corporis fabrica. Johannes Oporinus, Basle, 1543.
^ O'Malley, C.D. Andreas Vesalius of Brussels, 1514 1564. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964. p. 121
^ Pedro Jimeno, Dialogus de re medica, Johannes Mey, Valencia, 1549. https://archive.org/details/dialogusderemed00jimegoog
^ Mudry, Albert (2013). "Disputes Surrounding the Discovery of the Stapes in the Mid 16th Century". Otology & Neurotology. 34 (3): 588 592. doi:10.1097/mao.0b013e31827d8abc. PMID 23370557. S2CID 30466939.
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". etymonline.com.
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". etymonline.com.
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". etymonline.com.
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". etymonline.com.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ossicles.
The middle ear and the ossicles
vteAnatomy of hearing and balanceOuter ear
Auricle
helix
antihelix
tragus
antitragus
intertragic notch
earlobe
Ear canal
Auricular muscles
Eardrum
umbo
pars flaccida
Middle earTympanic cavity
Medial structures
oval window
round window
secondary tympanic membrane
prominence of facial canal
promontory of tympanic cavity
Posterior structures
mastoid cells
aditus to mastoid antrum
pyramidal eminence
Ossicles
Malleus
superior ligament
lateral ligament
anterior ligament
Incus
superior ligament
posterior ligament
Stapes
annular ligament
Muscles
stapedius
tensor tympani
Auditory tube /Eustachian tube
Torus tubarius
Inner earLabyrinths
membranous
bony
Auditory systemGeneral
Cochlea
Vestibular duct
Helicotrema
Tympanic duct
Modiolus
Cochlear cupula
Perilymphatic space
Perilymph
Cochlear aqueduct
Cells
Claudius
Boettcher
Cochlear duct /scala media
Reissner's/vestibular membrane
Basilar membrane
Reticular membrane
Endolymph
Stria vascularis
Spiral ligament
Organ of Corti
stereocilia
tip links
Tectorial membrane
Sulcus spiralis
externus
internus
Spiral limbus
Vestibular systemVestibule
Utricle
macula
Saccule
macula
Kinocilium
Otolith
Otolithic membrane
Vestibular aqueduct
endolymphatic duct
endolymphatic sac
Ductus reuniens
Semicircular canals
Superior
Posterior
Horizontal
Ampullary cupula
Ampullae
crista ampullaris
vteBones in the human skeletonAxial skeletonSkullNeurocranium
occipital
parietal
frontal
temporal
sphenoid
ethmoid
Face
nasal
maxilla
lacrimal
zygomatic
palatine
inferior nasal conchae
vomer
mandible
hyoid
Ear
ossicles
malleus
incus
stapes
Thorax
sternum
rib cage
rib
Vertebral column
vertebrae
cervical
thoracic
lumbar
sacrum
coccyx
AppendicularShoulder
clavicle
scapula
Arm
humerus
ulna
radius
Hand
carpals (scaphoid, lunate bone, triquetral, pisiform, trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, hamate)
metacarpals
phalanges (prox, int, dist)
Pelvis
ilium
ischium
pubis
Leg
femur
patella
fibula
tibia
sesamoid bones
Foot
tarsals
heelbone
anklebone
navicular
cuneiform
cuboid
metatarsals
phalanges
proximal
intermediate
distal
accessory
accessory navicular
Authority control National
Germany
Other
Terminologia Anatomica
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ossicles&oldid=1143265558"