American hip-hop group
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Boogie Down Productions" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (June 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article reads like a review rather than an encyclopedic description of the subject. Please help improve this article to make it neutral in tone and meet Wikipedia's quality standards. (July 2022)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Boogie Down ProductionsBackground informationOriginNew York City, U.S.GenresHip hopYears active1986 1992LabelsB-Boy RecordsJiveRCAMusical artist
Boogie Down Productions (BDP) was an American hip hop group originally composed of KRS-One, D-Nice, and DJ Scott La Rock. DJ Scott La Rock was murdered on August 27, 1987, five months after the release of BDP's debut album, Criminal Minded. The name of the group, Boogie Down, derives from a nickname for the South Bronx section of New York City. The group pioneered the fusion of dancehall reggae and hip hop music and their debut LP Criminal Minded contained frank descriptions of life in the South Bronx during the late 1980s, thus setting the stage for what would eventually become gangsta rap.
Members[edit]
BDP's membership changed throughout its existence, the only constant being KRS-One.[1] The group was founded by KRS-One and DJ Scott La Rock, with producer Lee Smith, who was essential in the production of the songs on Criminal Minded, being added as a member shortly after.[1] From those beginnings, BDP members and collaborators included Ced Gee of Ultramagnetic MC's, Lee Smith, Scott La Rock, D-Nice, Henry Wilkerson PoppyDa, Kenny Parker (KRS-One's younger brother), Just-Ice, ICU, McBoo, Ms. Melodie, Heather B., Scottie Morris, Tony Rahsan, Willie D., RoboCop, Harmony, DJ Red Alert, Jay Kramer, D-Square, Rebekah Foster, Scott Whitehill, Scott King, Chris Tait and Sidney Mills. BDP as a group essentially ended because KRS-One began recording and performing under his own name rather than the group name.[1] Lee Smith, who has co-producer credit on the original 12" "South Bronx" single, was the first to be jettisoned by KRS-One and the future new label after Scott's death.
In the liner notes on BDP's 1992 album Sex and Violence, KRS-One writes: "BDP in 1992 is KRS-One, Willie D, and Kenny Parker! BDP is not D-Nice, Jamal-ski, Harmony, Ms. Melodie, and Scottie Morris. They are not down with BDP so stop frontin'." Steve "Flash" Juon of RapReviews.com claimed that this initiated the ultimate breakup of the group.[2]
Cultural influences and impact[edit]
"The Bridge Wars"[edit]
Main article: The Bridge Wars
A conflict arose in the late 1980s concerning the origins of hip-hop, and BDP made conscious efforts in its early work to establish its interpretation of the issue. The origins of hip-hop to many, including BDP, are believed to be from the Bronx. A rival hip-hop collective, known as the Juice Crew's lyrics, were misunderstood to contain a claim in the song "The Bridge" that hip hop was directly a result of artists originating from Queensbridge. Boogie Down and KRS retorted angrily with songs such as "The Bridge is Over" and "South Bronx," which started one of the first notable hip hop wars as MC Shan, Marley Marl, Roxanne Shant  and Blaq Poet all released songs featuring verses personally attacking KRS and Scott La Rock. But the Bridge Wars were short-lived, and after Scott La Rock's death, KRS began to concentrate on socially conscious music.
While Criminal Minded contained vivid descriptions of South Bronx street life, BDP changed after Scott's death.[1] Lee Smith was dropped and KRS-One adopted the Teacha moniker and made a deliberate attempt at creating politically and socially conscious hip-hop. BDP was influential in provoking political and social consciousness in hip-hop, for example in "Stop The Violence" on 1988's By All Means Necessary.
Jamaican inspirations[edit]
The Jamaican influence in Criminal Minded is well illustrated by the use of the "Mad Mad" or "Diseases" riddim started in 1981 with reggae star Yellowman's song "Zunguzung." BDP used this riff in the song "Remix for P is Free,"[3] and it was later resampled by artists such as Black Star and dead prez. As an album regarded by many as the start of the gangsta rap movement,[1] Criminal Minded played an important role in reaffirming the social acceptance of having Jamaican roots. BDP referenced reggae in a way that helped to solidify Jamaica's place in modern hip-hop culture.[4]
Political and social activism[edit]
From its start, BDP affected the development of hip-hop and gave a sincere voice to the reality of life in the South Bronx, a section of New York City clouded with poverty and crime. With Criminal Minded, the group combined the sounds of LaRock's harsh, spare, reggae-influenced beats and KRS-One's long-winded rhyme style on underground classics such as "9mm Goes Bang" and "South Bronx," the album's gritty portrait of life on the streets (as well as the firearms that adorned its cover) influenced the gangsta rap movement that began in earnest two years later.[5]
BDP's influence in the creation and development of gangsta rap highlights the cultural significance and impact of the type of music BDP and other early hip-hop artists like it created. This subgenre of hip-hop is most closely associated with hard-core hip-hop and is widely misinterpreted as promoting violence and gang activity. This misinterpretation or stigma is closely related to Boogie Down Productions and the general purpose behind their underlying themes of violence. For instance, the cover art of Criminal Minded displays the two artists in the group brandishing drawn guns and displaying other firearms.[1] This is not an encouragement of the violence described in BDP's music, but a portrayal of the violence in the South Bronx as a means of expression, escape, and even condemnation. This album art is not meant to advocate violence but to challenge the conception of a criminal, to assert that those who are really criminally minded are those who hold power.[citation needed]
BDP's music became significantly more politically astute after Scott La Rock's death.[6] KRS-One published four more albums under the title Boogie Down Productions, and each was increasingly innovative and expanded from the thuggish imagery of Criminal Minded, exploring themes like black-on-black crime and black radicalism, using a riff on the words of Malcolm X, "by any means necessary", which became the title of the second BDP album, and remains one of the most political hip-hop albums to date.[5] It was in this album that KRS defined himself as the "teacha" or "teacher", symbolizing his emphasis on educating his audience members and fans about relevant social issues surrounding the African-American experience.
During his time in association with Boogie Down Productions, KRS-One joined other rappers to create the Stop the Violence Movement, which addressed many of the issues brought up in BDP's music and is the most conscious effort displayed by KRS-One and BDP of political activism and engagement. The movement created the single "Self-Destruction" in 1989 through the collaboration of BDP (KRS-One, D-Nice & Ms. Melodie), Stetsasonic (Delite, Daddy-O, Wise, and Frukwan), Kool Moe Dee, MC Lyte, Doug E. Fresh, Just-Ice, Heavy D, Biz Markie, and Public Enemy (Chuck D & Flavor Flav), with the aim of spreading awareness about violence in African-American and hip-hop communities.[7] All proceeds from this effort went to the National Urban League.
Discography[edit]
Main article: Boogie Down Productions discography
Studio albums
Criminal Minded (1987)
By All Means Necessary (1988)
Ghetto Music: The Blueprint of Hip Hop (1989)
Edutainment (1990)
Sex and Violence (1992)[8]
References[edit]
^ a b c d e f Larkin, Colin, ed. (2003). The Virgin Encyclopedia of Eighties Music (Third ed.). New York City: Virgin Books. pp. 78/9. ISBN 1-85227-969-9.
^ "Boogie Down Productions :: Sex and Violence :: Jive Records". Rapreviews.com. Retrieved October 31, 2019.
^ "YouTube". YouTube. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014.
^ Marshall, Wayne. "Follow Me Now: The Zigzagging Zunguzung Meme", May 10, 2007.
^ a b "KRS-One". OxfordAASC.com. 2005. doi:10.1093/acref/9780195301731.013.42050. ISBN 978-0-19-530173-1. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
^ Iverem, Esther. "Violent Death Halts Rap Musician's Rise." The New York Times, August 31, 1987
^ Nielson, Erik (July 2010). ""Can't C Me": Surveillance and Rap Music". Journal of Black Studies. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications. 40 (6): 1254 1274. doi:10.1177/0021934708328906. S2CID 145713976.
^ "Boogie Down Productions discography". RateYourMusic. Retrieved October 31, 2019.
Bibliography[edit]
"KRS-One." Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience, Second Edition. Ed. Kwame Anthony Appiah, Henry Louis Gates Jr. New York: Oxford UP, 2008. Oxford African American Studies Center. ISBN 978-0195170559
External links[edit]
Myspace Official Music: Boogie Down Productions
vteBoogie Down Productions
KRS-One
Scott La Rock
D-Nice
Kenny Parker
Studio albums
Criminal Minded
By All Means Necessary
Ghetto Music: The Blueprint of Hip Hop
Edutainment
Sex and Violence
Live albums
Live Hardcore Worldwide
Compilation albums
Man & His Music (Remixes from Around the World)
Best of B-Boy Records
Singles
"South Bronx"
"The Bridge Is Over"
Related articles
Boogie Down Productions discography
Stop the Violence Movement
KRS-One discography
vteKRS-One
Discography
Boogie Down Productions discography
Studio albums
Return of the Boom Bap
KRS-One
I Got Next
The Sneak Attack
Spiritual Minded
Kristyles
Keep Right
Life
Hip Hop Lives (w/ Marley Marl)
Adventures in Emceein
Maximum Strength
Survival Skills (w/ Buckshot)
Meta-Historical (w/ True Master)
Godsville (w/ Showbiz)
The BDP Album
Compilation albums
Battle for Rap Supremacy (vs. MC Shan)
A Retrospective
Digital
Mixtapes
The Mix Tape
Instrumentals
Strickly for da Breakdancers & Emceez
Extended plays
Back to the L.A.B. (Lyrical Ass Beating)
Singles
"Sound of da Police"
"MC's Act Like They Don't Know"
"Rappaz R. N. Dainja"
"Step into a World (Rapture's Delight)"
Featured singles
"Radio Song"
"Men of Steel"
"Digital"
"Return of Hip Hop (Ooh, Ooh)"
"Classic (Better Than I've Ever Been)"
Related articles
Boogie Down Productions
Stop the Violence Movement
"Suicide, it's a suicide"
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
United States
Artists
MusicBrainz
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boogie_Down_Productions&oldid=1147003784"