Legal term for the physical and emotional stress caused from an injury
For other uses, see Pain and Suffering (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Pain and suffering" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Pain and suffering is the legal term for the physical and emotional stress caused from an injury[1] (see also pain and suffering).
Some damages that might come under this category would be: aches, temporary and permanent limitations on activity, potential shortening of life, depression or scarring.  When filing a lawsuit as a result of an injury, it is common for someone to seek money both in compensation for actual money that is lost and for the pain and stress associated with virtually any injury.  In a suit, pain and suffering is part of the "general damages" section of the claimant's claim, or, alternatively, it is an element of "compensatory" non-economic damages that allows recovery for the mental anguish and/or physical pain endured by the claimant as a result of injury for which the plaintiff seeks redress.
Apart from money damages awarded in trial, money damages are also given informally outside the judicial system in mediations, arbitration (both of which may be court annexed or non litigated claims) as well as in routine insurance settlements. Individual claimants or those represented by lawyers often present demands to insurers to settle for money. These demand for bodily injury compensation monies often set out damages that are similarly used in the court litigated pleadings. Demands are usually written summaries of a claimant's medical care and the facts which resulted in the injury.
Size of settlement[edit]
The settlement a person receives for their pain and suffering depends on many factors.  This includes the severity of the injury, type of medical treatment received, the length of recovery time, and potential long term consequences of the personal injuries.  In addition to physical pain, claimants can also cite emotional and psychological trauma in their pain and suffering claims.  For example, a visible scar on the face can lead to painful feelings of constant embarrassment and insecurity.
The amount of money damages a claimant gets for pain and suffering will also depend upon the amount claimed in a lawsuit if such is filed or the amount demanded to the responsible party in the underlying claim if it is an insurance claim. Even though a lawyer representing a client in an injury negligence-based lawsuit may claim a certain amount for pain and suffering, the jury or the insurance adjuster will award pain and suffering money for differing reasons. In practice, historically tort cases involving personal injury often involve contingent fees, with attorneys being paid a portion of the pain and suffering damages; one commentator says a typical split of pain and suffering is one-third for the lawyer, one-third for the physician, and one-third for the plaintiff.[2]
Jury awards for pain and suffering may vary depending upon socio-economic and political factors within the community from which the jury is drawn.[3] In most states the maximum monetary amount awarded for pain and suffering is capped at what is listed in the particular suit or written complaint. In some jurisdictions there are maximum amounts set in law which a jury may not exceed in awarding damages.
The personality of the plaintiff, their witnesses and overall effect of the injuries which befell the victim plaintiff will play a powerful role in any damage award if damages are even awarded once liability issues are satisfied. The power and personality of the lawyer representing her or his client also may factor into a high money damage award case.
Such awards may follow in house insurance guidelines with some leeway granted to adjusters to adjust the claim in order to prevent the claim from being fully litigated in court. There is a wide range of levels of compensation which may fluctuate seasonally and with the economy and dictates of the insurance industry setting the varying levels of compensation to claimants. Some insurers have experimented with using computers which tabulate the data that is presented and grant the adjuster a level of money authority for which to settle the claim.
In the Western world these awards are typically discretionary awards made by juries and are regarded as difficult to predict, variable and subjective, for instance in the US,[4] UK,[5] Australia and New Zealand.[6]
See also[edit]
Hedonic damages
Psychological trauma
References[edit]
^ "Legal Dictionary - Law.com". Law.com Legal Dictionary. Retrieved 22 May 2020.
^ O'Connell, Jeffrey (1981). "A Proposal to Abolish Defendants' payment for Pain and Suffering in Return for Payment of Claimants' attorneys' fees" (PDF). Illinois Law Review. 1981: 333. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2017.
^ Helland, Eric; Tebarrok, Alexander (2003). "Race, Poverty, and American Tort Awards: Evidence from Three Datasets" (PDF). Journal of Legal Studies. 32 (1): 27 58. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.458.6651. doi:10.1086/344560. S2CID 14946769. Retrieved 14 August 2017.
^ Avraham, Ronen (2006). "Putting a Price on Pain-and-Suffering Damages: A Critique of the Current Approaches and a Preliminary Proposal for Change". Northwestern University Law Review. 100: 87. SSRN 835024.
^ "Personal Injuries". Citizens Advice for Scotland. 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2017.
^ Devaney, Margaret (September 2009). "A Comparative Assessment of Personal Injuries Compensation Schemes: Lessons for Tort Reform" (PDF). Electronic Journal of Comparative Law. 13 (3). Retrieved 14 August 2017.
Authority control: National 
Germany
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pain_and_suffering&oldid=1142220135"