American television personality
This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful.Find sources: "Michael Teutul" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Michael TeutulTeutul in 2007BornMichael Joseph Teutul (1978-11-26) November 26, 1978 (age 44)Parent(s)Paula TeutulPaul Teutul Sr.
Michael Joseph Teutul (born November 26, 1978) is an American television personality who appeared on the reality programs "Orange County Choppers" American Chopper and American Chopper: Senior vs. Junior.
Early life[edit]
He is the youngest son of Paul Teutul Sr., the founder of Orange County Choppers, and his first wife, Paula Teutul. He is the younger brother of  Paul Teutul Jr., the chief fabricator on the show, and Daniel Teutul, the owner/general manager of Orange County Ironworks LLC.
At age 14, Teutul began working at his family's company, the Orange County Iron Works.  
Career[edit]
After Paul Sr. and Paul Jr. started Orange County Choppers, Teutul joined them as an assistant general manager. His duties involved answering phones and taking out the trash. On rare occasions, Teutul would help build choppers, at one point building his own bike. The family business became the basis for the American Chopper series. 
Teutul's role as part of the TV shows was to provide comic relief. Teutul frequently appeared at promotional events for the company.[1] Teutul appeared on Late Show with David Letterman, Late Night with Conan O'Brien and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. 
In December 2009 it was revealed on American Chopper that Michael Teutul had checked himself into a rehabilitation center to overcome an alcohol addiction.[2]
Toward the end of the series, Teutul tried to mediate the ongoing disputes between Paul Sr. and Paul Jr. As revealed in season 6 episode 13, Michael was forced out of the business. Paul Sr. stated that Michael had many opportunities to be successful at OCC but never followed through on them. Michael joined Paul Jr. in his new business venture, Paul Jr. Designs.
Teutul's hobbies include painting and skeet shooting. In 2011 Teutul was attempting to market a line of gourmet pasta sauces under the moniker FarQueue Products, LLC.[3] That same year he opened an art gallery titled Mikey Teutul's Wolfgang Gallery which closed in June 2013 due to declining sales.
References[edit]
^ "American Chopper: Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribal Theme Bike episode on". Tv.com. Retrieved December 12, 2009.
^ American Chopper, Iraq Star Foundation episode, originally aired December 3, 2009
^ "FarQueue Products, LLC". Chefangrymike.com. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
External links[edit]
Michael Teutul at IMDb
vtePaul Jr. DesignsKey people
Paul Teutul Jr.
Michael Teutul
Vincent DiMartino
Cody Connelly
Bikes
AntiVenom
Geco Bike
vteAmerican ChopperCompanies
Orange County Choppers (OCC)
Paul Jr. Designs (PJD)
Main cast
Paul Teutul Sr.
Paul Teutul Jr.
Michael Teutul
Jason Pohl
Mike Rowe (narrator; 2002 2007)
Vincent DiMartino (2003 2007, 2010)
Cody Connelly (2003 2007, 2011)
Seasons
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pilots & specials
7 (Sr vs. Jr)
Bikes
Orange County Choppers bikes
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Teutul&oldid=1126575916"