Spread of world views, products, ideas, capital and labour
"Globalize" redirects here. For the JavaScript library, see Globalize (JavaScript library). For other uses, see Globalization (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Globalism.
Globalization. Top-left: showing early migration patterns of humans across the globe as part of the history of globalization. Top-right: the Namban ship carrying Europeans to trade with Japan. Middle-left: the headquarters of the United Nations in international territory within Midtown Manhattan, New York City. Middle-right: a branch of the American superstore Walmart, the largest company in the world by revenue as of 2021, in Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada. Bottom: a map of undersea cable connections around the African continent to and from Europe, Asia, and across the Atlantic Ocean.
Part of a series onSociology
History
Outline
Index
Key themes
Society
Globalization
Human behavior
Human environmental impact
Identity
Industrial revolutions 3 & 4
Social complexity
Social construct
Social environment
Social equality
Social equity
Social power
Social stratification
Social structure
Perspectives
Conflict theory
Critical theory
Structural functionalism
Positivism
Social constructionism
Symbolic interactionism
Branches
Aging
Architecture
Art
Astrosociology
Body
Criminology
Consciousness
Culture
Death
Demography
Deviance
Disaster
Economic
Education
Emotion (Jealousy)
Environmental
Family
Feminist
Fiscal
Food
Gender
Generations
Health
Historical
Immigration
Industrial
Internet
Jewry
Knowledge
Language
Law
Leisure
Literature
Marxist
Mathematic
Medical
Military
Music
Peace, war, and social conflict
Philosophy
Political
Public
Punishment
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science (History of science)
Social movements
Social psychology
Sociocybernetics
Sociology
Space
Sport
Technology
Terrorism
Urban
Utopian
Victimology
Visual
Methods
Quantitative
Qualitative
Comparative
Computational
Ethnographic
Conversation analysis
Historical
Interview
Mathematical
Network analysis
Social experiment
Survey
PeopleEast Asia
1900s
Fei Xiaotong
South Asia 
1800s
G.S Ghurye
1900s
Irawati Karve
M. N. Srinivas
Middle East
1400s
Ibn Khaldun
Europe
1700s
Auguste Comte
Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
1800s
 mile Durkheim
Harriet Martineau
Karl Marx
Georg Simmel
Herbert Spencer
Ferdinand T nnies
Max Weber
1900s
Michel Foucault
J rgen Habermas
North America
1800s
Jane Addams
Ernest Burgess
W.E.B. Du Bois
George Herbert Mead
Thorstein Veblen
1900s
James Coleman
Patricia Hill Collins
Erving Goffman
Paul Lazarsfeld
Charles Wright Mills
Robert K. Merton
Theda Skocpol
Dorothy E. Smith
Lists
Bibliography
Terminology
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline
By country
 Society portal
WikiProject Sociologyvte
Globalization, or globalisation (Commonwealth English; see spelling differences), is the process of interaction and integration among people, companies, and governments worldwide. The term globalization first appeared in the early 20th century (supplanting an earlier French term mondialization), developed its current meaning some time in the second half of the 20th century, and came into popular use in the 1990s to describe the unprecedented international connectivity of the post-Cold War world.[1] Its origins can be traced back to 18th and 19th centuries due to advances in transportation and communications technology. This increase in global interactions has caused a growth in international trade and the exchange of ideas, beliefs, and culture. Globalization is primarily an economic process of interaction and integration that is associated with social and cultural aspects. However, disputes and international diplomacy are also large parts of the history of globalization, and of modern globalization.
Economically, globalization involves goods, services, data, technology, and the economic resources of capital.[2] The expansion of global markets liberalizes the economic activities of the exchange of goods and funds. Removal of cross-border trade barriers has made the formation of global markets more feasible.[3] Advances in transportation, like the steam locomotive, steamship, jet engine, and container ships, and developments in telecommunication infrastructure, like the telegraph, Internet, mobile phones, and smartphones, have been major factors in globalization and have generated further interdependence of economic and cultural activities around the globe.[4][5][6]
Though many scholars place the origins of globalization in modern times, others trace its history to long before the European Age of Discovery and voyages to the New World, and some even to the third millennium BCE.[7] Large-scale globalization began in the 1820s, and in the late 19th century and early 20th century drove a rapid expansion in the connectivity of the world's economies and cultures.[8] The term global city was subsequently popularized by sociologist Saskia Sassen in her work The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo (1991).[9]
In 2000, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identified four basic aspects of globalization: trade and transactions, capital and investment movements, migration and movement of people, and the dissemination of knowledge.[10] Globalizing processes affect and are affected by business and work organization, economics, sociocultural resources, and the natural environment. Academic literature commonly divides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization, and political globalization.[11]
Etymology and usage
The word globalization was used in the English language as early as the 1930s, but only in the context of education, and the term failed to gain traction. Over the next few decades, the term was occasionally used by other scholars and media, but it was not clearly defined.[1] One of the first usages of the term in the meaning resembling the later, common usage was by French economist Fran ois Perroux in his essays from the early 1960s (in his French works he used the term mondialization (literary worldization), also translated as mundialization).[1] Theodore Levitt is often credited with popularizing the term and bringing it into the mainstream business audience in the later in the middle of 1980s.[1]
Since its inception, the concept of globalization has inspired competing definitions and interpretations. Its antecedents date back to the great movements of trade and empire across Asia and the Indian Ocean from the 15th century onward.[12][13]
Due to the complexity of the concept, various research projects, articles, and discussions often stay focused on a single aspect of globalization.[14]
In 1848, Karl Marx noticed the increasing level of national inter-dependence brought on by capitalism, and predicted the universal character of the modern world society. He states:
 The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. . . . In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence of nations. [15]
Sociologists Martin Albrow and Elizabeth King define globalization as "all those processes by which the people of the world are incorporated into a single world society."[2] In The Consequences of Modernity, Anthony Giddens writes: "Globalization can thus be defined as the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away and vice versa."[16] In 1992, Roland Robertson, professor of sociology at the University of Aberdeen and an early writer in the field, described globalization as "the compression of the world and the intensification of the consciousness of the world as a whole."[17]
In Global Transformations, David Held and his co-writers state:
Although in its simplistic sense globalization refers to the widening, deepening and speeding up of global interconnection, such a definition begs further elaboration. ... Globalization can be on a continuum with the local, national and regional. At one end of the continuum lie social and economic relations and networks which are organized on a local and/or national basis; at the other end lie social and economic relations and networks which crystallize on the wider scale of regional and global interactions. Globalization can refer to those spatial-temporal processes of change which underpin a transformation in the organization of human affairs by linking together and expanding human activity across regions and continents. Without reference to such expansive spatial connections, there can be no clear or coherent formulation of this term. ... A satisfactory definition of globalization must capture each of these elements: extensity (stretching), intensity, velocity and impact.[18]
Held and his co-writers' definition of globalization in that same book as "transformation in the spatial organization of social relations and transactions assessed in terms of their extensity, intensity, velocity and impact generating transcontinental or inter-regional flows" was called "probably the most widely-cited definition" in the 2014 DHL Global Connectiveness Index.[19]
Swedish journalist Thomas Larsson, in his book The Race to the Top: The Real Story of Globalization, states that globalization:
is the process of world shrinkage, of distances getting shorter, things moving closer. It pertains to the increasing ease with which somebody on one side of the world can interact, to mutual benefit, with somebody on the other side of the world.[20]
Paul James defines globalization with a more direct and historically contextualized emphasis:
Globalization is the extension of social relations across world-space, defining that world-space in terms of the historically variable ways that it has been practiced and socially understood through changing world-time.[21]
Manfred Steger, professor of global studies and research leader in the Global Cities Institute at RMIT University, identifies four main empirical dimensions of globalization: economic, political, cultural, and ecological. A fifth dimension the ideological cutting across the other four. The ideological dimension, according to Steger, is filled with a range of norms, claims, beliefs, and narratives about the phenomenon itself.[22]
James and Steger stated that the concept of globalization "emerged from the intersection of four interrelated sets of 'communities of practice' (Wenger, 1998): academics, journalists, publishers/editors, and librarians."[1]: 424  They note the term was used "in education to describe the global life of the mind"; in international relations to describe the extension of the European Common Market, and in journalism to describe how the "American Negro and his problem are taking on a global significance".[1] They have also argued that four forms of globalization can be distinguished that complement and cut across the solely empirical dimensions.[21][23] According to James, the oldest dominant form of globalization is embodied globalization, the movement of people. A second form is agency-extended globalization, the circulation of agents of different institutions, organizations, and polities, including imperial agents. Object-extended globalization, a third form, is the movement of commodities and other objects of exchange. He calls the transmission of ideas, images, knowledge, and information across world-space disembodied globalization, maintaining that it is currently the dominant form of globalization. James holds that this series of distinctions allows for an understanding of how, today, the most embodied forms of globalization such as the movement of refugees and migrants are increasingly restricted, while the most disembodied forms such as the circulation of financial instruments and codes are the most deregulated.[24]
The journalist Thomas L. Friedman popularized the term "flat world", arguing that globalized trade, outsourcing, supply-chaining, and political forces had permanently changed the world, for better and worse. He asserted that the pace of globalization was quickening and that its impact on business organization and practice would continue to grow.[25]
Economist Takis Fotopoulos defined "economic globalization" as the opening and deregulation of commodity, capital, and labor markets that led toward present neoliberal globalization. He used "political globalization" to refer to the emergence of a transnational  lite and a phasing out of the nation-state. Meanwhile, he used "cultural globalization" to reference the worldwide homogenization of culture. Other of his usages included "ideological globalization", "technological globalization", and "social globalization".[26]
Lechner and Boli (2012) define globalization as more people across large distances becoming connected in more and different ways.[27]
"Globophobia" is used to refer to the fear of globalization, though it can also mean the fear of balloons.[28][29][30]
History
Main article: History of globalization
See also: Timeline of international trade
There are both distal and proximate causes which can be traced in the historical factors affecting globalization. Large-scale globalization began in the 19th century.[31]
Archaic
 The 13th century world-system, as described by Janet Abu-Lughod
Main article: Archaic globalization
Archaic globalization conventionally refers to a phase in the history of globalization including globalizing events and developments from the time of the earliest civilizations until roughly the 1600s. This term is used to describe the relationships between communities and states and how they were created by the geographical spread of ideas and social norms at both local and regional levels.[32]
In this schema, three main prerequisites are posited for globalization to occur. The first is the idea of Eastern Origins, which shows how Western states have adapted and implemented learned principles from the East.[32] Without the spread of traditional ideas from the East, Western globalization would not have emerged the way it did. The interactions of states were not on a global scale and most often were confined to Asia, North Africa, the Middle East, and certain parts of Europe.[32] With early globalization, it was difficult for states to interact with others that were not close. Eventually, technological advances allowed states to learn of others' existence and thus another phase of globalization can occur. The third has to do with inter-dependency, stability, and regularity. If a state is not dependent on another, then there is no way for either state to be mutually affected by the other. This is one of the driving forces behind global connections and trade; without either, globalization would not have emerged the way it did and states would still be dependent on their own production and resources to work. This is one of the arguments surrounding the idea of early globalization. It is argued that archaic globalization did not function in a similar manner to modern globalization because states were not as interdependent on others as they are today.[32]
Also posited is a "multi-polar" nature to archaic globalization, which involved the active participation of non-Europeans. Because it predated the Great Divergence in the nineteenth century, where Western Europe pulled ahead of the rest of the world in terms of industrial production and economic output, archaic globalization was a phenomenon that was driven not only by Europe but also by other economically developed Old World centers such as Gujarat, Bengal, coastal China, and Japan.[33]
 Portuguese carrack in Nagasaki, 17th-century Japanese Nanban art
The German historical economist and sociologist Andre Gunder Frank argues that a form of globalization began with the rise of trade links between Sumer and the Indus Valley civilization in the third millennium BCE. This archaic globalization existed during the Hellenistic Age, when commercialized urban centers enveloped the axis of Greek culture that reached from India to Spain, including Alexandria and the other Alexandrine cities. Early on, the geographic position of Greece and the necessity of importing wheat forced the Greeks to engage in maritime trade. Trade in ancient Greece was largely unrestricted: the state controlled only the supply of grain.[7]
 The Silk Road in the 1st century
 Native New World crops exchanged globally: Maize, tomato, potato, vanilla, rubber, cacao, tobacco
Trade on the Silk Road was a significant factor in the development of civilizations from China, Indian subcontinent, Persia, Europe, and Arabia, opening long-distance political and economic interactions between them.[34] Though silk was certainly the major trade item from China, common goods such as salt and sugar were traded as well; and religions, syncretic philosophies, and various technologies, as well as diseases, also traveled along the Silk Routes. In addition to economic trade, the Silk Road served as a means of carrying out cultural trade among the civilisations along its network.[35] The movement of people, such as refugees, artists, craftsmen, missionaries, robbers, and envoys, resulted in the exchange of religions, art, languages, and new technologies.[36]
Early modern
Main article: Proto-globalization
"Early modern" or "proto-globalization" covers a period of the history of globalization roughly spanning the years between 1600 and 1800. The concept of "proto-globalization" was first introduced by historians A. G. Hopkins and Christopher Bayly. The term describes the phase of increasing trade links and cultural exchange that characterized the period immediately preceding the advent of high "modern globalization" in the late 19th century.[37] This phase of globalization was characterized by the rise of maritime European empires, in the 15th and 17th centuries, first the Portuguese Empire (1415) followed by the Spanish Empire (1492), and later the Dutch and British Empires. In the 17th century, world trade developed further when chartered companies like the British East India Company (founded in 1600) and the Dutch East India Company (founded in 1602, often described as the first multinational corporation in which stock was offered) were established.[38]
 Lisbon in the 1570s had many Africans.
An alternative view from historians Dennis Flynn and Arturo Giraldez, postulated that: globalization began with the first circumnavigation of the globe under the Magellan-Elcano expedition which preluded the rise of Global Silver Trade.[39]
Early modern globalization is distinguished from modern globalization on the basis of expansionism, the method of managing global trade, and the level of information exchange. The period is marked by such trade arrangements as the East India Company, the shift of hegemony to Western Europe, the rise of larger-scale conflicts between powerful nations such as the Thirty Years' War, and the rise of newfound commodities most particularly slave trade. The Triangular Trade made it possible for Europe to take advantage of resources within the Western Hemisphere. The transfer of animal stocks, plant crops, and epidemic diseases associated with Alfred W. Crosby's concept of the Columbian Exchange also played a central role in this process. European, Muslims, Indian, Southeast Asian, and Chinese merchants were all involved in early modern trade and communications, particularly in the Indian Ocean region.
 The 1843 launch of the Great Britain, the revolutionary ship of Isambard Kingdom Brunel
 During the 19th and early 20th centuries, the United Kingdom was a global superpower.
Modern
According to economic historians Kevin H. O'Rourke, Leandro Prados de la Escosura, and Guillaume Daudin, several factors promoted globalization in the period 1815 1870:[40]
The conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars brought in an era of relative peace in Europe.
Innovations in transportation technology reduced trade costs substantially.
New industrial military technologies increased the power of European states and the United States, and allowed these powers to forcibly open up markets across the world and extend their empires.
A gradual move towards greater liberalization in European countries.
During the 19th century, globalization approached its form as a direct result of the Industrial Revolution. Industrialization allowed standardized production of household items using economies of scale while rapid population growth created sustained demand for commodities. In the 19th century, steamships reduced the cost of international transportation significantly and railroads made inland transportation cheaper. The transportation revolution occurred some time between 1820 and 1850.[31] More nations embraced international trade.[31] Globalization in this period was decisively shaped by nineteenth-century imperialism such as in Africa and Asia. The invention of shipping containers in 1956 helped advance the globalization of commerce.[41][42]
After World War II, work by politicians led to the agreements of the Bretton Woods Conference, in which major governments laid down the framework for international monetary policy, commerce, and finance, and the founding of several international institutions intended to facilitate economic growth by lowering trade barriers. Initially, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) led to a series of agreements to remove trade restrictions. GATT's successor was the World Trade Organization (WTO), which provided a framework for negotiating and formalizing trade agreements and a dispute resolution process. Exports nearly doubled from 8.5% of total gross world product in 1970 to 16.2% in 2001.[43] The approach of using global agreements to advance trade stumbled with the failure of the Doha Development Round of trade negotiation. Many countries then shifted to bilateral or smaller multilateral agreements, such as the 2011 South Korea United States Free Trade Agreement.
Since the 1970s, aviation has become increasingly affordable to middle classes in developed countries. Open skies policies and low-cost carriers have helped to bring competition to the market. In the 1990s, the growth of low-cost communication networks cut the cost of communicating between countries. More work can be performed using a computer without regard to location. This included accounting, software development, and engineering design.
Student exchange programs became popular after World War II, and are intended to increase the participants' understanding and tolerance of other cultures, as well as improving their language skills and broadening their social horizons. Between 1963 and 2006 the number of students studying in a foreign country increased 9 times.[44]
 D.H. Comet, the world's first commercial jet airliner, entered service in 1949.
Since the 1980s, modern globalization has spread rapidly through the expansion of capitalism and neoliberal ideologies.[45] The implementation of neoliberal policies has allowed for the privatization of public industry, deregulation of laws or policies that interfered with the free flow of the market, as well as cut-backs to governmental social services.[46] These neoliberal policies were introduced to many developing countries in the form of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) that were implemented by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).[45] These programs required that the country receiving monetary aid would open its markets to capitalism, privatize public industry, allow free trade, cut social services like healthcare and education and allow the free movement of giant multinational corporations.[47] These programs allowed the World Bank and the IMF to become global financial market regulators that would promote neoliberalism and the creation of free markets for multinational corporations on a global scale.[48]
 With a population of 1.4 billion, China is the world's second-largest economy.
In the late 19th and early 20th century, the connectedness of the world's economies and cultures grew very quickly. This slowed down from the 1910s onward due to the World Wars and the Cold War,[49] but picked up again in the 1980s and 1990s.[50] The revolutions of 1989 and subsequent liberalization in many parts of the world resulted in a significant expansion of global interconnectedness. The migration and movement of people can also be highlighted as a prominent feature of the globalization process. In the period between 1965 and 1990, the proportion of the labor force migrating approximately doubled. Most migration occurred between the developing countries and least developed countries (LDCs).[51] As economic integration intensified workers moved to areas with higher wages and most of the developing world oriented toward the international market economy. The collapse of the Soviet Union not only ended the Cold War's division of the world   it also left the United States its sole policeman and an unfettered advocate of free market.[according to whom?] It also resulted in the growing prominence of attention focused on the movement of diseases, the proliferation of popular culture and consumer values, the growing prominence of international institutions like the UN, and concerted international action on such issues as the environment and human rights.[52] Other developments as dramatic were the Internet's becoming influential in connecting people across the world; As of June 2012[update], more than 2.4 billion people over a third of the world's human population have used the services of the Internet.[53][54] Growth of globalization has never been smooth. One influential event was the late 2000s recession, which was associated with lower growth (in areas such as cross-border phone calls and Skype usage) or even temporarily negative growth (in areas such as trade) of global interconnectedness.[55][56]
The China United States trade war, starting in 2018, negatively affected trade between the two largest national economies. The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic included a massive decline in tourism and international business travel as many countries temporarily closed borders. The 2021 2022 global supply chain crisis resulted from temporary shutdowns of manufacturing and transportation facilities, and labor shortages. Supply problems incentivized some switches to domestic production.[57] The economic impact of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine included a blockade of Ukrainian ports and international sanctions on Russia, resulting in some de-coupling of the Russian economy with global trade, especially with the European Union and other Western countries.
Economic globalization
Main article: Economic globalization Singapore is the top country in the Enabling Trade Index as of 2016[update].
 U.S. Trade Balance and Trade Policy (1895 2015)
 Dividends worth CZK 289 billion were paid to the foreign owners of Czech companies in 2016.[58]
Economic globalization is the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, services, technology, and capital.[59] Whereas the globalization of business is centered around the diminution of international trade regulations as well as tariffs, taxes, and other impediments that suppresses global trade, economic globalization is the process of increasing economic integration between countries, leading to the emergence of a global marketplace or a single world market.[60] Depending on the paradigm, economic globalization can be viewed as either a positive or a negative phenomenon. Economic globalization comprises: globalization of production; which refers to the obtainment of goods and services from a particular source from locations around the globe to benefit from difference in cost and quality. Likewise, it also comprises globalization of markets; which is defined as the union of different and separate markets into a massive global marketplace. Economic globalization also includes[61] competition, technology, and corporations and industries.[59]
Current globalization trends can be largely accounted for by developed economies integrating with less developed economies by means of foreign direct investment, the reduction of trade barriers as well as other economic reforms, and, in many cases, immigration.[62]
International standards have made trade in goods and services more efficient. An example of such standard is the intermodal container. Containerization dramatically reduced the costs of transportation, supported the post-war boom in international trade, and was a major element in globalization.[41] International standards are set by the International Organization for Standardization, which is composed of representatives from various national standards organizations.
A multinational corporation, or worldwide enterprise,[63] is an organization that owns or controls the production of goods or services in one or more countries other than their home country.[64] It can also be referred to as an international corporation, a transnational corporation, or a stateless corporation.[65]
A free-trade area is the region encompassing a trade bloc whose member countries have signed a free-trade agreement (FTA). Such agreements involve cooperation between at least two countries to reduce trade barriers   import quotas and tariffs   and to increase trade of goods and services with each other.[66]
If people are also free to move between the countries, in addition to a free-trade agreement, it would also be considered an open border.
Arguably the most significant free-trade area in the world is the European Union, a politico-economic union of 27 member states that are primarily located in Europe. The EU has developed European Single Market through a standardized system of laws that apply in all member states. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of people, goods, services, and capital within the internal market,[67]
Trade facilitation looks at how procedures and controls governing the movement of goods across national borders can be improved to reduce associated cost burdens and maximize efficiency while safeguarding legitimate regulatory objectives.
Global trade in services is also significant. For example, in India, business process outsourcing has been described as the "primary engine of the country's development over the next few decades, contributing broadly to GDP growth, employment growth, and poverty alleviation".[68][69]
William I. Robinson's theoretical approach to globalization is a critique of Wallerstein's World Systems Theory. He believes that the global capital experienced today is due to a new and distinct form of globalization which began in the 1980s. Robinson argues not only are economic activities expanded across national boundaries but also there is a transnational fragmentation of these activities.[70] One important aspect of Robinson's globalization theory is that production of goods are increasingly global. This means that one pair of shoes can be produced by six countries, each contributing to a part of the production process.
Cultural globalization
 Shakira, a Colombian multilingual singer-songwriter, playing outside her home country
Main article: Cultural globalization
Cultural globalization refers to the transmission of ideas, meanings, and values around the world in such a way as to extend and intensify social relations.[71] This process is marked by the common consumption of cultures that have been diffused by the Internet, popular culture media, and international travel. This has added to processes of commodity exchange and colonization which have a longer history of carrying cultural meaning around the globe. The circulation of cultures enables individuals to partake in extended social relations that cross national and regional borders. The creation and expansion of such social relations is not merely observed on a material level. Cultural globalization involves the formation of shared norms and knowledge with which people associate their individual and collective cultural identities. It brings increasing interconnectedness among different populations and cultures.[72]
Cross-cultural communication is a field of study that looks at how people from differing cultural backgrounds communicate, in similar and different ways among themselves, and how they endeavour to communicate across cultures. Intercultural communication is a related field of study.
Cultural diffusion is the spread of cultural items such as ideas, styles, religions, technologies, languages etc.
Cultural globalization has increased cross-cultural contacts, but may be accompanied by a decrease in the uniqueness of once-isolated communities. For example, sushi is available in Germany as well as Japan, but Euro-Disney outdraws the city of Paris, potentially reducing demand for "authentic" French pastry.[73][74][75] Globalization's contribution to the alienation of individuals from their traditions may be modest compared to the impact of modernity itself, as alleged by existentialists such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. Globalization has expanded recreational opportunities by spreading pop culture, particularly via the Internet and satellite television. The cultural diffusion can create a homogenizing force, where globalisation is seen as synonymous with homogenizing force via connectedness of markets, cultures, politics and the desire for modernizations through imperial countries sphere of influence.[76]
Religions were among the earliest cultural elements to globalize, being spread by force, migration, evangelists, imperialists, and traders. Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and more recently sects such as Mormonism are among those religions which have taken root and influenced endemic cultures in places far from their origins.[77]
 McDonald's is commonly seen as a symbol of globalization, often called McDonaldization of global society.
Globalization has strongly influenced sports.[78] For example, the modern Olympic Games has athletes from more than 200 nations participating in a variety of competitions.[79] The FIFA World Cup is the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world, exceeding even the Olympic Games; a ninth of the entire population of the planet watched the 2006 FIFA World Cup Final.[80][81][82][83]
The term globalization implies transformation. Cultural practices including traditional music can be lost or turned into a fusion of traditions. Globalization can trigger a state of emergency for the preservation of musical heritage. Archivists may attempt to collect, record, or transcribe repertoires before melodies are assimilated or modified, while local musicians may struggle for authenticity and to preserve local musical traditions. Globalization can lead performers to discard traditional instruments. Fusion genres can become interesting fields of analysis.[84]
Music has an important role in economic and cultural development during globalization. Music genres such as jazz and reggae began locally and later became international phenomena. Globalization gave support to the world music phenomenon by allowing music from developing countries to reach broader audiences.[85] Though the term "World Music" was originally intended for ethnic-specific music, globalization is now expanding its scope such that the term often includes hybrid subgenres such as "world fusion", "global fusion", "ethnic fusion",[86] and worldbeat.[87][88]
 Use of chili pepper has spread from the Americas to cuisines around the world, including Thailand, Korea, China, and Italy.[89]
Bourdieu claimed that the perception of consumption can be seen as self-identification and the formation of identity. Musically, this translates into each individual having their own musical identity based on likes and tastes. These likes and tastes are greatly influenced by culture, as this is the most basic cause for a person's wants and behavior. The concept of one's own culture is now in a period of change due to globalization. Also, globalization has increased the interdependency of political, personal, cultural, and economic factors.[90]
A 2005 UNESCO report[91] showed that cultural exchange is becoming more frequent from Eastern Asia, but that Western countries are still the main exporters of cultural goods. In 2002, China was the third largest exporter of cultural goods, after the UK and US. Between 1994 and 2002, both North America's and the European Union's shares of cultural exports declined while Asia's cultural exports grew to surpass North America. Related factors are the fact that Asia's population and area are several times that of North America. Americanization is related to a period of high political American clout and of significant growth of America's shops, markets and objects being brought into other countries.
Some critics of globalization argue that it harms the diversity of cultures. As a dominating country's culture is introduced into a receiving country through globalization, it can become a threat to the diversity of local culture. Some argue that globalization may ultimately lead to Westernization or Americanization of culture, where the dominating cultural concepts of economically and politically powerful Western countries spread and cause harm to local cultures.[92]
Globalization is a diverse phenomenon that relates to a multilateral political world and to the increase of cultural objects and markets between countries. The Indian experience particularly reveals the plurality of the impact of cultural globalization.[93]
Transculturalism is defined as "seeing oneself in the other".[94] Transcultural[95] is in turn described as "extending through all human cultures"[95] or "involving, encompassing, or combining elements of more than one culture".[96]
Political globalization
Main article: Political globalization
 The United Nations headquarters in New York City
Political globalization refers to the growth of the worldwide political system, both in size and complexity. That system includes national governments, their governmental and intergovernmental organizations as well as government-independent elements of global civil society such as international non-governmental organizations and social movement organizations. One of the key aspects of the political globalization is the declining importance of the nation-state and the rise of other actors on the political scene.
William R. Thompson has defined it as "the expansion of a global political system, and its institutions, in which inter-regional transactions (including, but certainly not limited to trade) are managed".[97] 
Political globalization is one of the three main dimensions of globalization commonly found in academic literature, with the two other being economic globalization and cultural globalization.[11]
Intergovernmentalism is a term in political science with two meanings. The first refers to a theory of regional integration originally proposed by Stanley Hoffmann; the second treats states and the national government as the primary factors for integration.[98]
Multi-level governance is an approach in political science and public administration theory that originated from studies on European integration. Multi-level governance gives expression to the idea that there are many interacting authority structures at work in the emergent global political economy. It illuminates the intimate entanglement between the domestic and international levels of authority.
Some people are citizens of multiple nation-states. Multiple citizenship, also called dual citizenship or multiple nationality or dual nationality, is a person's citizenship status, in which a person is concurrently regarded as a citizen of more than one state under the laws of those states.
 U.S. military presence around the world in 2007. As of 2015[update], the U.S. still had many bases and troops stationed globally.[99]
Increasingly, non-governmental organizations influence public policy across national boundaries, including humanitarian aid and developmental efforts.[100] Philanthropic organizations with global missions are also coming to the forefront of humanitarian efforts; charities such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Accion International, the Acumen Fund (now Acumen) and the Echoing Green have combined the business model with philanthropy, giving rise to business organizations such as the Global Philanthropy Group and new associations of philanthropists such as the Global Philanthropy Forum. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation projects include a current multibillion-dollar commitment to funding immunizations in some of the world's more impoverished but rapidly growing countries.[101] The Hudson Institute estimates total private philanthropic flows to developing countries at US$59 billion in 2010.[102]
As a response to globalization, some countries have embraced isolationist policies. For example, the North Korean government makes it very difficult for foreigners to enter the country and strictly monitors their activities when they do. Aid workers are subject to considerable scrutiny and excluded from places and regions the government does not wish them to enter. Citizens cannot freely leave the country.[103][104]
Globalization and gender
 From the documentary Ukraine Is Not a Brothel. Radical group Femen protest against the increase in sex tourism into Ukraine.
Globalization has been a gendered process where giant multinational corporations have outsourced jobs to low-wage, low skilled, quota free economies like the ready made garment industry in Bangladesh where poor women make up the majority of labor force.[105] Despite a large proportion of women workers in the garment industry, women are still heavily underemployed compared to men.[105] Most women that are employed in the garment industry come from the countryside of Bangladesh triggering migration of women in search of garment work.[105] It is still unclear as to whether or not access to paid work for women where it didn't exist before has empowered them.[105] The answers varied depending on whether it is the employers perspective or the workers and how they view their choices.[105] Women workers did not see the garment industry as economically sustainable for them in the long run due to long hours standing and poor working conditions.[105] Although women workers did show significant autonomy over their personal lives including their ability to negotiate with family, more choice in marriage, and being valued as a wage earner in the family. This did not translate into workers being able to collectively organize themselves in order to negotiate a better deal for themselves at work.[105]
Another example of outsourcing in manufacturing includes the maquiladora industry in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico where poor women make up the majority of the labor force.[106] Women in the maquiladora industry have produced high levels of turnover not staying long enough to be trained compared to men.[106] A gendered two tiered system within the maquiladora industry has been created that focuses on training and worker loyalty.[106] Women are seen as being untrainable, placed in un-skilled, low wage jobs, while men are seen as more trainable with less turnover rates, and placed in more high skilled technical jobs.[106] The idea of training has become a tool used against women to blame them for their high turnover rates which also benefit the industry keeping women as temporary workers.[106]
Other dimensions
Scholars also occasionally discuss other, less common dimensions of globalization, such as environmental globalization (the internationally coordinated practices and regulations, often in the form of international treaties, regarding environmental protection)[107] or military globalization (growth in global extent and scope of security relationships).[108] Those dimensions, however, receive much less attention the three described above, as academic literature commonly subdivides globalization into three major areas: economic globalization, cultural globalization and political globalization.[11]
Movement of people
 Scheduled airline traffic in 2009
An essential aspect of globalization is movement of people, and state-boundary limits on that movement have changed across history.[109] The movement of tourists and business people opened up over the last century. As transportation technology improved, travel time and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th century. For example, travel across the Atlantic ocean used to take up to 5 weeks in the 18th century, but around the time of the 20th century it took a mere 8 days.[110] Today, modern aviation has made long-distance transportation quick and affordable.
Tourism is travel for pleasure. The developments in technology and transportation infrastructure, such as jumbo jets, low-cost airlines, and more accessible airports have made many types of tourism more affordable. At any given moment half a million people are in the air.[111] International tourist arrivals surpassed the milestone of 1 billion tourists globally for the first time in 2012.[112]
A visa is a conditional authorization granted by a country to a foreigner, allowing them to enter and temporarily remain within, or to leave that country. Some countries   such as those in the Schengen Area   have agreements with other countries allowing each other's citizens to travel between them without visas (for example, Switzerland is part of a Schengen Agreement allowing easy travel for people from countries within the European Union). The World Tourism Organization announced that the number of tourists who require a visa before traveling was at its lowest level ever in 2015.[113]
Immigration is the international movement of people into a destination country of which they are not natives or where they do not possess citizenship in order to settle or reside there, especially as permanent residents or naturalized citizens, or to take-up employment as a migrant worker or temporarily as a foreign worker.[114][115][116]
According to the International Labour Organization, as of 2014[update] there were an estimated 232 million international migrants in the world (defined as persons outside their country of origin for 12 months or more) and approximately half of them were estimated to be economically active (i.e. being employed or seeking employment).[117] International movement of labor is often seen as important to economic development. For example, freedom of movement for workers in the European Union means that people can move freely between member states to live, work, study or retire in another country.
 2010 London Youth Games opening ceremony. About 69% of children born in London in 2015 had at least one parent who was born abroad.[118]
Globalization is associated with a dramatic rise in international education. The development of global cross-cultural competence in the workforce through ad-hoc training has deserved increasing attention in recent times.[119][120] More and more students are seeking higher education in foreign countries and many international students now consider overseas study a stepping-stone to permanent residency within a country.[121] The contributions that foreign students make to host nation economies, both culturally and financially has encouraged major players to implement further initiatives to facilitate the arrival and integration of overseas students, including substantial amendments to immigration and visa policies and procedures.[44]
A transnational marriage is a marriage between two people from different countries. A variety of special issues arise in marriages between people from different countries, including those related to citizenship and culture, which add complexity and challenges to these kinds of relationships.
In an age of increasing globalization, where a growing number of people have ties to networks of people and places across the globe, rather than to a current geographic location, people are increasingly marrying across national boundaries. Transnational marriage is a by-product of the movement and migration of people.
Movement of information
See also: Internet
Internet users by region[122]
Region
2005
2010
2017
2019
2021
Africa
2%
10%
21.8%
27.7%
39.7%
Americas
36%
49%
65.9%
75.9%
83.2%
Arab States
8%
26%
43.7%
55.2%
70.3%
Asia and Pacific
9%
23%
43.9%
48.9%
64.3%
Commonwealth ofIndependent States
10%
34%
67.7%
76.3%
83.7%
Europe
46%
67%
79.6%
81.7%
89.5%
 The global digital divide: Computers per 100 people
Before electronic communications, long-distance communications relied on mail. Speed of global communications was limited by the maximum speed of courier services (especially horses and ships) until the mid-19th century. The electric telegraph was the first method of instant long-distance communication. For example, before the first transatlantic cable, communications between Europe and the Americas took weeks because ships had to carry mail across the ocean. The first transatlantic cable reduced communication time considerably, allowing a message and a response in the same day. Lasting transatlantic telegraph connections were achieved in the 1865 1866. The first wireless telegraphy transmitters were developed in 1895.
The Internet has been instrumental in connecting people across geographical boundaries. For example, Facebook is a social networking service which has more than 1.65 billion monthly active users as of 31 March 2016[update].[123]
Globalization can be spread by Global journalism which provides massive information and relies on the internet to interact, "makes it into an everyday routine to investigate how people and their actions, practices, problems, life conditions, etc. in different parts of the world are interrelated. possible to assume that global threats such as climate change precipitate the further establishment of global journalism."[124]
Globalization and disease
Main article: Globalization and disease
See also: Virgin soil epidemic, Wildlife smuggling and zoonoses, Emerging infectious disease, and Pandemic
In the current era of globalization, the world is more interdependent than at any other time. Efficient and inexpensive transportation has left few places inaccessible, and increased global trade has brought more and more people into contact with animal diseases that have subsequently jumped species barriers (see zoonosis).[125]
Coronavirus disease 2019, abbreviated COVID-19, first appeared in Wuhan, China in November 2019. More than 180 countries have reported cases since then.[126] As of April 6, 2020[update], the U.S. has the most confirmed active cases in the world.[127] More than 3.4 million people from the worst-affected countries entered the U.S. in the first three months since the inception of the COVID-19 pandemic.[128] This has caused a detrimental impact on the global economy, particularly for SME's and Microbusinesses with unlimited liability/self-employed, leaving them vulnerable to financial difficulties, increasing the market share for oligopolistic markets as well as increasing the barriers of entry.
Measurement
See also: List of globalization-related indices
One index of globalization is the KOF Index of Globalization, which measures three important dimensions of globalization: economic, social, and political.[129] Another is the A.T. Kearney / Foreign Policy Magazine Globalization Index.[130]
2014 KOF Index of Globalization
Rank
Country
1
Ireland
2
Belgium
3
Netherlands
4
Austria
5
Singapore
6
Denmark
7
Sweden
8
Portugal
9
Hungary
10
Finland
 
2006 A.T. Kearney / Foreign Policy MagazineGlobalization Index
Rank
Country
1
Singapore
2
Switzerland
3
United States
4
Ireland
5
Denmark
6
Canada
7
Netherlands
8
Australia
9
Austria
10
Sweden
Measurements of economic globalization typically focus on variables such as trade, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Gross Domestic Product (GDP), portfolio investment, and income. However, newer indices attempt to measure globalization in more general terms, including variables related to political, social, cultural, and even environmental aspects of globalization.[131][132]
The DHL Global Connectedness Index studies four main types of cross-border flow: trade (in both goods and services), information, people (including tourists, students, and migrants), and capital. It shows that the depth of global integration fell by about one-tenth after 2008, but by 2013 had recovered well above its pre-crash peak.[19][55] The report also found a shift of economic activity to emerging economies.[19]
Support and criticism
See also: Criticisms of globalization
Reactions to processes contributing to globalization have varied widely with a history as long as extraterritorial contact and trade. Philosophical differences regarding the costs and benefits of such processes give rise to a broad-range of ideologies and social movements. Proponents of economic growth, expansion and development, in general, view globalizing processes as desirable or necessary to the well-being of human society.[133]
Antagonists view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale;[133] this includes those who focus on social or natural sustainability of long-term and continuous economic expansion, the social structural inequality caused by these processes, and the colonial, imperialistic, or hegemonic ethnocentrism, cultural assimilation and cultural appropriation that underlie such processes.
Globalization tends to bring people into contact with foreign people and cultures. Xenophobia is the fear of that which is perceived to be foreign or strange.[134][135] Xenophobia can manifest itself in many ways involving the relations and perceptions of an ingroup towards an outgroup, including a fear of losing identity, suspicion of its activities, aggression, and desire to eliminate its presence to secure a presumed purity.[136]
 The European Union Mercosur free trade agreement, which would form one of the world's largest free trade areas, has been denounced by environmental activists and indigenous rights campaigners.
Critiques of globalization generally stem from discussions surrounding the impact of such processes on the planet as well as the human costs. They challenge directly traditional metrics, such as GDP, and look to other measures, such as the Gini coefficient[137] or the Happy Planet Index,[138] and point to a "multitude of interconnected fatal consequences social disintegration, a breakdown of democracy, more rapid and extensive deterioration of the environment, the spread of new diseases, increasing poverty and alienation"[139] which they claim are the unintended consequences of globalization. Others point out that, while the forces of globalization have led to the spread of western-style democracy, this has been accompanied by an increase in inter-ethnic tension and violence as free market economic policies combine with democratic processes of universal suffrage as well as an escalation in militarization to impose democratic principles and as a means to conflict resolution.[140]
On 9 August 2019, Pope Francis denounced isolationism and hinted that the Catholic Church will embrace globalization at the October 2019 Amazonia Synod, stating "the whole is greater than the parts. Globalization and unity should not be conceived as a sphere, but as a polyhedron: each people retains its identity in unity with others"[141]
Public opinion
This article needs to be updated. Please help update this section to reflect recent events or newly available information. (December 2019)
As a complex and multifaceted phenomenon, globalization is considered by some as a form of capitalist expansion which entails the integration of local and national economies into a global, unregulated market economy.[142] A 2005 study by Peer Fis and Paul Hirsch found a large increase in articles negative towards globalization in the years prior. In 1998, negative articles outpaced positive articles by two to one.[143] The number of newspaper articles showing negative framing rose from about 10% of the total in 1991 to 55% of the total in 1999. This increase occurred during a period when the total number of articles concerning globalization nearly doubled.[143]
A number of international polls have shown that residents of Africa and Asia tend to view globalization more favorably than residents of Europe or North America. In Africa, a Gallup poll found that 70% of the population views globalization favorably.[144] The BBC found that 50% of people believed that economic globalization was proceeding too rapidly, while 35% believed it was proceeding too slowly.[145]
In 2004, Philip Gordon stated that "a clear majority of Europeans believe that globalization can enrich their lives, while believing the European Union can help them take advantage of globalization's benefits while shielding them from its negative effects." The main opposition consisted of socialists, environmental groups, and nationalists. Residents of the EU did not appear to feel threatened by globalization in 2004. The EU job market was more stable and workers were less likely to accept wage/benefit cuts. Social spending was much higher than in the US.[146] In a Danish poll in 2007, 76% responded that globalization is a good thing.[147]
Fiss, et al., surveyed US opinion in 1993. Their survey showed that, in 1993, more than 40% of respondents were unfamiliar with the concept of globalization. When the survey was repeated in 1998, 89% of the respondents had a polarized view of globalization as being either good or bad. At the same time, discourse on globalization, which began in the financial community before shifting to a heated debate between proponents and disenchanted students and workers. Polarization increased dramatically after the establishment of the WTO in 1995; this event and subsequent protests led to a large-scale anti-globalization movement.[143]
Initially, college educated workers were likely to support globalization. Less educated workers, who were more likely to compete with immigrants and workers in developing countries, tended to be opponents. The situation changed after the financial crisis of 2007. According to a 1997 poll 58% of college graduates said globalization had been good for the US. By 2008 only 33% thought it was good. Respondents with high school education also became more opposed.[148]
According to Takenaka Heizo and Chida Ryokichi, as of 1998[update] there was a perception in Japan that the economy was "Small and Frail". However, Japan was resource-poor and used exports to pay for its raw materials. Anxiety over their position caused terms such as internationalization and globalization to enter everyday language. However, Japanese tradition was to be as self-sufficient as possible, particularly in agriculture.[149]
Many in developing countries see globalization as a positive force that lifts them out of poverty.[150] Those opposing globalization typically combine environmental concerns with nationalism. Opponents consider governments as agents of neo-colonialism that are subservient to multinational corporations.[151] Much of this criticism comes from the middle class; the Brookings Institution suggested this was because the middle class perceived upwardly mobile low-income groups as threatening to their economic security.[152]
Economics
 Hu Jintao of China and George W. Bush meet while attending an APEC summit in Santiago de Chile, 2004.
The literature analyzing the economics of free trade is extremely rich with extensive work having been done on the theoretical and empirical effects. Though it creates winners and losers, the broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society.[153][154] In a 2006 survey of 83 American economists, "87.5% agree that the U.S. should eliminate remaining tariffs and other barriers to trade" and "90.1% disagree with the suggestion that the U.S. should restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries."[155]
Quoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw, "Few propositions command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world trade increases economic growth and raises living standards."[156] In a survey of leading economists, none disagreed with the notion that "freer trade improves productive efficiency and offers consumers better choices, and in the long run these gains are much larger than any effects on employment."[157] Most economists would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason derived from comparative advantage, this is not a reason to argue against free trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both "winner" and "loser" will increase with the "winner" gaining more than the "loser" but both gaining more than before in an absolute level.
In the book The End of Poverty, Jeffrey Sachs discusses how many factors can affect a country's ability to enter the world market, including government corruption; legal and social disparities based on gender, ethnicity, or caste; diseases such as AIDS and malaria; lack of infrastructure (including transportation, communications, health, and trade); unstable political landscapes; protectionism; and geographic barriers.[158] Jagdish Bhagwati, a former adviser to the U.N. on globalization, holds that, although there are obvious problems with overly rapid development, globalization is a very positive force that lifts countries out of poverty by causing a virtuous economic cycle associated with faster economic growth.[150] However, economic growth does not necessarily mean a reduction in poverty; in fact, the two can coexist. Economic growth is conventionally measured using indicators such as GDP and GNI that do not accurately reflect the growing disparities in wealth.[159] Additionally, Oxfam International argues that poor people are often excluded from globalization-induced opportunities "by a lack of productive assets, weak infrastructure, poor education and ill-health;"[160] effectively leaving these marginalized groups in a poverty trap. Economist Paul Krugman is another staunch supporter of globalization and free trade with a record of disagreeing with many critics of globalization. He argues that many of them lack a basic understanding of comparative advantage and its importance in today's world.[161]
 As of 2017, there were 2,754 U.S. dollar billionaires worldwide, with a combined wealth of over US$9.2 trillion.[162]
The flow of migrants to advanced economies has been claimed to provide a means through which global wages converge. An IMF study noted a potential for skills to be transferred back to developing countries as wages in those a countries rise.[10] Lastly, the dissemination of knowledge has been an integral aspect of globalization. Technological innovations (or technological transfer) are conjectured to benefit most developing and least developing countries (LDCs), as for example in the adoption of mobile phones.[51]
There has been a rapid economic growth in Asia after embracing market orientation-based economic policies that encourage private property rights, free enterprise and competition. In particular, in East Asian developing countries, GDP per head rose at 5.9% a year from 1975 to 2001 (according to 2003 Human Development Report[163] of UNDP). Like this, the British economic journalist Martin Wolf says that incomes of poor developing countries, with more than half the world's population, grew substantially faster than those of the world's richest countries that remained relatively stable in its growth, leading to reduced international inequality and the incidence of poverty.
 Of the factors influencing the duration of economic growth in both developed and developing countries, income equality has a more beneficial impact than trade openness, sound political institutions, and foreign investment.[164]
Certain demographic changes in the developing world after active economic liberalization and international integration resulted in rising general welfare and, hence, reduced inequality. According to Wolf, in the developing world as a whole, life expectancy rose by four months each year after 1970 and infant mortality rate declined from 107 per thousand in 1970 to 58 in 2000 due to improvements in standards of living and health conditions. Also, adult literacy in developing countries rose from 53% in 1970 to 74% in 1998 and much lower illiteracy rate among the young guarantees that rates will continue to fall as time passes. Furthermore, the reduction in fertility rate in the developing world as a whole from 4.1 births per woman in 1980 to 2.8 in 2000 indicates improved education level of women on fertility, and control of fewer children with more parental attention and investment.[165] Consequently, more prosperous and educated parents with fewer children have chosen to withdraw their children from the labor force to give them opportunities to be educated at school improving the issue of child labor. Thus, despite seemingly unequal distribution of income within these developing countries, their economic growth and development have brought about improved standards of living and welfare for the population as a whole.
Per capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth among post-1980 globalizing countries accelerated from 1.4 percent a year in the 1960s and 2.9 percent a year in the 1970s to 3.5 percent in the 1980s and 5.0 percent in the 1990s. This acceleration in growth seems even more remarkable given that the rich countries saw steady declines in growth from a high of 4.7 percent in the 1960s to 2.2 percent in the 1990s. Also, the non-globalizing developing countries seem to fare worse than the globalizers, with the former's annual growth rates falling from highs of 3.3 percent during the 1970s to only 1.4 percent during the 1990s. This rapid growth among the globalizers is not simply due to the strong performances of China and India in the 1980s and 1990s 18 out of the 24 globalizers experienced increases in growth, many of them quite substantial.[166]
 Worlds regions by total wealth (in trillions USD), 2018
The globalization of the late 20th and early 21st centuries has led to the resurfacing of the idea that the growth of economic interdependence promotes peace.[167] This idea had been very powerful during the globalization of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and was a central doctrine of classical liberals of that era, such as the young John Maynard Keynes (1883 1946).[168]
Some opponents of globalization see the phenomenon as a promotion of corporate interests.[169] They also claim that the increasing autonomy and strength of corporate entities shapes the political policy of countries.[170][171] They advocate global institutions and policies that they believe better address the moral claims of poor and working classes as well as environmental concerns.[172] Economic arguments by fair trade theorists claim that unrestricted free trade benefits those with more financial leverage (i.e. the rich) at the expense of the poor.[173]
Globalization allows corporations to outsource manufacturing and service jobs from high cost locations, creating economic opportunities with the most competitive wages and worker benefits.[68] Critics of globalization say that it disadvantages poorer countries. While it is true that free trade encourages globalization among countries, some countries try to protect their domestic suppliers. The main export of poorer countries is usually agricultural productions. Larger countries often subsidize their farmers (e.g., the EU's Common Agricultural Policy), which lowers the market price for foreign crops.[174]
Global democracy
Main article: Democratic globalization
Democratic globalization is a movement towards an institutional system of global democracy that would give world citizens a say in political organizations. This would, in their view, bypass nation-states, corporate oligopolies, ideological non-governmental organizations (NGO), political cults and mafias. One of its most prolific proponents is the British political thinker David Held. Advocates of democratic globalization argue that economic expansion and development should be the first phase of democratic globalization, which is to be followed by a phase of building global political institutions. Francesco Stipo, Director of the United States Association of the Club of Rome, advocates unifying nations under a world government, suggesting that it "should reflect the political and economic balances of world nations. A world confederation would not supersede the authority of the State governments but rather complement it, as both the States and the world authority would have power within their sphere of competence".[175] Former Canadian Senator Douglas Roche, O.C., viewed globalization as inevitable and advocated creating institutions such as a directly elected United Nations Parliamentary Assembly to exercise oversight over unelected international bodies.[176]
Global civics
Main articles: Global civics and Multiculturalism
See also: Global citizenship
Global civics suggests that civics can be understood, in a global sense, as a social contract between global citizens in the age of interdependence and interaction. The disseminators of the concept define it as the notion that we have certain rights and responsibilities towards each other by the mere fact of being human on Earth.[177] World citizen has a variety of similar meanings, often referring to a person who disapproves of traditional geopolitical divisions derived from national citizenship. An early incarnation of this sentiment can be found in Socrates, whom Plutarch quoted as saying: "I am not an Athenian, or a Greek, but a citizen of the world."[178] In an increasingly interdependent world, world citizens need a compass to frame their mindsets and create a shared consciousness and sense of global responsibility in world issues such as environmental problems and nuclear proliferation.[179]
Baha'i-inspired author Meyjes, while favoring the single world community and emergent global consciousness, warns of globalization[180] as a cloak for an expeditious economic, social, and cultural Anglo-dominance that is insufficiently inclusive to inform the emergence of an optimal world civilization. He proposes a process of "universalization" as an alternative.
Cosmopolitanism is the proposal that all human ethnic groups belong to a single community based on a shared morality. A person who adheres to the idea of cosmopolitanism in any of its forms is called a cosmopolitan or cosmopolite.[181] A cosmopolitan community might be based on an inclusive morality, a shared economic relationship, or a political structure that encompasses different nations. The cosmopolitan community is one in which individuals from different places (e.g. nation-states) form relationships based on mutual respect. For instance, Kwame Anthony Appiah suggests the possibility of a cosmopolitan community in which individuals from varying locations (physical, economic, etc.) enter relationships of mutual respect despite their differing beliefs (religious, political, etc.).[182]
Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan popularized the term Global Village beginning in 1962.[183] His view suggested that globalization would lead to a world where people from all countries will become more integrated and aware of common interests and shared humanity.[184]
International cooperation
 Barack Obama and Dmitry Medvedev after signing the New START treaty in Prague, 2010
Military cooperation  Past examples of international cooperation exist. One example is the security cooperation between the United States and the former Soviet Union after the end of the Cold War, which astonished international society. Arms control and disarmament agreements, including the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (see START I, START II, START III, and New START) and the establishment of NATO's Partnership for Peace, the Russia NATO Council, and the G8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, constitute concrete initiatives of arms control and de-nuclearization. The US Russian cooperation was further strengthened by anti-terrorism agreements enacted in the wake of 9/11.[185]
Environmental cooperation  One of the biggest successes of environmental cooperation has been the agreement to reduce chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions, as specified in the Montreal Protocol, in order to stop ozone depletion. The most recent debate around nuclear energy and the non-alternative coal-burning power plants constitutes one more consensus on what not to do. Thirdly, significant achievements in IC can be observed through development studies.[185]
Economic cooperation   One of the biggest challenges in 2019 with globalization is that many believe the progress made in the past decades are now back tracking. The back tracking of globalization has coined the term "Slobalization." Slobalization is a new, slower pattern of globalization.[186]
Anti-globalization movement
Main article: Anti-globalization movement
 Anti-TTIP demonstration in Hannover, Germany, 2016
Anti-globalization, or counter-globalization,[187] consists of a number of criticisms of globalization but, in general, is critical of the globalization of corporate capitalism.[188] The movement is also commonly referred to as the alter-globalization movement, anti-globalist movement, anti-corporate globalization movement,[189] or movement against neoliberal globalization. Opponents of globalization argue that power and respect in terms of international trade between the developed and underdeveloped countries of the world are unequally distributed.[190] The diverse subgroups that make up this movement include some of the following: trade unionists, environmentalists, anarchists, land rights and indigenous rights activists, organizations promoting human rights and sustainable development, opponents of privatization, and anti-sweatshop campaigners.[191]
In The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy, Christopher Lasch analyzes[192] the widening gap between the top and bottom of the social composition in the United States. For him, our epoch is determined by a social phenomenon: the revolt of the elites, in reference to The Revolt of the Masses (1929) by the Spanish philosopher Jos  Ortega y Gasset. According to Lasch, the new elites, i.e. those who are in the top 20% in terms of income, through globalization which allows total mobility of capital, no longer live in the same world as their fellow-citizens. In this, they oppose the old bourgeoisie of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which was constrained by its spatial stability to a minimum of rooting and civic obligations. Globalization, according to the sociologist, has turned elites into tourists in their own countries. The denationalization of business enterprise tends to produce a class who see themselves as "world citizens, but without accepting ... any of the obligations that citizenship in a polity normally implies". Their ties to an international culture of work, leisure, information   make many of them deeply indifferent to the prospect of national decline. Instead of financing public services and the public treasury, new elites are investing their money in improving their voluntary ghettos: private schools in their residential neighborhoods, private police, garbage collection systems. They have "withdrawn from common life".
Composed of those who control the international flows of capital and information, who preside over philanthropic foundations and institutions of higher education, manage the instruments of cultural production and thus fix the terms of public debate. So, the political debate is limited mainly to the dominant classes and political ideologies lose all contact with the concerns of the ordinary citizen. The result of this is that no one has a likely solution to these problems and that there are furious ideological battles on related issues.
However, they remain protected from the problems affecting the working classes: the decline of industrial activity, the resulting loss of employment, the decline of the middle class, increasing the number of the poor, the rising crime rate, growing drug trafficking, the urban crisis.
D.A. Snow et al. contend that the anti-globalization movement is an example of a new social movement, which uses tactics that are unique and use different resources than previously used before in other social movements.[193]
One of the most infamous tactics of the movement is the Battle of Seattle in 1999, where there were protests against the World Trade Organization's Third Ministerial Meeting. All over the world, the movement has held protests outside meetings of institutions such as the WTO, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the World Economic Forum, and the Group of Eight (G8).[191] Within the Seattle demonstrations the protesters that participated used both creative and violent tactics to gain the attention towards the issue of globalization.
Opposition to capital market integration
Main article: Anti-capitalist movements
 World Bank Protester, Jakarta, Indonesia
Capital markets have to do with raising and investing money in various human enterprises. Increasing integration of these financial markets between countries leads to the emergence of a global capital marketplace or a single world market. In the long run, increased movement of capital between countries tends to favor owners of capital more than any other group; in the short run, owners and workers in specific sectors in capital-exporting countries bear much of the burden of adjusting to increased movement of capital.[194]
Those opposed to capital market integration on the basis of human rights issues are especially disturbed[according to whom?] by the various abuses which they think are perpetuated by global and international institutions that, they say, promote neoliberalism without regard to ethical standards. Common targets include the World Bank (WB), International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) and free trade treaties like the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). In light of the economic gap between rich and poor countries, movement adherents claim free trade without measures in place to protect the under-capitalized will contribute only to the strengthening the power of industrialized nations (often termed the "North" in opposition to the developing world's "South").[195][better source needed]
Anti-corporatism and anti-consumerism
Main articles: Anti-corporatism and Anti-consumerism
Corporatist ideology, which privileges the rights of corporations (artificial or juridical persons) over those of natural persons, is an underlying factor in the recent rapid expansion of global commerce.[196] In recent years, there have been an increasing number of books (Naomi Klein's 2000 No Logo, for example) and films (e.g. The Corporation & Surplus) popularizing an anti-corporate ideology to the public.
A related contemporary ideology, consumerism, which encourages the personal acquisition of goods and services, also drives globalization.[197] Anti-consumerism is a social movement against equating personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions. Concern over the treatment of consumers by large corporations has spawned substantial activism, and the incorporation of consumer education into school curricula. Social activists hold materialism is connected to global retail merchandizing and supplier convergence, war, greed, anomie, crime, environmental degradation, and general social malaise and discontent. One variation on this topic is activism by postconsumers, with the strategic emphasis on moving beyond addictive consumerism.[198]
Global justice and inequality
Global justice
Main article: Global justice movement
 Differences in national income equality around the world as measured by the national Gini coefficient, as of 2018[199]
The global justice movement is the loose collection of individuals and groups often referred to as a "movement of movements" who advocate fair trade rules and perceive current institutions of global economic integration as problems.[200] The movement is often labeled an anti-globalization movement by the mainstream media. Those involved, however, frequently deny that they are anti-globalization, insisting that they support the globalization of communication and people and oppose only the global expansion of corporate power.[201] The movement is based in the idea of social justice, desiring the creation of a society or institution based on the principles of equality and solidarity, the values of human rights, and the dignity of every human being.[202][203][204] Social inequality within and between nations, including a growing global digital divide, is a focal point of the movement. Many nongovernmental organizations have now arisen to fight these inequalities that many in Latin America, Africa and Asia face. A few very popular and well known non-governmental organizations (NGOs) include: War Child, Red Cross, Free The Children and CARE International. They often create partnerships where they work towards improving the lives of those who live in developing countries by building schools, fixing infrastructure, cleaning water supplies, purchasing equipment and supplies for hospitals, and other aid efforts.
 Countries by total wealth (trillions USD), Credit Suisse
Social inequality
Main articles: Social inequality and International inequality
 Global share of wealth by wealth group, Credit Suisse, 2017
The economies of the world have developed unevenly, historically, such that entire geographical regions were left mired in poverty and disease while others began to reduce poverty and disease on a wholesale basis. From around 1980 through at least 2011, the GDP gap, while still wide, appeared to be closing and, in some more rapidly developing countries, life expectancies began to rise.[205] If we look at the Gini coefficient for world income, since the late 1980s, the gap between some regions has markedly narrowed between Asia and the advanced economies of the West, for example but huge gaps remain globally. Overall equality across humanity, considered as individuals, has improved very little. Within the decade between 2003 and 2013, income inequality grew even in traditionally egalitarian countries like Germany, Sweden and Denmark. With a few exceptions France, Japan, Spain the top 10 percent of earners in most advanced economies raced ahead, while the bottom 10 percent fell further behind.[206] By 2013, 85 multibillionaires had amassed wealth equivalent to all the wealth owned by the poorest half (3.5 billion) of the world's total population of 7 billion.[207]
Critics of globalization argue that globalization results in weak labor unions: the surplus in cheap labor coupled with an ever-growing number of companies in transition weakened labor unions in high-cost areas. Unions become less effective and workers their enthusiasm for unions when membership begins to decline.[174] They also cite an increase in the exploitation of child labor: countries with weak protections for children are vulnerable to infestation by rogue companies and criminal gangs who exploit them. Examples include quarrying, salvage, and farm work as well as trafficking, bondage, forced labor, prostitution and pornography.[208]
 Immigrant rights march for amnesty, Los Angeles, on May Day, 2006
Women often participate in the workforce in precarious work, including export-oriented employment. Evidence suggests that while globalization has expanded women's access to employment, the long-term goal of transforming gender inequalities remains unmet and appears unattainable without regulation of capital and a reorientation and expansion of the state's role in funding public goods and providing a social safety net.[209] Furthermore, the intersectionality of gender, race, class, and more remain overlooked when assessing the impact of globalization.[210]
In 2016, a study published by the IMF posited that neoliberalism, the ideological backbone of contemporary globalized capitalism, has been "oversold", with the benefits of neoliberal policies being "fairly difficult to establish when looking at a broad group of countries" and the costs, most significantly higher income inequality within nations, "hurt the level and sustainability of growth."[211]
Anti-global governance
Main article: Global governance
Beginning in the 1930s, opposition arose to the idea of a world government, as advocated by organizations such as the World Federalist Movement (WFM). Those who oppose global governance typically do so on objections that the idea is unfeasible, inevitably oppressive, or simply unnecessary.[212] In general, these opponents are wary of the concentration of power or wealth that such governance might represent. Such reasoning dates back to the founding of the League of Nations and, later, the United Nations.
Environmentalist opposition
 Deforestation of the Madagascar Highland Plateau has led to extensive siltation and unstable flows of western rivers.
 a shows carbon footprint (CF) hotspots of foreign final consumption in China. b d show carbon footprint hotspots of the consumption of the United States, Hong Kong, and Japan, respectively. Among all foreign regions, the United States, Hong Kong, and Japan have the largest CFs in China, contributing ~23.0%, 10.8%, and 9.0%, respectively, to the total foreign CF in China in 2012.
Main article: Environmentalism
See also: Global warming, Climate change, and Deforestation
Environmentalism is a broad philosophy, ideology[213][214][215] and social movement regarding concerns for environmental conservation and improvement of the health of the environment. Environmentalist concerns with globalization include issues such as global warming, global water supply and water crises, inequity in energy consumption and energy conservation, transnational air pollution and pollution of the world ocean, overpopulation, world habitat sustainability, deforestation, biodiversity loss and species extinction.
One critique of globalization is that natural resources of the poor have been systematically taken over by the rich and the pollution promulgated by the rich is systematically dumped on the poor.[216] Some argue that Northern corporations are increasingly exploiting resources of less wealthy countries for their global activities while it is the South that is disproportionately bearing the environmental burden of the globalized economy. Globalization is thus leading to a type of" environmental apartheid".[217]
Helena Norberg-Hodge, the director and founder of Local Futures/International Society for Ecology and Culture, criticizes globalization in many ways. In her book Ancient Futures, Norberg-Hodge claims that "centuries of ecological balance and social harmony are under threat from the pressures of development and globalization." She also criticizes the standardization and rationalization of globalization, as it does not always yield the expected growth outcomes. Although globalization takes similar steps in most countries, scholars such as Hodge claim that it might not be effective to certain countries and that globalization has actually moved some countries backward instead of developing them.[218]
A related area of concern is the pollution haven hypothesis, which posits that, when large industrialized nations seek to set up factories or offices abroad, they will often look for the cheapest option in terms of resources and labor that offers the land and material access they require (see Race to the bottom).[219] This often comes at the cost of environmentally sound practices. Developing countries with cheap resources and labor tend to have less stringent environmental regulations, and conversely, nations with stricter environmental regulations become more expensive for companies as a result of the costs associated with meeting these standards. Thus, companies that choose to physically invest in foreign countries tend to (re)locate to the countries with the lowest environmental standards or weakest enforcement.
The European Union Mercosur Free Trade Agreement, which would form one of the world's largest free trade areas,[220] has been denounced by environmental activists and indigenous rights campaigners.[221] The fear is that the deal could lead to more deforestation of the Amazon rainforest as it expands market access to Brazilian beef.[222]
Food security
Main article: Food security
Globalization is associated with a more efficient system of food production. This is because crops are grown in countries with optimum growing conditions. This improvement causes an increase in the world's food supply which encourages improved food security.[223] The political movement 'BREXIT' was considered a step back in globalisation; it has greatly disrupted food chains within the UK, as they import 26% of food produce from the EU.
Norway
Norway's limited crop range advocates globalization of food production and availability. The northernmost country in Europe requires trade with other countries to ensure population food demands are met. The degree of self-sufficiency in food production is around 50% in Norway.[224]
See also
Business portalWorld portal
Civilizing mission
Cosmopolitanism
Deglobalization
Environmental racism
Eurasianism
Franchising
Free trade
Global civics
Global commons
Global mobility
Globalism
Global public goods
List of bilateral free-trade agreements
List of globalization-related indices
List of multilateral free-trade agreements
Middle East and globalization
Neorealism (international relations)
North South divide
Outline of globalization
Postdevelopment theory
Technocapitalism
The No-Nonsense Guide to Globalization
Transnational cinema
Transnational citizenship
Triadization
United Nations Millennium Declaration
Vermeer's Hat
World Englishes
Global regionalization
References
^ a b c d e f James, Paul; Steger, Manfred B. (2014). "A Genealogy of globalization: The career of a concept". Globalizations. 11 (4): 417 34. doi:10.1080/14747731.2014.951186. S2CID 18739651.
^ a b Albrow, Martin; King, Elizabeth (1990). Globalization, Knowledge and Society. London: Sage. ISBN 0-8039-8323-9. OCLC 22593547.
^ Read "Following the Money: U.S. Finance in the World Economy" at NAP.edu. 1995. doi:10.17226/2134. ISBN 978-0-309-04883-5.
^ "Imagining the Internet". History of Information Technologies. Elon University School of Communications. Archived from the original on 23 March 2009. Retrieved 17 August 2009.
^ Stever, H. Guyford (1972). "Science, Systems, and Society". Journal of Cybernetics. 2 (3): 1 3. doi:10.1080/01969727208542909.
^ Wolf, Martin (September 2014). "Shaping Globalization" (PDF). Finance & Development. International Monetary Fund. 51 (3): 22 25. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2015.
^ a b Frank, Andre Gunder. (1998). ReOrient: Global economy in the Asian age. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21474-3
^ H., O'Rourke, Kevin; G., Williamson, Jeffrey (1 April 2002). "When did globalisation begin?". European Review of Economic History. 6 (1): 23 50. doi:10.1017/S1361491602000023. ISSN 1361-4916. S2CID 15767303.
^ Sassen, Saskia - The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. Archived 16 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine (1991) - Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-07063-6
^ a b "Globalization: Threat or Opportunity?". International Monetary Fund. 12 April 2000. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2019.
^ a b c Babones, Salvatore (2008). "Studying Globalization: Methodological Issues".  In Ritzer, George (ed.). The Blackwell Companion to Globalization. Malden: John Wiley & Sons. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2. OCLC 232611725.
^ Hopkins, Antony G., ed. (2002). Globalization in World History. New York: Norton. pp. 4 8. ISBN 0-393-97942-3. OCLC 50028410.
^ Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel (2013). "Globalization and Sustainable Development: False Twins?". New Global Studies. 7 (3): 23 56. doi:10.1515/ngs-2013-021. ISSN 1940-0004. S2CID 154786395.
^ Al-Rodhan, R.F. Nayef and G rard Stoudmann. (2006). Definitions of the Globalization: A Comprehensive Overview and a Proposed Definition. Archived 19 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Manifesto of the Communist Party", The Communist Manifesto, Pluto Press, pp. 47 103, 2017, doi:10.2307/j.ctt1k85dmc.4, ISBN 978-1-78680-025-1, S2CID 53056560, retrieved 18 October 2020
^ Giddens, Anthony (1990). The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press. p. 64. ISBN 0-7456-0793-4. OCLC 22305142.
^ Robertson, Roland (1992). Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture (Reprint. ed.). London: Sage. ISBN 978-0-8039-8187-4. OCLC 28634687.
^ Held, David; Goldblatt, David; McGrew, Anthony; Perraton, Jonathan (1999). Global Transformations Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-1498-4
^ a b c "DHL Global Connectedness Index 2014" (PDF). DHL. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2015.
^ Larsson, Thomas. (2001). The Race to the Top: The Real Story of Globalization Washington, DC: Cato Institute. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-930865-15-0
^ a b James, Paul (2005). "Arguing Globalizations: Propositions Towards an Investigation of Global Formation". Globalizations. 2 (2): 193 209. doi:10.1080/14747730500202206. S2CID 146553776.
^ Steger, Manfred (2009). Globalization: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-19-955226-9.
^ Manfred B. Steger; Paul James (2013). "Levels of Subjective Globalization: Ideologies, Imaginaries, Ontologies". Perspectives on Global Development and Technology. 12 (1 2).
^ James, Paul (2014). "Faces of Globalization and the Borders of States: From Asylum Seekers to Citizens". Citizenship Studies. 18 (2): 208 23. doi:10.1080/13621025.2014.886440. S2CID 144816686.
^ Friedman, Thomas L. "The Dell Theory of Conflict Prevention". Emerging: A Reader. Ed. Barclay Barrios. Boston: Bedford, St. Martins, 2008. 49
^ Fotopoulos, Takis. (2001). "Globalization, the reformist Left and the Anti-Globalization 'Movement.'" Democracy & Nature: The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy, 7:(2) (July 2001). Archived 26 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ Lechner, Frank J.; Boli, John, eds. (2012). The Globalization Reader (4th ed.). Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-65563-4. OCLC 723530747.
^ Henwood, Doug (13 November 2003). "Beyond Globophobia". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014.
^ Clark, Ross (20 March 2004). "Globophobia". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014. Retrieved 29 October 2014.
^ Ritzer, George, ed. (2008). The Blackwell Companion to Globalization. Malden: John Wiley & Sons. pp. 16 . ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2. OCLC 232611725.
^ a b c O'Rourke, Kevin H.; Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2002). "When Did Globalization Begin?". European Review of Economic History. 6 (1): 23 50. doi:10.1017/S1361491602000023. S2CID 15767303.
^ a b c d Martell, Luke (2010). The Sociology of Globalization. Policy Press.
^ Kochler, Hans (2000). Globality versus Democracy: The Changing Nature of International Relations in the Era of Globalization. Vienna: International Progress Organization. p. 35.
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 32.
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 33.
^ "The Legacy of the Silk Road". Yale Global. 25 January 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2015.
^ Hopkins, A.G., ed., 2003. Globalization in World History. New York City: Norton. ISBN 0-393-97942-3 pp. 4 5, 7
^ Chaudhuri, K.N. (1965\1999). The English East India Company: The Study of an Early Joint-stock Company 1600 1640 (Vol. 4). London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press.
^ China and the Birth of Globalization in the 16th Century, by Dennis O. Flynn and Arturo Gir ldez
^ Trade and empire (Chapter 4)   The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Europe. Cambridge Core. pp. 100 01. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511794834.006. ISBN 9780521882026. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 2 March 2018.
^ a b Levinson, Marc. "Sample Chapter for Levinson, M.: The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger". The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger. Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ Gittins, Ross (12 June 2006). "How the invention of a box changed our world   Business   smh.com.au". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "World Exports as Percentage of Gross World Product". Global Policy Forum. Archived from the original on 12 July 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2009.
^ a b Varghese, N.V. 2008, 'Globalization of higher education and cross-border student mobility', International Institute for Educational Planning, UNESCO
^ a b Lourdes, Bener a; Gunseli, Berik; Maria S., Floro (2016). Gender, Development, and Globalization: Economics as if all people mattered. New York: Routledge. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-415-53748-3.
^ Klein, Naomi (2008). The Shock Doctrine. Canada: Vintage. p. 68.
^ Lourdes, Bener a; Deere, Carmen Diana; Kabeer, Naila (8 August 2012). "Gender and International Migration: Globalization, Development and Governance". Feminist Economics. 18 (2): 1 33. doi:10.1080/13545701.2012.688998. S2CID 144565818.
^ Rai. "The History of International Development: Concepts and Contexts". Women, Gender and Development Reader: 15.
^ Wolf, Martin (2001). "Will the nation-state survive globalization?". Foreign Affairs. 80 (1): 178 190. doi:10.2307/20050051. JSTOR 20050051. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2017.
^ Ritzer, George (2011). Globalization: The Essentials. NY: John Wiley & Sons.
^ a b Saggi, Kamal (2002). "Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and International Technology Transfer: A Survey". World Bank Research Observer. 17 (2): 191 235. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.17.7732. doi:10.1093/wbro/17.2.191. S2CID 16620922.
^ Hunt, Michael H. (2004). The World Transformed 1945 to present. p. 399.
^ "The Open Market Internet Index". Treese.org. 11 November 1995. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013.
^ "World Stats". Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Marketing Group. 30 June 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 4 January 2015.
^ a b "Signs of life". The Economist. 15 November 2014. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2017.
^ Faiola, Anthony. (2009). "A Global Retreat As Economies Dry Up." The Washington Post, 5 March 2009. Archived 4 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine
^ Allison Morrow (24 May 2022). "Globalization is coming undone, and that's a huge red flag". CNN.
^ "Czech foreign owned companies take second biggest dividend yield in 2017:report". Radio Prague. 7 March 2018.
^ a b Joshi, Rakesh Mohan, (2009) International Business, Oxford University Press, New Delhi and New York ISBN 0-19-568909-7.
^ Riley, T: "Year 12 Economics", p. 9. Tim Riley Publications, 2005
^ Hill, Charles W.L. (2014). International business: competing in the global marketplace (10th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-811277-5. OCLC 864808614.
^ "What Is Globalization?". PIIE. 29 October 2018. Retrieved 25 May 2020.
^ Pitelis, Christos; Roger Sugden (2000). The nature of the transnational firm. Routledge. p. H72. ISBN 978-0-415-16787-1.
^ "Multinational Corporations". Archived from the original on 14 April 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2016.
^ Roy D. Voorhees, Emerson L. Seim, and John I. Coppett, "Global Logistics and Stateless Corporations," Transportation Practitioners Journal 59, 2 (Winter 1992): 144 51.
^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 453. ISBN 978-0-13-063085-8.
^ European Commission. "The EU Single Market: Fewer barriers, more opportunities". Europa web portal. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007."Activities of the European Union: Internal Market". Europa web portal. Archived from the original on 25 June 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007.
^ a b Kuruvilla, Sarosh; Ranganathan, Aruna (October 2008). "Economic Development Strategies And Macro- And Micro-Level Human Resource Policies: The Case Of India's "Outsourcing" Industry". Industrial & Labor Relations Review. 62 (1): 39 72. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.662.425. doi:10.1177/001979390806200103. S2CID 12104735.
^ "Outsourcing to Africa: The world economy calls | The Economist". 16 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 16 April 2011.
^ Robinson, William I. "Globalization and the sociology of Immanuel Wallerstein: A critical appraisal". International Sociology. 1 23.
^ James, Paul (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism. London: Sage Publications. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 20 December 2017.
^ Manfred B. Steger and Paul James,  Ideologies of Globalism , in Paul James and Manfred B. Steger, eds, Globalization and Culture: Vol. 4, Ideologies of Globalism Archived 8 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Sage Publications, London, 2010. Inda, Jonathan; Rosaldo, Renato (2002). "Introduction: A World in Motion". The Anthropology of Globalization. Wiley-Blackwell.
^ Cowen, Tyler; Barber, Benjamin (May June 2003). "Globalization and Culture" (PDF). Cato Policy Report. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 November 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2017.
^ Nadeem, S (2009) Macaulay's (Cyber) Children: The Cultural Politics of Outsourcing in India Archived 20 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Cultural Sociology
^ Hacker, Violaine (2011). "Budovanie medi lneho priemyslu a podpora hodnotovo orientovanej spolo nosti v globaliz cii: od chichotsk ho v beru k pragmatick m v hod m EU ob anov" [Building Medias Industry while Promoting a Community of Values in the Globalization: From Quixotic Choices to Pragmatic Boon for EU Citizens]. Politick  vedy. 14 (2): 64 74. ISSN 1335-2741.
^ Fangjun, Cao (1 September 2009). "Modernization Theory and China's Road to Modernization". Chinese Studies in History. 43 (1): 7 16. doi:10.2753/CSH0009-4633430101. ISSN 0009-4633. S2CID 145504998.
^ McAlister, Elizabeth (September 2005). "Globalization and the Religious Production of Space". Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion. 44 (3): 249 255. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5906.2005.00283.x.
^ "Globalization and Sport: A Review by Susan Froetschel". Archived from the original on 23 December 2016.
^ "Overview of Olympic Games". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 4 June 2008.
^ "2006 FIFA World Cup broadcast wider, longer and farther than ever before". FIFA.com. F d ration Internationale de Football Association. 6 February 2007. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2009.
^ Dunmore, Tom (2011). Historical Dictionary of Soccer. Scarecrow Press. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-8108-7188-5. The World Cup is now the most-watched sporting event in the world on television, above even the Olympic Games.
^ Dobson, Stephen; Goddard, John (10 February 2011). The Economics of Football. Cambridge University Press. pp. 407 . ISBN 978-1-139-49630-8. The World Cup is the most widely viewed sporting event in the world: the estimated cumulative television audience for the 2006 World Cup in Germany was 26.2 billion, an average of 409 million viewers per match.
^ Wong, Glenn M. (8 March 2012). The Comprehensive Guide to Careers in Sports. Jones & Bartlett Publishers. pp. 144 . ISBN 978-1-4496-0203-1. The World Cup is the most-watched sporting event in the world. In 2006, more than 30 billion viewers in 214 countries watched the World Cup on television, and more than 3.3 million spectators attended the 64 matches of the tournament.
^ Clayton, Thomas (August 2004). ""Competing Conceptions of Globalization" Revisited: Relocating the Tension between World Systems Analysis and Globalization Analysis". Comparative Education Review. 48 (3): 274 294. doi:10.1086/421180. ISSN 0010-4086. S2CID 56099753.
^ Throsby, David (2002). "The music industry in the new millennium: Global and Local Perspectives." Paper prepared for The Global Alliance for Cultural Diversity Division of Arts and Cultural Enterprise UNESCO, Paris.
^ "Ethnic fusion Music". Allmusic. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2020.
^ "Worldbeat". Allmusic. Archived from the original on 3 May 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2020.
^ "World Fusion Music". worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012.
^ "Chili: Small Fruit Sets Global Palettes on Fire" Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine, History of Globalization, YaleGlobal Online.
^ Beard, David and Keneth Gloag. 2005. Musicology: The Key Concepts. London and New York: Routledge.
^ "International Flows of Selected Goods and Services" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.
^ "Why do we need religion in a globalized world?". Aleteia   Catholic Spirituality, Lifestyle, World News, and Culture. 11 April 2018. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018.
^ Ghosh, Biswajit (June 2011). "Cultural Changes and Challenges in the Era of Globalization: The Case of India". Journal of Developing Societies. 27 (2): 153 175. doi:10.1177/0169796X1102700203. ISSN 0169-796X. S2CID 145494090.
^ Cuccioletta, Donald. Multiculturalism or Transculturalism: Towards a Cosmopolitan Citizenship., London Journal of Canadian Studies 2001/2002 Vol. 17, Plattsburgh State University of New York, Interdisciplinary Research Group on the Americas
^ a b transcultural Archived 5 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, thefreedictionary.com
^ transcultural Archived 2 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine, yourdictionary.com
^ George Modelski; Tessaleno Devezas; William R. Thompson (20 December 2007). Globalization as Evolutionary Process: Modeling Global Change. Routledge. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-135-97764-1.
^ Teodor Lucian Moga (2009). "The Contribution of the Neofunctionalist and Intergovernmentalist Theories to the Evolution of the European Integration Process" (PDF). Journal of Alternative Perspectives in the Social Sciences. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2012.
^ "These are all the countries where the US has a military presence". Quartz. 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019.
^ Pawel Zaleski Global Non-governmental Administrative System: Geosociology of the Third Sector, [in:] Gawin, Dariusz & Glinski, Piotr [ed.]: "Civil Society in the Making", IFiS Publishers, Warszawa 2006
^ "Vaccine Delivery". Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 6 June 2013.
^ "The Index of Global Philanthropy and Remittances 2012. Hudson Institute Center for Global Prosperity" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2012.
^ "North Korean Refugees NGO". Northkoreanrefugees.com. 20 October 2008. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 23 August 2010.
^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2 July 2008). "UNHCR Freedom in the World 2008   North Korea". Unhcr.org. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2010.
^ a b c d e f g Kabeer, Nalia; Simeen; Mahmud (2004). "Rags, Riches and Women Workers: Export-Oriented Garment Manufacturing in Bangladesh," from Linking Women Producers and Workers with Global Markets. London: Commonwealth Secretariat. pp. 137, 147, 148, 150, 152. ISBN 978-0-85092-798-6.
^ a b c d e Wright W., Melissa (2007). "The Dialectics of Still Life: Murder, Women, and Disposability," from Disposable Women and Other Myths of Global Capitalism. New York: Routledge. pp. 73, 82, 83.
^ Zimmerer, Karl S. (2006). Globalization & New Geographies of Conservation. University of Chicago Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-226-98344-8.
^ Krishnan, Armin (2016). War as Business: Technological Change and Military Service Contracting. Routledge. p. 157. ISBN 978-1-317-00049-5.
^ James, Paul (2014). "Faces of Globalization and the Borders of States: From Asylum Seekers to Citizens". Citizenship Studies. 18 (2): 208 23. doi:10.1080/13621025.2014.886440. S2CID 144816686.
^ Boustan, Adain May. "Fertility and Immigration." UCLA. 15 January 2009.
^ Siebeck, Florian. "Flugzeugparkplatz im Outback: Schlaf in der W ste". FAZ.NET (in German). ISSN 0174-4909. Retrieved 16 May 2020.
^ "UNWTO World Tourism Barometer" (PDF). UNWTO World Tourism Barometer. 11 (1). January 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2013. Retrieved 9 April 2013.
^ "Visa Openness Report 2015 January 2016" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 January 2016.
^ "immigration". OxfordDictionaries.com. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. Retrieved 11 May 2016.
^ "immigrate". Merriam-Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, In. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014.
^ "Who's who: Definitions". London, England: Refugee Council. 2016. Archived from the original on 16 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
^ "Mainstreaming of Migration in Development Policy and Integrating Migration in the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda" (PDF). www.ilo.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 23 December 2016.
^ "Most London babies have foreign-born parent Archived 25 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine". Financial Times. 1 December 2016.
^ Landis, Dan; Bhawuk, Dharm P. S. (2020). The Cambridge handbook of intercultural training (4th ed.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press & Assessment. ISBN 978-1-108-85418-4. OCLC 1135909636.
^ Caligiuri, Paula (2021). Build Your Cultural Agility The Nine Competencies of Successful Global Professionals. London: Kogan Page, Limited. ISBN 978-1-78966-660-1. OCLC 1239982517.
^ Gribble, C (2008). "Policy options for managing international student migration: the sending country's perspective". Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management. 30 (1): 25 39. doi:10.1080/13600800701457830. S2CID 155059201.
^ "Measuring digital development: Facts and figures 2021". Telecommunication Development Bureau, International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Retrieved 16 November 2022.
^ "Company Info   Facebook Newsroom". Facebook. Archived from the original on 15 November 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2016.
^ Berglez, Peter (2008). "What is Global Journalism?". Journalism Studies. 9 (6): 845 58. doi:10.1080/14616700802337727. S2CID 142859567.
^ "The Coronavirus Could Finally Kill the Wild Animal Trade". Foreign Policy. 25 February 2020. Archived from the original on 17 March 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020.
^ "Coronavirus: Which countries have confirmed cases?". Al Jazeera. 6 April 2020. Archived from the original on 31 March 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020.
^ "Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins". Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2020.
^ "Disaster in motion: 3.4 million travelers poured into US as coronavirus pandemic erupted". ABC News. 2 April 2020. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020.
^ "KOF Index of Globalization". ethz.ch. The KOF Swiss Economic Institute. 2014. Archived from the original on 31 May 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2013.
^ 16 October 2006 Archived 6 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Data for the year 2006. No longer published.
^ Vujakovic, Petra (2010). "How to Measure Globalization? A New Globalization Index (NGI)". Atlantic Economic Journal. 38 (2): 237. doi:10.1007/s11293-010-9217-3.
^ Overland, Indra (1 April 2016). "Energy: The missing link in globalization". Energy Research & Social Science. 14: 122. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2016.01.009. Archived from the original on 5 February 2018. Retrieved 7 April 2018.
^ a b Sen, Amartya K. (1970). Collective choice and social welfare. San Francisco, CA: Holden-Day.
^ "Definition of xenophobia in English from the Oxford dictionary". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 31 July 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016.
^ "Define Xenophobia at Dictionary.com". Dictionary.com. Archived from the original on 1 January 2011. Retrieved 23 December 2016.
^ Guido Bolaffi. Dictionary of race, ethnicity and culture. SAGE Publications Ltd., 2003. p. 332.
^ "Poverty Analysis   Measuring Inequality". worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2013.
^ "The Happy Planet Index". Neweconomics.org. Archived from the original on 26 September 2009. Retrieved 2 June 2013.
^ Capra, Fritjof (2002). The Hidden Connections. New York, New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-385-49471-7.
^ Sorrells, Kathryn. Intercultural Communication: Globalization and Social Justice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2013. Print.
^ "Pope: isolationism and populism lead to war   Vatican News". www.vaticannews.va. 9 August 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2019.
^ Guttal, Shalmali (2007). "Globalisation". Development in Practice. 17 (4/5): 523 531. doi:10.1080/09614520701469492. ISSN 0961-4524. JSTOR 25548249. S2CID 218523141.
^ a b c Fiss, Peer C.; Hirsch, Paul M. (February 2005). "The Discourse of Globalization: Framing and Sensemaking of an Emerging Concept". American Sociological Review. 70 (1): 29 52. doi:10.1177/000312240507000103. S2CID 16331519.
^ "Africans and Asians Tend to View Globalization Favorably; Europeans and Americans are More Skeptical". WorldPublicOpinion.org. 7 November 2006. Archived from the original on 12 February 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2019.
^ "Widespread Unease about Economy and Globalization   Global poll" (PDF). BBC World Service. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 24 March 2015.
^ Gordon, Philip. 2004. "Globalization: Europe's Wary Embrace" Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Yale Global, 1 November 2004.
^ Fox, Justin (15 November 2007). "Why Denmark Loves Globalization". Time. Archived from the original on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2019.
^ Ip, Greg (18 July 2008). "The Declining Value Of Your College Degree". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 29 February 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2019.
^ Heizo, Takenaka; Ryokichi, Chida (1998). "Japan" (PDF).  In Morrison, Charles E.; Soesastro, Hadi (eds.). Domestic Adjustments to Globalization. Tokyo: Japan Center for International Exchange. pp. 76 102. ISBN 4-88907-012-5. OCLC 40657196. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2011.
^ a b Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004). In Defense of Globalization. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-533093-9. OCLC 719371219.
^ Shoa, S. Rajgopal (2002). "Reclaiming Democracy, the Anti-globalization Movement in South Asia" (PDF) (70). Feminist Review. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2011. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Graham, Carol (1 January 2011). "Winners and Losers: Perspectives on Globalization from the Emerging Market Economies". Brookings. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011.
^ Fuller, Dan; Geide-Stevenson, Doris (Fall 2003). "Consensus Among Economists: Revisited" (PDF). Journal of Economic Review. 34 (4): 369 87. doi:10.1080/00220480309595230. S2CID 143617926. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2004. Retrieved 22 December 2016.(registration required)
^ Friedman, Milton (1993). "The Case for Free Trade". Hoover Digest. 1997 (4): 42. Bibcode:1993SciAm.269e..42B. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1193-42. Archived from the original on 22 January 2007.
^ Whaples, Robert (2006). "Do Economists Agree on Anything? Yes!". The Economists' Voice. 3 (9). doi:10.2202/1553-3832.1156. S2CID 201123406.
^ Mankiw, Gregory (7 May 2006). "Outsourcing Redux". Archived from the original on 2 April 2007. Retrieved 22 January 2007.
^ "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.
^ Sachs, Jeffrey (2005). The End of Poverty. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-045-8. OCLC 57243168.
^ Peet, Richard; Hartwick, Elaine (2015). Theories of Development: Contentions, Arguments, Alternatives (3rd ed.). New York: The Guilford Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-4625-1957-6. OCLC 908634816. But economic growth can occur without touching problems like inequality or poverty when all the increase in income goes to a relatively few people.
^ Beaudet, Pierre; Schafer, Jessica; Haslam, Paul A. (2012). Introduction to International Development: Approaches, Actors, and Issues. Oxford University Press. p. 112. ISBN 978-0-19-544020-1. According to Oxfam International, the contrasting experiences of Latin America and East Asia illustrate that globalization-induced growth and poverty can co-exist. Even when the market expands, 'poor people are often excluded from opportunities by a lack of productive assets, weak infrastructure, poor education, and ill-health'
^ Conversi, Daniele (2009) 'Globalization, ethnic conflict and nationalism Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine', in B. Turner (ed.) Handbook of Globalization Studies. London: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis; Barkawi, Tarak (2005) Globalization and War. Rowman & Littlefield; Smith, Dennis (2006) Globalization: The Hidden Agenda. Cambridge: Polity Press. See also Barber, Benjamin R., Jihad vs. McWorld. Ballantine Books, 1996
^ "Number of billionaires worldwide surged to 2,754 in 2017". The Guardian. 15 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2018.
^ "Human Development Report 2003" (PDF). UNDP. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013.
^ Berg, Andrew G.; Ostry, Jonathan D. (2011). "Equality and Efficiency". Finance and Development. 48 (3). Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
^ Martin Wolf (2004). Why Globalization Works. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10252-9. Retrieved 6 April 2013.[dead link]
^ Dollar, David; Kraay, Aart. "Trade, Growth, and Poverty". Finance and Development. International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2011.
^ E.g. Pyun, Ju Hyun; Lee, Jong-Wha (21 March 2009). "Globalisation promotes peace". Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
^ See, for example, Roy Harrod, The Life of John Maynard Keynes, Macmillan, 1951; Donald Markwell, John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace, Oxford University Press, 2006. Keynes had colourfully described the globalization before World War I in The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Macmillan, 1919, chapter 2.
^ Lee, Laurence (17 May 2007). "WTO blamed for India grain suicides". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 19 May 2007. Retrieved 17 May 2007.
^ Bakan, Joel (2004). The Corporation. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-4744-3.
^ Perkins, John (2004). Confessions of an Economic Hit Man. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. ISBN 978-1-57675-301-9.
^ "F rum Social Mundial". Forumsocialmundial.org.br. Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2010.
^ "NAFTA at 10". Economic Policy Institute. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2012.
^ a b Hurst E. Charles. Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and consequences, 6th ed. p. 41
^ "USACOR.org". USACOR.org. 28 July 2009. Archived from the original on 20 May 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010.
^ Roche, Douglas. "The Case for a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly" (PDF). The World Federalist Movement   Institute for Global Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 28 May 2012.
^ Altinay, Hakan (2010). "The Case for Global Civics". Global Economy and Development at Brookings. Archived from the original on 3 June 2010.
^ "Global Parliament | World Citizens Association (Australia)". australia. Archived from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019.
^ Altinay, Hakan (June 2010). "A Global Civics: Necessary? Feasible?". Global Policy. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2012.
^ Meyjes (also: Posthumus Meyjes), Gregory Paul (1999). "Language and Universalization: a 'Linguistic Ecology' Reading of Bah '  Writ". The Journal of Bah '  Studies. Vol. IX (1). Ottawa: Association for Bah  Studies. pp. 51 63.
^ "Cosmopolitan". Dictionary.com. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 7 April 2012.
^ Kwame Anthony Appiah, "Cosmopolitan Patriots," Critical Inquiry 23, no. 3 (Spring, 1997): 617 39.
^ Marshall McLuhan and Bruce R. Powers (17 September 1992) The Global Village: Transformations in World Life and Media in the 21st century . Oxford University Press: 17 September 1992
^ Chapman, Roger. Culture wars: an encyclopedia of issues, viewpoints, and voices, Volume 1. 2009: M.E. Sharp
^ a b "International cooperation as a stepping-stone to a world government". Global Policy Journal. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013.
^ "Archived copy". ProQuest 2171135679. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Jacques Derrida (May 2004) Enlightenment past and to come Archived 19 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine, speech at the party for 50 years of Le Monde diplomatique
^ Morris, Douglas "Globalization and Media Democracy: The Case of Indymedia", Shaping the Network Society, MIT Press 2003. Courtesy link to (pre-publication version) FIS.utoronto.ca Archived 4 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ Juris, Jeffrey S. (2008). Networking Futures: The Movements against Corporate Globalization. Durham: Duke University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-8223-4269-4.
^ Staggenborg, S. (2011). Social movements (Rev. ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
^ a b Engler, M. (30 May 2007). "The Anti-Globalization Movement Defined Share The World's Resources". Retrieved 14 March 2013.[permanent dead link]l
^ "The treachery of the lites Elite sense of irresponsibility". The Independent. 10 March 1995. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2018.
^ Snow, D.A., Soule, S.A., & Kriesi, H. (2004). The Blackwell companion to social movements. Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub..
^ Frieden, Jeffry A. (1991). "Invested Interests: The Politics of National Economic Policies in a World of Global Finance". International Organization. 45 (4): 425 51. doi:10.1017/s0020818300033178. ISSN 1531-5088. JSTOR 2706944. S2CID 154738660.
^ Kolas, Logan. "How Tariffs and Regressive Trade Policies Hurt the Poor". The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019.
^ Ottaway, Marina (September 2001). "Corporatism Goes Global". Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations. 7 (3). doi:10.1163/19426720-00703006. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014.
^ Storper Michael (2000). "Lived effects of the Contemporary Economy: Globalization, Inequality, and Consumer Society". Public Culture. 12 (2): 375 409. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.571.5793. doi:10.1215/08992363-12-2-375. S2CID 53599498.
^ Cohen, Maurie J. (July 2013). "Collective dissonance and the transition to post-consumerism". Futures. 52: 42 51. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2013.07.001.
^ "GINI index (World Bank estimate) | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 23 July 2020.
^ Mertes, Tom; Bello, Walden F.; Bov , Jos ; Cassen, Bernard;  et al., eds. (2004). A Movement of Movements: Is Another World Really Possible?. London: Verso. ISBN 1-85984-504-5. OCLC 53243132.
^ della Porta, D. 2005. "The Social Bases of the Global Justice Movement: Some Theoretical Reflections and Empirical Evidence from the First European Social Forum." Civil Society and Social Movements Programme Paper No. 21.Geneva: UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development).
^ Education and Social Justice By J. Zajda, S. Majhanovich, V. Rust, 2006, ISBN 1-4020-4721-5
^ Nursing ethics: across the curriculum and into practice By Janie B. Butts, Karen Rich, Jones and Bartlett Publishers 2005, ISBN 978-0-7637-4735-0
^ "Legal Birth Definition Act   Act 135 of 2004" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2012.
^ Rosling, Hans (2013). "How much do you know about the world?". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 9 July 2014.
^ Stiglits Joseph E. (13 October 2013). "Inequality is a Choice". New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 November 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2014.
^ "Outlook on the Global Agenda 2014" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 9 July 2014.
^ Pavcnik, Nina; Pavcnik, Nina (September 2005). "Child Labor in the Global Economy". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 19 (1): 199 220. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.488.791. doi:10.1257/0895330053147895.
^ Seguino, Stephanie; Grown, Caren (November 2006). "Gender equity and globalization: macroeconomic policy for developing countries". Journal of International Development. 18 (8): 1081 104. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.589.4614. doi:10.1002/jid.1295. Pdf version   via the World Bank. Archived 5 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine
^ Lourdes, Bener a (2014). Gender, development, and globalization : economics as if all people mattered. Berik, G nseli, Floro, Maria (Second ed.). New York. ISBN 978-0-415-53748-3. OCLC 903247621.
^ Foroohar, Rana (3 June 2016). "Globalization's True Believers Are Having Second Thoughts". TIME. Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2018.
^ Kennedy, Paul. (2006.) The Parliament of Man: The Past, Present, and Future of the United Nations. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-375-50165-4
^ "Ideology and Sustainability". Formal.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012.
^ Ronald Bailey from the February 2002 issue (February 2002). "Debunking Green Myths". Reason.com. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012.
^ Donald Gibson. Environmentalism: Ideology and Power. Nova Science Pub Inc. 2003
^ Low, Nicholas. (2002). Global Ethics and Environment. Routledge Science. ISBN 978-0-415-19735-9.
^ Lechner, Frank J., and John Boli. 2012. The Globalization Reader, 4th ed. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-470-65563-4.
^ Norberg-Hodge, Helena (1992). Ancient futures : learning from Ladakh (Sierra Club Books paperback ed.). San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. ISBN 978-0-87156-643-0.
^ Levinson, Arik; M. Scott Taylor (2008). "Unmasking the Pollution Haven Effect" (PDF). International Economic Review. 49 (1): 223 54. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2354.2008.00478.x. S2CID 40982519. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 June 2018. Retrieved 29 November 2019.
^ "Farmers, environmentalists slam 'sell-out' EU-Mercosur trade deal". France24. 29 June 2019. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019.
^ "EU urged to halt trade talks with S. America over Brazil abuses". France 24. 18 June 2019. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019.
^ "We must not barter the Amazon rainforest for burgers and steaks". The Guardian. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019.
^ Clapp, J. "Food Security and International Trade Unpacking disputed narratives" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2018.
^ Flaten and Hisano, 2007. Food Security Policy in a Food Importing Country: The Case of Norway
Further reading
Ampuja, Marko. Theorizing Globalization: A Critique of the Mediatization of Social Theory (Brill, 2012)
Conner, Tom, and Ikuko Torimoto, eds. Globalization Redux: New Name, Same Game (University Press of America, 2004).
Eriksen, Thomas Hylland. "Globalization." in Handbook of Political Anthropology (Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018).
Frey, James W. "The Global Moment: The Emergence of Globality, 1866 1867, and the Origins of Nineteenth-Century Globalization." The Historian 81.1 (2019): 9. online, focus on trade and Suez Canal
Gunder Frank, Andre, and Robert A. Denemark. ReOrienting the 19th Century: Global Economy in the Continuing Asian Age (Paradigm Publishers, 2013);
Hopkins, A.G., ed. Globalization in World History (Norton, 2003).
Lechner, Frank J., and John Boli, eds. The Globalization Reader (4th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, 2012).
Leibler, Anat. "The Emergence of a Global Economic Order: From Scientific Internationalism to Infrastructural Globalism." in Science, Numbers and Politics (Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 2019) pp. 121 145 online[dead link].
Mir, Salam. "Colonialism, Postcolonialism, Globalization, and Arab Culture." Arab Studies Quarterly 41.1 (2019): 33 58. online
 Olstein, Diego (2015)  Proto-globalization and Proto-glocalizations in the Middle Millennium.  In Kedar, Benjamin and Wiesner-Hanks, Merry (Eds.), Cambridge World History. Volume 5: Expanding Webs of Exchange and Conquest, 500-1500 CE. Cambridge University Press, pp. 665-684
Pfister, Ulrich (2012), Globalization, EGO - European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, retrieved: 25 March 2021 (pdf).
Pieterse, Jan Nederveen. Globalization and culture: Global m lange (Rowman & Littlefield, 2019).
Rosenberg, Justin. "Globalization Theory: A Post Mortem," International Politics 42:1 (2005), 2 74.
Steger, Manfred B. Globalization: A Very Short Introduction (4th ed. Oxford University Press, 2017)
Van Der Bly, Martha C.E. "Globalization: A Triumph of Ambiguity," Current Sociology 53:6 (November 2005), 875 893
Wallerstein, Immanuel. "Globalization or the Age of Transition? A Long-Term View of the Trajectory of the World System," International Sociology 15:2 (June 2000), 251 267.
External links
Scholia has a profile for globalisation (Q7181).
Wikimedia Commons has media related to globalization.
Look up globalisation or globalization in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Globalization.
Library resources about  Globalization 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Comprehensive discussion of the term at the Site Global Transformations Archived 12 October 2009 at the Portuguese Web Archive
Globalization Website (Emory University) Links, Debates, Glossary etc.
BBC News Special Report   "Globalisation"
Globalization collected news and commentary at The Guardian 
"Globalization" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Analysis of the idea and its history.
OECD Globalization statistics
Mapping Globalization, Princeton University
List of Global Development Indexes and Rankings
vteCapitalismAspects and perspectivesGeneral
Anarchy of production
Business cycle
Centralization
Competition
Depression
Deregulation
Economic bubble
Economic development
Economic liberalism
Economic planning
Entrepreneurship
Ecopreneurship
Externality
Financial crisis
Financial Revolution
Globalization
History of capitalist theory
Industrial Revolution
Invention
Market economy
Market failure
Merchantilism
Meritocracy
Multinational corporation
Nationalization
Oligopoly
Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought
Privatization
Profit
Property rights
Recession
Regulation
Wage labour
Wealth
Ideology
Anglo-Saxon
Authoritarian
Corporate
Democratic
Dirigist
Free-market
Humanistic
Laissez-faire
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Mercantilist
Mixed
Monopoly
National
Neo
Neoliberal
Nordic
Private
Raw
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social
State
State-sponsored
Welfare
Cultural aspects
Advertising
American Dream
Consumerism
Decentralization
Economic freedom
Economic mobility
Individualism
Liberalism
Liberty
Mainstream
Philanthropy
Private foundation
Private property
Rule of law
Social alienation
Spontaneous order
Social aspects
Corporatism
Economic inequality
Employment
Freedom of association
Labour market flexibility
Labour supply
Productivity
Prosperity
Social venture capital
Unemployment
Criticism
Anti-capitalism
Capitalist propaganda
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Market fundamentalism
Marxism
Wage slavery
Antithesis
Anarchism
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Collectivist anarchism
Communalism
Communism
Economic democracy
Eco-socialism
Free-market socialism
Green anarchism
Individualist anarchism
Libertarian socialism
Market anarchism
Market socialism
Mutualism
Post-capitalism
Post-scarcity economy
Sharing economy
Social anarchism
Socialism
Syndicalism
vteWestern world and cultureFoundations
Cradle of civilization
Old World
Greco-Roman world
Greece
Rome
Roman Empire
Western
Eastern
Roman legacy
Romanization
Romano-Germanic culture
Christendom
History
European Bronze Age
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
early
high
late
Renaissance
Early modern period
Age of Discovery
Reformation
Age of Enlightenment
Scientific Revolution
Late modern period
Age of Revolution
Abolitionism
Emancipation
Capitalism
Industrial Revolution
Great Divergence
Modern era
World War I
Interwar period
Universal suffrage
World War II
Cold War
Post Cold War era
Information age
War on terror
Culture
Alphabet
Greek
Latin
Cyrillic
Architecture
Art
Periods
Calendar
Cuisine
Diet
Classical tradition
Studies
Clothing
History
Dance
Esotericism
Astrology
Folklore
Law
Languages
Eurolinguistics
Standard Average European
Literature
Canon
Media
Internet
Music
Chant
Classical
Folk
Mythology
Painting (contemporary)
Philosophy
Science
Values
Religion
East West Schism
Western Christianity
Decline
Secularism
Philosophy
Ancient Greek philosophy
Hellenistic philosophy
Ancient Roman philosophy
Judeo-Christian ethics
Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Christian existentialism
Humanism
Christian humanism
Secular humanism
Liberalism
Conservatism
Socialism
Continental philosophy
Analytic philosophy
Post-structuralism
Tolerance
Paradox
Relativism
Peritrope
Atlanticism
Religion
Judaism
Culture
Christianity
Culture
Western/Eastern
Catholic Church
Latin Church
Eastern Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Paganism
Baltic
Celtic
Finnish
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Frankish
Gothic
Old Norse
Hellenistic
Roman
Slavic
Neo
Agnosticism
Atheism
Law
Natural law
Rule of law
Equality before the law
Constitutionalism
Human rights
Life
Thought
Speech
Press
Religion
Property
Democracy
International law
Contemporaryintegration
ABCANZ Armies
Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
ANZUS
Arctic Council
AUKUS
Baltic Assembly
Benelux
British Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
EEA
EFTA
ESA
EU
EU Customs Union
Eurozone
EU UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement
Five Eyes
G7
Lancaster House Treaties
Lublin Triangle
NATO
Nordic Council
OAS
OSCE
Pacific Islands Forum
PROSUL/PROSUR
Rio Treaty
Schengen
Special Relationship
Three Seas Initiative
USMCA
Visegr d Group
West Nordic Council
Western Bloc
Western European and Others Group
Westernization
vteInternational tradeTerminology
Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation
Organizationsand policies
International Monetary Fund
UN Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization
International Trade Centre
International Chamber of Commerce
Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Incoterms
ATA Carnet
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc
Political economy
Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)
Dedollarisation
Regional organizationsAmericas
Andean Community of Nations
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Mercosur
Asia-Pacific
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
Europe, Central Asia, and North Asia
Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
Eurasian Economic Union
European Union Customs Union
Middle East and North Africa
Arab Customs Union
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf
Subsaharan Africa
East African Community
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa
Southern African Customs Union
West African Economic and Monetary Union
Exports by product
Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Live animals
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine
 Category
 Commons
vteGlobalization
Journals
 Outline
Studies
Aspects
Alter-globalization
Anti-globalization
Cultural globalization
Deglobalization
Democratic globalization
Economic globalization
Environmental globalization
Financial globalization
Global citizenship
education
Global governance
Global politics
Global health
Globality
History of
archaic
early modern
Military globalization
Political globalization
Trade globalization
Workforce globalization
IssuesGlobal
Climate change
Climate justice
Disease
COVID-19 pandemic
Digital divide
Labor arbitrage
Population
Tax havens
Offshore financial centres
Tax inversions
Water crisis
Other
Brain drain
reverse
Care drain
Development aid
Economic inequality
Endangered languages
Fair trade
Forced displacement
Human rights
Illicit financial flows
Imperialism
academic
cultural
linguistic
media
scientific
social
Invasive species
Investor-state disputes
McDonaldization
New international division of labour
North South divide
Offshoring
Race to the bottom
pollution havens
Transnational crime
Westernization
World war
Theories
Capital accumulation
Dependency
Development
Earth system
Fiscal localism
Modernization
ecological
history of
Primitive accumulation
Social change
World history
World-systems
NotablescholarsEconomics
David Autor
Richard Baldwin
Ravi Batra
Jagdish Bhagwati
Robert Brenner
Jayati Ghosh
Michael Hudson
Branko Milanovi 
Kevin O'Rourke
Thomas Piketty
Dani Rodrik
Jeffrey Sachs
Amartya Sen
Joseph Stiglitz
Political economy
Samir Amin
Giovanni Arrighi
Robert W. Cox
Andre Gunder Frank
Stephen Gill
Peter Gowan
David Harvey
Ronen Palan
Susan Strange
Robert Wade
Politics /  sociology
Arjun Appadurai
Daniele Archibugi
K. Anthony Appiah
Ulrich Beck
Walden Bello
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Manuel Castells
Christopher Chase-Dunn
Alfred Crosby
Nancy Fraser
Susan George
Anthony Giddens
Michael Hardt
David Held
Paul Hirst
L. H. M. Ling
Antonio Negri
George Ritzer
Saskia Sassen
John Urry
Immanuel Wallerstein
Non academic
Noam Chomsky
Thomas Friedman
Naomi Klein
John R. Saul
Vandana Shiva
 Category
 Business portal
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Globalization&oldid=1148556305"