Manchu-led dynasty of China (1636 1912)
"Qing" redirects here. For other uses, see Qing (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with the Qin dynasty, the first dynasty of Imperial China.
Great Qing (Chinese) (Manchu)1636 1912
Flag(1889 1912)
Imperial seal[a](1909 1912)
Anthem: G ng J n' u"Cup of Solid Gold"(1911 1912)The Qing dynasty at its greatest extent in 1760 superimposed on a modern world map. Territory under its control shown in dark green; territory claimed but not under its control shown in light green.CapitalMukden (Shenyang)(1636 1644)[b]Peking (Beijing)(1644 1912)[c]Largest cityPeking (Beijing)Official languagesManchu,[1] Mandarin Chinese[2]Ethnic groups Han, Manchus, Mongols, Tibetans, Uyghurs, and othersReligion State religion:Confucianism[3]Majority: Chinesefolk religion, ChineseBuddhism, and TaoismMinority: TibetanBuddhism, Heavenworship, Islam,Shamanism,Christianity,and othersDemonym(s)ChineseGovernmentAbsolute monarchy(1636 1911)Constitutional monarchy(1911 1912)Emperor 1636 1643 (founder) Chongde Emperor 1643 1661 (first in Beijing) Shunzhi Emperor 1908 1912 (last) Xuantong Emperor
Regent 1643 1650 Dorgon, Prince Rui 1908 1911 Zaifeng, Prince Chun
Prime Minister 1911 Yikuang, Prince Qing 1911 1912 Yuan Shikai
LegislatureDeliberative Council(1636 1733)None (rule by decree)(1733 1910)Advisory Council(1910 1912)Historical eraLate modern Foundation 1636 Conquest of China 1644 1662 Conquest of Tibet,Mongolia, Xinjiang 1687 1757 Ten Great Campaigns 1755 1792 1st Opium War 1839 1842 Taiping Rebellion 1850 1864 2nd Opium War 1856 1860 Self-Strengthening Movement 1861 1895 1st Sino-Japanese War 1894 1895 100 Days Reform 1898 Boxer Rebellion 1900 1901 Late Qing reforms 1901 1911 Xinhai Revolution 1911 1912 End of monarchy 12 February 1912
Area1700[4]8,800,000 km2 (3,400,000 sq mi)1790[4]14,700,000 km2 (5,700,000 sq mi)1860[4]13,400,000 km2 (5,200,000 sq mi)CurrencyCash (w n)Tael (li ng)Paper money
 Preceded by
Succeeded by
1636:Later J n
1646:Shun dynasty
1662:Southern Ming
1755:Dzungar Khanate
1683:Kingdom of Tungning
1912:Republic of China
1883:Zheltuga Republic
1895:Republic of Formosa
1911:Bogd Khanate
Uryankhay Republic
1912:Tibet
This article contains Manchu text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Manchu alphabet.
Qing dynastyChinese nameChinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinQ ng ch oWade GilesCh'ing1 ch'ao2IPA[t i a ]WuSuzhouneseTshin z uYue: CantoneseYale RomanizationChing1 Chiu4JyutpingCing1 ciu4IPA[ts e ts i u]Southern MinHokkien POJChheng ti uT i-l Tshing ti uDynastic nameChinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinD  Q ngWade GilesTa4 Ch'ing1Yue: CantoneseYale RomanizationDaai6 Ching1Jyutpingdaai6 cing1IPA[ta i ts e ]Southern MinHokkien POJT i-chhengT i-l T i-tshingMongolian nameMongolian Cyrillic   Mongolian script TranscriptionsSASM/GNCDaiqing ulusManchu nameManchu script AbkaiDaiqing gurunM llendorffDaicing gurun
Part of a series on theHistory of China
Timeline
Dynasties
Historiography
Prehistoric
Paleolithic
Neolithic (c. 8500  c. 2000 BCE)
Yellow, Yangtze, and Liao civilization
Ancient
Xia (c. 2070  c. 1600 BCE)
Shang (c. 1600  c. 1046 BCE)
Zhou (c. 1046  c. 256 BCE)
Western Zhou (1046 771 BCE)
Eastern Zhou (771 256 BCE)
Spring and Autumn (c. 770  c. 476 BCE)
Warring States (475 221 BCE)
Imperial
Qin (221 207 BCE)
Han (206 BCE   220 CE)
Western Han (206 BCE   9 CE)
Xin (9 23 CE)
Eastern Han (25 220 CE)
Three Kingdoms (220 280 CE)
Wei, Shu, and Wu
Jin (266 420)
 
Western Jin (266 316)
Eastern Jin (317 420)
Sixteen Kingdoms (304 439)
Northern andSouthern dynasties (420 589)
Sui (581 618)
Tang (618 907)
 
Five Dynasties andTen Kingdoms (907 979)
Song (960 1279)
Northern Song (960 1127)
Southern Song (1127 1279)
Liao (916 1125)
Western Xia (1038 1227)
Jin (1115 1234)
Yuan (1271 1368)
Ming (1368 1644)
Qing (1636 1912)
Modern
Republic of China (mainland, 1912 1949)
 
People's Republicof China (1949 present)
Republic of China (Taiwan,1949 present)
Related articles
Art history
Economic history
Education history
Legal history
Media history
Music history
Timeline
Military history
Naval history
Science and technology history
Archaeology
Cartography
Discoveries
Inventions
Transport history
Women's history
vte
Part of a series on the
History of Manchuria
Ancient to Classical period
Liao civilization
Donghu
Gojoseon
Yan (Warring States)
Han dynasty
Sushen
Wuhuan
Xianbei state
Yemaek
Yan (Three Kingdoms)
Cao Wei
Buyeo
Goguryeo
Sima Jin dynasty
Yuwen
Former Yan
Former Qin
Later Yan
Northern Yan
Kumo Xi
Khitan
Northern Wei
Mohe
Shiwei
Medieval to Early Modern period
Tang dynasty (Andong Protectorate)
Balhae
Liao dynasty
Jurchen Jin dynasty
Yuan rule
Northern Yuan dynasty
Ming rule
Later Jin
Qing rule
Modern period
Amur Annexation
Chuang Guandong
Beiyang government (Fengtian Clique)
Far Eastern Republic
Green Ukraine
Kwantung Leased Territory
Nationalist government
Korean People's Association in Manchuria
Manchukuo
P.R. China (Northeast China)
Russian Far East (Outer Manchuria)
vte
The Qing dynasty (English: / t / CHING), officially the Great Qing,[d][e] was a Manchu-led imperial dynasty of China (1636 1912) and the last imperial dynasty in Chinese history.[f] It emerged from the Later Jin dynasty founded by the Jianzhou Jurchens, a Tungusic-speaking ethnic group who unified other Jurchen tribes to form a new "Manchu" ethnic identity. The dynasty was officially proclaimed in 1636 in Manchuria (modern-day Northeast China and Outer Manchuria). It seized control of Beijing in 1644, then later expanded its rule over the whole of China proper and Taiwan, and finally expanded into Inner Asia. The dynasty lasted until 1912 when it was overthrown in the Xinhai Revolution. In Chinese historiography, the Qing dynasty was preceded by the Ming dynasty and succeeded by the Republic of China. The multiethnic Qing dynasty lasted for almost three centuries and assembled the territorial base for modern China. It was the largest imperial dynasty in the history of China and in 1790 the fourth-largest empire in world history in terms of territorial size. With 419,264,000 citizens in 1907, it was the most populous country in the world at the time.
In the late sixteenth century, Nurhaci, leader of the House of Aisin-Gioro, began organizing "Banners", which were military-social units that included Manchu, Han, and Mongol elements. Nurhaci united clans to create a Manchu ethnic identity and officially founded the Later Jin dynasty in 1616. His son Hong Taiji renamed the dynasty "Great Qing" and elevated the realm to an empire in 1636. As Ming control disintegrated, peasant rebels conquered Beijing in 1644, but the Ming general Wu Sangui opened the Shanhai Pass to the armies of the regent Prince Dorgon, who defeated the rebels, seized the capital, and took over the government. Resistance from Ming loyalists in the south and the Revolt of the Three Feudatories delayed the complete conquest until 1683. The Kangxi Emperor (1661 1722) consolidated control, maintained the Manchu identity, patronized Tibetan Buddhism, and relished the role of a Confucian ruler. Han officials worked under or in parallel with Manchu officials. The dynasty also adapted the ideals of the tributary system in asserting superiority over peripheral countries such as Korea and Vietnam, while extending control over Tibet, Mongolia, and Xinjiang.
The height of Qing glory and power was reached in the reign of the Qianlong Emperor (1735 1796). He led Ten Great Campaigns that extended Qing control into Inner Asia and personally supervised Confucian cultural projects. After his death, the dynasty faced changes in the world system, foreign intrusion, internal revolts, population growth, economic disruption, official corruption, and the reluctance of Confucian elites to change their mindsets. With peace and prosperity, the population rose to some 400 million, but taxes and government revenues were fixed at a low rate, soon leading to fiscal crisis. Following China's defeat in the Opium Wars, Western colonial powers forced the Qing government to sign "unequal treaties", granting them trading privileges, extraterritoriality and treaty ports under their control. The Taiping Rebellion (1850 1864) and the Dungan Revolt (1862 1877) in Central Asia led to the deaths of over 20 million people, from famine, disease, and war. The Tongzhi Restoration in the 1860s brought vigorous reforms and the introduction of foreign military technology in the Self-Strengthening Movement. Defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895 led to loss of suzerainty over Korea and cession of Taiwan to Japan. The ambitious Hundred Days' Reform of 1898 proposed fundamental change, but the Empress Dowager Cixi (1835 1908), who had been the dominant voice in the national government for more than three decades, turned it back in a coup.
In 1900 anti-foreign "Boxers" killed many Chinese Christians and foreign missionaries; in retaliation, the foreign powers invaded China and imposed a punitive Boxer Indemnity. In response, the government initiated unprecedented fiscal and administrative reforms, including elections, a new legal code, and the abolition of the examination system. Sun Yat-sen and revolutionaries debated reform officials and constitutional monarchists such as Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao over how to transform the Manchu-ruled empire into a modern Han nation. After the deaths of the Guangxu Emperor and Cixi in 1908, Manchu conservatives at court blocked reforms and alienated reformers and local elites alike. The Wuchang Uprising on 10 October 1911 led to the Xinhai Revolution. The abdication of the Xuantong Emperor, the last emperor, on 12 February 1912, brought the dynasty to an end. In 1917, it was briefly restored in an episode known as the Manchu Restoration, but this was neither recognized by the Beiyang government of the Republic of China nor the international community.
Names
Main article: Names of the Qing dynasty
See also: Names of ChinaHong Taiji named the Great Qing dynasty in 1636.[5] There are competing explanations on the meaning of Q ng (lit. "clear" or "pure"). The name may have been selected in reaction to the name of the Ming dynasty ( ), which consists of the Chinese characters for "sun" ( ) and "moon" ( ), both associated with the fire element of the Chinese zodiacal system. The character Q ng ( ) is composed of "water" ( ) and "azure" ( ), both associated with the water element. This association would justify the Qing conquest as defeat of fire by water. The water imagery of the new name may also have had Buddhist overtones of perspicacity and enlightenment and connections with the Bodhisattva Manjusri.[6] The Manchu name daicing, which sounds like a phonetic rendering of D  Q ng or Dai Ching, may in fact have been derived from a Mongolian word " ,  " that means "warrior". Daicing gurun may therefore have meant "warrior state", a pun that was intelligible only to Manchu and Mongol peoples. In the later part of the dynasty, however, even the Manchus themselves had forgotten this possible meaning.[7]
Early European writers used the term "Tartar" indiscriminately for all the peoples of Northern Eurasia but in the 17th century Catholic missionary writings established "Tartar" to refer only to the Manchus and "Tartary" for the lands they ruled.[8]
After conquering "China proper", the Manchus identified their state as "China" ( , Zh nggu ; "Middle Kingdom"), and referred to it as Dulimbai Gurun in Manchu (Dulimbai means "central" or "middle," gurun means "nation" or "state"). The emperors equated the lands of the Qing state (including present-day Northeast China, Xinjiang, Mongolia, Tibet and other areas) as "China" in both the Chinese and Manchu languages, defining China as a multi-ethnic state, and rejecting the idea that "China" only meant Han areas. They used both "China" and "Qing" to refer to their state in official documents.[9] In the Chinese-language versions of its treaties and its maps of the world, the Qing government used "Qing" and "China" interchangeably.[10]
In English, the Qing dynasty is sometimes known as the "Manchu dynasty".[11] It is rendered as "Ch'ing dynasty" using the Wade Giles romanization system.
History
Main article: History of the Qing dynasty
Further information: Timeline of the Qing dynasty and History of foreign relations of China
Formation
Further information: Manchuria under Ming rule, Jurchen unification, and Timeline of the Jurchens  17th century
The Qing dynasty was founded not by the Han people, who constitute the majority of the Chinese population, but by the Manchus, descendants of a sedentary farming people known as the Jurchens, a Tungusic people who lived around the region now comprising the Chinese provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang.[12] The Manchus are sometimes mistaken for a nomadic people,[13] which they were not.[14][15]
Nurhaci
What was to become the Manchu state was founded by Nurhaci, the chieftain of a minor Jurchen tribe  the Aisin-Gioro  in Jianzhou in the early 17th century. Nurhaci may have spent time in a Han household in his youth, and became fluent in Chinese and Mongolian languages, and read the Chinese novels Romance of the Three Kingdoms and Water Margin.[16][17] Originally a vassal of the Ming emperors, Nurhaci embarked on an intertribal feud in 1582 that escalated into a campaign to unify the nearby tribes. By 1616, he had sufficiently consolidated Jianzhou so as to be able to proclaim himself Khan of the Great Jin in reference to the previous Jurchen-ruled dynasty.[18]
 Italian 1682 map showing the "Kingdom of the N zhen" or the "Jin Tartars"
Two years later, Nurhaci announced the "Seven Grievances" and openly renounced the sovereignty of Ming overlordship in order to complete the unification of those Jurchen tribes still allied with the Ming emperor. After a series of successful battles, he relocated his capital from Hetu Ala to successively bigger captured Ming cities in Liaodong: first Liaoyang in 1621, then Shenyang (Manchu: Mukden) in 1625.[18]
Furthermore, the Khorchin proved a useful ally in the war, lending the Jurchens their expertise as cavalry archers. To guarantee this new alliance, Nurhaci initiated a policy of inter-marriages between the Jurchen and Khorchin nobilities, while those who resisted were met with military action. This is a typical example of Nurhaci's initiatives that eventually became official Qing government policy. During most of the Qing period, the Mongols gave military assistance to the Manchus.[19]
 Manchu cavalry charging Ming infantry battle of Sarhu in 1619
Hong Taiji
Nurhaci died in 1626, and was succeeded by his eighth son, Hong Taiji. Although Hong Taiji was an experienced leader and the commander of two Banners, the Jurchens suffered defeat in 1627, in part due to the Ming's newly acquired Portuguese cannons. To redress the technological and numerical disparity, Hong Taiji in 1634 created his own artillery corps from his existing Han troops, who cast their own cannons in the European design with the help of defector Chinese metallurgists. One of the defining events of Hong Taiji's reign was the official adoption of the name "Manchu" for the united Jurchen people in November 1635. In 1635, the Manchus' Mongol allies were fully incorporated into a separate Banner hierarchy under direct Manchu command. In April 1636, Mongol nobility of Inner Mongolia, Manchu nobility and the Han mandarin recommended that Hong as the khan of Later Jin should be the emperor of the Great Qing.[20][21] When he was presented with the imperial seal of the Yuan dynasty after the defeat of the last Khagan of the Mongols, Hong Taiji renamed his state from "Great Jin" to "Great Qing" and elevated his position from Khan to Emperor, suggesting imperial ambitions beyond unifying the Manchu territories. Hong Taiji then proceeded to invade Korea again in 1636.
 Sura han ni chiha (Coins of Tiancong Khan) in Manchu alphabet
Meanwhile, Hong Taiji set up a rudimentary bureaucratic system based on the Ming model. He established six boards or executive level ministries in 1631 to oversee finance, personnel, rites, military, punishments, and public works. However, these administrative organs had very little role initially, and it was not until the eve of completing the conquest ten years later that they fulfilled their government roles.[22]
Hong Taiji staffed his bureaucracy with many Han Chinese, including newly surrendered Ming officials, but ensured Manchu dominance by an ethnic quota for top appointments. Hong Taiji's reign also saw a fundamental change of policy towards his Han Chinese subjects. Nurhaci had treated Han in Liaodong according to how much grain they had: those with less than 5 to 7 sin were treated badly, while those with more were rewarded with property. Due to a Han revolt in 1623, Nurhaci turned against them and ordered that they no longer be trusted and enacted discriminatory policies and killings against them. He ordered that Han who assimilated to the Jurchen (in Jilin) before 1619 be treated equally with Jurchens, not like the conquered Han in Liaodong. Hong Taiji recognized the need to attract Han Chinese, explaining to reluctant Manchus why he needed to treat the Ming defector General Hong Chengchou leniently.[23] Hong Taiji incorporated Han into the Jurchen "nation" as full (if not first-class) citizens, obligated to provide military service. By 1648, less than one-sixth of the bannermen were of Manchu ancestry.[24]
Claiming the Mandate of Heaven
See also: Transition from Ming to Qing
 Dorgon (1612 1650)
Hong Taiji died suddenly in September 1643. As the Jurchens had traditionally "elected" their leader through a council of nobles, the Qing state did not have a clear succession system. The leading contenders for power were Hong Taiji's oldest son Hooge and Hong Taiji's half brother Dorgon. A compromise installed Hong Taiji's five-year-old son, Fulin, as the Shunzhi Emperor, with Dorgon as regent and de facto leader of the Manchu nation.
Meanwhile, Ming government officials fought against each other, against fiscal collapse, and against a series of peasant rebellions. They were unable to capitalise on the Manchu succession dispute and the presence of a minor as emperor. In April 1644, the capital, Beijing, was sacked by a coalition of rebel forces led by Li Zicheng, a former minor Ming official, who established a short-lived Shun dynasty. The last Ming ruler, the Chongzhen Emperor, committed suicide when the city fell to the rebels, marking the official end of the dynasty.
Li Zicheng then led rebel forces numbering some 200,000[25] to confront Wu Sangui, at Shanhai Pass, a key pass of the Great Wall, which defended the capital. Wu Sangui, caught between a Chinese rebel army twice his size and a foreign enemy he had fought for years, cast his lot with the familiar Manchus. Wu Sangui may have been influenced by Li Zicheng's mistreatment of wealthy and cultured officials, including Li's own family; it was said that Li took Wu's concubine Chen Yuanyuan for himself. Wu and Dorgon allied in the name of avenging the death of the Chongzhen Emperor. Together, the two former enemies met and defeated Li Zicheng's rebel forces in battle on May 27, 1644.[26]
The newly allied armies captured Beijing on 6 June. The Shunzhi Emperor was invested as the "Son of Heaven" on 30 October. The Manchus, who had positioned themselves as political heirs to the Ming emperor by defeating Li Zicheng, completed the symbolic transition by holding a formal funeral for the Chongzhen Emperor. However, conquering the rest of China Proper took another seventeen years of battling Ming loyalists, pretenders and rebels. The last Ming pretender, Prince Gui, sought refuge with the King of Burma, Pindale Min, but was turned over to a Qing expeditionary army commanded by Wu Sangui, who had him brought back to Yunnan province and executed in early 1662.
The Qing had taken shrewd advantage of Ming civilian government discrimination against the military and encouraged the Ming military to defect by spreading the message that the Manchus valued their skills.[27] Banners made up of Han Chinese who defected before 1644 were classed among the Eight Banners, giving them social and legal privileges. Han defectors swelled the ranks of the Eight Banners so greatly that ethnic Manchus became a minority only 16% in 1648, with Han Bannermen dominating at 75% and Mongol Bannermen making up the rest.[28] Gunpowder weapons like muskets and artillery were wielded by the Chinese Banners.[29] Normally, Han Chinese defector troops were deployed as the vanguard, while Manchu Bannermen acted as reserve forces or in the rear and were used predominantly for quick strikes with maximum impact, so as to minimize ethnic Manchu losses.[30]
This multi-ethnic force conquered China for the Qing,[31] The three Liaodong Han Bannermen officers who played key roles in the conquest of southern China were Shang Kexi, Geng Zhongming, and Kong Youde, who governed southern China autonomously as viceroys for the Qing after the conquest.[32] Han Chinese Bannermen made up the majority of governors in the early Qing, stabilizing Qing rule.[33] To promote ethnic harmony, a 1648 decree allowed Han Chinese civilian men to marry Manchu women from the Banners with the permission of the Board of Revenue if they were registered daughters of officials or commoners, or with the permission of their banner company captain if they were unregistered commoners. Later in the dynasty the policies allowing intermarriage were done away with.[34]
 Qing Empire in 1636
The first seven years of the young Shunzhi Emperor's reign were dominated by Dorgon's regency. Because of his own political insecurity, Dorgon followed Hong Taiji's example by ruling in the name of the emperor at the expense of rival Manchu princes, many of whom he demoted or imprisoned under one pretext or another. Dorgon's precedents and example cast a long shadow. First, the Manchus had entered "South of the Wall" because Dorgon had responded decisively to Wu Sangui's appeal, then, instead of sacking Beijing as the rebels had done, Dorgon insisted, over the protests of other Manchu princes, on making it the dynastic capital and reappointing most Ming officials. No major Chinese dynasty had directly taken over its immediate predecessor's capital, but keeping the Ming capital and bureaucracy intact helped quickly stabilize the regime and sped up the conquest of the rest of the country. Dorgon then drastically reduced the influence of the eunuchs, a major force in the Ming bureaucracy, and directed Manchu women not to bind their feet in the Chinese style.[35]
However, not all of Dorgon's policies were equally popular or as easy to implement. The controversial July 1645 edict (the "haircutting order") forced adult Han Chinese men to shave the front of their heads and comb the remaining hair into the queue hairstyle which was worn by Manchu men, on pain of death.[36] The popular description of the order was: "To keep the hair, you lose the head; To keep your head, you cut the hair."[35] To the Manchus, this policy was a test of loyalty and an aid in distinguishing friend from foe. For the Han Chinese, however, it was a humiliating reminder of Qing authority that challenged traditional Confucian values.[37] The order triggered strong resistance in Jiangnan.[38] In the ensuing unrest, some 100,000 Han were slaughtered.[39][40][41]
 The Qing conquest of the Ming and expansion of the empire
On 31 December 1650, Dorgon suddenly died during a hunting expedition, marking the start of the Shunzhi Emperor's personal rule. Because the emperor was only 12 years old at that time, most decisions were made on his behalf by his mother, Empress Dowager Xiaozhuang, who turned out to be a skilled political operator. Although his support had been essential to Shunzhi's ascent, Dorgon had centralised so much power in his hands as to become a direct threat to the throne. So much so that upon his death he was bestowed the extraordinary posthumous title of Emperor Yi ( ), the only instance in Qing history in which a Manchu "prince of the blood" ( ) was so honored. Two months into Shunzhi's personal rule, however, Dorgon was not only stripped of his titles, but his corpse was disinterred and mutilated.[42] Dorgon's fall from grace also led to the purge of his family and associates at court, thus reverting power back to the person of the emperor. Shunzhi's promising start was cut short by his early death in 1661 at the age of 24 from smallpox. He was succeeded by his third son Xuanye, who reigned as the Kangxi Emperor.
The Manchus sent Han Bannermen to fight against Koxinga's Ming loyalists in Fujian.[43] They removed the population from coastal areas in order to deprive Koxinga's Ming loyalists of resources. This led to a misunderstanding that Manchus were "afraid of water". Han Bannermen carried out the fighting and killing, casting doubt on the claim that fear of the water led to the coastal evacuation and ban on maritime activities.[44] Even though a poem refers to the soldiers carrying out massacres in Fujian as "barbarians", both Han Green Standard Army and Han Bannermen were involved and carried out the worst slaughter.[45] 400,000 Green Standard Army soldiers were used against the Three Feudatories in addition to the 200,000 Bannermen.[46]
Kangxi Emperor's reign and consolidation
See also: Revolt of the Three Feudatories and High Qing era
 The Kangxi Emperor (r. 1661 1722)
The sixty-one year reign of the Kangxi Emperor was the longest of any emperor of China and marked the beginning of the "High Qing" era, the zenith of the dynasty's social, economic and military power. The early Manchu rulers established two foundations of legitimacy that help to explain the stability of their dynasty. The first was the bureaucratic institutions and the neo-Confucian culture that they adopted from earlier dynasties.[47] Manchu rulers and Han Chinese scholar-official elites gradually came to terms with each other. The examination system offered a path for ethnic Han to become officials. Imperial patronage of Kangxi Dictionary demonstrated respect for Confucian learning, while the Sacred Edict of 1670 effectively extolled Confucian family values. His attempts to discourage Chinese women from foot binding, however, were unsuccessful.
The second major source of stability was the Central Asian aspect of their Manchu identity, which allowed them to appeal to Mongol, Tibetan and Uighur constituents.[48] The Qing used the title of Emperor (Huangdi) in Chinese, while among Mongols the Qing monarch was referred to as Bogda khan (wise Khan), and referred to as Gong Ma in Tibet.[49] The Qianlong Emperor propagated the image of himself as a Buddhist sage ruler, a patron of Tibetan Buddhism.[50] The Kangxi Emperor also welcomed to his court Jesuit missionaries, who had first come to China under the Ming.
Kangxi's reign started when he was seven years old. To prevent a repeat of Dorgon's monopolizing of power, on his deathbed his father hastily appointed four regents who were not closely related to the imperial family and had no claim to the throne. However, through chance and machination, Oboi, the most junior of the four, gradually achieved such dominance as to be a potential threat. Even though Oboi's loyalty was never an issue, his arrogance and conservatism led him into an escalating conflict with the young emperor. In 1669 Kangxi, through trickery, disarmed and imprisoned Oboi   a significant victory for a fifteen-year-old emperor.
The young emperor faced challenges in maintaining control of his kingdom, as well. Three Ming generals singled out for their contributions to the establishment of the dynasty had been granted governorships in Southern China. They became increasingly autonomous, leading to the Revolt of the Three Feudatories, which lasted for eight years. Kangxi was able to unify his forces for a counterattack led by a new generation of Manchu generals. By 1681, the Qing government had established control over a ravaged southern China, which took several decades to recover.[51]
 Emperor with Manchu army in Khalkha 1688
To extend and consolidate the dynasty's control in Central Asia, the Kangxi Emperor personally led a series of military campaigns against the Dzungars in Outer Mongolia. The Kangxi Emperor expelled Galdan's invading forces from these regions, which were then incorporated into the empire. Galdan was eventually killed in the Dzungar Qing War.[52] In 1683, Qing forces received the surrender of Formosa (Taiwan) from Zheng Keshuang, grandson of Koxinga, who had conquered Taiwan from the Dutch colonists as a base against the Qing. Winning Taiwan freed Kangxi's forces for a series of battles over Albazin, the far eastern outpost of the Tsardom of Russia. The 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk was China's first formal treaty with a European power and kept the border peaceful for the better part of two centuries. After Galdan's death, his followers, as adherents to Tibetan Buddhism, attempted to control the choice of the next Dalai Lama. Kangxi dispatched two armies to Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, and installed a Dalai Lama sympathetic to the Qing.[53]
Reigns of the Yongzheng and Qianlong emperors
 Putuo Zongcheng Temple, Chengde, Qianlong reign; built on the model of Potala Palace, Lhasa
The reigns of the Yongzheng Emperor (r. 1723 1735) and his son, the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735 1796), marked the height of Qing power. Yet, as the historian Jonathan Spence puts it, the empire by the end of the Qianlong reign was "like the sun at midday". In the midst of "many glories", he writes, "signs of decay and even collapse were becoming apparent".[54]
After the death of the Kangxi Emperor in the winter of 1722, his fourth son, Prince Yong ( ), became the Yongzheng Emperor. In the later years of Kangxi's reign, Yongzheng and his brothers had fought, and there were unsubstantiated rumors that he had usurped the throne by tampering with the Kangxi's testament on the night when Kangxi died. In fact, his father had trusted him with delicate political issues and discussed state policy with him. When Yongzheng came to power at the age of 45, he felt a sense of urgency about the problems that had accumulated in his father's later years, and he did not need instruction on how to exercise power.[55] In the words of one recent historian, he was "severe, suspicious, and jealous, but extremely capable and resourceful",[56] and in the words of another, he turned out to be an "early modern state-maker of the first order".[57]
Yongzheng moved rapidly. First, he promoted Confucian orthodoxy and reversed what he saw as his father's laxness by cracking down on unorthodox sects and by decapitating an anti-Manchu writer his father had pardoned. In 1723 he outlawed Christianity and expelled Christian missionaries, though some were allowed to remain in the capital.[58] Next, he moved to control the government. He expanded his father's system of Palace Memorials, which brought frank and detailed reports on local conditions directly to the throne without being intercepted by the bureaucracy, and he created a small Grand Council of personal advisors, which eventually grew into the emperor's de facto cabinet for the rest of the dynasty. He shrewdly filled key positions with Manchu and Han Chinese officials who depended on his patronage. When he began to realize that the financial crisis was even greater than he had thought, Yongzheng rejected his father's lenient approach to local landowning elites and mounted a campaign to enforce collection of the land tax. The increased revenues were to be used for "money to nourish honesty" among local officials and for local irrigation, schools, roads, and charity. Although these reforms were effective in the north, in the south and lower Yangzi valley, where Kangxi had wooed the elites, there were long-established networks of officials and landowners. Yongzheng dispatched experienced Manchu commissioners to penetrate the thickets of falsified land registers and coded account books, but they were met with tricks, passivity, and even violence. The fiscal crisis persisted.[59]
 Campaign against the Dzungars in the Qing conquest of Xinjiang 1755 1758
Yongzheng also inherited diplomatic and strategic problems. A team made up entirely of Manchus drew up the Treaty of Kyakhta (1727) to solidify the diplomatic understanding with Russia. In exchange for territory and trading rights, the Qing would have a free hand in dealing with the situation in Mongolia. Yongzheng then turned to that situation, where the Zunghars threatened to re-emerge, and to the southwest, where local Miao chieftains resisted Qing expansion. These campaigns drained the treasury but established the emperor's control of the military and military finance.[60]
When Yongzheng Emperor died in 1735 his 24-year-old son, Prince Bao ( ), became the Qianlong Emperor. Qianlong personally led the Ten Great Campaigns to expand military control into present-day Xinjiang and Mongolia, putting down revolts and uprisings in Sichuan and parts of southern China while expanding control over Tibet.
 Lord Macartney saluting the Qianlong Emperor
The Qianlong Emperor launched several ambitious cultural projects, including the compilation of the Siku Quanshu, or Complete Repository of the Four Branches of Literature, the largest collection of books in Chinese history. Nevertheless, Qianlong used the literary inquisition to silence opposition.[61] Beneath outward prosperity and imperial confidence, the later years of Qianlong's reign were marked by rampant corruption and neglect. Heshen, the emperor's handsome young favorite, took advantage of the emperor's indulgence to become one of the most corrupt officials in the history of the dynasty.[62] Qianlong's son, the Jiaqing Emperor (r. 1796 1820), eventually forced Heshen to commit suicide.
 Commerce on the water, Prosperous Suzhou by Xu Yang, 1759
Population was stagnant for the first half of the 17th century due to civil wars and epidemics, but prosperity and internal stability gradually reversed this trend. The Qianlong Emperor bemoaned the situation by remarking, "The population continues to grow, but the land does not." The introduction of new crops from the Americas such as the potato and peanut allowed an improved food supply as well, so that the total population of China during the 18th century ballooned from 100 million to 300 million people. Soon farmers were forced to work ever-smaller holdings more intensely. The only remaining part of the empire that had arable farmland was Manchuria, where the provinces of Jilin and Heilongjiang had been walled off as a Manchu homeland. Despite prohibitions, by the 18th century Han Chinese streamed into Manchuria, both illegally and legally, over the Great Wall and Willow Palisade.
In 1796, open rebellion broke out among followers of the White Lotus Society, who blamed Qing officials, saying "the officials have forced the people to rebel." Officials in other parts of the country were also blamed for corruption, failing to keep the famine relief granaries full, poor maintenance of roads and waterworks, and bureaucratic factionalism. There soon followed uprisings of "new sect" Muslims against local Muslim officials, and Miao tribesmen in southwest China. The White Lotus Rebellion continued for eight years, until 1804, when badly run, corrupt, and brutal campaigns finally ended it.[63]
Rebellion, unrest, and external pressure
 British Steamship destroying Chinese war junks (E. Duncan) (1843)
At the start of the dynasty, the Chinese empire continued to be the hegemonic power in East Asia. Although there was no formal ministry of foreign relations, the Lifan Yuan was responsible for relations with the Mongol and Tibetans in Central Asia, while the tributary system, a loose set of institutions and customs taken over from the Ming, in theory governed relations with East and Southeast Asian countries. The Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) stabilized relations with Tsarist Russia.
However, during the 18th century European empires gradually expanded across the world, as European states developed economies built on maritime trade, colonial extraction, and advances in technology. The dynasty was confronted with newly developing concepts of the international system and state-to-state relations. European trading posts expanded into territorial control in nearby India and on the islands that are now Indonesia. The Qing response, successful for a time, was to establish the Canton System in 1756, which restricted maritime trade to that city (modern-day Guangzhou) and gave monopoly trading rights to private Chinese merchants. The British East India Company and the Dutch East India Company had long before been granted similar monopoly rights by their governments.
In 1793, the British East India Company, with the support of the British government, sent a diplomatic mission to China led by Lord George Macartney in order to open trade and put relations on a basis of equality. The imperial court viewed trade as of secondary interest, whereas the British saw maritime trade as the key to their economy. The Qianlong Emperor told Macartney "the kings of the myriad nations come by land and sea with all sorts of precious things", and "consequently there is nothing we lack..."[64]
 View of the Canton River, showing the Thirteen Factories in the background, 1850 1855
Since China had little demand for European goods, Europe paid in silver for Chinese goods such as silk, tea, and ceramics, an imbalance that worried the mercantilist governments of Britain and France. The growing Chinese demand for opium provided the remedy. The British East India Company greatly expanded its production in Bengal. The Daoguang Emperor, concerned both over the outflow of silver and the damage that opium smoking was causing to his subjects, ordered Lin Zexu to end the opium trade. Lin confiscated the stocks of opium without compensation in 1839, leading Britain to send a military expedition the following year.
The First Opium War revealed the outdated state of the Chinese military. The Qing navy, composed entirely of wooden sailing junks, was severely outclassed by the modern tactics and firepower of the British Royal Navy. British soldiers, using advanced muskets and artillery, easily outmaneuvered and outgunned Qing forces in ground battles. The Qing surrender in 1842 marked a decisive, humiliating blow. The Treaty of Nanjing, the first of the "unequal treaties", demanded war reparations, forced China to open up the Treaty Ports of Canton, Amoy, Fuzhou, Ningbo and Shanghai to Western trade and missionaries, and to cede Hong Kong Island to Britain. It revealed weaknesses in the Qing government and provoked rebellions against the regime.
The Taiping Rebellion in the mid-19th century was the first major instance of anti-Manchu sentiment. The rebellion began under the leadership of Hong Xiuquan (1814 64), a disappointed civil service examination candidate who, influenced by Christian teachings, had a series of visions and believed himself to be the son of God, the younger brother of Jesus Christ, sent to reform China. A friend of Hong's, Feng Yunshan, utilized Hong's ideas to organize a new religious group, the God Worshippers  Society (Bai Shangdi Hui), which he formed among the impoverished peasants of Guangxi province.[65] Amid widespread social unrest and worsening famine, the rebellion not only posed the most serious threat towards Qing rulers, it has also been called the "bloodiest civil war of all time"; during its fourteen-year course from 1850 to 1864 between 20 and 30 million people died.[66] Hong Xiuquan, a failed civil service candidate, in 1851 launched an uprising in Guizhou province, and established the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom with Hong himself as king. Hong announced that he had visions of God and that he was the brother of Jesus Christ. Slavery, concubinage, arranged marriage, opium smoking, footbinding, judicial torture, and the worship of idols were all banned. However, success led to internal feuds, defections and corruption. In addition, British and French troops, equipped with modern weapons, had come to the assistance of the Qing imperial army. It was not until 1864 that Qing armies under Zeng Guofan succeeded in crushing the revolt. After the outbreak of this rebellion, there were also revolts by the Muslims and Miao people of China against the Qing dynasty, most notably in the Miao Rebellion (1854 1873) in Guizhou, the Panthay Rebellion (1856 1873) in Yunnan and the Dungan Revolt (1862 77) in the northwest.
 Government forces defeating Taiping armies
The Western powers, largely unsatisfied with the Treaty of Nanjing, gave grudging support to the Qing government during the Taiping and Nian Rebellions. China's income fell sharply during the wars as vast areas of farmland were destroyed, millions of lives were lost, and countless armies were raised and equipped to fight the rebels. In 1854, Britain tried to re-negotiate the Treaty of Nanjing, inserting clauses allowing British commercial access to Chinese rivers and the creation of a permanent British embassy at Beijing.
 Yixin, Prince Gong
In 1856, Qing authorities, in searching for a pirate, boarded a ship, the Arrow, which the British claimed had been flying the British flag, an incident which led to the Second Opium War. In 1858, facing no other options, the Xianfeng Emperor agreed to the Treaty of Tientsin, which contained clauses deeply insulting to the Chinese, such as a demand that all official Chinese documents be written in English and a proviso granting British warships unlimited access to all navigable Chinese rivers.
Ratification of the treaty in the following year led to a resumption of hostilities. In 1860, with Anglo-French forces marching on Beijing, the emperor and his court fled the capital for the imperial hunting lodge at Rehe. Once in Beijing, the Anglo-French forces looted and burned the Old Summer Palace and, in an act of revenge for the arrest, torture, and execution of the English diplomatic mission.[67] Prince Gong, a younger half-brother of the emperor, who had been left as his brother's proxy in the capital, was forced to sign the Convention of Beijing. The humiliated emperor died the following year at Rehe.
Self-strengthening and the frustration of reforms
Yet the dynasty rallied. Chinese generals and officials such as Zuo Zongtang led the suppression of rebellions and stood behind the Manchus. When the Tongzhi Emperor came to the throne at the age of five in 1861, these officials rallied around him in what was called the Tongzhi Restoration. Their aim was to adopt Western military technology in order to preserve Confucian values. Zeng Guofan, in alliance with Prince Gong, sponsored the rise of younger officials such as Li Hongzhang, who put the dynasty back on its feet financially and instituted the Self-Strengthening Movement. The reformers then proceeded with institutional reforms, including China's first unified ministry of foreign affairs, the Zongli Yamen; allowing foreign diplomats to reside in the capital; establishment of the Imperial Maritime Customs Service; the formation of modernized armies, such as the Beiyang Army, as well as a navy; and the purchase from Europeans of armament factories.[68]
The dynasty lost control of peripheral territories bit by bit. In return for promises of support against the British and the French, the Russian Empire took large chunks of territory in the Northeast in 1860. The period of cooperation between the reformers and the European powers ended with the Tientsin Massacre of 1870, which was incited by the murder of French nuns set off by the belligerence of local French diplomats. Starting with the Cochinchina Campaign in 1858, France expanded control of Indochina. By 1883, France was in full control of the region and had reached the Chinese border. The Sino-French War began with a surprise attack by the French on the Chinese southern fleet at Fuzhou. After that the Chinese declared war on the French. A French invasion of Taiwan was halted and the French were defeated on land in Tonkin at the Battle of Bang Bo. However Japan threatened to enter the war against China due to the Gapsin Coup and China chose to end the war with negotiations. The war ended in 1885 with the Treaty of Tientsin (1885) and the Chinese recognition of the French protectorate in Vietnam.[69]
In 1884, pro-Japanese Koreans in Seoul led the Gapsin Coup. Tensions between China and Japan rose after China intervened to suppress the uprising. Japanese Prime Minister It  Hirobumi and Li Hongzhang signed the Convention of Tientsin, an agreement to withdraw troops simultaneously, but the First Sino-Japanese War of 1895 was a military humiliation. The Treaty of Shimonoseki recognized Korean independence and ceded Taiwan and the Pescadores to Japan. The terms might have been harsher, but when a Japanese citizen attacked and wounded Li Hongzhang, an international outcry shamed the Japanese into revising them. The original agreement stipulated the cession of Liaodong Peninsula to Japan, but Russia, with its own designs on the territory, along with Germany and France, in the Triple Intervention, successfully put pressure on the Japanese to abandon the peninsula.
 Empress Dowager Cixi (Oil painting by Hubert Vos c. 1905))
These years saw an evolution in the participation of Empress Dowager Cixi (Wade Giles: Tz'u-Hsi) in state affairs. She entered the imperial palace in the 1850s as a concubine to the Xianfeng Emperor (r. 1850 1861) and came to power in 1861 after her five-year-old son, the Tongzhi Emperor ascended the throne. She, the Empress Dowager Ci'an (who had been Xianfeng's empress), and Prince Gong (a son of the Daoguang Emperor), staged a coup that ousted several regents for the boy emperor. Between 1861 and 1873, she and Ci'an served as regents, choosing the reign title "Tongzhi" (ruling together). Following the emperor's death in 1875, Cixi's nephew, the Guangxu Emperor, took the throne, in violation of the dynastic custom that the new emperor be of the next generation, and another regency began. In the spring of 1881, Ci'an suddenly died, aged only forty-three, leaving Cixi as sole regent.[70]
From 1889, when Guangxu began to rule in his own right, to 1898, the Empress Dowager lived in semi-retirement, spending the majority of the year at the Summer Palace. On 1 November 1897, two German Roman Catholic missionaries were murdered in the southern part of Shandong province (the Juye Incident). Germany used the murders as a pretext for a naval occupation of Jiaozhou Bay. The occupation prompted a "scramble for concessions" in 1898, which included the German lease of Jiazhou Bay, the Russian acquisition of Liaodong, and the British lease of the New Territories of Hong Kong.
 Britain, Germany, Russia, France, and Japan dividing China
In the wake of these external defeats, the Guangxu Emperor initiated the Hundred Days' Reform of 1898. Newer, more radical advisers such as Kang Youwei were given positions of influence. The emperor issued a series of edicts and plans were made to reorganize the bureaucracy, restructure the school system, and appoint new officials. Opposition from the bureaucracy was immediate and intense. Although she had been involved in the initial reforms, the Empress Dowager stepped in to call them off, arrested and executed several reformers, and took over day-to-day control of policy. Yet many of the plans stayed in place, and the goals of reform were implanted.[71]
 The foreign armies of the Eight-Nation Alliance celebrating their victory in the Battle of Peking, within the walls of the Forbidden City on 28 November 1900
Drought in North China, combined with the imperialist designs of European powers and the instability of the Qing government, created background conditions for the Boxers. In 1900, local groups of Boxers proclaiming support for the Qing dynasty murdered foreign missionaries and large numbers of Chinese Christians, then converged on Beijing to besiege the Foreign Legation Quarter. A coalition of European, Japanese, and Russian armies (the Eight-Nation Alliance) then entered China without diplomatic notice, much less permission. Cixi declared war on all of these nations, only to lose control of Beijing after a short, but hard-fought campaign. She fled to Xi'an. The victorious allies then enforced their demands on the Qing government, including compensation for their expenses in invading China and execution of complicit officials, via the Boxer Protocol.[72]
Reform, revolution, collapse
 Yuan Shikai
 Qing China in 1911
The defeat by Japan in 1895 created a sense of crisis which the failure of the 1898 reforms and the disasters of 1900 only exacerbated. Cixi in 1901 moved to mollify the foreign community, called for reform proposals, and initiated a set of "New Policies", also known as the "Late Qing Reform". Over the next few years the reforms included the restructuring of the national education, judicial, and fiscal systems, the most dramatic of which was the abolition of the imperial examinations in 1905. [73] The court directed a constitution to be drafted, and provincial elections were held, the first in China's history.[74] Sun Yat-sen and revolutionaries debated reform officials and constitutional monarchists such as Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao over how to transform the Manchu Empire into a modern Han Chinese nation.[75]
 Zaifeng, Prince Chun
The Guangxu Emperor died on 14 November 1908 and Cixi died the following day. Rumors held that she or Yuan Shikai ordered trusted eunuchs to poison the Guangxu Emperor, and an autopsy conducted nearly a century later confirmed lethal levels of arsenic in his corpse.[76] Puyi, the oldest son of Zaifeng, Prince Chun, and nephew to the childless Guangxu Emperor, was appointed successor at the age of two, leaving Zaifeng with the regency. Zaifeng forced Yuan Shikai to resign. In April 1911 Zaifeng created a cabinet known as "The Royal Cabinet" because among the thirteen cabinet members, five were members of the imperial family or Aisin-Gioro relatives.[77]
The Wuchang Uprising of 10 October 1911 set off a series of uprisings. By November, 14 of the 15 provinces had rejected Qing rule. This led to the creation of the Republic of China, in Nanjing on 1 January 1912, with Sun Yat-sen as its provisional head. Seeing a desperate situation, the Qing court brought Yuan Shikai back to power. His Beiyang Army crushed the revolutionaries in Wuhan at the Battle of Yangxia. After taking the position of Prime Minister he created his own cabinet, with the support of Empress Dowager Longyu. However, Yuan Shikai decided to cooperate with Sun Yat-sen's revolutionaries to overthrow the Qing dynasty.
 A pitched battle between the imperial and revolutionary armies in 1911
On 12 February 1912, Longyu issued the abdication of the child emperor Puyi leading to the fall of the Qing dynasty under the pressure of Yuan Shikai's Beiyang army despite objections from conservatives and royalist reformers.[78] This brought an end to over 2,000 years of Imperial China and nearly 268 years of ruling China by the Manchu people, and began a period of instability. In July 1917, there was an abortive attempt to restore the Qing dynasty led by Zhang Xun. Puyi was allowed to live in the Forbidden City after his abdication until 1924, when he moved to the Japanese concession in Tianjin. The Empire of Japan invaded Northeast China and founded Manchukuo there in 1932, with Puyi as its emperor. After the invasion of Northeast China to fight Japan by the Soviet Union, Manchukuo fell in 1945.
Government
Main article: Government of the Qing Dynasty
See also: Military of the Qing dynasty
 A postage stamp from Yantai (Chefoo) in the Qing dynasty
 A Qing dynasty mandarin
The early Qing emperors adopted the bureaucratic structures and institutions from the preceding Ming dynasty but split rule between Han Chinese and Manchus, with some positions also given to Mongols.[79] Like previous dynasties, the Qing recruited officials via the imperial examination system, until the system was abolished in 1905. The Qing divided the positions into civil and military positions, each having nine grades or ranks, each subdivided into a and b categories. Civil appointments ranged from an attendant to the emperor or a Grand Secretary in the Forbidden City (highest) to being a prefectural tax collector, deputy jail warden, deputy police commissioner, or tax examiner. Military appointments ranged from being a field marshal or chamberlain of the imperial bodyguard to a third class sergeant, corporal or a first or second class private.[80]
Central government agencies
The formal structure of the Qing government centered on the Emperor as the absolute ruler, who presided over six Boards (Ministries[g]), each headed by two presidents[h] and assisted by four vice presidents.[i] In contrast to the Ming system, however, Qing ethnic policy dictated that appointments were split between Manchu noblemen and Han officials who had passed the highest levels of the state examinations. The Grand Secretariat,[j] which had been an important policy-making body under the Ming, lost its importance during the Qing and evolved into an imperial chancery. The institutions which had been inherited from the Ming formed the core of the Qing "Outer Court", which handled routine matters and was located in the southern part of the Forbidden City.[citation needed]
 The emperor of China from The Universal Traveller
In order not to let the routine administration take over the running of the empire, the Qing emperors made sure that all important matters were decided in the "Inner Court", which was dominated by the imperial family and Manchu nobility and which was located in the northern part of the Forbidden City. The core institution of the inner court was the Grand Council.[k] It emerged in the 1720s under the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor as a body charged with handling Qing military campaigns against the Mongols, but soon took over other military and administrative duties, centralizing authority under the crown.[81] The Grand Councillors[l] served as a sort of privy council to the emperor.
 2000 cash Da-Qing Baochao banknote from 1859
From the early Qing, the central government was characterized by a system of dual appointments by which each position in the central government had a Manchu and a Han Chinese assigned to it. The Han Chinese appointee was required to do the substantive work and the Manchu to ensure Han loyalty to Qing rule.[82]
There was also another government institution called Imperial Household Department which was unique to the Qing dynasty. It was established before the fall of the Ming, but it became mature only after 1661, following the death of the Shunzhi Emperor and the accession of his son, the Kangxi Emperor.[83] The department's original purpose was to manage the internal affairs of the imperial family and the activities of the inner palace (in which tasks it largely replaced eunuchs), but it also played an important role in Qing relations with Tibet and Mongolia, engaged in trading activities (jade, ginseng, salt, furs, etc.), managed textile factories in the Jiangnan region, and even published books.[84] Relations with the Salt Superintendents and salt merchants, such as those at Yangzhou, were particularly lucrative, especially since they were direct, and did not go through absorptive layers of bureaucracy. The department was manned by booi,[m] or "bondservants," from the Upper Three Banners.[85] By the 19th century, it managed the activities of at least 56 subagencies.[83][86]
Administrative divisions
 The Eighteen Provinces of China proper in 1875
 Qing China in 1832
Further information: History of the administrative divisions of China before 1912  Provinces and Feudatory Regions under the Qing dynasty, and Qing dynasty in Inner Asia
 The Qing dynasty in ca. 1820, with provinces in yellow, military governorates and protectorates in light yellow, tributary states in orange
Qing China reached its largest extent during the 18th century, when it ruled China proper (eighteen provinces) as well as the areas of present-day Northeast China, Inner Mongolia, Outer Mongolia, Xinjiang and Tibet, at approximately 13 million km2 in size. There were originally 18 provinces, all of which in China proper, but later this number was increased to 22, with Manchuria and Xinjiang being divided or turned into provinces. Taiwan, originally part of Fujian province, became a province of its own in the 19th century,[87] but was ceded to the Empire of Japan following the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895.[88]
Territorial administration
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Qing organization of provinces was based on the fifteen administrative units set up by the Ming dynasty, later made into eighteen provinces by splitting for example, Huguang into Hubei and Hunan provinces. The provincial bureaucracy continued the Yuan and Ming practice of three parallel lines, civil, military, and censorate, or surveillance. Each province was administered by a governor ( , xunfu) and a provincial military commander ( , tidu). Below the province were prefectures ( , fu) operating under a prefect ( , zh f ), followed by subprefectures under a subprefect. The lowest unit was the county, overseen by a county magistrate. The eighteen provinces are also known as "China proper". The position of viceroy or governor-general ( , zongdu) was the highest rank in the provincial administration. There were eight regional viceroys in China proper, each usually took charge of two or three provinces. The Viceroy of Zhili, who was responsible for the area surrounding the capital Beijing, is usually considered as the most honorable and powerful viceroy among the eight.
By the mid-18th century, the Qing had successfully put outer regions such as Inner and Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang under its control. Imperial commissioners and garrisons were sent to Mongolia and Tibet to oversee their affairs. These territories were also under supervision of a central government institution called Lifan Yuan. Qinghai was also put under direct control of the Qing court. Xinjiang, also known as Chinese Turkestan, was subdivided into the regions north and south of the Tian Shan mountains, also known today as Dzungaria and Tarim Basin respectively, but the post of Ili General was established in 1762 to exercise unified military and administrative jurisdiction over both regions. Dzungaria was fully opened to Han migration by the Qianlong Emperor from the beginning. Han migrants were at first forbidden from permanently settling in the Tarim Basin but were the ban was lifted after the invasion by Jahangir Khoja in the 1820s. Likewise, Manchuria was also governed by military generals until its division into provinces, though some areas of Xinjiang and Northeast China were lost to the Russian Empire in the mid-19th century. Manchuria was originally separated from China proper by the Inner Willow Palisade, a ditch and embankment planted with willows intended to restrict the movement of the Han Chinese, as the area was off-limits to civilian Han Chinese until the government started colonizing the area, especially since the 1860s.
With respect to these outer regions, the Qing maintained imperial control, with the emperor acting as Mongol khan, patron of Tibetan Buddhism and protector of Muslims. However, Qing policy changed with the establishment of Xinjiang province in 1884. During The Great Game era, taking advantage of the Dungan revolt in northwest China, Yaqub Beg invaded Xinjiang from Central Asia with support from the British Empire, and made himself the ruler of the kingdom of Kashgaria. The Qing court sent forces to defeat Yaqub Beg and Xinjiang was reconquered, and then the political system of China proper was formally applied onto Xinjiang. The Kumul Khanate, which was incorporated into the Qing dynasty as a vassal after helping Qing defeat the Zunghars in 1757, maintained its status after Xinjiang turned into a province through the end of the dynasty in the Xinhai Revolution up until 1930.[89] In the early 20th century, Britain sent an expedition force to Tibet and forced Tibetans to sign a treaty. The Qing court responded by asserting Chinese sovereignty over Tibet,[90] resulting in the 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention signed between Britain and China. The British agreed not to annex Tibetan territory or to interfere in the administration of Tibet, while China engaged not to permit any other foreign state to interfere with the territory or internal administration of Tibet.[91] Furthermore, similar to Xinjiang which was converted into a province earlier, the Qing government also turned Manchuria into three provinces in the early 20th century, officially known as the "Three Northeast Provinces", and established the post of Viceroy of the Three Northeast Provinces to oversee these provinces, making the total number of regional viceroys to nine.
Society
See also: Qing literati, Shamanism in the Qing dynasty, and Islam during the Qing dynasty
Population growth and mobility
The population grew in numbers, density, and mobility. The population grew from roughly 150 million in 1700, about what it had been a century before, then doubled over the next century, and reached a height of 450 million on the eve of the Taiping Rebellion in 1850.[92] The spread of New World crops, such as maize, peanuts, sweet potatoes, and potatoes decreased the number of deaths from malnutrition.  Diseases such as smallpox were brought under control by an increase in inoculations. In addition, infant deaths were decreased due to improvements in birthing techniques performed by doctors and midwives and an increase in medical books available to the public.[93] Government campaigns decreased the incidence of infanticide. In Europe population growth in this period was greatest in the cities, but in China growth in cities and the lower Yangzi was low. The greatest growth was in the borderlands and the highlands, where farmers could clear large tracts of marshlands and forests.[94]
The population was also remarkably mobile, perhaps more so than at any time in Chinese history. Indeed, the Qing government did far more to encourage mobility than to discourage it. Millions of Han Chinese migrated to Yunnan and Guizhou in the 18th century, and also to Taiwan. After the conquests of the 1750s and 1760s, the court organized agricultural colonies in Xinjiang. Migration might be permanent, for resettlement, or the migrants (in theory at least) might regard the move as a temporary sojourn. The latter included an increasingly large and mobile workforce. Local-origin-based merchant groups also moved freely. This mobility also included the organized movement of Qing subjects overseas, largely to Southeastern Asia, to pursue trade and other economic opportunities.[94]
Manchuria, however, was formally closed to Han settlement by the Willow Palisade, with the exception of some bannermen.[95] Nonetheless, by 1780, Han Chinese had become 80% of the population.[96] The relatively low populated territory was vulnerable as the Russian Empire demanded the Amur Annexation annexing Outer Manchuria. In response, the Qing officials such as Tepuqin ( ), the Military Governor of Heilongjiang in 1859 1867, made proposals (1860) to open parts of Guandong for Chinese civilian farmer settlers in order to oppose further possible annexations.[97] In the later 19th century, Manchuria was opened up for Han settlers leading to a more extensive migration,[98] which was called Chuang Guandong (simplified Chinese:  ; traditional Chinese:  ) literally "Crashing into Guandong" with Guandong being an older name for Manchuria.[99] At the end of the 19th century and turn of the 20th century, to counteract increasing Russian influence, the Qing Dynasty abolished the existing administrative system in Manchuria (created by the bannermen) and reclassified all immigrants to the region as Han (Chinese) instead of minren ( , civilians, non-bannermen), while replacing provincial generals with provincial governors. This reform occurred when Inner Manchuria was a battleground between Russia and Japan. From 1902-1911, seventy civil administrations were created due to the increasing population of Manchuria.[100]
Statuses in society
According to statute, Qing society was divided into relatively closed estates, of which in most general terms there were five. Apart from the estates of the officials, the comparatively minuscule aristocracy, and the degree-holding literati, there also existed a major division among ordinary Chinese between commoners and people with inferior status.[101] They were divided into two categories: one of them, the good "commoner" people, the other "mean" people who were seen as debased and servile. The majority of the population belonged to the first category and were described as liangmin, a legal term meaning good people, as opposed to jianmin meaning the mean (or ignoble) people. Qing law explicitly stated that the traditional four occupational groups of scholars, farmers, artisans and merchants were "good", or having a status of commoners. On the other hand, slaves or bondservants, entertainers (including prostitutes and actors), tattooed criminals, and those low-level employees of government officials were the "mean people". Mean people were legally inferior to commoners and suffered unequal treatments, such as being forbidden to take the imperial examination.[102] Furthermore, such people were usually not allowed to marry with free commoners and were even often required to acknowledge their abasement in society through actions such as bowing. However, throughout the Qing dynasty, the emperor and his court, as well as the bureaucracy, worked towards reducing the distinctions between the debased and free but did not completely succeed even at the end of its era in merging the two classifications together.[103]
Qing gentry
Main article: Qing literati
Although there had been no powerful hereditary aristocracy since the Song dynasty, the gentry (shenshi), like their British counterparts, enjoyed imperial privileges and managed local affairs. The status of this scholar-official was defined by passing at least the first level of civil service examinations and holding a degree, which qualified him to hold imperial office, although he might not actually do so. The gentry member could legally wear gentry robes and could talk to officials as equals. Officials who had served for one or two terms could retire to enjoy the glory of their status. Informally, the gentry then presided over local society and could use their connections to influence the magistrate, acquire land, and maintain large households. The gentry thus included not only males holding degrees but also their wives, descendants, some of their relatives.[104]
 Brush container symbol of elegant gentry cultureThe gentry class was divided into groups. Not all who held office were literati, as merchant families could purchase degrees, and not all who passed the exams found employment as officials, since the number of degree-holders was greater than the number of openings. The gentry class also differed in the source and amount of their income. Literati families drew income from landholding, as well as from lending money. Officials, of course, drew a salary, which, as the years went by, were less and less adequate, leading to widespread reliance on "squeeze," irrgular payments. Those who prepared for but failed the exams, like those who passed but were not appointed to office, could become tutors or teachers, private secretaries to sitting officials, administrators of guilds or temples, or other positions that required literacy. Others turned to fields such as engineering, medicine, or law, which by the nineteenth century demanded specialized learning. By the nineteenth century, it was no longer shameful to become an author or publisher of fiction. [105]
The Qing gentry were marked as much by their aspiration to a cultured lifestyle as by their legal status. They lived more refined and comfortable lives than the commoners and used sedan-chairs to travel any significant distance. They often showed off their learning by collecting objects such as scholars' stones,
porcelain or pieces of art for their beauty, which set them off from less cultivated commoners.[106]
Qing nobility
Main article: Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty
Family and kinship
 Chen Clan Ancestral Hall ( ) built in 1894
By the Qing, the building block of society was patrilineal kinship, that is, the local family lineage with descent through the male line, often translated as "clan". A shift in marital practices, identity and loyalty had begun during the Song dynasty when the civil service examination began to replace nobility and inheritance as a means for gaining status. Instead of intermarrying within aristocratic elites of the same social status, they tended to form marital alliances with nearby families of the same or higher wealth, and established the local people's interests as first and foremost which helped to form intermarried townships. [107] The neo-Confucian ideology, especially the Cheng-Zhu thinking favored by Qing social thought, emphasised patrilineal families and genealogy in society.[108]
The emperors and local officials exhorted families to compile genealogies in order to stabilize local society.[109] The genealogy was placed in the ancestral hall, which served as the lineage's headquarters and a place for annual ancestral sacrifice.The genealogy recorded the lineage's history, biographies of respected ancestors, a chart of all the family members of each generation, rules for the members to follow, and often copies of title contracts for collective property as well. A specific Chinese character appeared in the given name of each male of each generation, often well into the future. These lineages claimed to be based on biological descent but when a member of a lineage gained office or became wealthy, he might use considerable creativity in selecting a prestigious figure to be "founding ancestor". [110] Such worship was intended to ensure that the ancestors remain content and benevolent spirits (shen) who would keep watch over and protect the family. Later observers felt that the ancestral cult focused on the family and lineage, rather than on more public matters such as community and nation.[111]
Inner Mongols and Khalkha Mongols in the Qing rarely knew their ancestors beyond four generations and Mongol tribal society was not organized among patrilineal clans, contrary to what was commonly thought, but included unrelated people at the base unit of organization.[112] The Qing tried but failed to promote the Chinese Neo-Confucian ideology of organizing society along patrimonial clans among the Mongols.[113]
Religion
Further information: Religion in China  Qing dynastyManchu rulers presided over a multi-ethnic empire and the emperor, who was held responsible for  All Under Heaven  or Tian Xia, patronized and took responsibility for all religions and belief systems. The empire's  spiritual center of gravity" was the "religio-political state." [114] Since the empire was part of the order of the cosmos, which conferred the Mandate of Heaven, the Emperor as  Son of Heaven  was both the head of the political system and the head priest of the State Cult. He united political and spiritual roles that in medieval Europe were separated into the roles of emperor and pope and performed the imperial rites that ensured political order, prosperity, and social morality. The emperor and his officials, who were his personal representatives, took responsibility over all aspects of the empire, especially spiritual life and religious institutions and practices.[115] The county magistrate, as the emperor's political and spiritual representative, made offerings at officially recognized temples, for instance those dedicated to the God of Walls and Moats, (the so-called  City God), and local deified heroes. The magistrate lectured on the Emperor's Sacred Edict to promote civic morality; he kept close watch over religious organizations whose actions might threaten the sovereignty and religious prerogative of the state.[116]
 Patriarchal family
Manchu and imperial religion
Further information: Shamanism in the Qing dynasty
 Placard (right to left) in Manchu, Chinese, Tibetan, Mongolian Yonghe Lamasery, BeijingThe Manchu imperial family were especially attracted by Yellow Sect or Gelug Buddhism that had spread from Tibet into Mongolia. The Fifth Dalai Lama, who had gained power in 1642, just before the Manchus took Beijing, looked to the Qing court for support. The Kangxi and Qianlong emperors practiced this form of Tibetan Buddhism as one of their household religions and built temples that made Beijing one of its centers, and constructed a replica Lhasa's Potala Palace at their summer retreat in Rehe.[117]
Shamanism, the most common religion among Manchus, was a spiritual inheritance from their Tungusic ancestors that set them off from Han Chinese. [118] State shamanism was important to the imperial family both to maintain their Manchu cultural identity and to promote their imperial legitimacy among tribes in the northeast. [119] Imperial obligations included rituals on the first day of Chinese New Year at a shamanic shrine (tangse). [120] Practices in Manchu families included sacrifices to the ancestors, and the use of shamans, often women, who went into a trance to seek healing or exorcism [121]
Popular religion
Further information: Chinese folk religion
The belief system most widely practiced among Han Chinese is often called local, popular, or folk religion, and was centered around the patriarchal family, the maintenance of the male family line, and shen, or spirits. Common practices included ancestor veneration, filial piety, local gods and spirits. Rites included mourning, funeral, burial, practices.[122] Since they did not require exclusive allegiance, forms and branches of Confucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism were intertwined, for instance in the syncretic Three teachings.[123] Chinese folk religion combined elements of the three, with local variations [124] County magistrates, who were graded and promoted on their ability to maintain local order, tolerated local sects and even patronized local temples as long as they were orderly, but were suspicious of heterodox sects that defied state authority and rejected imperial doctrines. Some of these sects indeed had long histories of rebellion, such as the Way of Former Heaven, which drew on Daoism, and the White Lotus society, which drew on millennial Buddhism. The White Lotus Rebellion (1796 1804) confirmed official suspicions as did the Taiping Rebellion, which drew on millennial Christianity.
Christianity, Judaism, and Islam
Further information: Jesuit China missions, Chinese Rites controversy, Christianity in China, Protestant missions in China, Islam in China, Judaism in China, Catholic Church in China  Qing (1644 1911) dynasty, and Medical missions in China
The Abrahamic religions had arrived from Western Asia as early as the Tang dynasty but their insistence that they should be practiced to the exclusion of other religions made them less adaptable than Buddhism, which had quickly been accepted as native. Islam predominated in Central Asian areas of the empire, while Judaism and Christianity were practiced in well-established but self-contained communities.[125]
Several hundred Catholic missionaries arrived from the late Ming period until the proscription of Christianity in 1724. The Jesuits adapted to Chinese expectations, evangelized from the top down, adopted the robes and lifestyles of literati, becoming proficient in the Confucian classics, and did not challenge Chinese moral values, such as ancestor veneration. They proved their value to the early Manchu emperors with their work in gunnery, cartography, and astronomy, but fell out of favor for a time until the Kangxi Emperor's 1692 edict of toleration.[126] In the countryside, the newly arrived Dominican and Franciscan clerics established rural communities that adapted to local folk religious practices by emphasizing healing, festivals, and holy days rather than sacraments and doctrine. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, a spectrum of Christian believers had established communities.[127] In 1724, the Yongzheng Emperor (1678 1735) announced that Christianity was a "heterodox teaching" and hence proscribed.[128] Since the European Catholic missionaries kept control in their own hands and had not allowed the creation of a native clergy, however, the number of Catholics would grow more rapidly after 1724 and local communities could set their own rules and standards. In 1811, Christian religious activities were further criminalized by the Jiaqing Emperor (1760 1820).[129] The imperial ban was lifted by Treaty in 1846.[130]
The first Protestant missionary to China was Robert Morrison (1782 1834) of the London Missionary Society (LMS),[131] who arrived at Canton on September 6, 1807. He completed a translation of the entire Bible in 1819.[132] Liang Afa (1789 1855), a Morrison-trained Chinese convert, branched out the evangelization mission in inner China.[133][134] The two Opium Wars (1839 1860) marked the watershed of Protestant Christian missions.[128] The 1842 Treaty of Nanjing,[135] the American treaty and the French treaty signed in 1844,[136] and the 1858 Treaty of Tianjin,[128] distinguished Christianity from the local religions and granted it protected status.[137] Chinese popular cults, such as the White Lotus and the Eight Trigram, presented themselves as Christian to share this protection.[138]
In the late 1840s Hong Xiuquan read Morrison's Chinese Bible, as well as Liang Afa's evangelistic pamphlet, and announced to his followers that Christianity in fact had been the religion of ancient China before Confucius and his followers drove it out.[139] He formed the Taiping Movement, which emerged in South China as a "collusion of the Chinese tradition of millenarian rebellion and Christian messianism", "apocalyptic revolution, Christianity, and 'communist utopianism'".[140]
After 1860, enforcement of the treaties allowed missionaries to spread their evangelization efforts outside Treaty Ports. Their presence created cultural and political opposition. Historian John K. Fairbank observed that "[t]o the scholar-gentry, Christian missionaries were foreign subversives, whose immoral conduct and teaching were backed by gunboats".[141] In the next decades, there were 800 some conflicts between village Christians and non-Christians (jiao'an) mostly about non-religious issues, such as land rights or local taxes, but religious conflict often behind such cases.[142] In the summer of 1900, as foreign powers contemplated the division of China, village youths, known as Boxers, who practiced Chinese martial arts and spiritual practices, reacted against Western power and churches, attacked and murdered Chinese Christians and foreign missionaries in the Boxer Uprising. The imperialist powers once again invaded and imposed a substantial indemnity. The Beijing government reacted by implementing substantial fiscal and administrative reforms but this defeat convinced many among the educated elites that popular religion was an obstacle to China's development as a modern nation, and some turned to Christianity as a spiritual tool to build one.[143]
By 1900, there were about 1,400 Catholic priests and nuns in China serving nearly 1 million Catholics. Over 3,000 Protestant missionaries were active among the 250,000 Protestant Christians in China.[144] Western medical missionaries established clinics and hospitals, and led medical training in China.[145] Missionaries began establishing nurse training schools in the late 1880s, but nursing of sick men by women was rejected by local tradition, so the number of students was small until the 1930s.[146]
Economy
 Silver coin: 1 yuan/dollar Xuantong 3rd year - 1911 Chopmark
 Xi n F ng T ng B o ( ) 1850 1861 Qing dynasty copper (brass) cash coinMain article: Economic history of China before 1912  Qing dynasty (1644 1912)
By the end of the 17th century, the Chinese economy had recovered from the devastation caused by the wars in which the Ming dynasty were overthrown, and the resulting breakdown of order.[147] In the following century, markets continued to expand as in the late Ming period, but with more trade between regions, a greater dependence on overseas markets and a greatly increased population.[148] By the end of the 18th century the population had risen to 300 million from approximately 150 million during the late Ming dynasty. The dramatic rise in population was due to several reasons, including the long period of peace and stability in the 18th century and the import of new crops China received from the Americas, including peanuts, sweet potatoes and maize. New species of rice from Southeast Asia led to a huge increase in production. Merchant guilds proliferated in all of the growing Chinese cities and often acquired great social and even political influence. Rich merchants with official connections built up huge fortunes and patronized literature, theater and the arts. Textile and handicraft production boomed.[149]
The government broadened land ownership by returning land that had been sold to large landowners in the late Ming period by families unable to pay the land tax.[150] To give people more incentives to participate in the market, they reduced the tax burden in comparison with the late Ming, and replaced the corv e system with a head tax used to hire laborers.[151] The administration of the Grand Canal was made more efficient, and transport opened to private merchants.[152] A system of monitoring grain prices eliminated severe shortages, and enabled the price of rice to rise slowly and smoothly through the 18th century.[153] Wary of the power of wealthy merchants, Qing rulers limited their trading licenses and usually refused them permission to open new mines, except in poor areas.[154] These restrictions on domestic resource exploration, as well as on foreign trade, are held by some scholars as a cause of the Great Divergence, by which the Western world overtook China economically.[citation needed]
During the Ming Qing period (1368 1911) the biggest development in the Chinese economy was its transition from a command to a market economy, the latter becoming increasingly more pervasive throughout the Qing's rule.[111] From roughly 1550 to 1800 China proper experienced a second commercial revolution, developing naturally from the first commercial revolution of the Song period which saw the emergence of long-distance inter-regional trade of luxury goods. During the second commercial revolution, for the first time, a large percentage of farming households began producing crops for sale in the local and national markets rather than for their own consumption or barter in the traditional economy. Surplus crops were placed onto the national market for sale, integrating farmers into the commercial economy from the ground up. This naturally led to regions specializing in certain cash-crops for export as China's economy became increasingly reliant on inter-regional trade of bulk staple goods such as cotton, grain, beans, vegetable oils, forest products, animal products, and fertilizer.[103]
Silver
Silver entered in large quantities from mines in the New World after the Spanish conquered the Philippines in the 1570s. The re-opening of the southeast coast, which had been closed in the late 17th century, quickly revived trade, which expanded at 4% per annum throughout the latter part of the 18th century.[155] China continued to export tea, silk and manufactures, creating a large, favorable trade balance with the West.[149] The resulting expansion of the money supply supported competitive and stable markets.[156] During the mid-Ming China had gradually shifted to silver as the standard currency for large scale transactions and by the late Kangxi reign the assessment and collection of the land tax was done in silver. Landlords began only accepting rent payments in silver rather than in crops themselves, which in turn incentivized farmers to produce crops for sale in local and national markets rather than for their own personal consumption or barter.[103] Unlike the copper coins, qian or cash, used mainly for smaller transactions, silver was not reliably minted into a coin but rather was traded in units of weight: the liang or tael, which equaled roughly 1.3 ounces of silver. A third-party had to be brought in to assess the weight and purity of the silver, resulting in an extra "meltage fee" added on to the price of transaction. Furthermore, since the "meltage fee" was unregulated until the reign of the Yongzheng emperor it was the source of much corruption at each level of the bureaucracy. The Yongzheng emperor cracked down on the corrupt "meltage fees," legalizing and regulating them so that they could be collected as a tax, "returning meltage fees to the public coffer." From this newly increased public coffer, the Yongzheng emperor increased the salaries of the officials who collected them, further legitimizing silver as the standard currency of the Qing economy.[111]
Urbanization and the proliferation of market-towns
The second commercial revolution also had a profound effect on the dispersion of the Qing populace. Up until the late Ming there existed a stark contrast between the rural countryside and city metropoles and very few mid-sized cities existed. This was due to the fact that extraction of surplus crops from the countryside was traditionally done by the state and not commercial organizations. However, as commercialization expanded in the late-Ming and early-Qing, mid-sized cities began popping up to direct the flow of domestic, commercial trade. Some towns of this nature had such a large volume of trade and merchants flowing through them that they developed into full-fledged market-towns. Some of these more active market-towns even developed into small-cities and became home to the new rising merchant-class.[103] The proliferation of these mid-sized cities was only made possible by advancements in long-distance transportation and methods of communication. As more and more Chinese-citizens were travelling the country conducting trade they increasingly found themselves in a far-away place needing a place to stay, in response the market saw the expansion of guild halls to house these merchants.[111]
 Puankhequa (1714 1788). Chinese merchant and member of a Cohong family.
Full-fledged trade guilds emerged, which, among other things, issued regulatory codes and price schedules, and provided a place for travelling merchants to stay and conduct their business. Along with the huiguan trade guilds, guild halls dedicated to more specific professions, gongsuo, began to appear and to control commercial craft or artisanal industries such as carpentry, weaving, banking, and medicine.[111] By the nineteenth century guild halls worked to transform urban areas into cosmopolitan, multi-cultural hubs, staged theatre performances open to general public, developed real estate by pooling funds together in the style of a trust, and some even facilitated the development of social services such as maintaining streets, water supply, and sewage facilities.[103]
Trade with the West
In 1685, the Kangxi emperor legalized private maritime trade along the coast, establishing a series of customs stations in major port cities. The customs station at Canton became by far the most active in foreign trade; by the late Kangxi reign, more than forty mercantile houses specializing in trade with the West had appeared. The Yongzheng emperor made a parent corporation comprising those forty individual houses in 1725 known as the Cohong system. Firmly established by 1757, the Canton Cohong was an association of thirteen business firms that had been awarded exclusive rights to conduct trade with Western merchants in Canton. Until its abolition after the Opium War in 1842, the Canton Cohong system was the only permitted avenue of Western trade into China, and thus became a booming hub of international trade by the early eighteenth century.[111] By the eighteenth century, the most significant export China had was tea. British demand for tea increased exponentially up until they figured out how to grow it for themselves in the hills of northern India in the 1880s. By the end of the eighteenth century, tea exports going through the Canton Cohong system amounted to one-tenth of the revenue from taxes collected from the British and nearly the entire revenue of the British East India Company; in fact, until the early nineteenth century tea, comprised ninety percent of exports leaving Canton.[111]
Revenue
1735-1893
The recorded revenues of the central Qing government increased little over the course of the 18th and early 19th century from 36,106,483 taels in 1725 to 43,343,978 taels in 1812 before declining to 38,600,570 taels in 1841, the land tax was the principle source of revenue for the central government with the salt, customs and poll taxes being important seconday sources.[157] Following the Opium wars and the opening of China to foreign trade and the mid-century rebellions against the Qing 2 further important sources of revenue were added the foreign maritime customs revenue and the likin revenue though only 20% of the likin revenue was actually given by the provinces to Hu Pu (board of revenue) in Beijing the rest remaining in provincial hands, the Hu Pu also managed to raise some miscellaneous taxes and increased the rate of the salt tax these measures doubled revenue by the late 19th century, this however was insufficient for the central government which was facing numerous crises and wars during the period and 9 foreign loans amounting to 40mil taels were contracted by the Qing government prior to 1890.[158]
It was estimated in the 1850s that wages around the capital of Beijing and the Yangtze delta region for a farmer was between 0.99-1.02 taels a month assuming every day was worked this would amount to roughly 12 taels a year with over 400,000,000 citizens in 1890 the level of taxation was extremely low.[159]
An estimate of the revenue of the Qing central government in taels in the early 1890s:[160][161]
Name of tax (Fairbank)
Revenue (Fairbank)*
Revenue (Taizu)**
Name of tax (Taizu)
Land tax
25,088,000
23,170,000
Land-Head tax
Miscellaneous, sale of rank
and 'contributions'
5,500,000
7,780,000
Miscellaneous
duty and likin on opium
2,229,000
native customs
1,000,000
maritime customs (1893)
21,989,000
22,990,000
Tariffs
grain tribute
6,562,000
8,400,000
Grain
salt gabelle (including likin on salt)
13,659,000
13,650,000
Salt (including Likin of salt)
merchandise likin
12,952,000
12,950,000
Lijin (likin)
3,000,000
Huohao (meltage fee)
Total
88,979,000
91,850,000
*Fairbank provides an average of the early 1890s
**Taizu provides data specifically for 1894
An estimate of expenditure of the Qing central government in taels in the early 1890s:[160]
Name of expenditure
Expenditure amount
Central government administration,
Imperial household and stipends
to Manchu garrisons
19,478,000
Maritime customs administration
2,478,000
modernised armies, coastal defence
8,000,000
Public works
1,500,000
Defence of Manchuria
1,848,000
Administration (civil and military) of Gansu
and Central Asia
4,800,000
Beiyang fleet
5,000,000
Nanyang fleet
5,000,000
Railway construction
5,000,000
Aid grants to Gansu, Guizhou and Yunnan
1,655,000
Provincial administration
(including Provincial armies)
36,220,000
Principal and interest on foreign loans
2,500,000
Total
88,979,000
Pao Chao gives a record of revenues and expenditures in 1887:
Government Revenue 1887[162]
Source
Amount
(taels unless specified)
Land tax
31,184,042
Salt monopoly
12,557,552
Likin
16,548,199
Grain tax
3,624,532 Shih of rice
52,441,600 catties of hay
Copper transfers
123,600,000 copper coins*
Poll tax**
4,694,678
Total
65,108,071 taels
3,624,532 Shih of rice
52,441,600 catties of Hay
*1,000 copper coins to 1 tael was the official rate
**not explicity stated
Board of Revenue expenditure 1887[163]
Category
amount
% of total
Ceremonies and
sacrifices
336,609
1.32
Education and
Examinations
330,760
1.29
Civil Officials
4,845,453
19.28
Military
18,718,474
73.33
Charity and
rewards
225,125
0.88
Purchase and
manufacturing
579,641
2.27
Miscellaneous
415,959
1.63
Total
25,227,896
100
1894-1912
It is important to note that the revenue and expediture detailed above concerns that only of the central government in Beijing. There have been estimates of total national revenue the Financial Reorganisation bureau of the Dynasty (established in 1909) estimated total revenue to be 292,000,000 taels H.B. Morse estimated in the early 1900s a total of 284,150,000 taels of which 99,062,000 taels was spent by the Central government, 142,374,000 taels by the provincial governments and the remainder by the local government. In 1911 the Consultative assembly estimated total revenue to be 301,910,297 taels. Included in this figure was over 44,000,000 taels from the Likin of which only 13,000,000 was reported to Beijing.[164]
The Qing government during and following the First Sino-Japanese war increasingly took on loans to meet its expenditure requirements a total of 746,220,453 taels of which slightly over 330,000,000 taels was for Railway construction and the repayment to come from the revenues of the railways themselves thus these loans did not burden the central government finances. A relatively small sum of just over 25,500,000 taels was borrowed for industrial projects, over 5,000,000 taels for Telegraph lines with less than 1,000,000 taels for miscellaneous purposes. The remainder was primarily for the costs of the Sino-Japanese war and the indemnity in the Treaty of Shimonoseki amounting to over 382,000,000 taels.[164]
It is noted by Taizu that these figures for formal taxation only amounted to half of the total taxation and therefore revenue of the government with these surcharges being levied at a local level by local officials who found the level of taxation far too low to support even basic governance this is despite the ability to levy surcharges belonging solely to the central government.[161]
Science and technology
Main article: History of science and technology in China
Chinese scholars, court academies, and local officials carried on late Ming dynasty strengths in astronomy, mathematics, and geography, as well as technologies in ceramics, metallurgy, water transport, printing. Contrary to stereotypes in some Western writing, 16th and 17th century Qing dynasty officials and literati eagerly explored the technology and science introduced by Jesuit missionaries. Manchu leaders employed Jesuits to use cannon and gunpowder to great effect in the conquest of China, and the court sponsored their research in astronomy. The aim of these efforts, however, was to reform and improve inherited science and technology, not to replace it.[165] Scientific knowledge advanced during the Qing, but there was not a change in the way this knowledge was organized or the way scientific evidence was defined or its truth tested. Those who studied the physical universe shared their findings with each other and identified themselves as men of science, but they did not have a separate and independent professional role with its own training and advancement. They were still literati.[166]
The Opium Wars, however, demonstrated the power of steam engine and military technology that had only recently been put into practice in the West. During the Self-Strengthening Movement of the 1860s and 1870s Confucian officials in several coastal provinces established an industrial base in military technology. The introduction of railroads into China raised questions that were more political than technological. A British company built the 19 km (12 mi) Shanghai Woosung line in 1876, obtaining the land under false pretenses, and it was soon torn up. Court officials feared local public opinion and that railways would help invaders, harm farmlands, and obstruct feng shui.[167] To keep development in Chinese hands, the Qing government borrowed 34 billion taels of silver from foreign lenders for railway construction between 1894 and 1911. As late as 1900, only 470 km (292 mi) were in operation, with a further 6,400 km (4,000 mi) in the planning stage. Finally, 8,400 km (5,200 mi) of railway was completed. The British and French after 1905 were finally able to open lines to Burma and Vietnam.[168]
Protestant missionaries by the 1830s translated and printed Western science and medical textbooks. The textbooks found homes in the rapidly enlarging network of missionary schools, and universities. The textbooks opened learning open possibilities for the small number of Chinese students interested in science, and a very small number interested in technology. After 1900, Japan had a greater role in bringing modern science and technology to Chinese audiences but even then they reached chiefly the children of the rich landowning gentry, who seldom engaged in industrial careers.[169]
Arts and culture
See also: Chinese art  Late imperial China (1368 1911), Chinese literature  Classical fiction and drama, Classical Chinese poetry  History and development, and Qing poetry Pine, Plum and Cranes, 1759, by Shen Quan (1682 1760).
Under the Qing, inherited forms of art flourished and innovations occurred at many levels and in many types. High levels of literacy, a successful publishing industry, prosperous cities, and the Confucian emphasis on cultivation all fed a lively and creative set of cultural fields.
By the end of the nineteenth century, national artistic and cultural worlds had begun to come to terms with the cosmopolitan culture of the West and Japan. The decision to stay within old forms or welcome Western models was now a conscious choice rather than an unchallenged acceptance of tradition. Classically trained Confucian scholars such as Liang Qichao and Wang Guowei read widely and broke aesthetic and critical ground later cultivated in the New Culture Movement.
Fine arts
 A Daoguang period Peking glass vase. Colored in "Imperial Yellow", due to its association with the Qing.
The Qing emperors were generally adept at poetry and often skilled in painting, and offered their patronage to Confucian culture. The Kangxi and Qianlong Emperors, for instance, embraced Chinese traditions both to control them and to proclaim their own legitimacy. The Kangxi Emperor sponsored the Peiwen Yunfu, a rhyme dictionary published in 1711, and the Kangxi Dictionary published in 1716, which remains to this day an authoritative reference. The Qianlong Emperor sponsored the largest collection of writings in Chinese history, the Siku Quanshu, completed in 1782. Court painters made new versions of the Song masterpiece, Zhang Zeduan's Along the River During the Qingming Festival, whose depiction of a prosperous and happy realm demonstrated the beneficence of the emperor. The emperors undertook tours of the south and commissioned monumental scrolls to depict the grandeur of the occasion.[170] Imperial patronage also encouraged the industrial production of ceramics and Chinese export porcelain. Peking glassware became popular after European glass making processes were introduced by Jesuits to Beijing.[171][172]
Yet the most impressive aesthetic works were done among the scholars and urban elite. Calligraphy and painting[173] remained a central interest to both court painters and scholar-gentry who considered the four arts part of their cultural identity and social standing.[174] The painting of the early years of the dynasty included such painters as the orthodox Four Wangs and the individualists Bada Shanren (1626 1705) and Shitao (1641 1707). The nineteenth century saw such innovations as the Shanghai School and the Lingnan School,[175] which used the technical skills of tradition to set the stage for modern painting.
Traditional learning and literature
Traditional learning flourished, especially among Ming loyalists such as Dai Zhen and Gu Yanwu, but scholars in the school of evidential learning made innovations in skeptical textual scholarship. Scholar-bureaucrats, including Lin Zexu and Wei Yuan, developed a school of practical statecraft which rooted bureaucratic reform and restructuring in classical philosophy.
 Jade book of the Qianlong period on display at the British Museum
Philosophy[176] and literature grew to new heights in the Qing period. Poetry continued as a mark of the cultivated gentleman, but women wrote in larger and larger numbers and poets came from all walks of life. The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a lively field of research, being studied (along with the poetry of the Ming dynasty) for its association with Chinese opera, developmental trends of Classical Chinese poetry, the transition to a greater role for vernacular language, and for poetry by women. The Qing dynasty was a period of literary editing and criticism, and many of the modern popular versions of Classical Chinese poems were transmitted through Qing dynasty anthologies, such as the Quan Tangshi and the Three Hundred Tang Poems. Although fiction did not have the prestige of poetry, novels flourished. Pu Songling brought the short story to a new level in his Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio, published in the mid-18th century, and Shen Fu demonstrated the charm of the informal memoir in Six Chapters of a Floating Life, written in the early 19th century but published only in 1877. The art of the novel reached a pinnacle in Cao Xueqin's Dream of the Red Chamber, but its combination of social commentary and psychological insight were echoed in highly skilled novels such as Wu Jingzi's The Scholars (1750) and Li Ruzhen's Flowers in the Mirror (1827).[177]  Landscape by Wang Gai, 1694
Cuisine
Cuisine aroused a cultural pride in the richness of a long and varied past. The gentleman gourmet, such as Yuan Mei, applied aesthetic standards to the art of cooking, eating, and appreciation of tea at a time when New World crops and products entered everyday life. Yuan's Suiyuan Shidan expounded culinary aesthetics and theory, along with a range of recipes. The Manchu Han Imperial Feast originated at the court. Although this banquet was probably never common, it reflected an appreciation of Manchu culinary customs.[178] Nevertheless, culinary traditionalists such as Yuan Mei lambasted the opulence of the Manchu Han Feast. Yuan wrote that the feast was caused in part by the "vulgar habits of bad chefs" and that "displays this trite are useful only for welcoming new relations through one's gates or when the boss comes to visit". ( )[179]
Historiography and memory
Nationalism
After 1912, writers, scholars and popular opinion in China and abroad generally deprecated Qing rule, blaming it for China's weakness in the Century of Humiliation and racism of the Manchus against other peoples of China. However, in the 21st century, a favorable view has emerged in popular culture, and some nationalists have even portrayed Imperial China as benevolent, strong and more advanced than the West. They blame ugly wars and diplomatic controversies on imperialist exploitation by Western nations and Japan. Although officially still communist and Maoist, in practice China's rulers have used this grassroots settlement to proclaim that their current policies are restoring China's historical glory.[180][181] Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Xi Jinping has sought parity between Beijing and Washington and promised to restore China to its historical glory.[182]
New Qing History
Main article: New Qing History
The New Qing History is a revisionist historiographical trend starting in the mid-1990s emphasizing the Manchu nature of the dynasty. Earlier historians had emphasized the power of Han Chinese to "sinicize" their conquerors, that is, to assimilate and make them Chinese in their thought and institutions. In the 1980s and early 1990s, American scholars began to learn Manchu and took advantage of newly opened Chinese- and Manchu-language documents in the archives.[183] In addition, a general growing interest in ethnicity led to fresh understandings of non-Han peoples in Chinese politics and society, which was also part of a rethinking of how the modern Chinese nation-state developed, a rethinking not based on received ideas of Han superiority. [184] This new research found that the Manchu rulers manipulated their subjects and from the 1630s through at least the 18th century, emperors developed a sense of Manchu identity and used Central Asian models of rule as much as they did Confucian ones.[185] They argue that the Manchu rulers regarded "China" as only a part, although a very important part, of a much wider empire that extended into the Inner Asian territories of Mongolia, Tibet, Manchuria and Xinjiang.[183]
Ping-ti Ho criticized the new approach for exaggerating the Manchu character of the dynasty, which he argued had become sinified.[186] Some scholars in China accused the American group of imposing American concerns with race and identity or even of imperialist misunderstanding to weaken China. Still others in China agree that this scholarship has opened new vistas for the study of Qing history.[187]
The "New Qing History" is not related to the New Qing History, a multi-volume history authorized by the Chinese State Council in 2003.[188]
See also
China portalHistory portal
Anti-Qing sentiment
Century of humiliation
Christianity in China
Costumes of Qing officials
Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period
Foreign relations of the Qing dynasty
History of China
Imperial Chinese harem system
International relations (1814 1919)
Islam during the Qing dynasty
List of emperors of the Qing dynasty
List of rebellions in China
List of recipients of tribute from China
List of Chinese monarchs
Manchuria under Qing rule
Military history of China before 1911
Mongolia under Qing rule
Names of the Qing dynasty
New Qing History
Qing emperors' family tree
Qing dynasty in Inner Asia
Qing official headwear
The Rise and Fall of Qing Dynasty
Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty
Taiwan under Qing rule
Tibet under Qing rule
Timeline of Chinese history
Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions
Xinjiang under Qing rule
Notes
^ The inscription reads "Seal of the Empire of the Great Qing" ( ).
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: Sh ng J ng; Manchu:  , M llendorff: Mukden, Abkai: Mukden; capital after 1625 for Later Jin, secondary capital after 1644.
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: B ij ng; Manchu:  , M llendorff: Beging, Abkai: Beging; primary capital afterwards
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: D  Q ng; IPA: [t i ]Manchu:  , M llendorff: Daicing gurun, Abkai: Daiqing gurun, lit. 'Great Qing State'
^ For other names, see Names of the Qing dynasty.
^ Although there were several attempts to restore the dynastic Chinese monarchy after the collapse of the Qing dynasty in 1912, such as the Empire of China (1915 1916), the Manchu Restoration (1917), and the Manchukuo (1932 1945), these are usually not considered imperial regimes in Chinese historiography.
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: l ub 
^ traditional Chinese:  ; simplified Chinese:  ; pinyin: sh ngsh ; Manchu:  , M llendorff: aliha amban, Abkai: aliha amban
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: sh l ng; Manchu:  , M llendorff: ashan i amban, Abkai: ashan-i amban
^ traditional Chinese:  ; simplified Chinese:  ; pinyin: n ig ; Manchu:  , M llendorff: dorgi yamun, Abkai: dorgi yamun
^ traditional Chinese:  ; simplified Chinese:  ; pinyin: j nj  ch ; Manchu:  , M llendorff: coohai nash n i ba, Abkai: qouhai nashvn-i ba
^ traditional Chinese:  ; simplified Chinese:  ; pinyin: j nj  d ch n
^ Chinese:  ; pinyin: b oy ; Manchu:  , M llendorff: booi, Abkai: boui
References
Citations
^ S derblom Saarela (2021).
^ Norman (1988), pp. 133 134.
^ "Living in the Chinese Cosmos: Understanding Religion in Late Imperial China (1644 1911)", What is Popular Religion, Columbia University, archived from the original on 19 January 2015, retrieved 15 June 2021
^ a b c Taagepera, Rein (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia" (PDF). International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 500. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. JSTOR 2600793. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2020. Retrieved 24 July 2020.
^ Yamamuro, Shin'ichi (2006). Manchuria Under Japanese Domination. Translated by J. A. Fogel. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 246. ISBN 9780812239126.
^ Crossley (1997), pp. 212 213.
^ Elliott (2001), p. 402, note 118.
^ Dong, Shaoxin (2020), "The Tartars in European Missionary Writings of the Seventeenth Century",  in Weststeijn, Thijs (ed.), Foreign Devils and Philosophers Cultural Encounters between the Chinese, the Dutch, and Other Europeans, 1590 1800, Leiden: Brill, pp. 82 83, ISBN 9789004418929, archived from the original on 8 May 2021, retrieved 14 March 2021
^ Zhao (2006), pp. 4, 7 10, 12 14 and 24 n. 4.
^ Bilik, Naran. "Names Have Memories: History, Semantic Identity and Conflict in Mongolian and Chinese Language Use." Inner Asia 9.1 (2007): 23 39. p. 34
^ "Qing dynasty". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 9 March 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
^ Ebrey (2010), p. 220.
^ Crossley (1997), p. 3.
^ Ebrey & Walthall (2013), p. 271.
^ Wakeman Jr (1985), p. 24. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1985 (help)
^ Swope, Kenneth M. (2014). The Military Collapse of China's Ming Dynasty, 1618 44 (illustrated ed.). Routledge. p. 16. ISBN 978-1134462094. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
^ Mair, Victor H.; Chen, Sanping; Wood, Frances (2013). Chinese Lives: The People Who Made a Civilization (illustrated ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0500771471. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
^ a b Ebrey (2010), pp. 220 224.
^ Bernard Hung-Kay Luk, Amir Harrak-Contacts between cultures, Volume 4, p.25
^ Rawski (1991), p. 177.
^ Tumen jalafun jecen ak : Manchu studies in honour of Giovanni Stary By Giovanni Stary, Alessandra Pozzi, Juha Antero Janhunen, Michael Weiers
^ Li (2002), pp. 60 62. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFLi2002 (help)
^ Li (2002), p. 65. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFLi2002 (help)
^ "China". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019.
^ The exact figure of Li Zicheng's forces at the battle of Shanhai Pass is disputed. Some primary sources, such as the official Qing and Ming court histories ( ), cite 200,000.
^ Spence (2012), p. 32.
^ Di Cosmo (2007), p. 6.
^ Naquin & Rawski (1987), p. 141.
^ Di Cosmo (2007), p. 23.
^ Di Cosmo (2007), p. 9.
^ Rawski (1991), p. 175.
^ Di Cosmo (2007), p. 7.
^ Spence (1990), p. 41.
^ Wakeman Jr (1985), p. 478. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1985 (help)
^ a b Spence (2012), p. 38.
^ Wakeman Jr (1985), pp. 646 650. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1985 (help)
^ Wakeman Jr (1985), p. 648, n. 183. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1985 (help)
^ Wakeman Jr (1985), pp. 651 680. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1985 (help)
^ Faure (2007), p. 164.
^ Ebrey (1993), p. [page needed].
^ Wakeman Jr (1977), p. 83. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFWakeman_Jr1977 (help)
^ This event was recorded by Italian Jesuit Martin Martinius in his account Bellum Tartaricum with original text in Latin, first published in Rome 1654. First English edition, London: John Crook, 1654.
^ Ho (2011), p. 135.
^ Ho (2011), p. 198.
^ Ho (2011), p. 206.
^ Ho (2011), p. 307.
^ Rowe (2009), pp. 32 33.
^ Kuzmin, Sergius L.; Dmitriev, Sergey (2015). "Conquest dynasties of China or foreign empires? The problem of relations between China, Yuan and Qing". International Journal of Central Asian Studies. 19: 59 92. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2017   via Academia.
^ Alexander Golikov, Translating through the Cultural Barriers: the Qing Imperial Multilingualism[permanent dead link]
^ Farquhar, David (1978). "Emperor As Bodhisattva in the Governance of the Qing Empire". Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies. 38 (1): 5 34. doi:10.2307/2718931. JSTOR 2718931.
^ Spence (2012), pp. 48 51.
^ Perdue (2005).
^ Spence (2012), pp. 62 66.
^ Spence (2012), pp. 97, 101.
^ Spence (2012), p. 72.
^ Hs  (1990), p. 35.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 68.
^ Hs  (1990), pp. 35 37.
^ Spence (2012), pp. 80 83.
^ Spence (2012), pp. 83, 86.
^ " " ". china.com (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 5 January 2009. Retrieved 30 December 2008.
^ Schoppa, R. Keith. Revolution and its Past: Identities and Change in Modern Chinese History. Pearson Hall, 2010, pp. 42 43.
^ Spence (1990), pp. 112, 114, 116.
^ T ng & Fairbank (1954), p. 19.
^ "Taiping Rebellion | Causes, Effects, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 3 May 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2021.
^ Platt (2012), p. xxii.
^ Hevia (2003).
^ Wright (1957), pp. 196 221.
^ Hs  (1990), pp. 328 30.
^ Crossley (2010), p. 117.
^ Reynolds (1993), pp. 35 36.
^ Spence (2012), pp. 223 225.
^ Reynolds (1993), p. 5-11.
^ Hs  (1990), pp. 412 416.
^ Rhoads (2000), p. 121 ff.
^ Mu, Eric (3 November 2008). "Reformist Emperor Guangxu was Poisoned, Study Confirms". Danwei. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2013.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ Chien-nung Li, Jiannong Li, Ss -y  T ng, "The political history of China, 1840 1928", p234
^ Billingsley (1988), pp. 56 59.
^ Spence (2012), p. 39.
^ Jackson & Hugus (1999), pp. 134 135.
^ Bartlett (1991).
^ "The Rise of the Manchus". University of Maryland. Archived from the original on 18 December 2008. Retrieved 19 October 2008.
^ a b Rawski (1998), p. 179.
^ Rawski (1998), pp. 179 180.
^ Torbert (1977), p. 27.
^ Torbert (1977), p. 28.
^ Davidson, James W. (1903). The Island of Formosa, Past and Present : history, people, resources, and commercial prospects : tea, camphor, sugar, gold, coal, sulphur, economical plants, and other productions. London and New York: Macmillan. OL 6931635M. Pages, 247, 620.
^ "Treaty of Peace between China and Japan (Treaty of Shimonoseki)". Ch'ing Dynasty Treaties and Agreements Preserved by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of China (Taiwan). National Palace Museum. 17 April 1895.  ... ...  [China shall yield to Japan in perpetuity the rights to administer the following regions as well as all fortresses, munition factories, and public properties thereof ... the entire island of Taiwan and all appertaining islands ... Penghu archipelago]
^ Millward (2007), p. 190.
^ "<untitled>" (PDF). The New York Times. 19 January 1906. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 13 June 2018.
^ Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet . 1906   via Wikisource.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 91.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 91-92.
^ a b Rowe (2009), p. 92.
^ Edmonds, Richard L. (1979). "The Willow Palisade". Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 69 (4): 599 621. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8306.1979.tb01285.x. ISSN 0004-5608. JSTOR 2563132. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2021.
^ Richards, John F. (15 May 2003). The Unending Frontier: An Environmental History of the Early Modern World. University of California Press. pp. 141, 144. ISBN 978-0-520-23075-0. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2015.
^ Lee, Robert H. G. (1970). The Manchurian frontier in Ch ing history. Internet Archive. Cambridge, Harvard University Press. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-674-54775-9.
^ "China's narrative of Han expansion". South China Morning Post. 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2021.
^ Sewell, Bill (29 April 2019). Constructing Empire: The Japanese in Changchun, 1905 45. UBC Press. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-7748-3655-5. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2021.
^ Matsuzato, Kimitaka (7 December 2016). Russia and Its Northeast Asian Neighbors: China, Japan, and Korea, 1858 1945. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 27 28. ISBN 978-1-4985-3705-6. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022.
^ Rowe (2002), p. 485. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFRowe2002 (help)
^ Naquin & Rawski (1987), p. 117.
^ a b c d e Rowe (2009), p. [page needed].
^ Rowe (2009), p. 109-110.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 112-113.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 111.
^ Rowe (2009), p. 114-116.
^ Sneath (2007), p. 101.
^ Xu & Huang (2005), p. 335. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFXuHuang2005 (help)
^ Rowe (2009), p. 116-117.
^ a b c d e f g Porter (2016), p. [page needed].
^ Sneath (2007), p. 98.
^ Sneath (2007), p. 105 106.
^ GoossaertPalmer (2011), p. 3.
^ "Living in the Chinese Cosmos: Understanding Religion in Late Imperial China (1644 1911)", Religion, the State, and Imperial Legitimacy, Columbia University, archived from the original on 12 April 2021, retrieved 15 June 2021
^ Teiser, Stephen F. (1996), "Introduction" (PDF),  in Donald S. Lopez., Jr. (ed.), The Spirits of Chinese Religion, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 1 33, archived (PDF) from the original on 24 August 2015, retrieved 15 June 2021 p. 27
^ Harrison, Henrietta (2001). China. London: Arnold; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0340741333., pp 36- 42.
^ Elliott (2001), p. 235, 241.
^ Rawski (1998), pp. 231 236, 242 243.
^ Rawski (1998), p. 236.
^ Elliott (2001), p. 237-238.
^ Richard J. Smith (2007). Settling the Dead: Funerals, Memorials and Beliefs Concerning the Afterlife Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Living in the Chinese Cosmos: Understanding Religion in Late-Imperial China
^  Living in the Chinese Cosmos: Understanding Religion in Late Imperial China (1644 1911)  (Columbia University) Institutional Religion: The Three Teachings Archived 8 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ Lagerwey (2010), p. 6-7.
^ Mote, Frederick W. (1999). Imperial China, 900 1800. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674445155. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 15 June 2021., pp. 958 961.
^ Bays (2012), pp. 21 23.
^ Bays (2012), pp. 25 26.
^ a b c Reilly (2004), p. 43.
^ Reilly (2004), p. 44.
^ Elliott (2001), p. 241.
^ Daily (2013), p. 1.
^ Daily (2013), p. 145.
^ Daily (2013), pp. 188 189.
^ Reilly (2004), pp. 61, 64.
^ Reilly (2004), p. 48.
^ Reilly (2004), p. 49.
^ Reilly (2004), p. 50.
^ Reilly (2004), p. 52.
^ Reilly (2004), pp. 57, 62.
^ GoossaertPalmer (2011), p. 38 39.
^ Fairbank, John King (2006), China: A New History (2nd enlarged ed.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ISBN 9780674018280, archived from the original on 14 February 2022, retrieved 16 June 2021, pp 221 222.
^ GoossaertPalmer (2011), p. 38 40.
^ GoossaertPalmer (2011), p. 40 41.
^ M hlhahn (2019), p. 170.
^ Gerald H. Choa (1990). "Heal the Sick" was Their Motto: The Protestant Medical Missionaries in China. Chinese University Press.
^ Kaiyi Chen (1996). "Missionaries and the early development of nursing in China". Nursing History Review. 4: 129 149. doi:10.1891/1062-8061.4.1.129. PMID 7581277. S2CID 34206810.
^ Myers & Wang (2002), pp. 564, 566. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), p. 564. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ a b Murphey (2007), p. 151.
^ Myers & Wang (2002), p. 593. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), pp. 593, 595. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), p. 598. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), pp. 572 573, 599 600. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), pp. 606, 609. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), p. 587. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ Myers & Wang (2002), pp. 587, 590. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMyersWang2002 (help)
^ The Cambridge history of China. Denis Crispin Twitchett, John King Fairbank. Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. 1978. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-521-24327-8. OCLC 2424772.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ The Cambridge history of China. Denis Crispin Twitchett, John King Fairbank. Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. 1978. pp. 61 62. ISBN 978-0-521-24327-8. OCLC 2424772.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ Peng, Linan (2021). "The last guardian of the throne: the regional army in the late Qing dynasty". Journal of Institutional Economics. 17 (2): 328 329   via JSTOR.
^ a b The Cambridge history of China. Denis Crispin Twitchett, John King Fairbank. Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. 1978. p. 63. ISBN 978-0-521-24327-8. OCLC 2424772.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ a b Taizu, Zhang (2023). The ideological foundations of Qing taxation:Belief systems, Politics, and institutions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 99, 46, 69. ISBN 9781108995955.
^ Hsieh, Pao Chao (2018). The Government of China, 1644-1911. London. pp. 194 197 198. ISBN 978-0-429-45550-6. OCLC 1050360672.
^ Hsieh, Pao Chao (2018). The Government of China, 1644-1911. London. ISBN 978-0-429-45550-6. OCLC 1050360672.
^ a b The Cambridge history of China. Denis Crispin Twitchett, John King Fairbank. Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. 1978. pp. 63 66. ISBN 978-0-521-24327-8. OCLC 2424772.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ Porter (2016), p. 229-238.
^ Porter (2016), p. 237-238.
^ David Pong (1973). "Confucian patriotism and the destruction of the Woosung railway, 1877". Modern Asian Studies. 7 (3): 647 676. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00005333. JSTOR 311679. S2CID 202928323.
^ Jim Harter (2005). World Railways of the Nineteenth Century. Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 223. ISBN 9780801880896. Archived from the original on 30 June 2020. Retrieved 10 September 2019.
^ Benjamin Elman (2005). On Their Own Terms: Science in China, 1550 1900. Harvard University Press. pp. 270 331, 396. ISBN 9780674016859.
^ "Recording the Grandeur of the Qing". The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Columbia University. Archived from the original on 20 December 2012. Retrieved 17 May 2020. Chinese painting
^ Boda, Yang. Study of glass wares from the Qing Dynasty (1644 1911). 1983.
^ Nilsson, Jan-Erik. "Chinese Porcelain Glossary: Glass, Chinese (Peking Glass)". gotheborg.com. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2017.
^ "Ch'ing Dynasty   The Art of Asia   Chinese Dynasty Guide". www.artsmia.org. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2012.
^ "Qing Dynasty, Painting". The Met. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 20 September 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2012.
^ "Home". The Lingnan School of Painting. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012.
^ Ng, On-cho (2019). "Qing Philosophy".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Archived from the original on 16 June 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2020.
^ "Ming and Qing Novels" (PDF). Berkshire Encyclopedia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2012.
^ Spence, Jonathan (1977). ""Ch'ing"".  In Kwang-chih Chang (ed.). Food in Chinese Culture: Anthropological and Historical Perspectives. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 260 294.Reprinted in Spence, Jonathan (1992). Chinese Roundabout: Essays in History and Culture. New York: W. W. Norton.
^ Yuan Mei (5 September 2014). "Things to Avoid 12: Clich  ( )". The Way of the Eating, Sean JS Chen, translator (Translating the Suiyuan Shidan). Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015.
^ Haiyang Yu, "Glorious memories of imperial China and the rise of Chinese populist nationalism." Journal of Contemporary China 23.90 (2014): 1174 1187.
^ Zhang Weiwei (2016). China Horizon, The: Glory And Dream Of A Civilizational State. World Scientific. p. 80. ISBN 9781938134753. Archived from the original on 30 June 2020. Retrieved 23 August 2019.
^ Cheng Chen (2016). The Return of Ideology: The Search for Regime Identities in Postcommunist Russia and China. U of Michigan Press. p. 111. ISBN 9780472121991. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 23 August 2019.
^ a b Waley-Cohen (2004), p. 194-197.
^ Elliott (2001b), p. 70-71.
^ Rawski, Evelyn (1996). "Reenvisioning the Qing: The Significance of the Qing Period in Chinese History". Journal of Asian Studies. 55 (4): 829 850. doi:10.2307/2646525. JSTOR 2646525. S2CID 162388379.
^ Ping-ti Ho (1998). "In defense of Sinicization: A Rebuttal of Evelyn Rawski's 'Reenvisioning the Qing'". Journal of Asian Studies. 57 (1): 123 155. doi:10.1017/S0021911800022713. JSTOR 2659026. S2CID 162071050.
^ Ding, Yizhuang (2009). "Reflections on the "New Qing History" School in the United States". Chinese Studies in History. 43 (2): 92 96. doi:10.2753/CSH0009-4633430208. S2CID 161545950.
^ Mao, Liping; Zhao, Ma (2012). ""Writing History in the Digital Age": The New Qing History Project and the Digitization of Qing Archives". History Compass. 10 (5): 367 374. doi:10.1111/j.1478-0542.2012.00841.x.
Sources
Bartlett, Beatrice S. (1991). Monarchs and Ministers: The Grand Council in Mid-Ch'ing China, 1723 1820. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06591-8.
Bays, Daniel H. (2012). A New History of Christianity in China. Chichester, West Sussex; Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 9781405159548.
Billingsley, Phil (1988). Bandits in Republican China. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-804-71406-8. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2020.
Crossley, Pamela Kyle (1997). The Manchus. Wiley. ISBN 978-1-55786-560-1.
  (2000). A Translucent Mirror: History and Identity in Qing Imperial Ideology. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-92884-8. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2019.
  (2010). The Wobbling Pivot: China since 1800. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-6079-7.
Crossley, Pamela Kyle; Siu, Helen F.; Sutton, Donald S. (2006). Empire at the Margins: Culture, Ethnicity, and Frontier in Early Modern China. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-23015-6.
Daily, Christopher A. (2013). Robert Morrison and the Protestant Plan for China. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 9789888208036.
Di Cosmo, Nicola, ed. (2007). The Diary of a Manchu Soldier in Seventeenth Century China: "My Service in the Army," by Dzengseo. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-78955-8. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 12 July 2015.
Ebrey, Patricia (1993). Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook (2nd ed.). New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-02-908752-7.
  (2010). The Cambridge Illustrated History of China. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-12433-1.
 ; Walthall, Anne (2013). East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History (3rd ed.). Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-1-285-52867-0. Archived from the original on 24 June 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2015.
Elliott, Mark C. (2000). "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies" (PDF). Journal of Asian Studies. 59 (3): 603 646. doi:10.2307/2658945. JSTOR 2658945. S2CID 162684575. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 December 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2013.
  (2001b), "The Manchu-language Archives of the Qing Dynasty and the Origins of the Palace Memorial System", Late Imperial China, 22 (1): 1 70, doi:10.1353/late.2001.0002, S2CID 144117089, archived from the original on 2 October 2022, retrieved 15 April 2022 Available at Digital Access to Scholarship at Harvard HERE Archived 24 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine
  (2001). The Manchu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late Imperial China. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4684-7. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2015.
Faure, David (2007). Emperor and Ancestor: State and Lineage in South China. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-5318-0.
Goossaert, Vincent; Palmer, David A. (2011). The Religious Question in Modern China. Chicago: Chicago University Press. ISBN 9780226304168. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2021.
Hevia, James L. (2003). English Lessons: The Pedagogy of Imperialism in Nineteenth-Century China. Durham & Hong Kong: Duke University Press & Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 9780822331889.
Ho, David Dahpon (2011). Sealords Live in Vain: Fujian and the Making of a Maritime Frontier in Seventeenth-Century China (Thesis). University of California, San Diego. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 17 June 2016.
Hs , Immanuel C. Y. (1990). The rise of modern China (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505867-3.
Jackson, Beverly; Hugus, David (1999). Ladder to the Clouds: Intrigue and Tradition in Chinese Rank. Ten Speed Press. ISBN 978-1-580-08020-0.
Lagerwey, John (2010). China: A Religious State. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 9789888028047. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021.
Li, Gertraude Roth (2002). "State building before 1644".  In Peterson, Willard J. (ed.). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 9: The Ch'ing Empire to 1800, Part One. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 9 72. ISBN 978-0-521-24334-6.
Liu, Kwang-Ching; Smith, Richard J. (1980). "The Military Challenge: The North-west and the Coast".  In Fairbank, John K.; Liu, Kwang-Ching (eds.). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 11: Late Ch'ing 1800 1911, Part 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 202 273. ISBN 978-0-521-22029-3.
Millward, James A. (2007). Eurasian crossroads: a history of Xinjiang. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2020.
M hlhahn, Klaus (2019). Making China Modern: From the Great Qing to Xi Jinping. Harvard University Press. pp. 21 227. ISBN 978-0-674-73735-8.
Murphey, Rhoads (2007). East Asia: A New History (4th ed.). Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-0-321-42141-8.
Myers, H. Ramon; Wang, Yeh-Chien (2002). "Economic developments, 1644 1800".  In Peterson, Willard J. (ed.). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 9: The Ch'ing Empire to 1800, Part One. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 563 647. ISBN 978-0-521-24334-6.
Naquin, Susan; Rawski, Evelyn Sakakida (1987). Chinese Society in the Eighteenth Century. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-04602-1. Archived from the original on 31 August 2020. Retrieved 5 March 2018.
Norman, Jerry (1988). Chinese. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521228093.
Perdue, Peter C. (2005). China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Eurasia. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01684-2.
Platt, Stephen R. (2012). Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom: China, the West, and the Epic Story of the Taiping Civil War. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-27173-0.
Platt, Stephen R. (2018). Imperial Twilight: The Opium War and the End of China's Last Golden Age. New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 9780345803023.
Porter, Jonathan (2016). Imperial China, 1350 1900. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-442-22293-9. OCLC 920818520.
Rawski, Evelyn S. (1991). "Ch'ing Imperial Marriage and Problems of Rulership".  In Rubie Sharon Watson; Patricia Buckley Ebrey (eds.). Marriage and Inequality in Chinese Society. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06930-5.
  (1998). The Last Emperors: A Social History of Qing Imperial Institutions. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21289-3.
Reilly, Thomas H. (2004). The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom: Rebellion and the Blasphemy of Empire. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 9780295801926.
Rhoads, Edward J.M. (2000). Manchus & Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861 1928. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 0295979380. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2021.
Reynolds, Douglas Robertson (1993). China, 1898 1912 : The Xinzheng Revolution and Japan. Cambridge, MA: Council on East Asian Studies Harvard University : Distributed by Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-11660-3.
Rowe, William T. (2002). "Social stability and social change".  In Peterson, Willard J. (ed.). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 9: The Ch'ing Empire to 1800, Part One. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 473 562. ISBN 978-0-521-24334-6.
  (2009). China's Last Empire: The Great Qing. History of Imperial China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03612-3.
Sneath, David (2007). The Headless State: Aristocratic Orders, Kinship Society, and Misrepresentations of Nomadic Inner Asia (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-51167-4. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 4 May 2019.
S derblom Saarela, M rten (2021). "Manchu Language". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Asian History. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190277727.013.447. ISBN 978-0-19-027772-7. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021.
Spence, Jonathan D. (1990). The Search for Modern China (1st ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-30780-1. Online at Internet Archive
  (2012). The Search for Modern China (3rd ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-93451-9.
T ng, Ssu-y ; Fairbank, John King, eds. (1954) [reprint 1979]. China's Response to the West: A Documentary Survey, 1839 1923. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-12025-9.
Torbert, Preston M. (1977). The Ch'ing Imperial Household Department: A Study of Its Organization and Principal Functions, 1662 1796. Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN 978-0-674-12761-6.
Wakeman, Frederic Jr. (1977). The Fall of Imperial China. Transformation of modern China series. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-02-933680-9. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2015.
  (1985). The Great Enterprise: The Manchu Reconstruction of Imperial Order in Seventeenth-century China. Vol. I. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-04804-1.
Wang, Shuo (2008). "Qing Imperial Women: Empresses, Concubines, and Aisin Gioro Daughters".  In Anne Walthall (ed.). Servants of the Dynasty: Palace Women in World History. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25444-2.
Wright, Mary Clabaugh (1957). The Last Stand of Chinese Conservatism: The T'ung-Chih Restoration, 1862 1874. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-804-70475-5.
Zhao, Gang (2006). "Reinventing China Imperial Qing Ideology and the Rise of Modern Chinese National Identity in the Early Twentieth Century" (PDF). Modern China. 32 (1): 3 30. doi:10.1177/0097700405282349. JSTOR 20062627. S2CID 144587815. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2014.
Further reading
General studies. For works on specific topics, please see the article on that topic. 
Bickers, Robert (2011). The Scramble for China: Foreign Devils in the Qing Empire, 1832 1914. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-7139-9749-1.
Dunnell, Ruth W.; Elliott, Mark C.; Foret, Philippe;  et al., eds. (2004). New Qing Imperial History: The Making of Inner Asian Empire at Qing Chengde. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-36222-6.
Esherick, Joseph; Kayal , Hasan; Van Young, Eric, eds. (2006). Empire to Nation: Historical Perspectives on the Making of the Modern World. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-4031-6.
Graff, David Andrew; Higham, Robin, eds. (2012). A Military History of China. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-3584-7. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2015.
Fairbank, John K.; Liu, Kwang-Ching, eds. (1980). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 11: Late Ch'ing 1800 1911, Part 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22029-3.
Morse, Hosea Ballou. The international relations of the Chinese empire
Vol. I: The period of conflict, 1834 1860 (1910)
Vol. II: The period of submission, 1861 1893 (1918)
Vol. III: The period of subjection, 1894 1911 (1918)
Owen, Stephen (1997). "The Qing Dynasty: Period Introduction" (PDF).  In Owen, Stephen (ed.). An Anthology of Chinese Literature: Beginnings to 1911. New York: W. W. Norton. pp. 909 914. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016.
Paludan, Ann (1998). Chronicle of the Chinese Emperors. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-05090-3.
Peterson, Willard J., ed. (2002). The Cambridge History of China, Volume 9: The Ch'ing Empire to 1800, Part One. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-24334-6.
Schorkowitz, Dittmar; Chia, Ning, eds. (2016). Managing Frontiers in Qing China: The Lifanyuan and Libu Revisited. Boston: Brill. ISBN 9789004335004. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2022.
Smith, Richard Joseph (2015). The Qing Dynasty and Traditional Chinese Culture. Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-2193-2.
Stanford, Edward (1917). Atlas of the Chinese Empire, containing separate maps of the eighteen provinces of China (2nd ed.). Legible color maps.
Struve, Lynn A. (2004). The Qing Formation in World-Historical Time. Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN 978-0-674-01399-5.
Waley-Cohen, Joanna (2006). The culture of war in China: empire and the military under the Qing dynasty. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-159-5.
Zhao, Gang (2013). The Qing Opening to the Ocean: Chinese Maritime Policies, 1684 1757. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-3643-6.
Primary source collections and reference
Brunnert, I. S.; Gagelstrom, V. V. (1912). Present Day Political Organization of China. Translated by Edward Eugene Moran. Shanghai: Kelly and Walsh. Lists bureaucratic structure and offices, with standard translations.
Hummel, Arthur W. Sr., ed. (1943). "Index" . Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period. United States Government Printing Office. (2 vol); reprinted: Leiden: Brill, 2010); revised ed: Eminent Chinese of the Qing Period; Wade Giles converted to pinyin; Introductory matter by Pamela Kyle Crossley (Great Barrington, MA: Berkshire, 2018 ISBN 9780190088019). 800 biographical articles on people who died 1644 to 1912. Vol 1 of 1943 edition Internet Archive; Vol 2 Internet Archive
Leung, Edwin Pak-wah (1992). Historical dictionary of revolutionary China, 1839 1976. ISBN 9780313264573.
Leung, Edwin Pak-wah (2002). Political Leaders of Modern China: A Biographical Dictionary.
MacNair, Harley Farnsworth, ed. (1923). Modern Chinese History Selected Readings. Shanghai: Commercial Press; starts in 1842{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: postscript (link)
The China year book. 1914.
Historiography
Cohen, Paul (1984). Discovering History in China: American Historical Writing on the Recent Chinese Past. Reprinted with new Introduction, 2010. New York, London: Columbia University Press. ISBN 023152546X. Chapters on: The problem with "China's response to the West" Moving beyond "Tradition and modernity" Imperialism: reality or myth? -- Toward a China-centered history of China.
Ho, Ping-Ti (1967). "The Significance of the Ch'ing Period in Chinese History". The Journal of Asian Studies. 26 (2): 189 195. doi:10.2307/2051924. JSTOR 2051924. S2CID 162396785. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2019.
  (1998). "In Defense of Sinicization: A Rebuttal of Evelyn Rawski's 'Reenvisioning the Qing'". The Journal of Asian Studies. 57 (1): 123 155. doi:10.2307/2659026. JSTOR 2659026.
Hsieh, Winston (1975). Chinese Historiography on the Revolution of 1911: A Critical Survey and a Selected Bibliography. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University. ISBN 0817933417. Still useful for discussion of issues, schools of interpretation, and published sources.
Miller, H. Lyman (2000). "The Late Imperial Chinese State".  In Shambaugh, David L. (ed.). The Modern Chinese State. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 15 36. ISBN 0521772346. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2020.
Rawski, Evelyn S. "The Qing in Historiographical Dialogue." Late Imperial China (2016) 37#1 pp 1 4 summary online
Newby, L.J. (2011). "China: Pax Manjurica". Journal for Eighteenth-Century Studies. 34 (4): 557 563. doi:10.1111/j.1754-0208.2011.00454.x. Discusses developments in scholarship on 18th century history published after 2000.
Rawski, Evelyn S. (1996). "Reenvisioning the Qing: The Significance of the Qing Period in Chinese History". The Journal of Asian Studies. 55 (4): 829 850. doi:10.2307/2646525. JSTOR 2646525. S2CID 162388379.
Sivin, Nathan (1988). "Science and medicine in imperial China The state of the field". Journal of Asian Studies. 47 (1): 41 90. doi:10.2307/2056359. JSTOR 2056359. PMID 11617269. S2CID 26443679.
Waley-Cohen, Joanna (2004). "The New Qing History". Radical History Review. 88 (1): 193 206. doi:10.1215/01636545-2004-88-193. S2CID 144544216.
Wu, Guo (May 2016). "New Qing History: Dispute, Dialog, and Influence". Chinese Historical Review. 23 (1): 47 69. doi:10.1080/1547402X.2016.1168180. S2CID 148110389. Covers the New Qing History approach that arose in the U.S. in the 1980s and the responses to it.
Yu, George T. (1991). "The 1911 Revolution: Past, Present, and Future". Asian Survey. 31 (10): 895 904. doi:10.2307/2645062. JSTOR 2645062.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
  (category)
Section on the Ming and Qing dynasties of "China's Population: Readings and Maps."
Collection: "Manchu, Qing Dynasty" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art
Qing Dynasty resource Archived 24 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts
Preceded byMing dynasty
 Dynasties in Chinese history 1644 1912
Succeeded byRepublic of China
vteEmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Qin
Han
Jin
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Bactrian
Indo-greek
Hittite
Hunnic
White
Xiongnu
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
J n
Yuan
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Hellenic Roman
Byzantine
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Epirus
Morea
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Russian
Kievan Rus'
Vladimir-Suzdal
Muscovite
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Tsarist
Imperial
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish
Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire
vteMonarchies
Monarch
Imperial, royal and noble ranks
List of current sovereign monarchs
List of current non-sovereign monarchs
List of monarchy referendums
Type
Absolute
Constitutional
Diarchy
Elective
Federal
Hereditary
Non-sovereign
Personal union
Regency
Topics
Abdication
Abolition of monarchy
Aristocracy
Criticism of monarchy
Democratization
Decolonization
Dynasty
Government
Head of state
Legitimacy (political)
Oligarchy
Order of succession
Republicanism
Self-proclaimed monarchy
Sovereignty
Titles
Chhatrapati
Emperor
King
Queen regnant
Prince regnant
Raja
khan
Tsar
Sultan
Shah
Pharaoh
CurrentAfrica
Eswatini
Lesotho
Morocco
list
Asia
Bahrain
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Thailand
United Arab Emirates
list
Europe
Andorra
Belgium
Denmark
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Monaco
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Vatican City
Oceania
Tonga
Commonwealth realms
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Belize
Canada
Grenada
Jamaica
New Zealand
Cook Islands
Niue
Papua New Guinea
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
FormerAfrica
Adamawa
Ankole
Aussa
Barotseland
Bagirmi
Bornu
Burundi
Central Africa
Dahomey
Egypt
Ethiopia
Ghana
Gomma
Gumma
Kaffa
Kongo
Libya
Luba
Madagascar
Mali
Maore
Maravi
Mwali
Ndzuwani
Ngazidja
Rwanda
Shilluk
Islands of Refreshment
Tunisia
Wituland
Wassoulou
Yeke
Zanzibar
Zimbabwe
and other
Americas
Araucan a
Aztec
Brazil
Haiti
Inca
Mexico
Miskito
Suriname
Talamanca
Trinidad
Thirteen Colonies
Asia
Afghanistan
Asir
Bangladesh
Bukhara
Burma
Cebu
Chehab
China
Dapitan
Hejaz
Indonesia
Iran (Qajar)
Iraq
Jabal Shammar
Kandy (Sri Lanka)
Kathiri
Khiva
Korea
Kumul
Kurdistan
Laos
Maguindanao
Mahra
Maldives
Manchukuo
Mongolia
Najran
Nepal
Qu'aiti
Ryukyu
Sarawak
Shan
Sikkim
Sip Song Chau Tai
Sulu
Syria
Tibet
Taiwan
Upper Asir
Upper Yafa
Vietnam
Yemen (South Yemen)
Europe
Albania
Aragon
Asturias
Austria
Austria-Hungary
Bavaria
Bosnia
Brittany
Bulgaria
Crimea
Cilicia
Corsica
Cyprus
Finland
France
Galicia
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Granada
Hanover
Hungary
Iceland
Imereti
Ireland
Italy
Kartli-Kakheti
Lithuania
Majorca
Man
Moldavia
Montenegro
Navarre
Neuch tel
Ottoman Empire
Papal States
Piedmont-Sardinia
Poland Lithuania
Portugal
Prussia
Romania
Russia
Samos
Saxony
Savoy
Scotland
Serbia
Tavolara
Two Sicilies
Tuscany
Ukraine
United Baltic Duchy
Yugoslavia
Valencia
W rttemberg
Oceania
Abemama
Bora Bora
Easter Island
Kingdom of Fiji
Hawaii
Huahine
Mangareva
Niu -Fekai
Nuku Hiva
Raiatea
Rapa Iti
Rarotonga
Rimatara
Rurutu
Tahuata
Tahiti
Commonwealth realms
Barbados
Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
Fiji
The Gambia
Ghana
Guyana
India (British Raj, princely states)
Irish Free State / Ireland
Kenya
Malawi
Malta
Mauritius
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rhodesia
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Tanganyika
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
vteQing dynasty topicsHistoryEarly (1616 1683)
Jurchen unification
Later Jin
Seven Grievances
Later Jin invasion of Joseon
Qing invasion of Joseon
Transition from Ming to Qing
Battle of Shanhai Pass
Great Clearance
Revolt of the Three Feudatories
High Qing (1683 1839)
Sino-Russian border conflicts
Dzungar Qing Wars
Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720)
Chinese Rites controversy
Ten Great Campaigns
Miao Rebellion (1735 36)
Lhasa riot of 1750
Revolt of the Altishahr Khojas
 f q  Khoja Holy War
Sino-Burmese War (1765 1769)
Lin Shuangwen rebellion
Battle of Ng c H i- ng  a
Sino-Nepalese War
Miao Rebellion (1795 1806)
White Lotus Rebellion
Eight Trigrams uprising of 1813
Late (1840 1912)
First Opium War
Dogra Tibetan War (Sino-Sikh War)
Taiping Rebellion
Nian Rebellion
Red Turban Rebellion (1854 1856)
Small Swords Society
Miao Rebellion (1854 1873)
Nepalese Tibetan War
Panthay Rebellion
Second Opium War
Punti Hakka Clan Wars
Amur Annexation
Self-Strengthening Movement
Tongzhi Restoration
Dungan Revolt (1862 1877)
Mudan incident
Tianjin Massacre
Margary Affair
Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)
Northern Chinese Famine
Qing reconquest of Xinjiang
Sino-French War
Sikkim expedition
Jindandao incident
First Sino-Japanese War
Gongche Shangshu movement
Dungan revolt (1895 96)
Hundred Days' Reform
Third plague pandemic
Boxer Rebellion
Red Lanterns
Eight-Nation Alliance
Declaration of war
Late Qing reforms
British expedition to Tibet
1905 Batang uprising
1909 Provincial Assembly elections
Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910)
Manchurian plague
Railway Protection Movement
1911 Revolution
Wuchang Uprising
Xinhai Lhasa turmoil
Mongolian Revolution of 1911
Xinhai Revolution in Xinjiang
Imperial Edict of the Abdication of Puyi
Articles of Favourable Treatment
Manchu Restoration
Government
Emperor
List
Family tree
Amban
Cup of Solid Gold
Deliberative Council
Flag of the Qing dynasty
Grand Council
Great Qing Legal Code
Imperial Clan Court
Imperial Commissioner
Imperial Household Department
Lifan Yuan
Ministry of Posts and Communications
Nine Gates Infantry Commander
Provincial governor
Provincial military commander
Principles of the Constitution (1908)
Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty
Ta-Ching Government Bank
Viceroys
Zhili
Shaan-Gan
Liangjiang
Huguang
Sichuan
Min-Zhe
Liangguang
Yun-Gui
Three Northeast Provinces
Zongli Yamen
Military
Overview
Beiyang Army
Eight Banners
Ever Victorious Army
Green Standard Army
Hushenying
Imperial Guards
New Army
Peking Field Force
Shuishiying
Wuwei Corps
Yong Ying
Chu Army
Huai Army
Xiang Army
Navy
Special regions
Inner Asia
Manchuria
Mongolia
Administrative divisions
Tibet
Golden Urn
List of ambans
Xinjiang
General of Ili
Taiwan
Provincial Administration Hall
Palaces &mausoleums
Chengde Mountain Resort
Forbidden City
Hetu Ala
Mukden Palace
Old Summer Palace
Summer Palace
Eastern Qing tombs
Western Qing tombs
Fuling Mausoleum
Zhao Mausoleum (Qing dynasty)
Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties
Society &culture
Booi Aha
Changzhou School of Thought
Dibao
Four Wangs
Gujin Tushu Jicheng
History of Ming
Islam during the Qing dynasty
Kangxi Dictionary
Kaozheng
Literary inquisition
Manchu Han Imperial Feast
Peiwen Yunfu
Pentaglot Dictionary
Qing official headwear
Qing poetry
Quan Tangshi
Queue
Researches on Manchu Origins
Sacred Edict of the Kangxi Emperor
Shamanism in the Qing dynasty
Siku Quanshu
Zongmu Tiyao
Treaties
Treaty of Kyakhta (1727)
Treaty of Nerchinsk
Unequal treaty
Boxer Protocol
Burlingame Treaty
Chefoo Convention
Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet
Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory
Convention of Peking
Convention of Tientsin
Li Lobanov Treaty
Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking
Treaty of Aigun
Treaty of the Bogue
Treaty of Canton
Treaty of Kulja
Treaty of Nanking
Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881)
Treaty of Shimonoseki
Treaty of Tarbagatai
Treaty of Tientsin
Treaty of Wanghia
Treaty of Whampoa
CurrencyCoinage
Zhiqian
Kangxi Tongbao
Qianlong Tongbao
Hongqian
Da-Qing Tongbi
Da-Qing Jinbi
Paper money
Da-Qing Baochao
Hubu Guanpiao
Banknotes of the Ta-Ching Government Bank
Other topics
Aisin Gioro
Anti-Qing sentiment
Canton System
Chuang Guandong
Draft History of Qing
Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty
Manchu people
Names of the Qing dynasty
New Qing History
Qing conquest theory
Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions
Treaty ports
Willow Palisade
vteYears in the Qing dynasty (1616/1644 1911)Nurhaci
____
____
____
____
____
1616
Hong Taiji
____
____
____
____
____
1626
1627
1628
1629
1630
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
Dorgon
1635
1636
1637
1638
1639
1640
1641
1642
1643
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
Shunzhi Emperor
____
____
____
____
1644
1645
1646
1647
1648
1649
1650
1651
1652
1653
1654
1655
1656
1657
1658
1659
1660
1661
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
Kangxi Emperor
____
____
1662
1663
1664
1665
1666
1667
1668
1669
1670
1671
1672
1673
1674
1675
1676
1677
1678
1679
1680
1681
1682
1683
1684
1685
1686
1687
1688
1689
1690
1691
1692
1693
1694
1695
1696
1697
1698
1699
1700
1701
1702
1703
1704
1705
1706
1707
1708
1709
1710
1711
1712
1713
1714
1715
1716
1717
1718
1719
1720
1721
1722
____
____
____
____
____
____
Yongzheng Emperor
____
____
1723
1724
1725
1726
1727
1728
1729
1730
1731
1732
1733
1734
1735
____
____
____
____
____
Qianlong Emperor
____
____
____
____
____
____
1736
1737
1738
1739
1740
1741
1742
1743
1744
1745
1746
1747
1748
1749
1750
1751
1752
1753
1754
1755
1756
1757
1758
1759
1760
1761
1762
1763
1764
1765
1766
1767
1768
1769
1770
1771
1772
1773
1774
1775
1776
1777
1778
1779
1780
1781
1782
1783
1784
1785
1786
1787
1788
1789
1790
1791
1792
1793
1794
1795
____
____
____
____
Jiaqing Emperor
____
____
____
____
____
____
1796
1797
1798
1799
1800
1801
1802
1803
1804
1805
1806
1807
1808
1809
1810
1811
1812
1813
1814
1815
1816
1817
1818
1819
1820
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
Daoguang Emperor
____
1821
1822
1823
1824
1825
1826
1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
1833
1834
1835
1836
1837
1838
1839
1840
1841
1842
1843
1844
1845
1846
1847
1848
1849
1850
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
____
Xianfeng Emperor
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
1858
1859
1860
1861
Tongzhi Emperor
____
____
1862
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
Guangxu Emperor
____
____
____
____
____
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
Xuantong Emperor
1910
1911
1912
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Korea
Coordinates: 39 55 N 116 23 E  /  39.92 N 116.39 E  / 39.92; 116.39
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Qing_dynasty&oldid=1149198449"