Types of cyst
Medical conditionSebaceous cystPronunciation/s be s s st/ SpecialtyDermatology, general surgery
A sebaceous cyst is a term commonly used to refer to either:[1]
Epidermoid cysts (also termed epidermal cysts, infundibular cyst)
Pilar cysts (also termed trichelemmal cysts, isthmus-catagen cysts)
Both of the above types of cysts contain keratin, not sebum, and neither originates from sebaceous glands. Epidermoid cysts originate in the epidermis and pilar cysts originate from hair follicles. Technically speaking, then, they are not sebaceous cysts.[2] "True" sebaceous cysts,  which originate from sebaceous glands and which contain sebum, are relatively rare and are known as steatocystoma simplex or, if multiple, as steatocystoma multiplex.
Medical professionals have suggested that the term "sebaceous cyst" be avoided since it can be misleading.[3]: 31  In practice, however, the term is still often used for epidermoid and pilar cysts.
Signs and symptoms[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Close-up of an infected sebaceous cyst located behind the ear lobe
The scalp, ears, back, face, and upper arm, are common sites of sebaceous cysts, though they may occur anywhere on the body except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.[4] They are more common in hairier areas, where in cases of long duration they could result in hair loss on the skin surface immediately above the cyst. They are smooth to the touch, vary in size, and are generally round in shape.
They are generally mobile masses that can consist of:
Fibrous tissues and fluids
A fatty (keratinous) substance that resembles cottage cheese, in which case the cyst may be called "keratin cyst" - this material has a characteristic "cheesy" or foot odor smell
A somewhat viscous, serosanguineous fluid (containing purulent and bloody material)
The nature of the contents of a sebaceous cyst, and of its surrounding capsule, differs depending on whether the cyst has ever been infected.
With surgery, a cyst can usually be excised in its entirety. Poor surgical technique, or previous infection leading to scarring and tethering of the cyst to the surrounding tissue, may lead to rupture during excision and removal. A completely removed cyst will not recur, though if the patient has a predisposition to cyst formation, further cysts may develop in the same general area.
Causes[edit]
Cysts may be related to high levels of testosterone, hence may be more frequent in users of anabolic steroids.[5]
A case has been reported of a sebaceous cyst being caused by the human botfly.[6]
Hereditary causes of sebaceous cysts include Gardner's syndrome and basal cell nevus syndrome.
Types[edit]
Epidermoid cyst[edit]
Main article: Epidermoid cyst
Pilar cyst[edit]
Main article: Pilar cyst
About 90% of pilar cysts occur on the scalp, with the remaining sometimes occurring on the face, trunk, and extremities.[7]: 1477  Pilar cysts are significantly more common in females, and a tendency to develop these cysts is often inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.[7]: 1477  In most cases, multiple pilar cysts appear at once.[7]: 1477 
Treatment[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Sebaceous cysts generally do not require medical treatment. However, if they continue to grow, they may become unsightly, painful, and/or infected.
Surgical[edit]
Surgical excision of a sebaceous cyst is a simple procedure to completely remove the sac and its contents,[8] although it should be performed when inflammation is minimal.[9]
 A sebaceous cyst that has been surgically removed
Three general approaches are used - traditional wide excision, minimal excision, and punch biopsy excision.[10]
The typical outpatient surgical procedure for cyst removal is to numb the area around the cyst with a local anaesthetic, then to use a scalpel to open the lesion with either a single cut down the center of the swelling, or an oval cut on both sides of the center point. If the cyst is small, it may be lanced, instead. The person performing the surgery will squeeze out the contents of the cyst, then use blunt-headed scissors or another instrument to hold the incision wide open while using fingers or forceps to try to remove the cyst wall intact. If the cyst wall can be removed in one piece, the "cure rate" is 100%. If, however, it is fragmented and cannot be entirely recovered, the operator may use curettage (scraping) to remove the remaining exposed fragments, then burn them with an electrocauterization tool, in an effort to destroy them in place. In such cases, the cyst may recur. In either case, the incision is then disinfected, and if necessary, the skin is stitched back together over it. A scar will most likely result.
An infected cyst may require oral antibiotics or other treatment before or after excision. If pus has already formed, then incision and drainage should be done along with avulsion of the cyst wall with proper antibiotics coverage.
An approach involving incision, rather than excision, has also been proposed.[11]
References[edit]
^ "Epidermoid and pilar cysts (previously known as sebaceous cysts)". British Association of Dermatologists. Retrieved April 2, 2014.
^ "Epidermoid and Pilar Cysts (Sebaceous Cysts) - Patient UK". Retrieved 2013-03-04.
^ Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CA, Bouquot JE (2002). Oral & maxillofacial pathology (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. ISBN 978-0721690032.
^ "Sebaceous Cysts: Treatment & Cause". Cleveland Clinic. Retrieved 2022-02-05.
^ Scott, MJ; Scott, AM (1992). "Effects of anabolic-androgenic steroids on the pilosebaceous unit". Cutis. 50 (2): 113 116. PMID 1387354.
^ Harbin LJ, Khan M, Thompson EM, Goldin RD (2002). "A sebaceous cyst with a difference: Dermatobia hominis". J. Clin. Pathol. 55 (10): 798 9. doi:10.1136/jcp.55.10.798. PMC 1769786. PMID 12354816.
^ a b c Barnes L, ed. (2008). Surgical pathology of the head and neck (3rd ed.). New York: Informa Healthcare. ISBN 978-0849390234.
^ Klin B, Ashkenazi H (1990). "Sebaceous cyst excision with minimal surgery". American Family Physician. 41 (6): 1746 8. PMID 2349906.
^ Zuber TJ (2002). "Minimal excision technique for epidermoid (sebaceous) cysts". Am Fam Physician. 65 (7): 1409 12, 1417 8, 1420. PMID 11996426.
^ Moore RB, Fagan EB, Hulkower S, Skolnik DC, O'Sullivan G (2007). "Clinical inquiries. What's the best treatment for sebaceous cysts?". The Journal of Family Practice. 56 (4): 315 6. PMID 17403333.
^ Nakamura M (2001). "Treating a sebaceous cyst: an incisional technique". Aesthetic Plastic Surgery. 25 (1): 52 6. doi:10.1007/s002660010095. PMID 11322399. S2CID 8354318.
External links[edit]
ClassificationDICD-10: Epidermoid cyst L72.0,Pilar cyst L72.1ICD-10-CM: L72.3ICD-9-CM: 706.2MeSH: D004814DiseasesDB: 29388External resourcesMedlinePlus: 000842
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sebaceous cysts.
Overview at University of Maryland Medical Center
Epidermal Inclusion Cyst at eMedicine
vteDisorders of skin appendagesNail
thickness: Onychogryphosis
Onychauxis
color: Beau's lines
Yellow nail syndrome
Leukonychia
Azure lunula
shape: Koilonychia
Nail clubbing
behavior: Onychotillomania
Onychophagia
other: Ingrown nail
Anonychia
ungrouped: Paronychia
Acute
Chronic
Chevron nail
Congenital onychodysplasia of the index fingers
Green nails
Half and half nails
Hangnail
Hapalonychia
Hook nail
Ingrown nail
Lichen planus of the nails
Longitudinal erythronychia
Malalignment of the nail plate
Median nail dystrophy
Mees' lines
Melanonychia
Muehrcke's lines
Nail patella syndrome
Onychoatrophy
Onycholysis
Onychomadesis
Onychomatricoma
Onychomycosis
Onychophosis
Onychoptosis defluvium
Onychorrhexis
Onychoschizia
Platonychia
Pincer nails
Plummer's nail
Psoriatic nails
Pterygium inversum unguis
Pterygium unguis
Purpura of the nail bed
Racquet nail
Red lunulae
Shell nail syndrome
Splinter hemorrhage
Spotted lunulae
Staining of the nail plate
Stippled nails
Subungual hematoma
Terry's nails
Twenty-nail dystrophy
HairHair loss/Baldness
noncicatricial alopecia: Alopecia
areata
totalis
universalis
Ophiasis
Androgenic alopecia (male-pattern baldness)
Hypotrichosis
Telogen effluvium
Traction alopecia
Lichen planopilaris
Trichorrhexis nodosa
Alopecia neoplastica
Anagen effluvium
Alopecia mucinosa
cicatricial alopecia: Pseudopelade of Brocq
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia
Pressure alopecia
Traumatic alopecia
Tumor alopecia
Hot comb alopecia
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Graham-Little syndrome
Folliculitis decalvans
ungrouped: Triangular alopecia
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Marie Unna hereditary hypotrichosis
Hypertrichosis
Hirsutism
Acquired
localised
generalised
patterned
Congenital
generalised
localised
X-linked
Prepubertal
AcneiformeruptionAcne
Acne vulgaris
Acne conglobata
Acne miliaris necrotica
Tropical acne
Infantile acne/Neonatal acne
Excoriated acne
Acne fulminans
Acne medicamentosa (e.g., steroid acne)
Halogen acne
Iododerma
Bromoderma
Chloracne
Oil acne
Tar acne
Acne cosmetica
Occupational acne
Acne aestivalis
Acne keloidalis nuchae
Acne mechanica
Acne with facial edema
Pomade acne
Acne necrotica
Blackhead
Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei
Rosacea
Perioral dermatitis
Granulomatous perioral dermatitis
Phymatous rosacea
Rhinophyma
Blepharophyma
Gnathophyma
Metophyma
Otophyma
Papulopustular rosacea
Lupoid rosacea
Erythrotelangiectatic rosacea
Glandular rosacea
Gram-negative rosacea
Steroid rosacea
Ocular rosacea
Persistent edema of rosacea
Rosacea conglobata
variants
Periorificial dermatitis
Pyoderma faciale
Ungrouped
Granulomatous facial dermatitis
Idiopathic facial aseptic granuloma
Periorbital dermatitis
SAPHO syndrome
Follicular cysts
"Sebaceous cyst"
Epidermoid cyst
Trichilemmal cyst
Steatocystoma
simplex
multiplex
Milia
Inflammation
Folliculitis
Folliculitis nares perforans
Tufted folliculitis
Pseudofolliculitis barbae
Hidradenitis
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Recurrent palmoplantar hidradenitis
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis
Ungrouped
Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica of Bazex
Acroosteolysis
Bubble hair deformity
Disseminate and recurrent infundibulofolliculitis
Erosive pustular dermatitis of the scalp
Erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli
Hair casts
Hair follicle nevus
Intermittent hair follicle dystrophy
Keratosis pilaris atropicans
Kinking hair
Koenen's tumor
Lichen planopilaris
Lichen spinulosus
Loose anagen syndrome
Menkes kinky hair syndrome
Monilethrix
Parakeratosis pustulosa
Pili (Pili annulati
Pili bifurcati
Pili multigemini
Pili pseudoannulati
Pili torti)
Pityriasis amiantacea
Plica neuropathica
Poliosis
Rubinstein Taybi syndrome
Setleis syndrome
Traumatic anserine folliculosis
Trichomegaly
Trichomycosis axillaris
Trichorrhexis (Trichorrhexis invaginata
Trichorrhexis nodosa)
Trichostasis spinulosa
Uncombable hair syndrome
Wooly hair nevus
SweatglandsEccrine
Miliaria
Colloid milium
Miliaria crystalline
Miliaria profunda
Miliaria pustulosa
Miliaria rubra
Occlusion miliaria
Postmiliarial hypohidrosis
Granulosis rubra nasi
Ross  syndrome
Anhidrosis
Hyperhidrosis
Generalized
Gustatory
Palmoplantar
Apocrine
Body odor
Chromhidrosis
Fox Fordyce disease
Sebaceous
Sebaceous hyperplasia
Authority control: National 
Germany
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sebaceous_cyst&oldid=1126844759"