Country in Melanesia, Oceania
This article is about the island nation in the Pacific Ocean. For other uses, see Fiji (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Fuji (disambiguation).
Republic of FijiMatanitu Tugalala o Viti (Fijian)    Fij  Ga ar jya (Fiji Hindi)
Flag
 Coat of arms
Motto: "Rerevaka na Kalou ka Doka na Tui" (Fijian)"Fear God and honour the King"[1]Anthem: "God Bless Fiji"Capitaland largest citySuva[2]18 10 S 178 27 E  /  18.167 S 178.450 E  / -18.167; 178.450Official languages
English
Fijian
Fiji Hindi[3]
Recognised regional languagesRotumanEthnic groups  (2016[4])56.8% Indigenous Fijians37.5% Indo-Fijians1.2% Rotumans4.5% OthersReligion 
64.4% Christianity
34.6% Methodism
29.8% Other Christian
27.9% Hinduism
6.3% Islam
1.4% Others / None[5]
Demonym(s)FijianGovernmentUnitary parliamentary republic President Wiliame Katonivere Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka
LegislatureParliamentIndependence from the United Kingdom Independence 10 October 1970 Republic 7 October 1987
Area  Total18,274 km2 (7,056 sq mi) (151st) Water (%)negligiblePopulation 2018 estimate926,276[6] (161st) 2017 census884,887[7] Density46.4/km2 (120.2/sq mi) (148th)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate Total$12.6 billion [8] (158th) Per capita$13,944[8] (102nd)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate Total$4.85 billion[8] (164th) Per capita$5,341[8] (106th)Gini (2013)36.4[9]mediumHDI (2021) 0.730[10]high 99thCurrencyFijian dollar (FJD)Time zoneUTC+12 (FJT)Date formatdd/mm/yyyyDriving sideleftCalling code+679ISO 3166 codeFJInternet TLD.fjWebsitefiji.gov.fj
Fiji[n 1] (/ fi d i/ (listen) FEE-jee, /fi d i / fee-JEE;[11] Fijian: Viti, [ it i]; Fiji Hindi:  , Fij ), officially the Republic of Fiji,[n 2] is an island country in Melanesia, part of Oceania in the South Pacific Ocean. It lies about 1,100 nautical miles (2,000 km; 1,300 mi) north-northeast of New Zealand. Fiji consists of an archipelago of more than 330 islands of which about 110 are permanently inhabited and more than 500 islets, amounting to a total land area of about 18,300 square kilometres (7,100 sq mi). The most outlying island group is Ono-i-Lau. About 87% of the total population of 924,610 live on the two major islands, Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. About three-quarters of Fijians live on Viti Levu's coasts: either in the capital city of Suva; or in smaller urban centres such as Nadi where tourism is the major local industry; or in Lautoka, where the sugar-cane industry is dominant. The interior of Viti Levu is sparsely inhabited because of its terrain.[12]
The majority of Fiji's islands were formed by volcanic activity starting around 150 million years ago. Some geothermal activity still occurs today on the islands of Vanua Levu and Taveuni.[13] The geothermal systems on Viti Levu are non-volcanic in origin and have low-temperature surface discharges (of between roughly 35 and 60 degrees Celsius (95 and 140 F)).
Humans have lived in Fiji since the second millennium BCE first Austronesians and later Melanesians, with some Polynesian influences. Europeans first visited Fiji in the 17th century.[14] In 1874, after a brief period in which Fiji was an independent kingdom, the British established the Colony of Fiji. Fiji operated as a Crown colony until 1970, when it gained independence and became known as the Dominion of Fiji. In 1987, following a series of coups d' tat, the military government that had taken power declared it a republic. In a 2006 coup, Commodore Frank Bainimarama seized power. In 2009, the Fijian High Court ruled that the military leadership was unlawful. At that point, President Ratu Josefa Iloilo, whom the military had retained as the nominal head of state, formally abrogated the 1997 Constitution and re-appointed Bainimarama as interim prime minister. Later in 2009, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau succeeded Iloilo as president.[15] On 17 September 2014, after years of delays, a democratic election took place. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won 59.2% of the vote, and international observers deemed the election credible.[16]
Fiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific[17] through its abundant forest, mineral, and fish resources. The currency is the Fijian dollar, with the main sources of foreign exchange being the tourist industry, remittances from Fijians working abroad, bottled water exports, and sugar cane.[4] The Ministry of Local Government and Urban Development supervises Fiji's local government, which takes the form of city and town councils.[18]
Etymology
The name of Fiji's main island, Viti Levu, served as the origin of the name "Fiji", though the common English pronunciation is based on that of Fiji's island neighbours in Tonga. An official account of the emergence of the name states:
Fijians first impressed themselves on European consciousness through the writings of the members of the expeditions of Cook who met them in Tonga. They were described as formidable warriors and ferocious cannibals, builders of the finest vessels in the Pacific, but not great sailors. They inspired awe amongst the Tongans, and all their Manufactures, especially bark cloth and clubs, were highly valued and much in demand. They called their home Viti, but the Tongans called it Fisi, and it was by this foreign pronunciation, Fiji, first promulgated by Captain James Cook, that these islands are now known.[19]
"Feejee", the Anglicised spelling of the Tongan pronunciation,[20] occurred in accounts and other writings by missionaries and other travellers visiting Fiji until the late-19th century.[21][22]
History
Main article: History of Fiji
Early settlement
 A Fijian mountain warrior. Photograph by Francis Herbert Dufty, 1870s
 Map showing the migration and expansion of the Austronesians which began at about 3000 BC from Taiwan
Pottery art from Fijian towns shows that Fiji was settled by Austronesian peoples by at least 3500 to 1000 BC, with Melanesians following around a thousand years later, although there are still many open questions about the specific dates and patterns of human migration into Fiji and many other Pacific islands.
It is believed that either the Lapita people or the ancestors of the Polynesians settled the islands first, but not much is known of what became of them after the Melanesians arrived; the old culture may have had some influence on the new one, and archaeological evidence shows that some of the migrants moved on to Samoa, Tonga and even Hawai'i.
Archeological evidence also shows signs of human settlement on Moturiki Island beginning at least by 600 BC and possibly as far back as 900 BC.
Although some aspects of Fijian culture are similar to the Melanesian culture of the western Pacific, Fijian culture has a stronger connection to the older Polynesian cultures. The evidence is clear that there was trade between Fiji and neighbouring archipelagos long before Europeans made contact with Fiji. For example: The remains of ancient canoes made from native Fijian trees have been found in Tonga; the language of Fiji's Lau Islands contains Tongan words; and ancient pots that had been made in Fiji have been found in Samoa and even as far away as the Marquesas Islands.
In the 10th century, the Tu'i Tonga Empire was established in Tonga, and Fiji came within its sphere of influence. The Tongan influence brought Polynesian customs and language into Fiji. That empire began to decline in the 13th century.
Since Fiji spans 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) from east to west, it has been a nation of many languages. Fiji has long had permanent settlements, but its peoples also have a history of mobility. Over the centuries, unique Fijian cultural practices developed. Fijians constructed large, elegant watercraft, with rigged sails called drua and exported some to Tonga. Fijians also developed a distinctive style of village architecture, consisting of communal and individual bure and vale housing, and an advanced system of ramparts and moats that were usually constructed around the more important settlements. Pigs were domesticated for food, and a variety of agricultural endeavors, such as banana plantations, existed from an early stage. Villages were supplied with water brought in by constructed wooden aqueducts. Fijians lived in societies led by chiefs, elders and notable warriors. Spiritual leaders, often called bete, were also important cultural figures, and the production and consumption of yaqona was part of their ceremonial and community rites. Fijians developed a monetary system where the polished teeth of the sperm whale, called tambua, became an active currency. A type of writing existed which can be seen today in various petroglyphs around the islands.[23] Fijians developed a refined masi cloth textile industry, and used the cloth they produced to make sails and clothes such as the malo and the liku. As with most other ancient human civilisations, warfare or preparation for warfare was an important part of everyday life in pre-colonial Fiji. The Fijians were noted for their distinctive use of weapons, especially war clubs.[24][25] Fijians used many different types of clubs that can be broadly divided into two groups, two handed clubs and small specialised throwing clubs called ula.[26]
With the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century, and European colonization in the late 19th century, many elements of Fijian culture were either repressed or modified to ensure European   specifically, British   control. This was especially the case with respect to traditional Fijian spiritual beliefs. Early colonists and missionaries pointed to the practice of cannibalism in Fiji as providing a moral imperative justifying colonization.[27] Europeans labelled many native Fijian customs as debased or primitive, enabling many colonists to see Fiji as a "paradise wasted on savage cannibals".[28] Stories of cannibalism were circulated during the 19th century, such as one about Ratu Udre Udre, who was said to have consumed 872 people and to have made a pile of stones to record his achievement.[29] Stories like that made it easier for Europeans to stereotype and denigrate Fijians as "uncivilised". Authors such as Deryck Scarr[30] have perpetuated 19th century claims of "freshly killed corpses piled up for eating" and ceremonial mass human sacrifice on the construction of new houses and boats.[31] In fact, during colonial times, Fiji was known as the Cannibal Isles. On the other hand, William MacGregor, the long-term chief medical officer in British colonial Fiji, wrote that tasting of the flesh of the enemy was done only on rare occasions, and only "to indicate supreme hatred and not out of relish for a gastronomic treat".[32]
 Bure-kalou or temple, and scene of cannibalism
Modern archaeological research conducted on Fijian sites has shown that Fijians did in fact practice cannibalism, which has helped modern scholars to assess the accuracy of some of these colonial European accounts. Studies conducted by scholars including Degusta,[33] Cochrane,[34] and Jones[35] provide evidence of burnt or cut human skeletons, suggesting that cannibalism was practised in Fiji. In a 2015 study by Jones et al., isotopic analysis of bone collagen provided evidence that human flesh had been consumed by Fijians, although it was likely a small, and not necessarily regular, part of their diet.[35]
However, these archaeological accounts indicate that cannibalistic practices were likely more intermittent and less ubiquitous than European settlers had implied. They also suggest that and that exocannibalism (cannibalism of members of outsider tribes), and cannibalism practised as a means of violence or revenge, played significantly smaller roles in Fijian culture than colonial European accounts suggested. It appears that the cannibalism may more often have been nonviolent and ritualistic.[34][35]
Early interaction with Europeans
 Levuka, 1842
Dutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first known European visitor to Fiji, sighting the northern island of Vanua Levu and the North Taveuni archipelago in 1643 while looking for the Great Southern Continent.[citation needed]
James Cook, the British navigator, visited one of the southern Lau islands in 1774. It was not until 1789, however, that the islands were charted and plotted, when William Bligh, the castaway captain of HMS Bounty, passed Ovalau and sailed between the main islands of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu en route to Batavia, in what is now Indonesia. Bligh Water, the strait between the two main islands, is named after him and for a time, the Fiji Islands were known as the Bligh Islands.
 The first Europeans to land and live among the Fijians were shipwrecked sailors like Charles Savage.
The first Europeans to maintain substantial contact with the Fijians were sandalwood merchants, whalers and "beche-de-mer" (sea cucumber) traders. The first whaling vessel known to have visited was the Ann and Hope in 1799, and she was followed by many others in the 19th century.[36] These ships came for drinking water, food and firewood and, later, for men to help man their ships. Some of the Europeans who came to Fiji in this period were accepted by the locals and were allowed to stay as residents. Probably the most famous of these was a Swede by the name of Kalle Svenson, better known as Charlie Savage. Savage was permitted to take wives and establish himself in a high rank in Bau society in exchange for helping defeat local adversaries. In 1813, Savage became a victim of this lifestyle and was killed in a botched raid.[37]
By the 1820s, Levuka was established as the first European-style town in Fiji, on the island of Ovalau. The market for "beche-de-mer" in China was lucrative, and British and American merchants set up processing stations on various islands. Local Fijians were utilised to collect, prepare and pack the product which would then be shipped to Asia. A good cargo would result in a half-yearly profit of around $25,000 for the dealer.[38] The Fijian workers were often given firearms and ammunition as an exchange for their labour, and by the end of the 1820s most of the Fijian chiefs had muskets and many were skilled at using them. Some Fijian chiefs soon felt confident enough with their new weapons to forcibly obtain more destructive weaponry from the Europeans. In 1834, men from Viwa and Bau were able to take control of the French ship L'amiable Josephine and use its cannon against their enemies on the Rewa River, although they later ran it aground.[39]
Christian missionaries like David Cargill also arrived in the 1830s from recently converted regions such as Tonga and Tahiti, and by 1840 the European settlement at Levuka had grown to about 40 houses with former whaler David Whippey being a notable resident. The religious conversion of the Fijians was a gradual process which was observed first-hand by Captain Charles Wilkes of the United States Exploring Expedition. Wilkes wrote that "all the chiefs seemed to look upon Christianity as a change in which they had much to lose and little to gain".[40] Christianised Fijians, in addition to forsaking their spiritual beliefs, were pressured into cutting their hair short, adopting the sulu form of dress from Tonga and fundamentally changing their marriage and funeral traditions. This process of enforced cultural change was called lotu.[41] Intensification of conflict between the cultures increased, and Wilkes was involved in organising a large punitive expedition against the people of Malolo. He ordered an attack with rockets which acted as makeshift incendiary devices. The village, with the occupants trapped inside, quickly became an inferno with Wilkes noting that the "shouts of men were intermingled with the cries and shrieks of the women and children" as they burnt to death. Wilkes demanded the survivors should "sue for mercy" and if not "they must expect to be exterminated". Around 57 to 87 Maloloan people were killed in this encounter.[42]
Cakobau and the wars against Christian infiltration
 Ratu Tanoa Visawaqa
 Ratu Seru Epenisa Cakobau, Self Proclaimed Tui Viti
The 1840s was a time of conflict where various Fiji clans attempted to assert dominance over each other. Eventually, a warlord named Seru Epenisa Cakobau of Bau Island was able to become a powerful influence in the region. His father was Ratu Tanoa Visawaqa, the Vunivalu (a chiefly title meaning warlord, often translated also as paramount chief) who had previously subdued much of western Fiji. Cakobau, following on from his father, became so dominant that he was able to expel the Europeans from Levuka for five years over a dispute about their giving of weapons to his local enemies. In the early 1850s, Cakobau went one step further and declared war on all Christians. His plans were thwarted after the missionaries in Fiji received support from the already converted Tongans and the presence of a British warship. The Tongan Prince Enele Ma afu, a Christian, had established himself on the island of Lakeba in 1848, forcibly converting the local people to the Methodist Church. Cakobau and other chiefs in the west of Fiji regarded Ma afu as a threat to their power and resisted his attempts to expand Tonga's dominion. Cakobau's influence, however, began to wane, and his heavy imposition of taxes on other Fijian chiefs, who saw him at best as first among equals, caused them to defect from him.[43]
Around this time the United States also became interested in asserting their power in the region, and they threatened intervention following a number of incidents involving their consul in the Fiji islands, John Brown Williams. In 1849, Williams had his trading store looted following an accidental fire, caused by stray cannon fire during a Fourth of July celebration, and in 1853 the European settlement of Levuka was burnt to the ground. Williams blamed Cakobau for both these incidents, and the U.S. representative wanted Cakobau's capital at Bau destroyed in retaliation. A naval blockade was instead set up around the island which put further pressure on Cakobau to give up on his warfare against the foreigners and their Christian allies. Finally, on 30 April 1854, Cakobau offered his soro (supplication) and yielded to these forces. He underwent the lotu and converted to Christianity. The traditional Fijian temples in Bau were destroyed, and the sacred nokonoko trees were cut down. Cakobau and his remaining men were then compelled to join with the Tongans, backed by the Americans and British, to subjugate the remaining chiefs in the region who still refused to convert. These chiefs were soon defeated with Qaraniqio of the Rewa being poisoned and Ratu Mara of Kaba being hanged in 1855. After these wars, most regions of Fiji, except for the interior highland areas, had been forced into giving up much of their traditional systems and were now vassals of Western interest. Cakobau was retained as a largely symbolic representative of a few Fijian peoples and was allowed to take the ironic and self proclaimed title of "Tui Viti" ("King of Fiji"), but the overarching control now lay with foreign powers.[44]
Cotton, confederacies and the Kai Colo
 Kai Colo warrior
The rising price of cotton in the wake of the American Civil War (1861 1865) caused an influx of hundreds of settlers to Fiji in the 1860s from Australia and the United States in order to obtain land and grow cotton. Since there was still a lack of functioning government in Fiji, these planters were often able to get the land in violent or fraudulent ways such as exchanging weapons or alcohol with Fijians who may or may not have been the true owners. Although this made for cheap land acquisition, competing land claims between the planters became problematic with no unified government to resolve the disputes. In 1865, the settlers proposed a confederacy of the seven main native kingdoms in Fiji to establish some sort of government. This was initially successful, and Cakobau was elected as the first president of the confederacy.[45]
 Flag of the Confederacy of Independent Kingdoms of Fiji, 1865 1867
With the demand for land high, the white planters started to push into the hilly interior of Viti Levu. This put them into direct confrontation with the Kai Colo, which was a general term to describe the various Fijian clans resident to these inland districts. The Kai Colo were still living a mostly traditional lifestyle, they were not Christianised, and they were not under the rule of Cakobau or the confederacy. In 1867, a travelling missionary named Thomas Baker was killed by Kai Colo in the mountains at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River. The acting British consul, John Bates Thurston, demanded that Cakobau lead a force of Fijians from coastal areas to suppress the Kai Colo. Cakobau eventually led a campaign into the mountains but suffered a humiliating loss with 61 of his fighters being killed.[46] Settlers also came into conflict with the local eastern Kai Colo people called the Wainimala. Thurston called in the Australia Station section of the Royal Navy for assistance. The Navy duly sent Commander Rowley Lambert and HMS Challenger to conduct a punitive mission against the Wainimala. An armed force of 87 men shelled and burnt the village of Deoka, and a skirmish ensued which resulted in the deaths of over 40 Wainimala.[47]
Kingdom of Fiji (1871 1874)
Main article: Kingdom of Fiji
 Flag of the Kingdom of Fiji, 1871 1874
After the collapse of the confederacy, Enele Ma afu established a stable administration in the Lau Islands and the Tongans. Other foreign powers such as the United States were considering the possibility of annexing Fiji. This situation was not appealing to many settlers, almost all of whom were British subjects from Australia. Britain, however, refused to annex the country, and a compromise was needed.[48]
In June 1871, George Austin Woods, an ex-lieutenant of the Royal Navy, managed to influence Cakobau and organise a group of like-minded settlers and chiefs into forming a governing administration. Cakobau was declared the monarch (Tui Viti) and the Kingdom of Fiji was established. Most Fijian chiefs agreed to participate, and even Ma'afu chose to recognise Cakobau and participate in the constitutional monarchy. However, many of the settlers had come from Australia, where negotiation with the indigenous people almost universally involved forced coercion. As a result, several aggressive, racially motivated opposition groups, such as the British Subjects Mutual Protection Society, sprouted up. One group called themselves the Ku Klux Klan in a homage to the white supremacist group in America.[49] However, when respected individuals such as Charles St Julian, Robert Sherson Swanston and John Bates Thurston were appointed by Cakobau, a degree of authority was established.[50]
 Three Kai Colo men in traditional Fijian attire
With the rapid increase in white settlers into the country, the desire for land acquisition also intensified. Once again, conflict with the Kai Colo in the interior of Viti Levu ensued. In 1871, the killing of two settlers near the Ba River in the northwest of the island prompted a large punitive expedition of white farmers, imported slave labourers, and coastal Fijians to be organised. This group of around 400 armed vigilantes, including veterans of the U.S. Civil War, had a battle with the Kai Colo near the village of Cubu, in which both sides had to withdraw. The village was destroyed, and the Kai Colo, despite being armed with muskets, received numerous casualties.[51] The Kai Colo responded by making frequent raids on the settlements of the whites and Christian Fijians throughout the district of Ba.[52] Likewise, in the east of the island on the upper reaches of the Rewa River, villages were burnt, and many Kai Colo were shot by the vigilante settler squad called the Rewa Rifles.[53]
Although the Cakobau government did not approve of the settlers taking justice into their own hands, it did want the Kai Colo subjugated and their land sold. The solution was to form an army. Robert S. Swanston, the minister for Native Affairs in the Kingdom, organised the training and arming of suitable Fijian volunteers and prisoners to become soldiers in what was variably called the King's Troops or the Native Regiment. In a similar system to the Native Police that was present in the colonies of Australia, two white settlers, James Harding and W. Fitzgerald, were appointed as the head officers of this paramilitary brigade.[54] The formation of this force did not sit well with many of the white plantation owners as they did not trust an army of Fijians to protect their interests.
The situation intensified further in early 1873 when the Burns family was killed by a Kai Colo raid in the Ba River area. The Cakobau government deployed 50 King's Troopers to the region under the command of Major Fitzgerald to restore order. The local whites refused their posting, and deployment of another 50 troops under Captain Harding was sent to emphasise the government's authority. To prove the worth of the Native Regiment, this augmented force went into the interior and massacred about 170 Kai Colo people at Na Korowaiwai. Upon returning to the coast, the force was met by the white settlers who still saw the government troops as a threat. A skirmish between the government's troops and the white settlers' brigade was only prevented by the intervention of Captain William Cox Chapman of HMS Dido, who detained the leaders of the locals, forcing the group to disband. The authority of the King's Troops and the Cakobau government to crush the Kai Colo was now total.[55]
From March to October 1873, a force of about 200 King's Troops under the general administration of Swanston with around 1,000 coastal Fijian and white volunteer auxiliaries, led a campaign throughout the highlands of Viti Levu to annihilate the Kai Colo. Major Fitzgerald and Major H.C. Thurston (the brother of John Bates Thurston) led a two pronged attack throughout the region. The combined forces of the different clans of the Kai Colo made a stand at the village of Na Culi. The Kai Colo were defeated with dynamite and fire being used to flush them out from their defensive positions amongst the mountain caves. Many Kai Colo were killed, and one of the main leaders of the hill clans, Ratu Dradra, was forced to surrender with around 2,000 men, women and children being taken prisoner and sent to the coast.[56] In the months after this defeat, the only main resistance was from the clans around the village of Nibutautau. Major Thurston crushed this resistance in the two months following the battle at Na Culi. Villages were burnt, Kai Colo were killed, and a further large number of prisoners were taken.[57] About 1,000 of the prisoners (men, women and children) were sent to Levuka where some were hanged and the rest were sold into slavery and forced to work on various plantations throughout the islands.[58]
Blackbirding and slavery in Fiji
Main article: Blackbirding  In Fiji
 Map of Melanesia
The blackbirding era began in Fiji in 1865 when the first New Hebridean and Solomon Islands labourers were transported there to work on cotton plantations. The American Civil War had cut off the supply of cotton to the international market when the Union blockaded Confederate ports. Cotton cultivation was potentially an extremely profitable business. Thousands of European planters flocked to Fiji to establish plantations but found the natives unwilling to adapt to their plans. They sought labour from the Melanesian islands. On 5 July 1865 Ben Pease received the first licence to provide 40 labourers from the New Hebrides to Fiji.[59]
The British and Queensland governments tried to regulate this recruiting and transport of labour. Melanesian labourers were to be recruited for a term of three years, paid three pounds per year, issued basic clothing, and given access to the company store for supplies. Most Melanesians were recruited by deceit, usually being enticed aboard ships with gifts, and then locked up. In 1875, the chief medical officer in Fiji, Sir William MacGregor, listed a mortality rate of 540 out of every 1,000 labourers. After the expiry of the three-year contract, the government required captains to transport the labourers back to their villages, but most ship captains dropped them off at the first island they sighted off the Fiji waters. The British sent warships to enforce the law (Pacific Islanders' Protection Act of 1872), but only a small proportion of the culprits were prosecuted.
 Seizure of the blackbirder Daphne
A notorious incident of the blackbirding trade was the 1871 voyage of the brig Carl, organised by Dr. James Patrick Murray[60] to recruit labourers to work in the plantations of Fiji. Murray had his men reverse their collars and carry black books, to appear as church missionaries. When islanders were enticed to a religious service, Murray and his men would produce guns and force the islanders onto boats. During the voyage Murray shot about 60 islanders. He was never brought to trial for his actions, as he was given immunity in return for giving evidence against his crew members.[61][60] The captain of the Carl, Joseph Armstrong, was later sentenced to death.[60][62]
In addition to the blackbirded labour from other Pacific islands, thousands of people indigenous to the Fijian archipelago were sold into slavery on the plantations. As the white settler backed Cakobau government, and later the British colonial government, subjugated areas in Fiji under its power, the resultant prisoners of war were regularly sold at auction to the planters. This provided a source of revenue for the government and also dispersed the rebels to different, often isolated islands where the plantations were located. The land that was occupied by these people before they became slaves was then also sold for additional revenue. An example of this is the Lovoni people of Ovalau, who after being defeated in a war with the Cakobau government in 1871, were rounded up and sold to the settlers at  6 per head. Two thousand Lovoni men, women and children were sold, and their period of slavery lasted five years.[63] Likewise, after the Kai Colo wars in 1873, thousands of people from the hill tribes of Viti Levu were sent to Levuka and sold into slavery.[64] Warnings from the Royal Navy stationed in the area that buying these people was illegal were largely given without enforcement, and the British consul in Fiji, Edward Bernard Marsh, regularly turned a blind eye to this type of labour trade.[65]
Colonisation
Main articles: Colony of Fiji and British Western Pacific Territories
Despite achieving military victories over the Kai Colo, the Cakobau government was faced with problems of legitimacy and economic viability. Indigenous Fijians and white settlers refused to pay taxes, and the cotton price had collapsed. With these major issues in mind, John Bates Thurston approached the British government, at Cakobau's request, with another offer to cede the islands. The newly elected Tory British government under Benjamin Disraeli encouraged expansion of the empire and was therefore much more sympathetic to annexing Fiji than it had been previously. The murder of Bishop John Patteson of the Melanesian Mission at Nukapu in the Reef Islands had provoked public outrage, which was compounded by the massacre by crew members of more than 150 Fijians on board the brig Carl. Two British commissioners were sent to Fiji to investigate the possibility of an annexation. The question was complicated by maneuverings for power between Cakobau and his old rival, Ma'afu, with both men vacillating for many months. On 21 March 1874, Cakobau made a final offer, which the British accepted. On 23 September, Sir Hercules Robinson, soon to be appointed the British Governor of Fiji, arrived on HMS Dido and received Cakobau with a royal 21-gun salute. After some vacillation, Cakobau agreed to renounce his Tui Viti title, retaining the title of Vunivalu, or Protector. The formal cession took place on 10 October 1874, when Cakobau, Ma'afu, and some of the senior chiefs of Fiji signed two copies of the Deed of Cession. Thus the Colony of Fiji was founded; 96 years of British rule followed.[66]
Measles epidemic of 1875
To celebrate the annexation of Fiji, Hercules Robinson, who was Governor of New South Wales at the time, took Cakobau and his two sons to Sydney. There was a measles outbreak in that city and the three Fijians all came down with the disease. On returning to Fiji, the colonial administrators decided not to quarantine the ship on which the convalescents travelled. This was despite the British having a very extensive knowledge of the devastating effect of infectious disease on an unexposed population. In 1875 76 the resulting epidemic of measles killed over 40,000 Fijians,[67] about one-third of the Fijian population. Some Fijians allege that this failure of quarantine was a deliberate action to introduce the disease into the country. Historians have found no such evidence; the disease spread before the new British governor and colonial medical officers had arrived, and no quarantine rules existed under the outgoing regime.[68][69]
Sir Arthur Gordon and the "Little War"
 Governor Arthur Hamilton Gordon
Robinson was replaced as Governor of Fiji in June 1875 by Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon. Gordon was immediately faced with an insurgency of the Qalimari and Kai Colo people. In early 1875, colonial administrator Edgar Leopold Layard had met with thousands of highland clans at Navuso to formalise their subjugation to British rule and Christianity. Layard and his delegation managed to spread the measles epidemic to the highlanders, causing mass deaths in this population. As a result, anger at the British colonists flared throughout the region, and a widespread uprising quickly took hold. Villages along the Sigatoka River and in the highlands above this area refused British control, and Gordon was tasked with quashing this rebellion.[70]
In what Gordon termed the "Little War", the suppression of this uprising took the form of two co-ordinated military campaigns in the western half of Viti Levu. The first was conducted by Gordon's second cousin, Arthur John Lewis Gordon, against the Qalimari insurgents along the Sigatoka River. The second campaign was led by Louis Knollys against the Kai Colo in the mountains to the north of the river. Governor Gordon invoked a type of martial law in the area where Arthur John Lewis Gordon and Knollys had absolute power to conduct their missions outside of any restrictions of legislation. The two groups of rebels were kept isolated from each other by a force led by Walter Carew and George Le Hunte who were stationed at Nasaucoko. Carew also ensured the rebellion did not spread east by securing the loyalty of the Wainimala people of the eastern highlands. The war involved the use of the soldiers of the old Native Regiment of Cakobau supported by around 1,500 Christian Fijian volunteers from other areas of Viti Levu. The colonial New Zealand Government provided most of the advanced weapons for the army including 100 Snider rifles.
The campaign along the Sigatoka River was conducted under a scorched earth policy whereby numerous rebel villages were burnt and their fields ransacked. After the capture and destruction of the main fortified towns of Koroivatuma, Bukutia and Matanavatu, the Qalimari surrendered en masse. Those not killed in the fighting were taken prisoner and sent to the coastal town of Cuvu. This included 827 men, women and children as well as Mudu, the leader of the insurgents. The women and children were distributed to places like Nadi and Nadroga. Of the men, 15 were sentenced to death at a hastily conducted trial at Sigatoka. Governor Gordon was present, but chose to leave the judicial responsibility to his relative, Arthur John Lewis Gordon. Four were hanged and ten, including Mudu, were shot with one prisoner managing to escape. By the end of proceedings the governor noted that "my feet were literally stained with the blood that I had shed".[71]
The northern campaign against the Kai Colo in the highlands was similar but involved removing the rebels from large, well protected caves in the region. Knollys managed to clear the caves "after some considerable time and large expenditure of ammunition". The occupants of these caves included whole communities, and as a result many men, women and children were either killed or wounded in these operations. The rest were taken prisoner and sent to the towns on the northern coast. The chief medical officer in British Fiji, William MacGregor, also took part both in killing Kai Colo and tending to their wounded. After the caves were taken, the Kai Colo surrendered and their leader, Bisiki, was captured. Various trials were held, mostly at Nasaucoko under Le Hunte, and 32 men were either hanged or shot including Bisiki, who was killed trying to escape.[72]
By the end of October 1876, the "Little War" was over, and Gordon had succeeded in vanquishing the rebels in the interior of Viti Levu. Remaining insurgents were sent into exile with hard labour for up to 10 years. Some non-combatants were allowed to return to rebuild their villages, but many areas in the highlands were ordered by Gordon to remain depopulated and in ruins. Gordon also constructed a military fortress, Fort Canarvon, at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River where a large contingent of soldiers were based to maintain British control. He renamed the Native Regiment, the Armed Native Constabulary to lessen its appearance of being a military force.[72]
To further consolidate social control throughout the colony, Governor Gordon introduced a system of appointed chiefs and village constables in the various districts to both enact his orders and report any disobedience from the populace. Gordon adopted the chiefly titles Roko and Buli to describe these deputies and established a Great Council of Chiefs which was directly subject to his authority as Supreme Chief. This body remained in existence until being suspended by the military-backed interim government in 2007 and only abolished in 2012.
Gordon also extinguished the ability of Fijians to own, buy or sell land as individuals, the control being transferred to colonial authorities.[73]
Indian indenture system in Fiji
Main articles: Indian indenture system, Indian indenture ships to Fiji, and Repatriation of indentured Indians from Fiji
Gordon decided in 1878 to import indentured labourers from India to work on the sugarcane fields that had taken the place of the cotton plantations. The 463 Indians arrived on 14 May 1879   the first of some 61,000 that were to come before the scheme ended in 1916. The plan involved bringing the Indian workers to Fiji on a five-year contract, after which they could return to India at their own expense; if they chose to renew their contract for a second five-year term, they would be given the option of returning to India at the government's expense, or remaining in Fiji. The great majority chose to stay. The Queensland Act, which regulated indentured labour in Queensland, was made law in Fiji also.
Between 1879 and 1916, tens of thousands of Indians moved to Fiji to work as indentured labourers, especially on sugarcane plantations. A total of 42 ships made 87 voyages, carrying Indian indentured labourers to Fiji. Initially the ships brought labourers from Calcutta, but from 1903 all ships except two also brought labourers from Madras and Bombay. A total of 60,965 passengers left India but only 60,553 (including births at sea) arrived in Fiji. A total of 45,439 boarded ships in Calcutta and 15,114 in Madras. Sailing ships took, on average, 73 days for the trip while steamers took 30 days. The shipping companies associated with the labour trade were Nourse Line and British-India Steam Navigation Company.
Repatriation of indentured Indians from Fiji began on 3 May 1892, when the British Peer brought 464 repatriated Indians to Calcutta. Various ships made similar journeys to Calcutta and Madras, concluding with Sirsa's 1951 voyage. In 1955 and 1956, three ships brought Indian labourers from Fiji to Sydney, from where the labourers flew to Bombay.
Indentured Indians wishing to return to India were given two options. One was travel at their own expense and the other free of charge but subject to certain conditions. To obtain free passage back to India, labourers had to have been above age twelve upon arrival, completed at least five years of service and lived in Fiji for a total of ten consecutive years. A child born to these labourers in Fiji could accompany his or her parents or guardian back to India if he or she was under twelve.
Because of the high cost of returning at their own expense, most indentured immigrants returning to India left Fiji around ten to twelve years after their arrival. Indeed, just over twelve years passed between the voyage of the first ship carrying indentured Indians to Fiji (the Leonidas, in 1879) and the first ship to take Indians back (the British Peer, in 1892).
Given the steady influx of ships carrying indentured Indians to Fiji up until 1916, repatriated Indians generally boarded these same ships on their return voyage. The total number of repatriates under the Fiji indenture system is recorded as 39,261, while the number of arrivals is said to have been 60,553. Because the return figure includes children born in Fiji, many of the indentured Indians never returned to India.
Direct return voyages by ship ceased after 1951. Instead, arrangements were made for flights from Sydney to Bombay, the first of which departed in July 1955. Labourers still travelled to Sydney by ship.
Tuka rebellions
With almost all aspects of indigenous Fijian social life being controlled by the British colonial authorities, a number of charismatic individuals preaching dissent and return to pre-colonial culture were able to forge a following amongst the disenfranchised. These movements were called Tuka, which roughly translates as "those who stand up". The first Tuka movement was led by Ndoongumoy, better known as Navosavakandua, which means "he who speaks only once". He told his followers that if they returned to traditional ways and worshipped traditional deities such as Degei and Rokola, their current condition would be transformed, with the whites and their puppet Fijian chiefs being subservient to them. Navosavakandua was previously exiled from the Viti Levu highlands in 1878 for disturbing the peace, and the British quickly arrested him and his followers after this open display of rebellion. He was again exiled, this time to Rotuma where he died soon after his 10-year sentence ended.[74]
Other Tuka organisations, however, soon appeared. The British colonial administration ruthlessly suppressed both the leaders and followers, with figureheads such as Sailose being banished to an asylum for 12 years. In 1891, entire populations of villages who were sympathetic to the Tuka ideology were deported as punishment.[75] Three years later in the highlands of Vanua Levu, where locals had re-engaged in traditional religion, Governor Thurston ordered in the Armed Native Constabulary to destroy the towns and the religious relics. Leaders were jailed and villagers exiled or forced to amalgamate into government-run communities.[76] Later, in 1914, Apolosi Nawai came to the forefront of Fijian Tuka resistance by founding Viti Kabani, a co-operative company that would legally monopolise the agricultural sector and boycott European planters. The British and their proxy Council of Chiefs were not able to prevent the Viti Kabani's rise, and again the colonists were forced to send in the Armed Native Constabulary. Apolosi and his followers were arrested in 1915, and the company collapsed in 1917. Over the next 30 years, Apolosi was re-arrested, jailed and exiled, with the British viewing him as a threat right up to his death in 1946.[77]
World War I and II
Fiji was only peripherally involved in World War I. One memorable incident occurred in September 1917 when Count Felix von Luckner arrived at Wakaya Island, off the eastern coast of Viti Levu, after his raider, SMS Seeadler, had run aground in the Cook Islands following the shelling of Papeete in the French colony of Tahiti. On 21 September, the district police inspector took a number of Fijians to Wakaya, and von Luckner, not realising that they were unarmed, unwittingly surrendered.
Citing unwillingness to exploit the Fijian people, the colonial authorities did not permit Fijians to enlist. One Fijian of chiefly rank, a great-grandson of Cakobau, joined the French Foreign Legion and received France's highest military decoration, the Croix de Guerre. After going on to complete a law degree at Oxford University, this same chief returned to Fiji in 1921 as both a war hero and the country's first-ever university graduate. In the years that followed, Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, as he was later known, established himself as the most powerful chief in Fiji and forged embryonic institutions for what would later become the modern Fijian nation.
 Flag of Fiji 1924 1970
By the time of World War II, the United Kingdom had reversed its policy of not enlisting natives, and many thousands of Fijians volunteered for the Fiji Infantry Regiment, which was under the command of Ratu Sir Edward Cakobau, another great-grandson of Cakobau. The regiment was attached to New Zealand and Australian army units during the war. Because of its central location, Fiji was selected as a training base for the Allies. An airstrip was built at Nadi (later to become an international airport), and gun emplacements studded the coast. Fijians gained a reputation for bravery in the Solomon Islands campaign, with one war correspondent describing their ambush tactics as "death with velvet gloves". Corporal Sefanaia Sukanaivalu, of Yucata, was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross, as a result of his bravery in the Battle of Bougainville.
Responsible government and independence
 Kamisese Mara
A constitutional conference was held in London in July 1965 to discuss constitutional changes with a view to introducing responsible government. Indo-Fijians, led by A. D. Patel, demanded the immediate introduction of full self-government, with a fully elected legislature, to be elected by universal suffrage on a common voters' roll. These demands were vigorously rejected by the ethnic Fijian delegation, who still feared loss of control over natively owned land and resources should an Indo-Fijian dominated government come to power. The British made it clear, however, that they were determined to bring Fiji to self-government and eventual independence. Realizing that they had no choice, Fiji's chiefs decided to negotiate for the best deal they could get.
A series of compromises led to the establishment of a cabinet system of government in 1967, with Ratu Kamisese Mara as the first Chief Minister. Ongoing negotiations between Mara and Sidiq Koya, who had taken over the leadership of the mainly Indo-Fijian National Federation Party on Patel's death in 1969, led to a second constitutional conference in London, in April 1970, at which Fiji's Legislative Council agreed on a compromise electoral formula and a timetable for independence as a fully sovereign and independent nation within the Commonwealth. The Legislative Council would be replaced with a bicameral Parliament, with a Senate dominated by Fijian chiefs and a popularly elected House of Representatives. In the 52-member House, Native Fijians and Indo-Fijians would each be allocated 22 seats, of which 12 would represent communal constituencies comprising voters registered on strictly ethnic roles, and another 10 representing national constituencies to which members were allocated by ethnicity but elected by universal suffrage. A further 8 seats were reserved for "general electors"   Europeans, Chinese, Banaban Islanders, and other minorities; 3 of these were "communal" and 5 "national". With this compromise, it was agreed that Fiji would become independent.  
The British flag, the Union Jack, was lowered for the last time at sunset on 9 October 1970 in the capital Suva. The Fijian flag was raised after dawn on the morning of 10 October 1970; the country had officially become independent at midnight.
Independence
1987 coups d' tat
The British granted Fiji independence in 1970. Democratic rule was interrupted by two military coups in 1987[78] precipitated by a growing perception that the government was dominated by the Indo-Fijian (Indian) community. The second 1987 coup saw both the Fijian monarchy and the Governor General replaced by a non-executive president and the name of the country changed from Dominion of Fiji to Republic of Fiji and then in 1997 to Republic of the Fiji Islands. The two coups and the accompanying civil unrest contributed to heavy Indo-Fijian emigration; the resulting population loss resulted in economic difficulties and ensured that Melanesians became the majority.[79]
In 1990, the new constitution institutionalised ethnic Fijian domination of the political system. The Group Against Racial Discrimination (GARD) was formed to oppose the unilaterally imposed constitution and to restore the 1970 constitution. In 1992 Sitiveni Rabuka, the Lieutenant Colonel who had carried out the 1987 coup, became Prime Minister following elections held under the new constitution. Three years later, Rabuka established the Constitutional Review Commission, which in 1997 wrote a new constitution which was supported by most leaders of the indigenous Fijian and Indo-Fijian communities. Fiji was re-admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations.
2000 coup d' tat
In 2000, a coup was instigated by George Speight, which effectively toppled the government of Mahendra Chaudhry, who in 1997 had become the country's first Indo-Fijian Prime Minister following the adoption of the new constitution. Commodore Frank Bainimarama assumed executive power after the resignation, possibly forced, of President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara. Later in 2000, Fiji was rocked by two mutinies when rebel soldiers went on a rampage at Suva's Queen Elizabeth Barracks. The High Court ordered the reinstatement of the constitution, and in September 2001, to restore democracy, a general election was held which was won by interim Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's Soqosoqo Duavata ni Lewenivanua party.[80]
In 2005, the Qarase government amid much controversy proposed a Reconciliation and Unity Commission with power to recommend compensation for victims of the 2000 coup and amnesty for its perpetrators. However, the military, especially the nation's top military commander, Frank Bainimarama, strongly opposed this bill. Bainimarama agreed with detractors who said that to grant amnesty to supporters of the present government who had played a role in the violent coup was a sham. His attack on the legislation, which continued unremittingly throughout May and into June and July, further strained his already tense relationship with the government.
2006 coup d' tat
In late November and early December 2006, Bainimarama was instrumental in the 2006 Fijian coup d' tat. Bainimarama handed down a list of demands to Qarase after a bill was put forward to parliament, part of which would have offered pardons to participants in the 2000 coup attempt. He gave Qarase an ultimatum date of 4 December to accede to these demands or to resign from his post. Qarase adamantly refused either to concede or resign, and on 5 December President Ratu Josefa Iloilo signed a legal order dissolving the parliament after meeting with Bainimarama.
Citing corruption in the government, Bainimarama staged a military takeover on 5 December 2006 against the prime minister that he had installed after a 2000 coup. The commodore took over the powers of the presidency and dissolved the parliament, paving the way for the military to continue the takeover. The coup was the culmination of weeks of speculation following conflict between the elected prime minister, Laisenia Qarase, and Bainimarama. Bainimarama had repeatedly issued demands and deadlines to the prime minister. A particular issue was previously pending legislation to pardon those involved in the 2000 coup. Bainimarama named Jona Senilagakali as caretaker prime minister. The next week Bainimarama said he would ask the Great Council of Chiefs to restore executive powers to the president, Ratu Josefa Iloilo.[81]
On 4 January 2007, the military announced that it was restoring executive power to Iloilo,[82] who made a broadcast endorsing the actions of the military.[83] The next day, Iloilo named Bainimarama as the interim prime minister,[84] indicating that the military was still effectively in control. In the wake of the takeover, reports emerged of alleged intimidation of some of those critical of the interim regime.
2009 transfer of power
Main article: 2009 Fijian constitutional crisis
In April 2009, the Fiji Court of Appeal overturned the High Court decision that Bainimarama's takeover of Qarase's government was lawful and declared the interim government to be illegal. Bainimarama agreed to step down as interim prime minister immediately, along with his government, and President Iloilo was to appoint a new prime minister. President Iloilo abrogated the constitution, and removed all office holders under the constitution including all judges and the governor of the Central Bank. In his own words, he "appoint[ed] [him]self as the Head of the State of Fiji under a new legal order".[85] He then reappointed Bainimarama under his "New Order" as interim prime minister and imposed a "Public Emergency Regulation" limiting internal travel and allowing press censorship.
On 2 May 2009, Fiji became the first nation ever to have been suspended from participation in the Pacific Islands Forum, for its failure to hold democratic elections by the date promised.[86][87] Nevertheless, it remains a member of the Forum.
On 1 September 2009, Fiji was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations. The action was taken because Bainimarama failed to hold elections by 2010 as the Commonwealth of Nations had demanded after the 2006 coup. Bainimarama stated a need for more time to end a voting system that heavily favoured ethnic Fijians at the expense of the multi-ethnic minorities. Critics claimed that he had suspended the constitution and was responsible for human rights violations by arresting and detaining opponents.[88][89]
In his 2010 New Year's address, Bainimarama announced the lifting of the Public Emergency Regulations (PER). However, the PER was not rescinded until January 2012, and the Suva Philosophy Club was the first organisation to reorganise and convene public meetings.[90] The PER had been put in place in April 2009 when the former constitution was abrogated. The PER had allowed restrictions on speech, public gatherings, and censorship of news media and had given security forces added powers. He also announced a nationwide consultation process leading to a new constitution under which the 2014 elections were held.
The official name of the country was reverted back to Republic of Fiji in February 2011.[91]
Since 2014
On 14 March 2014, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group voted to change Fiji's full suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations to a suspension from the councils of the Commonwealth, allowing them to participate in a number of Commonwealth activities, including the 2014 Commonwealth Games.[92][93][non-primary source needed] The suspension was lifted in September 2014.[94]
The FijiFirst party, led by Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, won outright majority in the country's 51-seat parliament both in 2014 election and narrowly in 2018 election.[95] In October 2021, Tui Macuata Ratu Wiliame Katonivere was elected the new President of Fiji by the parliament.[96]
On 24 December 2022, Sitiveni Rabuka, the head of the People s Alliance (PAP), became Fiji s 12th prime minister, succeeding Bainimarama, following the December 2022 general election.[97]
Geography
Main article: Geography of Fiji
See also: Flora and fauna of Fiji
 Fiji's location in Oceania
 A map of Fiji
 Topography of Fiji
Fiji lies approximately 5,100 km (3,200 mi) southwest of Hawaii and roughly 3,150 km (1,960 mi) from Sydney, Australia.[98][99] Fiji is the hub of the Southwest Pacific, midway between Vanuatu and Tonga. The archipelago is located between 176  53  east and 178  12  west. The archipelago is roughly 498,000 square miles (1,290,000 km2) and less than 2 percent is dry land. The 180  meridian runs through Taveuni, but the International Date Line is bent to give uniform time (UTC+12) to all of the Fiji group. With the exception of Rotuma, the Fiji group lies between 15  42  and 20  02  south. Rotuma is located 220 nautical miles (410 km; 250 mi) north of the group, 360 nautical miles (670 km; 410 mi) from Suva, 12  30  south of the equator.
Fiji covers a total area of some 194,000 square kilometres (75,000 sq mi) of which around 10% is land. Fiji consists of 332[4] islands (of which 106 are inhabited) and 522 smaller islets. The two most important islands are Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, which account for about three-quarters of the total land area of the country. The islands are mountainous, with peaks up to 1,324 metres (4,341 ft), and covered with thick tropical forests.
The highest point is Mount Tomanivi on Viti Levu. Viti Levu hosts the capital city of Suva and is home to nearly three-quarters of the population. Other important towns include Nadi (the location of the international airport), and Lautoka, Fiji's second largest city with large sugar cane mills and a seaport.[citation needed]
The main towns on Vanua Levu are Labasa and Savusavu. Other islands and island groups include Taveuni and Kadavu (the third and fourth largest islands, respectively), the Mamanuca Group (just off Nadi) and Yasawa Group, which are popular tourist destinations, the Lomaiviti Group, off Suva, and the remote Lau Group. Rotuma has special administrative status in Fiji. Ceva-i-Ra, an uninhabited reef, is located about 250 nautical miles (460 km; 290 mi) southwest of the main archipelago.
Fiji contains two ecoregions: Fiji tropical moist forests and Fiji tropical dry forests.[100] It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.35/10, ranking it 24th globally out of 172 countries.[101]
Climate
The climate in Fiji is tropical marine and warm year round with minimal extremes. The warm season is from November to April, and the cooler season lasts from May to October. Temperatures in the cool season average 22 C (72 F). Rainfall is variable, with the warm season experiencing heavier rainfall, especially inland. For the larger islands, rainfall is heavier on the southeast portions of the islands than on the northwest portions, with consequences for agriculture in those areas. Winds are moderate, though cyclones occur about once annually (10 12 times per decade).[102][103][104]
Climate change in Fiji is an exceptionally pressing issue for the country - as an island nation, Fiji is particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels, coastal erosion and extreme weather.[105] These changes, along with temperature rise, will displace Fijian communities and will prove disruptive to the national economy - tourism, agriculture and fisheries, the largest contributors to the nation's GDP, will be severely impacted by climate change causing increases in poverty and food insecurity.[105] As a party to both the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Climate Agreement, Fiji hopes to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 which, along with national policies, will help to mitigate the impacts of climate change.[106]
Government and politics
Main article: Politics of Fiji
Politics in Fiji normally take place in the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic wherein the Prime Minister of Fiji is the head of government and the President the Head of State, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji, and the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
A general election took place on 17 September 2014. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won with 59.2% of the vote, and the election was deemed credible by a group of international observers from Australia, India and Indonesia.[16]
In the 2018 election FijiFirst won with 50.02 per cent of the total votes cast. It held its outright majority in the parliament, winning 27 of the 51 seats. The Social Democratic Liberal Party (SODELPA) came in second with 39.85 per cent of the vote.[107]
Armed forces and law enforcement
The military consists of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces with a total manpower of 3,500 active soldiers and 6,000 reservists, and includes a Navy unit of 300 personnel. The land force comprises the Fiji Infantry Regiment (regular and territorial force organised into six light infantry battalions), Fiji Engineer Regiment, Logistic Support Unit and Force Training Group. Relative to its size, Fiji has fairly large armed forces and has been a major contributor to UN peacekeeping missions in various parts of the world. In addition, a significant number of former military personnel have served in the lucrative security sector in Iraq following the 2003 U.S.-led invasion.[108]
The law enforcement branch is composed of the Fiji Police Force[109] and Fiji Corrections Service.[110]
Administrative divisions
Main article: Local government of Fiji
 A map of Fiji's administrative divisions
Fiji is divided into four major divisions which are further divided into 14 provinces. They are:
Central Division has 5 provinces: Naitasiri, Namosi, Rewa, Serua, and Tailevu.
Eastern Division has 3 provinces: Kadavu, Lau, and Lomaiviti.
Northern Division has 3 provinces: Bua, Cakaudrove, and Macuata.
Western Division has 3 provinces: Ba, Nadroga-Navosa, and Ra.
Fiji was divided into three confederacies or governments during the reign of Seru Epenisa Cakobau, though these are not considered political divisions, they are still considered important in the social divisions of the indigenous Fijians:
Confederacy
Chief
Kubuna
Vacant
Burebasaga
Ro Teimumu Vuikaba Kepa
Tovata
Ratu Naiqama Tawake Lalabalavu
Economy
Main article: Economy of Fiji
 A proportional representation of Fiji exports, 2019
 Suva, capital and commercial centre of Fiji
Endowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, Fiji is one of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though still with a large subsistence sector. Some progress was experienced by this sector when Marion M. Ganey introduced credit unions to the islands in the 1950s. Natural resources include timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil, and hydropower. Fiji experienced a period of rapid growth in the 1960s and 1970s but stagnated in the 1980s. The coups of 1987 caused further contraction.[111]
Economic liberalisation in the years following the coups created a boom in the garment industry and a steady growth rate despite growing uncertainty regarding land tenure in the sugar industry. The expiration of leases for sugar cane farmers (along with reduced farm and factory efficiency) has led to a decline in sugar production despite subsidies for sugar provided by the EU. Fiji's gold mining industry is based in Vatukoula.
Urbanisation and expansion in the service sector have contributed to recent GDP growth. Sugar exports and a rapidly growing tourist industry  with tourists numbering 430,800 in 2003[112] and increasing in the subsequent years  are the major sources of foreign exchange. Fiji is highly dependent on tourism for revenue. Sugar processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Long-term problems include low investment and uncertain property rights.
The South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE) is the only licensed securities exchange in Fiji and is based in Suva. Its vision is to become a regional exchange.[113]
Tourism
 Fijian luxury resort
 An island in the Mamanuca Islands group
 View of the over water bures located at Marriott Momi Bay, Western Fiji
Fiji has a significant amount of tourism with the popular regions being Nadi, the Coral Coast, Denarau Island, and Mamanuca Islands. The biggest sources of international visitors by country are Australia, New Zealand and the United States.[114] Fiji has a significant number of soft coral reefs, and scuba diving is a common tourist activity.[115] Fiji's main attractions to tourists are primarily white sandy beaches and aesthetically pleasing islands with all-year tropical weather. In general, Fiji is a mid-range priced holiday/vacation destination with most of the accommodations in this range. It also has a variety of world-class five-star resorts and hotels. More budget resorts are being opened in remote areas, which will provide more tourism opportunities.[115] CNN named Fiji's Laucala Island Resort as one of the fifteen world's most beautiful island hotels.[116]
Official statistics show that in 2012, 75% of visitors stated that they came for a holiday/vacation.[117] Honeymoons are very popular as are romantic getaways in general. There are also family-friendly resorts with facilities for young children including kids' clubs and nanny options.[118] Fiji has several popular tourism destinations. The Botanical Gardens of Thursten in Suva, Sigatoka Sand Dunes, and Colo-I-Suva Forest Park are three options on the mainland (Viti Levu).[119] A major attraction on the outer islands is scuba diving.[120]
According to the Fiji Bureau of Statistics, most visitors arriving to Fiji on a short-term basis are from the following countries or regions of residence:[121][114][122]
Country
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
 Australia
367,020
365,660
365,689
360,370
367,273
 New Zealand
205,998
198,718
184,595
163,836
138,537
 United States
96,968
86,075
81,198
69,628
67,831
 China
47,027
49,271
48,796
49,083
40,174
 United Kingdom
16,856
16,297
16,925
16,712
16,716
 Canada
13,269
13,220
12,421
11,780
11,709
 Japan
14,868
11,903
6,350
6,274
6,092
 South Korea
6,806
8,176
8,871
8,071
6,700
Total
894,389
870,309
842,884
792,320
754,835
Fiji has also served as a location for various Hollywood movies starting from the Mr Robinson Crusoe in 1932 to The Blue Lagoon (1980) starring Brooke Shields and Return to the Blue Lagoon (1991) with Milla Jovovich. Other popular movies shot in Fiji include Cast Away (2000) and Anacondas: The Hunt for the Blood Orchid (2004).[123]
The U.S. version of the reality television show Survivor has filmed all of its semiannual seasons in the Mamanuca Islands since its 33rd season in 2016. Typically, two 39-day competitions will be filmed back to back, with the first season airing in the fall of that year, and the second airing in the spring of the following year. This marks the longest consecutive period that Survivor has filmed in one location. Before the airing of the 35th season (Survivor: Heroes vs. Healers vs. Hustlers), host Jeff Probst said in an interview with Entertainment Weekly that the Mamanucas are the optimal location for the show and he would like to stay there permanently.[124]
Transport
Main article: Transport in Fiji
 Nadi airport   arrivals
 The Yasawa Flyer ferry connects Port Denarau near Nadi with the Yasawa Islands.
The Nadi International Airport is located 9 kilometres (5.6 mi) north of central Nadi and is the largest Fijian hub.[125] Nausori International Airport is about 23 kilometres (14 mi) northeast of downtown Suva and serves mostly domestic traffic with flights from Australia and New Zealand. The main airport in the second largest island of Vanua Levu is Labasa Airport[126] located at Waiqele, southwest of Labasa Town. The largest aircraft handled by Labasa Airport is the ATR 72. Airports Fiji Limited (AFL) is responsible for the operation of 15 public airports in the Fiji Islands. These include two international airports: Nadi international Airport, Fiji's main international gateway, and Nausori Airport, Fiji's domestic hub, and 13 outer island airports. Fiji's main airline is Fiji Airways.[127]  An inter-island vessel sails past one of the islands in the east of Fiji
Fiji's larger islands have extensive bus routes that are affordable and consistent in service.[115] There are bus stops, and in rural areas buses are often simply hailed as they approach.[115] Buses are the principal form of public transport[128] and passenger movement between the towns on the main islands. Buses also serve on inter-island ferries. Bus fares and routes are regulated by the Land Transport Authority (LTA). Bus and taxi drivers hold Public Service Licenses issued by the LTA. Taxis are licensed by the LTA and operate widely all over the country. Apart from urban, town-based taxis, there are others that are licensed to serve rural or semi-rural areas.
Inter-island ferries provide services between Fiji's principal islands, and large vessels operate roll-on-roll-off services such as Patterson Brothers Shipping Company LTD, transporting vehicles and large amounts of cargo between the main island of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and other smaller islands.[129]
Science and technology
Fiji is the only developing Pacific Island country with recent data for gross domestic expenditure on research and development (GERD), with the exception of Papua New Guinea. The national Bureau of Statistics cites a GERD/GDP ratio of 0.15% in 2012. Private-sector research and development (R&D) is negligible.[130] Government investment in research and development tends to favour agriculture. In 2007, agriculture and primary production accounted for just under half of government expenditure on R&D, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics. This share had risen to almost 60% by 2012. However, scientists publish much more in the field of geosciences and health than in agriculture.[130] The rise in government spending on agricultural research has come to the detriment of research in education, which dropped to 35% of total research spending between 2007 and 2012. Government expenditure on health research has remained fairly constant, at about 5% of total government research spending, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics.[130]
The Fijian Ministry of Health is seeking to develop endogenous research capacity through the Fiji Journal of Public Health, which it launched in 2012. A new set of guidelines are now in place to help build endogenous capacity in health research through training and access to new technology.[130]
Fiji is also planning to diversify its energy sector through the use of science and technology. In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that "while Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based energy sources."[131]
In 2014, the Centre of Renewable Energy became operational at the University of Fiji, with the assistance of the Renewable Energy in Pacific Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC) funded by the European Union.[130] From 2013 to 2017, the European Union funded the EPIC programme, which developed two master's programmes in renewable energy management, one at the University of Papua New Guinea and the other at the University of Fiji, both accredited in 2016.[132] In Fiji, 45 students have enrolled for the master's degree since the launch of the programme and a further 21 students have undertaken a related diploma programme introduced in 2019.[132]
In 2020, the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub Office in Fiji was launched to support climate change mitigation and adaptation. Pacific authors on the frontlines of climate change remain underrepresented in the scientific literature on the impact of disasters and on climate resilience strategies.[132]
Society
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Fiji
The 2017 census found that the population of Fiji was 884,887, compared to the population of 837,271 in the 2007 census.[7] The population density at the time of the 2007 census was 45.8 inhabitants per square kilometre. The life expectancy in Fiji was 72.1 years. Since the 1930s the population of Fiji has increased at a rate of 1.1% per year. The median age of the population was 29.9, and the gender ratio was 1.03 males per 1 female.
Ethnic groups
 Native Fijian women, 1935
The population of Fiji is mostly made up of native Fijians, who are Melanesians (54.3%), although many also have Polynesian ancestry; and Indo-Fijians (38.1%), descendants of Indian contract labourers brought to the islands by the British colonial powers in the 19th century. The percentage of the population of Indo-Fijian descent has declined significantly over the last two decades through migration for various reasons.[133] Indo-Fijians suffered reprisals for a period after the coup of 2000.[134][135] Relationships between ethnic Fijians and Indo-Fijians in the political arena have often been strained, and the tension between the two communities has dominated politics in the islands for the past generation. The level of political tension varies among different regions of the country.[136]
About 1.2% of the population is Rotuman   natives of Rotuma Island, whose culture has more in common with countries such as Tonga or Samoa than with the rest of Fiji. There are also small but economically significant groups of Europeans, Chinese, and other Pacific island minorities.
The membership of other ethnic groups is about 4.5%.[137] 3,000 people or 0.3% of the people living in Fiji are from Australia.[138]
The concept of family and community is of great importance to Fijian culture. Within the indigenous communities many members of the extended family will adopt particular titles and roles of direct guardians. Kinship is determined through a child's lineage to a particular spiritual leader, so that a clan is based on traditional customary ties as opposed to actual biological links. These clans, based on the spiritual leader, are known as a matangali. Within the matangali are a number of smaller collectives, known as the mbito. The descent is patrilineal, and all the status is derived from the father's side.[139]
Demonym
Constitutionally, citizens of Fiji were previously referred to as "Fiji Islanders" though the term Fiji Nationals was used for official purposes. However, the current constitution refers to all Fijian citizens as "Fijians".[140] In August 2008, shortly before the proposed People's Charter for Change, Peace and Progress was due to be released to the public, it was announced that it recommended a change in the name of Fiji's citizens. If the proposal were adopted, all citizens of Fiji, whatever their ethnicity, would be called "Fijians". The proposal would change the English name of indigenous Fijians from "Fijians" to itaukei, the Fijian language endonym for indigenous Fijians.[141] Deposed Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase reacted by stating that the name "Fijian" belonged exclusively to indigenous Fijians, and that he would oppose any change in legislation enabling non-indigenous Fijians to use it.[142] The Methodist Church, to which a large majority of indigenous Fijians belong, also reacted strongly to the proposal, stating that allowing any Fiji citizen to call themselves "Fijian" would be "daylight robbery" inflicted on the indigenous population.[143]
In an address to the nation during the constitutional crisis of April 2009, military leader and interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama, who has been at the forefront of the attempt to change the definition of "Fijian", stated:
I know we all have our different ethnicities, our different cultures and we should, we must, celebrate our diversity and richness. However, at the same time we are all Fijians. We are all equal citizens. We must all be loyal to Fiji; we must be patriotic; we must put Fiji first.[144]
 Fijians
In May 2010, Attorney-General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum reiterated that the term "Fijian" should apply to all Fiji nationals, but the statement was again met with protest. A spokesperson for the Viti Landowners and Resource Owners Association claimed that even fourth-generation descendants of migrants did not fully understand "what it takes to be a Fijian", and added that the term refers to a legal standing, since legislation affords specific rights to "Fijians" (meaning, in legislation, indigenous Fijians).[145]
Languages
Main article: Languages of Fiji
Fiji has three official languages under the 1997 constitution (and not revoked by the 2013 Constitution): English, Fijian (iTaukei) and Fiji Hindi. Fijian is an Austronesian language of the Malayo-Polynesian family spoken in Fiji. It has 350,000 native speakers, and another 200,000 speak it as a second language.
There are many dialects of the language across the Fiji Islands, which may be classified in two major branches eastern and western. Missionaries in the 1840s chose an eastern dialect, the speech of Bau Island to be the written standard of the Fijian language. Bau Island was home to Seru Epenisa Cakobau, the chief who eventually became the self-proclaimed King of Fiji.
Fiji Hindi, also known as Fijian Baat or Fijian Hindustani, is the language spoken by most Fijian citizens of Indian descent. It is derived mainly from the Awadhi and Bhojpuri varieties of Hindi. It has also borrowed a large number of words from Fijian and English. The relation between Fiji Hindi and Standard Hindi is similar to the relation between Afrikaans and Dutch. Indian indentured labourers were initially brought to Fiji mainly from districts of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, North-West Frontier and South India such as from Andhra and Tamil Nadu. They spoke numerous, mainly Hindi, dialects and languages depending on their district of origin.
English, a remnant of British colonial rule over the islands, was the sole official language until 1997 and is widely used in government, business and education as a lingua franca. 
English
hello/hi
good morning
goodbye
Fijian[146]
bula
yadra (pronounced yandra)
moce (pronounced mothe)
Fiji Hindi
  (namaste)
  (suprabhat)
  (alavid )
Religion
Main article: Religion in Fiji
Religion in Fiji (2007)[5]
 Christian (64.4%) Hindu (27.9%) Muslim (6.3%) Sikh (0.3%) Other or none (1.1%)
According to the 2007 census, 64.4% of the population at the time was Christian, while 27.9% was Hindu, 6.3% Muslim, 0.8% non-religious, 0.3% Sikh, and the remaining 0.3% belonged to other religions.[5]
Among Christians, 54% were counted as Methodist, followed by 14.2% Catholic, 8.9% Assemblies of God, 6.0% Seventh-day Adventist, 1.2% Anglican with the remaining 16.1% belonging to other denominations.[5]
The largest Christian denomination is the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma. With 34.6%[5] of the population (including almost two-thirds of ethnic Fijians), the proportion of the population adhering to Methodism is higher in Fiji than in any other nation. Roman Catholics in Fiji are headed by the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Suva, whose province also includes the dioceses of Rarotonga (on the Cook Islands, for those and Niue, both New Zealand-associated countries) and Tarawa and Nauru (with see at Tarawa on Kiribati, also for Nauru) and the Mission sui iuris of Tokelau (New Zealand).
The Assemblies of God and the Seventh-day Adventist denominations are significantly represented. Fiji is the base for the Anglican Diocese of Polynesia (part of the Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia).These and other denominations have small numbers of Indo-Fijian members; Christians of all kinds comprised 6.1% of the Indo-Fijian population in the 1996 census.[147] Hindus in Fiji mostly belong to the Sanatan sect (74.3% of all Hindus) or else are unspecified (22%). Muslims in Fiji are mostly Sunni (96.4%).
Education
Further information: Education in Fiji
Fiji has a high literacy rate (91.6 percent), and although there is no compulsory education, more than 85 percent of the children between the ages of 6 to 13 attend primary school. Schooling is free and provided by both public and church-run schools. Generally, the Fijian and Hindu children attend separate schools, reflecting the political split that exists in the nation.[148]
Education system in Fiji[149]
Education
School/level
Grades
Years
Notes
Primary
Primary education
1 8
8
Education is not compulsory but is free through the first eight years. Schools from pre-school to secondary are mostly managed by either the government, religion (Catholic, Methodist, Sabha or Muslim) or provinces.
Secondary
Secondary education
9-13
5
Courses include carpentry, metalwork, woodwork, home economics, agricultural science, economics, accounting, biology, chemistry, physics, history, geography. English and maths are compulsory.
Tertiary
Diploma programs
2
Higher education is offered at technical institutes and is structured around two-year diploma programs. There are also four or five-year professional degree programs in specific fields.
Bachelor's degree
3-5
Master's degree
1-3
Primary education
In Fiji, the role of government in education is to provide an environment in which children realise their full potential, and school is free from age 6 to 14. The primary school system consists of eight years of schooling and is attended by children from the ages of 6 to 14 years. Upon completion of primary school, a certificate is awarded and the student is eligible to take the secondary school examination.[148]
Secondary education
High school education may continue for a total of five years following an entry examination. Students either leave after three years with a Fiji school leaving certificate, or remain on to complete their final two years and qualify for tertiary education.[149] Entry into the secondary school system, which is a total of five years, is determined by a competitive examination. Students passing the exam then follow a three-year course that leads to the Fiji School Leaving Certificate and the opportunity to attend senior secondary school. At the end of this level, they may take the Form VII examination, which covers four or five subjects. Successful completion of this process gains students access to higher education.[148]
Tertiary education
The University of the South Pacific, called the crossroads of the South Pacific because it serves ten English-speaking territories in the South Pacific, is the major provider of higher education. Admission to the university requires a secondary school diploma, and all students must take a one-year foundation course at the university regardless of their major. Financing for the university is derived from school fees, funds from the Fiji government and other territories, and aid from Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom. In addition to the university, Fiji also has teacher-training colleges, as well as medical, technological, and agricultural schools. Primary school teachers are trained for two years, whereas secondary school teachers train for three years; they then have the option to receive a diploma in education or read for a bachelor's degree in arts or science and continue for an additional year to earn a postgraduate certificate of education.
The Fiji Polytechnic School offers training in various trades, apprenticeship courses, and other courses that lead to diplomas in engineering, hotel catering, and business studies. Some of the course offerings can also lead to several City and Guilds of London Institute Examinations. In addition to the traditional educational system, Fiji also offers the opportunity to obtain an education through distance learning. The University Extension Service provides centres and a network of terminals in most regional areas. For students taking non-credit courses, no formal qualifications are necessary. However, students who enroll in the credit courses may be awarded the appropriate degree or certificate upon successful completion of their studies through the extension services.
Culture
Main articles: Culture of Fiji, Architecture of Fiji, and Music of Fiji
 Several bure (one-room Fijian houses) in the village of Navala in the Nausori Highlands
While indigenous Fijian culture and traditions are very vibrant and are integral components of everyday life for the majority of Fiji's population, Fijian society has evolved over the past century with the introduction of traditions such as Indian and Chinese as well as significant influences from Europe and Fiji's Pacific neighbours, particularly Tonga and Samoa. Thus, the various cultures of Fiji have come together to create a unique multicultural national identity.[150]
Fiji's culture was showcased at the World Exposition held in Vancouver, Canada, in 1986 and more recently at the Shanghai World Expo 2010, along with other Pacific countries in the Pacific Pavilion.[151]
Sport
Main article: Sport in Fiji
Sports are very popular in Fiji, particularly sports involving physical contact. Fiji's national sport is Rugby sevens. Cricket is a minor sport in Fiji. Cricket Fiji is an associate member of the International Cricket Council ("ICC").[152] Netball is the most popular women's participation sport in Fiji.[153][154] The national team has been internationally competitive, at Netball World Cup competitions reaching 6th position in 1999, its highest level to date. The team won gold medals at the 2007[155] and 2015 Pacific Games.
Because of the success of Fiji's national basketball teams, the popularity of basketball has experienced rapid growth in recent years. In the past, the country only had few basketball courts, which severely limited Fijians who desired to practice the sport more frequently. Through recent efforts by the national federation Basketball Fiji and with the support of the Australian government, many schools have been able to construct courts and provide their students with basketball equipment.[156]
Rugby union
 The Fiji national rugby union team during the 2007 Rugby World Cup playing against Canada
Main article: Rugby union in Fiji
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Rugby Union is the most-popular team sport played in Fiji.[157] The Fiji national sevens side is a popular and successful international rugby sevens team and has won the Hong Kong Sevens a record eighteen times since its inception in 1976.[158] Fiji has also won the Rugby World Cup Sevens twice   in 1997 and 2005.[159] The Fiji national rugby union sevens team is the reigning Sevens World Series Champions in World Rugby. In 2016, they won Fiji's first ever Olympic medal in the Rugby sevens at the Summer Olympics, winning gold by defeating Great Britain 43 7 in the final.[160]
The national rugby union team is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance formerly along with Samoa and Tonga. In 2009, Samoa announced their departure from the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, leaving just Fiji and Tonga in the union. Fiji is currently ranked eleventh in the world by the IRB (as of 28 December 2015[update]). The national rugby union team has competed at five Rugby World Cup competitions, the first being in 1987, where they reached the quarter-finals. The team again qualified in the 2007 Rugby World Cup when they upset Wales 38 34 to progress to the quarter-finals where they lost to the eventual Rugby World Cup winners, South Africa.
Fiji competes in the Pacific Tri-Nations and the IRB Pacific Nations Cup. The sport is governed by the Fiji Rugby Union which is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, and contributes to the Pacific Islanders rugby union team. At the club level there are the Skipper Cup and Farebrother Trophy Challenge.
Fiji is one of the few countries where rugby union is the main sport. There are about 80,000 registered players from a total population of around 900,000. One of the problems for Fiji is simply getting their players to play for their home country, as many have contracts in Europe with the French Top 14 and the English Aviva Premiership or with Super Rugby teams, where monetary compensation is far more rewarding. The repatriated salaries of its overseas stars have become an important part of some local economies. In addition, a significant number of players eligible to play for Fiji end up representing Australia or New Zealand; notable examples are Fiji-born cousins and former New Zealand All Blacks, Joe Rokocoko and Sitiveni Sivivatu, current All Blacks Waisake Naholo and Seta Tamanivalu as well as Australian Wallabies former winger, Lote Tuqiri and current Wallabies Tevita Kuridrani, Samu Kerevi and Henry Speight. Fiji has won the most Pacific Tri-Nations Championships of the three participating teams.
Rugby league
Main article: Rugby league in Fiji
The Fiji national rugby league team, nicknamed the Bati (pronounced [m bat i]), represents Fiji in the sport of rugby league football and has been participating in international competition since 1992. It has competed in the Rugby League World Cup on three occasions, with their best results coming when they made consecutive semi-final appearances in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, 2013 Rugby League World Cup and 2019 Rugby League World Cup. The team also competes in the Pacific Cup.
Members of the team are selected from a domestic Fijian competition, as well as from competitions held in New Zealand and Australia. For the 2000, 2008 and 2013 World Cups, the Bati were captained by Lote Tuqiri, Wes Naiqama and the legendary Petero Civoniceva respectively. Fiji have also produced stars like Akuila Uate, Jarryd Hayne, Kevin Naiqama, Semi Tadulala, Marika Koroibete, Apisai Koroisau, Sisa Waqa and the Sims brothers Ashton Sims, Tariq Sims and Korbin Sims.
The Cibi (pronounced Thimbi) war dance was traditionally performed by the Fiji rugby team before each match. It was replaced in 2012 with the new "Bole" (pronounced mBolay) war cry.[161] Tradition holds that the original Cibi was first performed on the rugby field back in 1939 during a tour of New Zealand, when then Fijian captain Ratu Sir George Cakobau felt that his team should have something to match the Haka of the All Blacks. The 'Cibi' had perhaps been used incorrectly though, as the word actually means "a celebration of victory by warriors," whereas 'Bole' is the acceptance of a challenge. The Fiji Bati rugby league team also gather in a huddle and perform the hymn 'Noqu Masu' before each match.[162]
Association football
Association football was traditionally a minor sport in Fiji, popular largely amongst the Indo-Fijian community, but with international funding from FIFA and sound local management over the past decade, the sport has grown in popularity in the wider Fijian community. It is now the second most-popular sport in Fiji, after rugby for men and after netball for women.
The Fiji Football Association is a member of the Oceania Football Confederation. The national football team defeated New Zealand 2 0 in the 2008 OFC Nations Cup,[163] on their way to a joint-record third-place finish. However, they have never reached a FIFA World Cup to date. Fiji won the Pacific Games football tournament in 1991 and 2003. Fiji qualified for the 2016 Summer Olympics men's tournament for the first time in history.
See also
Islands portalOceania portal
Index of Fiji-related articles
List of festivals in Fiji
Outline of Fiji
Notes
^ Fijian: Viti, [ it i]Fiji Hindi:  , romanized: Fij 
^ Fijian: Matanitu Tugalala o VitiFiji Hindi:    , romanized: Fij  Ga ar jya
References
^ "About Fiji   History, Government and Economy". www.fijihighcommission.org.uk. Archived from the original on 30 August 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018.
^ Although Suva is the largest population center that is classified as a "city", the town of Nasinu has a population that is slightly higher than Suva's. See "Age, Sex and Marital Status by Urban and Rural Enumeration, Fiji 2007". statsfiji.gov.fj. Fiji Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017.
^ Compare: "Constitution of the Republic of Fiji". fiji.gov.fj. The Fijian Government. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2017. Subsection 3(3) reads: "This Constitution is to be adopted in the English language and translations in the iTaukei and Hindi languages are to be made available." Subsection 31(3) clarifies that Fiji Hindi is the intended meaning of "Hindi".
^ a b c "Fiji". The World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 20 August 2020.
^ a b c d e "Population by Religion and Province of Enumeration". 2007 Census of Population. Fiji Bureau of Statistics. June 2012. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2015.   Percentages are derived from total population figures provided in the source
^ "Fiji Demographics Profile". www.indexmundi.com.
^ a b Government of Fiji (10 January 2018). "Fiji Bureau of Statistics Releases 2017 Census Results". Archived from the original on 3 November 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2018.
^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2022". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 5 November 2017.
^ "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022.
^ Deverson, Tony; Kennedy, Graeme, eds. (2005). "Fiji". The New Zealand Oxford Dictionary. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acref/9780195584516.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-558451-6. Retrieved 18 February 2022.
^ "Fiji: People". United States of America State department. 28 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 January 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ "Fiji Geography". fijidiscovery.com. 2005. Archived from the original on 23 February 2011. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ "Fiji: History". infoplease.com. 2005. Archived from the original on 31 August 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ "Fiji's president takes over power". BBC. 10 April 2009. Archived from the original on 13 April 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ a b Perry, Nick; Pita, Ligaiula (29 September 2014). "Int'l monitors endorse Fiji election as credible". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 21 September 2014. Retrieved 25 September 2014.
^ "Fiji High Commission :: About Fiji". www.fiji.org.nz. Retrieved 13 January 2020.
^ 
"Fiji   Our Government". fiji.gov.fj. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 19 June 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010.
^ About Fiji Archived 2 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine, section on Europeans in Fiji. Fiji High Commission to the United Kingdom.
^ Schutz, Albert J. (December 1974). "The Forerunners of the Fijian Dictionary". The Journal of the Polynesian Society. 83 (4): 443 457. JSTOR 20705027. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 21 January 2019.
^ 
Barbour, Thomas (1923). "The Frogs of the Fiji Islands". Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. 75: 111 115. JSTOR 4063878.
^ 
For example:
Scarr, Deryck (1984). Fiji: A Short History. Laie, Hawaii: Institute for Polynesian Studies, Brigham Young University Hawaii Campus. p. 2. ISBN 9780939154364. OCLC 611678101. Retrieved 23 August 2020. 'The natives of Feejee whom we met here are of a colour that was a full shade darker than that of the Friendly Islands in general', observed Lieutenant James Cook [...].
^ Gravelle
^ Fergus., Clunie (2003). Fijian weapons & warfare. Fiji Museum. ISBN 978-9822080063. OCLC 55604396.
^ Brewster, Adolph (1922). The hill tribes of Fiji. London: Seeley.
^ "Fijian War clubs | Native weapons from Fiji | sell club | sell native weapon". new guinea tribal arts. 19 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018.
^ Williams, Thomas (1858). The islands and their inhabitants. A. Heylin. p. 205.
^ Banivanua-Mar, Tracey (2010). "Cannibalism and Colonialism: Charting colonies and frontiers in 19th century Fiji". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 52 (2): 255 281. doi:10.1017/S0010417510000046. JSTOR 40603087. S2CID 145307937.
^ Sanday, Peggy Reeves (1986) Divine hunger: cannibalism as a cultural system Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge University Press, p. 166, IBNS 0521311144.
^ Scarr, p. 3
^ Scarr, p. 19
^ Gordon, A.H. (1879). Letters and Notes written during the disturbances in the highlands of Viti Levu, Fiji, 1876. Vol. 2. Edinburgh: R&R Clark. p. 174.
^ Degusta, David (1999). "Fijian Cannibalism: Osteological Evidence from Navatu". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 110 (2): 215 241. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199910)110:2<215::AID-AJPA7>3.0.CO;2-D. PMID 10502244.
^ a b Cochrane, Ethan (2004). "Culturally Modified Human Remains Recovered from an Earth-Oven Interment on Waya Island, Fiji". Archaeology in Oceania. 39: 54 59. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.2004.tb00559.x.
^ a b c Jones, S (2012). "Kana Tamata or Feasts of Men: An Interdisciplinary Approach for Identifying Cannibalism in Prehistoric Fiji". Freshwater Biology. 10 (2): 127 145. doi:10.1002/oa.2269.
^ Robert Langdon (ed.) Where the whalers went; an index to the Pacific ports and islands visited by American whalers (and some other ships) in the 19th century, Canberra, Pacific Manuscripts Bureau, 1984, p.26. ISBN 0-86784-471-X
^ Gravelle, pp. 29 42
^ Wilkes, Charles (1849). Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition. Vol. 3. Philadelphia: C. Sherman. p. 220.
^ Gravelle, pp. 47 50
^ Wilkes, Charles (1849). Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition Vol. 3. C. Sherman. p. 155. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
^ Brewster, Adolph (1922). Hill Tribes of Fiji. London: Seeley. p. 25.
^ Wilkes, Charles (1849). Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition Vol 3. C. Sherman. p. 278. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
^ Gravelle, pp. 67 80
^ Gravelle, pp. 76 97
^ Gravelle, p. 102
^ Gravelle, pp. 102 107
^ "FIJI". Sydney Mail. Vol. IX, no. 429. New South Wales, Australia. 19 September 1868. p. 11. Retrieved 9 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "The Empire". No. 5767. New South Wales, Australia. 11 May 1870. p. 2. Retrieved 10 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "No title". The Ballarat Courier. No. 1538. Victoria, Australia. 22 May 1872. p. 2. Retrieved 10 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "FIJI". Illustrated Australian News For Home Readers. No. 187. Victoria, Australia. 16 July 1872. p. 154. Retrieved 11 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "FIJIAN EXPERIENCES". Adelaide Observer. Vol. XXVIII, no. 1576. South Australia. 16 December 1871. p. 11. Retrieved 11 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "FIJI". The Advocate. Vol. IV, no. 160. Victoria, Australia. 3 February 1872. p. 11. Retrieved 11 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "MASSACRE OF NATIVES BY SETTLERS IN FIJI". The Advocate. Vol. IV, no. 196. Victoria, Australia. 12 October 1872. p. 9. Retrieved 11 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "LETTER FROM FIJI". Hamilton Spectator. No. 1083. Victoria, Australia. 14 August 1872. p. 3. Retrieved 11 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "FIJI". The Argus (Melbourne). No. 8. Victoria, Australia. 16 April 1873. p. 5. Retrieved 12 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "LATEST FROM FIJI". Empire. No. 668. New South Wales, Australia. 29 August 1873. p. 3. Retrieved 13 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "FIJI ISLANDS". The Sydney Mail and New South Wales Advertiser. Vol. XVI, no. 694. New South Wales, Australia. 18 October 1873. p. 512. Retrieved 13 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ Gravelle, p. 131
^ Jane Resture. "The Story of Blackbirding in the South Seas   Part 2". Janesoceania.com. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2013.
^ a b c Elmslie, R. G. (1979). "The colonial career of James Patrick Murray". The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Surgery. 49 (1): 154 62. doi:10.1111/j.1445-2197.1979.tb06464.x. PMID 380544.
^ James A. Michener and A. Grove Day (1957) "Bully Hayes, South Sea Buccaneer", in Rascals in Paradise, London: Secker & Warburg.
^ Sydney Morning Herald, 20 23 Nov 1872, 1 March 1873
^ "A FIJIAN PLANTER'S CONFESSION". Empire. No. 6379. New South Wales, Australia. 16 September 1872. p. 3. Retrieved 13 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "GENERAL NEWS". Leader. Vol. XXVII, no. 940. Victoria, Australia. 3 January 1874. p. 24. Retrieved 13 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ "NINE MONTHS IN FIJI AND OTHER ISLANDS". Empire. No. 6014. New South Wales, Australia. 13 July 1871. p. 3. Retrieved 13 April 2018   via National Library of Australia.
^ Sarah Searight, "The British Acquisition of Fiji" History Today (Nov 1972), pp 806-813, online
^ "Historical Time line" Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Fiji government.
^ Gravelle, pp. 139 143
^ David M. Morens, "Measles in Fiji, 1875: thoughts on the history of emerging infectious diseases." Pacific Health Dialog 5#1 (1998): 119-128 online.
^ Gordon, Arthur Hamilton (1879). Letters and Notes written during the disturbances in the highlands of Viti Levu, 1876. Edinburgh: R&R Clark.
^ Gordon, Arthur Hamilton (1879). Letters and Notes Vol. 1. Privately printed by R . and R. Clark. p. 441.
^ a b Gordon, Arthur Hamilton (1879). Letters and Notes Vol. 2. Privately printed by R . and R. Clark.
^ France, Peter (1968). "The founding of an orthodoxy: Sir Arthur Gordon and the doctrine of the Fijian way of life". Journal of the Polynesian Society. 77 (1): 6 32. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
^ Brewster, Adolph (1922). Hill tribes of Fiji. London Seeley, Service. p. 236.
^ Kaplan, Martha (1995). Neither Cargo nor Cult. Duke University Press. pp. 100 118. ISBN 978-0822315933.
^ Nicole, Robert (2011). Disturbing History. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 9780824860981. Archived from the original on 16 April 2018. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
^ Gravelle, pp. 179 183
^ Blum, William (2002). Rogue State. Monroe: Common Courage Press. pp. 153 154. ISBN 184277221X.
^ Lal, Brij V (April 2003). "Fiji Islands: From Immigration to Emigration". Migration Policy Institute. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010. Retrieved 14 June 2009.
^ Lal, Brij V. (2002). "In George Speight's Shadow: Fiji General Elections of 2001". The Journal of Pacific History. 37 (1): 87 101. doi:10.1080/00223340220139298. JSTOR 25169576. S2CID 162166648.
^ Phil Taylor (6 December 2006). "Fiji   alone under the gun". The New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 30 September 2007.
^ "Commander hands back executive authority to Ratu Iloilo". FijiVillage.com. 4 January 2007. Archived from the original on 7 January 2007.
^ "I support army takeover: Iloilo". Fijilive. 4 January 2007. Archived from the original on 25 January 2007.
^ "President swears in interim PM". Fijilive. 5 January 2007. Archived from the original on 25 January 2007.
^ "President's Address to the Nation". Archived from the original on 18 August 2009. Retrieved 22 April 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link), fiji.gov.fj (10 April 2009).
^ Statement by Forum Chair on suspension of the Fiji military regime from the Pacific Islands Forum Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine; PIFS Press Statement (21/09), 2 May 2009
^ "Chair of Pacific Islands Forum says Fiji has been suspended". Radio New Zealand International. 2 May 2009. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. Retrieved 30 September 2011.
^ "Fiji suspended from the Commonwealth". Commonwealth.org. 1 September 2009. Archived from the original on 4 September 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ "Fiji suspended from Commonwealth". BBC News. 1 September 2009. Archived from the original on 10 June 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ Fiji Times, 'PER Lifted' (12 January 2012)
^ In February 2011, the prime minister's office issued a statement saying that the name of the state had officially changed from the Republic of the Fiji Islands to the Republic of Fiji and that the name written in the 1997 constitution was now void (the constitution has been suspended since April 2009). Compare: "Country is now officially called Republic of Fiji". Fijivillage.com. 3 February 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2016. The country is now officially called Republic of Fiji.Permanent Secretary at the Prime Minister's Office, Colonel Pio Tikoduadua said the name, Republic of the Fiji Islands, as stated in the 1997 constitution is no longer applicable.
^ Fiji flag flies again following Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group decision Archived 9 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine. thecommonwealth.org. 17 March 2014
^ Turagaiviu, Elenoa (15 March 2014). "Fiji's Commonwealth suspension partially lifted". FBC News. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
^ "Fiji rejoins Commonwealth as a full member". The Commonwealth. 26 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 September 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014.
^ Press, Australian Associated (18 November 2018). "Fiji election: Bainimarama returned as PM in slim victory". the Guardian.
^ Ligaiula, Pita. "Ratu Wiliame Katonivere is Fiji's new President | PINA".
^ "Sitiveni 'Rambo' Rabuka confirmed as Fiji's new prime minister". www.aljazeera.com.
^ "Distance between Fiji and Hawaii". distancebetween.info. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2020.
^ "Distance between Fiji and Australia". distancebetween.info. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2020.
^ Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric; Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey; Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance; Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kier n; Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter; Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, Jos  C.; Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake, Jonathan; Kl ser, Heinz; Shennan-Farp n, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lilles , Jens-Peter Barnekow; van Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534 545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869.
^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity - Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.
^ "Our Country". fiji.gov. Government of the Republic of the Fiji Islands. November 2009. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010.
^ "Fiji: Land". britannica.com. Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017.
^ "Suva, Fiji Monthly Weather". weather.com. The Weather Company. Retrieved 6 August 2017.
^ a b COP23. "How Fiji is Affected by Climate Change". Cop23. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022.
^ UN Climate Change News (5 March 2019). "Fiji Submits Long-Term National Climate Plan". unfccc.int. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Retrieved 17 July 2021.
^ "Setting the scene: Fiji's next general elections - Griffith Asia Insights". blogs.griffith.edu.au.
^ Hermione Gee. "Fijian peacekeepers in Iraq aren't just a battalion   they're a choir". Public Radio International. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2018.
^ Home Archived 30 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Police.gov.fj. Retrieved 5 May 2013.
^ Fiji Corrections Service Archived 22 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Corrections.org.fj. Retrieved 5 May 2013.
^ Narayan, Paresh; Prasad, Biman (30 May 2006). "The long run impact of coups on Fiji's economy: evidence from a computable general equilibrium model". Journal of International Development. 19 (2): 149 160. doi:10.1002/jid.1296.
^ "Fiji Economy and Politics". Archived from the original on 26 July 2008.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ "South Pacific Stock Exchange". South Pacific Stock Exchange. Archived from the original on 31 May 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018.
^ a b Amitesh. "PROVISIONAL VISITOR ARRIVALS   2018   Fiji Bureau of Statistics". www.statsfiji.gov.fj. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2019.
^ a b c d Fiji Travel Information and Travel Guide Archived 30 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Lonely Planet Archived 24 February 1999 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 2010.
^ Fordham, Krisanne (28 March 2017). "The world's most beautiful island hotels". cnn.com. Cable News Network. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ Fiji Bureau of Statistics Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Statsfiji.gov.fj. Retrieved 18 July 2013.
^ Howard, Anna (16 June 2015). "FIJI'S BEST KIDS' CLUBS". Flight Center. Archived from the original on 13 October 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2016.
^ "Viti Levu 2018: Best of Viti Levu Tourism   TripAdvisor". www.tripadvisor.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2018.
^ "Five of the best things to do in Fiji's Mamanuca Islands". Spy.nzherald.co.nz. 17 July 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 3 October 2017.
^ "PROVISIONAL VISITOR ARRIVALS - June 2020 - Fiji Bureau of Statistics". www.statsfiji.gov.fj. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
^ Amitesh. "PROVISIONAL VISITOR ARRIVALS   2017   Fiji Bureau of Statistics". www.statsfiji.gov.fj. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2018.
^ "Fiji in the Movies". Tourism Fiji. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019.
^ Ross, Dalton (12 September 2017). "Jeff Probst wants Survivor to stay in Fiji permanently". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 6 October 2018.
^ Airports Fiji Limited Archived 17 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 2010.
^ Airports Fiji Limited   Outer Islands Archived 6 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Airportsfiji.com. Retrieved 5 May 2013.
^ Gibson, Nevil (14 May 2012). "Air Pacific reverts to original Fiji Airways name". National Business Review. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012.
^ Land Transport Authority   "Steering Fiji Safely" Archived 19 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Ltafiji.com. Retrieved 5 May 2013.
^ "Transport". Tourism Fiji. Archived from the original on 3 February 2018.
^ a b c d e  This article incorporates text from a free content work.  Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (PDF). Paris: UNESCO. 2015. pp. 693 731. ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
^ "Pacific-first centre of excellence for renewable energy and energy efficiency takes shape". Secretariat of Pacific Community press release. 18 June 2015. Archived from the original on 18 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017.
^ a b c Scott-Kemmis; Intarakumnerd; Rasiah; Amaradasa (11 June 2021).  Schneegans, S.; Straza, T.; Lewis, J. (eds.). Southeast Asia and Oceania. In UNESCO Science Report: the Race Against Time for Smarter Development. Paris: UNESCO. pp. 674 715. ISBN 978-92-3-100450-6.
^ Fiji Islands: From Immigration to Emigration Archived 4 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Migration Information Source.
^ "Future bleak for Fiji's Indians Archived 30 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine". BBC News. July 2000.
^ "Dealing with the dictator". The Australian (Sydney). 16 April 2009.[dead link]
^ Minority Rights Group International. "Fiji Islands Overview". Archived from the original on 29 July 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2009.
^ "Fiji". World Fact Book. Retrieved 10 February 2020.
^ "Australia-Fiji relationship". Australian High Commission, Fiji.
^ "Whitehead, John and Roffee, James. Child sexual abuse in Fiji: Authority, risk factors and responses [online]. Current Issues in Criminal Justice, Vol. 27, No. 3, Mar 2016: [323]-334".
^ Government of Fiji (2013). Constitution of the Republic of Fiji. Suva. p. 3. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016.
^ "Charter proposes common Fijian name". Archived from the original on 17 August 2008. Retrieved 5 August 2008.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link), Fiji Live (4 August 2008).
^ "The Name  Fijian  Belongs to Indigenous   Qarase" Archived 13 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine, FijiVillage, 8 August 2008
^ "Communalism is  to love thy neighbour'" Archived 11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Fiji Times (29 August 2008).
^ "PM Bainimarama   Address to the nation following appointment of Cabinet". Archived from the original on 18 April 2009. Retrieved 22 April 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link), fiji.gov.fj (11 April 2009).
^ "All Fiji nationals to be known as Fijians, says AG". Radio New Zealand International. 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 4 September 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2011.
^ Fijian Language Archived 13 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Fiji-faqs.com. Retrieved 5 May 2013.
^ "Religion   Fiji Bureau of Statistics". www.statsfiji.gov.fj. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018.
^ a b c "Fiji". education.stateuniversity.com. Retrieved 16 February 2020.
^ a b "Fiji Education System". www.scholaro.com. Retrieved 16 February 2020.
^ "Fiji: the challenges and opportunities of diversity" (PDF). Minority Rights Group International 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 24 November 2017.
^ "Pacific Pavilion unveils artist's renditions". Shanghai World Expo 2010 website En.expo2010.cn. 11 March 2010. Archived from the original on 19 June 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ "Associate Member: Cricket Fiji". International Cricket Council. Retrieved 19 July 2020.
^ "Fiji Times article on participation in netball, 14 Sept 2015". Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016.
^ The Pacific Islands: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, Brij V. Lal, Kate Fortune, p458
^ "2007 South Pacific Games results". Archived from the original on 24 January 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2016.
^ Basketball Fiji bringing the sport to all Archived 24 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine, FIBA.com, 13 May 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2017.
^ "Sports & Golf | The official website of Tourism Fiji". www.fiji.travel. 30 September 2013. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ "Hong Kong Sevens   Past Champions". hksevens.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ "Fiji Rugby Union " History". www.fijirugby.com. Archived from the original on 12 February 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ "Fiji rugby heroes return home from Rio to national celebrations". ABC News. 22 August 2016. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ Rudgard, Olivia; Rothwell, James (18 September 2015). "Never mind the haka   here's the Bole". The Telegraph. elegraph Media Group Limited. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016.
^ "Not Found | Fox Sports Videos".
^ "Oceanian Nations Cup 2008". Archived from the original on 6 October 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
Cited sources
Gravelle, Kim (1983). Fiji's Times: A History of Fiji. Fiji Times.
Morens, David M. "Measles in Fiji, 1875: thoughts on the history of emerging infectious diseases." Pacific Health Dialog 5#1 (1998): 119-128 online.
Scarr, Deryck (1984). Fiji: A short history. Institute for Polynesian Studies, Brigham Young University Hawaii Campus. ISBN 978-0-939154-36-4. OCLC 611678101.
Further reading
Wright, Ronald (1986). On Fiji Islands. Original from the University of Michigan, Digitized 5 December 2006. ISBN 978-0-670-80634-8. Traces the colonisation of the Fiji Islands, explains how the Fijians have managed to keep their language and culture intact, and describes modern Fiji society.
Derrick, Ronald Albert (1951). The Fiji Islands: A Geographical Handbook. Govt. Print. Dept Fiji, 334 pages, Original from the University of Michigan, Digitized 11 July 2006. Details on Fiji its history and Geography.
Lal, Brij V. (1992). Broken Waves: A History of the Fiji Islands in the Twentieth Century. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1418-2. Details of Fiji's History, Geography, Economy.
M ckler, Hermann (2002). "Back to the Chessboard: The Coup and the Re-Emergence of Pre-colonial Rivalries in Fiji".  In Kolig, Erich; M ckler, Hermann (eds.). Politics of Indigeneity in the South Pacific. Hamburg: LIT Verlag. pp. 143 158. ISBN 978-3-8258-5915-2.
Miller, Korina; Jones, Robyn; Pinheiro, Leonardo (2003). Fiji. Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74059-134-8.
Derrick, Ronald Albert (1957). A History of Fiji. Suva, Fiji: Government Printer.
David Routledge: Matanitu  The Struggle for Power in Early Fiji, University of the South Pacific, Suva 1985
Scarr, Deryck (1984). Fiji: A Short History. Sydney, Australia: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-0-86861-319-2.
Waterhouse, Joseph (1998). The King and People of Fiji. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1920-0.
Sources
 This article incorporates text from a free content work.  Licensed under C-BY-SA 3.0 IGO. Text taken from UNESCO Science Report: the Race Against Time for Smarter Development. ,  Schneegans, S., T. Straza and J. Lewis (eds), UNESCO. To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please see the terms of use.
External links
Fiji  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage
Government
Official website of the Government of Fiji
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Fiji Bureau of Statistics
General information
Geologic Map
 Wikimedia Atlas of Fiji
 Geographic data related to Fiji at OpenStreetMap
Fiji. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Fiji at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Fiji at Curlie
Fiji profile from the BBC News
J. Edward Hoffmeister Films from the J. Edward Hoffmeister Papers. MSS 231. Special Collections & Archives, UC San Diego
Coordinates: 18 S 179 E  /  18 S 179 E  / -18; 179
vteFiji articlesHistory
Heads of state
Cakobau period
Colonial period
Governors
Modern history
1977 crisis
1987 coups
Military church relations
2000 coup
Reconciliation Commission
2005 2006 crisis
2006 coup
2009 crisis
Geography
Archipelagoes
Cities and towns
Earthquakes
Provinces
Rivers
Rotuma
Volcanoes
Wildlife
Politics
Chiefly system
Constitution
Cabinet
Climate change
Elections
Foreign relations
Great Council of Chiefs
Chairman
Human rights
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Local government
Military
Commander
Monarchy
Parliament
Political parties
President
Vice-President
Prime Minister
Proposed charter
Economy
Central bank
Companies
Fijian dollar (currency)
Stock exchange
Telecommunications
Transport
Society
Demographics
Education
Fijian (iTaukei)
Indo-Fijians
Languages
Religion
Rotuman people
Squatting
Culture
Anthem
Cinema
Coat of arms
Festivals
Flag
Meke (dance)
Literature
Music
Mythology
Notable people
Sports
Traditions and ceremonies
OutlineIndex
Category
Links to related articles
vteMelanesiaSovereign states
Fiji
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Other territories
Aru Islands
Bougainville
New Caledonia
Rotuma
Western New Guinea
Central Papua
Highland Papua
Papua
South Papua
Southwest Papua
West Papua
Culture
People
Languages
Music
Mythology
Universities
Geography
Island Melanesia
New Guinea
Louisiade archipelago
Bismarck Archipelago
Santa Cruz Islands
Loyalty Islands
Lau Islands
d'Entrecasteaux Islands
Raja Ampat Islands
Schouten Islands
Torres Strait Islands
Trobriand Islands
Woodlark Island
Organizations
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Melanesia 2000
Politics
Political parties
Sports
Melanesia Cup
Melanesian Super Cup
 Category
vteCountries and territories of Oceania
List of Oceanian countries by area
List of Oceanian countries by population
Sovereign statesEntire
Australia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
In part
Chile
Easter Island
Juan Fern ndez Islands
Ecuador
Gal pagos Islands
Indonesia
Central Papua
Highland Papua
Papua
South Papua
Southwest Papua
West Papua
Japan
Dait  Islands
Nanp  Islands
United States
Hawaii
Palmyra Atoll
Associated states
Cook Islands
Niue
Dependencies andother territoriesAustralia
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Norfolk Island
France
Clipperton Island
French Polynesia
New Caledonia
Wallis and Futuna
New Zealand
Tokelau
United Kingdom
Pitcairn Islands
United States
American Samoa
Baker Island
Guam
Howland Island
Jarvis Island
Johnston Atoll
Kingman Reef
Midway Atoll
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island
British Overseas Territories
Overseas France
Overseas collectivity
Overseas country of France
Realm of New Zealand
Political status of the Cook Islands and Niue
States and territories of Australia
Australian Indian Ocean Territories
Territories of the United States
Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)
Insular area
United States Minor Outlying Islands
vteMembers of the Commonwealth of NationsSovereign states(members)
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana
Brunei
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
Eswatini (Swaziland)
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Malta
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Tanzania
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom
Vanuatu
Zambia
Associated states
Cook Islands
Niue
Dependent territoriesAustralia
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island
New Zealand
Ross Dependency
Tokelau
United Kingdom
Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
Source: Commonwealth Secretariat   Member Countries
vtePacific Islands Forum (PIF)Members
Australia
Cook Islands
Fiji
French Polynesia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
New Caledonia
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Associate members
Tokelau
Observers
American Samoa
East Timor
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Wallis and Futuna
Observer Organisations
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States
Asian Development Bank
Commonwealth of Nations
International Organization for Migration
United Nations
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC)
World Bank
Dialogue partners
Canada
China
Cuba
European Union
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Spain
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Meetings
45th
51st
Former members
Kiribati
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Sweden
Japan
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
People
Trove
Other
NARA
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiji&oldid=1149260421"