English writer and social critic (1812 1870)
"Dickens" and "Dickensian" redirect here. For the television series, see Dickensian (TV series). For other uses, see Dickens (disambiguation).
Charles DickensDickens in New York, c. 1867 1868BornCharles John Huffam Dickens(1812-02-07)7 February 1812Portsmouth, EnglandDied9 June 1870(1870-06-09) (aged 58)Higham, Kent, EnglandResting placePoets' Corner, Westminster Abbey, England51 29 57 N 00 07 39 W  /  51.49917 N 0.12750 W  / 51.49917; -0.12750OccupationWriterNotable worksThe Pickwick PapersOliver TwistNicholas NicklebyA Christmas CarolDavid CopperfieldBleak HouseLittle DorritA Tale of Two CitiesGreat ExpectationsSpouseCatherine Thomson Hogarth
   (m. 1836; sep. 1858) PartnerEllen Ternan (1857 1870, his death)ChildrenCharles Dickens Jr.Mary DickensKate PeruginiWalter Landor DickensFrancis DickensAlfred D'Orsay Tennyson DickensSydney Smith Haldimand DickensHenry Fielding DickensDora Annie DickensEdward DickensSignature
Charles John Huffam Dickens (/ d k nz/; 7 February 1812  9 June 1870) was an English writer and social critic who created some of the world's best-known fictional characters and is regarded by many as the greatest novelist of the Victorian era.[1] His works enjoyed unprecedented popularity during his lifetime and, by the 20th century, critics and scholars had recognised him as a literary genius. His novels and short stories are widely read today.[2][3]
Born in Portsmouth, Dickens left school at the age of 12 to work in a boot-blacking factory when his father was incarcerated in a debtors' prison. After three years he returned to school, before he began his literary career as a journalist. Dickens edited a weekly journal for 20 years, wrote 15 novels, five novellas, hundreds of short stories and non-fiction articles, lectured and performed readings extensively, was an indefatigable letter writer, and campaigned vigorously for children's rights, for education, and for other social reforms.
Dickens's literary success began with the 1836 serial publication of The Pickwick Papers, a publishing phenomenon thanks largely to the introduction of the character Sam Weller in the fourth episode that sparked Pickwick merchandise and spin-offs. Within a few years Dickens had become an international literary celebrity, famous for his humour, satire and keen observation of character and society. His novels, most of them published in monthly or weekly installments, pioneered the serial publication of narrative fiction, which became the dominant Victorian mode for novel publication.[4][5] Cliffhanger endings in his serial publications kept readers in suspense.[6] The instalment format allowed Dickens to evaluate his audience's reaction, and he often modified his plot and character development based on such feedback.[5] For example, when his wife's chiropodist expressed distress at the way Miss Mowcher in David Copperfield seemed to reflect her own disabilities, Dickens improved the character with positive features.[7] His plots were carefully constructed and he often wove elements from topical events into his narratives.[8] Masses of the illiterate poor would individually pay a halfpenny to have each new monthly episode read to them, opening up and inspiring a new class of readers.[9]
His 1843 novella A Christmas Carol remains especially popular and continues to inspire adaptations in every artistic genre. Oliver Twist and Great Expectations are also frequently adapted and, like many of his novels, evoke images of early Victorian London. His 1859 novel A Tale of Two Cities (set in London and Paris) is his best-known work of historical fiction. The most famous celebrity of his era, he undertook, in response to public demand, a series of public reading tours in the later part of his career.[10] The term Dickensian is used to describe something that is reminiscent of Dickens and his writings, such as poor social or working conditions, or comically repulsive characters.[11][12]
Early life
Main article: Dickens family
 Charles Dickens's birthplace, 393 Commercial Road, Portsmouth
 2 Ordnance Terrace, Chatham, Dickens's home 1817  May 1821[13]
Charles Dickens was born on 7 February 1812 at 1 Mile End Terrace (now 393 Commercial Road), Landport in Portsea Island (Portsmouth), Hampshire, the second of eight children of Elizabeth Dickens (n e Barrow; 1789 1863) and John Dickens (1785 1851). His father was a clerk in the Navy Pay Office and was temporarily stationed in the district. He asked Christopher Huffam,[14] rigger to His Majesty's Navy, gentleman, and head of an established firm, to act as godfather to Charles. Huffam is thought to be the inspiration for Paul Dombey, the owner of a shipping company in Dickens's novel Dombey and Son (1848).[14]
In January 1815, John Dickens was called back to London and the family moved to Norfolk Street, Fitzrovia.[15] When Charles was four, they relocated to Sheerness and thence to Chatham, Kent, where he spent his formative years until the age of 11. His early life seems to have been idyllic, though he thought himself a "very small and not-over-particularly-taken-care-of boy".[16]
Charles spent time outdoors, but also read voraciously, including the picaresque novels of Tobias Smollett and Henry Fielding, as well as Robinson Crusoe and Gil Blas. He read and reread The Arabian Nights and the Collected Farces of Elizabeth Inchbald.[17] At age 7 he first saw Joseph Grimaldi the father of modern clowning perform at the Star Theatre, Rochester.[18] He later imitated Grimaldi's clowning on several occasions, and would also edit the Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi.[19][nb 1] He retained poignant memories of childhood, helped by an excellent memory of people and events, which he used in his writing.[22] His father's brief work as a clerk in the Navy Pay Office afforded him a few years of private education, first at a dame school and then at a school run by William Giles, a dissenter, in Chatham.[23]
 Illustration by Fred Bernard of Dickens at work in a shoe-blacking factory after his father had been sent to the Marshalsea, published in the 1892 edition of Forster's Life of Charles Dickens[24]
This period came to an end in June 1822, when John Dickens was recalled to Navy Pay Office headquarters at Somerset House and the family (except for Charles, who stayed behind to finish his final term at school) moved to Camden Town in London.[25] The family had left Kent amidst rapidly mounting debts and, living beyond his means,[26] John Dickens was forced by his creditors into the Marshalsea debtors' prison in Southwark, London in 1824. His wife and youngest children joined him there, as was the practice at the time. Charles, then 12 years old, boarded with Elizabeth Roylance, a family friend, at 112 College Place, Camden Town.[27] Mrs Roylance was "a reduced impoverished old lady, long known to our family", whom Dickens later immortalised, "with a few alterations and embellishments", as "Mrs Pipchin" in Dombey and Son. Later, he lived in a back-attic in the house of an agent for the Insolvent Court, Archibald Russell, "a fat, good-natured, kind old gentleman ... with a quiet old wife" and lame son, in Lant Street in Southwark.[28] They provided the inspiration for the Garlands in The Old Curiosity Shop.[29]
On Sundays   with his sister Frances, free from her studies at the Royal Academy of Music   he spent the day at the Marshalsea.[30] Dickens later used the prison as a setting in Little Dorrit. To pay for his board and to help his family, Dickens was forced to leave school and work ten-hour days at Warren's Blacking Warehouse, on Hungerford Stairs, near the present Charing Cross railway station, where he earned six shillings a week pasting labels on pots of boot blacking. The strenuous and often harsh working conditions made a lasting impression on Dickens and later influenced his fiction and essays, becoming the foundation of his interest in the reform of socio-economic and labour conditions, the rigours of which he believed were unfairly borne by the poor. He later wrote that he wondered "how I could have been so easily cast away at such an age".[31] As he recalled to John Forster (from Life of Charles Dickens):
The blacking-warehouse was the last house on the left-hand side of the way, at old Hungerford Stairs. It was a crazy, tumble-down old house, abutting of course on the river, and literally overrun with rats. Its wainscoted rooms, and its rotten floors and staircase, and the old grey rats swarming down in the cellars, and the sound of their squeaking and scuffling coming up the stairs at all times, and the dirt and decay of the place, rise up visibly before me, as if I were there again. The counting-house was on the first floor, looking over the coal-barges and the river. There was a recess in it, in which I was to sit and work. My work was to cover the pots of paste-blacking; first with a piece of oil-paper, and then with a piece of blue paper; to tie them round with a string; and then to clip the paper close and neat, all round, until it looked as smart as a pot of ointment from an apothecary's shop. When a certain number of grosses of pots had attained this pitch of perfection, I was to paste on each a printed label, and then go on again with more pots. Two or three other boys were kept at similar duty down-stairs on similar wages. One of them came up, in a ragged apron and a paper cap, on the first Monday morning, to show me the trick of using the string and tying the knot. His name was Bob Fagin; and I took the liberty of using his name, long afterwards, in Oliver Twist.[31]
When the warehouse was moved to Chandos Street in the smart, busy district of Covent Garden, the boys worked in a room in which the window gave onto the street. Small audiences gathered and watched them at work   in Dickens's biographer Simon Callow's estimation, the public display was "a new refinement added to his misery".[32]
 The Marshalsea around 1897, after it had closed. Dickens based several of his characters on the experience of seeing his father in the debtors' prison, most notably Amy Dorrit from Little Dorrit.
A few months after his imprisonment, John Dickens's mother, Elizabeth Dickens, died and bequeathed him  450. On the expectation of this legacy, Dickens was released from prison. Under the Insolvent Debtors Act, Dickens arranged for payment of his creditors and he and his family left the Marshalsea,[33] for the home of Mrs Roylance.
Charles's mother, Elizabeth Dickens, did not immediately support his removal from the boot-blacking warehouse. This influenced Dickens's view that a father should rule the family and a mother find her proper sphere inside the home: "I never afterwards forgot, I never shall forget, I never can forget, that my mother was warm for my being sent back." His mother's failure to request his return was a factor in his dissatisfied attitude towards women.[34]
Righteous indignation stemming from his own situation and the conditions under which working-class people lived became major themes of his works, and it was this unhappy period in his youth to which he alluded in his favourite, and most autobiographical, novel, David Copperfield:[35] "I had no advice, no counsel, no encouragement, no consolation, no assistance, no support, of any kind, from anyone, that I can call to mind, as I hope to go to heaven!"[36]
Dickens was eventually sent to the Wellington House Academy in Camden Town, where he remained until March 1827, having spent about two years there. He did not consider it to be a good school: "Much of the haphazard, desultory teaching, poor discipline punctuated by the headmaster's sadistic brutality, the seedy ushers and general run-down atmosphere, are embodied in Mr Creakle's Establishment in David Copperfield."[36]
Dickens worked at the law office of Ellis and Blackmore, attorneys, of Holborn Court, Gray's Inn, as a junior clerk from May 1827 to November 1828. He was a gifted mimic and impersonated those around him: clients, lawyers and clerks. He went to theatres obsessively: he claimed that for at least three years he went to the theatre every day. His favourite actor was Charles Mathews and Dickens learnt his "monopolylogues" (farces in which Mathews played every character) by heart.[37] Then, having learned Gurney's system of shorthand in his spare time, he left to become a freelance reporter. A distant relative, Thomas Charlton, was a freelance reporter at Doctors' Commons and Dickens was able to share his box there to report the legal proceedings for nearly four years.[38][39] This education was to inform works such as Nicholas Nickleby, Dombey and Son and especially Bleak House, whose vivid portrayal of the machinations and bureaucracy of the legal system did much to enlighten the general public and served as a vehicle for dissemination of Dickens's own views regarding, particularly, the heavy burden on the poor who were forced by circumstances to "go to law".
In 1830, Dickens met his first love, Maria Beadnell, thought to have been the model for the character Dora in David Copperfield. Maria's parents disapproved of the courtship and ended the relationship by sending her to school in Paris.[40]
Career
Journalism and early novels
 Catherine Hogarth Dickens by Samuel Laurence (1838). She met the author in 1834, and they became engaged the following year before marrying in April 1836.
In 1832, at the age of 20, Dickens was energetic and increasingly self-confident.[41] He enjoyed mimicry and popular entertainment, lacked a clear, specific sense of what he wanted to become, and yet knew he wanted fame. Drawn to the theatre   he became an early member of the Garrick Club[42]   he landed an acting audition at Covent Garden, where the manager George Bartley and the actor Charles Kemble were to see him. Dickens prepared meticulously and decided to imitate the comedian Charles Mathews, but ultimately he missed the audition because of a cold. Before another opportunity arose, he had set out on his career as a writer.[43]
In 1833, Dickens submitted his first story, "A Dinner at Poplar Walk", to the London periodical Monthly Magazine.[44] William Barrow, Dickens's uncle on his mother's side, offered him a job on The Mirror of Parliament and he worked in the House of Commons for the first time early in 1832. He rented rooms at Furnival's Inn and worked as a political journalist, reporting on Parliamentary debates, and he travelled across Britain to cover election campaigns for the Morning Chronicle. His journalism, in the form of sketches in periodicals, formed his first collection of pieces, published in 1836: Sketches by Boz   Boz being a family nickname he employed as a pseudonym for some years.[45][46] Dickens apparently adopted it from the nickname 'Moses', which he had given to his youngest brother Augustus Dickens, after a character in Oliver Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield. When pronounced by anyone with a head cold, "Moses" became "Boses"   later shortened to Boz.[46][47] Dickens's own name was considered "queer" by a contemporary critic, who wrote in 1849: "Mr Dickens, as if in revenge for his own queer name, does bestow still queerer ones upon his fictitious creations." Dickens contributed to and edited journals throughout his literary career.[44] In January 1835, the Morning Chronicle launched an evening edition, under the editorship of the Chronicle's music critic, George Hogarth. Hogarth invited him to contribute Street Sketches and Dickens became a regular visitor to his Fulham house   excited by Hogarth's friendship with Walter Scott (whom Dickens greatly admired) and enjoying the company of Hogarth's three daughters: Georgina, Mary and 19-year-old Catherine.[48]
 The wise-cracking, warm-hearted servant Sam Weller from The Pickwick Papers a publishing phenomenon that sparked numerous spin-offs and Pickwick merchandise made the 24-year-old Dickens famous.[49]
Dickens made rapid progress both professionally and socially. He began a friendship with William Harrison Ainsworth, the author of the highwayman novel Rookwood (1834), whose bachelor salon in Harrow Road had become the meeting place for a set that included Daniel Maclise, Benjamin Disraeli, Edward Bulwer-Lytton and George Cruikshank. All these became his friends and collaborators, with the exception of Disraeli, and he met his first publisher, John Macrone, at the house.[50] The success of Sketches by Boz led to a proposal from publishers Chapman and Hall for Dickens to supply text to match Robert Seymour's engraved illustrations in a monthly letterpress. Seymour committed suicide after the second instalment and Dickens, who wanted to write a connected series of sketches, hired "Phiz" to provide the engravings (which were reduced from four to two per instalment) for the story. The resulting story became The Pickwick Papers and, although the first few episodes were not successful, the introduction of the Cockney character Sam Weller in the fourth episode (the first to be illustrated by Phiz) marked a sharp climb in its popularity.[51] The final instalment sold 40,000 copies.[44] On the impact of the character, The Paris Review stated, "arguably the most historic bump in English publishing is the Sam Weller Bump."[49] A publishing phenomenon, John Sutherland called The Pickwick Papers "[t]he most important single novel of the Victorian era".[52] The unprecedented success led to numerous spin-offs and merchandise ranging from Pickwick cigars, playing cards, china figurines, Sam Weller puzzles, Weller boot polish and joke books.[49]
The Sam Weller Bump testifies not merely to Dickens's comic genius but to his acumen as an "authorpreneur", a portmanteau he inhabited long before The Economist took it up. For a writer who made his reputation crusading against the squalor of the Industrial Revolution, Dickens was a creature of capitalism; he used everything from the powerful new printing presses to the enhanced advertising revenues to the expansion of railroads to sell more books. Dickens ensured that his books were available in cheap bindings for the lower orders as well as in morocco-and-gilt for people of quality; his ideal readership included everyone from the pickpockets who read Oliver Twist to Queen Victoria, who found it "exceedingly interesting".
 How The Pickwick Papers Launched Charles Dickens's Career, The Paris Review.[49]
On the creation of modern mass culture, Nicholas Dames in The Atlantic writes, "Literature" is not a big enough category for Pickwick. It defined its own, a new one that we have learned to call "entertainment."[53] In November 1836, Dickens accepted the position of editor of Bentley's Miscellany, a position he held for three years, until he fell out with the owner.[54] In 1836, as he finished the last instalments of The Pickwick Papers, he began writing the beginning instalments of Oliver Twist   writing as many as 90 pages a month   while continuing work on Bentley's and also writing four plays, the production of which he oversaw. Oliver Twist, published in 1838, became one of Dickens's better known stories and was the first Victorian novel with a child protagonist.[55]
 Young Charles Dickens by Daniel Maclise, 1839
On 2 April 1836, after a one-year engagement, and between episodes two and three of The Pickwick Papers, Dickens married Catherine Thomson Hogarth (1815 1879), the daughter of George Hogarth, editor of the Evening Chronicle.[56] They were married in St Luke's Church,[57] Chelsea, London. After a brief honeymoon in Chalk in Kent, the couple returned to lodgings at Furnival's Inn.[58] The first of their ten children, Charles, was born in January 1837 and a few months later the family set up home in Bloomsbury at 48 Doughty Street, London (on which Charles had a three-year lease at  80 a year) from 25 March 1837 until December 1839.[56][59] Dickens's younger brother Frederick and Catherine's 17-year-old sister Mary Hogarth moved in with them. Dickens became very attached to Mary, and she died in his arms after a brief illness in 1837. Unusually for Dickens, as a consequence of his shock, he stopped working, and he and Catherine stayed at a little farm on Hampstead Heath for a fortnight. Dickens idealised Mary; the character he fashioned after her, Rose Maylie, he found he could not now kill, as he had planned, in his fiction,[60] and, according to Ackroyd, he drew on memories of her for his later descriptions of Little Nell and Florence Dombey.[61] His grief was so great that he was unable to meet the deadline for the June instalment of The Pickwick Papers and had to cancel the Oliver Twist instalment that month as well.[55] The time in Hampstead was the occasion for a growing bond between Dickens and John Forster to develop; Forster soon became his unofficial business manager and the first to read his work.[62]
 Barnaby Rudge was Dickens's first popular failure but the character of Dolly Varden, "pretty, witty, sexy, became central to numerous theatrical adaptations"[63]
His success as a novelist continued. The young Queen Victoria read both Oliver Twist and The Pickwick Papers, staying up until midnight to discuss them.[64] Nicholas Nickleby (1838 39), The Old Curiosity Shop (1840 41) and, finally, his first historical novel, Barnaby Rudge: A Tale of the Riots of 'Eighty, as part of the Master Humphrey's Clock series (1840 41), were all published in monthly instalments before being made into books.[65]
In the midst of all his activity during this period, there was discontent with his publishers and John Macrone was bought off, while Richard Bentley signed over all his rights in Oliver Twist. Other signs of a certain restlessness and discontent emerged; in Broadstairs he flirted with Eleanor Picken, the young fianc e of his solicitor's best friend and one night grabbed her and ran with her down to the sea. He declared they were both to drown there in the "sad sea waves". She finally got free, and afterwards kept her distance. In June 1841, he precipitously set out on a two-month tour of Scotland and then, in September 1841, telegraphed Forster that he had decided to go to America.[66] Master Humphrey's Clock was shut down, though Dickens was still keen on the idea of the weekly magazine, a form he liked, an appreciation that had begun with his childhood reading of the 18th-century magazines Tatler and The Spectator.
Dickens was perturbed by the return to power of the Tories, whom he described as "people whom, politically, I despise and abhor."[67] He had been tempted to stand for the Liberals in Reading, but decided against it due to financial straits.[67] He wrote three anti-Tory verse satires ("The Fine Old English Gentleman", "The Quack Doctor's Proclamation", and "Subjects for Painters") which were published in The Examiner.[68]
First visit to the United States
On 22 January 1842, Dickens and his wife arrived in Boston, Massachusetts, aboard the RMS Britannia during their first trip to the United States and Canada.[69] At this time Georgina Hogarth, another sister of Catherine, joined the Dickens household, now living at Devonshire Terrace, Marylebone to care for the young family they had left behind.[70] She remained with them as housekeeper, organiser, adviser and friend until Dickens's death in 1870.[71] Dickens modelled the character of Agnes Wickfield after Georgina and Mary.[72]
 Sketch of Dickens in 1842 during his first American tour. Sketch of Dickens's sister Fanny, bottom left
He described his impressions in a travelogue, American Notes for General Circulation. In Notes, Dickens includes a powerful condemnation of slavery which he had attacked as early as The Pickwick Papers, correlating the emancipation of the poor in England with the abolition of slavery abroad[73] citing newspaper accounts of runaway slaves disfigured by their masters. In spite of the abolitionist sentiments gleaned from his trip to America, some modern commentators have pointed out inconsistencies in Dickens's views on racial inequality. For instance, he has been criticised for his subsequent acquiescence in Governor Eyre's harsh crackdown during the 1860s Morant Bay rebellion in Jamaica and his failure to join other British progressives in condemning it.[74] From Richmond, Virginia, Dickens returned to Washington, D.C., and started a trek westward, with brief pauses in Cincinnati and Louisville, to St. Louis, Missouri. While there, he expressed a desire to see an American prairie before returning east. A group of 13 men then set out with Dickens to visit Looking Glass Prairie, a trip 30 miles into Illinois.
During his American visit, Dickens spent a month in New York City, giving lectures, raising the question of international copyright laws and the pirating of his work in America.[75][76] He persuaded a group of 25 writers, headed by Washington Irving, to sign a petition for him to take to Congress, but the press were generally hostile to this, saying that he should be grateful for his popularity and that it was mercenary to complain about his work being pirated.[77]
The popularity he gained caused a shift in his self-perception according to critic Kate Flint, who writes that he "found himself a cultural commodity, and its circulation had passed out his control", causing him to become interested in and delve into themes of public and personal personas in the next novels.[78] She writes that he assumed a role of "influential commentator", publicly and in his fiction, evident in his next few books.[78] His trip to the U.S. ended with a trip to Canada   Niagara Falls, Toronto, Kingston and Montreal   where he appeared on stage in light comedies.[79]
 Dickens's portrait by Margaret Gillies, 1843. Painted during the period when he was writing A Christmas Carol, it was in the Royal Academy of Arts' 1844 summer exhibition. After viewing it there, Elizabeth Barrett Browning said that it showed Dickens with "the dust and mud of humanity about him, notwithstanding those eagle eyes".[80]
Return to England
Soon after his return to England, Dickens began work on the first of his Christmas stories, A Christmas Carol, written in 1843, which was followed by The Chimes in 1844 and The Cricket on the Hearth in 1845. Of these, A Christmas Carol was most popular and, tapping into an old tradition, did much to promote a renewed enthusiasm for the joys of Christmas in Britain and America.[81] The seeds for the story became planted in Dickens's mind during a trip to Manchester to witness the conditions of the manufacturing workers there. This, along with scenes he had recently witnessed at the Field Lane Ragged School, caused Dickens to resolve to "strike a sledge hammer blow" for the poor. As the idea for the story took shape and the writing began in earnest, Dickens became engrossed in the book. He later wrote that as the tale unfolded he "wept and laughed, and wept again" as he "walked about the black streets of London fifteen or twenty miles many a night when all sober folks had gone to bed".[82]
After living briefly in Italy (1844), Dickens travelled to Switzerland (1846), where he began work on Dombey and Son (1846 48). This and David Copperfield (1849 50) mark a significant artistic break in Dickens's career as his novels became more serious in theme and more carefully planned than his early works.
At about this time, he was made aware of a large embezzlement at the firm where his brother, Augustus, worked (John Chapman & Co). It had been carried out by Thomas Powell, a clerk, who was on friendly terms with Dickens and who had acted as mentor to Augustus when he started work. Powell was also an author and poet and knew many of the famous writers of the day. After further fraudulent activities, Powell fled to New York and published a book called The Living Authors of England with a chapter on Charles Dickens, who was not amused by what Powell had written. One item that seemed to have annoyed him was the assertion that he had based the character of Paul Dombey (Dombey and Son) on Thomas Chapman, one of the principal partners at John Chapman & Co. Dickens immediately sent a letter to Lewis Gaylord Clark, editor of the New York literary magazine The Knickerbocker, saying that Powell was a forger and thief. Clark published the letter in the New-York Tribune and several other papers picked up on the story. Powell began proceedings to sue these publications and Clark was arrested. Dickens, realising that he had acted in haste, contacted John Chapman & Co to seek written confirmation of Powell's guilt. Dickens did receive a reply confirming Powell's embezzlement, but once the directors realised this information might have to be produced in court, they refused to make further disclosures. Owing to the difficulties of providing evidence in America to support his accusations, Dickens eventually made a private settlement with Powell out of court.[83]
Philanthropy
 Dickens presiding over a charity meeting to discuss the future of the College of God's Gift; from The Illustrated London News, March 1856
Angela Burdett Coutts, heir to the Coutts banking fortune, approached Dickens in May 1846 about setting up a home for the redemption of fallen women of the working class. Coutts envisioned a home that would replace the punitive regimes of existing institutions with a reformative environment conducive to education and proficiency in domestic household chores. After initially resisting, Dickens eventually founded the home, named Urania Cottage, in the Lime Grove area of Shepherd's Bush, which he managed for ten years,[84] setting the house rules, reviewing the accounts and interviewing prospective residents.[85] Emigration and marriage were central to Dickens's agenda for the women on leaving Urania Cottage, from which it is estimated that about 100 women graduated between 1847 and 1859.[86]
Religious views
As a young man, Dickens expressed a distaste for certain aspects of organised religion. In 1836, in a pamphlet titled Sunday Under Three Heads, he defended the people's right to pleasure, opposing a plan to prohibit games on Sundays. "Look into your churches   diminished congregations and scanty attendance. People have grown sullen and obstinate, and are becoming disgusted with the faith which condemns them to such a day as this, once in every seven. They display their feeling by staying away [from church]. Turn into the streets [on a Sunday] and mark the rigid gloom that reigns over everything around."[87][88]
 Portrait of Dickens, c. 1850,  National Library of Wales
Dickens honoured the figure of Jesus Christ.[89] He is regarded as a professing Christian.[90] His son, Henry Fielding Dickens, described him as someone who "possessed deep religious convictions". In the early 1840s, he had shown an interest in Unitarian Christianity and Robert Browning remarked that "Mr Dickens is an enlightened Unitarian."[91] Professor Gary Colledge has written that he "never strayed from his attachment to popular lay Anglicanism".[92] Dickens authored a work called The Life of Our Lord (1846), a book about the life of Christ, written with the purpose of sharing his faith with his children and family.[93][94] In a scene from David Copperfield, Dickens echoed Geoffrey Chaucer's use of Luke 23:34 from Troilus and Criseyde (Dickens held a copy in his library), with G. K. Chesterton writing, "among the great canonical English authors, Chaucer and Dickens have the most in common."[95]
Dickens disapproved of Roman Catholicism and 19th-century evangelicalism, seeing both as extremes of Christianity and likely to limit personal expression, and was critical of what he saw as the hypocrisy of religious institutions and philosophies like spiritualism, all of which he considered deviations from the true spirit of Christianity, as shown in the book he wrote for his family in 1846.[96][97] While Dickens advocated equal rights for Catholics in England, he strongly disliked how individual civil liberties were often threatened in countries where Catholicism predominated and referred to the Catholic Church as "that curse upon the world."[96] Dickens also rejected the Evangelical conviction that the Bible was the infallible word of God. His ideas on Biblical interpretation were similar to the Liberal Anglican Arthur Penrhyn Stanley's doctrine of "progressive revelation."[96] Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky referred to Dickens as "that great Christian writer".[98][99]
Middle years
In December 1845, Dickens took up the editorship of the London-based Daily News, a liberal paper through which Dickens hoped to advocate, in his own words, "the Principles of Progress and Improvement, of Education and Civil and Religious Liberty and Equal Legislation."[100] Among the other contributors Dickens chose to write for the paper were the radical economist Thomas Hodgskin and the social reformer Douglas William Jerrold, who frequently attacked the Corn Laws.[100][101] Dickens lasted only ten weeks on the job before resigning due to a combination of exhaustion and frustration with one of the paper's co-owners.[100]
 David reaches Canterbury, from David Copperfield. The character incorporates many elements of Dickens's own life. Artwork by Frank Reynolds.
The Francophile Dickens often holidayed in France and, in a speech delivered in Paris in 1846 in French, called the French "the first people in the universe".[102] During his visit to Paris, Dickens met the French literati Alexandre Dumas, Victor Hugo, Eug ne Scribe, Th ophile Gautier, Fran ois-Ren  de Chateaubriand and Eug ne Sue.[102] In early 1849, Dickens started to write David Copperfield. It was published between 1849 and 1850. In Dickens's biography, Life of Charles Dickens (1872), John Forster wrote of David Copperfield, "underneath the fiction lay something of the author's life".[103] It was Dickens's personal favourite among his own novels, as he wrote in the author's preface to the 1867 edition of the novel.[104]
In late November 1851, Dickens moved into Tavistock House where he wrote Bleak House (1852 53), Hard Times (1854) and Little Dorrit (1856).[105] It was here that he indulged in the amateur theatricals described in Forster's Life of Charles Dickens.[106] During this period, he worked closely with the novelist and playwright Wilkie Collins. In 1856, his income from writing allowed him to buy Gads Hill Place in Higham, Kent. As a child, Dickens had walked past the house and dreamed of living in it. The area was also the scene of some of the events of Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part 1 and this literary connection pleased him.[107]
During this time Dickens was also the publisher, editor and a major contributor to the journals Household Words (1850 1859) and All the Year Round (1858 1870).[108] In 1855, when Dickens's good friend and Liberal MP Austen Henry Layard formed an Administrative Reform Association to demand significant reforms of Parliament, Dickens joined and volunteered his resources in support of Layard's cause.[109] With the exception of Lord John Russell, who was the only leading politician in whom Dickens had any faith and to whom he later dedicated A Tale of Two Cities, Dickens believed that the political aristocracy and their incompetence were the death of England.[110][109] When he and Layard were accused of fomenting class conflict, Dickens replied that the classes were already in opposition and the fault was with the aristocratic class. Dickens used his pulpit in Household Words to champion the Reform Association.[110] He also commented on foreign affairs, declaring his support for Giuseppe Garibaldi and Giuseppe Mazzini, helping raise funds for their campaigns and stating that "a united Italy would be of vast importance to the peace of the world, and would be a rock in Louis Napoleon's way," and that "I feel for Italy almost as if I were an Italian born."[111][112][113]
Following the Indian Mutiny of 1857, Dickens joined in the widespread criticism of the East India Company for its role in the event,[citation needed] but reserved his fury for Indians, wishing that he was the commander-in-chief in India so that he would be able to, "do my utmost to exterminate the Race upon whom the stain of the late cruelties rested."[114]
 Actress Ellen Ternan, 1858. Dickens referred to Ternan as his "magic circle of one."
In 1857, Dickens hired professional actresses for the play The Frozen Deep, written by him and his prot g , Wilkie Collins. Dickens fell in love with one of the actresses, Ellen Ternan, and this passion was to last the rest of his life.[115] In 1858, when Dickens was 45 and Ternan 18, divorce was nearly unthinkable for someone as famous as he was. After publicly accusing Catherine of not loving their children and suffering from "a mental disorder", statements that disgusted his contemporaries, including Elizabeth Barrett Browning,[116] Dickens attempted to have Catherine institutionalized.[117] When this scheme failed, they separated. When Catherine left, never to see her husband again, she took with her one child, leaving the other children to be raised by her sister Georgina, who chose to stay at Gads Hill.[71]
During this period, whilst pondering a project to give public readings for his own profit, Dickens was approached through a charitable appeal by Great Ormond Street Hospital to help it survive its first major financial crisis. His "Drooping Buds" essay in Household Words earlier on 3 April 1852 was considered by the hospital's founders to have been the catalyst for the hospital's success.[118] Dickens, whose philanthropy was well-known, was asked by his friend, the hospital's founder Charles West, to preside over the appeal, and he threw himself into the task, heart and soul.[119] Dickens's public readings secured sufficient funds for an endowment to put the hospital on a sound financial footing; one reading on 9 February 1858 alone raised  3,000.[120][121][122]
 Dickens at his desk, 1858
After separating from Catherine,[123] Dickens undertook a series of hugely popular and remunerative reading tours which, together with his journalism, were to absorb most of his creative energies for the next decade, in which he was to write only two more novels.[124] His first reading tour, lasting from April 1858 to February 1859, consisted of 129 appearances in 49 towns throughout England, Scotland and Ireland.[125] Dickens's continued fascination with the theatrical world was written into the theatre scenes in Nicholas Nickleby, but more importantly he found an outlet in public readings. In 1866, he undertook a series of public readings in England and Scotland, with more the following year in England and Ireland.[126]
 Dickens was a regular patron at Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese pub in London. He included the venue in A Tale of Two Cities.
Other works soon followed, including A Tale of Two Cities (1859) and Great Expectations (1861), which were resounding successes. Set in London and Paris, A Tale of Two Cities is his best-known work of historical fiction and includes the famous opening sentence which begins with "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times." It is regularly cited as one of the best-selling novels of all time.[127][128] Themes in Great Expectations include wealth and poverty, love and rejection, and the eventual triumph of good over evil.[129]
In early September 1860, in a field behind Gads Hill, Dickens made a bonfire of most of his correspondence; only those letters on business matters were spared. Since Ellen Ternan also destroyed all of his letters to her,[130] the extent of the affair between the two remains speculative.[131] In the 1930s, Thomas Wright recounted that Ternan had unburdened herself to a Canon Benham and gave currency to rumours they had been lovers.[132] That the two had a son who died in infancy was alleged by Dickens's daughter, Kate Perugini, whom Gladys Storey had interviewed before her death in 1929. Storey published her account in Dickens and Daughter,[133][134] but no contemporary evidence exists. On his death, Dickens settled an annuity on Ternan which made her financially independent. Claire Tomalin's book, The Invisible Woman, argues that Ternan lived with Dickens secretly for the last 13 years of his life. The book was subsequently turned into a play, Little Nell, by Simon Gray, and a 2013 film. In the same period, Dickens furthered his interest in the paranormal, becoming one of the early members of The Ghost Club.[135]
In June 1862, he was offered  10,000 for a reading tour of Australia.[136] He was enthusiastic, and even planned a travel book, The Uncommercial Traveller Upside Down, but ultimately decided against the tour.[137] Two of his sons, Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson Dickens and Edward Bulwer Lytton Dickens, migrated to Australia, Edward becoming a member of the Parliament of New South Wales as Member for Wilcannia between 1889 and 1894.[138][139]
Later life
 Aftermath of the Staplehurst rail crash in 1865
On 9 June 1865, while returning from Paris with Ellen Ternan, Dickens was involved in the Staplehurst rail crash in Kent. The train's first seven carriages plunged off a cast iron bridge that was under repair. The only first-class carriage to remain on the track was the one in which Dickens was travelling. Before rescuers arrived, Dickens tended and comforted the wounded and the dying with a flask of brandy and a hat refreshed with water, and saved some lives. Before leaving, he remembered the unfinished manuscript for Our Mutual Friend, and he returned to his carriage to retrieve it.[140]
Dickens later used the experience of the crash as material for his short ghost story, "The Signal-Man", in which the central character has a premonition of his own death in a rail crash. He also based the story on several previous rail accidents, such as the Clayton Tunnel rail crash in Sussex of 1861. Dickens managed to avoid an appearance at the inquest to avoid disclosing that he had been travelling with Ternan and her mother, which would have caused a scandal.[141] After the crash, Dickens was nervous when travelling by train and would use alternative means when available.[142] In 1868 he wrote, "I have sudden vague rushes of terror, even when riding in a hansom cab, which are perfectly unreasonable but quite insurmountable." Dickens's son, Henry, recalled, "I have seen him sometimes in a railway carriage when there was a slight jolt. When this happened he was almost in a state of panic and gripped the seat with both hands."[142]
Second visit to the United States
 Crowd of spectators buying tickets for a Dickens reading at Steinway Hall, New York City in 1867
While he contemplated a second visit to the United States, the outbreak of the Civil War in America in 1861 delayed his plans. On 9 November 1867, over two years after the war, Dickens set sail from Liverpool for his second American reading tour. Landing in Boston, he devoted the rest of the month to a round of dinners with such notables as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and his American publisher, James T. Fields. In early December, the readings began. He performed 76 readings, netting  19,000, from December 1867 to April 1868.[143] Dickens shuttled between Boston and New York, where he gave 22 readings at Steinway Hall. Although he had started to suffer from what he called the "true American catarrh", he kept to a schedule that would have challenged a much younger man, even managing to squeeze in some sleighing in Central Park.[144]
During his travels, he saw a change in the people and the circumstances of America. His final appearance was at a banquet the American Press held in his honour at Delmonico's on 18 April, when he promised never to denounce America again. By the end of the tour Dickens could hardly manage solid food, subsisting on champagne and eggs beaten in sherry. On 23 April he boarded the Cunard liner Russia to return to Britain,[145] barely escaping a federal tax lien against the proceeds of his lecture tour.[146]
Farewell readings
 Poster promoting a reading by Dickens in Nottingham dated 4 February 1869, two months before he had a mild stroke
In 1868 69, Dickens gave a series of "farewell readings" in England, Scotland and Ireland, beginning on 6 October. He managed, of a contracted 100 readings, to give 75 in the provinces, with a further 12 in London.[143] As he pressed on he was affected by giddiness and fits of paralysis. He had a stroke on 18 April 1869 in Chester.[147] He collapsed on 22 April 1869, at Preston, Lancashire; on doctor's advice, the tour was cancelled.[148] After further provincial readings were cancelled, he began work on his final novel, The Mystery of Edwin Drood. It was fashionable in the 1860s to 'do the slums' and, in company, Dickens visited opium dens in Shadwell, where he witnessed an elderly addict called "Laskar Sal", who formed the model for "Opium Sal" in Edwin Drood.[149]
After Dickens regained enough strength, he arranged, with medical approval, for a final series of readings to partly make up to his sponsors what they had lost due to his illness. There were 12 performances, on 11 January to 15 March 1870; the last at 8:00pm at St. James's Hall, London. Though in grave health by then, he read A Christmas Carol and The Trial from Pickwick. On 2 May, he made his last public appearance at a Royal Academy banquet in the presence of the Prince and Princess of Wales, paying a special tribute on the death of his friend, illustrator Daniel Maclise.[150]
Death
Samuel Luke Fildes   The Empty Chair. Fildes was illustrating Edwin Drood at the time of Dickens's death. The engraving shows Dickens's empty chair in his study at Gads Hill Place. It appeared in the Christmas 1870 edition of The Graphic and thousands of prints of it were sold.[151]Dickens's grave in Westminster AbbeyA 1905 transcribed copy of the death certificate of Charles Dickens
On 8 June 1870, Dickens had another stroke at his home after a full day's work on Edwin Drood. He never regained consciousness and, the next day, he died at Gads Hill Place. Biographer Claire Tomalin has suggested Dickens was actually in Peckham when he had had the stroke and his mistress Ellen Ternan and her maids had him taken back to Gads Hill so that the public would not know the truth about their relationship.[152] Contrary to his wish to be buried at Rochester Cathedral "in an inexpensive, unostentatious, and strictly private manner",[153] he was laid to rest in the Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey. A printed epitaph circulated at the time of the funeral reads:
To the Memory of Charles Dickens (England's most popular author) who died at his residence, Higham, near Rochester, Kent, 9 June 1870, aged 58 years. He was a sympathiser with the poor, the suffering, and the oppressed; and by his death, one of England's greatest writers is lost to the world.[154]
A letter from Dickens to the Clerk of the Privy Council in March indicates he'd been offered and had accepted a baronetcy, which was not gazetted before his death.[155] His last words were "On the ground", in response to his sister-in-law Georgina's request that he lie down.[156][nb 2] On Sunday, 19 June 1870, five days after Dickens was buried in the Abbey, Dean Arthur Penrhyn Stanley delivered a memorial elegy, lauding "the genial and loving humorist whom we now mourn", for showing by his own example "that even in dealing with the darkest scenes and the most degraded characters, genius could still be clean, and mirth could be innocent". Pointing to the fresh flowers that adorned the novelist's grave, Stanley assured those present that "the spot would thenceforth be a sacred one with both the New World and the Old, as that of the representative of literature, not of this island only, but of all who speak our English tongue."[157]
In his will, drafted more than a year before his death, Dickens left the care of his  80,000 estate ( 8,143,500 in 2021)[158] to his long-time colleague John Forster and his "best and truest friend" Georgina Hogarth who, along with Dickens's two sons, also received a tax-free sum of  8,000 (equivalent to  814,000 in 2021).[158] Although Dickens and his wife had been separated for several years at the time of his death, he provided her with an annual income of  600 ( 61,100 in 2021)[158] and made her similar allowances in his will. He also bequeathed  19 19s ( 2,000 in 2021)[158] to each servant in his employment at the time of his death.[159]
Literary style
Dickens's approach to the novel is influenced by various things, including the picaresque novel tradition,[160] melodrama[161] and the novel of sensibility.[162] According to Ackroyd, other than these, perhaps the most important literary influence on him was derived from the fables of The Arabian Nights.[163] Satire and irony are central to the picaresque novel.[164] Comedy is also an aspect of the British picaresque novel tradition of Laurence Sterne, Henry Fielding and Tobias Smollett. Fielding's Tom Jones was a major influence on the 19th-century novelist including Dickens, who read it in his youth[165] and named a son Henry Fielding Dickens after him.[166][167] Influenced by Gothic fiction a literary genre that began with The Castle of Otranto (1764) by Horace Walpole Dickens incorporated Gothic imagery, settings and plot devices in his works.[168] Victorian gothic moved from castles and abbeys into contemporary urban environments: in particular London, such as Dickens's Oliver Twist and Bleak House. The jilted bride Miss Havisham from Great Expectations is one of Dickens's best-known gothic creations; living in a ruined mansion, her bridal gown effectively doubles as her funeral shroud.[169]
No other writer had such a profound influence on Dickens as William Shakespeare.
On Dickens's veneration of Shakespeare, Alfred Harbage wrote "No one is better qualified to recognise literary genius than a literary genius"  A Kind of Power: The Shakespeare-Dickens Analogy (1975).[170] Regarding Shakespeare as "the great master" whose plays "were an unspeakable source of delight", Dickens's lifelong affinity with the playwright included seeing theatrical productions of his plays in London and putting on amateur dramatics with friends in his early years.[170] In 1838 Dickens travelled to Stratford-upon-Avon and visited the house in which Shakespeare was born, leaving his autograph in the visitors' book. Dickens would draw on this experience in his next work, Nicholas Nickleby (1838 39), expressing the strength of feeling experienced by visitors to Shakespeare's birthplace: the character Mrs Wititterly states, "I don't know how it is, but after you've seen the place and written your name in the little book, somehow or other you seem to be inspired; it kindles up quite a fire within one."[171]
 Dickens's Dream by Robert William Buss, portraying Dickens at his desk at Gads Hill Place surrounded by many of his characters
Dickens's writing style is marked by a profuse linguistic creativity.[172] Satire, flourishing in his gift for caricature, is his forte. An early reviewer compared him to Hogarth for his keen practical sense of the ludicrous side of life, though his acclaimed mastery of varieties of class idiom may in fact mirror the conventions of contemporary popular theatre.[173] Dickens worked intensively on developing arresting names for his characters that would reverberate with associations for his readers and assist the development of motifs in the storyline, giving what one critic calls an "allegorical impetus" to the novels' meanings.[172] To cite one of numerous examples, the name Mr Murdstone in David Copperfield conjures up twin allusions to murder and stony coldness.[174] His literary style is also a mixture of fantasy and realism. His satires of British aristocratic snobbery   he calls one character the "Noble Refrigerator"   are often popular. Comparing orphans to stocks and shares, people to tug boats or dinner-party guests to furniture are just some of Dickens's acclaimed flights of fancy.
The author worked closely with his illustrators, supplying them with a summary of the work at the outset and thus ensuring that his characters and settings were exactly how he envisioned them. He briefed the illustrator on plans for each month's instalment so that work could begin before he wrote them. Marcus Stone, illustrator of Our Mutual Friend, recalled that the author was always "ready to describe down to the minutest details the personal characteristics, and ... life-history of the creations of his fancy".[175] Dickens employs Cockney English in many of his works, denoting working-class Londoners. Cockney grammar appears in terms such as ain't, and consonants in words are frequently omitted, as in 'ere (here) and wot (what).[176] An example of this usage is in Oliver Twist. The Artful Dodger uses cockney slang which is juxtaposed with Oliver's 'proper' English, when the Dodger repeats Oliver saying "seven" with "sivin".[177]
Characters
 The Old Curiosity Shop in Holborn, London, which inspired The Old Curiosity Shop. Many of Dickens's works do not just use London as a backdrop; they are also about the city and its character.
Dickens's biographer Claire Tomalin regards him as the greatest creator of character in English fiction after Shakespeare.[178]
Dickensian characters are amongst the most memorable in English literature, especially so because of their typically whimsical names. The likes of Ebenezer Scrooge, Tiny Tim, Jacob Marley and Bob Cratchit (A Christmas Carol); Oliver Twist, The Artful Dodger, Fagin and Bill Sikes (Oliver Twist); Pip, Miss Havisham and Abel Magwitch (Great Expectations); Sydney Carton, Charles Darnay and Madame Defarge (A Tale of Two Cities); David Copperfield, Uriah Heep and Mr Micawber (David Copperfield); Daniel Quilp and Nell Trent (The Old Curiosity Shop), Samuel Pickwick and Sam Weller (The Pickwick Papers); and Wackford Squeers (Nicholas Nickleby) are so well known as to be part and parcel of popular culture, and in some cases have passed into ordinary language: a scrooge, for example, is a miser or someone who dislikes Christmas festivity.[179]
 The Artful Dodger from Oliver Twist. His dialect is rooted in Cockney English.
His characters were often so memorable that they took on a life of their own outside his books. "Gamp" became a slang expression for an umbrella from the character Mrs Gamp, and "Pickwickian", "Pecksniffian" and "Gradgrind" all entered dictionaries due to Dickens's original portraits of such characters who were, respectively, quixotic, hypocritical and vapidly factual. The character that made Dickens famous, Sam Weller became known for his Wellerisms one-liners that turned proverbs on their heads.[49] Many were drawn from real life: Mrs Nickleby is based on his mother, although she didn't recognise herself in the portrait,[180] just as Mr Micawber is constructed from aspects of his father's 'rhetorical exuberance';[181] Harold Skimpole in Bleak House is based on James Henry Leigh Hunt; his wife's dwarfish chiropodist recognised herself in Miss Mowcher in David Copperfield.[182][183] Perhaps Dickens's impressions on his meeting with Hans Christian Andersen informed the delineation of Uriah Heep (a term synonymous with sycophant).[184]
Virginia Woolf maintained that "we remodel our psychological geography when we read Dickens" as he produces "characters who exist not in detail, not accurately or exactly, but abundantly in a cluster of wild yet extraordinarily revealing remarks".[185] T. S. Eliot wrote that Dickens "excelled in character; in the creation of characters of greater intensity than human beings".[186] One "character" vividly drawn throughout his novels is London itself.[187] Dickens described London as a magic lantern, inspiring the places and people in many of his novels.[188] From the coaching inns on the outskirts of the city to the lower reaches of the Thames, all aspects of the capital   Dickens's London   are described over the course of his body of work.[188] Walking the streets (particularly around London) formed an integral part of his writing life, stoking his creativity. Dickens was known to regularly walk at least a dozen miles (19 km) per day, and once wrote, "If I couldn't walk fast and far, I should just explode and perish."[189]
Autobiographical elements
 An original illustration by Phiz from the novel David Copperfield, which is widely regarded as Dickens's most autobiographical work
Authors frequently draw their portraits of characters from people they have known in real life. David Copperfield is regarded by many as a veiled autobiography of Dickens. The scenes of interminable court cases and legal arguments in Bleak House reflect Dickens's experiences as a law clerk and court reporter, and in particular his direct experience of the law's procedural delay during 1844 when he sued publishers in Chancery for breach of copyright.[190] Dickens's father was sent to prison for debt and this became a common theme in many of his books, with the detailed depiction of life in the Marshalsea prison in Little Dorrit resulting from Dickens's own experiences of the institution.[191] Lucy Stroughill, a childhood sweetheart, may have affected several of Dickens's portraits of girls such as Little Em'ly in David Copperfield and Lucie Manette in A Tale of Two Cities.[192][nb 3]
Dickens may have drawn on his childhood experiences, but he was also ashamed of them and would not reveal that this was where he gathered his realistic accounts of squalor. Very few knew the details of his early life until six years after his death, when John Forster published a biography on which Dickens had collaborated. Though Skimpole brutally sends up Leigh Hunt, some critics have detected in his portrait features of Dickens's own character, which he sought to exorcise by self-parody.[193]
Episodic writing
 Advertisement for Great Expectations, serialised in the weekly literary magazine All the Year Round from December 1860 to August 1861. The advert contains the plot device "to be continued".
A pioneer of the serial publication of narrative fiction, Dickens wrote most of his major novels in monthly or weekly instalments in journals such as Master Humphrey's Clock and Household Words, later reprinted in book form.[4][5] These instalments made the stories affordable and accessible, with the audience more evenly distributed across income levels than previous.[194] His instalment format inspired a narrative that he would explore and develop throughout his career, and the regular cliffhangers made each new episode widely anticipated.[6][194] When The Old Curiosity Shop was being serialised, American fans waited at the docks in New York harbour, shouting out to the crew of an incoming British ship, "Is little Nell dead?"[195] Dickens's talent was to incorporate this episodic writing style but still end up with a coherent novel at the end.
Another important impact of Dickens's episodic writing style resulted from his exposure to the opinions of his readers and friends. His friend Forster had a significant hand in reviewing his drafts, an influence that went beyond matters of punctuation. He toned down melodramatic and sensationalist exaggerations, cut long passages (such as the episode of Quilp's drowning in The Old Curiosity Shop), and made suggestions about plot and character. It was he who suggested that Charley Bates should be redeemed in Oliver Twist. Dickens had not thought of killing Little Nell and it was Forster who advised him to entertain this possibility as necessary to his conception of the heroine.[196]
At the helm in popularising cliffhangers and serial publications in Victorian literature,[197] Dickens's influence can also be seen in television soap operas and film series, with The Guardian stating "the DNA of Dickens's busy, episodic storytelling, delivered in instalments and rife with cliffhangers and diversions, is traceable in everything."[198] His serialisation of his novels also drew comments from other writers. In Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson's novel The Wrecker, Captain Nares, investigating an abandoned ship, remarked: "See! They were writing up the log," said Nares, pointing to the ink-bottle. "Caught napping, as usual. I wonder if there ever was a captain yet that lost a ship with his log-book up to date? He generally has about a month to fill up on a clean break, like Charles Dickens and his serial novels."[199]
Social commentary
 Nurse Sarah Gamp (left) from Martin Chuzzlewit became a stereotype of untrained and incompetent nurses of the early Victorian era, before the reforms of Florence Nightingale.
Dickens's novels were, among other things, works of social commentary. Simon Callow states, "From the moment he started to write, he spoke for the people, and the people loved him for it."[200] He was a fierce critic of the poverty and social stratification of Victorian society. In a New York address, he expressed his belief that "Virtue shows quite as well in rags and patches as she does in purple and fine linen".[201] Dickens's second novel, Oliver Twist (1839), shocked readers with its images of poverty and crime: it challenged middle class polemics about criminals, making impossible any pretence to ignorance about what poverty entailed.[202][203]
At a time when Britain was the major economic and political power of the world, Dickens highlighted the life of the forgotten poor and disadvantaged within society. Through his journalism he campaigned on specific issues   such as sanitation and the workhouse   but his fiction probably demonstrated its greatest prowess in changing public opinion in regard to class inequalities. He often depicted the exploitation and oppression of the poor and condemned the public officials and institutions that not only allowed such abuses to exist, but flourished as a result. His most strident indictment of this condition is in Hard Times (1854), Dickens's only novel-length treatment of the industrial working class. In this work, he uses vitriol and satire to illustrate how this marginalised social stratum was termed "Hands" by the factory owners; that is, not really "people" but rather only appendages of the machines they operated. His writings inspired others, in particular journalists and political figures, to address such problems of class oppression. For example, the prison scenes in The Pickwick Papers are claimed to have been influential in having the Fleet Prison shut down. Karl Marx asserted that Dickens "issued to the world more political and social truths than have been uttered by all the professional politicians, publicists and moralists put together".[204] George Bernard Shaw even remarked that Great Expectations was more seditious than Marx's Das Kapital.[204] The exceptional popularity of Dickens's novels, even those with socially oppositional themes (Bleak House, 1853; Little Dorrit, 1857; Our Mutual Friend, 1865), not only underscored his ability to create compelling storylines and unforgettable characters, but also ensured that the Victorian public confronted issues of social justice that had commonly been ignored.
It has been argued that his technique of flooding his narratives with an 'unruly superfluity of material' that, in the gradual d nouement, yields up an unsuspected order, influenced the organisation of Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species.[205]
Literary techniques
 Bleak House (pictured in the 1920s) in Broadstairs, Kent, where Dickens wrote some of his novels
 Dickens's chalet in Rochester, Kent where he was writing the last chapters of Edwin Drood the day before he died
Dickens is often described as using idealised characters and highly sentimental scenes to contrast with his caricatures and the ugly social truths he reveals. The story of Nell Trent in The Old Curiosity Shop (1841) was received as extraordinarily moving by contemporary readers but viewed as ludicrously sentimental by Oscar Wilde. "One must have a heart of stone to read the death of little Nell", he said in a famous remark, "without dissolving into tears ... of laughter."[206][207] G. K. Chesterton stated, "It is not the death of little Nell, but the life of little Nell, that I object to", arguing that the maudlin effect of his description of her life owed much to the gregarious nature of Dickens's grief, his "despotic" use of people's feelings to move them to tears in works like this.[208]
The question as to whether Dickens belongs to the tradition of the sentimental novel is debatable. Valerie Purton, in her book Dickens and the Sentimental Tradition, sees him continuing aspects of this tradition, and argues that his "sentimental scenes and characters [are] as crucial to the overall power of the novels as his darker or comic figures and scenes", and that "Dombey and Son is [ ... ] Dickens's greatest triumph in the sentimentalist tradition".[209] The Encyclop dia Britannica online comments that, despite "patches of emotional excess", such as the reported death of Tiny Tim in A Christmas Carol (1843), "Dickens cannot really be termed a sentimental novelist".[210]
In Oliver Twist Dickens provides readers with an idealised portrait of a boy so inherently and unrealistically good that his values are never subverted by either brutal orphanages or coerced involvement in a gang of young pickpockets. While later novels also centre on idealised characters (Esther Summerson in Bleak House and Amy Dorrit in Little Dorrit), this idealism serves only to highlight Dickens's goal of poignant social commentary. Dickens's fiction, reflecting what he believed to be true of his own life, makes frequent use of coincidence, either for comic effect or to emphasise the idea of providence.[211] For example, Oliver Twist turns out to be the lost nephew of the upper-class family that rescues him from the dangers of the pickpocket group. Such coincidences are a staple of 18th-century picaresque novels, such as Henry Fielding's Tom Jones, which Dickens enjoyed reading as a youth.[212]
Reputation
 Dickens's portrait (top left), in between Shakespeare and Tennyson, on a stained glass window at the Ottawa Public Library, Ottawa, Canada
Dickens was the most popular novelist of his time,[213] and remains one of the best-known and most-read of English authors. His works have never gone out of print,[214] and have been adapted continually for the screen since the invention of cinema,[215] with at least 200 motion pictures and TV adaptations based on Dickens's works documented.[216] Many of his works were adapted for the stage during his own lifetime   early productions included The Haunted Man which was performed in the West End's Adelphi Theatre in 1848   and, as early as 1901, the British silent film Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost was made by Walter R. Booth.[217] Contemporaries such as publisher Edward Lloyd cashed in on Dickens's popularity with cheap imitations of his novels, resulting in his own popular 'penny dreadfuls'.[218]
From the beginning of his career in the 1830s, Dickens's achievements in English literature were compared to those of Shakespeare.[170] Dickens created some of the world's best-known fictional characters and is regarded by many as the greatest British novelist of the Victorian era.[1] His literary reputation, however began to decline with the publication of Bleak House in 1852 53. Philip Collins calls Bleak House 'a crucial item in the history of Dickens's reputation. Reviewers and literary figures during the 1850s, 1860s and 1870s, saw a "drear decline" in Dickens, from a writer of "bright sunny comedy ... to dark and serious social" commentary.[219] The Spectator called Bleak House "a heavy book to read through at once ... dull and wearisome as a serial"; Richard Simpson, in The Rambler, characterised Hard Times as "this dreary framework"; Fraser's Magazine thought Little Dorrit "decidedly the worst of his novels".[220] All the same, despite these "increasing reservations amongst reviewers and the chattering classes, 'the public never deserted its favourite'". Dickens's popular reputation remained unchanged, sales continued to rise, and Household Words and later All the Year Round were highly successful.[220]
 "Charles Dickens as he appears when reading." Wood engraving from Harper's Weekly, 7 December 1867. Author David Lodge called Dickens the "first writer to be an object of unrelenting public interest and adulation".[221]
As his career progressed, Dickens's fame and the demand for his public readings were unparalleled. In 1868 The Times wrote, "Amid all the variety of 'readings', those of Mr Charles Dickens stand alone."[10] A Dickens biographer, Edgar Johnson, wrote in the 1950s: "It was [always] more than a reading; it was an extraordinary exhibition of acting that seized upon its auditors with a mesmeric possession."[10] Juliet John backed the claim for Dickens "to be called the first self-made global media star of the age of mass culture."[221] Comparing his reception at public readings to those of a contemporary pop star, The Guardian states, "People sometimes fainted at his shows. His performances even saw the rise of that modern phenomenon, the 'speculator' or ticket tout (scalpers)   the ones in New York City escaped detection by borrowing respectable-looking hats from the waiters in nearby restaurants."[222]
"Dickens's vocal impersonations of his own characters gave this truth a theatrical form: the public reading tour. No other Victorian could match him for celebrity, earnings, and sheer vocal artistry. The Victorians craved the author's multiple voices: between 1853 and his death in 1870, Dickens performed about 470 times."
 Peter Garratt in The Guardian on Dickens's fame and the demand for his public readings[10]
Among fellow writers, there was a range of opinions on Dickens. Poet laureate, William Wordsworth (1770 1850), thought him a "very talkative, vulgar young person", adding he had not read a line of his work, while novelist George Meredith (1828 1909), found Dickens "intellectually lacking".[223] In 1888 Leslie Stephen commented in the Dictionary of National Biography that "if literary fame could be safely measured by popularity with the half-educated, Dickens must claim the highest position among English novelists".[224] Anthony Trollope's Autobiography famously declared Thackeray, not Dickens, to be the greatest novelist of the age. However, both Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky were admirers. Dostoyevsky commented: "We understand Dickens in Russia, I am convinced, almost as well as the English, perhaps even with all the nuances. It may well be that we love him no less than his compatriots do. And yet how original is Dickens, and how very English!"[225] Tolstoy referred to David Copperfield as his favourite book, and he later adopted the novel as "a model for his own autobiographical reflections".[226] French writer Jules Verne called Dickens his favourite writer, writing his novels "stand alone, dwarfing all others by their amazing power and felicity of expression".[227] Dutch painter Vincent van Gogh was inspired by Dickens's novels in several of his paintings like Vincent's Chair and in an 1889 letter to his sister stated that reading Dickens, especially A Christmas Carol, was one of the things that was keeping him from committing suicide.[228] Oscar Wilde generally disparaged his depiction of character, while admiring his gift for caricature.[229] Henry James denied him a premier position, calling him "the greatest of superficial novelists": Dickens failed to endow his characters with psychological depth, and the novels, "loose baggy monsters",[230] betrayed a "cavalier organisation".[231] Joseph Conrad described his own childhood in bleak Dickensian terms, noting he had "an intense and unreasoning affection" for Bleak House dating back to his boyhood. The novel influenced his own gloomy portrait of London in The Secret Agent (1907).[226] Virginia Woolf had a love-hate relationship with Dickens, finding his novels "mesmerizing" while reproving him for his sentimentalism and a commonplace style.[232]
Around 1940 41, the attitude of the literary critics began to warm towards Dickens   led by George Orwell in Inside the Whale and Other Essays (March 1940), Edmund Wilson in The Wound and the Bow (1941) and Humphry House in Dickens and his World.[233] However, even in 1948, F. R. Leavis, in The Great Tradition, asserted that "the adult mind doesn't as a rule find in Dickens a challenge to an unusual and sustained seriousness"; Dickens was indeed a great genius, "but the genius was that of a great entertainer",[234] though he later changed his opinion with Dickens the Novelist (1970, with Q. D. (Queenie) Leavis): "Our purpose", they wrote, "is to enforce as unanswerably as possible the conviction that Dickens was one of the greatest of creative writers".[235] In 1944, Soviet film director and film theorist Sergei Eisenstein wrote an essay on Dickens's influence on cinema, such as cross-cutting   where two stories run alongside each other, as seen in novels such as Oliver Twist.[236]
In the 1950s, "a substantial reassessment and re-editing of the works began, and critics found his finest artistry and greatest depth to be in the later novels: Bleak House, Little Dorrit, and Great Expectations   and (less unanimously) in Hard Times and Our Mutual Friend".[237] Dickens was a favourite author of Roald Dahl; the best-selling children's author would include three of Dickens's novels among those read by the title character in his 1988 novel Matilda.[238] An avid reader of Dickens, in 2005, Paul McCartney named Nicholas Nickleby his favourite novel. On Dickens he states, "I like the world that he takes me to. I like his words; I like the language", adding, "A lot of my stuff   it's kind of Dickensian."[239] Screenwriter Jonathan Nolan's screenplay for The Dark Knight Rises (2012) was inspired by A Tale of Two Cities, with Nolan calling the depiction of Paris in the novel "one of the most harrowing portraits of a relatable, recognisable civilisation that completely folded to pieces".[240] On 7 February 2012, the 200th anniversary of Dickens's birth, Philip Womack wrote in The Telegraph: "Today there is no escaping Charles Dickens. Not that there has ever been much chance of that before. He has a deep, peculiar hold upon us".[241]
Legacy
 Dickens and Little Nell statue in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Museums and festivals celebrating Dickens's life and works exist in many places with which Dickens was associated. These include the Charles Dickens Museum in London, the historic home where he wrote Oliver Twist, The Pickwick Papers and Nicholas Nickleby; and the Charles Dickens Birthplace Museum in Portsmouth, the house in which he was born. The original manuscripts of many of his novels, as well as printers' proofs, first editions, and illustrations from the collection of Dickens's friend John Forster are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum.[242] Dickens's will stipulated that no memorial be erected in his honour; nonetheless, a life-size bronze statue of Dickens entitled Dickens and Little Nell, cast in 1890 by Francis Edwin Elwell, stands in Clark Park in the Spruce Hill neighbourhood of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Another life-size statue of Dickens is located at Centennial Park in Sydney, Australia.[243] In 1960 a bas-relief sculpture of Dickens, notably featuring characters from his books, was commissioned from sculptor Estcourt J Clack to adorn the office building built on the site of his former home at 1 Devonshire Terrace, London.[244][245] In 2014, a life-size statue was unveiled near his birthplace in Portsmouth on the 202nd anniversary of his birth; this was supported by his great-great-grandsons, Ian and Gerald Dickens.[246][247]
 A Christmas Carol significantly influenced the modern celebration of Christmas in many countries
A Christmas Carol is most probably his best-known story, with frequent new adaptations. It is also the most-filmed of Dickens's stories, with many versions dating from the early years of cinema.[248] According to the historian Ronald Hutton, the current state of the observance of Christmas is largely the result of a mid-Victorian revival of the holiday spearheaded by A Christmas Carol. Dickens catalysed the emerging Christmas as a family-centred festival of generosity, in contrast to the dwindling community-based and church-centred observations, as new middle-class expectations arose.[249] Its archetypal figures (Scrooge, Tiny Tim, the Christmas ghosts) entered into Western cultural consciousness. "Merry Christmas", a prominent phrase from the tale, was popularised following the appearance of the story.[250] The term Scrooge became a synonym for miser, and his exclamation "Bah! Humbug!'", a dismissal of the festive spirit, likewise gained currency as an idiom.[251] The Victorian era novelist William Makepeace Thackeray called the book "a national benefit, and to every man and woman who reads it a personal kindness".[248]
Dickens was commemorated on the Series E  10 note issued by the Bank of England that circulated between 1992 and 2003. His portrait appeared on the reverse of the note accompanied by a scene from The Pickwick Papers. The Charles Dickens School is a high school in Broadstairs, Kent. A theme park, Dickens World, standing in part on the site of the former naval dockyard where Dickens's father once worked in the Navy Pay Office, opened in Chatham in 2007. To celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Charles Dickens in 2012, the Museum of London held the UK's first major exhibition on the author in 40 years.[252] In 2002, Dickens was number 41 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.[253] American literary critic Harold Bloom placed Dickens among the greatest Western writers of all time.[254] In the 2003 UK survey The Big Read carried out by the BBC, five of Dickens's books were named in the Top 100.[255]
Actors who have portrayed Dickens on screen include Anthony Hopkins, Derek Jacobi, Simon Callow, Dan Stevens and Ralph Fiennes, the latter playing the author in The Invisible Woman (2013) which depicts Dickens's secret love affair with Ellen Ternan which lasted for thirteen years until his death in 1870.[256]
Dickens and his publications have appeared on a number of postage stamps in countries including: the United Kingdom (1970, 1993, 2011 and 2012 issued by the Royal Mail their 2012 collection marked the bicentenary of Dickens's birth),[257] the Soviet Union (1962), Antigua, Barbuda, Botswana, Cameroon, Dubai, Fujairah, St Lucia and Turks and Caicos Islands (1970), St Vincent (1987), Nevis (2007), Alderney, Gibraltar, Jersey and Pitcairn Islands (2012), Austria (2013), and Mozambique (2014).[258] In 1976, a crater on the planet Mercury was named in his honour.[259]
In November 2018 it was reported that a previously lost portrait of a 31-year-old Dickens, by Margaret Gillies, had been found in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa. Gillies was an early supporter of women's suffrage and had painted the portrait in late 1843 when Dickens, aged 31, wrote A Christmas Carol. It was exhibited, to acclaim, at the Royal Academy of Arts in 1844.[80] The Charles Dickens Museum is reported to have paid  180,000 for the portrait.[260]
Works
Main article: Charles Dickens bibliography
Dickens published well over a dozen major novels and novellas, a large number of short stories, including a number of Christmas-themed stories, a handful of plays, and several non-fiction books.
Novels
Dickens's novels were initially serialised in weekly and monthly magazines, then reprinted in standard book formats.
The Pickwick Papers (The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club; monthly serial, April 1836 to November 1837)[261]
Oliver Twist (The Adventures of Oliver Twist; monthly serial in Bentley's Miscellany, February 1837 to April 1839)
Nicholas Nickleby (The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby; monthly serial, April 1838 to October 1839)
The Old Curiosity Shop (weekly serial in Master Humphrey's Clock, April 1840 to November 1841)
Barnaby Rudge (Barnaby Rudge: A Tale of the Riots of Eighty; weekly serial in Master Humphrey's Clock, February to November 1841)
A Christmas Carol (A Christmas Carol in Prose: Being a Ghost-story of Christmas; 1843)
Martin Chuzzlewit (The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit; monthly serial, January 1843 to July 1844)
The Chimes (The Chimes: A Goblin Story of Some Bells That Rang an Old Year Out and a New Year In; 1844)
The Cricket on the Hearth (The Cricket on the Hearth: A Fairy Tale of Home; 1845)
The Battle of Life (The Battle of Life: A Love Story; 1846)
Dombey and Son (Dealings with the Firm of Dombey and Son: Wholesale, Retail and for Exportation; monthly serial, October 1846 to April 1848)
The Haunted Man (The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain: A Fancy for Christmas-time; 1848)
David Copperfield (The Personal History, Adventures, Experience and Observation of David Copperfield the Younger of Blunderstone Rookery [Which He Never Meant to Publish on Any Account]; monthly serial, May 1849 to November 1850)
Bleak House (monthly serial, March 1852 to September 1853)
Hard Times (Hard Times: For These Times; weekly serial in Household Words, 1 April 1854, to 12 August 1854)
Little Dorrit (monthly serial, December 1855 to June 1857)
A Tale of Two Cities (weekly serial in All the Year Round, 30 April 1859, to 26 November 1859)
Great Expectations (weekly serial in All the Year Round, 1 December 1860 to 3 August 1861)
Our Mutual Friend (monthly serial, May 1864 to November 1865)
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (monthly serial, April 1870 to September 1870), left unfinished due to Dickens's death
See also
List of Dickensian characters
Racism in the work of Charles Dickens
Charles Dickens bibliography
Notes
^ John Forster quotes an unpublished letter in which Dickens responds to the accusation that he must not have seen Grimaldi in person: "Now, Sir, although I was brought up from remote country parts in the dark ages of 1819 and 1820 to behold the splendour of Christmas pantomimes and the humour of Joe, in whose honour I am informed I clapped my hands with great precocity, and although I even saw him act in the remote times of 1823 ... I am willing ... to concede that I had not arrived at man's estate when Grimaldi left the stage".[19]  When Dickens arrived in America for the first time in 1842, he stayed at the Tremont House, America's "pioneer first-class hotel".  Dickens "bounded into the Tremont's foyer shouting out 'Here we are!', Grimaldi's famous catch-phrase and as such entirely appropriate for a great and cherished entertainer making his entrance upon a new stage."[20]  Later, Dickens was known to imitate Grimaldi's clowning on several occasions.[21]
^ A contemporary obituary in The Times, alleged that Dickens's last words were: "Be natural my children. For the writer that is natural has fulfilled all the rules of Art." Reprinted from The Times, London, August 1870 in Bidwell 1870, p. 223.
^ Slater also detects Ellen Ternan in the portrayal of Lucie Manette.
References
^ a b Black 2007, p. 735.
^ Mazzeno 2008, p. 76.
^ Chesterton 2005, pp. 100 126.
^ a b Grossman 2012, p. 54
^ a b c Lodge 2002, p. 118.
^ a b "Tune in next week". The New Yorker. 2 December 2017. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 2 December 2017.
^ Ziegler 2007, pp. 46 47.
^ Stone 1987, pp. 267 268.
^ Hauser 1999, p. 116.
^ a b c d "Hearing voices allowed Charles Dickens to create extraordinary fictional worlds". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019.
^ "Oxford Dictionaries  Dickensian" Archived 26 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Oxford University Press.
^ "Dickensian meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary". Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2021.
^ Callow 2012, p. 9
^ a b West, Gilian (Spring 1999). "Huffam and Son". The Dickensian. Dickens Fellowship. 95 (447): 5 18.
^ Callow 2012, p. 5
^ Forster 2006, p. 13.
^ Callow 2012, p. 7
^ Charles Dickens: Collected Papers, Vol 1, Preface to Grimaldi, p. 9
^ a b Forster 2006, p. 65.
^ Slater, p. 178
^ Dolby, pp. 39 40
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 22 24:29 30.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 41.
^ Schlicke 1999, p. 158.
^ Callow 2009, p. 13
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 76:'recklessly improvident'.
^ Pope-Hennessy 1945, p. 11.
^ Forster 2006, p. 27.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 76.
^ Wilson 1972, p. 53.
^ a b Forster 2006, pp. 23 24.
^ Callow 2009, p. 25
^ Schlicke 1999, p. 157.
^ Wilson 1972, p. 58.
^ Cain 2008, p. 91.
^ a b Wilson 1972, p. 61.
^ Callow 2009, pp. 34, 36
^ Pope-Hennessy 1945, p. 18.
^ Wilson 1972, p. 64.
^ Davis 1998, p. 23.
^ Callow 2009, p. 48
^ Tomalin 1992, p. 7
^ Tomalin 1992, p. 76
^ a b c Patten 2001, pp. 16 18.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 174 176.
^ a b Glancy 1999, p. 6.
^ Van De Linde 1917, p. 75.
^ Callow 2009, p. 54
^ a b c d e "The Sam Weller Bump". The Paris Review. Archived from the original on 26 June 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2021.
^ Callow 2012, p. 56
^ Callow 2012, p. 60
^ "Chapter One - The Pickwick Phenomenon". Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on 26 June 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2021.
^ Dames, Nicholas (June 2015). "Was Dickens a Thief?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2021.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 201, 278 279.
^ a b Smiley 2002, pp. 12 14.
^ a b Schlicke 1999, p. 160
^ "Notable people connected with St Luke's". St Luke's and Christ Church. Chelsea. Archived from the original on 27 October 2018. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 162, 181 182.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 221.
^ Callow 2012, p. 74
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 225 229:p=227.
^ Callow 2012, pp. 77, 78
^ Callow 2012, p. 97
^ "Queen Victoria's Journals". RA VIC/MAIN/QVJ (W). 26 December 1838. Retrieved 24 May 2013.
^ Schlicke 1999, p. 514.
^ Callow 2012, p. 98
^ a b Slater 2009, pp. 167 168
^ Schlicke, Paul (2011). The Oxford Companion to Charles Dickens (Anniversary ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 462 463. ISBN 978-0199640188.
^ Miller, Sandra A. (18 March 2012). "When Charles Dickens came to Boston". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 14 February 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2019.
^ Jones 2004, p. 7
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 10 11.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 225 229
^ Moore 2004, pp. 44 45
^ "Marlon James and Charles Dickens: Embrace the art, not the racist artist". The Economist. 20 October 2015. Archived from the original on 21 October 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2015.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 345 346.
^ Tomalin 2011, p. 127.
^ Tomalin 2011, pp. 128 132.
^ a b Flint 2001, p. 35.
^ "Charles Dickens in Toronto" (PDF). Halcyon: The Newsletter of the Friends of the Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library. University of Toronto. November 1992. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2017.
^ a b Brown, Mark (21 November 2018). "Lost portrait of Charles Dickens turns up at auction in South Africa". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
^ Callow 2009, pp. 146 148
^ Schlicke 1999, p. 98.
^ Moss, Sidney P.; Moss, Carolyn J. (1996). The Charles Dickens-Thomas Powell Vendetta. Troy New York: The Whitston Publishing Company. pp. 42 125.
^ Nayder 2011, p. 148.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 249, 530 538, 549 550, 575
^ Hartley 2009, pp. &#91, pages needed&#93, .
^ Callow 2012, p. 63
^ Dickens, Charles (2013) [1836]. "Sunday under Three Heads" (PDF). Electronics Classics Series. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
^ Simon Callow, 'Charles Dickens'. p.159
^ Colledge, Gary (2012). God and Charles Dickens: Recovering the Christian Voice of a Classic Author. Brazos Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-1441247872.
^ Rost, Stephen. "The Faith Behind the Famous: Charles Dickens". Christianity Today. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
^ Colledge 2009, p. 87.
^ Skelton, Stephen. "Reclaiming 'A Christmas Carol'". Christian Broadcasting Network. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
^ "The Life Of Our Lord" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2012.
^ Besserman, Lawrence (2006). The Chaucer Review. Penn State University Press. pp. 100 103.
^ a b c Smith, Karl (2008). Dickens and the Unreal City: Searching for Spiritual Significance in Nineteenth-Century London. Springer. pp. 11 12.
^ Allingham, Philip V, ed. (June 2011). "Dickens and Religion: The Life of Our Lord (1846)". Victorian Web. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
^ Ledger, Sally; Furneaux, Holly, eds. (2011). Charles Dickens in Context. Cambridge University Press. p. 318. ISBN 978-0521887007.
^ Watts, Cedric Thomas (1976). The English novel. Sussex Books. p. 55. ISBN 978-0905272023.
^ a b c Roberts, David (1989). "Charles Dickens and the "Daily News": Editorials and Editorial Writers". Victorian Periodicals Review. 22 (2): 51 63. JSTOR 20082378.
^ Slater, Michael (2015). Douglas Jerrold. Gerald Duckworth & Co. pp. 197 204. ISBN 978-0715646588.
^ a b Soubigou, Gilles "Dickens's Illustrations: France and other countries" pp. 154 167 from The Reception of Charles Dickens in Europe edited by Michael Hollington London: A&C Black 2013 p. 159.
^ Hiu Yen Lee, Klaudia (2015). Charles Dickens and China, 1895 1915: Cross-Cultural Encounters. Taylor & Francis. p. 56.
^ Dickens, Charles. "Preface". David Copperfield (1867 ed.). London: Wordsworth Classics. p. 4.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 628, 634 638.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 648, 686 687, 772 773
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 32:723:750.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 589 95, 848 852.
^ a b Slater 2009, pp. 389 390
^ a b Cotsell, Michael (1986). "Politics and Peeling Frescoes: Layard of Nineveh and "Little Dorrit"". Dickens Studies Annual. 15: 181 200.
^ Schlicke, Paul (2011). The Oxford Companion to Charles Dickens: Anniversary Edition. Oxford University Press. p. 10.
^ Dickens, Charles (1880). The Letters of Charles Dickens, Volume 2. Chapman and Hall. p. 140.
^ Ledger, Sally (2011). Charles Dickens in Context. Cambridge University Press. pp. 43 44.
^ Robins, Nick (2012), "A Skulking Power", The Corporation That Changed the World, How the East India Company Shaped the Modern Multinational, Pluto Press, pp. 171 198, doi:10.2307/j.ctt183pcr6.16, ISBN 978-0-7453-3195-9, JSTOR j.ctt183pcr6.16, archived from the original on 3 February 2021, retrieved 30 January 2021
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 788 799.
^ Bowen 2019, pp. 6 7.
^ Bowen 2019, p. 9.
^ Furneaux 2011, pp. 190 191.
^ Page 1999, p. 261.
^ Jones 2004, pp. 80 81.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 801, 804.
^ Page 1999, pp. 260 263 for excerpts from the speech.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 809 814.
^ Sutherland 1990, p. 185.
^ Hobsbaum 1998, p. 270.
^ Schlicke, Paul (2011). The Oxford Companion to Charles Dickens: Anniversary Edition. Oxford University Press. p. 302.
^ "Charles Dickens novel inscribed to George Eliot up for sale". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 October 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019.
^ "A Tale of Two Cities, King's Head, review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2019.
^ Charles Dickens (1993), Great Expectations, p. 1, introduction. Ware, Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Classics
^ Tomalin 2011, pp. 332.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 881 883.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 914 917.
^ Nisbet 1952, p. 37.
^ Tomalin 1992, pp. 142 143.
^ Henson 2004, p. 113.
^ Ashley Alexander Mallett, The Black Lords of Summer: The Story of the 1868 Aboriginal Tour of England Archived 30 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 65 66.
^ Australian Dictionary of Biography Archived 14 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 29 October 2013
^ University of Sydney Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 29 October 2013
^ Sydney Morning Herald, "Dickens of a time", 24 December 2002 Archived 31 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 29 October 2013
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 959 961.
^ "The Staplehurst Disaster". Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015.
^ a b "The Staplehurst Disaster". University of California: Santa Cruz. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2012.
^ a b Hobsbaum 1998, p. 271.
^ Forster, John (1874). The Life of Charles Dickens: 1852 - 1870, Volume 3. Chapman and Hall. p. 363.
^ Wills, Elspeth (2010). The Fleet 1840 - 2010. London: The Open Agency. p. 23. ISBN 9-780954-245184.
^ Jackson 1995, p. 333.
^ Tomalin 2011, p. 377
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 1043 1044.
^ Foxcroft 2007, p. 53.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 1069 1070.
^ "Luke Fildes". TheFamousArtists.com. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
^ Tomalin 2011, pp. 395 396, 484
^ Forster 2006, p. 628.
^ Hughes 1891, p. 226.
^ Charles Dickens Was Offered A Baronetcy, The Sphere, 2 July 1938, p34.
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 1077 1078.
^ Stanley 1870, pp. 144 147:146.
^ a b c d UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 11 June 2022.
^ "John Forster, "The Life of Charles Dickens" (13)". Archived from the original on 25 December 2013.
^ Levin 1970, p. 676
^ Levin 1970, p. 674
^ Purton 2012, p. xvii
^ Ackroyd 1990, pp. 44 45.
^ Luebering, J E. "Picaresque novel". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 5 March 2019.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 44
^ Dickens 1934, p. xviii
^ Forster, John (2008) [1875]. "Chapter 20". The Life of Charles Dickens. Vol. III. Project Gutenberg. p. 462. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 5 March 2019.
^ "Charles Dickens and the Gothic (2.11) - The Cambridge History of the Gothic". Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on 18 July 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2021.
^ "Charles Dickens, Victorian Gothic and Bleak House". British Library. Archived from the original on 27 July 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2021.
^ a b c Schlicke, Paul (2011). The Oxford Companion to Charles Dickens: Anniversary Edition. Oxford University Press. p. 537.
^ "Dickens and Shakespeare". University of Warwick. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2020.
^ a b Mee 2010, p. 20.
^ Vlock 1998, p. 30.
^ Stone 1987, pp. xx xxi.
^ Cohen 1980, p. 206.
^ "London dialect in Dickens". British Library. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2020.
^ Charles Dickens. "XLIII". Oliver Twist. Nalanda Digital Library. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Project Gutenberg
^ Jones 2012.
^ "Scrooge, Ebenezer - definition of Scrooge, Ebenezer in English". Oxford English Dictionary. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2018.
^ Ziegler 2007, p. 45.
^ Hawes 1998, p. 153.
^ Ziegler 2007, p. 46.
^ Hawes 1998, p. 158.
^ Hawes 1998, p. 109.
^ Woolf 1986, p. 286.
^ "The best Charles Dickens characters". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 October 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019.
^ Jones, Bryony (13 February 2012). "A tale of one city: Dickensian London". CNN. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
^ a b Wolfreys, Julian (2012). Dickens's London: Perception, Subjectivity and Phenomenal Urban Multiplicity. Edinburgh University Press. p. 209. ISBN 978-0-7486-4040-9.
^ "Steve Jobs was right about walking". Financial Post. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021.
^ Polloczek 1999, p. 133.
^ Ackroyd 1990.
^ Slater 1983, pp. 43, 47
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 653.
^ a b Howsam, Leslie (2015). The Cambridge Companion to the History of the Book. Cambridge University Press. p. 85. It inspired a narrative that Dickens would explore and develop throughout his career. The instalments would typically culminate at a point in the plot that created reader anticipation and thus reader demand, generating a plot and sub-plot motif that would come to typify the novel structure.
^ Glancy 1999, p. 34.
^ Davies 1983, pp. 166 169.
^ "Cliffhangers poised to make Dickens a serial winner again". The Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 3 September 2021.
^ "Streaming: the best Dickens adaptations". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 3 September 2021.
^ Stevenson, Robert Louis (1895). The Novels and Tales of Robert Louis Stevenson: The Wrecker. Scribner's. p. 245.
^ "My hero: Charles Dickens by Simon Callow". The Guardian. 12 February 2012. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2021.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 345.
^ Raina 1986, p. 25.
^ Bodenheimer 2011, p. 147.
^ a b Kucich & Sadoff 2006, p. 155.
^ Atkinson 1990, p. 48, citing Gillian Beer's Darwin's Plots (1983, p.8).
^ Boev, Hristo. "Deconstructing Little Nell". The Victorian Web. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
^ Ellmann 1988, p. 441: In conversation with Ada Leverson.
^ Chesterton 1911, pp. 54 55.
^ Purton, Valerie (2012). Dickens and the Sentimental Tradition: Fielding, Richardson, Sterne, Goldsmith, Sheridan, Lamb. Anthem nineteenth century studies. London: Anthem Press. pp. xiii, 123. ISBN 978-0857284181.
^ "novel (literature)". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2013.
^ Marlow 1994, pp. 149 150.
^ Ackroyd 1990, p. 44.
^ Trollope 2007, p. 62.
^ Swift 2007
^ Sasaki 2011, p. 67.
^ Morrison 2012.
^ Davidson, Ewan. "Blackfriars Bridge". BFI Screenonline Database. Retrieved 20 May 2022.
^ Flood, Alison (25 June 2019). "Oliver Twiss and Martin Guzzlewit   the fan fiction that ripped off Dickens". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 July 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020.
^ Adam Roberts, "Reputation of Dickens", Oxford Reader's Companion to Dickens, ed. Paul Schlicke, Oxford University Press Print Publication Date: 2000 Print ISBN 9780198662532 Published online: 2011 (subscription required) e ISBN 9780191727986, p. 504.
^ a b Adam Roerts, "Dickens Reputation", p. 505.
^ a b "Charles Dickens and Fame vs. Celebrity". JSTOR Daily. Retrieved 20 May 2022.
^ Shinn, Matt (31 January 2004). "Stage frights". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019.
^ Neil Roberts, Meredith and the Novel. Springer, 1997, p. 49 Archived 19 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Dictionary of National Biography Macmillan, 1888, p. 30.
^ Friedberg, Maurice (1997). Literary Translation in Russia: A Cultural History. Penn State Press. p. 12.
^ a b Kakutani, Michiko (22 December 1988). "Charles Dickens: Eminently Adaptable but Quite Inimitable; Dostoyevsky to Disney, The Dickensian Legacy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2020.
^ Soubigou, Gilles "Dickens's Illustrations: France and other countries" pp. 154-167 from The Reception of Charles Dickens in Europe edited by Michael Hollington London: A&C Black 2013 p. 161.
^ Soubigou, Gilles "Dickens's Illustrations: France and other countries" pp. 154-167 from The Reception of Charles Dickens in Europe edited by Michael Hollington London: A&C Black 2013 pp. 164-165.
^ Ellmann 1988, pp. 25, 359.
^ Kucich & Sadoff 2006, p. 162.
^ Mazzeno 2008, pp. 23 4.
^ Mazzeno 2008, p. 67.
^ Philip Collins, "Dickens reputation". Britannica Academica
^ Oxford Reference, subscription required
^ ""Dickens", Faber & Faber".[permanent dead link]
^ "Dickens on screen: the highs and the lows". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020.
^ Britannica Academica, subscription required.
^ Rosen, Michael (2012). Fantastic Mr Dahl. Penguin UK.
^ "Dear sir or madam, will you read my book?". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2020.
^ "Christopher and Jonathan Nolan Explain How A Tale Of Two Cities Influenced The Dark Knight Rises". Collider. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 9 September 2019.
^ "Why Charles Dickens speaks to us now". Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine. The Telegraph. Retrieved 31 May 2019
^ Jones 2004, p. 104.
^ "Down Under with Dickens" Archived 1 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine Sydney Morning Herald". Retrieved 18 February 2014
^ Hawes, Donald. (1998). Who's who in Dickens. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-13604-0. OCLC 36663056.
^ "Charles Dickens relief". London Remembers. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2020.
^ Kennedy, Maev (6 February 2014). "Portsmouth erects Britain's first full-size statue of Charles Dickens". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 26 February 2014.
^ "Charles Dickens statue unveiled in Portsmouth". BBC. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 14 February 2014.
^ a b Callow 2009, p. 39
^ Hutton 2001, p. 188.
^ Cochrane 1996, p. 126.
^ Robinson 2005, p. 316.
^ Werner 2011.
^ "BBC  Great Britons  Top 100". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on 4 December 2002. Retrieved 20 April 2013.
^ Bloom, Harold (1994). The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages. New York: Harcourt Brace. p. 226. ISBN 0-15-195747-9.
^ "The Big Read: Top 100 Books" Archived 31 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 2 April 2011
^ "First pictures released of Ralph Fiennes as Charles Dickens". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021.
^ "The Royal Mail unveils special Charles Dickens stamps". ITV. Retrieved 27 September 2022.
^ Mrva-Montoya, Agata (August 2011). "On Dickens and postage stamps". University of Sydney. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019.
^ "Dickens". Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature. NASA. Retrieved 10 March 2022.
^ "Lost Portrait Appeal Campaign". Charles Dickens Museum.
^ Johnson 1969 for the serial publication dates.
Sources
Ackroyd, Peter (1990). Dickens. London: Sinclair-Stevenson. ISBN 978-1-85619-000-8. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Atkinson, Paul (1990). The Ethnographic Imagination: Textual Constructions of Reality. London: Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-01761-9.
Bidwell, Walter Hilliard, ed. (July December 1870). "The Eclectic Magazine: Foreign Literature". Eclectic Magazine: Foreign Literature, Science and Art. New Series (Charles Dickens Obituary). 12: 222 224. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Black, Joseph Laurence (2007). "Charles Dickens".  In Black, Joseph Laurence (ed.). The age of romanticism. The Victorian era. The twentieth century and beyond. The Broadview Anthology of British Literature. Vol. 2. Broadview Press. pp. 735 743. ISBN 978-1-55111-869-7. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Bodenheimer, Rosemarie (2011). "London in the Victorian Novel".  In Manley, Lawrence (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to the Literature of London. Cambridge University Press. pp. 142 159. ISBN 978-0-521-72231-5. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Bowen, John (2019). "Madness and the Dickens Marriage: a New Source". The Dickensian. 115 (507): 5 20. Retrieved 8 February 2023.
Cain, Lynn (2008). Dickens, family, authorship: psychoanalytic perspectives on kinship and creativity. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-6180-1. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Callow, Simon (2012). Charles Dickens and the Great Theatre of the World. Vintage. ISBN 978-0-345-80323-8.
Callow, Simon (2009). Dickens's Christmas: A Victorian Celebration. Frances Lincoln Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7112-3031-6. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Chesterton, G K (2005) [1906]. Charles Dickens: A Critical Study. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4179-1996-3. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Chesterton, G K (1911). Appreciations and Criticisms of the Works of Charles Dickens. J M DentForgotten Books. p. 54. ISBN 978-1-4400-9125-4.
Cochrane, Robertson (1996). Wordplay: origins, meanings, and usage of the English language. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-7752-3.
Cohen, Jane R. (1980). Charles Dickens and His Original Illustrators. Ohio State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8142-0284-5. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Colledge, Gary L (2009). God and Charles Dickens. Baker Books. ISBN 978-1-4412-3778-1. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Davis, Paul (1998). Charles Dickens A to Z. Facts on File, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8160-2905-1.
Hartley, Jenny (2009). Charles Dickens and The House of Fallen Women. London: Methuen. ISBN 978-0-413-77643-3. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Morrison, Richard (3 February 2012). "Champion of the little people". The Australian. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
Davies, James A (1983). John Forster, a Literary Life. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-389-20391-9. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Dickens, Henry Fielding (1934). The Recollections of Sir Henry Fielding Dickens, KC. William Heinemann Ltd.
Ellmann, Richard (1988) [1987]. Oscar Wilde. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-009661-3.
Flint, Kate (2001). "The middle novels: Chuzzlewit, Dombey and Copperfield".  In Jordan, John O (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Charles Dickens. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-66964-1.
Forster, John (2006) [1872 1874]. Life of Charles Dickens. London: Diderot Publishing. ISBN 978-90-77932-03-2. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Foxcroft, Louise (2007). The Making of Addiction: The 'Use and Abuse' of Opium in Nineteenth-Century Britain. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-5633-3. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Furneaux, Holly (2011). "Childhood".  In Ledger, Sally; Furneaux, Holly (eds.). Dickens in Context. Cambridge University Press. pp. 186 193. ISBN 978-0-521-88700-7. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Glancy, Ruth (1999). Student Companion to Charles Dickens. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-313-30611-2. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Grossman, Jonathan H (2012). Charles Dickens's Networks: Public Transport and the Novel. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-964419-3. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Hauser, Arnold (1999) [1951]. The Social History of Art: Naturalism, impressionism, the film age. The Social History of Art. Vol. 4. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-19948-3. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Hawes, Donald (1998). Who's Who in Dickens. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-13604-4. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Henson, Louise (2004). "'In the Natural Course of Physical Things': Ghosts and Science in Charles Dickens's All the Year Round".  In Henson, Louise; Cantor, Geoffrey; Dawson, Gowan; Noakes, Richard; Shuttleworth, Sally; Topham, Jonathan R (eds.). Culture and Science in the Nineteenth-Century Media. Ashgate Publishing. pp. 113 124. ISBN 978-0-7546-3574-1. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Hobsbaum, Philip (1998) [1972]. A reader's guide to Charles Dickens. Syracuse University Press. p. 270. ISBN 978-0-8156-0475-4.
Hughes, William Richard (1891). A week's tramp in Dickens-Land: together with personal reminiscences of the 'Inimitable Boz'. Oxford: Chapman & Hall.
Hutton, Ronald (2001). The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in Britain. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285448-3. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Jackson, Kenneth T (1995). The Encyclopedia of New York City. New York Historical Society. ISBN 978-0-300-05536-8.
Johnson, E D H (1969). Charles Dickens: An Introduction to His Novels. Random House Studies in Language and Literature. Random House. ASIN B0011BLL8W. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
Jones, Richard (2004). Walking Dickensian London. Globetrotter walking guides. London: New Holland Publishers. ISBN 978-1-84330-483-8. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Jones, Sam (6 February 2012). "Ebenezer Scrooge named most popular Dickens character". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
Kucich, John; Sadoff, Dianne F (2006). "Charles Dickens".  In Kastan, David Scott (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of British Literature, Volume. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. pp. 154 164. ISBN 978-0-19-516921-8. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Levin, Harry (Autumn 1970). "Charles Dickens (1812 1870)". The American Scholar. 39 (4).
Lodge, David (2002). Consciousness and the Novel. Harvard, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-674-00949-3.
Marlow, James E. (1994). Charles Dickens: The Uses of Time. Susquehanna University Press. ISBN 978-0-945636-48-9. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Mazzeno, Laurence W (2008). The Dickens industry: critical perspectives 1836 2005. Studies in European and American literature and culture. Literary criticism in perspective. Camden House. ISBN 978-1-57113-317-5. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Mee, Jon (2010). The Cambridge Introduction to Charles Dickens. Cambridge Introductions to Literature. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-67634-2. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Moore, Grace (2004). Dickens and Empire:Discourses of Class, Race and Colonialism in the Works of Charles Dickens. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-3412-6. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Nayder, Lillian (2011). The other Dickens: a life of Catherine Hogarth. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-4787-7.
Nisbet, Ada (1952). Dickens & Ellen Ternan. University of California Press. p. 37.
Page, Norman (1999). Charles Dickens:Family History. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-22233-4. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Patten, Robert L (2001). "From Sketches to Nickleby".  In Jordan, John O (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Charles Dickens. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-66964-1.
Polloczek, Dieter (1999). "Aporias of Retribution and questions of responsibility: the legacy of incarceration in Dickens's Bleak House". Literature and Legal Discourse: Equity and Ethics from Sterne to Conrad. Cambridge University Press. pp. 124 201. ISBN 978-0-521-65251-3. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Pope-Hennessy, Una (1945). Charles Dickens 1812 1870. Chatto and Windus.
Raina, Badri (1986). Dickens and the Dialectic of Growth. University of Wisconsin Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-299-10610-2.
Robinson, David J. (2005). Disordered personalities (3 ed.). Rapid Psychler Press. ISBN 978-1-894328-09-8. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Sasaki, Toru (2011). "Modern screen adaptations".  In Ledger, Sally; Furneaux, Holly (eds.). Dickens in Context. Cambridge University Press. pp. 67 73. ISBN 978-0-521-88700-7. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Schlicke, Paul, ed. (1999). Oxford Reader's Companion to Dickens. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-866213-6.
Slater, Michael (1983). Dickens and Women. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-1180-7. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Slater, Michael (2009). Charles Dickens: A Life Defined by Writing. New Haven / London: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11207-8.
Smiley, Jane (2002). Charles Dickens. New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-670-03077-4.
Smith, Grahame (2001). "The Life and Times of Charles Dickens".  In Jordan, John O (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Charles Dickens. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-66964-1.
Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn (1870). "Dean Stanley on Charles Dickens". Speeches, letters, and sayings of Charles Dickens. Harper. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Stone, Harry (1987). Dickens's working notes for his novels. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-14590-7. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Sutherland, John (1990). The Stanford Companion to Victorian Fiction. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-1842-4. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Swift, Simon (18 April 2007). "What the Dickens?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
Tomalin, Claire (2011). Charles Dickens: A Life. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-91767-9.
Tomalin, Claire (1992). The invisible woman: the story of Nelly Ternan and Charles Dickens. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-73819-0. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Trollope, Anthony (2007).  Bloom, Harold (ed.). Charles Dickens. Bloom's Classic Critical Views. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7910-9558-4. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Van De Linde, G rard (1917). Reminiscences. Ayer Publishing. ISBN 978-0-405-10917-1. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Vlock, Deborah (1998). Dickens, Novel Reading, and the Victorian Popular Theatre. Cambridge Studies in Nineteenth-Century Literature and Culture. Vol. 19. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-64084-8. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Werner, Alex (9 December 2011). "Exhibition in focus: Dickens and London, the Museum of London". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 7 April 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
Wilson, Angus (1972). The World of Charles Dickens. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-02026-3. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Woolf, Virginia (1986).  McNeillie, Andrew (ed.). The Essays of Virginia Woolf: 1925 1928 (2 ed.). Hogarth Press. ISBN 978-0-7012-0669-7. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Ziegler, Alan (2007). The Writing Workshop Note Book: Notes on Creating and Workshopping. Counterpoint Press. ISBN 978-1-933368-70-2. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Further reading
"Dickens, Charles" . Dictionary of National Biography. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885 1900.
Bowen, John (2003). Other Dickens: Pickwick to Chuzzlewit (2 ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926140-6. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Bradbury, Nicola, Charles Dickens' Great Expectations (St. Martin's Press, 1990) ISBN 978-0312056582
Douglas-Fairhurst, Robert, "Becoming Dickens 'The Invention of a Novelist'", London: Harvard University Press, 2011
Gold, David L (2009).  Gonz lez, F lix Rodr quez; Buades, Antonio Lillo (eds.). Studies in Etymology and Etiology: With Emphasis on Germanic, Jewish, Romance and Slavic Languages. Universidad de Alicante. ISBN 978-84-7908-517-9. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Hart, Christopher (20 May 2007). "What, the Dickens World?". The Sunday Times. UK. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008. Retrieved 21 April 2012.
Heller, Deborah (1990). "The Outcast as Villain and Victim: Jews in Dickens Oliver Twist and Our Mutual Friend".  In Cohen, Derek; Heller, Deborah (eds.). Jewish Presences in English Literature. McGill-Queen's Press. pp. 40 60. ISBN 978-0-7735-0781-4. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Jarvie, Paul A (2005). Ready to Trample on All Human Law: Finance Capitalism in the Fiction of Charles Dickens. Studies in Major Literary Authors. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-97524-7.
Johnson, Edgar, Charles Dickens: his tragedy and triumph, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1952. In two volumes.
Joshi, Prithi (2011). "Race".  In Ledger, Sally; Furneaux, Holly (eds.). Dickens in Context. Cambridge University Press. pp. 292 300. ISBN 978-0-521-88700-7. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2016.
Kaplan, Fred (1988). Dickens: A Biography. William Morrow & Company. ISBN 978-0-688-04341-4.
Levine, Gary Martin (2003). The merchant of modernism: the economic Jew in Anglo-American Literature, 1864 1939. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-94109-9. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Mackenzie, Robery Shelton (1870). Life of Charles Dickens. by R. Shelton Mackenzie. With Personal Recollections and Anecdotes;   Letters by 'Boz', Never Before Published;   And ... Prose and Verse. With Portrait and Autograph. Philadelphia: T B Peterson & Brothers. ISBN 978-1-4255-5680-8. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
Manning, Mick & Granstr m, Brita, Charles Dickens: Scenes From An Extraordinary Life, Frances Lincoln Children's Books, 2011.
Mendelsohn, Ezra (1996). Literary Strategies: Jewish Texts and Contexts. Studies in Contemporary Jewry. Vol. 12. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511203-0. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Meckier, Jerome (2002). Dickens's Great Expectations: Misnar's Pavilion Versus Cinderella. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-813-12228-1.
Moore, Grace (2002). "Reappraising Dickens's 'Noble Savage'". The Dickensian. 98 (458): 236 243.
Nayder, Lillian (2002). Unequal Partners: Charles Dickens, Wilkie Collins, and Victorian Authorship. Cornell University Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-8014-3925-4.
Dickens, Charles (1978). "Introduction".  In Patten, Robert L. (ed.). The Pickwick Papers. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-415-22233-4. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Pointer, Michael (1996). Charles Dickens on the screen: the film, television, and video adaptations. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-2960-2. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
Pope-Hennessy, Una (2007). Charles Dickens. Hennessy Press. ISBN 978-1-4067-5783-5.
Slater, Michael (2011) [2004]. "Dickens, Charles John Huffam". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/7599. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Waller, John O. (July 1960). "Charles Dickens and the American Civil War". Studies in Philology. 57 (3): 535 548. JSTOR 4173318.
Waller, Philip J (2006). Writers, Readers, and Reputations: Literary Life in Britain, 1870 1918. Oxford University Press. p. 194. ISBN 978-0-19-820677-4.
External links
Charles Dickens  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Library resources about  Charles Dickens 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Charles Dickens
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Works
Charles Dickens's works on Bookwise
Works by Charles Dickens in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Charles Dickens at Project Gutenberg
Works by Charles Dickens at Faded Page (Canada)
Works by or about Charles Dickens at Internet Archive
Works by Charles Dickens at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Online books, and library resources in your library and in other libraries by Charles Dickens
Charles Dickens at the British Library
Organisations and portals
"Archival material relating to Charles Dickens". UK National Archives.
Portraits of Charles Dickens at the National Portrait Gallery, London
Charles Dickens on the Archives Hub
Archival material at Leeds University Library
The Dickens Fellowship, an international society dedicated to the study of Dickens and his Writings
Correspondence of Charles Dickens, with related papers, ca. 1834 1955
Finding aid to Charles Dickens papers at Columbia University. Rare Book & Manuscript Library.
Museums
Dickens Museum Situated in a former Dickens House, 48 Doughty Street, London, WC1
Dickens Birthplace Museum Archived 9 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Old Commercial Road, Portsmouth
Victoria and Albert Museum The V&A's collections relating to Dickens
Other
Dickens on In Our Time at the BBC
Charles Dickens's Traveling Kit From the John Davis Batchelder Collection at the Library of Congress
Charles Dickens's Walking Stick From the John Davis Batchelder Collection at the Library of Congress
Charles Dickens Collection: First editions of Charles Dickens's works included in the Leonard Kebler gift (dispersed in the Division's collection). From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Media offices
Preceded byNew position
 Editor of the Daily News 1846
Succeeded byJohn Forster
vteCharles Dickens
Bibliography
Novels
The Pickwick Papers
Oliver Twist
Nicholas Nickleby
The Old Curiosity Shop
Barnaby Rudge
Martin Chuzzlewit
Dombey and Son
David Copperfield
Bleak House
Hard Times
Little Dorrit
A Tale of Two Cities
Great Expectations
Our Mutual Friend
The Mystery of Edwin Drood
Christmas books
A Christmas Carol
The Chimes
The Cricket on the Hearth
The Battle of Life
The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain
Short stories
"To Be Read at Dusk"
"The Long Voyage"
"The Signal-Man"
"The Trial for Murder"
Short story  collections
Sketches by Boz
The Mudfog Papers
Master Humphrey's Clock
Non-fiction
American Notes
Pictures from Italy
The Life of Our Lord
A Child's History of England
The Uncommercial Traveller
Letters
Plays
The Frozen Deep
No Thoroughfare
Journalism
Bentley's Miscellany
Master Humphrey's Clock
The Daily News
Household Words
All the Year Round
Collaborations
"A House to Let"
"The Haunted House"
"A Message from the Sea"
"Mugby Junction"
No Thoroughfare
FamilyParents
John Dickens
Elizabeth Dickens
Brothers
Frederick Dickens
Alfred Lamert Dickens
Augustus Dickens
Partners
Catherine Dickens (wife)
Ellen Ternan (mistress)
Children
Charles Dickens Jr.
Mary Dickens
Kate Perugini
Walter Landor Dickens
Francis Dickens
Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson Dickens
Sydney Smith Haldimand Dickens
Henry Fielding Dickens
Dora Annie Dickens
Edward Dickens
Related
Epitaph of Charles Irving Thornton
Bleak House
Tavistock House
Gads Hill Place
Dickens fair
Dickens and Little Nell (statue)
Dickens of London (1976 miniseries)
Dickens in America (2005 documentary)
The Invisible Woman (2013 film)
Dickensian (2015 TV series)
The Man Who Invented Christmas (2017 film)
 Category
Works by Charles Dickens
vteCharles Dickens's The Pickwick Papers (1836)Characters
Samuel Pickwick
Sam Weller
Alfred Jingle
Nathaniel Winkle
Augustus Snodgrass
Tracy Tupman
Mrs Bardell
Tony Weller
Mr Wardle
Places
Goswell Street
Bath
Ipswich
Fleet Prison
Adaptations
Samuel Weller, or, The Pickwickians (1837)
Pickwick (1889)
1913 film
1921 film
1952 film
1963 musical
1969 TV film
1985 TV series
1985 film
Other
"If I Ruled the World"
George and Vulture
vteCharles Dickens's Oliver TwistCharacters
Oliver Twist
Bill Sikes
Fagin
Mr Brownlow
Nancy
Rose Maylie
Monks
The Artful Dodger
Charley Bates
Mr Sowerberry
Mr. Bumble
Film adaptations
Oliver Twist (1909)
Oliver Twist (1912)
Oliver Twist (1912)
Oliver Twist (1916)
Oliver Twist (1919)
Oliver Twist (1922)
Oliver Twist (1933)
Oliver Twist (1948)
Oliver! (1968)
Oliver Twist (1974)
Las Aventuras de Oliver Twist (1987)
Oliver Twist (2005)
Film retellings
Manik (1961)
Chitti Tammudu (1962)
Oliver & Company (1988)
Twisted (1996)
Twist (2003)
Boy Called Twist (2004)
Twist (2021)
TV adaptations
Oliver Twist (1962 TV serial)
Oliver Twist (1982 American-British TV film)
Oliver Twist (1982 Australian TV film)
Oliver Twist (1985 TV serial)
Saban's Adventures of Oliver Twist (1996 TV series)
Oliver Twist (1997 TV film)
Oliver Twist (1999 TV series)
Oliver Twist (2007 TV series)
Play
Oliver! (1960)
Songs
"As Long as He Needs Me"
"Consider Yourself"
"Food, Glorious Food"
"I'd Do Anything"
"Oliver!"
"Oom-Pah-Pah"
"Where Is Love?"
"You've Got to Pick a Pocket or Two"
"Be Back Soon"
Related
Oliver! (soundtrack to the 1968 film)
Escape of the Artful Dodger (2001 TV series retelling)
Fagin the Jew (2003 graphic novel)
Oliver and the Artful Dodger (1972 TV film)
I'd Do Anything (2008 TV series)
vteCharles Dickens's Nicholas NicklebyFilms
Nicholas Nickleby (1912)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (1947)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (2001)
Nicholas Nickleby (2002)
Television
Nicholas Nickleby (1957)
The Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (1958)
Nicholas Nickleby (1968)
Nicholas Nickleby (1977)
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (1982)
Related
The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby (play)
Smike (musical)
vteCharles Dickens's The Old Curiosity ShopCharacters
Nell Trent
Sampson Brass
Master Humphrey
Quilp
Dick Swiveller
Films
The Old Curiosity Shop (1911)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1914)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1921)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1934)
Mister Quilp (1975)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1984)
Television
The Old Curiosity Shop (1979)
The Old Curiosity Shop (2007)
Related
Dickens and Little Nell statue
vteCharles Dickens's A Christmas CarolCharacters
Ebenezer Scrooge
Bob Cratchit
Mr. Fezziwig
Tiny Tim
Jacob Marley
Ghost of Christmas Past
Ghost of Christmas Present
Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come
Films
Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost (1901)
A Christmas Carol (1908)
A Christmas Carol (1910)
Scrooge (1913)
The Right to Be Happy (1916)
Scrooge (1935)
A Christmas Carol (1938)
Scrooge (1951)
It's Never Too Late (1953)
A Christmas Carol (1960)
Scrooge (1970)
A Christmas Carol (1971)
An American Christmas Carol (1979)
Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983)
Scrooged (1988)
The Muppet Christmas Carol (1992)
A Christmas Carol (1997)
A Christmas Carol (1999)
Christmas Carol: The Movie (2001)
A Carol Christmas (2003)
Springtime with Roo (2004)
Chasing Christmas (2005)
A Christmas Carol (2006)
A Dennis the Menace Christmas (2007)
An American Carol (2008)
Barbie in A Christmas Carol (2008)
Ghosts of Girlfriends Past (2009)
A Christmas Carol (2009)
The Smurfs: A Christmas Carol (2011)
Scrooge & Marley (2012)
A Christmas Carol (2020)
Spirited (2022)
Scrooge: A Christmas Carol (2022)
Television
The Christmas Carol (1949)
A Christmas Carol (1954)
Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol (1962)
Carol for Another Christmas (1964)
A Special Sesame Street Christmas (1978)
The Stingiest Man in Town (1978)
Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol (1979)
Rich Little's Christmas Carol (1979)
A Christmas Carol (1982)
A Christmas Carol (1984)
Blackadder's Christmas Carol (1988)
A Flintstones Christmas Carol (1994)
Ebbie (1995)
Ms. Scrooge (1997)
An All Dogs Christmas Carol (1998)
Ebenezer (1998)
A Diva's Christmas Carol (2000)
A Christmas Carol (2000)
A Christmas Carol (2004)
An Easter Carol (2004)
Karroll's Christmas (2004)
Bah, Humduck! A Looney Tunes Christmas (2006)
Nan's Christmas Carol (2009)
"A Christmas Carol" (Doctor Who) (2010)
It's Christmas, Carol! (2012)
Kelly Clarkson's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale (2013)
A Hearth's Warming Tail (2016)
A Christmas Carol (2019)
Musicals
Scrooge (1992)
A Christmas Carol (1994)
Mrs. Bob Cratchit's Wild Christmas Binge  (2002)
Plays
A Christmas Carol; or, Past, Present, and Future (1844)
A Christmas Carol (1988)
Fellow Passengers (2004)
A Klingon Christmas Carol (2007)
A Christmas Carol (2017)
A Christmas Carol: A Ghost Story (2021)
Soundtracks
A Christmas Carol (2009)
Doctor Who: A Christmas Carol (2011)
Other
Adaptations of A Christmas Carol
Batman: No l (comic)
"Green Chri$tma$" (single)
The Misadventures of the Wholesome Twins (2005)
The Man Who Invented Christmas (2017)
Related
John Leech (illustrator)
vteCharles Dickens's Dombey and SonFilm
Dombey and Son (1917)
Rich Man's Folly (1931)
TV
Dombey and Son (1969)
Dombey and Son (1983)
vteCharles Dickens's David CopperfieldCharacters
David Copperfield
Mr. Dick
Uriah Heep
Wilkins Micawber
Edward Murdstone
Peggotty
Dora Spenlow
James Steerforth
Betsey Trotwood
Agnes Wickfield
Film
1911 film
1913 film
1922 film
1935 film
The Personal History of David Copperfield (2019 film)
Television
1956 serial
1966 serial
1969 film
1974 serial
1986 serial
1993 film
1999 film
2000 film
Micawber (2001 series)
Other
Copperfield (musical)
vteCharles Dickens's Bleak HouseFilms
The Death of Poor Joe (1901)
Bleak House (1920)
Television
Bleak House (1959)
Bleak House (1985)
Bleak House (2005)
Related
Jarndyce and Jarndyce
vteCharles Dickens's Hard TimesCharacters
Gradgrind
Film
Hard Times (1915)
Hard Times (1988)
Television
Hard Times (1977)
vteCharles Dickens's Little DorritAdaptations
Little Dorrit (1920)
Little Dorrit (1924)
Little Dorrit (1934)
Little Dorrit (1987)
Little Dorrit (2008)
Literature
The Great Fire of London
Related
Little Dorrit's Playground
Shut up
vteCharles Dickens's A Tale of Two CitiesCharacters
Sydney Carton
Lucie Manette
Charles Darnay
Alexandre Manette
Monsieur Ernest Defarge
Madame Th r se Defarge
Jarvis Lorry
Miss Pross
Marquis St. Evr monde
John Barsad
Jerry Cruncher
Stryver
The Seamstress
Film
A Tale of Two Cities (1911)
A Tale of Two Cities (1917)
A Tale of Two Cities (1922)
The Only Way (1927)
A Tale of Two Cities (1935)
A Tale of Two Cities (1958)
A Tale of Two Cities (1980)
Musicals
Two Cities (2006)
A Tale of Two Cities (2007)
Television
A Tale of Two Cities (1965)
A Tale of Two Cities (1980)
A Tale of Two Cities (1989)
vteCharles Dickens's Great ExpectationsCharacters
Philip "Pip" Pirrip
Estella
Compeyson
Miss Havisham
Arthur Havisham
Abel Magwitch
John Wemmick
Films
1917
1934
1946
An Orphan's Tragedy (1955 film)
1974
1998
1999
2012
Fitoor (2016)
TV series
1967
1981
1989
2011
2023
Other adaptations
1975 musical
Miss Havisham's Fire (1979 opera)
"Pip" (2000 South Park retelling)
Related
Great Expectations: The Untold Story
vteCharles Dickens's Our Mutual FriendTelevision
Our Mutual Friend (1958)
Our Mutual Friend (1976)
Our Mutual Friend (1998)
Related
Jenny Wren (2005 song)
vteCharles Dickens's The Mystery of Edwin DroodFilm and television
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (1935 film)
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (1993 film)
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (2012 TV miniseries)
Stage
The Mystery of Edwin Drood (1985 musical)
Attempted continuations
By T.P. James (1873)
The D Case (1989 humorous literary critique)
Related
The Last Dickens (2009 novel)
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
2
VIAF
2
WorldCat
2
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
2
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Finland
Belgium
United States
2
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Romania
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Vatican
Academics
International Plant Names Index
Artists
MusicBrainz
Te Papa (New Zealand)
ULAN
People
Australia
Netherlands
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
2
Other
RISM
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Dickens&oldid=1147889937"