1954 1968 U.S. nonviolent social movement
This article is about the 1954 1968 movement in the United States. For earlier movements in the United States and others elsewhere, see Civil rights movement (disambiguation).
Civil rights movementPart of 1950's 1960's in the United StatesThe 1963 March on Washington participants and leaders marching from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln MemorialDateMay 17, 1954   August 1, 1968[a]LocationUnited StatesCaused byRacism, segregation, disenfranchisement, Jim Crow laws, socioeconomic inequalityMethodsNonviolence, nonviolent resistance, civil disobedienceResulted in
Rulings by federal judiciary:
"Separate but equal" doctrine overturned by Brown v. Board of Education (1954)
Bus segregation ruled unconstitutional by Browder v. Gayle (1956)
Interracial marriages legalized by Loving v. Virginia (1967)
Passage of federal laws:Civil Rights Act of 1957Civil Rights Act of 1960Civil Rights Act of 1964Voting Rights Act of 1965Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act)
Ratification of a federal constitutional amendment:24th Amendment (1964)
Formation of federal agencies:Civil Rights Division within US Department of Justice (1957)US Commission on Civil Rights (1957)Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (1965)Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity within US Department of Housing and Urban Development (1968)
vteCivil rights movementPrelude
Bombingham
Journey of Reconciliation
Murder of Harry and Harriette Moore
Baton Rouge bus boycott
1954 1959
Montgomery bus boycott
Tallahassee bus boycott
Mansfield school desegregation incident
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
Royal Ice Cream sit-in
Little Rock Nine
Dockum Drug Store sit-in
Katz Drug Store sit-in
Kissing Case
Biloxi wade-ins
1960 1963
Tent City
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Sit-in movement
Freedom Riders
New Orleans school desegregation crisis
Albany movement
Cambridge movement
Ole Miss riot of 1962
Birmingham campaign
Bloody Monday
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
Leesburg Stockade
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
St. Augustine movement
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protest
Black Christmas boycott
1964 1968
Chester school protests
Bloody Tuesday
Freedom Summer
Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner
Carpenters for Christmas
Selma to Montgomery marches
March Against Fear
Chicago Freedom Movement
Orangeburg massacre
Memphis sanitation strike
Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.
Poor People's Campaign
The civil rights movement[b] was a nonviolent social movement and campaign from 1954 to 1968 in the United States to abolish legalized racial segregation, discrimination, and disenfranchisement throughout the United States. The movement had its origins in the Reconstruction era during the late 19th century, although it made its largest legislative gains in the 1960s after years of direct actions and grassroots protests. The social movement's major nonviolent resistance and civil disobedience campaigns eventually secured new protections in federal law for the civil rights of all Americans.
After the American Civil War and the subsequent abolition of slavery in the 1860s, the Reconstruction Amendments to the United States Constitution granted emancipation and constitutional rights of citizenship to all African Americans, most of whom had recently been enslaved. For a short period of time, African-American men voted and held political office, but as time went on they were increasingly deprived of civil rights, often under the racist Jim Crow laws, and African Americans were subjected to discrimination and sustained violence by white supremacists in the South. Over the following century, various efforts were made by African Americans to secure their legal and civil rights, such as the civil rights movement (1865 1896) and the civil rights movement (1896 1954). The movement was characterized by nonviolent mass protests and civil disobedience following highly publicized events such as the lynching of Emmett Till. These included boycotts such as the Montgomery bus boycott, "sit-ins" in Greensboro and Nashville, a series of protests during the Birmingham campaign, and a march from Selma to Montgomery.[1][2]
At the culmination of a legal strategy pursued by African Americans, in 1954 the Supreme Court struck down many of the laws that had allowed racial segregation and discrimination to be legal in the United States as unconstitutional.[3][4][5][6] The Warren Court made a series of landmark rulings against racist discrimination, including the separate but equal doctrine, such as Brown v. Board of Education (1954), Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States (1964), and Loving v. Virginia (1967) which banned segregation in public schools and public accommodations, and struck down all state laws banning interracial marriage.[7][8][9] The rulings played a crucial role in bringing an end to the segregationist Jim Crow laws prevalent in the Southern states.[10] In the 1960s, moderates in the movement worked with the United States Congress to achieve the passage of several significant pieces of federal legislation that authorized oversight and enforcement of civil rights laws. The Civil Rights Act of 1964[11] explicitly banned all discrimination based on race, including racial segregation in schools, businesses, and in public accommodations.[12] The Voting Rights Act of 1965 restored and protected voting rights by authorizing federal oversight of registration and elections in areas with historic under-representation of minority voters. The Fair Housing Act of 1968 banned discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
African Americans re-entered politics in the South, and young people across the country began to take action. From 1964 through 1970, a wave of riots and protests in black communities dampened support from the white middle class, but increased support from private foundations.[13][clarification needed] The emergence of the Black Power movement, which lasted from 1965 to 1975, challenged Black leaders of the movement for its cooperative attitude and its adherence to legalism and nonviolence. Its leaders demanded not only legal equality, but also economic self-sufficiency for the community. Support for the Black Power movement came from African Americans who had seen little material improvement since the civil rights movement's peak in the mid-1960s, and still faced discrimination in jobs, housing, education and politics. Martin Luther King Jr. was the most visible leader of the movement. However, some scholars note that the movement was too diverse to be credited to any particular person, organization, or strategy.[14]
Background
Main articles: African-American history and Timeline of African-American history
American Civil War and Reconstruction era
Further information: Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
Before the American Civil War, eight serving presidents had owned slaves, almost four million black people remained enslaved in the South, generally only white men with property could vote, and the Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites.[15][16][17] Following the Civil War, three constitutional amendments were passed, including the 13th Amendment (1865) that ended slavery; the 14th Amendment (1869) that gave black people citizenship, adding their total for Congressional apportionment; and the 15th Amendment (1870) that gave black males the right to vote (only males could vote in the U.S. at the time).[18] From 1865 to 1877, the United States underwent a turbulent Reconstruction era during which the federal government tried to establish free labor and the civil rights of freedmen in the South after the end of slavery. Many whites resisted the social changes, leading to the formation of insurgent movements such as the Ku Klux Klan, whose members attacked black and white Republicans in order to maintain white supremacy. In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant, the U.S. Army, and U.S. Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, initiated a campaign to repress the KKK under the Enforcement Acts.[19] Some states were reluctant to enforce the federal measures of the act. In addition, by the early 1870s, other white supremacist and insurgent paramilitary groups arose that violently opposed African-American legal equality and suffrage, intimidating and suppressing black voters, and assassinating Republican officeholders.[20][21] However, if the states failed to implement the acts, the laws allowed the Federal Government to get involved.[21] Many Republican governors were afraid of sending black militia troops to fight the Klan for fear of war.[21]
Disenfranchisement after Reconstruction
Main article: Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era
Further information: Jim Crow laws, Civil rights movement (1865 1896), and Civil rights movement (1896 1954)
After the disputed election of 1876, which resulted in the end of Reconstruction and the withdrawal of federal troops, whites in the South regained political control of the region's state legislatures. They continued to intimidate and violently attack blacks before and during elections to suppress their voting, but the last African Americans were elected to Congress from the South before disenfranchisement of blacks by states throughout the region, as described below.
 The mob-style lynching of Will James, Cairo, Illinois, 1909
From 1890 to 1908, southern states passed new constitutions and laws to disenfranchise African Americans and many Poor Whites by creating barriers to voter registration; voting rolls were dramatically reduced as blacks and poor whites were forced out of electoral politics. After the landmark Supreme Court case of Smith v. Allwright (1944), which prohibited white primaries, progress was made in increasing black political participation in the Rim South and Acadiana   although almost entirely in urban areas[22] and a few rural localities where most blacks worked outside plantations.[23] The status quo ante of excluding African Americans from the political system lasted in the remainder of the South, especially North Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, until national civil rights legislation was passed in the mid-1960s to provide federal enforcement of constitutional voting rights. For more than sixty years, blacks in the South were essentially excluded from politics, unable to elect anyone to represent their interests in Congress or local government.[21] Since they could not vote, they could not serve on local juries.
During this period, the white-dominated Democratic Party maintained political control of the South. With whites controlling all the seats representing the total population of the South, they had a powerful voting bloc in Congress. The Republican Party the "party of Lincoln" and the party to which most blacks had belonged shrank to insignificance except in remote Unionist areas of Appalachia and the Ozarks as black voter registration was suppressed. The Republican lily-white movement also gained strength by excluding blacks. Until 1965, the "Solid South" was a one-party system under the white Democrats. Excepting the previously noted historic Unionist strongholds the Democratic Party nomination was tantamount to election for state and local office.[24] In 1901, President Theodore Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington, president of the Tuskegee Institute, to dine at the White House, making him the first African American to attend an official dinner there. "The invitation was roundly criticized by southern politicians and newspapers."[25] Washington persuaded the president to appoint more blacks to federal posts in the South and to try to boost African-American leadership in state Republican organizations. However, these actions were resisted by both white Democrats and white Republicans as an unwanted federal intrusion into state politics.[25]
 Lynching victim Will Brown, who was mutilated and burned during the Omaha, Nebraska race riot of 1919. Postcards and photographs of lynchings were popular souvenirs in the U.S.[26]
During the same time as African Americans were being disenfranchised, white southerners imposed racial segregation by law. Violence against blacks increased, with numerous lynchings through the turn of the century. The system of de jure state-sanctioned racial discrimination and oppression that emerged from the post-Reconstruction South became known as the "Jim Crow" system. The United States Supreme Court made up almost entirely of Northerners, upheld the constitutionality of those state laws that required racial segregation in public facilities in its 1896 decision Plessy v. Ferguson, legitimizing them through the "separate but equal" doctrine.[27] Segregation, which began with slavery, continued with Jim Crow laws, with signs used to show blacks where they could legally walk, talk, drink, rest, or eat.[28] For those places that were racially mixed, non-whites had to wait until all white customers were served first.[28] Elected in 1912, President Woodrow Wilson gave in to demands by Southern members of his cabinet and ordered segregation of workplaces throughout the federal government.[29]
The early 20th century is a period often referred to as the "nadir of American race relations", when the number of lynchings was highest. While tensions and civil rights violations were most intense in the South, social discrimination affected African Americans in other regions as well.[30] At the national level, the Southern bloc controlled important committees in Congress, defeated passage of federal laws against lynching, and exercised considerable power beyond the number of whites in the South.
Characteristics of the post-Reconstruction period:
Racial segregation. By law, public facilities and government services such as education were divided into separate "white" and "colored" domains.[31] Characteristically, those for colored were underfunded and of inferior quality.
Disenfranchisement. When white Democrats regained power, they passed laws that made voter registration more restrictive, essentially forcing black voters off the voting rolls. The number of African-American voters dropped dramatically, and they were no longer able to elect representatives. From 1890 to 1908, Southern states of the former Confederacy created constitutions with provisions that disfranchised tens of thousands of African Americans, and U.S. states such as Alabama disenfranchised poor whites as well.
Exploitation. Increased economic oppression of blacks through the convict lease system, Latinos, and Asians, denial of economic opportunities, and widespread employment discrimination.
Violence. Individual, police, paramilitary, organizational, and mob racial violence against blacks (and Latinos in the Southwest, and Asians in the West Coast).
 KKK night rally near Chicago, in the 1920s
African Americans and other ethnic minorities rejected this regime. They resisted it in numerous ways and sought better opportunities through lawsuits, new organizations, political redress, and labor organizing (see the Civil rights movement (1896 1954)). The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was founded in 1909. It fought to end race discrimination through litigation, education, and lobbying efforts. Its crowning achievement was its legal victory in the Supreme Court decision Brown v. Board of Education (1954), when the Warren Court ruled that segregation of public schools in the US was unconstitutional and, by implication, overturned the "separate but equal" doctrine established in Plessy v. Ferguson of 1896.[7][32] Following the unanimous Supreme Court ruling, many states began to gradually integrate their schools, but some areas of the South resisted by closing public schools altogether.[7][32]
The integration of Southern public libraries followed demonstrations and protests that used techniques seen in other elements of the larger civil rights movement.[33] This included sit-ins, beatings, and white resistance.[33] For example, in 1963 in the city of Anniston, Alabama, two black ministers were brutally beaten for attempting to integrate the public library.[33] Though there was resistance and violence, the integration of libraries was generally quicker than the integration of other public institutions.[33]
National issues
 Colored Sailors room in World War I
The situation for blacks outside the South was somewhat better (in most states they could vote and have their children educated, though they still faced discrimination in housing and jobs). In 1900 Reverend Matthew Anderson, speaking at the annual Hampton Negro Conference in Virginia, said that "...the lines along most of the avenues of wage-earning are more rigidly drawn in the North than in the South. There seems to be an apparent effort throughout the North, especially in the cities to debar the colored worker from all the avenues of higher remunerative labor, which makes it more difficult to improve his economic condition even than in the South."[34] From 1910 to 1970, blacks sought better lives by migrating north and west out of the South. A total of nearly seven million blacks left the South in what was known as the Great Migration, most during and after World War II. So many people migrated that the demographics of some previously black-majority states changed to a white majority (in combination with other developments). The rapid influx of blacks altered the demographics of Northern and Western cities; happening at a period of expanded European, Hispanic, and Asian immigration, it added to social competition and tensions, with the new migrants and immigrants battling for a place in jobs and housing.
 A white gang looking for blacks during the Chicago race riot of 1919
Reflecting social tensions after World War I, as veterans struggled to return to the workforce and labor unions were organizing, the Red Summer of 1919 was marked by hundreds of deaths and higher casualties across the U.S. as a result of white race riots against blacks that took place in more than three dozen cities, such as the Chicago race riot of 1919 and the Omaha race riot of 1919. Urban problems such as crime and disease were blamed on the large influx of Southern blacks to cities in the north and west, based on stereotypes of rural southern African-Americans. Overall, blacks in Northern and Western cities experienced systemic discrimination in a plethora of aspects of life. Within employment, economic opportunities for blacks were routed to the lowest status and restrictive in potential mobility. Within the housing market, stronger discriminatory measures were used in correlation to the influx, resulting in a mix of "targeted violence, restrictive covenants, redlining and racial steering".[35] The Great Migration resulted in many African Americans becoming urbanized, and they began to realign from the Republican to the Democratic Party, especially because of opportunities under the New Deal of the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration during the Great Depression in the 1930s.[36] Substantially under pressure from African-American supporters who began the March on Washington Movement, President Roosevelt issued the first federal order banning discrimination and created the Fair Employment Practice Committee. After both World Wars, black veterans of the military pressed for full civil rights and often led activist movements. In 1948, President Harry Truman issued Executive Order 9981, which ended segregation in the military.[37]
 White tenants seeking to prevent blacks from moving into the housing project erected this sign, Detroit, 1942.
Housing segregation became a nationwide problem following the Great Migration of black people out of the South. Racial covenants were employed by many real estate developers to "protect" entire subdivisions, with the primary intent to keep "white" neighborhoods "white". Ninety percent of the housing projects built in the years following World War II were racially restricted by such covenants.[38] Cities known for their widespread use of racial covenants include Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit, Milwaukee,[39] Los Angeles, Seattle, and St. Louis.[40]
Said premises shall not be rented, leased, or conveyed to, or occupied by, any person other than of the white or Caucasian race. Racial covenant for a home in Beverly Hills, California.[41]
While many whites defended their space with violence, intimidation, or legal tactics toward black people, many other whites migrated to more racially homogeneous suburban or exurban regions, a process known as white flight.[42] From the 1930s to the 1960s, the National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) issued guidelines that specified that a realtor "should never be instrumental in introducing to a neighborhood a character or property or occupancy, members of any race or nationality, or any individual whose presence will be clearly detrimental to property values in a neighborhood." The result was the development of all-black ghettos in the North and West, where much housing was older, as well as South.[43]
The first anti-miscegenation law was passed by the Maryland General Assembly in 1691, criminalizing interracial marriage.[44] In a speech in Charleston, Illinois in 1858, Abraham Lincoln stated, "I am not, nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people".[45] By the late 1800s, 38 US states had anti-miscegenation statutes.[44] By 1924, the ban on interracial marriage was still in force in 29 states.[44] While interracial marriage had been legal in California since 1948, in 1957 actor Sammy Davis Jr. faced a backlash for his involvement with white actress Kim Novak.[46] Davis briefly married a black dancer in 1958 to protect himself from mob violence.[46] In 1958, officers in Virginia entered the home of Mildred and Richard Loving and dragged them out of bed for living together as an interracial couple, on the basis that "any white person intermarry with a colored person"  or vice versa each party "shall be guilty of a felony" and face prison terms of five years.[44]
Invigorated by the victory of Brown and frustrated by the lack of immediate practical effect, private citizens increasingly rejected gradualist, legalistic approaches as the primary tool to bring about desegregation. They were faced with "massive resistance" in the South by proponents of racial segregation and voter suppression. In defiance, African-American activists adopted a combined strategy of direct action, nonviolence, nonviolent resistance, and many events described as civil disobedience, giving rise to the civil rights movement of 1954 to 1968.
A. Philip Randolph had planned a march on Washington, D.C., in 1941 to support demands for elimination of employment discrimination in the defense industry; he called off the march when the Roosevelt administration met the demand by issuing Executive Order 8802, which barred racial discrimination and created an agency to oversee compliance with the order.[47]
Protests begin
The strategy of public education, legislative lobbying, and litigation that had typified the civil rights movement during the first half of the 20th century broadened after Brown to a strategy that emphasized "direct action": boycotts, sit-ins, Freedom Rides, marches or walks, and similar tactics that relied on mass mobilization, nonviolent resistance, standing in line, and, at times, civil disobedience.[48]
Churches, local grassroots organizations, fraternal societies, and black-owned businesses mobilized volunteers to participate in broad-based actions. This was a more direct and potentially more rapid means of creating change than the traditional approach of mounting court challenges used by the NAACP and others.
In 1952, the Regional Council of Negro Leadership (RCNL), led by T. R. M. Howard, a black surgeon, entrepreneur, and planter organized a successful boycott of gas stations in Mississippi that refused to provide restrooms for blacks. Through the RCNL, Howard led campaigns to expose brutality by the Mississippi state highway patrol and to encourage blacks to make deposits in the black-owned Tri-State Bank of Nashville which, in turn, gave loans to civil rights activists who were victims of a "credit squeeze" by the White Citizens' Councils.[49]
After Claudette Colvin was arrested for not giving up her seat on a Montgomery, Alabama bus in March 1955, a bus boycott was considered and rejected. But when Rosa Parks was arrested in December, Jo Ann Gibson Robinson of the Montgomery Women's Political Council put the bus boycott protest in motion. Late that night, she, John Cannon (chairman of the Business Department at Alabama State University) and others mimeographed and distributed thousands of leaflets calling for a boycott.[50][51] The eventual success of the boycott made its spokesman Martin Luther King Jr., a nationally known figure. It also inspired other bus boycotts, such as the successful Tallahassee, Florida boycott of 1956 57.[52] This movement also sparked the 1956 Sugar Bowl riots in Atlanta which later became a major organizing center of the civil rights movement, with Martin Luther King Jr.[53][54]
In 1957, King and Ralph Abernathy, the leaders of the Montgomery Improvement Association, joined with other church leaders who had led similar boycott efforts, such as C. K. Steele of Tallahassee and T. J. Jemison of Baton Rouge, and other activists such as Fred Shuttlesworth, Ella Baker, A. Philip Randolph, Bayard Rustin and Stanley Levison, to form the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The SCLC, with its headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia, did not attempt to create a network of chapters as the NAACP did. It offered training and leadership assistance for local efforts to fight segregation. The headquarters organization raised funds, mostly from Northern sources, to support such campaigns. It made nonviolence both its central tenet and its primary method of confronting racism.
In 1959, Septima Clarke, Bernice Robinson, and Esau Jenkins, with the help of Myles Horton's Highlander Folk School in Tennessee, began the first Citizenship Schools in South Carolina's Sea Islands. They taught literacy to enable blacks to pass voting tests. The program was an enormous success and tripled the number of black voters on Johns Island. SCLC took over the program and duplicated its results elsewhere.
History
Main article: History of civil rights in the United States
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the civil rights movement.
Further information: Civil rights movement (1865 1896) and Civil rights movement (1896 1954)
Brown v. Board of Education, 1954
Main article: Brown v. Board of Education
In the spring of 1951, black students in Virginia protested their unequal status in the state's segregated educational system. Students at Moton High School protested the overcrowded conditions and failing facility.[55] Some local leaders of the NAACP had tried to persuade the students to back down from their protest against the Jim Crow laws of school segregation. When the students did not budge, the NAACP joined their battle against school segregation. The NAACP proceeded with five cases challenging the school systems; these were later combined under what is known today as Brown v. Board of Education.[55] Under the leadership of Walter Reuther, the United Auto Workers donated $75,000 to help pay for the NAACP's efforts at the Supreme Court.[56]
 In 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren ruled unanimously that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional.
On May 17, 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren ruled unanimously in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, that mandating, or even permitting, public schools to be segregated by race was unconstitutional.[7] Chief Justice Warren wrote in the court majority opinion that[7][32]
Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children. The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law; for the policy of separating the races is usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the Negro group.[57]
The lawyers from the NAACP had to gather plausible evidence in order to win the case of Brown vs. Board of Education. Their method of addressing the issue of school segregation was to enumerate several arguments. One pertained to having exposure to interracial contact in a school environment. It was argued that interracial contact would, in turn, help prepare children to live with the pressures that society exerts in regards to race and thereby afford them a better chance of living in a democracy. In addition, another argument emphasized how "'education' comprehends the entire process of developing and training the mental, physical and moral powers and capabilities of human beings".[58]
Risa Goluboff wrote that the NAACP's intention was to show the Courts that African American children were the victims of school segregation and their futures were at risk. The Court ruled that both Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which had established the "separate but equal" standard in general, and Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899), which had applied that standard to schools, was unconstitutional.
The federal government filed a friend of the court brief in the case urging the justices to consider the effect that segregation had on America's image in the Cold War. Secretary of State Dean Acheson was quoted in the brief stating that "The United States is under constant attack in the foreign press, over the foreign radio, and in such international bodies as the United Nations because of various practices of discrimination in this country."[59][60]
The following year, in the case known as Brown II, the Court ordered segregation to be phased out over time, "with all deliberate speed".[61] Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954) did not overturn Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). Plessy v. Ferguson was segregation in transportation modes. Brown v. Board of Education dealt with segregation in education. Brown v. Board of Education did set in motion the future overturning of 'separate but equal'.
 School integration, Barnard School, Washington, D.C., 1955
On May 18, 1954, Greensboro, North Carolina, became the first city in the South to publicly announce that it would abide by the Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of Education ruling. "It is unthinkable,' remarked School Board Superintendent Benjamin Smith, 'that we will try to [override] the laws of the United States."[62] This positive reception for Brown, together with the appointment of African American David Jones to the school board in 1953, convinced numerous white and black citizens that Greensboro was heading in a progressive direction. Integration in Greensboro occurred rather peacefully compared to the process in Southern states such as Alabama, Arkansas, and Virginia where "massive resistance" was practiced by top officials and throughout the states. In Virginia, some counties closed their public schools rather than integrate, and many white Christian private schools were founded to accommodate students who used to go to public schools. Even in Greensboro, much local resistance to desegregation continued, and in 1969, the federal government found the city was not in compliance with the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Transition to a fully integrated school system did not begin until 1971.[62]
Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies, which resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white communities. In Harlem, New York, for example, neither a single new school was built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery school exist  even as the Second Great Migration was causing overcrowding. Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed with inexperienced teachers. Brown helped stimulate activism among New York City parents like Mae Mallory who, with the support of the NAACP, initiated a successful lawsuit against the city and state on Brown's principles. Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959. During the boycott, some of the first freedom schools of the period were established. The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open transfers to high-quality, historically-white schools. (New York's African-American community, and Northern desegregation activists generally, now found themselves contending with the problem of white flight, however.)[63][64]
Emmett Till's murder, 1955
Main article: Emmett Till
 Emmett Till's mother Mamie (middle) at her son's funeral in 1955. He was killed by white men after a white woman accused him of offending her in her family's grocery store.
Emmett Till, a 14-year-old African American from Chicago, visited his relatives in Money, Mississippi, for the summer. He allegedly had an interaction with a white woman, Carolyn Bryant, in a small grocery store that violated the norms of Mississippi culture, and Bryant's husband Roy and his half-brother J. W. Milam brutally murdered young Emmett Till. They beat and mutilated him before shooting him in the head and sinking his body in the Tallahatchie River. Three days later, Till's body was discovered and retrieved from the river. After Emmett's mother, Mamie Till,[65] came to identify the remains of her son, she decided she wanted to "let the people see what I have seen".[66] Till's mother then had his body taken back to Chicago where she had it displayed in an open casket during the funeral services where many thousands of visitors arrived to show their respects.[66] A later publication of an image at the funeral in Jet is credited as a crucial moment in the civil rights era for displaying in vivid detail the violent racism that was being directed at black people in America.[67][66] In a column for The Atlantic, Vann R. Newkirk wrote: "The trial of his killers became a pageant illuminating the tyranny of white supremacy".[1] The state of Mississippi tried two defendants, but they were speedily acquitted by an all-white jury.[68]
"Emmett's murder," historian Tim Tyson writes, "would never have become a watershed historical moment without Mamie finding the strength to make her private grief a public matter."[69] The visceral response to his mother's decision to have an open-casket funeral mobilized the black community throughout the U.S.[1] The murder and resulting trial ended up markedly impacting the views of several young black activists.[69] Joyce Ladner referred to such activists as the "Emmett Till generation."[69] One hundred days after Emmett Till's murder, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on the bus in Montgomery, Alabama.[70] Parks later informed Till's mother that her decision to stay in her seat was guided by the image she still vividly recalled of Till's brutalized remains.[70] The glass topped casket that was used for Till's Chicago funeral was found in a cemetery garage in 2009. Till had been reburied in a different casket after being exhumed in 2005.[71] Till's family decided to donate the original casket to the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American Culture and History, where it is now on display.[72] In 2007, Bryant said that she had fabricated the most sensational part of her story in 1955.[67][73]
Rosa Parks and the Montgomery bus boycott, 1955 1956
Main articles: Rosa Parks and Montgomery bus boycott
 Rosa Parks being fingerprinted after being arrested for not giving up her seat on a bus to a white person.
On December 1, 1955, nine months after a 15-year-old high school student, Claudette Colvin, refused to give up her seat to a white passenger on a public bus in Montgomery, Alabama, and was arrested, Rosa Parks did the same thing. Parks soon became the symbol of the resulting Montgomery bus boycott and received national publicity. She was later hailed as the "mother of the civil rights movement".[74]
Parks was secretary of the Montgomery NAACP chapter and had recently returned from a meeting at the Highlander Folk School in Tennessee where nonviolence as a strategy was taught by Myles Horton and others. After Parks' arrest, African Americans gathered and organized the Montgomery bus boycott to demand a bus system in which passengers would be treated equally.[75] The organization was led by Jo Ann Robinson, a member of the Women's Political Council who had been waiting for the opportunity to boycott the bus system. Following Rosa Parks' arrest, Jo Ann Robinson mimeographed 52,500 leaflets calling for a boycott. They were distributed around the city and helped gather the attention of civil rights leaders. After the city rejected many of its suggested reforms, the NAACP, led by E. D. Nixon, pushed for full desegregation of public buses. With the support of most of Montgomery's 50,000 African Americans, the boycott lasted for 381 days, until the local ordinance segregating African Americans and whites on public buses was repealed. Ninety percent of African Americans in Montgomery partook in the boycotts, which reduced bus revenue significantly, as they comprised the majority of the riders. This movement also sparked riots leading up to the 1956 Sugar Bowl.[76] In November 1956, the United States Supreme Court upheld a district court ruling in the case of Browder v. Gayle and ordered Montgomery's buses desegregated, ending the boycott.[75]
Local leaders established the Montgomery Improvement Association to focus their efforts. Martin Luther King Jr. was elected President of this organization. The lengthy protest attracted national attention for him and the city. His eloquent appeals to Christian brotherhood and American idealism created a positive impression on people both inside and outside the South.[51]
Little Rock Nine, 1957
Main article: Little Rock Nine
 White parents rally against integrating Little Rock's schools in August 1959.
The Little Rock Nine were a group of nine students who attended segregated black high schools in Little Rock, the capital of the state of Arkansas.  They each volunteered when the NAACP and the national civil rights movement obtained federal court orders to integrate the prestigious Little Rock Central High School in September, 1957. The Nine faced intense harassment and threats of  violence from white parents and students, as well as organized white supremacy groups.  The enraged opposition emphasized miscegenation as the threat to white society. Arkansas Governor, Orval Faubus, claiming his only goal was to preserve the peace, deployed the Arkansas National Guard to prevent the blacks from entering the school. Faubus defied federal court orders, whereupon President Dwight D. Eisenhower intervened. He federalized the Arkansas National Guard and sent them home. Then he sent in an elite Army unit to escort the students to school and protect them between classes  during the 1957 58 school year. In class, however, the Nine were teased and ridiculed every day. In the city compromise efforts all failed and political tensions continued to fester. A year later in September 1958 the Supreme Court ruled that all the city's high schools had to be integrated immediately. Governor Faubus and the legislature responded by immediately shutting down all the public high schools in the city for the entire 1958 1959 school year, despite the harm it did to all the students. The decision to integrate the school was a landmark event in the civil rights movement, and the students' bravery and determination in the face of violent opposition is remembered as a key moment in American history. The city and state were entangled in very expensive legal disputes for decades, while suffering a reputation for hatred and obstruction.[77][78]
Method of nonviolence and nonviolence training
During the time period considered to be the "African-American civil rights" era, the predominant use of protest was nonviolent, or peaceful.[79] Often referred to as pacifism, the method of nonviolence is considered to be an attempt to impact society positively. Although acts of racial discrimination have occurred historically throughout the United States, perhaps the most violent regions have been in the former Confederate states. During the 1950s and 1960s, the nonviolent protesting of the civil rights movement caused definite tension, which gained national attention.
In order to prepare for protests physically and psychologically, demonstrators received training in nonviolence. According to former civil rights activist Bruce Hartford, there are two main branches of nonviolence training. There is the philosophical method, which involves understanding the method of nonviolence and why it is considered useful, and there is the tactical method, which ultimately teaches demonstrators "how to be a protestor how to sit-in, how to picket, how to defend yourself against attack, giving training on how to remain cool when people are screaming racist insults into your face and pouring stuff on you and hitting you" (Civil Rights Movement Archive). The philosophical method of nonviolence, in the American civil rights movement, was largely inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's "non-cooperation" policies during his involvement in the Indian independence movement which were intended to gain attention so that the public would either "intervene in advance," or "provide public pressure in support of the action to be taken" (Erikson, 415). As Hartford explains it, philosophical nonviolence training aims to "shape the individual person's attitude and mental response to crises and violence" (Civil Rights Movement Archive). Hartford and activists like him, who trained in tactical nonviolence, considered it necessary in order to ensure physical safety, instill discipline, teach demonstrators how to demonstrate, and form mutual confidence among demonstrators (Civil Rights Movement Archive).[79][80]
For many, the concept of nonviolent protest was a way of life, a culture. However, not everyone agreed with this notion. James Forman, former SNCC (and later Black Panther) member, and nonviolence trainer was among those who did not. In his autobiography, The Making of Black Revolutionaries, Forman revealed his perspective on the method of nonviolence as "strictly a tactic, not a way of life without limitations." Similarly, Bob Moses, who was also an active member of SNCC, felt that the method of nonviolence was practical. When interviewed by author Robert Penn Warren, Moses said "There's no question that he (Martin Luther King Jr.) had a great deal of influence with the masses. But I don't think it's in the direction of love. It's in a practical direction . . ." (Who Speaks for the Negro? Warren).[81][82]
According to a 2020 study in the American Political Science Review, nonviolent civil rights protests boosted vote shares for the Democratic party in presidential elections in nearby counties, but violent protests substantially boosted white support for Republicans in counties near to the violent protests.[83]
Sit-ins, 1958 1960
See also: Greensboro sit-ins, Nashville sit-ins, and Sit-in movement
In July 1958, the NAACP Youth Council sponsored sit-ins at the lunch counter of a Dockum Drug Store in downtown Wichita, Kansas. After three weeks, the movement successfully got the store to change its policy of segregated seating, and soon afterward all Dockum stores in Kansas were desegregated. This movement was quickly followed in the same year by a student sit-in at a Katz Drug Store in Oklahoma City led by Clara Luper, which also was successful.[84]
 Student sit-in at Woolworth in Durham, North Carolina on February 10, 1960.
Mostly black students from area colleges led a sit-in at a Woolworth's store in Greensboro, North Carolina.[85] On February 1, 1960, four students, Ezell A. Blair Jr., David Richmond, Joseph McNeil, and Franklin McCain from North Carolina Agricultural & Technical College, an all-black college, sat down at the segregated lunch counter to protest Woolworth's policy of excluding African Americans from being served food there.[86] The four students purchased small items in other parts of the store and kept their receipts, then sat down at the lunch counter and asked to be served. After being denied service, they produced their receipts and asked why their money was good everywhere else at the store, but not at the lunch counter.[87]
The protesters had been encouraged to dress professionally, to sit quietly, and to occupy every other stool so that potential white sympathizers could join in. The Greensboro sit-in was quickly followed by other sit-ins in Richmond, Virginia;[88][89] Nashville, Tennessee; and Atlanta, Georgia.[90][91] The most immediately effective of these was in Nashville, where hundreds of well organized and highly disciplined college students conducted sit-ins in coordination with a boycott campaign.[92][93]
As students across the south began to "sit-in" at the lunch counters of local stores, police and other officials sometimes used brutal force to physically escort the demonstrators from the lunch facilities.
The "sit-in" technique was not new as far back as 1939, African-American attorney Samuel Wilbert Tucker organized a sit-in at the then-segregated Alexandria, Virginia, library.[94] In 1960 the technique succeeded in bringing national attention to the movement.[95]
On March 9, 1960, an Atlanta University Center group of students released An Appeal for Human Rights as a full page advertisement in newspapers, including the Atlanta Constitution, Atlanta Journal, and Atlanta Daily World.[96] Known as the Committee on Appeal for Human Rights (COAHR), the group initiated the Atlanta Student Movement and began to lead sit-ins starting on March 15, 1960.[91][97] By the end of 1960, the process of sit-ins had spread to every southern and border state, and even to facilities in Nevada, Illinois, and Ohio that discriminated against blacks.
Demonstrators focused not only on lunch counters but also on parks, beaches, libraries, theaters, museums, and other public facilities. In April 1960 activists who had led these sit-ins were invited by SCLC activist Ella Baker to hold a conference at Shaw University, a historically black university in Raleigh, North Carolina. This conference led to the formation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).[98] SNCC took these tactics of nonviolent confrontation further, and organized the freedom rides. As the constitution protected interstate commerce, they decided to challenge segregation on interstate buses and in public bus facilities by putting interracial teams on them, to travel from the North through the segregated South.[99]
Freedom Rides, 1961
Main article: Freedom Rider
Freedom Rides were journeys by civil rights activists on interstate buses into the segregated southern United States to test the United States Supreme Court decision Boynton v. Virginia (1960), which ruled that segregation was unconstitutional for passengers engaged in interstate travel. Organized by CORE, the first Freedom Ride of the 1960s left Washington D.C. on May 4, 1961, and was scheduled to arrive in New Orleans on May 17.[100]
During the first and subsequent Freedom Rides, activists traveled through the Deep South to integrate seating patterns on buses and desegregate bus terminals, including restrooms and water fountains. That proved to be a dangerous mission. In Anniston, Alabama, one bus was firebombed, forcing its passengers to flee for their lives.[101]
 A mob beats Freedom Riders in Birmingham. This picture was reclaimed by the FBI from a local journalist who also was beaten and whose camera was smashed.
In Birmingham, Alabama, an FBI informant reported that Public Safety Commissioner Eugene "Bull" Connor gave Ku Klux Klan members fifteen minutes to attack an incoming group of freedom riders before having police "protect" them. The riders were severely beaten "until it looked like a bulldog had got a hold of them." James Peck, a white activist, was beaten so badly that he required fifty stitches to his head.[101]
In a similar occurrence in Montgomery, Alabama, the Freedom Riders followed in the footsteps of Rosa Parks and rode an integrated Greyhound bus from Birmingham. Although they were protesting interstate bus segregation in peace, they were met with violence in Montgomery as a large, white mob attacked them for their activism. They caused an enormous, 2-hour long riot which resulted in 22 injuries, five of whom were hospitalized.[102]
Mob violence in Anniston and Birmingham temporarily halted the rides. SNCC activists from Nashville brought in new riders to continue the journey from Birmingham to New Orleans. In Montgomery, Alabama, at the Greyhound Bus Station, a mob charged another busload of riders, knocking John Lewis[103] unconscious with a crate and smashing Life photographer Don Urbrock in the face with his own camera. A dozen men surrounded James Zwerg,[104] a white student from Fisk University, and beat him in the face with a suitcase, knocking out his teeth.[101]
On May 24, 1961, the freedom riders continued their rides into Jackson, Mississippi, where they were arrested for "breaching the peace" by using "white only" facilities. New Freedom Rides were organized by many different organizations and continued to flow into the South. As riders arrived in Jackson, they were arrested. By the end of summer, more than 300 had been jailed in Mississippi.[100]
.. When the weary Riders arrive in Jackson and attempt to use "white only" restrooms and lunch counters they are immediately arrested for Breach of Peace and Refusal to Obey an Officer. Says Mississippi Governor Ross Barnett in defense of segregation: "The Negro is different because God made him different to punish him." From lockup, the Riders announce "Jail No Bail" they will not pay fines for unconstitutional arrests and illegal convictions and by staying in jail they keep the issue alive. Each prisoner will remain in jail for 39 days, the maximum time they can serve without loosing [sic] their right to appeal the unconstitutionality of their arrests, trials, and convictions. After 39 days, they file an appeal and post bond...[105]
The jailed freedom riders were treated harshly, crammed into tiny, filthy cells and sporadically beaten. In Jackson, some male prisoners were forced to do hard labor in 100 F (38 C) heat. Others were transferred to the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman, where they were treated to harsh conditions. Sometimes the men were suspended by "wrist breakers" from the walls. Typically, the windows of their cells were shut tight on hot days, making it hard for them to breathe.
Public sympathy and support for the freedom riders led John F. Kennedy's administration to order the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to issue a new desegregation order. When the new ICC rule took effect on November 1, 1961, passengers were permitted to sit wherever they chose on the bus; "white" and "colored" signs came down in the terminals; separate drinking fountains, toilets, and waiting rooms were consolidated; and lunch counters began serving people regardless of skin color.
The student movement involved such celebrated figures as John Lewis, a single-minded activist; James Lawson,[106] the revered "guru" of nonviolent theory and tactics; Diane Nash,[107] an articulate and intrepid public champion of justice; Bob Moses, pioneer of voting registration in Mississippi; and James Bevel, a fiery preacher and charismatic organizer, strategist, and facilitator. Other prominent student activists included Dion Diamond,[108] Charles McDew, Bernard Lafayette,[109] Charles Jones, Lonnie King, Julian Bond,[110] Hosea Williams, and Stokely Carmichael.
Voter registration organizing
After the Freedom Rides, local black leaders in Mississippi such as Amzie Moore, Aaron Henry, Medgar Evers, and others asked SNCC to help register black voters and to build community organizations that could win a share of political power in the state. Since Mississippi ratified its new constitution in 1890 with provisions such as poll taxes, residency requirements, and literacy tests, it made registration more complicated and stripped blacks from voter rolls and voting. Also, violence at the time of elections had earlier suppressed black voting.
By the mid-20th century, preventing blacks from voting had become an essential part of the culture of white supremacy. In June and July 1959, members of the black community in Fayette County, TN formed the Fayette County Civic and Welfare League to spur voting. At the time, there were 16,927 blacks in the county, yet only 17 of them had voted in the previous seven years. Within a year, some 1,400 blacks had registered, and the white community responded with harsh economic reprisals. Using registration rolls, the White Citizens Council circulated a blacklist of all registered black voters, allowing banks, local stores, and gas stations to conspire to deny registered black voters essential services. What's more, sharecropping blacks who registered to vote were getting evicted from their homes. All in all, the number of evictions came to 257 families, many of whom were forced to live in a makeshift Tent City for well over a year. Finally, in December 1960, the Justice Department invoked its powers authorized by the Civil Rights Act of 1957 to file a suit against seventy parties accused of violating the civil rights of black Fayette County citizens.[111] In the following year the first voter registration project in McComb and the surrounding counties in the Southwest corner of the state. Their efforts were met with violent repression from state and local lawmen, the White Citizens' Council, and the Ku Klux Klan. Activists were beaten, there were hundreds of arrests of local citizens, and the voting activist Herbert Lee was murdered.[112]
White opposition to black voter registration was so intense in Mississippi that Freedom Movement activists concluded that all of the state's civil rights organizations had to unite in a coordinated effort to have any chance of success. In February 1962, representatives of SNCC, CORE, and the NAACP formed the Council of Federated Organizations (COFO). At a subsequent meeting in August, SCLC became part of COFO.[113]
In the Spring of 1962, with funds from the Voter Education Project, SNCC/COFO began voter registration organizing in the Mississippi Delta area around Greenwood, and the areas surrounding Hattiesburg, Laurel, and Holly Springs. As in McComb, their efforts were met with fierce opposition arrests, beatings, shootings, arson, and murder. Registrars used the literacy test to keep blacks off the voting roles by creating standards that even highly educated people could not meet. In addition, employers fired blacks who tried to register, and landlords evicted them from their rental homes.[114] Despite these actions, over the following years, the black voter registration campaign spread across the state.
Similar voter registration campaigns with similar responses were begun by SNCC, CORE, and SCLC in Louisiana, Alabama, southwest Georgia, and South Carolina. By 1963, voter registration campaigns in the South were as integral to the Freedom Movement as desegregation efforts. After the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,[11] protecting and facilitating voter registration despite state barriers became the main effort of the movement. It resulted in the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which had provisions to enforce the constitutional right to vote for all citizens.
Integration of Mississippi universities, 1956 1965
Further information: Ole Miss riot of 1962
Beginning in 1956, Clyde Kennard, a black Korean War-veteran, wanted to enroll at Mississippi Southern College (now the University of Southern Mississippi) at Hattiesburg under the G.I. Bill. William David McCain, the college president, used the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, in order to prevent his enrollment by appealing to local black leaders and the segregationist state political establishment.[115]
The state-funded organization tried to counter the civil rights movement by positively portraying segregationist policies. More significantly, it collected data on activists, harassed them legally, and used economic boycotts against them by threatening their jobs (or causing them to lose their jobs) to try to suppress their work.
Kennard was twice arrested on trumped-up charges, and eventually convicted and sentenced to seven years in the state prison.[116] After three years at hard labor, Kennard was paroled by Mississippi Governor Ross Barnett. Journalists had investigated his case and publicized the state's mistreatment of his colon cancer.[116]
McCain's role in Kennard's arrests and convictions is unknown.[117][118][119][120] While trying to prevent Kennard's enrollment, McCain made a speech in Chicago, with his travel sponsored by the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission. He described the blacks' seeking to desegregate Southern schools as "imports" from the North. (Kennard was a native and resident of Hattiesburg.) McCain said:
We insist that educationally and socially, we maintain a segregated society...In all fairness, I admit that we are not encouraging Negro voting...The Negroes prefer that control of the government remain in the white man's hands.[117][119][120]
Note: Mississippi had passed a new constitution in 1890 that effectively disfranchised most blacks by changing electoral and voter registration requirements; although it deprived them of constitutional rights authorized under post-Civil War amendments, it survived U.S. Supreme Court challenges at the time. It was not until after the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that most blacks in Mississippi and other southern states gained federal protection to enforce the constitutional right of citizens to vote.
 James Meredith walking to class accompanied by a U.S. Marshal and a Justice Department official.
In September 1962, James Meredith won a lawsuit to secure admission to the previously segregated University of Mississippi. He attempted to enter campus on September 20, on September 25, and again on September 26. He was blocked by Governor Ross Barnett, who said, "[N]o school will be integrated in Mississippi while I am your Governor." The Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held Barnett and Lieutenant Governor Paul B. Johnson Jr. in contempt, ordering them arrested and fined more than $10,000 for each day they refused to allow Meredith to enroll.
 U.S. Army trucks loaded with Federal law enforcement personnel on the University of Mississippi campus, 1962.
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy sent in a force of U.S. Marshals and deputized U.S. Border Patrol agents and Federal Bureau of Prisons officers. On September 30, 1962, Meredith entered the campus under their escort. Students and other whites began rioting that evening, throwing rocks and firing on the federal agents guarding Meredith at Lyceum Hall. Rioters ended up killing two civilians, including a French journalist; 28 federal agents suffered gunshot wounds, and 160 others were injured. President John F. Kennedy sent U.S. Army and federalized Mississippi National Guard forces to the campus to quell the riot. Meredith began classes the day after the troops arrived.[121]
Kennard and other activists continued to work on public university desegregation. In 1965 Raylawni Branch and Gwendolyn Elaine Armstrong became the first African-American students to attend the University of Southern Mississippi. By that time, McCain helped ensure they had a peaceful entry.[122] In 2006, Judge Robert Helfrich ruled that Kennard was factually innocent of all charges for which he had been convicted in the 1950s.[116]
Albany Movement, 1961 1962
Main article: Albany Movement
The SCLC, which had been criticized by some student activists for its failure to participate more fully in the freedom rides, committed much of its prestige and resources to a desegregation campaign in Albany, Georgia, in November 1961. King, who had been criticized personally by some SNCC activists for his distance from the dangers that local organizers faced and given the derisive nickname "De Lawd" as a result intervened personally to assist the campaign led by both SNCC organizers and local leaders.
The campaign was a failure because of the canny tactics of Laurie Pritchett, the local police chief, and divisions within the black community. The goals may not have been specific enough. Pritchett contained the marchers without violent attacks on demonstrators that inflamed national opinion. He also arranged for arrested demonstrators to be taken to jails in surrounding communities, allowing plenty of room to remain in his jail. Pritchett also foresaw King's presence as a danger and forced his release to avoid King's rallying the black community. King left in 1962 without having achieved any dramatic victories. The local movement, however, continued the struggle, and it obtained significant gains in the next few years.[123]
Birmingham campaign, 1963
Main article: Birmingham campaign
The Albany movement was shown to be an important education for the SCLC, however, when it undertook the Birmingham campaign in 1963. Executive Director Wyatt Tee Walker carefully planned the early strategy and tactics for the campaign. It focused on one goal the desegregation of Birmingham's downtown merchants, rather than total desegregation, as in Albany.
The movement's efforts were helped by the brutal response of local authorities, in particular Eugene "Bull" Connor, the Commissioner of Public Safety. He had long held much political power but had lost a recent election for mayor to a less rabidly segregationist candidate. Refusing to accept the new mayor's authority, Connor intended to stay in office.
The campaign used a variety of nonviolent methods of confrontation, including sit-ins, kneel-ins at local churches, and a march to the county building to mark the beginning of a drive to register voters. The city, however, obtained an injunction barring all such protests. Convinced that the order was unconstitutional, the campaign defied it and prepared for mass arrests of its supporters. King elected to be among those arrested on April 12, 1963.[124]
 Recreation of Martin Luther King Jr.'s cell in Birmingham Jail at the National Civil Rights Museum
While in jail, King wrote his famous "Letter from Birmingham Jail"[125] on the margins of a newspaper, since he had not been allowed any writing paper while held in solitary confinement.[126] Supporters appealed to the Kennedy administration, which intervened to obtain King's release. Walter Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers, arranged for $160,000 to bail out King and his fellow protestors.[127] King was allowed to call his wife, who was recuperating at home after the birth of their fourth child and was released early on April 19.
The campaign, however, faltered as it ran out of demonstrators willing to risk arrest. James Bevel, SCLC's Director of Direct Action and Director of Nonviolent Education, then came up with a bold and controversial alternative: to train high school students to take part in the demonstrations. As a result, in what would be called the Children's Crusade, more than one thousand students skipped school on May 2 to meet at the 16th Street Baptist Church to join the demonstrations. More than six hundred marched out of the church fifty at a time in an attempt to walk to City Hall to speak to Birmingham's mayor about segregation. They were arrested and put into jail. In this first encounter, the police acted with restraint. On the next day, however, another one thousand students gathered at the church. When Bevel started them marching fifty at a time, Bull Connor finally unleashed police dogs on them and then turned the city's fire hoses water streams on the children. National television networks broadcast the scenes of the dogs attacking demonstrators and the water from the fire hoses knocking down the schoolchildren.[128]
Widespread public outrage led the Kennedy administration to intervene more forcefully in negotiations between the white business community and the SCLC. On May 10, the parties announced an agreement to desegregate the lunch counters and other public accommodations downtown, to create a committee to eliminate discriminatory hiring practices, to arrange for the release of jailed protesters, and to establish regular means of communication between black and white leaders.
 Wreckage at the Gaston Motel following the bomb explosion on May 11, 1963
Not everyone in the black community approved of the agreement Fred Shuttlesworth was particularly critical, since he was skeptical about the good faith of Birmingham's power structure from his experience in dealing with them. Parts of the white community reacted violently. They bombed the Gaston Motel, which housed the SCLC's unofficial headquarters, and the home of King's brother, the Reverend A. D. King. In response, thousands of blacks rioted, burning numerous buildings and one of them stabbed and wounded a police officer.[129]
 Alabama governor George Wallace tried to block desegregation at the University of Alabama and is confronted by U.S. Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach in 1963.
Kennedy prepared to federalize the Alabama National Guard if the need arose. Four months later, on September 15, a conspiracy of Ku Klux Klan members bombed the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, killing four young girls.
"Rising tide of discontent" and Kennedy's response, 1963
Main articles: Gloria Richardson, Stand in the Schoolhouse Door, and Civil Rights Address
Birmingham was only one of over a hundred cities rocked by the chaotic protest that spring and summer, some of them in the North but mainly in the South. During the March on Washington, Martin Luther King Jr. would refer to such protests as "the whirlwinds of revolt." In Chicago, blacks rioted through the South Side in late May after a white police officer shot a fourteen-year-old black boy who was fleeing the scene of a robbery.[130] Violent clashes between black activists and white workers took place in both Philadelphia and Harlem in successful efforts to integrate state construction projects.[131][132] On June 6, over a thousand whites attacked a sit-in in Lexington, North Carolina; blacks fought back and one white man was killed.[133][134] Edwin C. Berry of the National Urban League warned of a complete breakdown in race relations: "My message from the beer gardens and the barbershops all indicate the fact that the Negro is ready for war."[130]
In Cambridge, Maryland, a working class city on the Eastern Shore, Gloria Richardson of SNCC led a movement that pressed for desegregation but also demanded low rent public housing, job training, public and private jobs, and an end to police brutality.[135] On June 11, struggles between blacks and whites escalated into violent rioting, leading Maryland Governor J. Millard Tawes to declare martial law. When negotiations between Richardson and Maryland officials faltered, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy directly intervened to negotiate a desegregation agreement.[136] Richardson felt that the increasing participation of poor and working-class blacks was expanding both the power and parameters of the movement, asserting that "the people as a whole really do have more intelligence than a few of their leaders. [135]
In their deliberations during this wave of protests, the Kennedy administration privately felt that militant demonstrations were  bad for the country  and that "Negroes are going to push this thing too far."[137] On May 24, Robert Kennedy had a meeting with prominent black intellectuals to discuss the racial situation. The blacks criticized Kennedy harshly for vacillating on civil rights and said that the African-American community's thoughts were increasingly turning to violence. The meeting ended with ill will on all sides.[138][139][140] Nonetheless, the Kennedys ultimately decided that new legislation for equal public accommodations was essential to drive activists "into the courts and out of the streets."[137][141] The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom at the National Mall
 Leaders of the March on Washington posing before the Lincoln Memorial on August 28, 1963
On June 11, 1963, George Wallace, Governor of Alabama, tried to block[142] the integration of the University of Alabama. President John F. Kennedy sent a military force to make Governor Wallace step aside, allowing the enrollment of Vivian Malone Jones and James Hood. That evening, President Kennedy addressed the nation on TV and radio with his historic civil rights speech, where he lamented "a rising tide of discontent that threatens the public safety." He called on Congress to pass new civil rights legislation, and urged the country to embrace civil rights as "a moral issue...in our daily lives."[143] In the early hours of June 12, Medgar Evers, field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, was assassinated by a member of the Klan.[144][145] The next week, as promised, on June 19, 1963, President Kennedy submitted his Civil Rights bill to Congress.[146]
March on Washington, 1963
Main article: March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
 Bayard Rustin (left) and Cleveland Robinson (right), organizers of the March, on August 7, 1963Randolph and Bayard Rustin were the chief planners of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which they proposed in 1962. In 1963, the Kennedy administration initially opposed the march out of concern it would negatively impact the drive for passage of civil rights legislation. However, Randolph and King were firm that the march would proceed.[147] With the march going forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to work to ensure its success. Concerned about the turnout, President Kennedy enlisted the aid of white church leaders and Walter Reuther, president of the UAW, to help mobilize white supporters for the march.[148][149]
The march was held on August 28, 1963. Unlike the planned 1941 march, for which Randolph included only black-led organizations in the planning, the 1963 march was a collaborative effort of all of the major civil rights organizations, the more progressive wing of the labor movement, and other liberal organizations. The march had six official goals:
meaningful civil rights laws
a massive federal works program
full and fair employment
decent housing
the right to vote
adequate integrated education.
Of these, the march's major focus was on passage of the civil rights law that the Kennedy administration had proposed after the upheavals in Birmingham.
 Martin Luther King Jr. at a civil rights march on Washington, D.C.
National media attention also greatly contributed to the march's national exposure and probable impact. In the essay "The March on Washington and Television News,"[150] historian William Thomas notes: "Over five hundred cameramen, technicians, and correspondents from the major networks were set to cover the event. More cameras would be set up than had filmed the last presidential inauguration. One camera was positioned high in the Washington Monument, to give dramatic vistas of the marchers". By carrying the organizers' speeches and offering their own commentary, television stations framed the way their local audiences saw and understood the event.[150]
"I Have a Dream"
30-second sample from "I Have a Dream" speech by Martin Luther King Jr. at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The march was a success, although not without controversy. An estimated 200,000 to 300,000 demonstrators gathered in front of the Lincoln Memorial, where King delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech. While many speakers applauded the Kennedy administration for the efforts it had made toward obtaining new, more effective civil rights legislation protecting the right to vote and outlawing segregation, John Lewis of SNCC took the administration to task for not doing more to protect southern blacks and civil rights workers under attack in the Deep South.
After the march, King and other civil rights leaders met with President Kennedy at the White House. While the Kennedy administration appeared sincerely committed to passing the bill, it was not clear that it had enough votes in Congress to do so. However, when President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963,[146] the new President Lyndon Johnson decided to use his influence in Congress to bring about much of Kennedy's legislative agenda.
Malcolm X joins the movement, 1964 1965
Main articles: Malcolm X, Black Nationalism, and The Ballot or the Bullet
In March 1964, Malcolm X (el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz), national representative of the Nation of Islam, formally broke with that organization, and made a public offer to collaborate with any civil rights organization that accepted the right to self-defense and the philosophy of Black nationalism (which Malcolm said no longer required Black separatism). Gloria Richardson, head of the Cambridge, Maryland, chapter of SNCC, and leader of the Cambridge rebellion,[151] an honored guest at The March on Washington, immediately embraced Malcolm's offer. Mrs. Richardson, "the nation's most prominent woman [civil rights] leader,"[152] told The Baltimore Afro-American that "Malcolm is being very practical...The federal government has moved into conflict situations only when matters approach the level of insurrection. Self-defense may force Washington to intervene sooner."[152] Earlier, in May 1963, writer and activist James Baldwin had stated publicly that "the Black Muslim movement is the only one in the country we can call grassroots, I hate to say it...Malcolm articulates for Negroes, their suffering...he corroborates their reality..."[153] On the local level, Malcolm and the NOI had been allied with the Harlem chapter of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) since at least 1962.[154]
 Malcolm X meets with Martin Luther King Jr., March 26, 1964
On March 26, 1964, as the Civil Rights Act was facing stiff opposition in Congress, Malcolm had a public meeting with Martin Luther King Jr. at the Capitol. Malcolm had tried to begin a dialog with King as early as 1957, but King had rebuffed him. Malcolm had responded by calling King an "Uncle Tom", saying he had turned his back on black militancy in order to appease the white power structure. But the two men were on good terms at their face-to-face meeting.[155] There is evidence that King was preparing to support Malcolm's plan to formally bring the U.S. government before the United Nations on charges of human rights violations against African Americans.[156] Malcolm now encouraged Black nationalists to get involved in voter registration drives and other forms of community organizing to redefine and expand the movement.[157]
Civil rights activists became increasingly combative in the 1963 to 1964 period, seeking to defy such events as the thwarting of the Albany campaign, police repression and Ku Klux Klan terrorism in Birmingham, and the assassination of Medgar Evers. The latter's brother Charles Evers, who took over as Mississippi NAACP Field Director, told a public NAACP conference on February 15, 1964, that "non-violence won't work in Mississippi...we made up our minds...that if a white man shoots at a Negro in Mississippi, we will shoot back."[158] The repression of sit-ins in Jacksonville, Florida, provoked a riot in which black youth threw Molotov cocktails at police on March 24, 1964.[159] Malcolm X gave numerous speeches in this period warning that such militant activity would escalate further if African Americans' rights were not fully recognized. In his landmark April 1964 speech "The Ballot or the Bullet", Malcolm presented an ultimatum to white America: "There's new strategy coming in. It'll be Molotov cocktails this month, hand grenades next month, and something else next month. It'll be ballots, or it'll be bullets."[160]
As noted in the PBS documentary Eyes on the Prize, "Malcolm X had a far-reaching effect on the civil rights movement. In the South, there had been a long tradition of self-reliance. Malcolm X's ideas now touched that tradition".[161] Self-reliance was becoming paramount in light of the 1964 Democratic National Convention's decision to refuse seating to the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) and instead to seat the regular state delegation, which had been elected in violation of the party's own rules, and by Jim Crow law instead.[162] SNCC moved in an increasingly militant direction and worked with Malcolm X on two Harlem MFDP fundraisers in December 1964.
When Fannie Lou Hamer spoke to Harlemites about the Jim Crow violence that she'd suffered in Mississippi, she linked it directly to the Northern police brutality against blacks that Malcolm protested against;[163] When Malcolm asserted that African Americans should emulate the Mau Mau army of Kenya in efforts to gain their independence, many in SNCC applauded.[164]
During the Selma campaign for voting rights in 1965, Malcolm made it known that he'd heard reports of increased threats of lynching around Selma. In late January he sent an open telegram to George Lincoln Rockwell, the head of the American Nazi Party, stating:
"if your present racist agitation against our people there in Alabama causes physical harm to Reverend King or any other black Americans...you and your KKK friends will be met with maximum physical retaliation from those of us who are not handcuffed by the disarming philosophy of nonviolence."[165]The following month, the Selma chapter of SNCC invited Malcolm to speak to a mass meeting there. On the day of Malcolm's appearance, President Johnson made his first public statement in support of the Selma campaign.[166] Paul Ryan Haygood, a co-director of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, credits Malcolm with a role in gaining support by the federal government. Haygood noted that "shortly after Malcolm's visit to Selma, a federal judge, responding to a suit brought by the Department of Justice, required Dallas County, Alabama, registrars to process at least 100 Black applications each day their offices were open."[167]
St. Augustine, Florida, 1963 1964
Main article: St. Augustine movement
Further information: 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protest
 "We Cater to White Trade Only" sign on a restaurant window in Lancaster, Ohio, in 1938. In 1964, Martin Luther King Jr. was arrested and spent a night in jail for attempting to eat at a white-only restaurant in St. Augustine, Florida.
St. Augustine was famous as the "Nation's Oldest City", founded by the Spanish in 1565. It became the stage for a great drama leading up to the passage of the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964. A local movement, led by Robert B. Hayling, a black dentist and Air Force veteran affiliated with the NAACP, had been picketing segregated local institutions since 1963. In the fall of 1964, Hayling and three companions were brutally beaten at a Ku Klux Klan rally.
Nightriders shot into black homes, and teenagers Audrey Nell Edwards, JoeAnn Anderson, Samuel White, and Willie Carl Singleton (who came to be known as "The St. Augustine Four") sat in at a local Woolworth's lunch counter, seeking to get served. They were arrested and convicted of trespassing, and sentenced to six months in jail and reform school. It took a special act of the governor and cabinet of Florida to release them after national protests by the Pittsburgh Courier, Jackie Robinson, and others.
 White segregationists (foreground) trying to prevent black people from swimming at a "White only" beach in St. Augustine, Florida during the 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests
In response to the repression, the St. Augustine movement practiced armed self-defense in addition to nonviolent direct action. In June 1963, Hayling publicly stated that "I and the others have armed. We will shoot first and answer questions later. We are not going to die like Medgar Evers." The comment made national headlines.[168] When Klan nightriders terrorized black neighborhoods in St. Augustine, Hayling's NAACP members often drove them off with gunfire. In October 1963, a Klansman was killed.[169]
In 1964, Hayling and other activists urged the Southern Christian Leadership Conference to come to St. Augustine. Four prominent Massachusetts women   Mary Parkman Peabody, Esther Burgess, Hester Campbell (all of whose husbands were Episcopal bishops), and Florence Rowe (whose husband was vice president of an insurance company)   also came to lend their support. The arrest of Peabody, the 72-year-old mother of the governor of Massachusetts, for attempting to eat at the segregated Ponce de Leon Motor Lodge in an integrated group, made front-page news across the country and brought the movement in St. Augustine to the attention of the world.[170]
Widely publicized activities continued in the ensuing months. When King was arrested, he sent a "Letter from the St. Augustine Jail" to a northern supporter, Rabbi Israel S. Dresner. A week later, in the largest mass arrest of rabbis in American history took place, while they were conducting a pray-in at the segregated Monson Motel. A well-known photograph taken in St. Augustine shows the manager of the Monson Motel pouring hydrochloric acid in the swimming pool while blacks and whites are swimming in it. As he did so he yelled that he was "cleaning the pool", a presumed reference to it now being, in his eyes, racially contaminated.[171] The photograph was run on the front page of a Washington newspaper the day the Senate was to vote on passing the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Chester school protests, Spring 1964
Main article: Chester school protests
From November 1963 through April 1964, the Chester school protests were a series of civil rights protests led by George Raymond of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored Persons (NAACP) and Stanley Branche of the Committee for Freedom Now (CFFN) that made Chester, Pennsylvania one of the key battlegrounds of the civil rights movement. James Farmer, the national director of the Congress of Racial Equality called Chester "the Birmingham of the North".[172]
In 1962, Branche and the CFFN focused on improving conditions at the predominantly black Franklin Elementary school in Chester. Although the school was built to house 500 students, it had become overcrowded with 1,200 students. The school's average class size was 39, twice the number of nearby all-white schools.[173] The school was built in 1910 and had never been updated. Only two bathrooms were available for the entire school.[174] In November 1963, CFFN protesters blocked the entrance to Franklin Elementary school and the Chester Municipal Building resulting in the arrest of 240 protesters. Following public attention to the protests stoked by media coverage of the mass arrests, the mayor and school board negotiated with the CFFN and NAACP.[172] The Chester Board of Education agreed to reduce class sizes at Franklin school, remove unsanitary toilet facilities, relocate classes held in the boiler room and coal bin and repair school grounds.[174]
Emboldened by the success of the Franklin Elementary school demonstrations, the CFFN recruited new members, sponsored voter registration drives and planned a citywide boycott of Chester schools. Branche built close ties with students at nearby Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania Military College and Cheyney State College in order to ensure large turnouts at demonstrations and protests.[172] Branche invited Dick Gregory and Malcolm X to Chester to participate in the "Freedom Now Conference"[175] and other national civil rights leaders such as Gloria Richardson came to Chester in support of the demonstrations.[176]
In 1964, a series of almost nightly protests brought chaos to Chester as protestors argued that the Chester School Board had de facto segregation of schools. The mayor of Chester, James Gorbey, issued "The Police Position to Preserve the Public Peace", a ten-point statement promising an immediate return to law and order. The city deputized firemen and trash collectors to help handle demonstrators.[172] The State of Pennsylvania deployed 50 state troopers to assist the 77-member Chester police force.[174] The demonstrations were marked by violence and charges of police brutality.[177] Over six hundred people were arrested over a two-month period of civil rights rallies, marches, pickets, boycotts and sit-ins.[172] Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton became involved in the negotiations and convinced Branche to obey a court-ordered moratorium on demonstrations.[175] Scranton created the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission to conduct hearings on the de facto segregation of public schools. All protests were discontinued while the commission held hearings during the summer of 1964.[178]
In November 1964, the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission concluded that the Chester School Board had violated the law and ordered the Chester School District to desegregate the city's six predominantly African-American schools. The city appealed the ruling, which delayed implementation.[174]
Freedom Summer, 1964
Main article: Freedom Summer
In the summer of 1964, COFO brought nearly 1,000 activists to Mississippi most of them white college students from the North and West to join with local black activists to register voters, teach in "Freedom Schools," and organize the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP).[179]
Many of Mississippi's white residents deeply resented the outsiders and attempts to change their society. State and local governments, police, the White Citizens' Council and the Ku Klux Klan used arrests, beatings, arson, murder, spying, firing, evictions, and other forms of intimidation and harassment to oppose the project and prevent blacks from registering to vote or achieving social equality.[180]
 Missing persons poster created by the FBI in 1964 shows the photographs of Andrew Goodman, James Chaney, and Michael Schwerner
On June 21, 1964, three civil rights workers disappeared: James Chaney, a young black Mississippian and plasterer's apprentice; and two Jewish activists, Andrew Goodman, a Queens College anthropology student; and Michael Schwerner, a CORE organizer from Manhattan's Lower East Side. They were found weeks later, murdered by conspirators who turned out to be local members of the Klan, some of the members of the Neshoba County sheriff's department. This outraged the public, leading the U.S. Justice Department along with the FBI (the latter which had previously avoided dealing with the issue of segregation and persecution of blacks) to take action. The outrage over these murders helped lead to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
From June to August, Freedom Summer activists worked in 38 local projects scattered across the state, with the largest number concentrated in the Mississippi Delta region. At least 30 Freedom Schools, with close to 3,500 students, were established, and 28 community centers were set up.[181]
Over the course of the Summer Project, some 17,000 Mississippi blacks attempted to become registered voters in defiance of the red tape and forces of white supremacy arrayed against them only 1,600 (less than 10%) succeeded. But more than 80,000 joined the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), founded as an alternative political organization, showing their desire to vote and participate in politics.[182]
Though Freedom Summer failed to register many voters, it had a significant effect on the course of the civil rights movement. It helped break down the decades of people's isolation and repression that were the foundation of the Jim Crow system. Before Freedom Summer, the national news media had paid little attention to the persecution of black voters in the Deep South and the dangers endured by black civil rights workers. The progression of events throughout the South increased media attention to Mississippi.[183]
The deaths of affluent northern white students and threats to non-Southerners attracted the full attention of the media spotlight to the state. Many black activists became embittered, believing the media valued the lives of whites and blacks differently. Perhaps the most significant effect of Freedom Summer was on the volunteers, almost all of whom black and white still consider it to have been one of the defining periods of their lives.[183]
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Main article: Civil Rights Act of 1964
Although President Kennedy had proposed civil rights legislation and it had support from Northern Congressmen and Senators of both parties, Southern Senators blocked the bill by threatening filibusters. After considerable parliamentary maneuvering and 54 days of filibuster on the floor of the United States Senate, President Johnson got a bill through the Congress.[184]
 Lyndon B. Johnson signs the historic Civil Rights Act of 1964
On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964,[11] which banned discrimination based on "race, color, religion, sex or national origin" in employment practices and public accommodations. The bill authorized the Attorney General to file lawsuits to enforce the new law. The law also nullified state and local laws that required such discrimination.
Harlem riot of 1964
Main article: Harlem riot of 1964
When police shot an unarmed black teenager in Harlem in July 1964, tensions escalated out of control. Residents were frustrated with racial inequalities. Rioting broke out, and Bedford-Stuyvesant, a major black neighborhood in Brooklyn, erupted next. That summer, rioting also broke out in Philadelphia, for similar reasons. The riots were on a much smaller scale than what would occur in 1965 and later.
Washington responded with a pilot program called Project Uplift. Thousands of young people in Harlem were given jobs during the summer of 1965. The project was inspired by a report generated by HARYOU called Youth in the Ghetto.[185] HARYOU was given a major role in organizing the project, together with the National Urban League and nearly 100 smaller community organizations.[186] Permanent jobs at living wages were still out of reach of many young black men.
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, 1964
Main article: Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
Blacks in Mississippi had been disfranchised by statutory and constitutional changes since the late 19th century. In 1963 COFO held a Freedom Ballot in Mississippi to demonstrate the desire of black Mississippians to vote. More than 80,000 people registered and voted in the mock election, which pitted an integrated slate of candidates from the "Freedom Party" against the official state Democratic Party candidates.[187]
 President Lyndon B. Johnson (center) meets with civil rights leaders Martin Luther King Jr., Whitney Young, and James Farmer, January 1964
In 1964, organizers launched the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) to challenge the all-white official party. When Mississippi voting registrars refused to recognize their candidates, they held their own primary. They selected Fannie Lou Hamer, Annie Devine, and Victoria Gray to run for Congress, and a slate of delegates to represent Mississippi at the 1964 Democratic National Convention.[179]
The presence of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in Atlantic City, New Jersey, was inconvenient, however, for the convention organizers. They had planned a triumphant celebration of the Johnson administration's achievements in civil rights, rather than a fight over racism within the Democratic Party. All-white delegations from other Southern states threatened to walk out if the official slate from Mississippi was not seated. Johnson was worried about the inroads that Republican Barry Goldwater's campaign was making in what previously had been the white Democratic stronghold of the "Solid South", as well as support that George Wallace had received in the North during the Democratic primaries.
Johnson could not, however, prevent the MFDP from taking its case to the Credentials Committee. There Fannie Lou Hamer testified eloquently about the beatings that she and others endured and the threats they faced for trying to register to vote. Turning to the television cameras, Hamer asked, "Is this America?"
Johnson offered the MFDP a "compromise" under which it would receive two non-voting, at-large seats, while the white delegation sent by the official Democratic Party would retain its seats. The MFDP angrily rejected the "compromise."
The MFDP kept up its agitation at the convention after it was denied official recognition. When all but three of the "regular" Mississippi delegates left because they refused to pledge allegiance to the party, the MFDP delegates borrowed passes from sympathetic delegates and took the seats vacated by the official Mississippi delegates. National party organizers removed them. When they returned the next day, they found convention organizers had removed the empty seats that had been there the day before. They stayed and sang "freedom songs".
The 1964 Democratic Party convention disillusioned many within the MFDP and the civil rights movement, but it did not destroy the MFDP. The MFDP became more radical after Atlantic City. It invited Malcolm X to speak at one of its conventions and opposed the war in Vietnam.
Selma Voting Rights Movement
Main articles: Selma to Montgomery marches and Voting Rights Act
SNCC had undertaken an ambitious voter registration program in Selma, Alabama, in 1963, but by 1965 little headway had been made in the face of opposition from Selma's sheriff, Jim Clark. After local residents asked the SCLC for assistance, King came to Selma to lead several marches, at which he was arrested along with 250 other demonstrators. The marchers continued to meet violent resistance from the police. Jimmie Lee Jackson, a resident of nearby Marion, was killed by police at a later march on February 17, 1965. Jackson's death prompted James Bevel, director of the Selma Movement, to initiate and organize a plan to march from Selma to Montgomery, the state capital.
On March 7, 1965, acting on Bevel's plan, Hosea Williams of the SCLC and John Lewis of SNCC led a march of 600 people to walk the 54 miles (87 km) from Selma to the state capital in Montgomery. Six blocks into the march, at the Edmund Pettus Bridge where the marchers left the city and moved into the county, state troopers, and local county law enforcement, some mounted on horseback, attacked the peaceful demonstrators with billy clubs, tear gas, rubber tubes wrapped in barbed wire, and bullwhips. They drove the marchers back into Selma. Lewis was knocked unconscious and dragged to safety. At least 16 other marchers were hospitalized. Among those gassed and beaten was Amelia Boynton Robinson, who was at the center of civil rights activity at the time.
 Police attack non-violent marchers on "Bloody Sunday", the first day of the Selma to Montgomery marches.
The national broadcast of the news footage of lawmen attacking unresisting marchers seeking to exercise their constitutional right to vote provoked a national response and hundreds of people from all over the country came for a second march. These marchers were turned around by King at the last minute so as not to violate a federal injunction. This displeased many demonstrators, especially those who resented King's nonviolence (such as James Forman and Robert F. Williams).
That night, local Whites attacked James Reeb, a voting rights supporter. He died of his injuries in a Birmingham hospital on March 11. Due to the national outcry at a White minister being murdered so brazenly (as well as the subsequent civil disobedience led by Gorman and other SNCC leaders all over the country, especially in Montgomery and at the White House), the marchers were able to lift the injunction and obtain protection from federal troops, permitting them to make the march across Alabama without incident two weeks later; during the march, Gorman, Williams, and other more militant protesters carried bricks and sticks of their own.
Four Klansmen shot and killed Detroit homemaker Viola Liuzzo as she drove marchers back to Selma that night.
Voting Rights Act of 1965
"Remarks on the Signing of the Voting Rights Act"
Statement before the United States Congress by Johnson on August 6, 1965, about the Voting Rights Act
"Remarks on the Signing of the Voting Rights Act"
audio only
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Eight days after the first march, but before the final march, President Johnson delivered a televised address to support the voting rights bill he had sent to Congress. In it he stated:
Their cause must be our cause too. Because it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.
On August 6, Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which suspended literacy tests and other subjective voter registration tests. It authorized Federal supervision of voter registration in states and individual voting districts where such tests were being used and where African Americans were historically under-represented in voting rolls compared to the eligible population. African Americans who had been barred from registering to vote finally had an alternative to taking suits to local or state courts, which had seldom prosecuted their cases to success. If discrimination in voter registration occurred, the 1965 act authorized the Attorney General of the United States to send Federal examiners to replace local registrars.
Within months of the bill's passage, 250,000 new black voters had been registered, one-third of them by federal examiners. Within four years, voter registration in the South had more than doubled. In 1965, Mississippi had the highest black voter turnout at 74% and led the nation in the number of black public officials elected. In 1969, Tennessee had a 92.1% turnout among black voters; Arkansas, 77.9%; and Texas, 73.1%.
Several whites who had opposed the Voting Rights Act paid a quick price. In 1966 Sheriff Jim Clark of Selma, Alabama, infamous for using cattle prods against civil rights marchers, was up for reelection. Although he took off the notorious "Never" pin on his uniform, he was defeated. At the election, Clark lost as blacks voted to get him out of office.
Blacks' regaining the power to vote changed the political landscape of the South. When Congress passed the Voting Rights Act, only about 100 African Americans held elective office, all in northern states. By 1989, there were more than 7,200 African Americans in office, including more than 4,800 in the South. Nearly every county where populations were majority black in Alabama had a black sheriff. Southern blacks held top positions in city, county, and state governments.
Atlanta elected a black mayor, Andrew Young, as did Jackson, Mississippi, with Harvey Johnson Jr., and New Orleans, with Ernest Morial. Black politicians on the national level included Barbara Jordan, elected as a Representative from Texas in Congress, and President Jimmy Carter appointed Andrew Young as United States Ambassador to the United Nations. Julian Bond was elected to the Georgia State Legislature in 1965, although political reaction to his public opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War prevented him from taking his seat until 1967. John Lewis was first elected in 1986 to represent Georgia's 5th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives, where he served from 1987 until his death in 2020.
Watts riot of 1965
Main article: Watts Riots
 Police arrest a man during the Watts riots in Los Angeles, August 1965
The new Voting Rights Act of 1965 had no immediate effect on living conditions for poor blacks. A few days after the act became law, a riot broke out in the South Central Los Angeles neighborhood of Watts. Like Harlem, Watts was a majority-black neighborhood with very high unemployment and associated poverty. Its residents confronted a largely white police department that had a history of abuse against blacks.[188]
While arresting a young man for drunk driving, police officers argued with the suspect's mother before onlookers. The spark triggered massive destruction of property through six days of rioting in Los Angeles. Thirty-four people were killed,[189] and property valued at about $40 million was destroyed, making the Watts riots among the city's worst unrest until the Rodney King riots of 1992.[190][191]
With black militancy on the rise, ghetto residents directed acts of anger at the police. Black residents growing tired of police brutality continued to riot. Some young people joined groups such as the Black Panthers, whose popularity was based in part on their reputation for confronting police officers. Riots among blacks occurred in 1966 and 1967 in cities such as Atlanta, San Francisco, Oakland, Baltimore, Seattle, Tacoma, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Columbus, Newark, Chicago, New York City (specifically in Brooklyn, Harlem and the Bronx), and worst of all in Detroit.
Fair housing movements, 1966 1968
The first major blow against housing segregation in the era, the Rumford Fair Housing Act, was passed in California in 1963. It was overturned by white California voters and real estate lobbyists the following year with Proposition 14, a move which helped precipitate the Watts riots.[192][193] In 1966, the California Supreme Court invalidated Proposition 14 and reinstated the Rumford Fair Housing Act.[194]
Working and organizing for fair housing laws became a major project of the movement over the next two years, with Martin Luther King Jr., James Bevel, and Al Raby leading the Chicago Freedom Movement around the issue in 1966. In the following year, Father James Groppi and the NAACP Youth Council also attracted national attention with a fair housing campaign in Milwaukee.[195][196] Both movements faced violent resistance from white homeowners and legal opposition from conservative politicians.
The Fair Housing Bill was the most contentious civil rights legislation of the era. Senator Walter Mondale, who advocated for the bill, noted that over successive years, it was the most filibustered legislation in U.S. history. It was opposed by most Northern and Southern senators, as well as the National Association of Real Estate Boards. A proposed "Civil Rights Act of 1966" had collapsed completely because of its fair housing provision.[197] Mondale commented that:
A lot of civil rights [legislation] was about making the South behave and taking the teeth from George Wallace, [but] this came right to the neighborhoods across the country. This was civil rights getting personal.[198]
Nationwide riots of 1967
Main article: Long Hot Summer of 1967
Further information: Detroit Riot of 1967, 1967 Newark riots, and 1967 Plainfield riots
 Film on the riots created by the White House Naval Photographic Unit
In 1967 riots broke out in black neighborhoods in more than 100 U.S. cities, including Detroit, Newark, Cincinnati, Cleveland, and Washington, D.C.[199] The largest of these was the 1967 Detroit riot.
In Detroit, a large black middle class had begun to develop among those African Americans who worked at unionized jobs in the automotive industry. These workers complained of persisting racist practices, limiting the jobs they could have and opportunities for promotion. The United Auto Workers channeled these complaints into bureaucratic and ineffective grievance procedures.[200] Violent white mobs enforced the segregation of housing up through the 1960s.[201] Blacks who were not upwardly mobile were living in substandard conditions, subject to the same problems as poor African Americans in Watts and Harlem.
When white Detroit Police Department (DPD) officers shut down an illegal bar and arrested a large group of patrons during the hot summer, furious black residents rioted. Rioters looted and destroyed property while snipers engaged in firefights from rooftops and windows, undermining the DPD's ability to curtail the disorder. In response, the Michigan Army National Guard and U.S. Army paratroopers were deployed to reinforce the DPD and protect Detroit Fire Department (DFD) firefighters from attacks while putting out fires. Residents reported that police officers and National Guardsmen shot at black civilians and suspects indiscriminately. After five days, 43 people had been killed, hundreds injured, and thousands left homeless; $40 to $45 million worth of damage was caused.[201][202]
State and local governments responded to the riot with a dramatic increase in minority hiring.[203] In the aftermath of the turmoil, the Greater Detroit Board of Commerce also launched a campaign to find jobs for ten thousand "previously unemployable" persons, a preponderant number of whom were black.[204] Governor George Romney immediately responded to the riot of 1967 with a special session of the Michigan legislature where he forwarded sweeping housing proposals that included not only fair housing, but "important relocation, tenants' rights and code enforcement legislation." Romney had supported such proposals in 1965 but abandoned them in the face of organized opposition. The laws passed both houses of the legislature. Historian Sidney Fine wrote that:
The Michigan Fair Housing Act, which took effect on November 15, 1968, was stronger than the federal fair housing law...It is probably more than a coincidence that the state that had experienced the most severe racial disorder of the 1960s also adopted one of the strongest state fair housing acts.[205]
President Johnson created the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders in response to a nationwide wave of riots. The commission's final report called for major reforms in employment and public policy in black communities. It warned that the United States was moving toward separate white and black societies.
Memphis, King assassination, and Civil Rights Act of 1968
Main articles: Poor People's Campaign, Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., and Civil Rights Act of 1968
See also: King assassination riots and Orangeburg massacre
 A 3,000-person shantytown called Resurrection City was established in 1968 on the National Mall as part of the Poor People's Campaign.
As 1968 began, the fair housing bill was being filibustered once again, but two developments revived it.[198] The Kerner Commission report on the 1967 ghetto riots was delivered to Congress on March 1, and it strongly recommended "a comprehensive and enforceable federal open housing law" as a remedy to the civil disturbances. The Senate was moved to end their filibuster that week.[206]
James Lawson invited King to Memphis, Tennessee, in March 1968 to support a sanitation workers' strike. These workers launched a campaign for union representation after two workers were accidentally killed on the job; they were seeking fair wages and improved working conditions. King considered their struggle to be a vital part of the Poor People's Campaign he was planning.
"I've Been to the Mountaintop"
Final 30 seconds of "I've Been to the Mountaintop" speech by Martin Luther King Jr. These are the final words from his final public speech.
Problems playing this file? See media help.
A day after delivering his stirring "I've Been to the Mountaintop" sermon, which has become famous for his vision of American society, King was assassinated on April 4, 1968 at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis. Riots broke out in black neighborhoods in more than 110 cities across the United States in the days that followed, notably in Chicago, Baltimore, and Washington, D.C.
The day before King's funeral, April 8, a completely silent march with Coretta Scott King, SCLC, and UAW president Walter Reuther attracted approximately 42,000 participants.[207][208] Armed National Guardsmen lined the streets, sitting on M-48 tanks, to protect the marchers, and helicopters circled overhead. On April 9, Mrs. King led another 150,000 people in a funeral procession through the streets of Atlanta.[209] Her dignity revived courage and hope in many of the Movement's members, confirming her place as the new leader in the struggle for racial equality.
Coretta Scott King said,[210]
Martin Luther King Jr. gave his life for the poor of the world, the garbage workers of Memphis and the peasants of Vietnam. The day that Negro people and others in bondage are truly free, on the day want is abolished, on the day wars are no more, on that day I know my husband will rest in a long-deserved peace.
 Aftermath of the King assassination riots in Washington, D.C.
Ralph Abernathy succeeded King as the head of the SCLC and attempted to carry forth King's plan for a Poor People's March. It was to unite blacks and whites to campaign for fundamental changes in American society and economic structure. The march went forward under Abernathy's plainspoken leadership but did not achieve its goals.
Civil Rights Act of 1968
The U.S. House of Representatives had been deliberating its Fair Housing Act in early April, before King's assassination and the aforementioned wave of unrest that followed, the largest since the Civil War.[211] Senator Charles Mathias wrote:
[S]ome Senators and Representatives publicly stated they would not be intimidated or rushed into legislating because of the disturbances. Nevertheless, the news coverage of the riots and the underlying disparities in income, jobs, housing, and education, between White and Black Americans helped educate citizens and Congress about the stark reality of an enormous social problem. Members of Congress knew they had to act to redress these imbalances in American life to fulfill the dream that King had so eloquently preached.[206]
The House passed the legislation on April 10, less than a week after King was murdered, and President Johnson signed it the next day. The Civil Rights Act of 1968 prohibited discrimination concerning the sale, rental, and financing of housing based on race, religion, and national origin. It also made it a federal crime to "by force or by the threat of force, injure, intimidate, or interfere with anyone...by reason of their race, color, religion, or national origin."[212]
Gates v. Collier
 Mississippi State Penitentiary
Conditions at the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman, then known as Parchman Farm, became part of the public discussion of civil rights after activists were imprisoned there. In the spring of 1961, Freedom Riders came to the South to test the desegregation of public facilities. By the end of June 1963, Freedom Riders had been convicted in Jackson, Mississippi.[213] Many were jailed in Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman. Mississippi employed the trusty system, a hierarchical order of inmates that used some inmates to control and enforce punishment of other inmates.[214]
In 1970 the civil rights lawyer Roy Haber began taking statements from inmates. He collected 50 pages of details of murders, rapes, beatings and other abuses suffered by the inmates from 1969 to 1971 at Mississippi State Penitentiary. In a landmark case known as Gates v. Collier (1972), four inmates represented by Haber sued the superintendent of Parchman Farm for violating their rights under the United States Constitution.
Federal Judge William C. Keady found in favor of the inmates, writing that Parchman Farm violated the civil rights of the inmates by inflicting cruel and unusual punishment. He ordered an immediate end to all unconstitutional conditions and practices. Racial segregation of inmates was abolished, as was the trusty system, which allowed certain inmates to have power and control over others.[215]
The prison was renovated in 1972 after the scathing ruling by Keady, who wrote that the prison was an affront to "modern standards of decency." Among other reforms, the accommodations were made fit for human habitation. The system of trusties was abolished. (The prison had armed lifers with rifles and given them authority to oversee and guard other inmates, which led to many cases of abuse and murders.)[216]
In integrated correctional facilities in northern and western states, blacks represented a disproportionate number of prisoners, in excess of their proportion of the general population. They were often treated as second-class citizens by white correctional officers. Blacks also represented a disproportionately high number of death row inmates. Eldridge Cleaver's book Soul on Ice was written from his experiences in the California correctional system; it contributed to black militancy.[217]
Legacy
Civil rights protest activity had an observable impact on white American's views on race and politics over time.[218] White people who live in counties in which civil rights protests of historical significance occurred have been found to have lower levels of racial resentment against blacks, are more likely to identify with the Democratic Party as well as more likely to support affirmative action.[218]
One study found that non-violent activism of the era tended to produce favorable media coverage and changes in public opinion focusing on the issues organizers were raising, but violent protests tended to generate unfavorable media coverage that generated public desire to restore law and order.[219]
The 1964 Act was passed to end discrimination in various fields based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin in the areas of employment and public accommodation.[220][221] The 1964 Act did not prohibit sex discrimination against persons employed at educational institutions. A parallel law, Title VI, had also been enacted in 1964 to prohibit discrimination in federally funded private and public entities. It covered race, color, and national origin but excluded sex. Feminists during the early 1970s lobbied Congress to add sex as a protected class category. In 1972, Title IX was enacted to fill this gap and prohibit discrimination in all federally funded education programs. Title IX, or the Education Amendments of 1972 was later renamed the Patsy T. Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act following Mink's death in 2002.[222]
Characteristics
 Fannie Lou Hamer of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (and other Mississippi-based organizations) is an example of local grassroots leadership in the movement.
African-American women
Main article: African-American women in the civil rights movement
African-American women in the civil rights movement were pivotal to its success.[223] They volunteered as activists, advocates, educators, clerics, writers, spiritual guides, caretakers and politicians for the civil rights movement; leading and participating in organizations that contributed to the cause of civil rights.[223] Rosa Parks's refusal to sit at the back of a public bus resulted in the year-long Montgomery bus boycott,[223] and the eventual desegregation of interstate travel in the United States.[224] Women were members of the NAACP because they believed it could help them contribute to the cause of civil rights.[223] Some of those involved with the Black Panthers were nationally recognized as leaders, and still others did editorial work on the Black Panther newspaper spurring internal discussions about gender issues.[225] Ella Baker founded the SNCC and was a prominent figure in the civil rights movement.[226][227] Female students involved with the SNCC helped to organize sit-ins and the Freedom Rides.[226] At the same time many elderly black women in towns across the Southern US cared for the organization's volunteers at their homes, providing the students food, a bed, healing aid and motherly love.[226] Other women involved also formed church groups, bridge clubs, and professional organizations, such as the National Council of Negro Women, to help achieve freedom for themselves and their race.[225] Several who participated in these organizations lost their jobs because of their involvement.[225]
Sexist discrimination
Many women who participated in the movement experienced gender discrimination and sexual harassment.[228] In the SCLC, Ella Baker's input was discouraged in spite of her being the oldest and most experienced person on the staff.[229] There are many other accounts and examples.[230][231][232][233]
Avoiding the "Communist" label
See also: The Communist Party and African-Americans
On December 17, 1951, the Communist Party affiliated Civil Rights Congress delivered the petition We Charge Genocide: The Crime of Government Against the Negro People to the United Nations, arguing that the U.S. federal government, by its failure to act against lynching in the United States, was guilty of genocide under Article II of the UN Genocide Convention (see Black genocide).[234] The petition was presented to the United Nations at two separate venues: Paul Robeson, a concert singer and activist, presented it to a UN official in New York City, while William L. Patterson, executive director of the CRC, delivered copies of the drafted petition to a UN delegation in Paris.[235]
Patterson, the editor of the petition, was a leader of the Communist Party USA and head of the International Labor Defense, a group that offered legal representation to communists, trade unionists, and African Americans who were involved in cases that involved issues of political or racial persecution. The ILD was known for leading the defense of the Scottsboro Boys in Alabama in 1931, where the Communist Party had a considerable amount of influence among African Americans in the 1930s. This influence had largely declined by the late 1950s, although it could command international attention. As earlier civil rights figures such as Robeson, Du Bois and Patterson became more politically radical (and therefore targets of Cold War anti-Communism by the U.S. Government), they lost favor with mainstream Black America as well as with the NAACP.[235]
In order to secure a place in the political mainstream and gain the broadest base of support, the new generation of civil rights activists believed that it had to openly distance itself from anything and anyone associated with the Communist party. According to Ella Baker, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference added the word "Christian" to its name in order to deter charges that it was associated with Communism.[236] Under J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI had been concerned about communism since the early 20th century, and it kept civil rights activists under close surveillance and labeled some of them "Communist" or "subversive", a practice that continued during the civil rights movement. In the early 1960s, the practice of distancing the civil rights movement from "Reds" was challenged by the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee which adopted a policy of accepting assistance and participation from anyone who supported the SNCC's political program and was willing to "put their body on the line, regardless of political affiliation." At times the SNCC's policy of political openness put it at odds with the NAACP.[235]
Grassroots leadership
While most popular representations of the movement are centered on the leadership and philosophy of Martin Luther King Jr., some scholars note that the movement was too diverse to be credited to one person, organization, or strategy. Sociologist Doug McAdam has stated that, "in King's case, it would be inaccurate to say that he was the leader of the modern civil rights movement...but more importantly, there was no singular civil rights movement. The movement was, in fact, a coalition of thousands of local efforts nationwide, spanning several decades, hundreds of discrete groups, and all manner of strategies and tactics legal, illegal, institutional, non-institutional, violent, non-violent. Without discounting King's importance, it would be sheer fiction to call him the leader of what was fundamentally an amorphous, fluid, dispersed movement."[237] Decentralized grassroots leadership has been a major focus of movement scholarship in recent decades through the work of historians John Dittmer, Charles Payne, Barbara Ransby, and others.
Tactics and non-violence
 Armed Lumbee Indians aggressively confronting Klansmen in the Battle of Hayes Pond
The Jim Crow system employed "terror as a means of social control,"[238] with the most organized manifestations being the Ku Klux Klan and their collaborators in local police departments. This violence played a key role in blocking the progress of the civil rights movement in the late 1950s. Some black organizations in the South began practicing armed self-defense. The first to do so openly was the Monroe, North Carolina, chapter of the NAACP led by Robert F. Williams. Williams had rebuilt the chapter after its membership was terrorized out of public life by the Klan. He did so by encouraging a new, more working-class membership to arm itself thoroughly and defend against attack.[239] When Klan nightriders attacked the home of NAACP member Albert Perry in October 1957, Williams' militia exchanged gunfire with the stunned Klansmen, who quickly retreated. The following day, the city council held an emergency session and passed an ordinance banning KKK motorcades.[240] One year later, Lumbee Indians in North Carolina would have a similarly successful armed stand-off with the Klan (known as the Battle of Hayes Pond) which resulted in KKK leader James W. "Catfish" Cole being convicted of incitement to riot.[241]
After the acquittal of several white men charged with sexually assaulting black women in Monroe, Williams announced to United Press International reporters that he would "meet violence with violence" as a policy. Williams' declaration was quoted on the front page of The New York Times, and The Carolina Times considered it "the biggest civil rights story of 1959".[242] NAACP National chairman Roy Wilkins immediately suspended Williams from his position, but the Monroe organizer won support from numerous NAACP chapters across the country. Ultimately, Wilkins resorted to bribing influential organizer Daisy Bates to campaign against Williams at the NAACP national convention and the suspension was upheld. The convention nonetheless passed a resolution which stated: "We do not deny, but reaffirm the right of individual and collective self-defense against unlawful assaults."[243] Martin Luther King Jr. argued for Williams' removal,[244] but Ella Baker[245] and WEB Dubois[14] both publicly praised the Monroe leader's position.
Williams along with his wife, Mabel Williams continued to play a leadership role in the Monroe movement, and to some degree, in the national movement. The Williamses published The Crusader, a nationally circulated newsletter, beginning in 1960, and the influential book Negroes With Guns in 1962. Williams did not call for full militarization in this period, but "flexibility in the freedom struggle."[246] Williams was well-versed in legal tactics and publicity, which he had used successfully in the internationally known "Kissing Case" of 1958, as well as nonviolent methods, which he used at lunch counter sit-ins in Monroe all with armed self-defense as a complementary tactic.
Williams led the Monroe movement in another armed stand-off with white supremacists during an August 1961 Freedom Ride; he had been invited to participate in the campaign by Ella Baker and James Forman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). The incident (along with his campaigns for peace with Cuba) resulted in him being targeted by the FBI and prosecuted for kidnapping; he was cleared of all charges in 1976.[247] Meanwhile, armed self-defense continued discreetly in the Southern movement with such figures as SNCC's Amzie Moore,[247] Hartman Turnbow,[248] and Fannie Lou Hamer[249] all willing to use arms to defend their lives from nightrides. Taking refuge from the FBI in Cuba, the Willamses broadcast the radio show Radio Free Dixie throughout the eastern United States via Radio Progresso beginning in 1962. In this period, Williams advocated guerilla warfare against racist institutions and saw the large ghetto riots of the era as a manifestation of his strategy.
University of North Carolina historian Walter Rucker has written that "the emergence of Robert F Williams contributed to the marked decline in anti-black racial violence in the U.S....After centuries of anti-black violence, African Americans across the country began to defend their communities aggressively employing overt force when necessary. This in turn evoked in whites real fear of black vengeance..." This opened up space for African Americans to use nonviolent demonstrations with less fear of deadly reprisal.[250] Of the many civil rights activists who share this view, the most prominent was Rosa Parks. Parks gave the eulogy at Williams' funeral in 1996, praising him for "his courage and for his commitment to freedom," and concluding that "The sacrifices he made, and what he did, should go down in history and never be forgotten."[251]
Political responses
Eisenhower administration: 1953 1961
While not a key focus of his administration, President Eisenhower made several conservative strides toward making America a racially integrated country. The year he was elected, Eisenhower desegregated Washington D.C. after hearing a story about an African American man who was unable to rent a hotel room, buy a meal, access drinking water, and attend a movie.[252] Shortly after this act, Eisenhower utilized Hollywood personalities to pressure movie theatres into desegregating as well.[253]
Under the previous administration, President Truman signed Executive Order 9981 to desegregate the military. However, Truman's executive order had hardly been enforced. President Eisenhower made it a point to enforce the executive order. By October 30, 1954, there were no segregated combat units in the United States.[252] Not only this, but Eisenhower also desegregated the Veterans Administration and military bases in the South, including federal schools for military dependents. Expanding his work beyond the military, Eisenhower formed two non-discrimination committees, one to broker nondiscrimination agreements with government contractors, and a second to end discrimination within government departments and agencies.[252]
The first major piece of civil rights legislation since the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was also passed under the Eisenhower administration. President Eisenhower proposed, championed, and signed the Civil Rights Act of 1957. The legislation established the Civil Rights Commission and the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division and banned intimidating, coercing, and other means of interfering with a citizen's right to vote. Eisenhower's work in desegregating the judicial system is also notable. The judges he appointed were liberal when it came to the subject of civil rights / desegregation, and he actively avoided placing segregationists in federal courts.[252]
Kennedy administration: 1961 1963
 Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy speaking before a hostile Civil Rights crowd protesting low minority hiring in his Justice Department June 14, 1963[254]
For the first two years of the Kennedy administration, civil rights activists had mixed opinions of both the president and his younger brother, Robert F. Kennedy, the Attorney General. Historian David Halberstam wrote that the race question was for a long time a minor ethnic political issue in Massachusetts (where the Kennedy brothers came from), and had they been from another part of the country, "they might have been more immediately sensitive to the complexities and depth of black feelings."[255] A well of historical skepticism toward liberal politics had left African Americans with a sense of uneasy disdain for any white politician who claimed to share their concerns for freedom, particularly ones connected to the historically pro-segregationist Democratic Party. Still, many were encouraged by the discreet support Kennedy gave to King, and the administration's willingness, after dramatic pressure from civil disobedience, to bring forth racially egalitarian initiatives.
Many of the initiatives resulted from Robert Kennedy's passion. The younger Kennedy gained a rapid education in the realities of racism through events such as the Baldwin-Kennedy meeting. The president came to share his brother's sense of urgency on the matter, resulting in the landmark Civil Rights Address of June 1963 and the introduction of the first major civil rights act of the decade.[256][257]
Robert Kennedy expressed the administration's commitment to civil rights during a May 6, 1961 speech at the University of Georgia Law School:
Our position is quite clear. We are upholding the law. The federal government would not be running the schools in Prince Edward County any more than it is running the University of Georgia or the schools in my home state of Massachusetts. In this case, in all cases, I say to you today that if the orders of the court are circumvented, the Department of Justice will act. We will not stand by or be aloof we will move. I happen to believe that the 1954 decision was right. But my belief does not matter. It is now the law. Some of you may believe the decision was wrong. That does not matter. It is the law.[258]
That same month, during the Freedom Rides, Robert Kennedy became concerned with the issue when photographs of the burning bus and savage beatings in Anniston and Birmingham were broadcast around the world. They came at an especially embarrassing time, as President Kennedy was about to have a summit with the Soviet premier in Vienna. The White House was concerned with its image among the populations of newly independent nations in Africa and Asia, and Robert Kennedy responded with an address for Voice of America stating that great progress had been made on the issue of race relations. Meanwhile, behind the scenes, the administration worked to resolve the crisis with a minimum of violence and prevent the Freedom Riders from generating a fresh crop of headlines that might divert attention from the President's international agenda. The Freedom Riders documentary notes that, "The back burner issue of civil rights had collided with the urgent demands of Cold War realpolitik."[259]
On May 21, when a white mob attacked and burned the First Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama, where King was holding out with protesters, Robert Kennedy telephoned King to ask him to stay in the building until the U.S. Marshals and National Guard could secure the area. King proceeded to berate Kennedy for "allowing the situation to continue". King later publicly thanked Kennedy for deploying the force to break up an attack that might otherwise have ended King's life.
With a very small majority in Congress, the president's ability to press ahead with legislation relied considerably on a balancing game with the Senators and Congressmen of the South. Without the support of Vice-President Johnson, a former Senator who had years of experience in Congress and longstanding relations there, many of the Attorney-General's programs would not have progressed.
By late 1962, frustration at the slow pace of political change was balanced by the movement's strong support for legislative initiatives, including administrative representation across all U.S. Government departments and greater access to the ballot box. From squaring off against Governor George Wallace, to "tearing into" Vice-President Johnson (for failing to desegregate areas of the administration), to threatening corrupt white Southern judges with disbarment, to desegregating interstate transport, Robert Kennedy came to be consumed by the civil rights movement. He continued to work on these social justice issues in his bid for the presidency in 1968.
On the night of Governor Wallace's capitulation to African-American enrollment at the University of Alabama, President Kennedy gave an address to the nation, which marked the changing tide, an address that was to become a landmark for the ensuing change in political policy as to civil rights. In 1966, Robert Kennedy visited South Africa and voiced his objections to apartheid, the first time a major US politician had done so:
At the University of Natal in Durban, I was told the church to which most of the white population belongs teaches apartheid as a moral necessity. A questioner declared that few churches allow black Africans to pray with the white because the Bible says that is the way it should be, because God created Negroes to serve. "But suppose God is black", I replied. "What if we go to Heaven and we, all our lives, have treated the Negro as an inferior, and God is there, and we look up and He is not white? What then is our response?" There was no answer. Only silence. LOOK Magazine[260]
Robert Kennedy's relationship with the movement was not always positive. As attorney general, he was called to account by activists who booed him at a June 1963 speech for the Justice Department's own poor record of hiring blacks.[254] He also presided over FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover and his COINTELPRO program. This program ordered FBI agents to "expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" the activities of Communist front groups, a category in which the paranoid Hoover included most civil rights organizations.[261][262] Kennedy personally authorized some of the programs.[263] According to Tim Weiner, "RFK knew much more about this surveillance than he ever admitted." Although Kennedy only gave approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones "on a trial basis, for a month or so." Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of the black leader's life they deemed important; they then used this information to harass King.[264] Kennedy directly ordered surveillance on James Baldwin after their antagonistic racial summit in 1963.[265][266]
Johnson administration: 1963 1969
Further information: Civil Rights Act of 1964, War on Poverty, and Lyndon B. Johnson
Lyndon Johnson made civil rights one of his highest priorities, coupling it with a whites war on poverty. However increasing the opposition to the Vietnam War, coupled with the cost of the war, undercut support for his domestic programs.[267]
Under Kennedy, major civil rights legislation had been stalled in Congress. His assassination changed everything. On one hand, President Lyndon Johnson was a much more skillful negotiator than Kennedy, but he had behind him a powerful national momentum demanding immediate action on moral and emotional grounds. Demands for immediate action originated from unexpected directions, especially white Protestant church groups. The Justice Department, led by Robert Kennedy, moved from a posture of defending Kennedy from the quagmire minefield of racial politics to acting to fulfill his legacy. The violent death and public reaction dramatically moved the conservative Republicans, led by Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen, whose support was the margin of victory for the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The act immediately ended de jure (legal) segregation and the era of Jim Crow.[268]
With the civil rights movement at full blast, Lyndon Johnson coupled black entrepreneurship with his war on poverty, setting up special programs in the Small Business Administration, the Office of Economic Opportunity, and other agencies.[269] This time there was money for loans designed to boost minority business ownership. Richard Nixon greatly expanded the program, setting up the Office of Minority Business Enterprise (OMBE) in the expectation that black entrepreneurs would help defuse racial tensions and possibly support his reelection .[270]
Popular reactions
American Jews
See also: African American Jewish relations; New York City teachers' strike of 1968; and Brownsville, Brooklyn
 Jewish civil rights activist Joseph L. Rauh Jr. marching with Martin Luther King Jr. in 1963
Many in the Jewish community supported the civil rights movement. In fact, statistically, Jews were one of the most actively involved non-black groups in the Movement. Many Jewish students worked in concert with African Americans for CORE, SCLC, and SNCC as full-time organizers and summer volunteers during the Civil Rights era. Jews made up roughly half of the white northern and western volunteers involved in the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Summer project and approximately half of the civil rights attorneys active in the South during the 1960s.[271]
Jewish leaders were arrested while heeding a call from Martin Luther King Jr. in St. Augustine, Florida, in June 1964, where the largest mass arrest of rabbis in American history took place at the Monson Motor Lodge. Abraham Joshua Heschel, a writer, rabbi, and professor of theology at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York, was outspoken on the subject of civil rights. He marched arm-in-arm with King in the 1965 Selma to Montgomery march. In the 1964 murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner, the two white activists killed, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, were both Jewish.
Brandeis University, the only nonsectarian Jewish-sponsored college university in the world, created the Transitional Year Program (TYP) in 1968, in part response to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. The faculty created it to renew the university's commitment to social justice. Recognizing Brandeis as a university with a commitment to academic excellence, these faculty members created a chance for disadvantaged students to participate in an empowering educational experience.
The American Jewish Committee, American Jewish Congress, and Anti-Defamation League (ADL) actively promoted civil rights. While Jews were very active in the civil rights movement in the South, in the North, many had experienced a more strained relationship with African Americans.  It has been argued that with Black militancy and the Black Power movements on the rise, "Black Anti-Semitism" increased leading to strained relations between Blacks and Jews in Northern communities. In New York City, most notably, there was a major socio-economic class difference in the perception of African Americans by Jews.[272] Jews from better educated Upper-Middle-Class backgrounds were often very supportive of African American civil rights activities while the Jews in poorer urban communities that became increasingly minority were often less supportive largely in part due to more negative and violent interactions between the two groups.
According to political scientist Michael Rogin, Jewish-Black hostility was a two-way street extending to earlier decades. In the post-World War II era, Jews were granted white privilege and most moved into the middle-class while Blacks were left behind in the ghetto.[273] Urban Jews engaged in the same sort of conflicts with Blacks over integration busing, local control of schools, housing, crime, communal identity, and class divides that other white ethnics did, leading to Jews participating in white flight. The culmination of this was the 1968 New York City teachers' strike, pitting largely Jewish schoolteachers against predominantly Black parents in Brownsville, New York.[274]
Public profile
Many Jews in the Southern states who supported civil rights for African Americans tended to keep a low profile on "the race issue", in order to avoid attracting the attention of the anti-Black and antisemitic Ku Klux Klan.[275] However, Klan groups exploited the issue of African-American integration and Jewish involvement in the struggle in order to commit violently antisemitic hate crimes. As an example of this hatred, in one year alone, from November 1957 to October 1958, temples and other Jewish communal gatherings were bombed and desecrated in Atlanta, Nashville, Jacksonville, and Miami, and dynamite was found under synagogues in Birmingham, Charlotte, and Gastonia, North Carolina. Some rabbis received death threats, but there were no injuries following these outbursts of violence.[275]
Black segregationists
Despite the common notion that the ideas of Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and Black Power only conflicted with each other and were the only ideologies of the civil rights movement, there were other sentiments felt by many blacks. Fearing the events during the movement was occurring too quickly, there were some blacks who felt that leaders should take their activism at an incremental pace. Others had reservations on how focused blacks were on the movement and felt that such attention was better spent on reforming issues within the black community.
While Conservatives, in general, supported integration, some defended incrementally phased out segregation as a backstop against assimilation. Based on her interpretation of a 1966 study made by Donald Matthews and James Prothro detailing the relative percentage of blacks for integration, against it or feeling something else, Lauren Winner asserts that:
Black defenders of segregation look, at first blush, very much like black nationalists, especially in their preference for all-black institutions; but black defenders of segregation differ from nationalists in two key ways. First, while both groups criticize NAACP-style integration, nationalists articulate a third alternative to integration and Jim Crow, while segregationists preferred to stick with the status quo. Second, absent from black defenders of segregation's political vocabulary was the demand for self-determination. They called for all-black institutions, but not autonomous all-black institutions; indeed, some defenders of segregation asserted that black people needed white paternalism and oversight in order to thrive.[276]
Oftentimes, African-American community leaders would be staunch defenders of segregation. Church ministers, businessmen, and educators were among those who wished to keep segregation and segregationist ideals in order to retain the privileges they gained from patronage from whites, such as monetary gains. In addition, they relied on segregation to keep their jobs and economies in their communities thriving. It was feared that if integration became widespread in the South, black-owned businesses and other establishments would lose a large chunk of their customer base to white-owned businesses, and many blacks would lose opportunities for jobs that were presently exclusive to their interests.[277] On the other hand, there were the everyday, average black people who criticized integration as well. For them, they took issue with different parts of the civil rights movement and the potential for blacks to exercise consumerism and economic liberty without hindrance from whites.[278]
For Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and other leading activists and groups during the movement, these opposing viewpoints acted as an obstacle against their ideas. These different views made such leaders' work much harder to accomplish, but they were nonetheless important in the overall scope of the movement. For the most part, the black individuals who had reservations on various aspects of the movement and ideologies of the activists were not able to make a game-changing dent in their efforts, but the existence of these alternate ideas gave some blacks an outlet to express their concerns about the changing social structure.
"Black Power" militants
Main articles: Black Power and Black Power movement
 Gold medalist Tommie Smith (center) and bronze medalist John Carlos (right) showing the raised fist on the podium after the 200 m race at the 1968 Summer Olympics; both wear Olympic Project for Human Rights badges. Peter Norman (silver medalist, left) from Australia also wears an OPHR badge in solidarity with Smith and Carlos.
During the Freedom Summer campaign of 1964, numerous tensions within the civil rights movement came to the forefront. Many blacks in SNCC developed concerns that white activists from the North and West were taking over the movement. The participation by numerous white students was not reducing the amount of violence that SNCC suffered, but seemed to exacerbate it. Additionally, there was profound disillusionment at Lyndon Johnson's denial of voting status for the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party at the Democratic National Convention.[279][280] Meanwhile, during CORE's work in Louisiana that summer, that group found the federal government would not respond to requests to enforce the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, or to protect the lives of activists who challenged segregation. The Louisiana campaign survived by relying on a local African-American militia called the Deacons for Defense and Justice, who used arms to repel white supremacist violence and police repression. CORE's collaboration with the Deacons was effective in disrupting Jim Crow in numerous Louisiana areas.[281][282]
In 1965, SNCC helped organize an independent political party, the Lowndes County Freedom Organization (LCFO), in the heart of the Alabama Black Belt, also Klan territory. It permitted its black leaders to openly promote the use of armed self-defense. Meanwhile, the Deacons for Defense and Justice expanded into Mississippi and assisted Charles Evers' NAACP chapter with a successful campaign in Natchez. Charles had taken the lead after his brother Medgar Evers was assassinated in 1963.[283] The same year, the 1965 Watts Rebellion took place in Los Angeles. Many black youths were committed to the use of violence to protest inequality and oppression.[284]
During the March Against Fear in 1966, initiated by James Meredith, SNCC and CORE fully embraced the slogan of "black power" to describe these trends towards militancy and self-reliance. In Mississippi, Stokely Carmichael declared, "I'm not going to beg the white man for anything that I deserve, I'm going to take it. We need power."[285]
Some people engaging in the Black Power movement claimed a growing sense of black pride and identity. In gaining more of a sense of a cultural identity, blacks demanded that whites no longer refer to them as "Negroes" but as "Afro-Americans," similar to other ethnic groups, such as Irish Americans and Italian Americans. Until the mid-1960s, blacks had dressed similarly to whites and often straightened their hair. As a part of affirming their identity, blacks started to wear African-based dashikis and grow their hair out as a natural afro. The afro, sometimes nicknamed the "'fro," remained a popular black hairstyle until the late 1970s. Other variations of traditional African styles have become popular, often featuring braids, extensions, and dreadlocks.
The Black Panther Party (BPP), which was founded by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale in Oakland, California, in 1966, gained the most attention for Black Power nationally. The group began following the revolutionary pan-Africanism of late-period Malcolm X, using a "by-any-means necessary" approach to stopping racial inequality. They sought to rid African-American neighborhoods of police brutality and to establish socialist community control in the ghettos. While they conducted armed confrontation with police, they also set up free breakfast and healthcare programs for children.[286] Between 1968 and 1971, the BPP was one of the most important black organizations in the country and had support from the NAACP, SCLC, Peace and Freedom Party, and others.[287]
Black Power was taken to another level inside prison walls. In 1966, George Jackson formed the Black Guerrilla Family in the California San Quentin State Prison. The goal of this group was to overthrow the white-run government in America and the prison system. In 1970, this group displayed their dedication after a white prison guard was found not guilty of shooting and killing three black prisoners from the prison tower. They retaliated by killing a white prison guard.
"Say It Loud  I'm Black and I'm Proud"
James Brown's "Say It Loud  I'm Black and I'm Proud" (1968)
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Numerous popular cultural expressions associated with black power appeared at this time. Released in August 1968, the number one Rhythm & Blues single for the Billboard Year-End list was James Brown's "Say It Loud  I'm Black and I'm Proud".[288] In October 1968, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, while being awarded the gold and bronze medals, respectively, at the 1968 Summer Olympics, donned human rights badges and each raised a black-gloved Black Power salute during their podium ceremony.
King was not comfortable with the "Black Power" slogan, which sounded too much like black nationalism to him. When King was assassinated in 1968, Stokely Carmichael said that whites had murdered the one person who would prevent rampant rioting and that blacks would burn every major city to the ground. Riots broke out in more than 100 cities across the country. Some cities did not recover from the damage for more than a generation; other city neighborhoods never recovered.
Native Americans
King and the civil rights movement inspired the Native American rights movement of the 1960s and many of its leaders.[289] Native Americans had been dehumanized as "merciless Indian savages" in the United States Declaration of Independence,[290] and in King's 1964 book Why We Can't Wait he wrote: "Our nation was born in genocide when it embraced the doctrine that the original American, the Indian, was an inferior race."[291] John Echohawk, a member of the Pawnee tribe and the executive director and one of the founders of the Native American Rights Fund, stated: "Inspired by Dr. King, who was advancing the civil rights agenda of equality under the laws of this country, we thought that we could also use the laws to advance our Indianship, to live as tribes in our territories governed by our own laws under the principles of tribal sovereignty that had been with us ever since 1831. We believed that we could fight for a policy of self-determination that was consistent with U.S. law and that we could govern our own affairs, define our own ways and continue to survive in this society".[292] Native Americans were also active supporters of King's movement throughout the 1960s, which included a sizable Native American contingent at the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.[289]
Northern Ireland
See also: Northern Ireland civil rights movement
 Mural of Malcolm X in Belfast
Due to policies of segregation and disenfranchisement present in Northern Ireland many Irish activists took inspiration from American civil rights activists. People's Democracy had organized a "Long March" from Belfast to Derry which was inspired by the Selma to Montgomery marches.[293] During the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland protesters often sang the American protest song We Shall Overcome and sometimes referred to themselves as the "negroes of Northern Ireland".[294]
Soviet Union
There was an international context for the actions of the U.S. federal government during these years. The Soviet media frequently covered racial discrimination in the U.S.[295] Deeming American criticism of its own human rights abuses hypocritical, the Soviet government would respond by stating "And you are lynching Negroes".[296] In his 1934 book Russia Today: What Can We Learn from It?, Sherwood Eddy wrote: "In the most remote villages of Russia today Americans are frequently asked what they are going to do to the Scottsboro Negro boys and why they lynch Negroes."[297]
In Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy, the historian Mary L. Dudziak wrote that Communists who were critical of the United States accused it of practicing hypocrisy when it portrayed itself as the "leader of the free world," while so many of its citizens were being subjected to severe racial discrimination and violence; she argued that this was a major factor in moving the government to support civil rights legislation.[298]
White moderates
A majority of White Southerners have been estimated to have neither supported or resisted the civil rights movement.[299] Many did not enjoy the idea of expanding civil rights but were uncomfortable with the language and often violent tactics used by those who resisted the civil rights movement as part of the Massive resistance.[300] Many only reacted to the movement once forced to by their changing environment, and when they did their response was usually whatever they felt would disturb their daily life the least. Most of their personal reactions, whether eventually in support or resistance were not in extreme.[299]
White segregationists
 Ku Klux Klan demonstration in St. Augustine, Florida in 1964
King reached the height of popular acclaim during his life in 1964, when he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. After that point his career was filled with frustrating challenges. The liberal coalition that had gained passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 began to fray.
King was becoming more estranged from the Johnson administration. In 1965 he broke with it by calling for peace negotiations and a halt to the bombing of Vietnam. He moved further left in the following years, speaking about the need for economic justice and thoroughgoing changes in American society. He believed that change was needed beyond the civil rights which had been gained by the movement.
However, King's attempts to broaden the scope of the civil rights movement were halting and largely unsuccessful. In 1965 King made several attempts to take the Movement north in order to address housing discrimination. The SCLC's campaign in Chicago publicly failed, because Chicago's Mayor Richard J. Daley marginalized the SCLC's campaign by promising to "study" the city's problems. In 1966, white demonstrators in notoriously racist Cicero, a suburb of Chicago, held "white power" signs and threw stones at marchers who were demonstrating against housing segregation.[301]
Politicians and journalists quickly blamed this white backlash on the movement's shift towards Black Power in the mid-1960s; today most scholars believe the backlash was a phenomenon that was already developing in the mid-1950s, and it was embodied in the "massive resistance" movement in the South where even the few moderate white leaders (including George Wallace, who had once been endorsed by the NAACP) shifted to openly racist positions.[302][303] Northern and Western racists opposed the southerners on a regional and cultural basis, but also held segregationist attitudes which became more pronounced as the civil rights movement headed north and west. For instance, prior to the Watts riot, California whites had already mobilized to repeal the state's 1963 fair housing law.[301]
Even so, the backlash which occurred at the time was not able to roll back the major civil rights victories which had been achieved or swing the country into reaction. Social historians Matthew Lassiter and Barbara Ehrenreich note that the backlash's primary constituency was suburban and middle-class, not working-class whites: "among the white electorate, one half of blue-collar voters cast their ballot for [the liberal presidential candidate] Hubert Humphrey in 1968 only in the South did George Wallace draw substantially more blue-collar than white-collar support."[304]
In popular culture
Main article: Civil rights movement in popular culture
The 1954 to 1968 civil rights movement contributed strong cultural threads to American and international theater, song, film, television, and art.
Activist organizations
National/regional civil rights organizations
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR)
Medical Committee for Human Rights (MCHR)
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)
Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU)
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Southern Conference Educational Fund (SCEF)
Southern Student Organizing Committee (SSOC)
National economic empowerment organizations
Operation Breadbasket
Urban League
Local civil rights organizations
Albany Movement (Albany, Georgia)
Council of Federated Organizations (Mississippi)
Montgomery Improvement Association (Montgomery, Alabama)
Nashville Student Movement (Nashville, Tennessee)
Regional Council of Negro Leadership (Mississippi)
Women's Political Council (Montgomery, Alabama)
Individual activists
Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Muhammad Ali
Maya Angelou
Louis Austin
Ella Baker
James Baldwin
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
Fay Bellamy Powell
James Bevel
Claude Black
Unita Blackwell
Julian Bond
Anne Braden
Carl Braden
Stanley Branche
Ralph Bunche
Mary Fair Burks
Stokely Carmichael
James Chaney
Shirley Chisholm
Septima Poinsette Clark
Xernona Clayton
Albert Cleage
Eldridge Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
John Conyers
Sam Cooke
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Jonathan Daniels
Ossie Davis
Ruby Dee
Annie Devine
Doris Derby
Marian Wright Edelman
Medgar Evers
James L. Farmer Jr.
Walter E. Fauntroy
Karl Fleming
Sarah Mae Flemming
James Forman
Frankie Muse Freeman
Andrew Goodman
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
Lorraine Hansberry
Robert Hayling
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Libby Holman
Myles Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Winson Hudson
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Mahalia Jackson
Esau Jenkins
Clarence B. Jones
Barbara Jordan
Vernon Jordan
Clyde Kennard
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
John Lewis
Stanley Levison
Viola Liuzzo
Audre Lorde
Joseph Lowery
Autherine Lucy
Clara Luper
Thurgood Marshall
Benjamin Mays
Franklin McCain
Floyd McKissick
James Meredith
Loren Miller
Jack Minnis
Anne Moody
Harry T. Moore
E. Frederic Morrow
Bob Moses
Bill Moyer
Elijah Muhammad
Diane Nash
Denise Nicholas
E. D. Nixon
David Nolan
James Orange
Nan Grogan Orrock
Rosa Parks
Rutledge Pearson
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Gloria Johnson-Powell
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond
George Raymond Jr.
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Walter Reuther
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Paul Robeson
Amelia Boynton Robinson
Jackie Robinson
Jo Ann Robinson
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Bayard Rustin
Michael Schwerner
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
Nina Simone
Charles Kenzie Steele
Annie Stein
Dempsey Travis
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Robert F. Williams
Malcolm X
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
See also
Civil rights movement portalUnited States portalSociety portal1950s portal1960s portal
Civil rights movement (1896 1954)
Civil rights movement (1865 1896)
American Indian Movement
Asian American movement
Chicano Movement
History of civil rights in the United States
List of civil rights leaders
List of Kentucky women in the civil rights era
List of photographers of the civil rights movement
South Carolina in the civil rights movement
Timeline of the civil rights movement
"We Shall Overcome," the unofficial anthem of the movement
History preservation
Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument
Civil Rights Movement Archive
Freedom Riders National Monument
Read's Drug Store (Baltimore), the site of a 1955 desegregation sit-in
Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project
Television News of the Civil Rights Era 1950 1970
Post civil rights movement
Black Lives Matter
Post civil rights era in African-American history
Notes
^ Various other dates have been proposed as the date on which the civil rights movement began or ended.
^ The social movement has also been called the 1960s civil rights movement, the African-American civil rights movement, the Afro-American civil rights movement, the American civil rights movement, the American freedom movement, the Black civil rights movement, the Black revolution, the Black rights movement, the civil rights revolution, the civil rights struggle, the modern civil rights movement, the Negro American revolution, the Negro freedom movement, the Negro movement, the Negro revolt, the Negro revolution, the Second Reconstruction, the Southern freedom movement, and the United States civil rights movement. Civil rights struggles can denote this or other social movements that occurred in the United States during the same period. The social movement's span of time is called the civil rights era.
References
^ a b c Newkirk II, Vann R. (February 16, 2017). "How The Blood of Emmett Till Still Stains America Today". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 28, 2017. Retrieved July 3, 2017.
^ "Brown v. Board of Education". History.com. Retrieved November 12, 2019.
^ Horwitz, Morton J. (Winter 1993). "The Warren Court and the Pursuit Of Justice". Washington and Lee Law Review. 50.
^ Powe, Lucas A. Jr. (2002). The Warren Court and American Politics. Harvard University Press.
^ Swindler, William F. (1970). "The Warren Court: Completion of a Constitutional Revolution" (PDF). Vanderbilt Law Review. 23. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2019.
^ Driver, Justin (October 2012). "The Constitutional Conservatism of the Warren Court". California Law Review. 100 (5): 1101 1167. JSTOR 23408735.
^ a b c d e "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1)". Oyez. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ "Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States". Oyez. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ "Loving v. Virginia". Oyez. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ "The struggle for civil rights". Miller Center. January 5, 2018. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ a b c "Civil Rights Act of 1964  CRA  Title VII  Equal Employment Opportunities  42 US Code Chapter 21  findUSlaw". Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "The  Booker Monroe story: The first African American to use a Whites-only public accomodation," The Onion, YouTube, September 9, 2022.
^ Haines, Herbert H. (1995). Black Radicals and the Civil Rights Mainstream, 1954 1970. Univ. of Tennessee Press. pp. 98 118. ISBN 978-1-57233-260-7.
^ a b Tyson, Timothy B. (September 1998). "Robert F. Williams, 'Black Power,' and the Roots of the African American Freedom Struggle" (PDF). Journal of American History. 85 (2): 540 570.
^ "How the end of slavery led to starvation and death for millions of black Americans". The Guardian. August 30, 2015.
^ Schultz, Jeffrey D. (2002). Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics: African Americans and Asian Americans. p. 284. ISBN 978-1-57356-148-8. Retrieved March 25, 2010.
^ Leland T. Saito (1998). Race and Politics: Asian Americans, Latinos, and Whites in a Los Angeles Suburb. p. 154. University of Illinois Press
^ "Black voting rights, 15th Amendment still challenged after 150 years". USA Today. Retrieved December 3, 2020.
^ Smith, Jean Edward (2001). Grant. Simon and Schuster. pp. 244 247. ISBN 978-0-7432-1701-9.
^ Wormser, Richard. "The Enforcement Acts (1870 71)". PBS: Jim Crow Stories. Retrieved May 12, 2012.
^ a b c d Black-American Representatives and Senators by Congress, 1870 Present Archived January 1, 2009, at the Wayback Machine U.S. House of Representatives
^ Klarman, Michael J.; 'The White Primary Rulings: A Case Study in the Consequences of Supreme Court Decisionmaking'; Florida State University Law Review, vol. 29, issue 55, pp. 55 107
^ Walton, Hanes (junior); Puckett, Sherman and Deskins Donald R. (junior); The African American Electorate: A Statistical History, p. 539 ISBN 0872895084
^ Otis H Stephens, Jr; John M Scheb, II (2007). American Constitutional Law: Civil Rights and Liberties. Cengage Learning. p. 528. ISBN 978-0-495-09705-1.
^ a b Paul Finkelman, ed. (2009). Encyclopedia of African American History. Oxford University Press. pp. 199 200 of vol 4. ISBN 978-0-19-516779-5.
^ Moyers, Bill. "Legacy of Lynching" Archived August 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. PBS. Retrieved July 28, 2016
^ Rayford Logan,The Betrayal of the Negro from Rutherford B. Hayes to Woodrow Wilson, pp. 97 98. New York: Da Capo Press, 1997.
^ a b Leon Litwack, Jim Crow Blues, Magazine of History (OAH Publications, 2004)
^ Michael Kazin, Rebecca Edwards, Adam Rothman (2009). The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History. p. 245. Princeton University Press
^ C. Vann Woodward, The Strange Career of Jim Crow, 3rd rev. ed. (Oxford University Press, 1974), pp. 67 109.
^ Birmingham Segregation Laws Archived February 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b c "The Court's Decision   Separate Is Not Equal". americanhistory.si.edu. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ a b c d Fultz, M. (2006). "Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation", Libraries & The Cultural Record, 41(3), 338 346.
^ Matthew, Anderson (1900). "The Economic Aspect of the Negro Problem".  In Browne, Hugh; Kruse, Edwina; Walker, Thomas C.; Moton, Robert Russa; Wheelock, Frederick D. (eds.). Annual Report of the Hampton Negro Conference. Hampton bulletinno. 9 10, 12 16. Vol. 4. Hampton, Virginia: Hampton Institute Press. p. 39. hdl:2027/chi.14025588.
^ Tolnay, Stewart (2003). "The African American 'Great Migration' and Beyond". Annual Review of Sociology. 29: 218 221. doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100009. JSTOR 30036966. S2CID 145520215.
^ "Party Realignment and the New Deal". US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
^ "Executive Order 9981". Harry S. Truman Library and Museum. Retrieved May 18, 2019.
^ Kennedy, Stetson (1959). "Who May Live Where". Jim Crow Guide: The Way it Was.
^ Michelle Maternowski; Joy Powers (March 3, 2017). "How Did Metro Milwaukee Become So Segregated?". WUWM.com.
^ "Racial Restrictive Covenants: Enforcing Neighborhood Segregation in Seattle   Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project". University of Washington. Retrieved December 5, 2020.
^ "Racist language is still woven into home deeds across America. Erasing it isn't easy, and some don't want to". CNN. Retrieved January 26, 2021.
^ Seligman, Amanda (2005). Block by block : neighborhoods and public policy on Chicago's West Side. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 213 14. ISBN 978-0-226-74663-0.
^ "Future of Fair Housing: How We Got Here". Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ a b c d "Eugenics, Race, and Marriage". Facing History.org. Retrieved February 23, 2021.
^ Douglas, Stephen A. (1991). The Complete Lincoln-Douglas Debates of 1858. University of Chicago Press. p. 235.
^ a b Lanzendorfer, Joy (August 9, 2017) "Hollywood Loved Sammy Davis Jr. Until He Dated a White Movie Star", Smithsonian Retrieved February 23, 2021.
^ Clawson, Laura. "A. Philip Randolph, the union leader who led the March on Washington". Daily Kos. Daily Kos Group. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
^ Carter, April (January 14, 2005). Direct Action and Democracy Today. Polity. pp. x. ISBN 978-0-7456-2936-0.
^ David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito, Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009, pp. 81, 99 100.
^ "Robinson, Jo Ann Gibson". The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute. Stanford University. June 22, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ a b Robinson, Jo Ann & Garrow, David J. (foreword by Coretta Scott King) The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It (1986) ISBN 0-394-75623-1 Knoxville, University of Tennessee Press
^ "The Tallahassee Bus Boycott Fifty Years Later," The Tallahassee Democrat, May 21, 2006 Archived December 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ Sell, Jack (December 30, 1955). "Panthers defeat flu; face Ga. Tech next". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. 1.
^ Kevin Michael Kruse (February 1, 2008). White Flight: Atlanta and the Making of Modern Conservatism. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09260-7.
^ a b Klarman, Michael J.,Brown v. Board of Education and the Civil Rights Movement [electronic resource] : abridged edition of From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality, Oxford; New York : Oxford University Press, 2007, p. 55.
^ Boyle, Kevin (November 21, 1995). The UAW and the Heyday of American Liberalism, 1945 1968. Cornell University Press. p. 121. ISBN 978-1-5017-1327-9.
^ "Brown v. Board of Education (Kansas)". The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2016.
^ Risa L. Goluboff, The Lost Promise of Civil Rights, Harvard University Press, MA: Cambridge, 2007, pp. 249 251
^ "Antonly Lester, "Brown v. Board of Education Overseas" PROCEEDINGS OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY VOL. 148, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2004" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2015.
^ "Mary L Dudziak "Brown as a Cold War Case" Journal of American History, June 2004". Archived from the original on December 7, 2014.
^ Brown v Board of Education Decision Archived June 5, 2008, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b "Civil Rights Greensboro". Archived from the original on May 15, 2014. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Weiner, Melissa F. (2010). Power, Protest, and the Public Schools: Jewish and African American Struggles in New York City. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-4772-5.
^ "Adina Back "Exposing the Whole Segregation Myth: The Harlem Nine and New York City Schools" in Freedom north: Black freedom struggles outside the South, 1940 1980, Jeanne Theoharis, Komozi Woodard, eds.(Palgrave Macmillan, 2003) pp. 65 91" (PDF).
^ American Experience; The Murder of Emmett Till; Interview with Mamie Till Mobley, mother of Emmett Till, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ a b c "How The Horrific Photograph Of Emmett Till Helped Energize The Civil Rights Movement". 100 Photographs | The Most Influential Images of All Time. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved July 3, 2017.
^ a b Weller, Sheila (January 26, 2017). "How Author Timothy Tyson Found the Woman at the Center of the Emmett Till Case". Vanity Fair.
^ Whitfield, Stephen (1991). A Death in the Delta: The story of Emmett Till. pp 41 42. JHU Press.
^ a b c "'The Blood of Emmett Till' remembers a horrific crime". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved July 3, 2017.
^ a b Haas, Jeffrey (2011). The Assassination of Fred Hampton. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-56976-709-2.
^ "| Authorities discover original casket of Emmett Till". archive.is. September 13, 2009. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ Callard, Abby. "Emmett Till's Casket Goes to the Smithsonian". Smithsonian. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ Tyson, Timothy B. (2017). The Blood of Emmett Till. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 221. ISBN 978-1-4767-1486-8. Carolyn Bryant Donham, interview with the author, Raleigh, NC, September 8, 2008.
^ J. Mills Thornton III, "Challenge and Response in the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955 1956." Alabama Review 67.1 (2014): 40 112.
^ a b Chafe, William Henry (2003). The Unfinished Journey: America since World War II. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-515049-0.
^ Thamel, Pete (January 1, 2006). "Grier Integrated a Game and Earned the World's Respect". New York Times. Retrieved April 15, 2009.
^ Karen Anderson, "The Little Rock school desegregation crisis: Moderation and social conflict." Journal of Southern History 70.3 (2004): 603-636 online.
^ Elizabeth Jacoway, Turn away thy son: Little Rock, the crisis that shocked the nation (Simon and Schuster, 2007).
^ a b Erikson, Erik (1969). Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence. New York City: Norton. p. 415. ISBN 978-0-393-31034-4.
^ "Civil Rights Movement". Civil Rights Movement Archive. Retrieved May 18, 2015.
^ "Bruce Hartford (full interview)". Retrieved May 18, 2015   via Vimeo.
^ Forman, James (1972). The Making of Black Revolutionaries. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-940880-10-8.
^ Wasow, Omar (2020). "Agenda Seeding: How 1960s Black Protests Moved Elites, Public Opinion and Voting". American Political Science Review. 114 (3): 638 659. doi:10.1017/S000305542000009X. ISSN 0003-0554.
^ "Kansas Sit-In Gets Its Due at Last" Archived April 21, 2018, at the Wayback Machine; NPR; October 21, 2006
^ First Southern Sit-in, Greensboro NC Archived March 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Chafe, William Henry (1980). Civilities and civil rights : Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black struggle for freedom. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-19-502625-2.
^ "Civil Rights Greensboro". Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "60 years ago, the Richmond 34 were arrested during a sit-in at the Thalhimers lunch counter". Richmond Times-Dispatch. Retrieved February 20, 2020.
^ I, Stations, Community (January 1, 2008). "Rising Up". Southern Spaces. 2008. doi:10.18737/M7HP4M. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Atlanta Sit-ins Archived March 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Archive
^ a b "Atlanta Sit-Ins" Archived January 17, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, The New Georgia Encyclopedia
^ Houston, Benjamin (2012). The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the Struggle for Social Justice in a Southern City. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-4326-6.
^ Nashville Student Movement Archived March 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ "America's First Sit-Down Strike: The 1939 Alexandria Library Sit-In". City of Alexandria. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved February 11, 2010.
^ Davis, Townsend (1998). Weary Feet, Rested Souls: A Guided History of the Civil Rights Movement. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 311. ISBN 978-0-393-04592-5.
^ "Atlanta Sit-ins". Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Students Begin to Lead Archived January 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine  The New Georgia Encyclopedia Atlanta Sit-Ins
^ Carson, Clayborne (1981). In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 311. ISBN 978-0-674-44727-1.
^ Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Founded Archived March 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b Freedom Rides Archived July 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b c Arsenault, Raymond (2006). Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice. Oxford Press.
^ Black Protest (1961)
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with John Lewis, 1 of 3, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with Jim Zwerg, 1 of 4, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ Hartford, Bruce Hartford. "Arrests in Jackson MS". The Civil Rights Movement Archive. Retrieved October 21, 2011.
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with James Lawson, 1 of 4, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with Diane Nash, 1 of 3, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with Dion Diamond, 1 of 2, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with Bernard Lafayette, Jr., 1 of 3, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ American Experience; Freedom Riders; Interview with Julian Bond, 1 of 2, retrieved June 10, 2020
^ Our Portion of Hell: Fayette County, Tennessee, an Oral History of the Struggle For Civil Rights by Robert Hamburger (New York; Links Books, 1973)
^ Voter Registration & Direct-action in McComb MS Archived July 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Council of Federated Organizations Formed in Mississippi Archived October 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Mississippi Voter Registration Greenwood Archived October 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ handeyside, Hugh (February 13, 2014). "What Have We Learned from the Spies of Mississippi?". American Civil Liberty Union. ACLU National Security Project. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
^ a b c "Carrying the burden: the story of Clyde Kennard" Archived October 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, District 125, Mississippi. Retrieved November 5, 2007
^ a b William H. Tucker, The Funding of Scientific Racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund, University of Illinois Press (May 30, 2007), pp 165 66.
^ Neo-Confederacy: A Critical Introduction, Edited by Euan Hague, Heidi Beirich, Edward H. Sebesta, University of Texas Press (2008) pp. 284 85
^ a b "A House Divided". Southern Poverty Law Center. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2010.
^ a b Jennie Brown, Medgar Evers, Holloway House Publishing, 1994, pp. 128 132
^ "James Meredith Integrates Ole Miss" Archived October 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ [1], University of Southern Mississippi Library Archived September 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
^ Albany GA, Movement Archived July 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ The Birmingham Campaign Archived June 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Letter from a Birmingham Jail Archived April 7, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ~ King Research & Education Institute at Stanford Univ.
^ Bass, S. Jonathan (2001) Blessed Are The Peacemakers: Martin Luther King Jr., Eight White Religious Leaders, and the "Letter from Birmingham Jail". Baton Rouge: LSU Press. ISBN 0-8071-2655-1
^ "The Great Society: A New History with Amity Shlaes". Hoover Institution. Retrieved April 29, 2020.
^ "Children have changed America before, braving fire hoses and police dogs for civil rights". The Washington Post. March 23, 2018.
^ Freedom-Now" Time, May 17, 1963 Archived March 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine; Glenn T. Eskew, But for Birmingham: The Local and National Struggles in the Civil Rights Movement (University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 301.
^ a b Nicholas Andrew Bryant, The Bystander: John F. Kennedy And the Struggle for Black Equality (Basic Books, 2006), pg. 2
^ "Thomas J Sugrue, "Affirmative Action from Below: Civil Rights, Building Trades, and the Politics of Racial Equality in the Urban North, 1945 1969" The Journal of American History, Vol. 91, Issue 1" (PDF).
^ "Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission website, "The Civil Rights Movement"".
^ T he Daily Capital News(Missouri) June 14, 1963, pg. 4 Archived September 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
^ "The Dispatch  Google News Archive Search". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ a b Jackson, Thomas F. (July 17, 2013). From Civil Rights to Human Rights. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-8122-0000-3.
^ "Teaching American History in Maryland  Documents for the Classroom  Maryland State Archives". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ a b "Thomas F. Jackson, "Jobs and Freedom: The Black Revolt of 1963 and the Contested Meanings of the March on Washington" Virginia Foundation for the Humanities April 2, 2008, pg. 10 14" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on June 6, 2011.
^ Ortega, Tony (May 4, 2009). "Miss Lorraine Hansberry & Bobby Kennedy". Archived from the original on October 18, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Hilty, James (April 1, 2000). Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector. Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-4399-0519-7. Retrieved July 29, 2016   via Google Books.
^ Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times (1978), pp. 332 333.
^ ""Book Reviews-The Bystander by Nicholas A. Bryant" The Journal of American History (2007) 93 (4)". Archived from the original on October 10, 2012.
^ Standing In the Schoolhouse Door Archived June 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ "Radio and Television Report to the American People on Civil Rights," June 11, 1963, transcript from the JFK library. Archived February 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ Medgar Evers Archived November 7, 2005, at the Wayback Machine, a worthwhile article, on The Mississippi Writers Page, a website of the University of Mississippi English Department.
^ Medgar Evers Assassination Archived June 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b Civil Rights bill submitted, and date of JFK murder, plus graphic events of the March on Washington. Archived October 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine This is an Abbeville Press website, a large informative article apparently from the book The Civil Rights Movement (ISBN 0-7892-0123-2).
^ Rosenberg, Jonathan; Karabell, Zachary (2003). Kennedy, Johnson, and the Quest for Justice: The Civil Rights Tapes. WW Norton & Co. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-393-05122-3.
^ Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. (2002) [1978]. Robert Kennedy and His Times. Houghton Mifflin Books. pp. 350, 351. ISBN 978-0-618-21928-5.
^ Thompson, Krissah (August 25, 2013). "In March on Washington, white activists were largely overlooked but strategically essential". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2018.
^ a b William G. Thomas III (November 3, 2004). "Television News and the Civil Rights Struggle: The Views in Virginia and Mississippi". Southern Spaces. doi:10.18737/M73C7X. Retrieved November 8, 2012.
^ "Cambridge, Maryland, activists campaign for desegregation, USA, 1962 1963". Global Nonviolent Action Database. Swarthmore College. Retrieved January 13, 2015.
^ a b "Baltimore Afro-American  Google News Archive Search". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "The Negro and the American Promise," Archived December 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine produced by Boston public television station WGBH in 1963
^ Harlem CORE, "Film clip of Harlem CORE chairman Gladys Harrington speaking on Malcolm X" Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Malcolm X". The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute. June 29, 2017.
^ Marable, Manning (April 4, 2011). Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention. Penguin. ISBN 9781101445273   via Google Books.
^ Media, American Public. "Say it Plain, Say it Loud  American RadioWorks". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Akinyele Umoja, We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom Movement (NYU Press, 2013), p. 126
^ Francis Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, Regulating the Poor (Random House 1971), p. 238; Abel A. Bartley, Keeping the Faith: Race, Politics and Social Development in Jacksonville, 1940 1970 (Greenwood Publishing Group, 2000), 111
^ "The Ballot or the Bullet". Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Blackside Productions, Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Movement 1954 1985, " Archived April 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, The Time Has Come", Public Broadcasting System
^ Lewis, John (1998). Walking With the Wind. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780684810652.
^ Fannie Lou Hamer, Speech Delivered with Malcolm X at the Williams Institutional CME Church, Harlem, New York, December 20, 1964 Archived January 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
^ George Breitman, ed. Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements (Grove Press, 1965), pp. 106 109
^ Strain, Christopher B. (September 20, 2005). Pure Fire: Self-defense as Activism in the Civil Rights Era. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 9780820326870   via Google Books.
^ Juan Williams, et al, Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years 1954 1965 (Penguin Group, 1988), p. 262
^ Paul Ryan Haygood, "Malcolm's Contribution to Black Voting Rights" Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, The Black Commentator
^ Civil Rights Movement Archive. "St. Augustine FL, Movement 1963" Archived August 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine; "Hayling, Robert B.", Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute, Stanford University; "Black History: Dr. Robert B. Hayling" Archived January 22, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Augustine.com; David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (Harper Collins, 1987) p 316 318
^ Civil Rights Movement Archive. "St. Augustine FL, Movement 1963" Archived August 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine; David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (Harper Collins, 1987) p 317;
^ "MARY PEABODY, 89, RIGHTS ACTIVIST, DIES". The New York Times. February 7, 1981.
^ Snodgrass, M. E. (2009). Civil Disobedience: A-Z entries. New York: Sharpe Reference. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-76568-127-0.
^ a b c d e Mele, Christopher (2017). Race and the Politics of Deception: The Making of an American City. New York: New York University Press. pp. 74 100. ISBN 978-1-4798-6609-0. Retrieved October 27, 2018.
^ Holcomb, Lindsay (October 29, 2015). "Questions surround student activism fifty-two years later". www.swarthmorephoenix.com. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
^ a b c d "African American residents of Chester, PA, demonstrate to end de facto segregation in public schools, 1963 1966". www.nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu. Retrieved October 26, 2018.
^ a b McLarnon, John M. (2002). ""Old Scratchhead" Reconsidered: George Raymond & Civil Rights in Chester, Pennsylvania". Pennsylvania History. 69 (3): 318 326. Retrieved October 27, 2018.
^ "Chester NAACP Scrapbook 1963 1964". www.digitalwolfgram.widener.edu. Retrieved October 20, 2018.
^ "RIOTS MAR PEACE IN CHESTER, PA.; Negro Protests Continue   School Policy at Issue". The New York Times. April 26, 1964. Retrieved July 13, 2018.
^ Mele 2017, p. 96.
^ a b The Mississippi Movement & the MFDP Archived April 24, 2008, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Mississippi: Subversion of the Right to Vote Archived May 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ McAdam, Doug (1988). Freedom Summer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504367-9.
^ Carson, Clayborne (1981). In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Harvard University Press.
^ a b Veterans Roll Call Archived April 23, 2008, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Reeves 1993, pp. 521 524.
^ Youth in the Ghetto: A Study of the Consequences of Powerlessness, Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited, Inc., 1964
^ Poverty and Politics in Harlem, Alphnso Pinkney and Roger Woock, College & University Press Services, Inc., 1970
^ Freedom Ballot in MS Archived August 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Spencer Crump, Black riot in Los Angeles: the story of the Watts tragedy (1966).
^ Hinton, Elizabeth (2016). From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration in America. Harvard University Press. pp. 68 72. ISBN 9780674737235.
^ Joshua, Bloom; Martin, Waldo (2016). Black Against Empire: The History And Politics Of The Black Panther Party. University of California Press. p. 30.
^ Szymanski, Michael (August 5, 1990). "How Legacy of the Watts Riot Consumed, Ruined Man's Life". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved June 22, 2013.
^ Self, Robert O. (August 8, 2005). American Babylon: Race and the Struggle for Postwar Oakland. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-4417-3. Retrieved July 29, 2016   via Google Books.
^ Reitman, Valerie; Landsberg, Mitchell (August 11, 2005). "Watts Riots, 40 Years Later". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "No on Proposition 14: California Fair Housing Initiative Collection". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "Black Thursday". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Folkart, Burt A. (November 5, 1985). "James Groppi, Ex-Priest, Civil Rights Activist, Dies". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "Darren Miles "Everett Dirksen's Role in Civil Rights Legislation" Western Illinois Historical Review, Vol. I Spring 2009" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 23, 2014.
^ a b Hannah-Jones, Nikole (June 25, 2015). "Living Apart: How the Government Betrayed a Landmark Civil Rights Law". Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ "A Walk Through Newark. History. The Riots". Thirteen/WNET. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Miller, Karen (October 1, 1999). "Review of Georgakas, Dan; Surkin, Marvin, Detroit, I Do Mind Dying: A Study in Urban Revolution".
^ a b "American Experience.Eyes on the Prize.Profiles  PBS". PBS. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Hubert G. Locke, The Detroit Riot of 1967 (Wayne State University Press, 1969).
^ Sidney Fine, Expanding the Frontier of Civil Rights: Michigan, 1948 1968 (Wayne State University Press, 2000) p. 325
^ Fine, Sidney (September 20, 2000). Expanding the frontiers of civil rights : Michigan, 1948 1968. Detroit : Wayne State University Press. ISBN 9780814328750   via Internet Archive.
^ "Sidney Fine, "Michigan and Housing Discrimination 1949 1969" Michigan Historical Review, Fall 1997" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 4, 2013.
^ a b "Honorable Charles Mathias Jr. "Fair Housing Legislation: Not an Easy Row To Hoe" US Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2014.
^ "Memphis, Tennessee, sanitation workers strike, 1968 | Global Nonviolent Action Database". nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu. Retrieved May 19, 2020.
^ University, Stanford; Stanford; California 94305 (June 21, 2017). "Reuther, Walter Philip". The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute. Retrieved May 19, 2020.
^ "Coretta Scott King". Spartacus Educational Publishers. Archived from the original on July 5, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2010.
^ Gregg, Khyree. A Concise Chronicle History of the African-American People Experience in America. Henry Epps. p. 284.
^ "Peter B. Levy, "The Dream Deferred: The Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., and the Holy Week Uprisings of 1968" in Baltimore '68 : Riots and Rebirth in an American city(Temple University Press, 2011), p. 6" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2014.
^ "Public Law 90-284, Government Printing Office" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 16, 2014.
^ "Riding On". Time. July 7, 2007. Archived from the original on March 4, 2008. Retrieved October 23, 2007.
^ "ACLU Parchman Prison". Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved November 29, 2007.
^ "Parchman Farm and the Ordeal of Jim Crow Justice". Archived from the original on August 26, 2006. Retrieved August 28, 2006.
^ Goldman, Robert M. Goldman (April 1997). ""Worse Than Slavery": Parchman Farm and the Ordeal of Jim Crow Justice  book review". Hnet-online. Archived from the original on August 29, 2006. Retrieved August 29, 2006.
^ Cleaver, Eldridge (1967). Soul on Ice. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
^ a b Mazumder, Soumyajit (August 30, 2018). "The Persistent Effect of U.S. Civil Rights Protests on Political Attitudes". American Journal of Political Science. 62 (4): 922 935. doi:10.1111/ajps.12384. ISSN 0092-5853. S2CID 158718227.
^ Omar Wasow. "Agenda Seeding: How 1960s Black Protests Moved Elites, Public Opinion and Voting" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2021.
^ Section 703(a)(1), Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, 78 Stat. 241, 255 (July 2, 1964).
^ "The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission". National Archives. August 15, 2016. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
^ Miller, George (October 29, 2002). "H.J.Res.113   107th Congress (2001 2002): Recognizing the contributions of Patsy Takemoto Mink". www.congress.gov. Retrieved March 30, 2020.
^ a b c d Gyant, LaVerne (1996). "Passing the Torch: African American Women in the Civil Rights Movement". Journal of Black Studies. 26 (5): 629 647. doi:10.1177/002193479602600508. JSTOR 2784888. S2CID 143581432.
^ "Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1955". www.crmvet.org.
^ a b c Greene, Christina (November 22, 2016). "Women in the Civil Rights and Black Power Movements". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.212. ISBN 9780199329175. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
^ a b c Urban, Dennis J. (2002). "The Women of SNCC: Struggle, Sexism, and the Emergence of Feminist Consciousness, 1960 66". International Social Science Review. 77 (3/4): 185 190. JSTOR 41887103.
^ Ransby, Barbara (January 20, 2020). "Opinion | Ella Baker's Legacy Runs Deep. Know Her Name". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 20, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020.
^ "Women in the Civil Rights Movement   Civil Rights History Project". The Library of Congress. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
^ "On MLK Day, Honor the Mother of the Civil Rights Movement". Time. Archived from the original on February 20, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
^ Holladay, Jennifer (2009). "Sexism in the Civil Rights Movement: A Discussion Guide".
^ Ling, Peter J.; Monteith, Sharon, eds. (2004). Gender and the Civil Rights Movement. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0813534381.
^ "Women in the Civil Rights Movement". Library of Congress.
^ Delaney, Paul (May 12, 2010). "Dorothy Height and the Sexism of the Civil Rights Movement". The Root.
^ We Charge Genocide Archived April 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine  Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ a b c Carson, Clayborne (1981). In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674447264.
^ Ella, Baker. "Oral History Interview with Ella Baker, September 4, 1974. Interview G-0007. Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007): Electronic Edition. Ella Baker Describes Her Role in the Formation of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" (Interview).
^ "What Should a Sustained Movement Look Like?". Boston Review. June 26, 2012.
^ Francis Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, Poor People's Movements: How They Succeed, How They Fail (Random House, 1977), 182
^ "Timothy B. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams and the Roots of "Black Power" (University of North Carolina Press, 1999), 79 80". Archived from the original on March 26, 2014. Retrieved September 9, 2013.
^ Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 88 89
^ Nicholas Graham, "January 1958: The Lumbees face the Klan" Archived February 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, This Month in North Carolina History
^ Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 149
^ Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 159 164
^ "Williams, Robert Franklin". July 13, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ Ransby, Barbara (November 20, 2003). Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision. Univ of North Carolina Press. ISBN 9780807862704   via Google Books.
^ "The Black Power Movement, Part 2: The Papers of Robert F. Williams" A Guide to the Microfilm Editions of the Black Studies Research Sources (University Publications of America) Archived January 8, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Tyson, Journal of American History (September 1998)
^ Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954 1963 (Simon and Schuster, 1988), 781
^ Marqusee, Mike (June 17, 2004). "By Any Means Necessary". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2021.
^ Walter Rucker, "Crusader in Exile: Robert F. Williams and the International Struggle for Black Freedom in America" The Black Scholar 36, No. 2 3 (Summer Fall 2006): 19 33. URL Archived July 27, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
^ Timothy B. Tyson, "Robert Franklin Williams: A Warrior For Freedom, 1925 1996" Archived July 8, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, Southern Exposure, Winter 1996, Investigating U.S. History (City University of New York)
^ a b c d Nichols, David A. (June 8, 2020). "'Unless we progress, we regress': How Eisenhower Broke Ground on Desegregation". HistoryNet. Retrieved March 4, 2021.
^ Pipes, Kasey (April 4, 2016). "Ike's Forgotten Legacy on Civil Rights: A Lesson in Leadership for Today". RiponSociety. Retrieved March 4, 2021.
^ a b Risen, Clay (2014). The Bill of the Century: The Epic Battle for the Civil Rights Act. Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 76. ISBN 978-1-60819-824-5.
^ Halberstam, David (1968). The Unfinished Odyssey of Robert Kennedy. Random House. p. 142.
^ James Hilty, Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector (Temple University Press, 2000), p. 350-361.
^ Schlesinger, Arthur Jr, Robert Kennedy And His Times (2002)
^ "Law Day Address at the University of Georgia Law School". American Rhetoric. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2016.
^ "The Cold War | American Experience | PBS". www.pbs.org.
^ "Ripple of Hope in the Land of Apartheid: Robert Kennedy in South Africa, June 1966". Archived from the original on March 13, 2005.
^ "COINTELPRO Revisited   Spying & Disruption   In Black and White: The F.B.I. Papers". What Really Happened.
^ "A Huey P. Newton Story   Actions   COINTELPRO". PBS. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved June 23, 2008.
^ Weiner, Tim (2012). Enemies: A History of the FBI (1st ed.). New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6748-0. OCLC 1001918388
^ Hersh, Burton (2007). Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover That Transformed America. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-1982-2. OCLC 493616276
^ Campbell, James (1999). "James Baldwin and the FBI". The Threepenny Review (77): 11. JSTOR 4384813.
^ Talia Whyte, "Baldwin: A literary standard Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine", Black History 43 (27), February 14, 2009.
^ David Zarefsky, President Johnson's war on poverty: Rhetoric and history (2005).
^ Peter J. Ling, "What a difference a death makes: JFK, LBJ, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964." The Sixties 8#2 (2015): 121 137.
^ Robert E. Weems Jr., Business in Black and White: American Presidents and Black Entrepreneurs (2009).
^ Douglas Schoen (2015). The Nixon Effect: How His Presidency Has Changed American Politics. Encounter Books. pp. 34 35. ISBN 978-1-59403-800-6.
^ From Swastika to Jim Crow Archived July 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine PBS Documentary
^ Cannato, Vincent "The Ungovernable City: John Lindsay and his struggle to save New York" Better Books, 2001. ISBN 0-465-00843-7
^ Karen Brodkin (2000). How Jews Became White Folks and What That Says About Race in America. Rutgers University Press.
^ Rogin, Michael (May 29, 1998). Blackface, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot. University of California Press. pp. 262 267. ISBN 978-0-520-21380-7.
^ a b Sachar, Howard (November 2, 1993). A History of Jews in America. myjewishlearning.com. Vintage Books. Archived from the original on July 21, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2015.
^ Winner, Lauren F. "Doubtless Sincere: New Characters in the Civil Rights Cast." In The Role of Ideas in the Civil Rights South, edited by Ted Ownby. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2002, pp. 158 159.
^ Winner, Doubtless Sincere, 164 165.
^ Winner, Doubtless Sincere, 166 167.
^ Davies, Tom Adam. "SNCC, the Federal Government & the Road to Black Power". Retrieved July 29, 2016. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ "Allen J. Matusow "From Civil Rights to Black Power: The Case of SNCC", in Twentieth-Century America: Recent Interpretations (Harcourt Press, 1972), pp. 367 378" (PDF).
^ Marqusee, Mike (June 18, 2004). "By Any Means Necessary". The Nation. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Martin, Douglas (April 24, 2010). "Robert Hicks, Leader in Armed Rights Group, Dies at 81". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2010.
^ Hill, Lance (February 1, 2006). The Deacons for Defense: Armed Resistance and the Civil Rights Movement. Univ of North Carolina Press. ISBN 9780807857021   via Google Books.
^ "Watts Rebellion (Los Angeles)". Stanford University. June 12, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ "American Experience. Eyes on the Prize. Transcript". PBS. Retrieved July 29, 2016.
^ Rickford, Russell (January 14, 2016). We Are an African People: Independent Education, Black Power, and the Radical Imagination. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-986148-4.
^ Bloom, Joshua; Martin, Waldo E. (October 25, 2016). Black Against Empire: The History and Politics of the Black Panther Party. Univ of California Press. pp. 223 236. ISBN 978-0-520-29328-1.
^ "Year End Charts  Year-end Singles  Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved September 8, 2009.
^ a b Bender, Albert (February 13, 2014). "Dr. King spoke out against the genocide of Native Americans". People's World. People's World. Retrieved November 25, 2018.
^ "Facebook labels declaration of independence as 'hate speech'". The Guardian. Retrieved September 7, 2020.
^ Rickert, Levi (January 16, 2017). "Dr. Martin Luther King Jr: Our Nation was Born in Genocide". Native News Online. Native News Online. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2018.
^ Cook, Roy. "'I have a dream for all God's children,' Martin Luther King Jr. Day". American Indian Source. Retrieved November 25, 2018.
^ "How Martin Luther King inspired a Northern Ireland uprising". irishcentral.com. Retrieved September 11, 2020.
^ "Dr. King's Impact on the Fight for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland". nbcnews.com. Retrieved September 11, 2020.
^ Quinn, Allison (November 27, 2014), "Soviet Propaganda Back in Play With Ferguson Coverage", The Moscow Times, retrieved December 17, 2016
^ Volodzko, David (May 12, 2015), "The History Behind China's Response to the Baltimore Riots", The Diplomat, archived from the original on April 28, 2016, retrieved December 17, 2016, Soon Americans who criticized the Soviet Union for its human rights violations were answered with the famous tu quoque argument: 'A u vas negrov linchuyut' (and you are lynching Negroes).
^ Eddy, Sherwood (1934), Russia Today: What Can We Learn from It?, New York: Farrar & Rinehar, pp. 73, 151, OCLC 1617454
^ Dudziak, Mary L. (July 31, 2011). Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy. ISBN 978-0691152431. Retrieved July 13, 2019.
^ a b "White Southerners' Role in Civil Rights". npr.org. Retrieved April 19, 2020.
^ "The white Southerners who fought US segregation". BBC News. March 12, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2020.
^ a b Zelizer, Julian E. (January 8, 2015). "Chapter Seven". The Fierce Urgency of Now: Lyndon Johnson, Congress, and the Battle for the Great Society. Penguin. ISBN 978-1-101-60549-3.
^ "Gillman on Klarman, 'From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality' | H-Law | H-Net". networks.h-net.org. Archived from the original on March 26, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
^ "Racism to Redemption". National Endowment for the Humanities. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2018.
^ Lassiter, Matthew D. (October 24, 2013). The Silent Majority: Suburban Politics in the Sunbelt South. Princeton University Press. pp. 6 7, 302 304. ISBN 978-1-4008-4942-0.
Bibliography
Arsenault, Raymond (2006). Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice. Oxford Press.
Back, Adina "Exposing the Whole Segregation Myth: The Harlem Nine and New York City Schools" in Freedom north: Black freedom struggles outside the South, 1940 1980, Jeanne Theoharis, Komozi Woodard, eds.(Palgrave Macmillan, 2003).
Bartley, Abel A. Keeping the Faith: Race, Politics and Social Development in Jacksonville, 1940 1970 (Greenwood Publishing Group, 2000)
Bass, S. Jonathan (2001) Blessed Are The Peacemakers: Martin Luther King Jr., Eight White Religious Leaders, and the "Letter from Birmingham Jail". Baton Rouge: LSU Press. ISBN 0-8071-2655-1
Beito, David T. and Beito, Linda Royster, Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power, University of Illinois Press, 2009. ISBN 978-0-252-03420-6
Branch, Taylor. Parting the waters: America in the King years, 1954 1963. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988
Breitman, George ed. Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements (Grove Press, 1965)
Brown, Jennie Medgar Evers, Holloway House Publishing, 1994
Bryant, Nicholas Andrew The Bystander: John F. Kennedy And the Struggle for Black Equality (Basic Books, 2006)
Cannato, Vincent "The Ungovernable City: John Lindsay and his struggle to save New York" Better Books, 2001. ISBN 0-465-00843-7
Carson, Clayborne (1981). In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-44727-1.
Chafe, William Henry (1980). Civilities and civil rights : Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black struggle for freedom. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-502625-2.
Chafe, William Henry (2003). The Unfinished Journey: America since World War II. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-515049-0.
Cleaver, Eldridge (1967). Soul on Ice. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Crump, Spencer Black riot in Los Angeles: the story of the Watts tragedy (1966)
Davis, Mike; Wiener, Jon (2020). Set the Night on Fire: L.A. in the Sixties. New York: Verso Books.
Davis, Townsend (1998). Weary Feet, Rested Souls: A Guided History of the Civil Rights Movement. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04592-5.
Dudziak, M.L.: Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy
Erikson, Erik (1969). Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence. New York City: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-31034-4.
Eskew, Glenn T. But for Birmingham: The Local and National Struggles in the Civil Rights Movement (University of North Carolina Press, 1997)
Fine, Sidney Expanding the Frontier of Civil Rights: Michigan, 1948 1968 (Wayne State University Press, 2000)
Finkelman, Paul, ed. (2009). Encyclopedia of African American History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516779-5.
Forman, James (1972). The Making of Black Revolutionaries. New York: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-940880-10-8.
Garrow, David J. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (Harper Collins, 1987)
Gershenhorn, Jerry (2018). Louis Austin and The Carolina Times: A Life in the Long Black Freedom Struggle. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Goluboff, Risa L. The Lost Promise of Civil Rights, Harvard University Press, MA: Cambridge, 2007.
Gregg, Khyree. A Concise Chronicle History of the African-American People Experience in America. Henry Epps.
Hague, Euan; Sebesta, Edward H.; Beirich, Heidi (2008). Neo-Confederacy: A Critical Introduction. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-71837-1.
Hill, Lance The Deacons for Defense: Armed Resistance and the Civil Rights Movement (University of North Carolina Press, 2006)
Hilty, James (2000). Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector. Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-4399-0519-7.
Hoose, Phillip (2009). Claudette Colvin: Twice Toward Justice. New York: Melanie Kroupa Books/Farrar Straus Giroux. ISBN 978-0-312-66105-2.
Houston, Benjamin (2012). The Nashville Way: Racial Etiquette and the Struggle for Social Justice in a Southern City. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-4326-6.
Jackson, Thomas F. (July 17, 2013). From Civil Rights to Human Rights. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-0000-3.
Klarman, Michael J., Brown v. Board of Education and the Civil Rights Movement [electronic resource] : abridged edition of From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality, Oxford; New York : Oxford University Press, 2007.
Levy, Peter B. "The Dream Deferred: The Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., and the Holy Week Uprisings of 1968" in Baltimore '68 : Riots and Rebirth in an American city (Temple University Press, 2011)
Lewis, John (1998). Walking With the Wind. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780684810652.
Locke, Hubert G. The Detroit riot of 1967 (Wayne State University Press, 1969)
Logan, Rayford,The Betrayal of the Negro from Rutherford B. Hayes to Woodrow Wilson. New York: Da Capo Press, 1997.
McAdam, Doug (1988). Freedom Summer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-504367-9.
Marable, Manning Malcolm X: A Life of Reinvention (Penguin Books, 2011)
Matusow, Allen J. "From Civil Rights to Black Power: The Case of SNCC" in Twentieth Century America: Recent Interpretations (Harcourt Press, 1972)
Pinkney, Alphnso and Woock, Roger Poverty and Politics in Harlem, College & University Press Services, Inc., 1970
Piven, Francis Fox and Cloward, Richard Regulating the Poor (Random House 1971)
Piven, Francis Fox and Cloward, Richard Poor People's Movements: How They Succeed, How They Fail (Random House, 1977)
Ransby, Barbara Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision (University of North Carolina Press, 2003).
Reeves, Richard (1993). President Kennedy: Profile of Power. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4.
Robinson, Jo Ann & Garrow, David J. (foreword by Coretta Scott King) The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It (1986) ISBN 0-394-75623-1 Knoxville, University of Tennessee Press.
Rosenberg, Jonathan; Karabell, Zachary (2003). Kennedy, Johnson, and the Quest for Justice: The Civil Rights Tapes. WW Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-05122-3.
Saito, Leland T. (1998). Race and Politics: Asian Americans, Latinos, and Whites in a Los Angeles Suburb. University of Illinois Press.
Schultz, Jeffrey D. (2002). Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics: African Americans and Asian Americans. ISBN 978-1-57356-148-8.
Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. (2002) [1978]. Robert Kennedy and His Times. Houghton Mifflin Books. ISBN 978-0-618-21928-5.
Schoen, Douglas (2015). The Nixon Effect: How His Presidency Has Changed American Politics. Encounter Books. ISBN 978-1-59403-800-6.
Self, Robert O. (2005). American Babylon: Race and the Struggle for Postwar Oakland. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-4417-3.
Smith, Jean Edward (2001). Grant. Simon and Schuster. p. 544. ISBN 978-0-7432-1701-9.
Stephens, Otis H. Jr.; Scheb, John M. II (2007). American Constitutional Law: Civil Rights and Liberties. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-09705-1.
Strain, Christopher Pure Fire:Self-Defense as Activism in the Civil Rights Era (University of Georgia Press, 2005)
Sugrue, Thomas J. Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North  (2008)- 720pp comprehensive history of civil rights issue in the North, 1930s -2000s online
Sugrue, Thomas J. The origins of the urban crisis : race and inequality in postwar Detroit (2014) online
Tucker, William H. The Funding of Scientific Racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund, University of Illinois Press (May 30, 2007)
Tyson, Timothy B. Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams and the Roots of "Black Power" (University of North Carolina Press, 1999)
Umoja, Akinyele We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom Movement (NYU Press, 2013)
Weems, Robert E. Jr., Business in Black and White: American presidents and Black Entrepreneurs (2009)
Weiner, Melissa F. (2010). Power, Protest, and the Public Schools: Jewish and African American Struggles in New York City. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-4772-5.
Wendt, Simon The Spirit and the Shotgun: Armed Resistance and the Struggle for Civil Rights (University of Florida Press, 2007).
Williams, Juan. Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years, 1954 1965. Penguin Books, 1987. ISBN 0-14-009653-1.
Winner, Lauren F. "Doubtless Sincere: New Characters in the Civil Rights Cast." In The Role of Ideas in the Civil Rights South, edited by Ted Ownby. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2002
Woodward, C. Vann The Strange Career of Jim Crow, 3rd rev. ed. (Oxford University Press, 1974).
Young, Coleman Hard Stuff: The Autobiography of Mayor Coleman Young (1994)
Zarefsky, David President Johnson's war on poverty: Rhetoric and history (2005)
Further reading
Abel, Elizabeth. Signs of the Times: The Visual Politics of Jim Crow. (U of California Press, 2010).
Bader, Michael D.M., and Siri Warkentien. "The fragmented evolution of racial integration since the civil rights movement." Sociological Science 3 (2016): 135-166. online
Barnes, Catherine A. Journey from Jim Crow: The Desegregation of Southern Transit (Columbia UP, 1983).
Bloom, Jack M. Class, race, and the civil rights movement (Indiana University Press, 2019).
Branch, Taylor. Pillar of fire: America in the King years, 1963 1965. (1998)
Branch, Taylor. At Canaan's Edge: America In the King Years, 1965 1968. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006. ISBN 0-684-85712-X
Chandra, Siddharth and Angela Williams-Foster. "The 'Revolution of Rising Expectations,' Relative Deprivation, and the Urban Social Disorders of the 1960s: Evidence from State-Level Data." Social Science History, (2005) 29#2 pp:299 332, in JSTOR
Cox, Julian. Road to Freedom: Photographs of the Civil Rights Movement, 1956 1968, Atlanta: High Museum of Art, 2008.
Ellis, Sylvia. Freedom's Pragmatist: Lyndon Johnson and Civil Rights (U Press of Florida, 2013).
Fairclough, Adam. To Redeem the Soul of America: The Southern Christian Leadership Conference & Martin Luther King. The University of Georgia Press, 1987.
Faulkenbury, Evan. Poll Power: The Voter Education Project and the Movement for the Ballot in the American South. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2019.
Garrow, David J. The FBI and Martin Luther King. New York: W.W. Norton. 1981. Viking Press Reprint edition. 1983. ISBN 0-14-006486-9. Yale University Press; Revised and Expanded edition. 2006. ISBN 0-300-08731-4.
Greene, Christina. Our Separate Ways: Women and the Black Freedom Movement in Durham. North Carolina. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Hine, Darlene Clark, ed. Black Women in America (3 Vol. 2nd ed. 2005; several multivolume editions). Short biographies by scholars.
Horne, Gerald. The Fire This Time: The Watts Uprising and the 1960s. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. 1995. Da Capo Press; 1st Da Capo Press ed edition. October 1, 1997. ISBN 0-306-80792-0
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of love, labor of sorrow: Black women, work, and the family, from slavery to the present (2009).
Kasher, Steven. The Civil Rights Movement: A Photographic History, New York: Abbeville Press, 1996.
Keppel, Ben. Brown v. Board and the Transformation of American Culture (LSU Press, 2016). xiv, 225 pp.
Kirk, John A. Redefining the Color Line: Black Activism in Little Rock, Arkansas, 1940 1970. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2002. ISBN 0-8130-2496-X
Kirk, John A. Martin Luther King Jr. London: Longman, 2005. ISBN 0-582-41431-8.
Kousser, J. Morgan, "The Supreme Court And The Undoing of the Second Reconstruction," National Forum, (Spring 2000).
Kryn, Randall L. "James L. Bevel, The Strategist of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement", 1984 paper with 1988 addendum, printed in We Shall Overcome, Volume II edited by David Garrow, New York: Carlson Publishing Co., 1989.
Levy, Peter B. The Civil Rights Movement: A Reference Guide (ABC-CLIO, 2019).
Lowery, Charles D. Encyclopedia of African-American civil rights: from emancipation to the present (Greenwood, 1992).
Marable, Manning. Race, Reform and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction in Black America, 1945 1982. 249 pages. University Press of Mississippi, 1984. ISBN 0-87805-225-9.
McAdam, Doug. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930 1970, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1982.
McAdam, Doug, 'The US Civil Rights Movement: Power from Below and Above, 1945 70', in Adam Roberts and Timothy Garton Ash (eds.), Civil Resistance and Power Politics: The Experience of Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press, 2009. ISBN 978-0-19-955201-6.
Minchin, Timothy J. Hiring the Black Worker: The Racial Integration of the Southern Textile Industry, 1960 1980. University of North Carolina Press, 1999. ISBN 0-8078-2470-4.
Morris, Aldon D. The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement: Black Communities Organizing for Change. New York: The Free Press, 1984. ISBN 0-02-922130-7
Ogletree, Charles J. Jr. (2004). All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on the First Half Century of Brown v. Board of Education. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-05897-0.
Payne, Charles M. I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom Struggle. U of California Press, 1995.
Patterson, James T. Brown v. Board of Education : a civil rights milestone and its troubled legacy Brown v. Board of Education, a Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy]. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-515632-3.
Raiford, Leigh. Imprisoned in a Luminous Glare: Photography and the African American Freedom Struggle Archived August 22, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. (U of North Carolina Press, 2011).
Reed, Thomas Vernon. The art of protest: Culture and activism from the Civil Rights Movement to the present (U of Minnesota Press, 2019).
Richardson, Christopher M.; Ralph E. Luker, eds. (2014). Historical Dictionary of the Civil Rights Movement (2nd ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8108-8037-5.
Riches, William. The civil rights movement: Struggle and resistance (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017), short survey
Sitkoff, Howard. The Struggle for Black Equality (2nd ed. 2008)
Smith, Jessie Carney, ed. Encyclopedia of African American Business (2 vol. Greenwood 2006). excerpt
Sokol, Jason. There Goes My Everything: White Southerners in the Age of Civil Rights, 1945 1975. (Knopf, 2006).
Tsesis, Alexander. We Shall Overcome: A History of Civil Rights and the Law. (Yale University Press, 2008). ISBN 978-0-300-11837-7
Tuck, Stephen. We Ain't What We Ought to Be: The Black Freedom Struggle from Emancipation to Obama (2011).
Historiography and memory
Armstrong, Julie Buckner, ed. (2015). The Cambridge Companion to American Civil Rights Literature. Cambridge University Press. pp. xxiv, 209. ISBN 978-1-316-24038-0.
Berger, Martin A. Seeing through Race: A Reinterpretation of Civil Rights Photography. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.
Berger, Maurice. For All the World to See: Visual Culture and the Struggle for Civil Rights. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2010.
Carawan, Candie. Sing for freedom: The story of the civil rights movement through its songs (NewSouth Books, 2021).
Catsam, Derek (January 2008). "The Civil Rights Movement and the Presidency in the Hot Years of the Cold War: A Historical and Historiographical Assessment". History Compass. 6 (1): 314 344. doi:10.1111/j.1478-0542.2007.00486.x.
Cha-Jua, Sundiata Keita; Lang, Clarence (Spring 2007). "The 'Long Movement' as Vampire: Temporal and Spatial Fallacies in Recent Black Freedom Studies". The Journal of African American History. 92 (2): 265 288. doi:10.1086/JAAHv92n2p265. S2CID 140436349.
Clayton, Dewey M. "Black Lives Matter and the civil rights movement: A comparative analysis of two social movements in the United States." Journal of Black Studies 49.5 (2018): 448-480.
Eagles, Charles W. (November 2000). "Toward New Histories of the Civil Rights Era". The Journal of Southern History. 66 (4): 815 848. doi:10.2307/2588012. JSTOR 2588012.
Fairclough, Adam (December 1990). "Historians and the Civil Rights Movement". Journal of American Studies. 24 (3): 387 398. doi:10.1017/S0021875800033697.
Frost, Jennifer (May 2012). "Using 'Master Narratives' to Teach History: The Case of the Civil Rights Movement" (PDF). History Teacher. 45 (3): 437 446. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2015.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd (March 2005). "The Long Civil Rights Movement and the Political Uses of the Past" (PDF). The Journal of American History. 91 (4): 1233 1263. doi:10.2307/3660172. JSTOR 3660172. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 27, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2016.
Lang, Clarence. "Locating the civil rights movement: An essay on the Deep South, Midwest, and border South in Black Freedom Studies." Journal of Social History 47.2 (2013): 371 400. Online
Lawson, Steven F. (April 1991). "Freedom Then, Freedom Now: The Historiography of the Civil Rights Movement". The American Historical Review. 96 (2): 456 471. doi:10.2307/2163219. JSTOR 2163219.
Lawson, Steven F.; Payne, Charles M. (1998). Debating the Civil Rights Movement, 1945 1968. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9053-4.
Lawson, Steven F. (2003). Civil Rights Crossroads: Nation, Community, and the Black Freedom Struggle. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2693-7.
Payne, Charles M. (2007). "Bibliographic Essay: The Social Construction of History". I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom Struggle. University of California Press. pp. 413 442. ISBN 978-0-520-25176-2.
Robinson, Armstead L.; Sullivan, Patricia, eds. (1991). New Directions in Civil Rights Studies. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0-8139-1319-3.
Sandage, Scott A. (June 1993). "A Marble House Divided: The Lincoln Memorial, the Civil Rights Movement, and the Politics of Memory, 1939 1963" (PDF). The Journal of American History. 80 (1): 135 167. doi:10.2307/2079700. JSTOR 2079700. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 2, 2015.
Strickland, Arvarh E.; Weems, Robert E., eds. (2001). The African American Experience: An Historiographical and Bibliographical Guide. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29838-7.
Zamalin, Alex (2015). African American Political Thought and American Culture: The Nation's Struggle for Racial Justice. Springer. pp. xii, 192. ISBN 978-1-137-52810-0.
Autobiographies and memoirs
Carson, Clayborne; Garrow, David J.; Kovach, Bill; Polsgrove, Carol, eds. Reporting Civil Rights: American Journalism 1941 1963 and Reporting Civil Rights: American Journalism 1963 1973. New York: Library of America, 2003. ISBN 1-931082-28-6 and ISBN 1-931082-29-4.
Dann, Jim. Challenging the Mississippi Firebombers, Memories of Mississippi 1964 65. Baraka Books, 2013. ISBN 978-1-926824-87-1.
Holsaert, Faith et al. Hands on the Freedom Plow Personal Accounts by Women in SNCC. University of Illinois Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-252-03557-9.
Malcolm X (with the assistance of Alex Haley). The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York: Random House, 1965. Paperback ISBN 0-345-35068-5. Hardcover ISBN 0-345-37975-6.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Civil Rights Movement.
Voices from the Southern Civil Rights Movement Exhibit   Provided by the American Archive of Public Broadcasting
Civil Rights Digital Library  Provided by the Digital Library of Georgia.
Civil Rights Movement Archive ~ Provides movement history, personal stories, documents, and photos. Hosted by Tougaloo College.
Civil Rights Movement Timeline;  Provided by History.com on December 4, 2017, and updated on January 19, 2021. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021.
Civil Rights in America  Provided by The National Archives of the United Kingdom.
Television News of the Civil Rights Era 1950 1970  Provided by the University of Virginia.
Provided by the Library of Congress:
The Civil Rights Era  Part of The African American Odyssey: A Quest for Full Citizenship presentation.
Voices of Civil Rights  A project with the collaboration of AARP and the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR).
We Shall Overcome: Historic Places of the Civil Rights Movement  Provided by the National Park Service.
Provided by Southern Poverty Law Center:
"Teaching the Movement: The State Standards We Deserve"  Part of "Teaching Tolerance" project published on September 19, 2011.
"Teaching Tolerance Publishes Guide for Teaching the Civil Rights Movement"  Part of "Teaching Tolerance" project published on March 26, 2014.
"Teaching the Movement 2014: The State of Civil Rights Education in the United States"  Part of "Teaching Tolerance" project published in 2014.
Civil Rights Teaching  Provided by Teaching for Change, a 501(c)(3) organization.
SNCC Digital Gateway  Profiles and primary documents on the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the national civil rights movement organization led by young people. A project of the SNCC Legacy Project, Duke's Center for Documentary Studies, and Duke University Libraries.
Collection: "U.S. Civil Rights Movement" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art
vteCivil rights movement (1954 1968)Events(timeline)Prior to 1954
Journey of Reconciliation
Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore
Sweatt v. Painter (1950)
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950)
Baton Rouge bus boycott
1954 1959
Brown v. Board of Education
Bolling v. Sharpe
Briggs v. Elliott
Davis v. Prince Edward County
Gebhart v. Belton
Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company
Emmett Till
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle
Tallahassee bus boycott
Mansfield school desegregation
1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
"Give Us the Ballot"
Royal Ice Cream sit-in
Little Rock Nine
Cooper v. Aaron
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Ministers' Manifesto
Katz Drug Store sit-in
Kissing Case
Biloxi wade-ins
1960 1963
New Year's Day March
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Atlanta sit-ins
Sit-in movement
Greenville Eight
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Ax Handle Saturday
Gomillion v. Lightfoot
Boynton v. Virginia
University of Georgia desegregation riot
Rock Hill sit-ins
Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address
Freedom Rides
Anniston bombing
Birmingham attack
Garner v. Louisiana
Albany Movement
Cambridge movement
University of Chicago sit-ins
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot
Atlanta's Berlin Wall
"Segregation now, segregation forever"
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
1963 Birmingham campaign
Letter from Birmingham Jail
Children's Crusade
Birmingham riot
16th Street Baptist Church bombing
John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights
Detroit Walk to Freedom
March on Washington
"I Have a Dream"
Big Six
St. Augustine movement
1964 1968
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Chester school protests
Bloody Tuesday
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests
Freedom Summer
workers' murders
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States
Katzenbach v. McClung
1964 1965 Scripto strike
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches
"How Long, Not Long"
Voting Rights Act of 1965
Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections
March Against Fear
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement
Loving v. Virginia
Memphis sanitation strike
King assassination
funeral
riots
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Poor People's Campaign
Green v. County School Board of New Kent County
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.
Activistgroups
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
Atlanta Student Movement
Black Panther Party
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Committee for Freedom Now
Committee on Appeal for Human Rights
An Appeal for Human Rights
Council for United Civil Rights Leadership
Council of Federated Organizations
Dallas County Voters League
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Georgia Council on Human Relations
Highlander Folk School
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights
Lowndes County Freedom Organization
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
Montgomery Improvement Association
NAACP
Youth Council
Nashville Student Movement
Nation of Islam
Northern Student Movement
National Council of Negro Women
National Urban League
Operation Breadbasket
Regional Council of Negro Leadership
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Southern Regional Council
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
The Freedom Singers
United Auto Workers (UAW)
Wednesdays in Mississippi
Women's Political Council
Activists
Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Zev Aelony
Mathew Ahmann
Muhammad Ali
William G. Anderson
Gwendolyn Armstrong
Arnold Aronson
Ella Baker
James Baldwin
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
James Bevel
Claude Black
Gloria Blackwell
Randolph Blackwell
Unita Blackwell
Ezell Blair Jr.
Joanne Bland
Julian Bond
Joseph E. Boone
William Holmes Borders
Amelia Boynton
Bruce Boynton
Raylawni Branch
Stanley Branche
Ruby Bridges
Aurelia Browder
H. Rap Brown
Ralph Bunche
Guy Carawan
Stokely Carmichael
Johnnie Carr
James Chaney
J. L. Chestnut
Shirley Chisholm
Colia Lafayette Clark
Ramsey Clark
Septima Clark
Xernona Clayton
Eldridge Cleaver
Kathleen Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Abraham Lincoln Davis
Angela Davis
Joseph DeLaine
Dave Dennis
Annie Devine
Patricia Stephens Due
Joseph Ellwanger
Charles Evers
Medgar Evers
Myrlie Evers-Williams
Chuck Fager
James Farmer
Walter Fauntroy
James Forman
Marie Foster
Golden Frinks
Andrew Goodman
Robert Graetz
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Lawrence Guyot
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
Fred Hampton
William E. Harbour
Vincent Harding
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Oliver Hill
Donald L. Hollowell
James Hood
Myles Horton
Zilphia Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Ruby Hurley
Cecil Ivory
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Richie Jean Jackson
T. J. Jemison
Esau Jenkins
Barbara Rose Johns
Vernon Johns
Frank Minis Johnson
Clarence Jones
J. Charles Jones
Matthew Jones
Vernon Jordan
Tom Kahn
Clyde Kennard
A. D. King
C.B. King
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Martin Luther King Sr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
Sanford R. Leigh
Jim Letherer
Stanley Levison
John Lewis
Viola Liuzzo
Z. Alexander Looby
Joseph Lowery
Clara Luper
Danny Lyon
Malcolm X
Mae Mallory
Vivian Malone
Bob Mants
Thurgood Marshall
Benjamin Mays
Franklin McCain
Charles McDew
Ralph McGill
Floyd McKissick
Joseph McNeil
James Meredith
William Ming
Jack Minnis
Amzie Moore
Cecil B. Moore
Douglas E. Moore
Harriette Moore
Harry T. Moore
Queen Mother Moore
William Lewis Moore
Irene Morgan
Bob Moses
William Moyer
Elijah Muhammad
Diane Nash
Charles Neblett
Huey P. Newton
Edgar Nixon
Jack O'Dell
James Orange
Rosa Parks
James Peck
Charles Person
Homer Plessy
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Fay Bellamy Powell
Rodney N. Powell
Al Raby
Lincoln Ragsdale
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond
George Raymond Jr.
Bernice Johnson Reagon
Cordell Reagon
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Walter Reuther
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Bernice Robinson
Jo Ann Robinson
Angela Russell
Bayard Rustin
Bernie Sanders
Michael Schwerner
Bobby Seale
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Alexander D. Shimkin
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
Glenn E. Smiley
A. Maceo Smith
Kelly Miller Smith
Mary Louise Smith
Maxine Smith
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Charles Kenzie Steele
Hank Thomas
Dorothy Tillman
A. P. Tureaud
Hartman Turnbow
Albert Turner
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Hollis Watkins
Walter Francis White
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Kale Williams
Robert F. Williams
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Sammy Younge Jr.
Bob Zellner
James Zwerg
By region
Omaha, Nebraska
South Carolina
Movementsongs
"Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round"
"If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus"
"Kumbaya"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
"Oh, Freedom"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"We Shall Not Be Moved"
"We Shall Overcome"
""Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)"
Influences
Nonviolence
Padayatra
Sermon on the Mount
Mahatma Gandhi
Ahimsa
Satyagraha
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Mary McLeod Bethune
Related
Jim Crow laws
Lynching in the United States
Plessy v. Ferguson
Separate but equal
Buchanan v. Warley
Hocutt v. Wilson
Sweatt v. Painter
Hernandez v. Texas
Loving v. Virginia
African-American women in the movement
Fifth Circuit Four
16th Street Baptist Church
Kelly Ingram Park
A.G. Gaston Motel
Brown Chapel
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
Holt Street Baptist Church
Edmund Pettus Bridge
March on Washington Movement
African-American churches attacked
List of lynching victims in the United States
Freedom Schools
Freedom songs
Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"
Voter Education Project
1960s counterculture
African American founding fathers of the United States
Eyes on the Prize
Legacy
In popular culture
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument
Civil Rights Memorial
Civil Rights Movement Archive
Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument
Freedom Rides Museum
Freedom Riders National Monument
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
other King memorials
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum
National Civil Rights Museum
National Voting Rights Museum
St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument
Notedhistorians
Taylor Branch
Clayborne Carson
John Dittmer
Michael Eric Dyson
Chuck Fager
Adam Fairclough
David Garrow
David Halberstam
Vincent Harding
Steven F. Lawson
Doug McAdam
Diane McWhorter
Charles M. Payne
Thomas E. Ricks
Timothy Tyson
Akinyele Umoja
Movement photographers
 Civil rights movement portal
Links to related articles
vteProtests of 1968Movements
1968 movement in Italy
Civil Rights Movement
Anti-nuclear movement
Black Consciousness Movement
Black power movement
Black Power Revolution
Chicano Movement
Cultural Revolution
Gay liberation
Hippie movement
Human rights movement in the Soviet Union
May 1968 events in France
Mexico 68
Northern Ireland civil rights movement
Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
Prague Spring
Red Power movement
Sexual revolution
The Troubles
West German student movement
Women's liberation movement
1968 69 Japanese university protests
Events
1968 Polish political crisis
1968 student demonstrations in Yugoslavia
1968 Democratic National Convention protests
"The whole world is watching"
1968 Miami riot
1968 Red Square demonstration
B stad riots
Battle of Valle Giulia
Ceau escu's speech of 21 August 1968
Central Park be-ins
Columbia University protests of 1968
East L.A. walkouts
King assassination riots
March of the One Hundred Thousand
Memphis sanitation strike
Mexican Movement of 1968 (Tlatelolco massacre)
Movement of 22 March
Occupation of the Old Student House
Occupation of the Student Union Building
Poor People's Campaign
Presidio mutiny
Rodney riots
Third World Liberation Front strikes of 1968
Related
Anti-capitalism
Black power
Counterculture of the 1960s
Flower power
Free love
Hippie
Antisemitism in Poland
Hot Autumn
New Left
Racism in the United States
School discipline
Second-wave feminism
Years of Lead (Italy)
Morocco
Segregation in Northern Ireland
Student activism
Vietnam War
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
vteAfrican AmericansHistory
Timeline
Abolitionism
African American founding fathers
Afrocentrism
American Civil War
Atlantic slave trade
Black genocide
Black Lives Matter
Brown v. Board of Education (1954)
Children of the plantation
Civil Rights Acts
1964
Voting Rights Act of 1965
1968
Civil rights movement 1865 1896
Civil right movement 1896 1954
Civil rights movement 1954 1968
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle (1956)
Sit-in movement
Freedom Riders
Birmingham movement
March on Washington
Selma to Montgomery marches
Chicago Freedom Movement
Post civil rights era
Cornerstone Speech
COVID-19 impact
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Free Negro
Free people of color
George Floyd protests
Great Migration
Second
New
Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013
Jim Crow laws
Lynching
Military history
Nadir of American race relations
The Negro Motorist Green Book
Partus sequitur ventrem
Plantations
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Reconstruction Amendments
Reconstruction era
Redlining
Separate but equal
Slavery
Treatment of slaves
Tulsa race massacre
Underground Railroad
Women's suffrage movement
Culture
Afrofuturism
Art
Black mecca
Businesses
Dance
Family structure
Film
Folktales
Hair
Harlem Renaissance
New Negro
Juneteenth
Kwanzaa
LGBT community
Literature
Music
Musical theater
Names
Negro National Anthem
Neighborhoods
Newspapers
Soul food
Stereotypes
Middle class
Upper class
Notable people
Ralph Abernathy
Maya Angelou
Crispus Attucks
James Baldwin
James Bevel
Julian Bond
Amelia Boynton
James Bradley
Carol Moseley Braun
Edward Brooke
Blanche Bruce
Ralph Bunche
George Washington Carver
Shirley Chisholm
Claudette Colvin
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Medgar Evers
James Farmer
Henry Highland Garnet
Marcus Garvey
Fred Gray
Fannie Lou Hamer
Kamala Harris
Jimi Hendrix
Jesse Jackson
Ketanji Brown Jackson
Michael Jackson
Harriet Jacobs
Barbara Jordan
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Huddie Ledbetter
John Lewis
Joseph Lowery
Malcolm X
Thurgood Marshall
Toni Morrison
Bob Moses
Diane Nash
Barack Obama
Michelle Obama
Rosa Parks
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Colin Powell
Gabriel Prosser
Joseph Rainey
A. Philip Randolph
Hiram Revels
Paul Robeson
Al Sharpton
Fred Shuttlesworth
Clarence Thomas
Emmett Till
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Denmark Vesey
C. T. Vivian
David Walker
Booker T. Washington
Ida B. Wells
Roy Wilkins
Oprah Winfrey
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Education, scienceand technology
Black studies
Black schools
Historically black colleges and universities
Inventors and scientists
Museums
Women
in computer science
in medicine
in STEM fields
Religion
African-American Jews
Islam
American Society of Muslims
Nation of Islam
Black church
Azusa Street Revival
Black Hebrew Israelites
Black theology
Doctrine of Father Divine
Political movements
Anarchism
Back-to-Africa movement
Black power
Movement
Capitalism
Conservatism
Leftism
Pan-Africanism
Populism
Raised fist
Self-determination
Nationalism
Socialism
Civic and economicgroups
Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)
Black Panther Party
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
Nashville Student Movement
National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC)
National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
National Urban League (NUL)
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Thurgood Marshall College Fund
United Negro College Fund (UNCF)
Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL)
Sports
Negro league baseball
Baseball color line
Black players in professional American football
Black NFL quarterbacks
Black players in ice hockey
Muhammad Ali
Arthur Ashe
Jack Johnson
Joe Louis
Jesse Owens
Jackie Robinson
Serena Williams
Athletic associationsand conferences
Central (CIAA)
Mid-Eastern (MEAC)
Southern (SIAC)
Southwestern (SWAC)
Ethnic subdivisions
By African descent
Fula
Gullah
Igbo
Yoruba
Black Indians
Black Seminoles
Cherokee freedmen controversy
Choctaw freedmen
Creek Freedmen
Black Southerners
Blaxicans
Louisiana Creole
of color
Melungeon
Demographics
Neighborhoods
list
U.S. cities with large populations
2000 majorities
2010 majorities
Metropolitan areas
States and territories
Languages
English
American English
African-American English
African-American Vernacular English
Gullah
Louisiana Creole
By state/city
Alabama
Arkansas
California
Los Angeles
San Francisco
Florida
Jacksonville
Tallahassee
Georgia
Atlanta
Hawaii
Illinois
Chicago
Iowa
Davenport
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Baltimore
Massachusetts
Boston
Michigan
Detroit
Mississippi
Nebraska
Omaha
New York
New York City
North Carolina
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Philadelphia
Puerto Rico
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Austin
Dallas Fort Worth
Houston
San Antonio
Utah
Virginia
Diaspora
Africa
Gambia
Ghana
Liberia
Sierra Leone
America
Canada
Dominican Republic
Haiti
Mexico
Trinidad and Tobago
Israel
Europe
France
Lists
African Americans
Activists
Actors
Astronauts
Billionaires
Jurists
Mathematicians
Republicans
Singers
Spingarn Medal winners
US cabinet members
US representatives
US senators
Visual artists
Writers
African-American firsts
Mayors
Sports firsts
US state firsts
Historic places
Index of related articles
Landmark African-American legislation
Lynching victims
Monuments
Neighborhoods
Topics related to the African diaspora
Category
 United States portal
vteCivil Rights MemorialSouthern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)Designer
Maya Lin
Martyrs
Louis Allen
Willie Brewster
Benjamin Brown
Johnnie Mae Chappell
James Chaney
Addie Mae Collins
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Henry Hezekiah Dee
Roman Ducksworth Jr.
Willie Edwards
Medgar Evers
Andrew Goodman
Paul Guihard
Samuel Hammond Jr.
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Wharlest Jackson
Martin Luther King Jr.
Bruce W. Klunder
George W. Lee
Herbert Lee
Viola Liuzzo
Carol Denise McNair
Delano Herman Middleton
Charles Eddie Moore
Oneal Moore
William Lewis Moore
Mack Charles Parker
Lemuel Penn
James Reeb
John Earl Reese
Carole Robertson
Michael Schwerner
Henry Ezekial Smith
Lamar Smith
Emmett Till
Clarence Triggs
Virgil Lamar Ware
Cynthia Wesley
Ben Chester White
Sammy Younge Jr.
Related
Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore
Mississippi Cold Case
Civil Rights Movement
 Civil rights movement portal
vteMartin Luther King Jr.Speeches, writings, movements, and protestsSpeeches
"Give Us the Ballot" (1957)
"I Have a Dream" (1963)
"How Long, Not Long" (1965)
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence" (1967)
"I've Been to the Mountaintop" (1968)
Writings
Stride Toward Freedom (1958)
"What Is Man?" (1959)
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Strength to Love (1963)
"Letter from Birmingham Jail" (1963)
Why We Can't Wait (1964)
Conscience for Change (1967)
Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (1967)
Movementsand protests
Montgomery bus boycott (1955 1956)
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom (1957)
Albany Movement (1961 1962)
Birmingham campaign (1963)
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom (1963)
St. Augustine movement (1963 1964)
Selma to Montgomery marches (1965)
Chicago Freedom Movement (1966)
Mississippi March Against Fear (1966)
Anti-Vietnam War movement (1967)
Memphis sanitation strike (1968)
Poor People's Campaign (1968)
PeopleFamily
Coretta Scott King (wife)
Yolanda King (daughter)
Martin Luther King III (son)
Dexter King (son)
Bernice King (daughter)
Martin Luther King Sr. (father)
Alberta Williams King (mother)
Christine King Farris (sister)
A. D. King (brother)
James Albert King (grandfather)
Alveda King (niece)
Otherleaders
Ralph Abernathy (mentor, colleague)
Ella Baker (colleague)
James Bevel (strategist / colleague)
Dorothy Cotton (colleague)
Jesse Jackson (prot g )
Bernard Lafayette (colleague)
James Lawson (colleague)
John Lewis (colleague)
Joseph Lowery (colleague)
Benjamin Mays (mentor)
Diane Nash (colleague)
James Orange (colleague)
Bayard Rustin (advisor)
Fred Shuttlesworth (colleague)
C. T. Vivian (colleague)
Wyatt Walker (colleague)
Hosea Williams (colleague)
Andrew Young (colleague)
Assassination
Lorraine Motel (now National Civil Rights Museum)
Riots
Funeral
James Earl Ray
Jack Kershaw
U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA)
Martin Luther King Jr. Records Collection Act
Loyd Jowers
Trial
Conspiracy theories
MediaFilm
King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis (1970 documentary)
Our Friend, Martin (1999 animated)
Boycott (2001 film)
The Witness: From the Balcony of Room 306 (2008 documentary)
Selma (2014 film)
All the Way (2016 film)
King in the Wilderness (2018 documentary)
MLK/FBI (2020 documentary)
Rustin (upcoming film)
Television
King (1978 miniseries)
"The First Store" (The Jeffersons, 1980)
"Great X-Pectations" (A Different World, 1993)
"The Promised Land" (New York Undercover, 1997)
Selma, Lord, Selma (1999)
"Return of the King" (The Boondocks, 2006)
Alpha Man: The Brotherhood of MLK (2011 documentary)
Genius
Plays
The Meeting (1987)
The Mountaintop (2009)
I Dream (2010)
All the Way (2012)
Illustrated
Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story (1957 comic book)
Music
"Abraham, Martin and John" (Dion)
"March! For Martin Luther King" (John Fahey)
"Martin Luther King's Dream" (Strawbs)
"Happy Birthday" (Stevie Wonder)
"Pride (In the Name of Love)" (U2)
"MLK" (U2)
"King Holiday" (King Dream Chorus and Holiday Crew)
"By the Time I Get to Arizona" (Public Enemy)
"Shed a Little Light" (James Taylor)
"Up to the Mountain" (Patti Griffin)
"Never Alone Martin" (Jason Upton)
"Symphony of Brotherhood" (Miri Ben-Ari)
Joseph Schwantner: New Morning for the World; Nicolas Flagello: The Passion of Martin Luther King (1995 album)
"A Dream" (Common featuring will.i.am)
"Glory" (Common and John Legend)
Related
Civil rights movement in popular culture
Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inc. v. CBS, Inc.
King v. Trustees of Boston Univ.
Related topics
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
passage
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
National Historical Park
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
National Civil Rights Museum
Big Six
African American founding fathers of the United States
Authorship issues
FBI King suicide letter
Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity
Season for Nonviolence
U.S. Capitol Rotunda sculpture
Oval Office bust
Homage to King sculpture, Atlanta
Hope Moving Forward statue, Atlanta
Statues of Martin Luther King Jr.
Atlanta
Boston
Denver
Houston
Jersey City
Milwaukee
Mexico City
Newark
Statue of Martin Luther King Jr. (Pueblo, Colorado)
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial, San Francisco
Landmark for Peace Memorial, Indianapolis
The Dream sculpture, Portland, Oregon
Kennedy King College
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Library, San Jose
Memorials to Martin Luther King Jr.
King County, Washington
Eponymous streets
America in the King Years
Civil rights movement in popular culture
Lee Jackson King Day
High schools named after King
Schools in France named after King
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteCounterculture of the 1960s (timeline)Arts
Black Arts Movement
Psychedelic art
Psychedelic music
Youthquake
Cultural events
San Francisco Renaissance
Beatlemania
British Invasion
Mods and rockers
Swinging Sixties
Hippie movement
Human Be-In
Summer of Love
Bed-Ins for Peace
Woodstock
Social and politicalmovements
American Indian Movement
Anti-nuclear movement
Back-to-the-land movement
Black Power movement
Civil rights movement
Dialoguero
Free school movement
Free Speech Movement
Gay liberation
Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
protests
Second-wave feminism
Women's liberation movement
Sexual revolution
United States
Media
Underground press
newspapers
Subcultures
Freak scene
Hippie
Mod
Rocker
Rude boy
UK underground
Yippies
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Israel
United States
Japan
Portals: Freedom of speech Journalism Law Society United States 1950s 1960s
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_rights_movement&oldid=1148761800"