Craftsman or tradesman engaged with the erection of machinery
MillwrightOccupationOccupation typeVocationalActivity sectorsConstructionIndustrial manufacturingDescriptionCompetenciesPatience, steady hand, ability to read plans, physically strongEducation requiredIndustrial Training Institute, ApprenticeshipFields ofemploymentConstructionIndustrial manufacturingRelated jobsMachinist, Maintenance Technician
A millwright is a craftsperson or skilled tradesperson who installs, dismantles, maintains, repairs, reassembles, and moves machinery in factories, power plants, and construction sites.[1]
The term millwright (also known as industrial mechanic[2]) is mainly used in the United States, Canada and South Africa to describe members belonging to a particular trade. Other countries use different terms to describe tradesmen engaging in similar activities. Related but distinct crafts include machinists, mechanics and mechanical fitters.
As the name suggests, the original function of a millwright was the construction of flour mills, sawmills, paper mills and fulling mills powered by water or wind, made mostly of wood with a limited number of metal parts.[3] Since the use of these structures originates in antiquity, millwrighting could arguably be considered one of the oldest engineering trades and the forerunner of modern mechanical engineering.[4]
In modern usage, a millwright is engaged with the erection of machinery. This includes such tasks as leveling, aligning, & installing machinery on foundations or base plates, or setting, leveling, & aligning electric motors or other power sources such as turbines with the equipment, which millwrights typically connect with some type of coupling.
History[edit]
Before the modern era[edit]
Originally, millwrights were specialized carpenters who completely designed and constructed mills. Having a working knowledge of driveshafts, bearings, gearing and mechanical belts, they executed every type of engineering operation in the construction of these mills. They designed the patterns of the water wheel systems, carved their gear mechanisms, and finally erected the mill machines.[5]
In the Hellenistic period, Greek millwrights invented the two main components of watermills, the waterwheel and toothed gearing. Greeks, along with the Romans, were the first to operate undershot, overshot and breastshot waterwheel mills.[6]
Muslim millwrights adopted the Greek watermill technology from the Byzantine Empire, where it had been applied for centuries in those provinces conquered by the Muslims. They used several solutions to achieve the maximum output from watermills, by either mounting them to piers of bridges to take advantage of the increased flow or by using a shipmill, a type of watermill powered by water wheels mounted on the sides of ships moored in midstream.[7]
In Medieval Europe, millwrights built the first industrial mills which introduced new innovative uses of waterpower. A survey of the types introduced in Western Europe was conducted by Adam Robert Lucas.[8]
In China, in the late 14th century, the millwrights were known as jiang and kong (a special term for artisan-engineers) and existed at an early age. They learned their craft on the shop floor, in a kind of apprenticeship scheme.[9]
Sir William Fairbairn, a millwright of the late 19th century, wrote in his "Treatise on Mills and Millwork", "...the millwright of the late centuries was an itinerant engineer and mechanic of high reputation. He could handle the axe, the hammer, and the plane with equal skill and precision...he could set out and cut in the furrows of a millstone with an accuracy equal or superior to that of the miller himself."[10]
Modern era[edit]
The introduction of the steam engine and the increasing importance of iron and steel changed the global industrial landscape.
It created specialisation and the birth of new trades (turners, fitters, machine makers, and mechanical engineers). It also changed the traditional job of the millwright.
As James F. Hobart wrote in his book Millwrighting, "The ancient type of millwright has passed away. He has gone with the old time carpenter and obsolete shoemaker - the former with 500 pounds of molding planes and woodworking tools, the latter with nothing but pegging and sewing awls, hammer, and knife..."[11]
Through the 20th century, the trade adapted to the change. Modern millwrights work with steel and other materials and must often combine the skills of other mechanical trades in order to successfully install industrial machinery or to assemble machines from pre-fabricated parts.  Modern millwrights must also be able to read blueprints and other schematics to aid them in the construction of complex systems. Millwrights are frequently unionized, with estimated numbers of around 45% in the US.[12]
Modern millwrights[edit]
General characteristics[edit]
Millwrights install, maintain, repair and troubleshoot stationary industrial machinery and mechanical equipment in sites such as factories, production plants and recreational facilities. However, the exact duties of a millwright vary depending on whether they are unionized or not, with union rules typically being more restrictive than non-union situations, which may have their own job description.
On a typical job millwrights:[13]
read diagrams and schematic drawings and service manuals to determine work procedures
operate rigging equipment and dollies to place heavy machinery and parts
fit bearings, align gears and shafts, attach motors, and connect couplings and belts to precise tolerances
align and test equipment, and make any necessary adjustments
perform predictive and operational procedures
repair or replace defective parts
service and repair hydraulic and pneumatic systems
may do some welding (when not structural) and tack welding (a weld that is adequate in size to temporarily hold components in place until it can be completely welded by a registered apprentice welder or a journeyman welder when it is structural) and fabrication as well as maintain an inventory of replacement parts.
may install concrete for supports or flooring as needed.
Modern standards of practice for millwrights also require working:
within precise limits or standards of accuracy
at heights without fear
using of logical step-by-step procedures in work
planning, solving problems and decision-making based on quantifiable information.
Areas of specialty[edit]
Millwrights by nature of their profession have to be extremely well versed in many aspects of construction/demobilization. They may install a conveyor system at an airport one week and the following week work at an industrial wastewater treatment plant.
Power industry[edit]
Millwrights in the power generation industry can assemble, set, align and balance turbines or rotors, as well as install pumps, valves, cranes, fans, and travelling screens.  Millwrights also perform critical lifts involving major components to be flown level at up to and within .005 inch (5 thousandths of an inch). Because of their training and expertise, Millwrights are generally chosen to work on tasks associated with flying and setting heavy machinery.
Training and education[edit]
Millwrights are also in demand as teachers for vocational programs, both at the high school level and in post-secondary institutions. Many high schools feature fabrication courses that include metal work, where the experience of a qualified millwright is valuable. Often, these millwrights are paid a premium based on their years of field experience.[citation needed]
Training[edit]
Millwrights must have a good understanding of fluid mechanics (hydraulics and pneumatics), and all of the components involved in these processes, such as valves, cylinders, pumps and compressors.
They are also trained to work with a wide array of precision tools, such as calipers, micrometers, dial indicators, levels, gauge blocks, and optical and laser alignment tooling.
Most millwrights are educated through apprenticeship programs where they receive a combination of classroom education along with a good deal of on-the-job training. For example, in Alberta, the term of apprenticeship for a millwright is four years (four 12-month periods) including a minimum of 1560 hours of on-the-job training and eight weeks of technical training each year.[13]
Within the Steelworkers Union, known as the United Steelworkers or USW, the largest Industrial Union in North America, there is also a mix of both classroom and on-the-job training. Upon successful completion of required testing in blueprints, hydraulics, pneumatics, rigging, pipefitting, welding, burning, gears, couplings, and other various types of mechanical fasteners and machinery, as well as mobile equipment and other heavy machinery, a Millwright must also have 10 years of experience and seniority before being allowed to acquire one's Journeyman card from the International Union.
Apprentices are usually paid a percentage of the average millwright's wage, and this percentage increases with experience.
A typical training course, to qualify as a millwright, may include, among others, the following:[14]
Shaft alignment
Rigging
Welding
Machining
Electrical wiring
Steel fabrication
Conveyor systems
Steam turbine installation
Gas turbine installation
Blueprint basic, intermediate and advanced
Safety basic, intermediate and advanced
Labor history
Associates degree classes
South Africa[edit]
In South Africa, the millwright trade (especially focused on the mining sector) enjoys a far more versatile description than in most other countries.[citation needed]
Fields wherein South African millwrights may operate include:
Low-, medium- and high-voltage electrical fault finding, installation, and maintenance.
PLC maintenance, installations, operations and fault finding.
Fitting; installation and maintenance of most mechanical equipment, as well as hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
Steelworks, rigging,
and various other miscellaneous fields all depending on the site, company, Mine Health and Safety Act, personal interest and specialization.
At most trades training centers, prospective millwright artisans are required to have a certain level of theoretical certification (e.g. N3-Nated- certificate) and psychometric characteristics, judged by thorough testing, in order to qualify for the foundation practical and theoretical technical training.
After being trained in a multitude of different fields, novice, unqualified Millwrights enter in an apprenticeship for "on-the-job" training. There they work alongside all available artisans regardless of trade, depending on the institution. Once they meet a structured quota of experience and pass the necessary modules, apprentices have two months to prepare for their practical Trade Test. After they passed, they receive the certification and status of a qualified Millwright Tradesman.[15]
Once millwrights qualify, they have the opportunity to qualify as technicians, engineers, planners, foremen and many other routes requiring mainly electrical and mechanical expertise.
Many millwrights choose to enter the private sector to work on a contractual basis.
Prominent historical millwrights[edit]
A number of prominent early-modern civil engineers originally trained as millwrights, including:
James Brindley
John Rennie
William Fairbairn
Oliver Evans
See also[edit]
Stationary engineer
References[edit]
^ "Millwright". sokanu.com. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
^ "Industry Training Authority (ITA)". itabc.ca. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
^ Evans, Oliver; Cadwallader Evans; Thomas Ellicott (1848). The young mill-wright and miller's guide, 12th edition. Lea & Blanchard.
^ "Union Millwrights Machine Erectors". UnionMillwright.com. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
^ Oliver, Ron. "Millwright History". UnionMillwright.com. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
^ Oleson 1984, pp. 325ff. harvnb error: no target: CITEREFOleson1984 (help); Oleson 2000, pp. 217 302 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFOleson2000 (help); Donners & Waelkens 2002, pp. 10 15 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFDonnersWaelkens2002 (help); Wikander 2000, pp. 371 400 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWikander2000 (help)
^ HistoryofSciences.htm Archived 2007-12-25 at the Wayback Machine
^ Adam Robert Lucas, 'Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds. A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe', Technology and Culture, Vol. 46, (January 2005), pp. 1 30 (17).
^ Prak, Maarten; Jan Luiten van Zanden;  et al. (2013). Technology, Skills and the Pre-Modern Economy in the East and the West, Essays Dedicated to the Memory of S. R. Epstein. Brill. ISBN 9789004251571.
^ Fairbairn, William (1863). Treatise on Mills and Millwork, Part I. London: Longmans, Green and Company. Retrieved 14 January 2016.
^ Hobart, James F. (James Francis) (1919). Millwrighting (2nd ed., rev. and enl ed.). McGraw-Hill Book Company, inc.; [etc., etc.] Retrieved 14 January 2016.
^ unionstats.com
^ a b Government of Alberta (September 2012). "Tradesecrets - Millwright". Tradesecrets. Alberta Government. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
^ millwright
^ "Exxaro Integrated Annual Report 2010 - Human resources". FinancialResults.co.za. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
vteMetalworkingvteMachining and computingComputer-aidedengineering
2.5D
CAD
CAM
G-code
Numerical control (NC and CNC)
Stewart platform
Drilling andthreading
Die head
Drill
Drill bit
Drill bit shank
Drill bit sizes
Drilling
List of drill and tap sizes
Tap and die
Tap wrench
Threading
Grinding andlapping
Abrasive
Abrasive machining
Angle grinder
Bench grinder
Coated abrasive
Cylindrical grinder
Diamond plate
Flick grinder
Grinding
Grinding dresser
Grinding machine
Grinding wheel
Jig grinder
Lapping
Sanding
Sharpening stone
Spark testing
Surface grinder
Tool and cutter grinder
Machining
Boring
Broaching
Electrical discharge machining
Electrochemical machining
Electron-beam machining
End mill
Engraving
Facing
Hobbing
Jig borer
Machine tool
Machining
Metal lathe
Milling
Milling cutter
Pantograph
Photochemical machining
Planer
Reamer
Rotary transfer machine
Shaper
Skiving
Turning
Ultrasonic machining
Machine tools
Angle plate
Chuck
Collet
Fixture
Indexing head
Jig
Lathe center
Machine taper
Magnetic switchable device
Mandrel
Rotary table
Wiggler
Terminology
Cutting fluid
Machining vibrations
Speeds and feeds
Swarf
Tolerance
Tool and die making
Tramp oil
Workpiece
vteMetalworking toolsCutting machines
Bandsaw
Cold saw
Laser
Miter saw
Plasma
Water jet cutter
Cutting tools
Broach
Burr
Chisel
Counterbore
Countersink
End mill
File
Hand scraper
Milling cutter
Nibbler
Oxy-fuel cutting torch
Reamer
Shears
Tipped tool
Tool bit
Forming tools
Brake
Die
English wheel
Hydraulic press
Machine press
Punch press
Screw press
Stamping press
Hand tools
Clamp
Combination square
Drift pin
Hacksaw
Hammer
Hand scraper
Machinist square
Needlegun scaler
Piercing saw
Pliers
Punch
Scriber
Tap and die
Tongs
Vise
Workbench
Wrench
Machine tooling
Angle plate
Chuck
Collet
Fixture
Indexing head
Jig
Lathe center
Machine taper
Magnetic switchable device
Mandrel
Rotary table
Wiggler
Measuring instruments
Bore gauge
Caliper
Center gauge
Dial indicator
Engineer's blue
Engineer's spirit level
Feeler gauge
Gauge
Gauge block
Go/no go gauge
Height gauge
Machinist square
Marking blue
Marking gauge
Marking out
Micrometer
Optical comparator
Radius gauge
Ruler
Sine bar
Straightedge
Surface plate
Tape measure
Thread pitch gauge
Vernier scale
Smithing tools
Anvil
Forge
Fuller
Hardy tools
Pritchel
Steam hammer
Swage block
Trip hammer
Casting
Fabrication
Forming
Jewellery
Machining
Metallurgy
Smithing
Tools and terminology
Welding
vteConstructionTypes
Home construction
Offshore construction
Underground construction
Tunnel construction
History
Architecture
Construction
Structural engineering
Timeline of architecture
Water supply and sanitation
Professions
Architect
Building engineer
Building estimator
Building officials
Chartered Building Surveyor
Civil engineer
Civil estimator
Clerk of works
Project manager
Quantity surveyor
Site manager
Structural engineer
Superintendent
Trades workers(List)
Banksman
Boilermaker
Bricklayer
Carpenter
Concrete finisher
Construction foreman
Construction worker
Electrician
Glazier
Ironworker
Millwright
Plasterer
Plumber
Roofer
Steel fixer
Welder
Organizations
American Institute of Constructors (AIC)
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC)
Associated General Contractors of America (AGC)
Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC)
Build UK
Construction History Society
Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES)
Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE)
Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA)
The Concrete Society
Construction Management Association of America (CMAA)
Construction Specifications Institute (CSI)
FIDIC
Home Builders Federation (HBF)
Lighting Association
National Association of Home Builders (NAHB)
National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC)
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA)
National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC)
National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA)
Railway Tie Association (RTA)
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS)
Scottish Building Federation (SBF)
Society of Construction Arbitrators
By country
India
Iran
Japan
Romania
United Kingdom
Regulation
Building code
Construction law
Site safety
Zoning
Architecture
Style
List
Industrial architecture
British
Indigenous architecture
Interior architecture
Landscape architecture
Vernacular architecture
Engineering
Architectural engineering
Building services engineering
Civil engineering
Coastal engineering
Construction engineering
Structural engineering
Earthquake engineering
Environmental engineering
Geotechnical engineering
Methods
List
Earthbag construction
Monocrete construction
Slip forming
Other topics
Building material
List of building materials
Millwork
Construction bidding
Construction delay
Construction equipment theft
Construction loan
Construction management
Construction waste
Demolition
Design build
Design bid build
Heavy equipment
Interior design
Megaproject
Megastructure
Plasterwork
Damp
Proofing
Parge coat
Roughcast
Harling
Real estate development
Sustainability in construction
Unfinished building
Urban design
Urban planning
 Outline
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Millwright&oldid=1149459526"