British political party
Conservative and Unionist Party LeaderRishi SunakLords LeaderThe Lord TrueChief WhipsSimon Hart (Commons)The Baroness Williams of Trafford (Lords)ChairmanGreg HandsChief ExecutiveStephen Massey[1]Founded1834; 189 years ago (1834) (original form)1912; 111 years ago (1912) (current form)Merger ofConservative PartyLiberal Unionist PartyPreceded byToriesHeadquartersConservative Campaign Headquarters
4 Matthew Parker Street, London SW1H 9HQYouth wingYoung Conservatives[2]Women's wingConservative Women's OrganisationOverseas wingConservatives AbroadLGBT wingLGBT+ ConservativesMembership (2022) 172,437[3]IdeologyConservatism (British)[4][5]Economic liberalism[5][6]British unionism[7][8]Political positionCentre-right[9][10]European affiliationNone[note 1]International affiliationInternational Democrat UnionIrish affiliationUlster Unionist Party (1922 1972)Irish Unionist Alliance (1891 1922)Irish Conservative Party (1834 1891)Colours  Sky blueSlogan"Getting Britain Moving" (since 2022)Governing bodyConservative Party BoardDevolved or semi-autonomous branchesLondon ConservativesScottish ConservativesWelsh ConservativesNorthern Ireland ConservativesParliamentary party1922 CommitteeHouse of Commons355 / 650House of Lords261 / 777Scottish Parliament31 / 129Senedd16 / 60Regional mayors[nb]2 / 10London Assembly9 / 25PCCs and PFCCs30 / 39Directly elected Mayors2 / 16Councillors[nb][13]6,603 / 19,187Websitewww.conservatives.com Politics of the United KingdomPolitical partiesElections^ Mayor of London and nine combined authority mayors.^ Councillors of local authorities in England (including 25 aldermen of the City of London) and Scotland, principal councils in Wales and local councils in Northern Ireland.
The Conservative Party, officially the Conservative and Unionist Party and also known colloquially as the Tories, is one of the two main political parties in the United Kingdom, along with the Labour Party. It is the current governing party, having won the 2019 general election. It has been the primary governing party in the United Kingdom since 2010. The party is on the centre-right of the political spectrum, and encompasses various ideological factions including one-nation conservatives, Thatcherites, and traditionalist conservatives. The party currently has 355 Members of Parliament, 260 members of the House of Lords, 9 members of the London Assembly, 31 members of the Scottish Parliament, 16 members of the Welsh Parliament, 4 directly elected mayors, 30 police and crime commissioners, and around 6,619 local councillors.[14] It holds the annual Conservative Party Conference.[15]
The Conservative Party was founded in 1834 from the Tory Party and was one of two dominant political parties in the 19th century, along with the Liberal Party. Under Benjamin Disraeli, it played a preeminent role in politics at the height of the British Empire. In 1912, the Liberal Unionist Party merged with the party to form the Conservative and Unionist Party. Since the 1920s, the Labour Party emerged to be the Conservatives' main rival and the Conservative Labour political rivalry has shaped modern British politics for the last century.
In 2010, the Conservatives entered a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats.[16][17] Following the 2015 general election, the Conservatives formed a government with a small majority.[18] A snap general election in 2017 resulted in the Conservatives losing their majority and governing through a confidence and supply arrangement with the Democratic Unionist Party.[19][20] In the 2019 general election, the Conservatives won an 80-seat majority, but a series of scandals led to a motion of no confidence in Boris Johnson, the July 2022 government crisis and the prime minister announcing his resignation pending a leadership contest.[21][22][not verified in body] Johnson was succeeded by Liz Truss, who announced her own resignation less than two months later following another government crisis.[23] Rishi Sunak was elected unopposed as leader of the party on 24 October 2022.
The party has generally adopted liberal economic policies favouring free markets, including deregulation, privatisation, and marketisation, since the 1980s, although historically it advocated for protectionism. The party is British unionist, opposing a united Ireland as well as Scottish and Welsh independence, and has been critical of devolution. Historically, the party supported the continuance and maintenance of the British Empire. The party has taken various approaches towards the European Union (EU), with eurosceptic and, to an increasingly lesser extent, pro-European factions within it. It embraced a strongly eurosceptic position, with the slogan "Get Brexit Done", following the decision to leave the EU in a 2016 referendum held under the Conservative Cameron government. It historically took a socially conservative approach,[24][25] but its social policy has become more liberal, evidenced by the legalisation of same-sex marriage under the Conservative Liberal Democrat coalition in 2014, the lifting of the ban on women in combat roles in the military in 2016 under the Cameron government and the legalisation of medical cannabis in 2018 under the second May ministry. In defence policy, it favours a strong military capability including an independent nuclear weapons programme and commitment to NATO membership.
For much of modern British political history, the United Kingdom exhibited a wide urban rural political divide;[26] the Conservative Party's voting and financial support base has historically consisted primarily of homeowners, business owners, farmers,  real estate developers and middle class voters, especially in rural and suburban areas of England.[27][28][29][30][31] However, since the EU referendum in 2016, the Conservatives have also targeted working class voters in small and medium-sized urban areas (which were traditionally Labour supporting) by utilising targeted political campaigns against the perceived harms caused by the freedom of movement for workers in the European Union (within the European Single Market) and the European Convention on Human Rights.[32][33][34][35] The Conservatives' domination of British politics throughout the 20th century having governed for 65 nonconsecutive years and its re-emergence in the 2010s has led to it being referred to as one of the most successful political parties in the Western world.[36][37][38][better source needed]
The London, Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish branches of the party are semi-autonomous. The Conservatives are a founding member party of the International Democrat Union, and were a founding member of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party.
History
Main article: History of the Conservative Party (UK)
 Robert Peel, twice Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and founder of the Conservative Party
Origins
The Conservative Party was created in the 1830s by Robert Peel. However, some writers trace its origins to the Tory Party which it soon replaced, the name of which had originated as an insult in the reign of Charles II in the 1670s Exclusion Crisis. Other historians point to a faction, rooted in the 18th century Whig Party, that coalesced around William Pitt the Younger in the 1780s. They were known as "Independent Whigs", "Friends of Mr Pitt", or "Pittites" and never used terms such as "Tory" or "Conservative". Pitt died in 1806. From about 1812 on the name "Tory" was commonly used for a new party that, according to historian Robert Blake, "are the ancestors of Conservatism".  Blake adds that Pitt's successors after 1812 "were not in any sense standard-bearers of 'true Toryism'".[39]
 Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, served as the first Conservative Secretary of State.
The term "Conservative" was suggested as a title for the party by a magazine article by J. Wilson Croker in the Quarterly Review in 1830.[40] The name immediately caught on and was formally adopted under the aegis of Robert Peel around 1834. Peel is acknowledged as the founder of the Conservative Party, which he created with the announcement of the Tamworth Manifesto.  The term "Conservative Party" rather than Tory was the dominant usage by 1845.[41][42]
Conservatives and Unionists (1867 1914)
 Winston Churchill, who was twice Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
The widening of the electoral franchise in the 19th century forced the Conservative Party to popularise its approach under Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli, who carried through their own expansion of the franchise with the Reform Act of 1867. The party was initially opposed to further expansion of the electorate which Liberal Prime Minister William Gladstone had wanted but eventually acquiesced and allowed passage of Gladstone's 1884 Reform Act. In 1886, the party formed an alliance with Spencer Compton Cavendish, Lord Hartington (later the 8th Duke of Devonshire) and Joseph Chamberlain's new Liberal Unionist Party and, under the statesmen Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, Lord Salisbury and Arthur Balfour, held power for all but three of the following twenty years before suffering a heavy defeat in 1906 when it split over the issue of free trade.  Historian Richard Shannon argues that while Salisbury presided over one of the longest periods of Tory dominance, he misinterpreted and mishandled his election successes. Salisbury's blindness to the middle class and reliance on the aristocracy prevented the Conservatives from becoming a majority party.[43] Historian E. H. H. Green argues that after Salisbury's retirement the Party was ideologically driven and resembled a broader European conservatism. After its defeat in 1906, a radical conservatism emerged that sought to promote "tariff reform" (that is high new tariffs) to unite the British Empire and protect British agriculture and industry from foreign competition and head off the threat of socialism.[44]
Young Winston Churchill denounced Chamberlain's attack on free trade, and helped organise the opposition inside the Unionist/Conservative Party. Nevertheless, Balfour, as party leader, followed Chamberlain's policy introduced protectionist legislation.[45] The high tariff element called itself "Tariff Reformers" and in a major speech in Manchester on 13 May 1904, Churchill warned their takeover of the Unionist/Conservative party would permanently brand it as follows:
A party of great vested interests, banded together in a formidable confederation; corruption at home, aggression to cover it up abroad; the trickery of tariff juggles, the tyranny of a party machine; sentiment by the bucketful; patriotism by the imperial pint; the open hand at the public exchequer, the open door at the public-house; dear food for the million, cheap labour for the millionaire.[46]
Two weeks later, Churchill crossed the floor and formally joined the Liberal Party (he rejoined the Conservatives in 1925). In December, Balfour lost control of his party, as the defections multiplied. He was replaced by Liberal Prime Minister Henry Campbell-Bannerman who called an election in January 1906, which produced a massive Liberal victory with a gain of 214 seats.  Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith enacted a great deal of reform legislation, but the Unionists worked hard at grassroots organizing. Two general elections were held in 1910, one in January and one in December. The two main parties were now almost dead equal in seats. The Unionists had more popular votes but the Liberals kept control with a coalition with the Irish Parliamentary Party.[47][48]
In 1912, the Liberal Unionists merged with the Conservative Party. In Ireland, the Irish Unionist Alliance had been formed in 1891 which merged Unionists who were opposed to Irish Home Rule into one political movement. Its MPs took the Conservative whip at Westminster, and in essence, formed the Irish wing of the party until 1922. In Britain, the Conservative party was known as the Unionist Party because of its opposition to home rule in Ireland.[49][50]
Under Bonar Law's leadership in 1911 14, the Party morale improved, the "radical right" wing was contained, and the party machinery strengthened. It made some progress toward developing constructive social policies.[51] Historian Jeremy Smith says Bonar Law was pushing hard certainly blustering and threatening, and perhaps bluffing but in the end his strategy proved both coherent and effective.[52]
First World War
Further information: History of the United Kingdom during the First World War
While the Liberals were mostly against the war until the invasion of Belgium, Conservative leaders were strongly in favour of aiding France and stopping Germany. The Liberal party was in full control of the government until its mismanagement of the war effort under the Shell Crisis badly hurt its reputation. An all-party coalition government was formed in May 1915. In late 1916 Liberal David Lloyd George became prime minister but the Liberals soon split and the Conservatives dominated the government, especially after their landslide in the 1918 election.  The Liberal party never recovered, but Labour gained strength after 1920.[53]
Nigel Keohane finds that the Conservatives were bitterly divided before 1914, especially on the issue of Irish Unionism and the experience of three consecutive election losses. However the war pulled the party together, allowing it to emphasise patriotism as it found new leadership and worked out its positions on the Irish question, socialism, electoral reform, and the issue of intervention in the economy. The fresh emphasis on anti-Socialism was its response to the growing strength of the Labour Party. When electoral reform was an issue, it worked to protect their base in rural England.[54] It aggressively sought female voters in the 1920s, often relying on patriotic themes.[55]
 1929 Conservative poster attacking the Labour Party
1920 1945
Main article: Interwar Britain
In 1922, Bonar Law and Stanley Baldwin led the breakup of the coalition, and the Conservatives governed until 1923, when a minority Labour government led by Ramsay MacDonald came to power. The Conservatives regained power in 1924 and remained in power for the full five-year term. They were defeated in 1929 as a minority Labour government, again led by MacDonald, took office. In 1931, following the collapse of the Labour minority government, it entered another coalition, which was dominated by the Conservatives with some support from factions of both the Liberal Party and the Labour Party (National Labour and National Liberals).[56] In May 1940, a more balanced coalition was formed,[56] the National Government, which, under the leadership of Winston Churchill, saw the United Kingdom through World War II. However, the party lost the 1945 general election in a landslide to the resurgent Labour Party, which won their first-ever majority government.[57][58]
The concept of the "property-owning democracy" was coined by Noel Skelton in 1923 and became a core principle of the party.[59]
1945 1963
Main article: Political history of the United Kingdom (1945 present)
Popular dissatisfaction
While serving in Opposition during the late 1940s, the Conservative Party exploited and incited growing public anger at food rationing, scarcity, controls, austerity, and omnipresent government bureaucracy. It used the dissatisfaction with the socialist and egalitarian policies of the Labour Party to rally middle-class supporters and build a political comeback that won them the 1951 general election. Their appeal was especially effective to housewives, who faced more difficult shopping conditions after the war than during the war.[60]
Modernising the party
 Harold Macmillan is closely associated with the post-war settlement.
In 1947, the party published its Industrial Charter which marked its acceptance of the "post-war consensus" on the mixed economy and labour rights.[61] David Maxwell Fyfe chaired a committee into Conservative Party organisation that resulted in the Maxwell Fyfe Report (1948 49). The report required the party to do more fundraising, by forbidding constituency associations from demanding large donations from candidates, with the intention of broadening the diversity of MPs. In practice, it may have had the effect of lending more power to constituency parties and making candidates more uniform.[62]
The success of the Conservative Party in reorganising itself was validated by its victory at the 1951 general election. Winston Churchill, the party leader, brought in a Party chairman to modernise the creaking institution. Frederick Marquis, 1st Earl of Woolton, was a successful department store owner and wartime Minister of Food. As Party chairman 1946 55, he rebuilt the local organisations with an emphasis on membership, money, and a unified national propaganda appeal on critical issues. To broaden the base of potential candidates, the national party provided financial aid to candidates and assisted the local organisations in raising local money. Woolton emphasised rhetoric that characterised the opponents as "Socialist" rather than "Labour". The libertarian influence of Professor Friedrich Hayek's 1944 best-seller Road to Serfdom was apparent in the younger generation, but that took another quarter-century to have a policy impact. By 1951, Labour had worn out its welcome in the middle classes; its factions were bitterly embroiled. The Conservatives felt ready to govern again.[63]
With a narrow victory at the 1951 general election, despite losing the popular vote, Churchill was back in power. Although he was ageing rapidly, he had national and global prestige. Apart from rationing, which was ended in 1954, most of the welfare state enacted by Labour were accepted by the Conservatives and became part of the "post-war consensus" that was satirised as Butskellism and that lasted until the 1970s.[64][65] The Conservatives were conciliatory towards unions, but they did privatise the steel and road haulage industries in 1953.[66] During the Conservatives' thirteen-year tenure in office, pensions went up by 49% in real terms, sickness and unemployment benefits by 76% in real terms, and supplementary benefits by 46% in real terms. However, family allowances fell by 15% in real terms during that period.[67]
"Thirteen Wasted Years" was a popular slogan attacking the Conservative record 1951 1964. Criticism came primarily from Labour. In addition, there were attacks by the right wing of the Conservative Party itself for its tolerance of socialist policies and reluctance to curb the legal powers of labour unions, thus making them complicit in the Post-war consensus. The critics contend that Britain was overtaken by its economic competitors, and was unable to prevent a troublesome wage-price upward spiral. Historian Graham Goodlad calls for taking a longer perspective. He argues that there were significant advances in transport, healthcare, and higher education.  It would have been unrealistic to expect that Britain could continue as a world power after the huge expense of the Second World War, and the independence of India and other colonies. Goodlad says the Conservative foreign-policy leadership properly adjusted Britain's world role by building an independent nuclear capacity and maintaining a leading role in world affairs, and anyway successive governments seldom did a better job.[68]
The Conservatives were re-elected in 1955 and 1959 with larger majorities. Conservative Prime Ministers Churchill, Anthony Eden, Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home promoted relatively liberal trade regulations and less state involvement throughout the 1950s and early-1960s. The Suez Crisis of 1956 was a humiliating defeat for Prime Minister Eden, but his successor, Macmillan, minimised the damage and focused attention on domestic issues and prosperity. Macmillan boasted during the 1959 general election that Britain had "never had it so good".
In 1958, Geoffrey Howe co-authored the report A Giant's Strength published by the Inns of Court Conservative Association. The report argued that the unions had become too powerful and that their legal privileges ought to be curtailed. Iain Macleod discouraged the authors from publicising the report. Macmillan believed that trade union votes had contributed towards the 1951 and 1955 victories and thought that it "would be inexpedient to adopt any policy involving legislation which would alienate this support".[69]
Macmillan's bid to join the European Economic Community (EEC) in early 1963 was blocked by French President Charles de Gaulle. The period saw the decline of the United Kingdom as a prominent world leader, with the loss of practically the entire Empire and a laggard economy.
Following controversy over the selections of Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home via a process of consultation known as the 'Magic Circle',[70][71] a formal election process was created and the first leadership election was held in 1965. Of the three candidates, Edward Heath won with 150 votes to Reginald Maudling's 133 and Enoch Powell's 15 votes.[72]
Edward Heath (1965 1975)
 Edward Heath, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1970 1974)
Edward Heath's 1970 74 government was known for taking the UK into the EEC, although the right-wing of the party objected to his failure to control the trade unions at a time when a declining British industry saw many strikes, as well as a recession which started in 1973 and lasted for two years.
Since accession to the EEC, which developed into the EU, British membership has been a source of heated debate within the Conservative Party.
Heath had come to power in June 1970 and the last possible date for the next general election was not until mid-1975.[73] However a general election was held in February 1974 in a bid to win public support during a national emergency caused by the miners' strike. However, Heath's attempt to win a second term in power at this "snap" election failed, as a deadlock result left no party with an overall majority. The Conservatives had more votes than Labour, but Labour had four more seats. Heath resigned within days, after failing to gain Liberal Party support to form a coalition government, paving the way for Harold Wilson and Labour to return to power as a minority government. Heath's hopes of returning to power later in the year were ended when Labour won the October 1974 election with an overall majority of three seats.[74]
Margaret Thatcher (1975 1990)
Further information: Premiership of Margaret Thatcher
 Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1979 1990)
Loss of power weakened Heath's control over the party and Margaret Thatcher deposed him in the 1975 leadership election. The UK in the 1970s had seen sustained high inflation rates, which were above 20% at the time of the leadership election, subsequently falling to below 10%; unemployment had risen, and over the winter of 1978 79 there was a series of strikes known as the "Winter of Discontent".[75] Thatcher led her party to victory at the 1979 general election with a manifesto which concentrated on the party's philosophy rather than presenting a "shopping list" of policies.[76]
As Prime Minister, Thatcher focused on rejecting the mild liberalism of the post-war consensus that tolerated or encouraged nationalisation, strong labour unions, heavy regulation, high taxes, and a generous welfare state.[77] She did not challenge the National Health Service, and supported the Cold War policies of the consensus, but otherwise tried to dismantle and delegitimise it. To replace the old post-war consensus, she built a right-wing political ideology that became known as Thatcherism, based on social and economic ideas from British and American intellectuals such as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. Thatcher believed that too much socially democratic-oriented government policy was leading to a long-term decline in the British economy. As a result, her government pursued a programme of economic liberalism, adopting a free-market approach to public services based on the sale of publicly owned industries and utilities, as well as a reduction in trade union power. She held the belief that the existing trend of unions was bringing economic progress to a standstill by enforcing "wildcat" strikes, keeping wages artificially high and forcing unprofitable industries to stay open.
One of Thatcher's largest and most successful policies assisted council house tenants in public housing to purchase their homes at favourable rates. The "Right to Buy" had emerged in the late-1940s but was too great a challenge to the Post-War Consensus to win Conservative endorsement. Thatcher from her earliest days in politics favoured the idea because it would lead to a "property-owning democracy", an important idea that had emerged in the 1920s.[59] Some local Conservative-run councils enacted profitable local sales schemes during the late-1960s. By the 1970s, many working-class people had ample incomes to afford to buy homes, and eagerly adopted Thatcher's invitation to purchase their homes at a sizable discount. The new owners were more likely to vote Conservative, as Thatcher had hoped.[78][79]
Thatcher led the Conservatives to two further electoral victories with landslide[clarification needed] majorities in 1983 and 1987. She was greatly admired by her supporters for her leadership in the Falklands War of 1982 which coincided with a dramatic boost in her popularity and for policies such as giving the right to council house tenants to buy their council house at a discount on market value. She was also deeply unpopular in certain sections of society due to high unemployment, which reached its highest level since the 1930s, peaking at over 3,000,000 people following her economic reforms, and her response to the miners' strike. Unemployment had doubled between 1979 and 1982, largely due to Thatcher's monetarist battle against inflation.[80][81] At the time of the 1979 general election, inflation had been at 9% or under for the previous year, having decreased under Callaghan, then increased to over 20% in the first two years of the Thatcher ministry, but it had fallen again to 5.8% by the start of 1983 (it continued to be under 7% until 1990).[82] The British economy benefitted in the first Thatcher ministry by tax income from North Sea oil coming on stream.[83]
The period of unpopularity of the Conservatives in the early 1980s coincided with a crisis in the Labour Party, which then formed the main opposition. The Social Democratic Party (SDP) was established in 1981 and consisted of more than twenty breakaway Labour MPs, who quickly formed the SDP-Liberal Alliance with the Liberal Party. By the turn of 1982, the SDP-Liberal Alliance was ahead of the Conservatives in the opinion polls, but victory in the Falklands War in June that year, along with the recovering British economy, saw the Conservatives returning quickly to the top of the opinion polls and winning the 1983 general election with a landslide majority, due to a split opposition vote.[80]
Thatcher now faced, arguably, her most serious rival yet after the 1983 general election, when Michael Foot resigned as Leader of the Labour Party and was succeeded by Neil Kinnock. With a new leader at the helm, Labour were clearly determined to defeat the Conservatives at the next election, and for virtually the entirety of Thatcher's second ministry, it was looking a very serious possibility, as the lead in the opinion polls constantly saw a change in leadership from the Conservatives to Labour, with the Alliance occasionally scraping into first place.[84]
By the time of the general election in June 1987, the economy was stronger, with lower inflation and falling unemployment and Thatcher secured her third successive electoral victory with a second, albeit reduced, landslide majority.[85]
The introduction of the Community Charge (known by its opponents as the poll tax) in 1989 is often cited as contributing to her political downfall. The summer of 1989 saw her fall behind Neil Kinnock's Labour in the opinion polls for the first time since 1986, and her party's fall in popularity continued into 1990. By the second half of that year, opinion polls were showing that Labour had a lead of up to 16 points over the Conservatives, and they faced a tough 18 months ahead of them if they were to prevent Kinnock's ambition to become Prime Minister from becoming a reality. At the same time, the economy was sliding into another recession.[84]
Internal party tensions led to a leadership challenge by the Conservative MP Michael Heseltine; and, after months of speculation about her future as Prime Minister, she resigned on 28 November 1990, making way for a new Conservative leader more likely to win the next general election in the interests of party unity.[86]
John Major (1990 1997)
 John Major, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1990 1997)
John Major won the party leadership election on 27 November 1990, and his appointment led to an almost immediate boost in Conservative Party fortunes. A MORI poll six days before Mrs Thatcher's resignation had shown the Conservatives to be 11 points behind Labour, but within two months the Conservatives had returned to the top of the opinion polls with a narrow lead.[84]
A general election had to be held within the next eighteen months and the UK economy was sliding into recession, but 1991 was a year of electoral uncertainty as the Conservatives and Labour regularly swapped places at the top of the opinion polls, and Major resisted Neil Kinnock's numerous calls for an immediate election.[84]
The election was finally held on 9 April 1992 and the Conservatives won a fourth successive electoral victory, even though the economy was still in recession and most of the polls had predicted either a narrow Labour victory or a hung parliament. Major's vigorous campaigning, notably his claim that the UK would have higher prices and higher taxes under a Labour government, was seen to have been crucial to his election win (in which he became the first and as of 2015, only Prime Minister to attract 14,000,000 votes in a general election), as was a high-profile campaign by the newspaper The Sun against Labour leader Neil Kinnock, who resigned in the aftermath of the election to be succeeded by John Smith. The Conservative Party also touched upon the issue of immigration, claiming that under Labour, immigration would rise hugely.[87]
The UK economy was deep in recession by this stage and remained so until the end of the year. The pound sterling was forced out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism on 16 September 1992, a day thereafter referred to as Black Wednesday.
Soon after, approximately one million householders faced repossession of their homes during a recession that saw a sharp rise in unemployment, taking it close to 3,000,000 people. The party subsequently lost much of its reputation for good financial stewardship although the end of the recession was declared in April 1993[88] bringing economic recovery and a fall in unemployment.
 Rail modal share (rail's share of total travel), 1952 2015[89]
From 1994 to 1997, Major privatised British Rail, splitting it up into franchises to be run by the private sector. Its success is hotly debated, with a large increase in passenger numbers and investment in the network balanced by worries about the level of subsidy. Train fares cost more than under British Rail.[90]
The party was plagued by internal division and infighting, mainly over the UK's role in the European Union. The party's Eurosceptic wing, represented by MPs such as John Redwood, opposed further EU integration, whilst the party's pro-European wing, represented by those such as Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke, was broadly supportive. The issue of the creation of a single European currency also inflamed tensions, and these would continue to dog the party until the early-2000s (decade)".[91]
Major also had to survive a leadership challenge in 1995 by Redwood, then the Secretary of State for Wales. Major survived, but Redwood received 89 votes from MPs, as well as the backing of the Sun newspaper, which described the choice as being between "Redwood or Deadwood". This further undermined Major's influence in the Conservative Party.[92]
The Conservative government was also increasingly accused in the media of "sleaze". Their support reached its lowest ebb in late 1994, after the sudden death of Labour Party leader John Smith and the election of Tony Blair as his successor, when Labour had up to 60% of the vote in opinion polls and had a lead of some 30 points ahead of the Conservatives. The Labour lead was gradually narrowed over the next two years, as the Conservatives gained some credit for the strong economic recovery and fall in unemployment. But as the 1997 general election loomed, despite their high-profile New Labour, New Danger campaign, it was still looking certain that Labour would win.[84]
An effective opposition campaign by the Labour Party culminated in a landslide defeat for the Conservatives in 1997 that was Labour's largest ever parliamentary victory and the worst defeat for the Conservatives since the 1906 general election 91 years earlier. The 1997 general election left the Conservative Party as an England-only party, with all Scottish and Welsh seats having been lost, and not a single new seat having been gained anywhere.
Political wilderness (1997 2005)
William Hague
John Major resigned as party leader after the Conservatives were heavily defeated in a landslide and was succeeded by William Hague. Though Hague was a strong orator, a Gallup poll for The Daily Telegraph found that two-thirds of voters regarded him as "a bit of a wally",[93] for headlines such as his claim that he drank 14 pints of beer in a single day in his youth. He was also criticised for attending the Notting Hill Carnival and for wearing a baseball cap in public in what were seen as poor attempts to appeal to younger voters.[94] Shortly before the 2001 general election, Hague was much maligned for a speech in which he predicted that a re-elected Labour government would turn the UK into a "foreign land".[95] The BBC also reported that the Conservative peer John Lord Taylor criticised Hague for not removing the whip from John Townend, a Conservative MP, after the latter made a speech in which he said the British were becoming "a mongrel race", although Hague did reject Townend's views.[96]
The 2001 general election resulted in a net gain of just one seat for the Conservative Party, just months after the fuel protests of September 2000 had seen the Conservatives briefly take a narrow lead over Labour in the opinion polls.[84]
Iain Duncan Smith and Michael Howard
In 2001, Iain Duncan Smith was elected leader of the Conservative Party. Although Duncan Smith was a strong Eurosceptic, the issue did not define his leadership. During his tenure, Europe ceased to be an issue of division in the party as it united behind calls for a referendum on the proposed European Union Constitution.
However, before he could lead the party into a general election, Duncan Smith lost the vote on a motion of no confidence by MPs who felt that the party would not be returned to government under his leadership. This was despite the Conservative support equalling that of Labour in the months leading up to his departure from the leadership.[84]
Michael Howard then stood for the leadership unopposed on 6 November 2003.
Under Howard's leadership in the 2005 general election, the Conservative Party increased their total vote share by around 0.7% (up to 32.4%) and more significantly their number of parliamentary seats by 33 (up to 198 seats). This gain accompanied a large decline in the Labour vote, and the election reduced Labour's majority from 167 to 68 and its share of the vote to 35.2%.[97] The campaign, based on the slogan "Are you thinking what we're thinking?", was designed by Australian pollster Lynton Crosby. The day following the election, on 6 May, Howard announced that he did not feel it was right to continue as leader after defeat in the general election, also saying that he would be too old to lead the party into another campaign and would therefore step down after allowing time for the party to amend its leadership election rules.
David Cameron (2005 2016)
Further information: Political positions of David Cameron and Premiership of David Cameron
 David Cameron, Prime Minister (2010 2016)
David Cameron won the 2005 leadership election. Cameron defeated his closest rival, David Davis, by a margin of more than two to one, taking 134,446 votes to 64,398. He then announced his intention to reform and realign the Conservatives, saying they needed to change the way they looked, felt, thought and behaved, advocating a more centre-right stance as opposed to their recent staunchly right-wing platform.[98] Cameron's views were slightly to the left of the party membership and he sought to make the Conservative brand more attractive to young, socially liberal voters,[99] he has also expressed his admiration for Margaret Thatcher, describing himself as a "big fan of Thatcher's", though he questions whether that makes him a "Thatcherite". For most of 2006 and the first half of 2007, polls showed leads over Labour for the Conservatives.[100]
Polls became more volatile in summer 2007 with the accession of Gordon Brown as Prime Minister, although polls gave the Conservatives a lead after October of that year and, by May 2008, with the UK's economy sliding into its first recession since 1992. The Conservatives gained control of the London mayoralty for the first time in May 2008 after Boris Johnson defeated the Labour incumbent, Ken Livingstone.[101]
The Conservative lead in the opinion polls had been almost unbroken for nearly three years when Britain finally went to the polls on 6 May 2010, though since the turn of 2010 most polls had shown the Conservative lead as less than 10 points wide. The election resulted in a hung parliament with the Conservatives having the most seats (306) but being twenty seats short of an overall majority. Following the resignation of Gordon Brown, Cameron was named the country's new Prime Minister, and the Conservatives entered government in a coalition with the Liberal Democrats the first postwar coalition government.[102]
In May 2014, the Conservatives were defeated in the European parliamentary elections, coming in third place behind the UK Independence Party and Labour. UKIP ended with 24 MEPs, Labour 20, and the Conservatives 19. The result was described by UKIP leader Nigel Farage as "disastrous" for Cameron, and the leaders of the other main parties.[103]
In September 2014, the Unionist side, championed by Labour as well as by the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats, won in the Scottish Independence referendum by 55% No to 45% Yes on the question "Should Scotland be an independent country". This can be seen as a victory for British Unionism, a core part of traditional Conservative ideology, and also for Cameron as the incumbent Prime Minister.
At the 2015 general election, the Conservatives won a majority of seats in the House of Commons and formed a majority government under Cameron. The party increased its national vote share, becoming the first incumbent party to do so since 1900. The result was unexpected and exceeded even the party leadership's expectations, as most polls had predicted a hung parliament.[104][105] This was also the first general election since 1992 in which the Conservatives had won an overall majority, although the vote share of 36.9% was lower than the previous four Conservative majority governments under Thatcher and Major.[106] In March 2017, the party was fined  70,000, the largest fine of this sort in British political history, after an Electoral Commission investigation found "significant failures" by the party to report its 2015 general election campaign spending.[107]
On the morning of Friday 24 June 2016, Cameron announced his intention to resign as Prime Minister, after he failed to convince the British public to stay in the European Union, and subsequently the Conservative Party leadership election was announced with Theresa May, Michael Gove, Stephen Crabb, Liam Fox and Andrea Leadsom confirmed as the official contenders to be his successor with Boris Johnson ruling himself out of the process.[108] After Crabb withdrew, Fox and then Gove were eliminated in successive ballots by Conservative MPs, leaving Leadsom and May as the final candidates to be put before the wider Conservative Party membership.[109] Leadsom subsequently withdrew from the contest on 11 July.[110]
Theresa May (2016 2019)
Further information: Premiership of Theresa May
 Theresa May, Prime Minister (2016 2019)
On 11 July 2016, Theresa May became the leader of the Conservative Party with immediate effect following the withdrawal from the leadership election of her sole remaining opponent, Andrea Leadsom. Appointed Prime Minister of the United Kingdom on 13 July 2016, May promised social reform and a more centrist political outlook for the Conservative Party and its government.[111] In a speech after her appointment, May emphasised the term Unionist in the name of the party, reminding all of "the precious, precious bond between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland".[112] May considers herself a one nation conservative.[113]
May's early cabinet appointments were interpreted both as "centrist and conciliatory", an effort to reunite the party in the wake of the UK's vote to leave the European Union, and as "a shift to the right" according to The Guardian.[114]
May appointed former Mayor of London Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary, former Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change Amber Rudd as Home Secretary, and former Shadow Home Secretary David Davis to the newly created office of Brexit Secretary.[115] Liam Fox and Philip Hammond, who had both previously served as Secretary of State for Defence (Fox from 2010 to 2011 and Hammond from 2011 to 2014), were appointed to the newly created office of International Trade Secretary and as Chancellor of the Exchequer respectively.[116][117]
Replacing Michael Gove, Liz Truss was made Justice Secretary, the "first female Lord Chancellor in the thousand-year history of the role".[118]
Andrea Leadsom, who was energy minister and May's primary competitor for party leader, was made the new environment secretary.[119] However, former Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers resigned from Cabinet after May offered her a different, non-Cabinet post that was, she said, "not one which I felt I could take on".[120] Nearly half of the first May ministry were women.[121]
In her first speech, May made a promise to combat the "burning injustice" in British society and create a union "between all of our citizens" and promising to be an advocate for the "ordinary working-class family" and not just for "privileged few" in the UK.[122]
In April 2017, the Cabinet agreed to hold a general election on 8 June.[123] During the resulting campaign, Theresa May asked the electorate to "strengthen my hand" in Brexit negotiations, promised "strong and stable leadership in the national interest" and warned of a "coalition of chaos" under Jeremy Corbyn.
Contrary to opinion polling at the time, the election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Conservative Party having 317 seats in the House of Commons, but without an overall majority. The Democratic Unionist Party suggested it would be able to provide a confidence and supply arrangement depending on negotiations.[124] On 9 June 2017, May announced her intention to form a new minority government with support from the DUP,[125] which was finalised on 26 June.[126]
On 8 January 2018, May announced her first major cabinet reshuffle, keeping in place most ministers, but promoting others.[127]
In May 2018, the Conservative Party was accused of failing to take action on Islamophobia that was allegedly happening in the party.[128]
In February 2019, three Conservative MPs   Heidi Allen, Sarah Wollaston, and Anna Soubry   defected from the party to join the Independent Group, a pro-EU political association of MPs founded by seven former members of the Labour Party. The MPs said the reasons for their departure were their opposition to the party's handling of Brexit, what they saw as the takeover of the Conservative party by 'right wing, ... hard-line anti-EU' MPs, and lack of concern from the Conservative party for the 'most vulnerable in society'.[129][130]
 Prime Minister Theresa May, right, with U.S. President Donald Trump, left, at a joint press conference in London in 2019
May announced her resignation from the leadership of the Conservative Party on 24 May 2019, intending to leave the role on 7 June. However, she remained Prime Minister until a successor was elected by the party.[131]
Theresa May resigned as Prime Minister on 24 July 2019 after her successor, Boris Johnson, was elected on 23 July 2019. She remained as the Member of Parliament for the Parliamentary Constituency of Maidenhead and won re-election for a further term as a backbencher in the December general election.
Boris Johnson (2019 2022)
Further information: Premiership of Boris Johnson
 Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (2019 2022)
In July 2019, former Foreign Secretary and Mayor of London Boris Johnson defeated Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt, with 66% of the vote in the final ballot of Conservative Party members, to become Leader of the Conservative Party.[132] He became Prime Minister the next day.
Johnson lost his working majority in the House of Commons on 3 September 2019 when former Justice minister Phillip Lee crossed the floor during Johnson's speech to join the Liberal Democrats, later explaining that he believed the Conservative party had been "infected with the twin diseases of populism and English nationalism".[133][134] The same day, the former Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond announced that he would "defend his party" against "incomers and entryists", perceived by some as referring to Johnson's adviser Dominic Cummings.[135] Later that same day, 21 Conservative MPs had the Conservative whip withdrawn after voting with the Opposition to grant the House of Commons control over its order paper, leading to Johnson becoming the first Prime Minister to lose his first Commons vote.[136]
Subsequent votes in the Commons effected the passing of the Benn Act, which Prime Minister Johnson controversially dubbed the 'Surrender Act'.[137] The Act required the Prime Minister to request a formal extension to Article 50 if a new withdrawal agreement had not been approved by Parliament by 19 October 2019. After having agreed a revised withdrawal agreement (WA) with the European Union on 17 October,[138] the Government put a motion before the House of Commons in a rare Saturday sitting on 19 October. This motion requested approval for the revised WA, such that the Benn Act would have been satisfied and no extension to Article 50 would be legally required. An amendment to the motion was passed, withholding formal approval of the WA until all the necessary legislation had been passed by Parliament. The following week, the full Withdrawal Agreement Bill (WAB) was introduced. It passed a second reading, but the programme motion for the bill put forward by the Government was voted down. This meant that there was no guarantee that the legislation would be passed in time to allow the United Kingdom to legally withdraw from the European Union (EU) on 31 October. Johnson had made withdrawal from the EU by this date "with no ifs, buts or maybes" a key pledge during his campaign for the leadership of the Conservative Party.[139]
Johnson then immediately halted the WAB, and then called for a general election to be held. He made clear his view that Parliament was "...refusing to deliver Brexit. It's impossible to deliver legislation. It's time, frankly, the opposition summoned up the nerve to submit themselves to the judgment of our collective boss, which is the UK."[140] After failing to gain the necessary support of two-thirds of all MPs to call an election under the provisions of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, the Government indicated its intention to pass a short bill requiring only a simple majority of votes to hold such an election. The early parliamentary general election act was passed on 29 October 2019 and specified that a general election was to be held on 12 December 2019. This election resulted in Johnson's Conservatives winning of a majority of 80 seats in the House of Commons, a significant improvement on their 2017 result, and indeed the Party's largest majority since 1987, under Thatcher.[141] The party won several constituencies, especially in Northern England but also in the Midlands and North Wales (often dubbed Labour's Red Wall), that the party had either never won before or had not produced a Tory majority in several decades. These results prompted observations from a number of political analysts in both the United Kingdom and abroad that the Conservatives under Johnson had widened their appeal to working class voters, particularly among those who had voted for Brexit.[32][33] Having previously been split on the issue of British membership of the European Union since the premiership of John Major, the Conservatives adopted a clear pro-Brexit line under Johnson.[citation needed]
In late December 2019, a number of far-right activists claimed to have joined the Conservatives, prompting criticism by David Lammy over entryism.[142][143]
On 20 December 2019, MPs passed an agreement for withdrawing from the EU, the United Kingdom formally left at 11pm on 31 January 2020.[144][145] This began a transitional period, in which agreements between the UK and the EU would remain the same until 31 December 2020.[146]
Johnson presided over the UK's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Johnson initially held off on enacting lockdown measures, instead choosing to provide soft advice and protect vulnerable groups.[147] With a rising death toll and hospital admission rate, Johnson later decided to enact a national lockdown on 23 March 2020.[148] Johnson himself caught coronavirus during this period, and was moved to an intensive care unit on 7 April.[149] Dominic Raab, who had been appointed First Secretary of State, deputised for Johnson whilst he was sick.[150] Johnson later recovered from his illness, and returned to work on 27 April.[151] Throughout May to July, COVID-19 restrictions began to ease in England.[152]
Johnson received criticism in May 2020 for his handling of the Dominic Cummings scandal, in which Johnson's chief advisor Dominic Cummings was accused of breaking lockdown rules by travelling from London to County Durham whilst experiencing symptoms of COVID-19.[153] Johnson defended Cummings' actions and refused to fire him.[154]
With a significant increase in incidences of coronavirus during Winter 2020, Johnson enacted a system of tiered restrictions, in which areas across England would have varying levels of restrictions based on the number of cases in the area.[155] The plan was criticised by some as ineffective, with some suggesting stricter lockdowns were being imposed on areas in northern England, increasing the north south divide.[156] Johnson again presided over a second strict lockdown, initially focusing on London and the south east on 20 December before increasing to the entire country two weeks later, due to the emergence of the Delta variant.[157] The lockdown coincided with the approval and roll-out of the COVID-19 vaccine, with some praise for the speed of the roll-out.[158] All legal restrictions were lifted in July 2021.[159]
The Conservative Party took  11m from the finance sector between the 2019 general election and 2021 and became dependent on bankers and hedge fund tycoons, who gave nerly 40% of donations. Transparency campaigners feared Johnson was relying on "vested interests" who wanted little regulation and low business tax.[160] Johnson gave the names of six major donors for peerages, including Michael Hintze who gave  4.5m to the Conservatives; Michael Spencer, who with his company gave roughly  7m; and Peter Cruddas, who gave  3.4m.[161]  The Sunday Times found in 2021 15 of the previous 16 Conservative Party treasurers got peerages and each donated over  3m to the Conservatives.[162]
From late 2021 onwards, Johnson received huge public backlash for the Partygate scandal, in which various senior members of government, aides, and Cabinet Office staff were pictured holding parties and other gatherings during lockdown.[163] The Metropolitan Police investigated these claims and eventually fined Johnson for breaking lockdown rules in April 2022.[164] Calls from leading opposition figures, including Labour Party leader Keir Starmer and the First Ministers of Scotland and Wales, for Johnson to resign as a consequence of Partygate were rejected.[165] In July 2022, Johnson admitted to appointing Chris Pincher as deputy chief whip while being aware of allegations of sexual assault against him, and apologised.[166] This, along with Partygate and increasing criticisms on Johnson's handling of the cost-of-living crisis, resulted in many members of the party losing confidence in Johnson as leader, and mass resignations from the Cabinet; this led to Johnson announcing his resignation as Conservative Party leader and Prime Minister on 7 July.[167]
Liz Truss (2022)
Further information: Premiership of Liz Truss
 Liz Truss, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (2022)
Following the July 2022 United Kingdom government crisis,[168] Boris Johnson resigned as Prime Minister.[169]
Boris Johnson's successor as leader of the party was confirmed as Liz Truss on 5 September, following a leadership election.[170] She defeated Rishi Sunak, with 57.4% of the final ballot of party members. She became Prime Minister the following day.[171]
The death of Queen Elizabeth II occurred just two days into Truss' premiership, making Truss the last Prime Minister to have been appointed by the Queen. Throughout the mourning period that followed, Truss met King Charles III and accompanied him on visits to various remembrance services across the country.[172]
In a strategy labelled Trussonomics, Truss introduced policies in response to the cost of living crisis,[173] including tax cuts, price caps on energy bills, and government help to pay them.[174][175] However, her tax cuts were met with severe criticism as they benefitted higher earners much more, due to removing the top 45% rate of tax and offering tax cuts through the medium of cancelling a rise in national insurance. Markets reacted poorly to the actions of Truss and her Chancellor, Kwasi Kwarteng.[176] After the announcement of the 'mini-budget' on 26 September, the pound fell to a record low of 1.03 against the dollar, and UK government gilt yields rose to 4.3%, prompting the Bank of England to trigger an emergency bond-buying programme.[177] Condemnation was received from the public, the Labour Party, and from within the Conservative Party itself, and Truss scrapped some aspects of the budget, including axing the top rate of tax.[178][179] In response to the criticism, Truss fired Kwarteng and appointed Jeremy Hunt as Chancellor.[180] She also appeared in a number of interviews, including one with the BBC in which she apologised for the 'mistakes' she made in the first weeks of her premiership.[181] After continuous backlash against her in Tory backbenches, Truss announced her pending resignation as Prime Minister on 20 October 2022,[182] after just 44 days in office.[183][184] This is the shortest term in British political history,[182] breaking George Canning's previous record of 119 days after he died whilst in office.[185]
Truss was observed as having not received a so-called 'honeymoon period' at the beginning of her term, wherein a leader experiences a polling boost upon taking office. Whereas former Labour prime minister Sir Tony Blair had an approval rating of up to around 90% during the early months of his premiership, polling suggested that Truss had an approval rating lower than any ever received by Boris Johnson or Jeremy Corbyn, including being mostly disapproved of by 2019 Conservative voters.[186] Truss also oversaw the worst polling the Conservative Party has ever received - shortly after Truss' resignation the Labour Party's seven-day polling average stands at 54% up from 41% on 23 September, with the Conservatives' average falling from 33% to 21%.[187] One poll, held between 26 and 30 September, suggested a loss of 219 Conservative seats, resulting in a Labour landslide.[188]
Rishi Sunak (2022 present)
Further information: Premiership of Rishi Sunak
 Rishi Sunak, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (2022 present)
Another leadership election began after Truss' resignation, with an increased nomination threshold of 100 and promises to conclude before 28 October, with Rishi Sunak and Penny Mordaunt declaring their candidacies.[189][190] Boris Johnson was widely expected to attempt a comeback, but, while claiming he had the sufficient amount of support to enter the race, ruled himself out on 23 October.[191] On 24 October, Mordaunt pulled out of the leadership race, and Sunak was declared Leader - with Sunak being the first Britsh Asian Leader of the Conservatives and the first British Asian Prime Minister.  YouGov found under Sunak the Conservatives poll below Labour and that voters feel they are less competent to handle various issues compared to Labour.  Under Sunak polls stabilised and the Labour lead reduced, but there is still a large gap.[192]
Policies
Part of a series onConservatismin the United Kingdom
Ideologies
Anglo-Catholicism
Cameronism
Muscular liberalism
Christian democracy
Compassionate
Green
Liberal
Neo
One-nation
Powellism
Progressive
Thatcherism
Toryism
High
Red
Social
Ultra
Principles
Civil society
Classical liberalism
Elitism
Aristocracy
Meritocracy
Noblesse oblige
Family values
Loyalism
Monarchism
Moral absolutism
Protectionism
Royalism
Social market economy
Tradition
Intellectuals
Belloc
Burke
Carlyle
Chesterton
Coleridge
Dalrymple
Dawson
Disraeli
Eliot
Ferguson
Hitchens
Hume
Johnson (Paul)
Johnson (Samuel)
Joseph
Lewis
More
Newman
Oakeshott
Roberts
Scott
Scruton
Tolkien
Works
A Vindication of Natural Society (1756)
Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790)
Coningsby (1844)
Sybil (1845)
Orthodoxy (1908)
"Tradition and the Individual Talent" (1919)
The Abolition of Man (1943)
Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005)
The Rage Against God (2010)
The Great Degeneration (2013)
How to Be a Conservative (2014)
Conservatism: An Invitation to the Great Tradition (2017)
Politicians
Baldwin
Burke
Cameron
Canning
Churchill
Disraeli
Johnson
Joseph
May
Pitt
Powell
Salisbury
Thatcher
Parties
Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK
Christian Party
Christian Peoples Alliance
Conservative and Unionist Party
Democratic Unionist Party
For Britain Movement
Heritage Party
Traditional Unionist Voice
Tories
UK Independence Party
Ulster Unionist Party
Veterans and People's Party
Organisations
Bright Blue
Blue Collar Conservativism
Cornerstone Group
One Nation Conservatives
Tory Reform Group
Media
Daily Express
Sunday Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
Evening Standard
The Spectator
The Times
The Sunday Times
The Sun
The Sun on Sunday
Related topics
Liberalism in the United Kingdom
Politics of the United Kingdom
Socialism in the United Kingdom
 Conservatism portal
 United Kingdom portalvte
Economic policy
The Conservative Party believes that a free market and individual achievement are the primary factors behind economic prosperity.
A leading economic theory advocated by Conservatives is supply-side economics.  This theory holds that reduced income tax rates increase growth and enterprise (although a reduction in the budget deficit has sometimes taken priority over cutting taxes).[193]  The party has recently focused on the social market economy in Britain, promoting a free market for competition with social balance to create fairness. This has included curbs on the banking sector, enterprise zones to revive regions in Britain and grand infrastructure projects such as high-speed rail.[194][195]
One concrete economic policy of recent[when?] years has been opposition to the European single currency, the euro. With the growing Euroscepticism within his party, John Major negotiated a British opt-out in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which enabled the UK to stay within the European Union without adopting the single currency. However, several members of Major's cabinet, such as Kenneth Clarke, were personally supportive of EMU participation. Following Major's resignation after the 1997 election defeat, all subsequent Conservative leaders have positioned the party firmly against the adoption of the euro.
Following Labour's victory in the 1997 general election, the Conservative Party opposed Labour's decision to grant the Bank of England independent control of interest rates on the grounds that it would be a prelude to the abolition of the pound sterling and acceptance of the European single currency, and also expressed concern over the removal of monetary policy from democratic control. However, Bank independence was popular amongst the financial community as it helped to keep inflation low.[196] The Conservatives accepted Labour's policy in early 2000.[197]
Since returning to power, the 50% top rate of income tax was reduced to 45% by the Cameron-Clegg coalition.[198] Alongside a reduction in tax and commitments to keep taxation low, the Conservative Party has significantly reduced government spending, through the austerity programme which commenced in 2010. This program became increasing unpopular and as a result, during the 2019 election campaign, now incumbent Conservative Prime Minister Boris Johnson signalled an end to austerity with promises to restore 20,000 police officers from those previously cut and increase public investment in the NHS, amongst other anti-austerity promises.
Social policy
 Conservative Party supporters at Pride London in 2010
Socially conservative policies such as tax incentives for married couples and the belief that benefits for those out of work should be reduced may have played a role in the party's electoral decline in the 1990s and early 2000s, and so the party has attempted to seek a new direction. The introduction of equal marriage rights for LGBT+ individuals in 2010 can be said to have represented a shift away from social conservatism, though the extent to which this policy truly represented a more 'liberal' Conservative party has been challenged.[199]
Since 1997, debate has occurred within the party between 'modernisers' such as Alan Duncan,[200] who believe that the Conservatives should modify their public stances on social issues, and 'traditionalists' such as Liam Fox[201][202] and Owen Paterson,[203] who believe that the party should remain faithful to its traditional conservative platform. William Hague and Michael Howard campaigned on traditionalist grounds in the 2001 and 2005 general elections respectively, and 2001 also saw the election of traditionalist Iain Duncan Smith as party leader. In the current parliament, modernising forces are represented by MPs such as Neil O'Brien, who has argued that the party needs to renew its policies and image, and is said to be inspired by Macron's centrist politics.[204] Ruth Davidson is also seen as a reforming figure. Many of the original 'traditionalists' remain influential, though Duncan Smith's influence in terms of Commons contributions has waned.[205] Many 'traditionalist' backbenchers such as Christopher Chope and Peter Bone command significant media attention for their use of filibustering and frequent interjections, and so remain influential forces in the Commons, though they cannot be taken to represent all 'traditionalist' Conservatives.[citation needed]
The party has strongly criticised Labour's "state multiculturalism".[206] Shadow Home Secretary Dominic Grieve said in 2008 that state multiculturalism policies had created a "terrible" legacy of "cultural despair" and dislocation, which has encouraged support for "extremists" on both sides of the debate.[207] David Cameron responded to Grieve's comments by agreeing that policies of "state multiculturalism" that treat social groups as distinct, for example policies that "treat British Muslims as Muslims, rather than as British citizens", are wrong. However, he expressed support for the premise of multiculturalism on the whole, arguing that it was "absolutely right" to encourage society to integrate more "to build a strong British identity for the future".[207]
Official statistics showed that EU and non-EU mass immigration, together with asylum seeker applications, all increased substantially during Cameron's term in office.[208][209][210] However, this was not solely as a result of intentional government policy   during this period, there were significant refugee flows into the UK and an increased level of asylum applications due to conflict and persecution in a number of other states.[211] Some political and media discourses at the time suggested that this increase in immigration and reception of refugees and asylum seekers caused significant strain on other areas of social policy through overburdening the NHS and the welfare state   these discourses were influential, but have not been empirically or decisively proven to be true.[212] In 2019, Conservative Home Secretary Priti Patel announced that the government would enact stricter immigration reforms by cracking down on illegal immigration and scrapping freedom of movement with the European Union following the completion of Brexit. These reforms also included introducing more stringent measures for migrating to the UK such as requiring that immigrants speak English, have skilled job offers, and meet minimum salary requirements, as well as persuading businesses to hire British workers over outsourcing to low-skilled immigrants.[213]
Foreign policy
 Margaret Thatcher (second left), Ronald Reagan (far left) and their respective spouses in 1988. Thatcher and Reagan developed a close relationship against the Soviet Union.
For much of the 20th century, the Conservative Party took a broadly Atlanticist stance in relations with the United States, favouring close ties with the United States and similarly aligned nations such as Canada, Australia and Japan. The Conservatives have generally favoured a diverse range of international alliances, ranging from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to the Commonwealth of Nations.
Close US-British relations have been an element of Conservative foreign policy since World War II. Winston Churchill during his 1951 1955 post-war premiership built up a strong relationship with the Eisenhower Administration in the United States. Harold Macmillan demonstrated a similarly close relationship with the Democratic administration of John F. Kennedy. Though the US British relationship in foreign affairs has often been termed a 'Special Relationship', a term coined by Winston Churchill, this has often been observed most clearly where leaders in each country are of a similar political stripe. Out of power and perceived as largely irrelevant by American politicians, Conservative leaders Hague, Duncan-Smith, and Howard each struggled to forge personal relationships with presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush. However, the Republican 2008 presidential candidate, John McCain, spoke at the 2006 Conservative Party Conference.[214]
The Conservatives have proposed a Pan-African Free Trade Area, which it says could help entrepreneurial dynamism of African people.[215] The Conservatives pledged to increase aid spending to 0.7% of national income by 2013.[215] They met this pledge in 2014, when spending on aid reached 0.72% of GDP and the commitment was enshrined in UK law in 2015.[216]
David Cameron had sought to distance himself from former US President Bush and his neoconservative foreign policy, calling for a "rebalancing" of US-UK ties[217] and met Barack Obama during his 2008 European tour. Despite traditional links between the UK Conservatives and US Republicans, and between centre-left Labour and the Democrats, London Mayor Boris Johnson, a Conservative, endorsed Barack Obama in the 2008 election.[218] However, after becoming Prime Minister, Boris Johnson developed a close relationship with Republican President Donald Trump, with both British and American media commentators drawing physical and ideological comparisons between the two leaders.[219][220][221] This has also been described as a reestablishing of the Special Relationship with the United States following Britain's withdraw from the European Union, as well as returning to the links between the Conservatives and Republican Party.[222]
Beyond relations with the United States, the Commonwealth and the EU, the Conservative Party has generally supported a pro free-trade foreign policy within the mainstream of international affairs. The degree to which Conservative Governments have supported interventionist or non-interventionist presidents in the US has often varied with the personal relations between the US president and the British prime minister.
Although stances have changed with successive leadership, the modern Conservative Party generally supports cooperation and maintaining friendly relations with the State of Israel. Historic Conservative statesmen such as Arthur Balfour and Winston Churchill supported the idea of national home for the Jewish people. Under Margaret Thatcher Conservative support for Israel was seen to crystallise.[223][224] Support for Israel has increased under the leaderships of Theresa May and Boris Johnson, with prominent Conservative figures within the May and Johnson ministries such as Priti Patel, Robert Jenrick, Michael Gove and Sajid Javid strongly endorsing Israel. In 2016, Theresa May publicly rebutted statements made by US Secretary of State John Kerry over the composition of the Israeli government, which some commentators saw as a closer alignment to the stance of the incoming Trump administration.[225][226] In 2018, the party pledged to proscribe all wings of the Lebanese-based militant group Hezbollah and this was adopted as a UK-wide policy in 2019.[227][228] In 2019, the Conservative government under Boris Johnson announced plans to stop the influence of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement on local politics which included prohibiting local councils in the United Kingdom from boycotting Israeli products.[229][230][231]
The Conservatives maintain a continuous stance of staying neutral on matters relating to Kashmir.[citation needed]
Defence policy
Afghanistan
After the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the Conservative Party supported the coalition military action in Afghanistan. The Conservative Party believed that success in Afghanistan would be defined in terms of the Afghans achieving the capability to maintain their own internal and external security.[232] They have repeatedly criticised the former Labour Government for failing to equip British Forces adequately in the earlier days on the campaign especially highlighting the shortage of helicopters for British Forces resulting from Gordon Brown's  1.4bn cut to the helicopter budget in 2004.[233]
Strategic Defence and Security Review
The Conservative Party believes that in the 21st century defence and security are interlinked. It has pledged to break away from holding a traditional Strategic Defence Review and have committed to carrying out a more comprehensive Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) immediately upon coming into office. This review will include both defence and homeland security related matters. The Labour Government last conducted a review in 1998. To prevent a long gap in the future it also pledged to hold regular defence reviews every 4 5 years, and if necessary will put this requirement into legislation. Party officials claim that the SDSR will be a major improvement, and will ensure that Britain maintains generic and flexible capability to adapt to any changing threats. It will be a cross-departmental review that will begin with foreign policy priorities and will bring together all the levers of domestic national security policy with overseas interests and defence priorities.[234]
As well as an SDSR, the Conservative Party pledged in 2010 to undertake a fundamental and far-reaching review of the procurement process and how defence equipment is provided in Britain. It pledged to reform the procurement process, compile a Green Paper on Sovereignty Capability, and publish another Defence Industrial Strategy following on from the Defence Industrial Strategy in 2005. The Conservative Party has said that there will be four aims for British defence procurement: to provide the best possible equipment at the best possible price; to streamline the procurement process to ensure the speedy delivery of equipment to the front line; to support our industry jobs at home by increasing defence exports; to provide defence procurement that underpins strategic relationships abroad and; to provide predictability to the defence industry.[citation needed]
The Conservative Party also pledged to increase Britain's share of the global defence market as Government policy.
NATO
The Conservative Party upholds the view that NATO remains and should remain the most important security alliance for the United Kingdom.[235]
It has advocated for the creation of a fairer funding mechanism for NATO's expeditionary operations and called for all NATO countries to meet their required defence spending 2% of GDP. As well as this, some Conservatives believe that there is scope for expanding NATO's Article V to include new 21st Century threats such as cybersecurity.
European defence
The Conservative Party aims to build enhanced bilateral defence relations with key European partners and believes that it is in Britain's national interest to cooperate fully with all its European neighbours. It has pledged to ensure that any EU military capability must supplement and not supplant British national defence and NATO, and that it is not in the British interest to hand over security to any supranational body.[236]
The Conservatives see it as a priority to encourage all members of the European Union to do more in terms of a commitment to European security at home and abroad.
Regarding the defence role of the European Union, the Conservatives pledged to re-examine some of Britain's EU Defence commitments to determine their practicality and utility; specifically, to reassess UK participation provisions like Permanent Structured Cooperation, the European Defence Agency and EU Battlegroups to determine if there is any value in Britain's participation.
Nuclear weapons
The Conservatives support the UK's possession of nuclear weapons through the Trident nuclear missile programme.[236]
Health policy
In 1945, the Conservatives declared support for universal healthcare.[237] Since entering office in 2010, they have introduced the Health and Social Care Act, constituting the biggest reformation that the NHS has ever undertaken. However, there has been much criticism and protest about the 2010 government's actions on the NHS, focusing on budget cuts and privatisation of services. After a 2013 union protest said by police to have been one of the largest protests seen in Manchester, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress (TUC) said that austerity was having a devastating effect, with 21,000 NHS jobs lost over the previous three months alone, and that "The NHS is one of Britain's finest achievements and we will not allow ministers to destroy, through cuts and privatisation, what has taken generations to build." The Department of Health responded that there was "absolutely no government policy to privatise NHS services".[238]
Drug policy
The Conservative Party supports current drug prohibition policies.[239] However, views on drugs do vary amongst some MPs in the party. Some Conservative politicians such as former MP Alan Duncan and Crispin Blunt take the libertarian approach that individual freedom and economic freedom of industry and trade should be respected. Other Conservative politicians, despite being economically liberal, are in favour of full prohibition of the ownership and trade of many drugs. Legalisation of cannabis for medical uses is favoured by some Conservative politicians.[240] The party has rejected both decriminalising drugs for personal use and safe consumption rooms.[241]
Education and research
In education, the Conservatives have pledged to review the National Curriculum, and introduce the English Baccalaureate. The restoration of discipline was also highlighted, as they want it to be easier for pupils to be searched for contraband items, the granting of anonymity to teachers accused by pupils, and the banning of expelled pupils being returned to schools via appeal panels.
In Higher education, the Conservatives have increased tuition fees to  9,250 per year, however have ensured that this will not be paid by anyone until they are earning over  25,000. The Scottish Conservatives also support the re-introduction of tuition fees in Scotland. In 2016 the Conservative government extended student loan access in England to postgraduate students to help improve access to education.[242]
Within the EU, the UK is one of the largest recipients of research funding in the European Union, receiving  7 billion between 2007 and 2015, which is invested in universities and research-intensive businesses.[243] Following the vote to leave the EU, Prime Minister Theresa May guaranteed that the Conservative government would protect funding for existing research and development projects in the UK.[244]
In autumn 2017 the Conservatives decided to introduce the T Level qualification aimed at improving the teaching and administration of technical education.[245]
Family policy
As prime minister, David Cameron wanted to 'support family life in Britain' and put families at the centre of domestic social policymaking.[246] He stated in 2014 that there was 'no better place to start' in the Conservative mission of 'building society from the bottom up' than the family, which was responsible for individual welfare and well-being long before the welfare state came into play.[246] He also argued that 'family and politics are inextricably linked'.[246] Both Cameron and Theresa May have aimed at helping families achieve a work-home balance and have previously proposed to offer all parents 12 months parental leave, to be shared by parents as they choose.[247] This policy is now in place, offering 50 weeks total parental leave, of which 37 weeks are paid leave, which can be shared between both parents.[248]
Other policies have included doubling the free hours of childcare for working parents of three and four-year-olds from 15 hours to 30 hours a week during term-time, although parents can reduce the number of hours per week to 22 and spread across 52 weeks of the year. However, numerous childcare providers have argued that this policy is unworkable, as it means that they do not receive enough compensation from the government to make up for the lost childcare fees, and so their businesses are no longer financially viable.[249] The government also introduced a policy to fund 15 hours a week of free education and childcare for 2-year-olds in England if parents are receiving certain state benefits or the child has a SEN statement or diagnosis, worth  2,500 a year per child.[250][251]
Jobs and welfare policy
One of the Conservatives' key policy goals in 2010 was to reduce the number of people in the UK claiming state benefits, and increase the number of people in the workforce. Between 2010 and 2014, all claimants of Incapacity Benefit were moved onto a new benefit scheme, Employment and Support Allowance, which was then subsumed into the Universal Credit system alongside other welfare benefits in 2018.[252][253] The Universal Credit system has come under immense scrutiny since its introduction. Shortly after her appointment to the Department for Work and Pensions, Secretary of State Amber Rudd acknowledged there were 'real problems' with the Universal Credit system, especially the wait times for initial payments and the housing payments aspect of the combined benefits.[254] Rudd pledged specifically to review and address the uneven impact of Universal Credit implementation on economically disadvantaged women, which had been the subject of numerous reports by the Radio 4 You and Yours programme and others.[254][255]
Until 1999, Conservatives opposed the creation of a national minimum wage, as they believed it would cost jobs, and businesses would be reluctant to start business in the UK from fear of high labour costs.[256] However the party have since pledged support and in the July 2015 budget, Chancellor George Osborne announced a National Living Wage of  9/hour, to be introduced by 2020, for those aged 25 and over.[257] The National Minimum Wage in 2012 was  6.19 for over-21-year olds, so the proposed rises in National Living Wage by 2020 will represent a significantly higher pay for many.[258] However, the National Living Wage varies significantly by age, and there is evidence that up to 200,000 eligible individuals are not actually receiving the pay that they should be under the National Living Wage scheme.[259] The party support, and have implemented, the restoration of the link between pensions and earnings, and seek to raise retirement age from 65 to 67 by 2028.[260]
Energy and climate change policy
David Cameron brought several 'green' issues to the forefront of his 2010 campaign. These included proposals designed to impose a tax on workplace car parking spaces, a halt to airport growth, a tax on cars with exceptionally poor petrol mileage, and restrictions on car advertising. Many of these policies were implemented in the Coalition including the 'Green Deal'.[261]
In November 2019, UK Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader Boris Johnson did not accept an invitation to a Channel 4 News climate debate on how to tackle the climate crisis that was attended by other political party leaders.[262] Also in 2019, Greenpeace conducted a scorecard on the main parties' environmental commitments placing the party second from bottom (one point above the Brexit Party) and scoring it 7 out of 20.[263] In 2021, Northern Conservative Party MPs declared their support for opening a new coal mine in Cumbria.[264]  A poll in 2021 found that one in 15 Conservative MPs (7%) believe climate change is a myth.[265] A poll of over 1,100 Conservative Party members in 2020 found that less than half believe that human activity is responsible for climate change and 9.7% did not believe that climate change was happening at all.[266]
Justice, crime and security policy
In 2010, the Conservatives campaigned to cut the perceived bureaucracy of the modern police force and pledged greater legal protection to people convicted of defending themselves against intruders.
The party has also campaigned for the creation of a UK Bill of Rights to replace the Human Rights Act 1998, but this was vetoed by their coalition partners the Liberal Democrats. Some Conservatives, particularly within the socially conservative Cornerstone Group, support the re-introduction of the death penalty.
The Conservatives' 2017 manifesto pledged to create a national infrastructure police force, subsuming the existing British Transport Police; Civil Nuclear Constabulary; and Ministry of Defence Police "to improve the protection of critical infrastructure such as nuclear sites, railways and the strategic road network". However, this has not yet occurred.[267]
European Union policy
No subject has proved more divisive in the Conservative Party in recent history than the role of the United Kingdom within the European Union. Though the principal architect of the UK's entry into the European Communities (which became the European Union) was Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, and both Winston Churchill and Harold Macmillan favoured some form of European union, the bulk of contemporary Conservative opinion is opposed to closer economic and particularly political union with the EU. This is a noticeable shift in British politics, as in the 1960s and 1970s the Conservatives were more pro-Europe than the Labour Party: for example, in the 1971 House of Commons vote on whether the UK should join the European Economic Community, only 39 of the then 330 Conservative MPs were opposed to membership.[268][269]
The Conservative Party has members with varying opinions of the EU, with pro-European Conservatives joining the affiliate Conservative Group for Europe, while some Eurosceptics left the party to join the United Kingdom Independence Party. Whilst the vast majority of Conservatives in recent decades have been Eurosceptics, views among this group regarding the UK's relationship with the EU have been polarised between moderate, soft Eurosceptics who support continued British membership but oppose further harmonisation of regulations affecting business and accept participation in a multi-speed Europe, and a more radical, economically libertarian faction who oppose policy initiatives from Brussels, support the rolling back of integration measures from the Maastricht Treaty onwards, and have become increasingly supportive of a complete withdrawal.[268]
In 2009 the Conservative Party actively campaigned against the Lisbon Treaty, which it believes would give away too much sovereignty to Brussels. Shadow Foreign Secretary William Hague stated that, should the treaty be in force by the time of an incoming Conservative government, he would "not let matters rest there".[270] However, on 14 June 2009 the shadow Business Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, said in an interview to the BBC that the Conservative Party would not reopen negotiations on the Lisbon Treaty if the Irish backed it in a new referendum.[271]
Constitutional policy
Traditionally the Conservative Party has supported the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom and its traditional Westminster system of politics. The party opposed many of Tony Blair's reforms, such as the removal of the hereditary peers,[272] the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights into British law, and the 2009 creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, a function formerly carried out by the House of Lords.
There was also a split on whether to introduce a British Bill of Rights that would replace the Human Rights Act 1998; David Cameron expressed support, but party grandee Ken Clarke described it as "xenophobic and legal nonsense".[273]
In 2019, the Conservatives' manifesto committed to a broad constitutional review in a line which read "after Brexit we also need to look at the broader aspects of our constitution: the relationship between the government, parliament and the courts".[274] Following the party's significant election victory, it remains unclear what this may mean.
Organisation
Party structure
 The National Conservative Convention is held during the Conservative Party Conference.
The Conservative Party comprises the voluntary party, parliamentary party (sometimes called the political party) and the professional party.
Members of the public join the party by becoming part of a local constituency Conservative Association.[275] The country is also divided into regions, with each region containing a number of areas, both having a similar structure to constituency associations. The National Conservative Convention sets the voluntary party's direction. It is composed of all association chairs, officers from areas and regions, and 42 representatives and the Conservative Women's Organisation.[276] The Convention meets twice a year. Its Annual General Meeting is usually held at Spring Forum, with another meeting usually held at the Conservative Party Conference. In the organisation of the Conservative Party, constituency associations dominate selection of local candidates, and some associations have organised open parliamentary primaries.
The 1922 Committee consists of backbench MPs, meeting weekly while parliament is sitting. Frontbench MPs have an open invitation to attend. The 1922 Committee plays a crucial role in the selection of party leaders. All Conservative MPs are members of the 1922 Committee by default. There are 20 executive members of the committee, agreed by consensus among backbench MPs.
The Conservative Campaign Headquarters (CCHQ) is effectively head of the Professional Party and leads financing, organisation of elections and drafting of policy.
The Conservative Party Board is the party's ultimate decision-making body, responsible for all operational matters (including fundraising, membership and candidates) and is made up of representatives from each (voluntary, political and professional) section of the Party.[276] The Party Board meets about once a month and works closely with CCHQ, elected representatives and the voluntary membership mainly through a number of management sub-committees (such as membership, candidates and conferences).
Membership
 Share of the vote received by Conservatives (blue), Whigs/Liberals/Liberal Democrats (orange), Labour (red) and others (grey) in general elections since 1832[277][278]
Membership peaked in the mid-1950s at approximately 3 million, before declining steadily through the second half of the 20th century.[279] Despite an initial boost shortly after David Cameron's election as leader in December 2005, membership resumed its decline in 2006 to a lower level than when he was elected. In 2010, the Conservative Party had about 177,000 members according to activist Tim Montgomerie,[280] and in 2013 membership was estimated by the party itself at 134,000.[281] The membership fee for the Conservative Party is  25, or  5 if the member is under the age of 23. From April 2013 until the 2015 general election people could join Team2015 without being Party members, and take part in political campaigning for the party. At the 2018 Conservative Spring Forum, Party chairman Brandon Lewis announced that the party's membership stood at 124,000.[282]
In 2013 the Conservative Party lost an estimated 35 40% of its membership due to the Same Sex Marriage Bill.[283][284]
Prospective parliamentary candidates
Further information: Prospective parliamentary candidate
Associations select their constituency's candidates.[275][285] Some associations have organised open parliamentary primaries. A constituency Association must choose a candidate using the rules approved by, and (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) from a list established by, the Committee on Candidates of the Board of the Conservative Party.[286] Prospective candidates apply to the Conservative Central Office to be included on the approved list of candidates, some candidates will be given the option of applying for any seat they choose, while others may be restricted to certain constituencies.[287][288] A Conservative MP can only be deselected at a special general meeting of the local Conservative association, which can only be organised if backed by a petition of more than fifty members.[287]
Young Conservatives
Main article: Young Conservatives (UK)
From 1998 to 2015, the Conservative Party maintained a youth wing for members under 30 called Conservative Future, with branches at both universities and at parliamentary constituency level. By 2006, the group had become the largest political organisation on British university campuses.[289] The organisation was closed in 2015 after allegations that bullying by Mark Clarke had caused the suicide of Elliot Johnson, a 21-year-old party activist.
Conferences
The major annual party events are the Spring Forum and the Conservative Party Conference, which takes place in Autumn in alternately Manchester or Birmingham. This is when the National Conservative Convention holds meetings.
Funding
In the first decade of the 21st century, half the party's funding came from a cluster of just fifty "donor groups", and a third of it from only fifteen.[290] In the year after the 2010 general election, half the Tories' funding came from the financial sector.[291]
For 2013, the Conservative Party had an income of  25.4 million, of which  749,000 came from membership subscriptions.[292]
In 2015, according to accounts filed with the Electoral Commission, the party had an income of about  41.8 million and expenditures of about  41 million.[293]
Construction businesses, including the Wates Group and JCB, have also been significant donors to the party, contributing  430,000 and  8.1m respectively between 2007 and 2017.[294]
The Advisory Board of the party represents donors who have given significant sums to the party, typically in excess of  250,000.[295]
In December 2022 The Guardian reported 10% of Conservative peers were large party donors and gave nearly  50m in total.  27 out of the party's 274 peers had given over  100,000 to the Conservatives.  At least 6 large donor peers got government jobs in the 10 years to 2022.[161]
International organisations
The Conservative Party is a member of a number of international organisations, most notably the International Democrat Union which unites right-wing parties including the United States Republican Party, the Liberal Party of Australia, the Indian Bharatiya Janata Party, the Conservative Party of Canada and the South Korean United Future Party.
At a European level, the Conservatives are members of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party (ECR Party), which unites conservative parties in opposition to a federal European Union, through which the Conservatives have ties to the Ulster Unionist Party and the governing parties of Israel and Turkey, Likud and the Justice and Development Party respectively. In the European Parliament, the Conservative Party's MEPs sat in the European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR Group), which is affiliated to the ACRE.  Party leader David Cameron pushed the foundation of the ECR, which was launched in 2009, along with the Czech Civic Democratic Party and the Polish Law and Justice, before which the Conservative Party's MEPs sat in the European Democrats, which had become a subgroup of the European People's Party in the 1990s.  Since the 2014 European election, the ECR Group has been the third-largest group, with the largest members being the Conservatives (nineteen MEPs), Law and Justice (eighteen MEPs), the Liberal Conservative Reformers (five MEPs), and the Danish People's Party and New Flemish Alliance (four MEPs each). In June 2009, The Conservatives required a further four partners apart from the Polish and Czech supports to qualify for official fraction status in the parliament; the rules state that a European parliamentary caucus requires at least 25 MEPs from at least seven of the 27 EU member states.[296] In forming the caucus, the party broke with two decades of co-operation by the UK's Conservative Party with the mainstream European Christian Democrats and conservatives in the European parliament, the European People's Party (EPP). It did so on the grounds that it is dominated by European federalists and supporters of the Lisbon treaty, which the Conservatives were generally highly critical of.[296]
Logo
 The Conservatives' "oak tree" logo in Union Jack colours at the 2011 party conference.
When Sir Christopher Lawson was appointed as a marketing director at Conservative Central Office in 1981, he was surprised to find that, apart from a few diverse symbols, there was no logo to represent the party. He developed a design based on the Olympic flame in the colours of the Union Jack,[297] which was intended to represent leadership, striving to win, dedication, and a sense of community.[298] Despite opposition from some traditionalists in the party, the emblem was adopted for the 1983 general election.[297] In 1989, the party's director of communications, Brendan Bruce, decided to conduct some market research into the public reaction to the logo. The results were that recognition of the symbol was low and that people found it old fashioned and uninspiring. It was decided to redesign the existing logo, rather than adopt an entirely new one which might be interpreted as signalling a change of the party's ethos. Using a design company headed by Michael Peters, an image of a hand carrying a torch was developed, which referenced the Statue of Liberty.[299]
In 2006, there was a rebranding exercise to emphasise the Conservatives' commitment to environmentalism; a project costing  40,000 resulted in a sketched silhouette of an oak tree, a national symbol, which was said to represent "strength, endurance, renewal and growth". However, there was criticism from within the party; former chairman Norman Tebbit remarked on national radio that the new green logo resembled "a bunch of broccoli". It had been intended to unveil the emblem at the party conference, but a leak to the press resulted in it being launched a week earlier.[300] A change from green to the traditional Conservative blue colour appeared in 2007,[301] followed by a version with the Union Jack superimposed in 2010.[302] An alternative version featuring the colours of the Rainbow flag was unveiled for an LGBT event at the 2009 conference in Manchester.[303]
Party factions
The Conservative Party has a variety of internal factions or ideologies, including one-nation conservatism,[304][305] social conservatism, Thatcherism, traditional conservatism, neoconservatism,[306][307] Euroscepticism,[308] and Christian democracy.[309][310]
Traditionalist Conservatives
This socially conservative right-wing grouping is currently associated with the Cornerstone Group (or Faith, Flag and Family), and is the oldest tradition within the Conservative Party, closely associated with High Toryism. The name stems from its support for three social institutions: the Church of England, the unitary British state and the family. To this end, it emphasises the country's Anglican heritage, oppose any transfer of power away from the United Kingdom either downwards to the nations and regions or upwards to the European Union and seek to place greater emphasis on traditional family structures to repair what it sees as a broken society in the UK. It is a strong advocate of marriage and believes the Conservative Party should back the institution with tax breaks and have opposed the alleged assaults on both traditional family structures and fatherhood.
Most oppose high levels of immigration and support the lowering of the current 24 week abortion limit. Some members in the past have expressed support for capital punishment. Prominent MPs from this wing of the party include Andrew Rosindell, Nadine Dorries, Edward Leigh and Jacob Rees-Mogg the latter two being prominent Roman Catholics, notable in a faction marked out by its support for the established Church of England.
One-nation Conservatives
Part of the Conservatism seriesOne-nation conservatism
Ideas
Conservatism
Pragmatic
Paternalism
Social policy
Solidarity
Organicism
Subsidiarity
Morality
Responsibility
Welfare
Dignity
Communitarianism
Humanism
Distributism
Noblesse oblige
Big Society
Progressive
People
Benjamin Disraeli
Edmund Burke
Lord Randolph Churchill
Stanley Baldwin
Harold Macmillan
Rab Butler
David Cameron
Theresa May
Boris Johnson
Documents
Sybil, or The Two Nations
Coningsby, or The New Generation
Industrial Charter
Organisations
Conservative Party
Tory Reform Group
Bright Blue
 Conservatism portal
 Politics portal
 United Kingdom portalvte
One-nation conservatism was the party's dominant ideology in the 20th century until the rise of Thatcherism in the 1970s. It has included in its ranks Conservative Prime Ministers such as Stanley Baldwin, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath.[311] One-nation Conservatives in the contemporary party include former First Secretary of State Damian Green, the current chair of the One Nation Conservatives caucus.
The name itself comes from a famous phrase of Disraeli. Ideologically, One-nation conservatism identifies itself with a broad paternalistic conservative stance. One-nation Conservatives are often associated with the Tory Reform Group and the Bow Group. Adherents believe in social cohesion and support social institutions that maintain harmony between different interest groups, classes, and more recently different races or religions. These institutions have typically included the welfare state, the BBC, and local government.
One-nation Conservatives often invoke Edmund Burke and his emphasis on civil society ("little platoons") as the foundations of society, as well as his opposition to radical politics of all types. The Red Tory theory of Phillip Blond is a strand of the One-nation school of thought; prominent Red Tories include former Cabinet Ministers Iain Duncan Smith and Eric Pickles and Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State Jesse Norman.[312] There is a difference of opinion among supporters regarding the European Union. Some support it perhaps stemming from an extension of the cohesion principle to the international level, though others are strongly against the EU (such as Peter Tapsell).
Free-market Conservatives
The "free-market wing" of economic liberals achieved dominance after the election of Margaret Thatcher as party leader in 1975. Their goal was to reduce the role of the government in the economy and to this end, they supported cuts in direct taxation, the privatisation of nationalised industries and a reduction in the size and scope of the welfare state. Supporters of the "free-market wing" have been labelled as "Thatcherites". The group has disparate views of social policy: Thatcher herself was socially conservative and a practising Anglican but the free-market wing in the Conservative Party harbour a range of social opinions from the civil libertarian views of Michael Portillo, Daniel Hannan, and David Davis to the traditional conservatism of former party leaders William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith. The Thatcherite wing is also associated with the concept of a "classless society".[313]
Whilst a number of party members are pro-European, some free-marketeers are Eurosceptic, perceiving most EU regulations as interference in the free market and/or a threat to British sovereignty. EU centralisation also conflicts with the localist ideals that have grown in prominence within the party in recent years. Rare Thatcherite Europhiles included Leon Brittan. Many take inspiration from Thatcher's Bruges speech in 1988, in which she declared that "we have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain only to see them reimposed at a European level". A number of free-market Conservatives have signed the Better Off Out pledge to leave the EU.[314] Thatcherites and economic liberals in the party tend to support Atlanticism, something exhibited between Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan.
Thatcher herself claimed philosophical inspiration from the works of Burke and Friedrich Hayek for her defence of liberal economics. Groups associated with this tradition include the No Turning Back Group and Conservative Way Forward, whilst Enoch Powell and Keith Joseph are usually cited as early influences in the movement.[315] Some free-market supporters and Christian Democrats within the party tend to advocate the Social Market Economy, which supports free markets alongside social and environmental responsibility, as well a welfare state. Joseph was the first to introduce the model idea into British politics, writing the publication: Why Britain needs a Social Market Economy.
Relationships between the factions
Sometimes two groupings have united to oppose the third. Both Thatcherite and Traditionalist Conservatives rebelled over Europe (and in particular Maastricht) during John Major's premiership; and Traditionalist and One Nation MPs united to inflict Margaret Thatcher's only major defeat in Parliament, over Sunday trading.
Not all Conservative MPs can be easily placed within one of the above groupings. For example, John Major was the ostensibly "Thatcherite" candidate during the 1990 leadership election, but he consistently promoted One-Nation Conservatives to the higher reaches of his cabinet during his time as Prime Minister. These included Kenneth Clarke as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Michael Heseltine as Deputy Prime Minister.[316]
Electoral performance and campaigns
National campaigning within the Conservative Party is fundamentally managed by the CCHQ campaigning team, which is part of its central office[317]
However, it also delegates local responsibility to Conservative associations in the area, usually to a team of Conservative activists and volunteers[317] in that area, but campaigns are still deployed from and thus managed by CCHQ
National campaigning sometimes occurs in-house by volunteers and staff at CCHQ in Westminster.[318]
The Voter Communications Department is line-managed by the Conservative Director of Communications who upholds overall responsibility, though she has many staff supporting her, and the whole of CCHQ at election time, her department being one of the most predominant at this time, including project managers, executive assistants, politicians, and volunteers.[319] The Conservative Party also has regional call centres and VoteSource do-it-from-home accounts.
UK-wide elections
UK general elections
This chart shows the electoral performance of the Conservative Party in each general election since 1835.[320][321]
For results of the Tories, the party's predecessor, see here.
Parliament of the United Kingdom
Election
Leader
Votes
Seats
Position
Government
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
1835
Robert Peel
261,269
40.8%
273 / 658
 98
41.5%
 2nd
Whig
1837
379,694
48.3%
314 / 658
 41
47.7%
 2nd
Whig
1841
379,694
56.9%
367 / 658
 53
55.8%
 1st
Conservative
1847
Earl of Derby
205,481
42.7%
325 / 656Includes Peelites
 42
49.5%
 1st
Whig
1852
311,481
41.9%
330 / 654Includes Peelites
 5
50.5%
 1st
Conservative
1857
239,712
34.0%
264 / 654
 66
40.4%
 2nd
Whig
1859
193,232
34.3%
298 / 654
 34
45.6%
 2nd
Whig
1865
346,035
40.5%
289 / 658
 9
43.9%
 2nd
Liberal
1868[fn 1]
Benjamin Disraeli
903,318
38.4%
271 / 658
 18
41.2%
 2nd
Liberal
1874
1,091,708
44.3%
350 / 652
 79
53.7%
 1st
Conservative
1880
1,462,351
42.5%
237 / 652
 113
36.3%
 2nd
Liberal
1885[fn 2]
Marquess of Salisbury
2,020,927
43.5%
247 / 670
 10
36.9%
 2nd
Liberal minority
1886
1,520,886
51.1%
317 / 670
 70
47.3%
 1st
Conservative Liberal Unionist
1892
2,159,150
47.0%
268 / 670
 49
40.0%
 2nd
Liberal
1895
1,894,772
49.0%
340 / 670
 72
50.7%
 1st
Conservative Liberal Unionist
1900
1,767,958
50.3%
335 / 670
 5
50.0%
 1st
Conservative Liberal Unionist
1906
Arthur Balfour
2,422,071
43.4%
131 / 670
 204
19.6%
 2nd
Liberal
January 1910
3,104,407
46.8%
240 / 670
 109
35.8%
 2nd
Liberal minority
December 1910
2,420,169
46.6%
235 / 670
 5
35.1%
 2nd
Liberal minority
Merged with Liberal Unionist Party in 1912 to become the Conservative and Unionist Party
1918[fn 3]
Bonar Law
3,472,738
33.3%
379 / 707332 elected with Coupon
 108
53.6%
 1st
Coalition Liberal Conservative
1922
5,294,465
38.5%
344 / 615
 35
55.9%
 1st
Conservative
1923
Stanley Baldwin
5,286,159
38.0%
258 / 625
 86
41.3%
 1st
Labour minority
1924
7,418,983
46.8%
412 / 615
 124
67.0%
 1st
Conservative
1929[fn 4]
8,252,527
38.1%
260 / 615
 152
42.3%
 2nd
Labour minority
1931
11,377,022
55.0%
470 / 615
 210
76.4%
 1st
Conservative Liberal National Labour
1935
10,025,083
47.8%
386 / 615
 83
62.8%
 1st
Conservative Liberal National National Labour
1945
Winston Churchill
8,716,211
36.2%
197 / 640
 189
30.8%
 2nd
Labour
1950
11,507,061
40.0%
282 / 625
 85
45.1%
 2nd
Labour
1951
13,724,418
48.0%
302 / 625
 20
48.3%
 1st
Conservative National Liberal
1955
Anthony Eden
13,310,891
49.7%
324 / 630
 22
51.4%
 1st
Conservative National Liberal
1959
Harold Macmillan
13,750,875
49.4%
345 / 630
 21
54.8%
 1st
Conservative National Liberal
1964
Alec Douglas-Home
12,002,642
43.4%
298 / 630
 47
47.3%
 2nd
Labour
1966
Edward Heath
11,418,455
41.9%
250 / 630
 48
39.7%
 2nd
Labour
1970[fn 5]
13,145,123
46.4%
330 / 630
 80
52.4%
 1st
Conservative
February 1974
11,872,180
37.9%
297 / 635
 33
46.8%
 2nd
Labour minority
October 1974
10,462,565
35.8%
277 / 635
 20
43.6%
 2nd
Labour
1979
Margaret Thatcher
13,697,923
43.9%
339 / 635
 62
53.4%
 1st
Conservative
1983
13,012,316
42.4%
397 / 650
 38
61.1%
 1st
Conservative
1987
13,760,935
42.2%
376 / 650
 21
57.8%
 1st
Conservative
1992
John Major
14,093,007
41.9%
336 / 651
 40
51.6%
 1st
Conservative
1997
9,600,943
30.7%
165 / 659
 171
25.0%
 2nd
Labour
2001
William Hague
8,357,615
31.7%
166 / 659
 1
25.2%
 2nd
Labour
2005
Michael Howard
8,785,941
32.4%
198 / 646
 32
30.7%
 2nd
Labour
2010
David Cameron
10,704,647
36.1%
306 / 650
 108
47.1%
 1st
Conservative Liberal Democrats
2015
11,334,920
36.9%
330 / 650
 24
50.8%
 1st
Conservative
2017
Theresa May
13,632,914
42.3%
317 / 650
 13
48.8%
 1st
Conservative minority with DUP confidence and supply
2019
Boris Johnson
13,966,451
43.6%
365 / 650
 48
56.2%
 1st
Conservative
Note
^ The first election held under the Reform Act 1867.
^ The first election held under the Representation of the People Act 1884 and the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885.
^ The first election held under the Representation of the People Act 1918 in which all men over 21, and most women over the age of 30 could vote, and therefore a much larger electorate.
^ The first election held under the Representation of the People Act 1928 which gave all women aged over 21 the vote.
^ Franchise extended to all 18- to 20-year-olds under the Representation of the People Act 1969.
European Parliament elections
See also: European Parliament and Elections to the European Parliament
Election
Party Group
Leader
Votes
Seats
Position
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
1979
ED
Margaret Thatcher
6,508,492
48.4
60 / 81
75.0%
1st
1984
EPP
5,426,866
38.8
45 / 81
 15
55.6%
 1st
1989
5,331,077
34.7
32 / 81
 13
39.5%
 2nd
1994
John Major
4,274,122
26.8
18 / 87
 13
20.7%
 2nd
1999[fn 1]
EPP-ED
William Hague
3,578,218
35.8
36 / 87
 18
41.4%
 1st
2004
Michael Howard
4,397,087
26.7
27 / 78
 8
34.6%
 1st
2009[fn 2]
ECR
David Cameron
4,281,286
27.7
26 / 72
 1
36.1%
 1st
2014
3,792,549
23.1
19 / 73
 7
26.0%
 3rd
2019
Theresa May
1,512,809
8.8
4 / 73
 15
5.5%
 5th
Note
^ Electoral system changed from first past the post to proportional representation.
^ Includes 82,892 votes and 1 seat gained from the UCUNF alliance
Police and Crime Commissioner elections
Election
Leader
Votes
Commissioners
Position
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
2012
David Cameron
1,480,323
27.6%
16 / 41
34.8%
1st
2016
2,601,560
29.3%
20 / 40
4
50.0%
1st
2021
Boris Johnson
4,900,501
30 / 39
10
76.9%
1st
Devolved elections
Scottish Parliament elections
See also: Scottish Parliament and Scottish Conservatives
Election
Leader
Votes (Constituency)
Votes (List)
Seats
Position
Government
No.
Share
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
1999
David McLetchie
364,225
15.6%
359,109
15.4%
18 / 129
14.0%
3rd
Labour Liberal Democrats
2003
318,279
16.6%
296,929
15.6%
18 / 129
 0
14.0%
 3rd
Labour Liberal Democrats
2007
Annabel Goldie
334,743
16.6%
284,005
13.9%
17 / 129
 1
13.4%
 3rd
Scottish National minority
2011
276,652
13.9%
245,967
12.4%
15 / 129
 2
11.6%
 3rd
Scottish National
2016
Ruth Davidson
501,844
22.0%
524,222
22.9%
31 / 129
 16
24.0%
 2nd
Scottish National minority
2021
Douglas Ross
592,526
21.9%
637,131
23.5%
31 / 129
 0
24.0%
 2nd
Scottish National minority
Senedd elections
See also: Senedd and Welsh Conservatives
Election
Leader
Votes (Constituency)
Votes (List)
Seats
Position
Government
No.
Share
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
1999
Rod Richards
162,133
15.8%
168,206
16.5%
9 / 60
15.0%
3rd
Labour Liberal Democrats
2003
Nick Bourne
169,832
19.9%
162,725
19.2%
11 / 60
 2
18.3%
 3rd
Labour
2007
218,739
22.4%
209,153
21.4%
12 / 60
 1
20.0%
 3rd
Labour Plaid Cymru
2011
237,388
25.0%
213,773
22.5%
14 / 60
 2
23.3%
 2nd
Labour
2016
Andrew R. T. Davies
215,597
21.1%
190,846
18.8%
11 / 60
 3
18.3%
 3rd
Labour minority
2021
289,802
26.1%
278,560
25.1%
16 / 60
 5
26.7%
 2nd
Labour minority
Northern Ireland devolved elections
See also: Northern Ireland Assembly and Northern Ireland Conservatives
Prior to 1973, the Ulster Unionist Party acted as the de facto Northern Ireland branch of the Conservative Party.  The UUP's results may be seen here.
Election
Leader
Votes
Seats
Position
Government
No.
Share
No.
 
Share
Elections to the Northern Ireland Forum in 1996
1996
Barbara Finney
3,595
0.48
0 / 110
0.0%
12th
Dissolution
Elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly from 1998
1998
Un known
1,835
0.23
0 / 108
 0
0.0%
 14th
UUP Sinn F in
2003
Un known
1,604
0.20
0 / 108
 0
0.0%
 14th
Dissolution
2007
Un known
3,457
0.50
0 / 108
 0
0.0%
 10th
DUP Sinn F in
2011
Un known
Did not contest election
DUP Sinn F in
2016
Alan Dunlop
2,554
0.40
0 / 108
 0
0.0%
 11th
DUP Sinn F in
2022
Matthew Robinson
Did not contest election
tbc
London Mayoral elections
See also: London Mayor and London Conservatives
Election
Leader
Candidate
Votes (1st pref.)
Votes (run-off)
Position
No.
Share
No.
Share
2000
William Hague
Steven Norris
464,434
27.1%
564,137
42.1%
2nd
2004
Michael Howard
542,423
29.1%
667,180
44.6%
 2nd
2008
David Cameron
Boris Johnson
1,043,761
43.2%
1,168,738
53.2%
 1st
2012
971,931
44.0%
1,054,811
51.5%
 1st
2016
Zac Goldsmith
909,755
35.0%
994,614
43.2%
 2nd
2021
Boris Johnson
Shaun Bailey
893,051
35.3%
977,601
44.8%
 2nd
London Assembly elections
See also: London Assembly and London Conservatives
Election
Leader
Assembly Leader
Votes (Constituency)
Votes (List)
Seats
Position
No.
Share
No.
Share
No.
+
Share
2000
William Hague
Eric Ollerenshaw
526,422
33.2%
481,053
29.0%
9 / 25
36.0%
1st
2004
Michael Howard
Bob Neill
562,047
31.2%
533,696
28.5%
9 / 25
 0
36.0%
 1st
2008
David Cameron
Richard Barnes
900,569
37.4%
835,535
34.1%
11 / 25
 2
44.0%
 1st
2012
James Cleverly
722,280
32.7%
708,528
32.0%
9 / 25
 2
36.0%
 2nd
2016
Gareth Bacon
812,415
31.1%
764,230
29.2%
8 / 25
 1
32.0%
 2nd
2021
Boris Johnson
Susan Hall
833,021
32.0%
795,081
30.7%
9 / 25
 1
36.0%
 2nd
Combined authority elections
Year
Leader
Mayoralties won
Change
2017
Theresa May
4 / 6
2018
0 / 1
2019
0 / 1
2021
Boris Johnson
2 / 7
 2
Associated groups
Further information: List of organisations associated with the British Conservative Party
Ideological groups
Tory Reform Group
Conservative Mainstream
Bright Blue
One Nation Conservatives
Conservative Way Forward
Cornerstone Group
Selsdon Group
The Monday Club
Interest groups
Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation
Conservative Friends of Israel
Conservative Friends of Turkey
Conservative Friends of the Chinese
LGBT+ Conservatives
Bruges Group
Conservative Christian Fellowship
Conservative Muslim Forum
Think tanks
European Foundation
Bow Group
Centre for Policy Studies
Alliances
International Democrat Union
European Democrat Union
Economic League
European Conservatives and Reformists
European Democrat Group
Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists
Ulster Conservatives and Unionists   New Force
Party structures
Scottish Conservatives
Welsh Conservatives
Northern Ireland Conservatives
London Conservatives
1922 Committee
Conservative Campaign Headquarters (CCHQ)
Conservative Party Archive
Conservative Research Department
Conservative Women's Organisation
Young Conservatives
Conservative Future Scotland
See also
Politics portalUnited Kingdom portalConservatism portal
History of the Conservative Party (UK)
List of conservative parties by country
List of Conservative Party MPs (UK)
List of Conservative Party (UK) general election manifestos
List of political parties in the United Kingdom
Politics of the United Kingdom
Notes
^ The Conservative Party was a founding member of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party, leaving that party in 2021. Its members in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe sit with the European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance.[11][12]
References
^ Croft, Ethan (11 November 2022). "Rishi Sunak donor gets top job with the Tories". Evening Standard. Retrieved 14 January 2023.
^ Wilkins, Jessica (17 March 2018). "Conservatives re-launch youth wing in a bid to take on Labour". PoliticsHome.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2019. Retrieved 9 July 2019.
^ Wheeler, Brian (5 September 2022). "Tory membership figure revealed". BBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2022.
^ "Capping welfare and working to control immigration". Conservative and Unionist Party. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.
^ a b Nordsieck, Wolfram (2019). "United Kingdom". Parties and Elections in Europe. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2020.
^ Bale, Tim (2011). The Conservative Party: From Thatcher to Cameron. p. 145.
^ David Dutton, "Unionist Politics and the aftermath of the General Election of 1906: A Reassessment." Historical Journal 22#4 (1979): 861 76.
^ McConnel, James (17 February 2011). "Irish Home Rule: An imagined future". BBC. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Whiteley, Paul; Seyd, Patrick; Richardson, Jeremy (1994). True Blues: The Politics of Conservative Party Membership. Oxford University Press. pp. 141 142. ISBN 978-0-19-154441-5. Retrieved 9 May 2016.
^ Lynch, Philip; Whitaker, Richard; Loomes, Gemma. "Competing on the centre right: An examination of party strategy in Britain". University of Leicester. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 9 May 2016.
^ "About - ECR Party". 4 August 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2022.
^ "European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance". Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 12 November 2022.
^ "Open Council Data UK". opencouncildata.co.uk.
^ "Local Council Political Compositions". Open Council Date UK. 23 January 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2017. Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ "Party Conferences". Institute for Government. 26 August 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2022.
^ Maer, Lucinda; Gay, Oonagh (8 May 2021). "The 2010 Coalition Government at Westminster". House of Commons Library. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
^ "David Cameron and Nick Clegg lead coalition into power". The Guardian. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 3 June 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
^ "Election 2015   BBC News". www.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
^ "The 2017 General Election   the numbers behind the result   London Datastore". Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
^ Erlanger, Steven; Castle, Stephen (8 June 2017). "Theresa May Loses Overall Majority in U.K. Parliament". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
^ "The U.K. Is Caught in a Leadership Crisis at the Worst Possible Time". Time. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022.
^ "Tories Fear Johnson May Call Snap UK Election If He Faces Rebellion". Bloomberg.com. 31 May 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022.
^ Marx, Willem (20 October 2022). "British Prime Minister Liz Truss resigns after weeks of criticism and turmoil". NPR. Retrieved 20 October 2022.
^ Hartley-Brewer, Julia (25 July 2000). "Section 28". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
^ Special, Keep Sunday (12 June 2020). "Keep Sunday Special: Why Sunday trading regulations need to stay". Conservative Home. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 3 November 2020.
^ "Europe-wide political divide emerging between cities and countryside   study". Bennett Institute for Public Policy. 16 August 2021. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ "Why the UK has no clear party of business". theconversation.com. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ "How Tory dominance is built on home ownership". New Statesman. 12 May 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ "Tories have unhealthy financial reliance on property developers, says report | Housing". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ "Conservatives 'receive donations worth  17,500 a day from developers'". The Independent. 30 July 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ "Why some farmers are turning away from the Tories". BBC News. 25 May 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022.
^ a b "Tories won more working class votes than Labour amid stark generation gap at general election, poll suggests". The Independent. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 16 August 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
^ a b Mueller, Benjamin (13 December 2019). "How Labour's Working-Class Vote Crumbled and Its Nemesis Won the North". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
^ Garcha, Ciara (3 April 2021). "The Conservatives' attack on the ECHR: A Long Time Coming". Cherwell. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2022.
^ "How the Tories became the party of the working class". The Independent. 22 October 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022.
^ Steve Coulter (10 April 2011). "Book Review: The Conservative Party from Thatcher to Cameron". Archived from the original on 15 August 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
^ Philip Johnston (19 April 2016). "The Conservative Party may be destroyed by this European madness". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
^ Andrew Gimson (15 May 2017). "Why the Tories keep winning". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
^ Robert Blake, The Conservative Party from Peel to Major (1997) p. 4
^ Safire, William (2008). Safire's Political Dictionary. Oxford University Press. p. 144. ISBN 978-0195343342. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 29 March 2017.
^ Ivor Bulmer-Thomas, The Growth of the British Party System Volume I: 1640 1923 (1965) pp. 66 81
^ David Paterson, Liberalism and Conservatism, 1846 1905 (2001) p. 5
^ Richard Shannon, The Age of Salisbury, 1881 1902 (1996)
^ E. H. H. Green, The Crisis of Conservatism: The Politics, Economics and Ideology of the British Conservative Party, 1880 1914 (1995).
^ Peter Fraser, "Unionism and Tariff Reform: The Crisis of 1906." Historical Journal 5.2 (1962): 149 166.
^ Andrew Roberts,  Churchill: Walking with Destiny (2018) p 92.
^ R. C. K. Ensor, England, 1870 1914 pp 373 428. online Archived 8 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine
^ Neal Blewett, Peers, the Parties and the People: General Election of 1910 (1972).
^ Leala Padmanabhan, ''Conservative' or 'Tory': What's in a name? Archived 20 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine' (08/04/15) on BBC News
^ The Conservative Party Archive Trust, Guide to the Conservative Party Archive Archived 9 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine (2009)
^ Graham D. Goodlad, "The 'Crisis' of Edwardian Conservatism," Modern History Review (1998) 9#4 pp 10 13.
^ Jeremy Smith, "Bluff, Bluster and Brinkmanship: Andrew Bonar Law and the Third Home Rule Bill." Historical Journal 36#1 (1993): 161 178.
^ J. A. R. Marriott, Modern England, 1885 1945 (4th ed. 1949) pp 375 432 online free
^ Keohane, Nigel (2010). The Party of Patriotism: The Conservative Party and the First World War. Ashgate.
^ Jarvis, David (1992). "Mrs. Maggs and Betty: The Conservative Appeal to Women Voters in the 1920s". Twentieth Century British History. 5 (2): 129 52. doi:10.1093/tcbh/5.2.129.
^ a b Bogdanor, Vernon (1983). Multi-Party Politics and the Constitution. Cambridge University Press.
^ Marriott, Modern England, 1885 1945 (4th ed. 1949) pp 504 66. online free
^ Alfred F. Havighurst, Modern England, 1901 1984 (2nd ed. 1987) online free to borrow
^ a b Matthew Francis, "A Crusade to Enfranchise the Many': Thatcherism and the 'Property-Owning Democracy." Twentieth Century British History (2011)
^ Zweiniger-Bargileowska, Ina. "Rationing, austerity and the Conservative party recovery after 1945." Historical Journal (1994) 37#1 pp. 173 97.
^ Kynaston, David (2007). Austerity Britain: 1945 1951. London: Bloomsbury. pp. 238 41. ISBN 978-0-7475-7985-4.
^ Dutton, D. J. (2004). "Fyfe, David Patrick Maxwell, Earl of Kilmuir (1900 1967) Archived 6 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press. Retrieved 4 August 2007 (subscription or UK public library membership required)
^ Blake, Robert. The Conservative Party from Peel to Major (1997) pp. 260 64.
^ Toye, Richard. "From 'Consensus' to 'Common Ground': The Rhetoric of the Postwar Settlement and its Collapse," Journal of Contemporary History (2013) 48#1 pp. 3 23.
^ The Economist, 'Mr Butskell's Dilemma', 13 February 1954.
^ Morgan, Kenneth O. (2001). Britain Since 1945: The People's Peace: The People's Peace. Oxford UP. pp. 114 15. ISBN 9780191587993. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 25 November 2015.
^ The Labour Party in Crisis by Paul Whiteley
^ Graham Goodlad,  "Thirteen Wasted Years: "Do the Conservative governments of 1951 64 deserve this label" Modern History Review  (2001) 13#2 pp 2 5.
^ Kynaston, David (2013). Modernity Britain: Opening the Box 1957 1959. London: Bloomsbury. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-7475-8893-1.
^ Thorpe, D.R. (2010). Supermac.
^ "History of Sir Alec Douglas". Inside Government. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ "On This Day 1965: Heath is new Tory leader". BBC News. 27 July 1996. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ "1970: Heath's surprise victory". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "1974 Oct : Wilson makes it four". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "1979: Thatcher wins Tory landslide". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ David Butler and Dennis Kavanagh, "The British General Election of 1979", Macmillan, 1979, p. 154.
^ David Dutton, British Politics Since 1945: The Rise, Fall and Rebirth of Consensus (2nd ed. Blackwell, 1997).
^ Aled Davies, "'Right to Buy': The Development of a Conservative Housing Policy, 1945 1980." Contemporary British History 27.4 (2013): 421 44.
^ "Stephen Farrall, et al. "Thatcherite Ideology, Housing Tenure, and Crime: The Socio-Spatial Consequences of the Right to Buy for Domestic Property Crime." British Journal of Criminology (2015)". Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016.
^ a b "1983: Thatcher triumphs again". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ Stephanie Flanders. "Were 364 economists all wrong?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2015.
^ Office for National Statistics (13 January 2015). "Consumer Price Indices   RPI annual percentage change: 1948 to 2014". UK Government. Archived from the original on 13 February 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015.
^ "North Sea oil: Facts and figures". BBC News. 24 February 2014. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015.
^ a b c d e f g "Poll tracker: Interactive guide to the opinion polls". BBC News. 29 September 2009. Archived from the original on 17 December 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "1987: Thatcher's third victory". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "On This Day 1990: Thatcher quits as prime minister". BBC News. 22 November 1990. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "1992: Tories win again against odds". BBC News. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "1993: Recession over  it's official". BBC News. 26 April 1993. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "Department for Transport Statistics: Passenger transport: by mode, annual from 1952". Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 3 February 2016.
^ Swaine, Jon (1 December 2008). "Train fares cost more than under British Rail". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2015.
^ W, Tony Blair, Cameron, Gordon Brown, Labour Party, Margaret Thatcher, John Major, John Redwood, Kenneth Clarke, Diana, Princess of Wales, George. "Lecture 5 The Blair Revolution ppt download". slideplayer.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021.
^ The Conservative Party   From Thatcher to Cameron
^ Cowling, David (9 February 2001). "Poll monitor: Labour looks hard to beat". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Trying to be 'down with the kids'". BBC News. 7 March 2003. Archived from the original on 13 March 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Tory critics round on Hague". BBC News. 5 March 2001. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Tory peer attacks Hague over race". BBC News. 27 April 2001. Archived from the original on 13 March 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "2005 General election results summary". UK Political Info. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
^ "Full text of David Cameron's victory speech". The Guardian. London. 12 June 2005. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ Wheeler, Brian (3 July 2009). "Minister in Tory homophobia claim". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ "Conservative or Labour preference ("forced choice")". UK Polling Report. YouGov. Archived from the original on 2 May 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Boris is the new Mayor of London". Conservative Party. 3 May 2008. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008.
^ "Election 2010 results". BBC News. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 12 May 2010.
^ "European voters now calling for less EU". The UK News. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
^ Holehouse, Rosa Prince Matthew (8 May 2015). "Election 2015: Ed Miliband resigns as Conservatives win stunning majority". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 8 May 2015.
^ "Election results: Conservatives win majority". BBC News. 8 May 2015. Archived from the original on 8 May 2015. Retrieved 8 May 2015.
^ Parker, George (8 May 2015). "It is 1992 all over again for David Cameron's Conservatives". Financial Times. Nikkei. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016.
^ Elgot, Jessica; Mason, Rowena (16 March 2017). "Conservatives fined record  70,000 for campaign spending failures". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ "Theresa May gains strong support from Conservative MPs". Itv.com. 30 June 2016. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2016.
^ "Theresa May v Andrea Leadsom to be next prime minister". BBC News. 8 July 2016. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2016.
^ "Andrea Leadsom quits Conservative leadership race". The Daily Telegraph. 11 July 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2016.
^ correspondent, Rowena Mason Political (11 July 2016). "May promises social reform in centrist leadership pitch". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ "Theresa May: Word unionist 'very important to me'". BBC News. BBC. 13 July 2016. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ Quinn, Ben (30 June 2016). "Theresa May sets out 'one-nation Conservative' pitch for leadership". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 September 2016.
^ Stewart, Heather (13 July 2016). "Theresa May appeals to centre ground but cabinet tilts to the right". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 July 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ "Who is David Davis? A profile of Britain's new 'Brexit Secretary'". The Daily Telegraph. 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ Gross, Jenny; Douglas, Jason (13 July 2016). "U.K.'s Theresa May Readies Brexit Team With Boris Johnson in Key Cabinet Post". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 6 March 2017.
^ Walker, Peter (14 July 2016). "Women get key jobs as Theresa May sacks four senior ministers". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ Walker, Peter (14 July 2016). "Theresa May appoints Justine Greening and Liz Truss after mass cull of old government sees Michael Gove and Nicky Morgan axed". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ "Andrea Leadsom appointed environment secretary". The Guardian. London, UK. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ "Theresa Villiers to be replaced as Northern Ireland secretary". BBC News. BBC. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ Swinford, Steven (12 July 2016). "Women to make up nearly half of Theresa May's reshuffled Cabinet". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ Stewart, Heather (14 July 2016). "Theresa May appeals to centre ground but cabinet tilts to the right". The Guardian. London, UK. Archived from the original on 13 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016.
^ "Theresa May seeks general election". YouTube. 18 April 2017. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017.
^ "Who are the DUP and will they demand a soft Brexit to prop up the Tories?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017.
^ "General Election 2017 result live: We will work with DUP friends and allies in interests of all UK, says Theresa May". Belfast Telegraph. 9 June 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017.
^ "DUP and Conservatives make confidence and supply deal worth  1.5bn". Sky News. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018.
^ "Cabinet meets as reshuffle continues". BBC News. 2018. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018. Retrieved 9 January 2018.
^ "Baroness Warsi: Conservatives must act on Islamophobia". BBC News. 31 May 2018. Archived from the original on 2 June 2018. Retrieved 9 June 2018.
^ "Three Conservative MPs to defect to Independent Group". The Guardian. 20 February 2019. Archived from the original on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2019.
^ "Three Tory MPs join Labour breakaway group". BBC News. 20 February 2019. Archived from the original on 20 February 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2019.
^ "Theresa May resigns over Brexit: What happened?". BBC News. 24 May 2019. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019.
^ "Boris Johnson wins race to be Tory leader and PM". BBC News. 23 July 2019. Archived from the original on 30 November 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2019.
^ "Brexit: Tory MP defects ahead of crucial no deal vote". BBC News. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.
^ "Phillip Lee quits Tories: Boris Johnson loses working majority after Bracknell MP defects to Lib Dems". The Standard. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.
^ "Hammond: 'I am going to defend my party'". BBC News. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.
^ "Brexit showdown: Who were Tory rebels who defied Boris Johnson?". BBC News. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.
^ "PM Johnson defends use of Brexit 'surrender act'". Reuters. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019.
^ "Boris Johnson agrees Brexit deal with EU". The Independent. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019.
^ "Boris Johnson in 'deal or no deal' Brexit challenge to rival Hunt". BBC News. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019.
^ "Johnson seeks 12 December election after shelving 'do or die' Brexit pledge". The Guardian. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019.
^ "UK results: Conservatives win majority". BBC News. 13 December 2019. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019.
^ "Britain First says 5,000 of its members have joined Tories". The Guardian. 28 December 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019.
^ "Conservatives urged to clamp down on 'far-right entryism' after Britain First tells members to join". The Independent. 28 December 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2019.
^ Stewart, Heather (20 December 2019). "Brexit: MPs pass withdrawal agreement bill by 124 majority". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Rawlinson, Kevin; Topping, Alexandra; Murphy, Simon (1 February 2020). "Brexit day: end of an era as United Kingdom leaves EU   as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Fella, Stefano (17 November 2020). "End of the Brexit transition period: What will change?". House of Commons Library. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Stewart, Heather; Proctor, Kate; Siddique, Haroon (12 March 2020). "Johnson: many more people will lose loved ones to coronavirus". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "Coronavirus: Strict new curbs on life in UK announced by PM". BBC News. 24 March 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "Coronavirus: Boris Johnson moved to intensive care as symptoms worsen". BBC News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Douglas, Jason (6 April 2020). "Dominic Raab, Johnson Ally and Brexit Stalwart, Steps In to Manage U.K. Coronavirus". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Hutton, Robert (27 April 2020). "Boris Johnson Returns to Work After Coronavirus Recovery and Urges U.K. to Maintain Lockdown". TIME. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "PM announces easing of lockdown restrictions: 23 June 2020". Gov.uk. 23 June 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Lockdown: They told us to stay home - then went out. The political figures who broke the rules". Sky News. 23 May 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Mason, Rowena (25 May 2020). "Dominic Cummings refuses to resign or apologise for lockdown breach". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Young, Sarah; Petter, Olivia (22 December 2020). "Covid rules for tiers 1, 2, 3 and 4 - what are the restrictions for December 2020?". The Independent. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Rigby, Beth (17 October 2020). "Coronavirus: Tiered lockdowns are reviving the north-south divide". Sky News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Stewart, Heather (19 December 2020). "PM announces 'tier 4' Covid curbs and curtails Christmas mixing in England". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Jackson, Fraser (28 February 2021). "UK vaccination hits 20 million mark in Europe's fastest jab rollout". France24. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "Covid: These are the lockdown rules that have changed from July 19 in England". ITV News. 19 July 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Tories rake in  11m from hedge funds and finance tycoons openDemocracy
^ a b One in 10 Tory peers have given more than  100,000 to party
^ Met Police urged to launch 'cash for honours' investigation amid fresh scrutiny of Conservative peerages Sky News
^ "Partygate: A timeline of the lockdown gatherings". BBC News. 19 May 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Osborne, Samuel (13 April 2022). "Boris Johnson fined: Prime minister apologises after receiving fixed penalty notice for lockdown-breaking party". Sky News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Scott, Jennifer (13 April 2022). "Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak reject calls to resign over lockdown fines". BBC News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Amos, Owen (7 July 2022). "Boris Johnson resigns: Five things that led to the PM's downfall". BBC News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "Boris Johnson: The inside story of the prime minister's downfall". BBC News. 13 July 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ "Boris Johnson digs in amid growing cabinet mutiny". BBC News. 6 July 2022. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022.
^ Meredith, Sam (7 July 2022). "UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson resigns". CNBC. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022.
^ "How Liz Truss won the Conservative leadership race". 6 September 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2022.
^ Elgot, Jessica (6 September 2022). "Liz Truss becomes UK prime minister after meeting Queen at Balmoral". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Elgot, Jessica (11 September 2022). "Liz Truss will not accompany King Charles on UK tour, says No 10". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 September 2022.
^ Sinclair, Tom (4 October 2022). "Cost-of-living crisis: Workers have gone without meals or pawned posessions says Union". The Pembrokeshire Herald. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
^ "Liz Truss to freeze energy bills at  2,500 a year average, funded by borrowing". The Guardian. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
^ Gilchrist, Karen. "UK's Liz Truss pledges tax-cutting future in landmark speech plagued by protest and political infighting". CNBC. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
^ Webber, Esther; Brenton, Hannah; Courea, Eleni (11 October 2022). "Liz Truss panics as markets keep plunging". Politico. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Grierson, Jamie (30 September 2022). "How Kwasi Kwarteng's mini-budget hit UK economy   in numbers". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ "Liz Truss abandons plan to scrap 45p top rate of income tax amid Tory revolt". The Guardian. 3 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
^ "Liz Truss says she has 'absolutely no shame' in performing tax cut U-turn". Sky News. Retrieved 5 October 2022.
^ Walker, Peter; Crerar, Pippa; Mason, Rowena (14 October 2022). "Liz Truss sacks Kwasi Kwarteng before corporation tax U-turn". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Davies, Gareth (18 October 2022). "Watch: Liz Truss finally says 'sorry' for mini-Budget". The Telegraph. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ a b "Liz Truss resigns as prime minister after Tory revolt". BBC News. 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022.
^ Miguel, Rafa de (20 October 2022). "Liz Truss dimite como primera ministra del Reino Unido tras 44 d as en el cargo". El Pa s (in Spanish). Retrieved 20 October 2022.
^ Landler, Mark; Castle, Stephen (20 October 2022). "U.K. Live Updates: Liz Truss Resigns as Prime Minister". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 October 2022.
^ Adam; Booth, Karla; William (20 October 2022). "U.K. Prime Minister Liz Truss announces resignation after six weeks in office". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 October 2022.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Woodcock, Andrew (30 September 2022). "No honeymoon for Truss, as poll gives thumbs-down to PM in first month in office". The Independent. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ O'Carroll, Lisa (21 October 2022). "'Such a letdown of democracy': clamour grows for early UK general election". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Mason, Rowena (16 October 2022). "Rees-Mogg, Coffey, and Hunt would lose seats in election, poll suggests". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Scott, Jennifer (23 October 2022). "Rishi Sunak enters race to be next PM - hours after late-night talks with Boris Johnson". Sky News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ Whannel, Kate (22 October 2022). "Tory leadership race: Who could replace Liz Truss as prime minister?". BBC News. Retrieved 22 October 2022.
^ Andersson, Jasmine (23 October 2022). "Boris Johnson pulls out of Conservative leadership race". BBC News. Retrieved 23 October 2022.
^ 100 days in, Rishi Sunak's ratings are lacklustre and he has failed to salvage the Tory brand
^ In the recession year of 1981, for example, the Conservatives raised taxes to reduce the budget deficit, with the aim of a reduction of interest rates.
^ "The death and life of Britain's market economy". Financial Times. 24 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2019. Retrieved 18 February 2019.
^ Letwin, Oliver (1 October 2017). "The case for social market capitalism must be made once again, says Sir Oliver Letwin". Express. Archived from the original on 18 February 2019. Retrieved 18 February 2019.
^ "Business: The Economy   Labour's economic record". BBC News. 26 July 1999. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Portillo springs surprise U-turns". BBC News. 3 February 2000. Archived from the original on 28 July 2003. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ "Budget 2012: Top tax rate cut from 50p to 45p". bbc.co.uk. 21 March 2012. Archived from the original on 20 July 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2016.
^ Hayton, Richard; McEnhill, Libby (20 April 2015). "Cameron's Conservative Party, social liberalism and social justice" (PDF). British Politics. 10 (2): 131 147. doi:10.1057/bp.2015.19. ISSN 1746-918X. S2CID 153581022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 4 September 2019.
^ "Biography   Rt Hon Alan Duncan MP". Alan Duncan. 27 May 2012. Archived from the original on 29 May 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ Spencer, Clare (October 2011). "Daily View: Liam Fox's fate". BBC blog. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ "Liam Fox: Colourful politician with traditionalist agenda". Monsters and Critics. 14 October 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2013.[permanent dead link]
^ Montgomerie, Tim (November 2012). "Underrated: Owen Paterson". Stand Point. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ Payne, Sebastian (16 December 2017). "Where next for the Conservatives?". The Financial Times.
^ "Mr Iain Duncan Smith   Contributions   Hansard". hansard.parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ Sparrow, Andrew (26 February 2008). "Cameron attacks 'state multiculturalism'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ a b "Tory warning on multiculturalism". BBC News. 28 September 2008. Archived from the original on 7 March 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ Kylie Maclellan (25 February 2016). "As EU vote looms, immigration rise piles pressure on Cameron". reuters.com. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017.
^ William James (27 August 2015). "UK immigration hits record high, causing headache for Cameron". reuters.com. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017.
^ Grice, Andrew (26 February 2015). "David Cameron immigration pledge 'failed spectacularly' as figures show net migration almost three times as high as Tories promised". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 7 July 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2017.
^ Kingsley, Patrick (10 August 2015). "10 truths about Europe's migrant crisis". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "FactCheck: Are migrants causing the A&E crisis?". Channel 4 News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Priti Patel scraps freedom of movement in new immigration rules". CityAM. 13 July 2020. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Kettle, Martin (29 August 2006). "David Cameron's special relationship". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ a b Robbins, James (26 June 2008). "Cameron's Britain: Foreign policy". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2009.
^ Anderson, Mark (9 March 2015). "UK passes bill to honour pledge of 0.7% foreign aid target". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015.
^ Tempest, Matthew (11 September 2006). "Cameron: I'm no neo-con". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ Mulholland, H l ne (1 August 2008). "Barack Obama gets backing from Boris Johnson". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 28 March 2020.
^ Chadwick, Vince (24 May 2016). "Donald Trump and Boris Johnson kiss and make Out". Politico. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Greenslade, Roy (29 June 2016). "New York Post compares Boris Johnson to Donald Trump". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "London mayor Boris Johnson eyes Trump-style insurgency in EU battle". Newsweek. Reuters. 23 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "Boris and Donald: A very special relationship". POLITICO. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "The New Special Relationship: The British Conservative Party and Israel". Fathom. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "Board of Deputies   Political party manifestos- where they stand on issues of Jewish interest". www.bod.org.uk. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "Britain's PM rebukes John Kerry for his 'attack' on Israel". NBC News. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "Theresa May appears to align herself with Donald Trump on Israel". The Independent. 29 December 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "Sajid Javid set to announce full ban of Hezbollah at party conference". jewishnews.timesofisrael.com. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ "UK to outlaw Hezbollah's political wing". The Guardian. 25 February 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020.
^ "U.K.'s Conservative Party vows to ban councils from boycotting Israeli products". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Mueller, Benjamin (16 December 2019). "U.K. Plans to Pass Anti-B.D.S. Law". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Diver, Tony (16 November 2019). "Tories to ban councils from boycotting products from Israel under manifesto plans". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Fox, Liam (28 September 2009). "If Afghanistan will be lost, it will be lost at home". Conservative Party. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 28 September 2009.
^ Fox, Liam (15 December 2009). "Armed Forces pay for Labour's incompetence". Conservative Party. Archived from the original on 13 January 2010.
^ "The Strategic Defence and Security Review: A Conservative View of Defence and Future Challenges". Royal United Services Institute. 8 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2010.
^ "Liam Fox: The EU should only act when NATO cannot". Conservative Party. 11 February 2010. Archived from the original on 1 April 2010. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
^ a b Fox, Liam (11 February 2010). "The EU should only act when NATO cannot". Archived from the original on 1 April 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2010.
^ "British Conservative Party election manifesto, 1945". Politicsresources.net. 22 October 2012. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011.
^ "50,000 march in NHS cuts protest in Manchester". BBC News. 29 September 2013. Archived from the original on 17 December 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.
^ Frymorgen, Tomasz (6 June 2017). "Which political parties want to legalise weed?". BBC. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Johnson, Boris (24 April 2008). "Legalise cannabis for pain relief" Archived 25 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine. The Daily Telegraph (London).
^ "'Surprise and disappointment' at UK drug response". BBC News. 7 September 2020. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ "Student loans extended to postgraduates in Budget". FT.com. 16 March 2016. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ "How much research funding does the UK get from the EU and how does this compare with other countries?". RoyalSociety.org. Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ Cressey, Daniel (2016). "UK government gives Brexit science funding guarantee". Nature. doi:10.1038/nature.2016.20434. S2CID 168424106. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ "[Withdrawn] Education Secretary announces first new T Levels". Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ a b c "David Cameron on families". GOV.UK. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ Summers, Deborah (15 March 2008). "Family at heart of Conservative policy, says Cameron". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 March 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ "Shared Parental Leave and Pay". GOV.UK. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ Ferguson, Donna (26 August 2017). "Looking forward to those 30 hours of free nursery care? Think again  ". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ Swinford, Steven (8 May 2015). "Conservative manifesto 2015: summary of key policies". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017.
^ "Help paying for childcare". GOV.UK. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Incapacity Benefit". GOV.UK. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Universal Credit for sick and disabled people". Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ a b "Universal Credit: Amber Rudd acknowledges 'real problems' with welfare system". Sky News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "BBC Radio 4   You and Yours, Universal Credit and electric planes". BBC. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Is the National Minimum Wage Safe Under a Conservative Government Poll?". General-election-2010.co.uk. 5 May 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012.
^ "Budget 2015: Osborne commits to national living wage". BBC News. 8 July 2015. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2015.
^ "National Minimum Wage and National Living Wage rates". GOV.UK. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Workers underpaid by record  15.6m". BBC News. 22 September 2018. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "Changes to State Pension Age | Age UK". www.ageuk.org.uk. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018.
^ "David Cameron pledges radical green shake-up". The Daily Telegraph. 14 September 2007.[dead link]
^ Guru-Murthy, Krishnan (28 November 2019). "The Channel 4 News Climate Debate". Channel 4 News. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Duncan, Pamela; Harvey, Fiona. "Tory manifesto mentions climate crisis only 10 times". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Woodcock, Andrew. "Northern Tory MPs declare support for controversial coal mine". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Forrest, Adam. "One in 15 Conservative MPs believe climate change is a 'myth', poll finds". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Woodcock, Andrew. "Most Tory members don't believe established climate change science, survey finds". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Walker, Andy. "Labour slams PM for failure to create national infrastructure police force". Infrastructure Intelligence. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
^ a b Georgiou, Christakis (April 2017). "British Capitalism and European Unification, from Ottawa to the Brexit Referendum". Historical Materialism. 25 (1): 90 129. doi:10.1163/1569206X-12341511.
^ Lewis, Anthony (29 October 1971). "Commons Votes, 356 to 242, for Britain's Membership in the European Market". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2019.
^ Mardell, Mark (26 June 2008). "Cameron's Britain: Euro-doubts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2010.
^ "Clarke's treaty pledge sparks row". BBC News. 14 June 2009. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2009.
^ "Blair attacks hereditary peers". BBC News. 18 November 1998. Archived from the original on 23 February 2003. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ "Clarke slams Cameron rights plan". BBC News. 27 June 2006. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ Leybourn, Heather (11 December 2019). "The threat to our democracy buried in the Tory manifesto". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
^ a b Conservative and Unionist Central Office v. James Robert Samuel Burrell (HM Inspector of Taxes) [1981] EWCA Civ 2 (10 December 1981)
^ a b "Party Structure and Organisation". Conservative Party. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2016.
^ Rallings, Colin; Thrasher, Michael (2007). British electoral facts, 1832 2006 (7th ed.). Table 2.01 "Summary Results of General Elections 1832 2005 (UK)", p. 59. ISBN 978-0-7546-2712-8.
^ "Election 2010 Results". BBC News. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2010.
^ McGuinness, Feargal (3 December 2012). "Membership of UK political parties" (PDF). House of Commons Library. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 April 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2014.
^ Mulholland, H l ne (5 October 2010). "Tories voice fears over falling membership". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 23 April 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2011. Tim Montgomerie, the editor of the influential grassroots Tory website ConservativeHome, told a fringe event that two separate sources had told him party membership was now 177,000 down 80,000 on the 2005 figure of 257,000 ... The Conservative party refused to confirm the figure
^ "Conservative membership has nearly halved under Cameron". BBC News. 18 September 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2014.
^ Yorke, Harry (17 March 2018). "Conservative Party nearly twice the size originally thought, new figures show". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
^ "Statement on average age and analysis of Conservative Party Membership (2019) | the Bow Group". Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019.
^ "Who are Britain's Conservatives? | Europe | al Jazeera". Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019.
^ Knight, Julian (2015). British Politics For Dummies (2nd ed.). p. 202. ISBN 978-1-118-97152-9.
^ Constitution of the Conservative Party, Schedule 6
^ a b Colomer, Josep M. (2013). Personal Representation: The Neglected Dimension of Electoral Systems. European Consortium for Political Research. p. 45. ISBN 9781907301575. Retrieved 16 November 2016.
^ Webber, Esther (2 August 2013). "The costly process of becoming an election candidate". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.
^ Gordon, Bryony (3 October 2006). "Forget Tory Boy, Conservatives are now cool". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 20 March 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
^ Crone, Stephen; Wilks-Heeg, Stuart (20 December 2010). "Just 50 'donor groups' have supplied over half of the Conservative party's declared donation income in the last decade, a fact disguised by legal 'fame avoidance' techniques". British Politics and Policy blog at LSE. Archived from the original on 12 July 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ Syal, Rajeev; Treanor, Jill; Mathiason, Nick (30 September 2011). "City's influence over Conservatives laid bare by research into donations". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ "Labour was best-funded UK political party in 2013". BBC News. 29 July 2014. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018.
^ "Details of party accounts since 2002". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 30 April 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2017.
^ "Tories boosted by construction donations". The Construction Index. 25 August 2017. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 25 August 2017.
^ Gabriel Pogrund; Henry Zeffman (20 February 2022). "The Tory donors with access to Boris Johnson's top team". The Times. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022.
^ a b Traynor, Ian (2 June 2009). "Anti-gay, climate change deniers: meet David Cameron's new friends". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2009.
^ a b Bruce, Brendan (1992). Images of Power: How the Image Makers Shape Our Leaders. London: Kogan Page Ltd. p. 120. ISBN 978-0749406691. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
^ Ranney, Austin (1985). Britain at the polls, 1983: a study of the general election. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0822306191. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
^ Rosenbaum, Martin (1996). From Soapbox to Soundbite: Party Political Campaigning in Britain since 1945. London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 203. ISBN 9781349253111. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
^ "Tories show off 'scribbled' logo". news.bbc.co.uk. BBC. 15 September 2006. Archived from the original on 15 July 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
^ Jones, George (8 August 2007). "Tory Oak Tree Logo Turns Blue". www.telegraph.co.uk. Telegraph Media Group Limited. Archived from the original on 13 June 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
^ Hodgson, Stewart (17 May 2017). "The history of political party logos and what they really mean". fabrikbrands.com. Fabrik Brands. Archived from the original on 30 March 2018. Retrieved 17 April 2014.
^ Mulholland, H l ne (28 August 2009). "Tories seek to win gay vote with new rainbow logo". www.theguardian.com. Guardian News & Media Limited. Archived from the original on 7 September 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2020.
^ "UK Politics   Cameron: Tories need new identity". bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 24 July 2014.
^ "Introducing Cameronism". BBC News. 11 July 2011. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2012.
^ "Document 783" (PDF). GEES. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ Richard Seymour (3 March 2011). "The siren song of the neocons in David Cameron's cabinet". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016.
^ Lynch, Whitaker, Philip, Richard (2012). "Where There is Discord, Can They Bring Harmony? Managing Intra-party Dissent on European Integration in the Conservative Party" (PDF). The British Journal of Politics and International Relations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014.
^ "A Christian Democrat leadership for the UK". Financial Times. 7 October 2016. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2021.
^ Stanley, Tim (5 October 2016). "Theresa May has closed the liberal era. Bring on Christian democracy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ Garner, Robert; Kelly, Richard N. (1998). British political parties today. p. 66.
^ Politics Review, April 2013
^ Bale, Tim (2011). The Conservative Party: From Thatcher to Cameron. p. 145.
^ "Supporters". Better Off Out. Archived from the original on 20 June 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ Evans, Eric J. (2004). Thatcher and Thatcherism. pp. 6, 72.
^ "Mr Major's Third Cabinet". John Major. 25 September 1992. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2013.
^ a b "Party Structure and Organisation". Conservatives.com. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2018.
^ "Philip May's Calling Community". Conservatives.com. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018.
^ "w4mp   The site for everyone working for an MP". W4mpjobs.org. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018.
^ "General Election Results 1885 1979". Election.demon.co.uk. Archived from the original on 30 January 2012. Retrieved 13 April 2010.
^ "1835 General Election Results | From A Vision of Britain through Time". www.visionofbritain.org.uk. Archived from the original on 18 February 2020. Retrieved 18 February 2020.
Further reading
Bale, Tim. The Conservatives since 1945: the Drivers of Party Change. (2012, Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0-19-923437-0)
Bale, Tim (2011). The Conservative Party: From Thatcher to Cameron. Cambridge, England: Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-4858-3.
Ball, Stuart. Portrait of a Party: The Conservative Party in Britain 1918 1945 (Oxford UP, 2013).
Beer, Samuel. "The Conservative Party of Great Britain," Journal of Politics 14#1 (February 1952), pp. 41 71 in JSTOR Archived 15 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine
Blake, Robert (2011). The Conservative Party from Peel to Major (4th ed.). London: Faber Finds.
Blake, Robert and Louis William Roger, eds. Churchill: A Major New Reassessment of His Life in Peace and War (Oxford UP, 1992), 581 pp; 29 essays by scholars on specialized topics
Blake, Robert. The Conservative Party From Peel To Churchill (1970) online
Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor. The Growth of the British Party System Volume I: 1640 1923 (1965); The Growth of the British Party System Volume II: 1924 1964, revised to 1966 Conservative-Labour Confrontation (1967)
Campbell, John. Margaret Thatcher; Volume Two: The Iron Lady (Pimlico  (2003). ISBN 0-7126-6781-4
Charmley, John. "Tories and Conservatives." in David Brown, Robert Crowcroft, and Gordon Pentland eds., The Oxford Handbook of Modern British Political History, 1800 2000 (2018): 306.
Dorey, Peter; Garnett, Mark; Denham, Andrew. From Crisis to Coalition: The Conservative Party, 1997 2010 (2011) Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-54238-9 excerpt and text search Archived 16 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine
 . British conservatism: the politics and philosophy of inequality (IB Tauris, 2010), Covers more than just political party.
Ensor,  R. C. K. England, 1870 1914 online Archived 8 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine, passim.
Evans, Eric J. (2004). Thatcher and Thatcherism.
Garnett, Mark, and Philip Lynch. The conservatives in crisis: the Tories after 1997 (1994)
Green, E. H. H. Ideologies of conservatism: conservative political ideas in the twentieth century (2004)
Green, E. H. H. The Crisis of Conservatism: The Politics, Economics and Ideology of the British Conservative Party, 1880 1914 (1995).
 . The Crisis of conservatism: The politics, economics, and ideology of the British Conservative Party, 1880 1914 (1996)
Harris, Robert. The Conservatives   A History (2011) Bantam Press ISBN 978-0-593-06511-2
Hayton, Richard, and Andrew Scott Crines, eds. Conservative orators from Baldwin to Cameron (2015).
Hazell, Robert and Ben Yong, eds. The Politics of Coalition: How the Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government Works (Hart Publishing, 2012).
Heppell, Timothy, and David Seawright, eds. Cameron and the Conservatives: The Transition to Coalition Government (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012).
King, Anthony, ed. British Political Opinion 1937 2000: The Gallup Polls (2001)
Lawrence, Jon. Electing Our Masters: The Hustings in British Politics from Hogarth to Blair (Oxford University Press, 2009) excerpt and text search Archived 3 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine
McKenzie, R. T., and A. Silver. Angels in Marble: Working-class Conservatives in Urban England (1968)
Mowat, Charles Loch. Britain between the Wars, 1918 1940 (1955) 694 pp;
Norton, Bruce F. Politics in Britain (2007) textbook
Parry, J. P. "Disraeli and England," Historical Journal 43#3 (2000), pp. 699 728 in JSTOR Archived 9 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine
Paterson, David (2001). Liberalism and Conservatism, 1846 1905.
Powell, David. British Politics, 1910 1935: The Crisis of the Party System (2004)
Roberts, Andrew.  Churchill: Walking with Destiny (2018), a fully detailed biography.
Reitan, Earl Aaron. The Thatcher Revolution: Margaret Thatcher, John Major, Tony Blair, and the Transformation of Modern Britain, 1979 2001  (2003) Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 0-7425-2203-2
Searle, G. R. A New England?: Peace and War 1886 1918 (2005) 976pp broad survey
Seldon, Anthony and Stuart Ball, eds. Conservative Century: The Conservative Party since 1900 (1994) 896pp; essays by experts Contents Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Shannon, Richard. The Age of Disraeli, 1868 1881: The Rise of Tory Democracy (A History of the Conservative Party Series) (1992)
Shannon, Richard. The Age of Salisbury, 1881 1902: Unionism and Empire (A History of the Conservative Party) (1996)
Snowdon, Peter. Back from the Brink: The Extraordinary Fall and Rise of the Conservative Party (2010) HarperPress ISBN 978-0-00-730884-2
Taylor, A. J. P. English History, 1914 1945 (1965), a standard political history of the era
Thackeray, David. "Home and Politics: Women and Conservative Activism in Early Twentieth Century Britain," Journal of British Studies (2010) 49#4 pp. 826 48.
Windscheffel, Alex. "Men or Measures? Conservative Party Politics, 1815 1951," Historical Journal Vol. 45, No. 4 (December 2002), pp. 937 51 in JSTOR Archived 15 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine
Historiography
Crowson, N. J., ed. The Longman Companion to the Conservative Party Since 1830 (2001); chronologies; relations with women, minorities, trade unions, EU, Ireland, social reform and empire.
Harrison, Brian. "Margaret Thatcher's Impact on Historical Writing", in William Roger Louis, ed., Irrepressible Adventures with Britannia: Personalities, Politics, and Culture in Britain (London, 2013), 307 21.
Kowol, Kit. "Renaissance on the Right? New Directions in the History of the Post-War Conservative Party." Twentieth Century British History 27#2 (2016): 290 304. online Kowol, Kit (2016). "Renaissance on the Right? New Directions in the History of the Post-War Conservative Party". Twentieth Century British History. 27 (2): 290 304. doi:10.1093/tcbh/hww012. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2020.
Porter, Bernard. "'Though Not an Historian Myself 'Margaret Thatcher and the Historians." Twentieth Century British History 5#2 (1994): 246 56.
Turner, John. "The British Conservative Party in the Twentieth Century: from Beginning to End?." Contemporary European History 8#2 (1999): 275 87.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Conservative Party (UK).
Wikiquote has quotations related to Conservative Party (UK).
Official website 
Conservatives.tv
Conservatives in Northern Ireland Archived 3 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine
Conservatives in Scotland
Constitution of the Conservative Party
conservative-party.net   Conservative website directory
Guardian Politics   Special Report: Conservative Party
The Thatcher legacy 1979 2009   International conference
Conservative Party (UK) at Curlie
vteConservative and Unionist PartyHistoryOrganisations
Conservative Party Archive
Topics
History of the Conservative Party
History of conservatism in Great Britain
Tories
Tamworth Manifesto
Carlton Club
Primrose League
Tariff Reform League
Unionist Free Food League
Coalition Coupon
Carlton Club meeting
General election manifestos
Fourth Party
Liberal Unionist Party
Irish Conservative Party 
Irish Unionist Party
Scottish Unionist Party
National Party (1917)
National Liberal Party
LeadershipHouse of Lords(1828 1922)
Wellington
Derby
Malmesbury
Cairns
Richmond
Beaconsfield
Salisbury
Devonshire
Lansdowne
Curzon
House of Commons(1834 1922)
Peel
Bentinck
Granby
vacant (1848 1849)
Disraeli / Granby / Herries
Disraeli
Northcote
Hicks Beach
R. Churchill
Smith
Balfour
Law
A. Chamberlain
Leaders (1922 )
Law
Baldwin
N. Chamberlain
W. Churchill
Eden
Macmillan
Douglas-Home
Heath
Thatcher
Major
Hague
Duncan Smith
Howard
Cameron
May
Johnson
Truss
Sunak
Chairmen (1911 )
Steel-Maitland
Younger
Jackson
Davidson
N. Chamberlain
Baird
Hacking
Dugdale
Assheton
Woolton
Poole
Hailsham
Butler
Macleod / Poole
Blakenham
du Cann
Barber
Thomas
Carrington
Whitelaw
Thorneycroft
Parkinson
Gummer
Tebbit
Brooke
Baker
Patten
Fowler
Hanley
Mawhinney
Parkinson
Ancram
Davis
May
Fox / Saatchi
Maude
Spelman
Pickles
Warsi / Feldman
Shapps / Feldman
Feldman
McLoughlin
Lewis
Cleverly / Elliot
Milling / Elliot
Dowden / Elliot
Stephenson / Elliot
Berry
Zahawi
Hands
See also
Deputy Leader of the Conservative Party
Maudling
Whitelaw
Lilley
Ancram
Leadership elections
1965
Heath
1975
Thatcher
1989
Thatcher re-elected
1990
Major
1995
Major re-elected
1997
Hague
2001
Duncan Smith
2003
Howard
2005
Cameron
2016
May
2019
Johnson
July September 2022
Truss
October 2022
Sunak
Party structureProfessional
Conservative Party Board
Conservative Campaign Headquarters
Treasurer of the Conservative Party
Conservative Research Department
Voluntary
National Conservative Convention
Parliamentary
1922 Committee
Conservative Chief Whip's Office
Conference
Conservative Party Conference
Subnational
Northern Ireland Conservatives
Scottish Conservatives
Welsh Conservatives
Gibraltar Conservatives
Directly elected city mayoral authorities
London Conservatives
Local
Conservative Associations
Associated organisationsList
Organisations associated with the Conservative Party
Sectional groups
Conservative Women's Organisation
Young Conservatives
Conservatives Abroad
LGBT+ Conservatives
Association of Conservative Clubs
Factional groups
2020 group
Activate
The Atlantic Bridge
Blue Collar Conservativism
Common Sense Group
Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation
Conservative Christian Fellowship
Conservative Countryside Forum
Conservative Disability Group
Conservative European Forum
Conservative Friends of America
Conservative Friends of the Chinese
Conservative Friends of Gibraltar
Conservative Friends of India
Conservative Friends of Israel
Conservative Friends of Palestine
Conservative Friends of Turkey
Conservative History Group
Conservative Humanist Association
Conservative Mainstream
Conservative Health
Conservative Muslim Forum
Conservative Education Society
Conservative National Property Advisory Committee
Conservative Rural Affairs Group
Conservative Science & Technology Forum
Conservative Trade Unionists
Conservative Transport Group
Conservative Way Forward
Conservative Women National Committee
Conservative Workers & Trade Unionists
Conservatives 4 Cities
Conservatives Against Fox Hunting
Conservatives at Work
Conservatives for International Travel
Cornerstone Group
COVID Recovery Group
European Foundation
European Research Group
Fresh Start
Macleod Group
Margaret Thatcher Foundation
Monday Club
92 Group
No Campaign
No Turning Back
Northern Research Group
One Nation Conservatives
Selsdon Group
Tory Green Initiative
Tory Reform Group
Renewing One Nation
Young Britons' Foundation
Conservative Co-operative Movement
Politicians
List of MPs
2005 2010
2010 2015
London
Think tanks
Bow Group
Bright Blue
Bruges Group
Centre for Policy Studies
Centre for Social Justice
European Foundation
Onward
Policy Exchange
Society of Conservative Lawyers
Party alliancesCurrent
List of current alliances
European Conservatives and Reformists Party
International Democrat Union (European Democrat Union)
European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance
Former
List of former alliances
Conservative DUP agreement
European People's Party (European People's Party Group)
European Conservative Group
European Conservatives and Reformists
European Democrats
Movement for European Reform
Alliance for an Open Europe
Ulster Conservatives and Unionists (Ulster Unionist Party)
 Conservatism portal  United Kingdom portal
Links to related articles
vtePolitical parties in the United KingdomLegislatures of the United KingdomHouse of Commons (650)
Conservative (358)
Labour (200, including Labour Co-operative*)
SNP (44)
Liberal Democrats (14)
DUP (8)
Sinn F in  (7)
Plaid Cymru (3)
SDLP (2)
Alba (2)
Alliance (1)
Green (E&W) (1)
Independents (9)
Speaker (1)
House of Lords (777)
Conservative (261)
Crossbenchers (184)
Labour (173)
Liberal Democrats (83)
Democratic Unionist (6)
Ulster Unionist (2)
Green (E&W) (2)
Plaid Cymru (1)
Lord Speaker (1)
Non-affiliated (37)
Independents (2)
Lords Spiritual (25)
Scottish Parliament (129)
Scottish National Party (64)
Scottish Conservatives (31)
Scottish Labour (22)
Scottish Greens (7)
Scottish Liberal Democrats (4)
Presiding Officer (1)
Senedd (60)
Welsh Labour (30)
Welsh Conservatives (16)
Plaid Cymru (12)
Welsh Liberal Democrats (1)
Independent (1)
Northern Ireland Assembly (90)
Sinn F in (27)
DUP (25)
Alliance (17)
Ulster Unionist (9)
SDLP (8)
Independent Unionists (2)
Traditional Unionist Voice (1)
People Before Profit (1)
London Assembly (25)
London Labour (11)
London Conservatives (9)
London Greens (3)
London Liberal Democrats (2)
Other national and regional parties
Abolish the Welsh Assembly
Animal Welfare
Aont 
Ashfield Independents
Aspire
Breakthrough Party
Burning Pink
Christian Peoples Alliance
English Democrats
Green (NI)
Gwlad
Heavy Woollen District Independents
Independent Community and Health Concern
Independent Green Voice
Left Unity
Liberal
Lincolnshire Independents
Mebyon Kernow
National Health Action
Northern Independence Party
Official Monster Raving Loony
Progressive Unionist
Propel
Reclaim
Reform UK
Social Democratic
Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition
UKIP
Women's Equality
Yorkshire
*Co-operative Party candidates stand jointly with the Labour Party.  Sinn F in have elected members and offices at Westminster, but as abstentionists do not take their seats.
Portal:Politics
List of political parties by representation
Politics of the United Kingdom
vteInternational Democrat Union
Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists
Asia Pacific Democrat Union
Caribbean Democrat Union
Democrat Union of Africa
European Democrat Union
European People's Party
International Women's Democrat Union
International Young Democrat Union
Union of Latin American Parties
Member parties 
 Democratic Party
 Palmavon Webster
 Liberal Party
 Austrian People's Party
 National Independence Party
 United Democratic Party
 Social Democrat Movement
 Party of Democratic Action
 Democrats
 Union of Democratic Forces
 Conservative Party
 Independent Democratic Union
 National Renewal
 Kuomintang
 Conservative Party
 Democratic Union
 Democratic Rally
 Civic Democratic Party
 Dominica Freedom Party
 National Progressive Force
 Social Christian Party
 Nationalist Republican Alliance
 Isamaa
 National Coalition Party
 United National Movement
 Christian Democratic Union
 Christian Social Union in Bavaria
 New Patriotic Party
 New Democracy
 New National Party
 Unionist Party
 National Party
 Fidesz
 Independence Party
 Bharatiya Janata Party
 Jamaica Labour Party
 Maldivian Democratic Party
 Liberal Democratic Party
 Democratic Party
 National Party
 Conservative Party
 VMRO DPMNE
 Conservative Party
 Christian People's Party
 CDS PP
 People's Action Movement
 United Workers Party
 New Democratic Party
 Democratic Party of Serbia
 Slovenian Democratic Party
 People Power Party
 People's Party
 United National Party
 People's Democratic Movement
 Moderate Party
 Forum for Democratic Change
 Conservative Party
 Republican Party
 Project Venezuela
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
People
UK Parliament
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservative_Party_(UK)&oldid=1149817045"