For the cocktail 'Melon ball', see List of cocktails.
 A melon baller
Melon ballers are utensils to make balls of melon from a scoop with a diameter from around 1 centimeter to 3 centimeters (about 3/8 inch to 1 inch). They are generally used to make fruit salad.[1]
Melon balls are made by pressing them into the melon's flesh and rotating. It can also be used to cut other soft fruit and ice cream. The diameter of a melon baller's bowl varies from around 1 centimeter to 3 centimeters (about 3/8 inch to 1 inch), and it is typically made of stainless steel with a handle of wood, metal, or hard plastic. Some varieties have the handle in the middle and a different-sized bowl on each end, and the bowl typically has a small hole in the middle to allow air and juice through. It is more commonly known as a prepping utensil. Melon ballers can be used for a variety of melons; like watermelon, cantaloupe, or honeydew.[2] They typically are multifunctional utensils. They are also used for trying small bits of other foods such as ice cream or making chocolate truffles.
See also[edit]
List of melon dishes
Melon
References[edit]
^ Bellingham, Linda; Bybee, Jean Ann (2012-11-12). Food Styling for Photographers: A Guide to Creating Your Own Appetizing Art. CRC Press. pp. 68 69. ISBN 978-1-136-10166-3.
^ The Code of Federal Regulations of the United States of America. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1967. p. 680.
vteMelonBenincasaSpecies
B. hispida (Winter melon)
CitrullusSpecies
C. lanatus
Watermelon
C. caffer
Citron melon
C. colocynthis (egusi)
C. ecirrhosus (Namib tsamma)
Productsand dishes
Egusi
Watermelon rind preserves
Watermelon seed oil
Watermelon steak
CucumisSpecies
C. melo (muskmelon)
Barattiere
Cantaloupe
Carosello
Galia
Oriental
C. melo Inodorus Group
Canary
Honeydew
Persian
Santa Claus
C. metuliferus (horned/jelly melon)
C. myriocarpus (paddy melon)
Cultivars
Bailan
Banana
Charentais
Crane
Gaya
Hami
Kajari
Kolkhoznitsa
Mirza
Montreal
Sprite
Sugar
Yubari King
Productsand dishes
Melon ball
Midori
Other species
Cucumeropsis mannii (white-seed melon)
Momordica charantia (bitter melon)
See also
List of melon dishes
Melon Day
Melothria scabra (cucamelon)
Solanum muricatum (pepino melon)
 Category
 Commons
This food ingredient article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Melon_ball&oldid=1145777602"