Ballet shoe with stiffened toe for dancing en pointe
Not to be confused with Pointed shoe.
 Modern pointe shoes. The edge of the toe pad, which is inserted between the foot and toe box for cushioning, can be seen on the dancer's right foot.
A pointe shoe (UK: /pw t/, US: /pw nt, p nt/), also called a ballet shoe,[1][2][3][4] is a type of shoe worn by ballet dancers when performing pointe work. Pointe shoes were conceived in response to the desire for dancers to appear weightless and sylph-like and have evolved to enable dancers to dance en pointe (on the tips of their toes) for extended periods of time. They are manufactured in a variety of colors, most commonly in shades of light pink.
History[edit]
 Marie Taglioni in the title role of La Sylphide, a ballet danced entirely en pointe
Women began to dance ballet in 1681, twenty years after King Louis XIV of France ordered the founding of the Acad mie Royale de Danse.[5] At that time, the standard women's ballet shoe had heels. Mid-18th century dancer Marie Camargo of the Paris Op ra Ballet was the first to wear a non-heeled shoe, enabling her to perform leaps that would have been difficult, if not impossible, in the more conventional shoes of the age.[6] After the French Revolution, heels were completely eliminated from standard ballet shoes. These flat-bottomed predecessors of the modern pointe shoe were secured to the feet by ribbons and incorporated pleats under the toes to enable dancers to leap, execute turns, and fully extend their feet.
The first dancers to rise up on their toes did so with the help of an invention by Charles Didelot in 1796.[7] His "flying machine" lifted dancers upward, allowing them to stand on their toes before leaving the ground.[6] This lightness and ethereal quality was well received by audiences and, as a result, choreographers began to look for ways to incorporate more pointe work into their pieces.
As dance progressed into the 19th century, the emphasis on technical skill increased, as did the desire to dance en pointe without the aid of wires. When Marie Taglioni first danced La Sylphide en pointe, her shoes were nothing more than modified satin slippers; the soles were made of leather and the sides and toes were darned to help the shoes hold their shapes.[8] Because the shoes of this period offered no support, dancers would pad their toes for comfort and rely on the strength of their feet and ankles for support.
The next substantially different form of pointe shoe appeared in Italy in the late 19th century. Dancers like Pierina Legnani wore shoes with a sturdy, flat platform at the front end of the shoe, rather than the more sharply pointed toe of earlier models. These shoes also included a box made of layers of fabric for containing the toes, and a stiffer, stronger sole. They were constructed without nails and the soles were only stiffened at the toes, making them nearly silent. By 1880s, shoemaker Salvatore Capezio also improved the construction of pointe shoes after a series of work for repairing pointe shoes.[9][10]
The birth of the modern pointe shoe is often attributed to the early 20th-century Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova, who was one of the most famous and influential dancers of her time. Pavlova had particularly high, arched insteps, which left her vulnerable to injury when dancing en pointe. She also had slender, tapered feet, which resulted in excessive pressure on her big toes. To compensate for this, she inserted toughened leather soles into her shoes for extra support and flattened and hardened the toe area to form a box.[8]
Men have not historically performed in pointe shoes except for comedic effect.[11] Examples of this include Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo, and characters such as Bottom in A Midsummer Night's Dream and the evil stepsisters in Cinderella. [6]
Controversy[edit]
Pointe shoes employ structural reinforcements in both shank and toe box in an attempt to distribute the dancer's weight load throughout the feet, thus reducing the load on the toes enough to enable the dancer to support all their body weight on fully vertical feet.
But this belief is disputed. Nothing in pointe shoe design prevents a foot s  slippage,  in which, when en pointe, the dancer s weight forces their foot down into the shoe until their big toe meets the end of the toe box. Measurements have shown that most of the dancer's weight en pointe is borne by the big toe(s) regardless of the length of the second toe. Hence, such reinforcements cannot and do not distribute the weight load throughout the foot as claimed.[12]
Construction[edit]
 Parts of a pointe shoe.
Every dancer has unique feet, with variations that include toe length and shape, arch flexibility, and mechanical strength. Consequently, most pointe shoe manufacturers produce more than one model of shoe, with each model offering a different fit, as well as custom fitted shoes. Regardless of the manufacturer or model, however, all pointe shoes share two important structural features that enable dancers to dance on the tips of their toes:
A box within the front end of the shoe that encases and supports the dancer's toes.
A shank, which is a piece of rigid material that serves to stiffen the sole so as to provide support for the arch of the en pointe foot.[8]
The exterior of a pointe shoe is covered with fabric, thus concealing the box and other internal structural elements and lending an aesthetically pleasing look to the shoe. Most pointe shoes are covered with satin, but some are available with canvas exteriors. Pointe shoes are most often available in light pink colors and less commonly in black and white. In recent years, pointe shoes have also become more diverse in color. For example, many pointe shoe makers, like Bloch, offer pointe shoes in various skin tones ranging from light pink to deeper browns to suit darker complexions. When other colors are desired (e.g., to match a costume), pointe shoes may be dyed or, if available, ordered in custom colors.
The vamp refers to the shoe's upper piece, measured from the platform to the drawstring; normally, longer toes call for a longer vamp. The throat is the edge of the vamp above the arch of the foot; it is usually either v-shaped or round, which tend to suit feet with higher or lower arches, respectively. The drawstring is located within the binding on the throat; this may be made from either elastic or lace.
Box[edit]
 A pointe shoe's tightly stretched satin exterior exposes the shape of its underlying toe box.
The box is a rigid enclosure within the front end of the shoe that encases and supports the dancer's toes.[13] The front end of the box is flattened so as to form a platform upon which the dancer can balance, and fabric covers the exterior of the box for aesthetics.
In conventional pointe shoes, the box is typically made from tightly packed layers of paper, paste and fabric that have been glued together and then shaped into an enclosure.[13] When the glue dries, it becomes hard and provides the required stiffness. In some newer pointe shoes, the box may be made from plastic and rubber, with rigidity provided by the plastic.[13]
Box shapes vary widely among shoe models and manufacturers. A number of shape attributes, including box length, height, taper angle and platform area, determine the suitability of a shoe for any particular foot.[13]
Sole[edit]
 The sole is thin and covers only part of the bottom of the pointe shoe so as to remain inconspicuous.
For most pointe shoes, the sole is constructed from a piece of leather that is attached to the shoe with adhesive and reinforced by stitching along its edges.[13] The sole overlaps and secures the unfinished edges of the shoe's exterior fabric. Pointe shoes may be manufactured with either scraped soles, which provide superior traction, or buffed soles, which have a smoother surface for reduced traction.
Aesthetic appearance is of paramount importance for modern pointe shoes. To achieve an elegant appearance, the shoe's more decorative outer fabric is prominently featured, covering the maximum possible area of the shoe's visible surfaces. To this end, the sole is made of thin material to give it a minimal profile, and a margin of satin is artfully pleated around it so that the sole covers only part of the bottom of the shoe.
Shank[edit]
 The shank is covered by thin fabric, which in turn directly contacts the bottom of the dancer's foot.
Shanks are typically made from leather, plastic, cardstock, or layers of glue-hardened burlap. The flexibility of a shank is determined by its thickness and the type of material used. A shank's thickness may be consistent throughout or it may vary along its length to produce different strengths at select points. For example, slits may be cut across a shank at demi-pointe to enhance roll through. Also, a shank's thickness may transition at some point along its length in order to implement differing strengths above and below the transition. Standard pointe shoes typically have a full shank, in which the shank runs the full length of the sole, or fractional (e.g., half or three-quarter) length shanks. Many pointe shoe manufacturers offer a choice of shank materials, and some will build shoes with customized shanks of varying stiffness and length.
Different pointe shoe makers offer different strengths of shank. For example, Grishko, a Russian pointe shoe company, offers various shank strengths such as super soft, soft, medium, hard, and super hard. The strength of the shank mostly depends on the arch and strength of the dancer s foot.[14] If the dancer has a strong and flexible arch, they would need a hard or super hard shank to support the foot while en pointe properly. If the dancer is starting pointe and has weaker feet, a super soft or soft shank would be more suitable, allowing the dancer to pointe their foot more easily. Additionally, dancers will sometimes wear different pointe shoe models for different performance pieces. In such cases, the choreography can dictate the type of shank required; a lyrical style may call for a softer shoe, while an aggressive style with many turns is more easily performed in a hard, stiff shoe.
Ribbons and elastic band[edit]
 Ribbons and elastic band used to secure a pointe shoe to the foot.
A pointe shoe employs two fabric ribbons and an elastic band to secure it to the foot. Most of the work of securing shoes to feet is done by the ribbons. The two ribbons wrap around the dancer's ankle in opposite directions, overlapping one another so as to form a cross at the front. The ends are then tied together in a knot, which is then tucked under the ribbon on the inside of the ankle to hide it from view.
The elastic band which traverses the front of the ankle below the ribbons keeps the heel of the shoe in place against the foot when the dancer is en pointe. Optionally, two overlapped elastic bands may be used on each shoe to increase tension and holding power.
The locations where the band and ribbons attach to a shoe is critical, as incorrect placement can result in a poorly fitting shoe.[15] Some dancers choose to sew the ribbons and elastics onto the inside of the shoe, whereas others sew them outside onto the silk exterior. Typically, the loose ends of newly sewn ribbons are briefly exposed to open flames to melt them and thus prevent fraying.
Pr -pointe shoe[edit]
A pr -pointe shoe, which is also variously called a break-down, "demi-pointe" or a soft-block shoe, shares many characteristics with pointe shoes. For example, its outer appearance resembles that of a pointe shoe and it has a toe box, although the box is softer and the wings (sides of the toe box) are typically not as deep as those found on pointe shoes. Pr -pointe shoes are secured to the feet with ribbons and elastic band in identical fashion to pointe shoes. Unlike pointe shoes, however, demi-pointe shoes have no shank and, as a result, they do not provide the support necessary for proper pointe work.[16]
Pr -pointe shoes are most often used to train dancers who are new to pointe technique. They serve to acclimate dancers to the feel of wearing pointe shoes and to strengthen the ankles and feet in preparation for dancing en pointe in pointe shoes. The toe box allows the dancer to experience the feel of a pointe shoe, while the insole and outsole work together to provide the resistance needed for developing foot and ankle strength.
Manufacturing process[edit]
Traditional pointe shoes are usually manufactured using a method known as turnshoe, in which each shoe is initially assembled inside-out on a last and then turned right-side-out before finishing.[17] When manufacturing standard pointe shoes, a standardized, common last is used for both left and right shoes, resulting in identical left and right shoes in a pair. Some ballerinas have custom-made lasts that replicate the shapes of their own feet; these may be supplied to a pointe shoe manufacturer for the purpose of manufacturing custom shoes.
Breaking in[edit]
Dancers typically "break in" new pointe shoes to reduce or eliminate the discomfort they commonly cause. Typically this is done by performing relev s that flex the box and shank in a natural manner, thus causing the box shape and shank flex points to adapt to the dancer's feet.[13] Various other methods have been employed for breaking in pointe shoes, including deforming them with hands or against hard surfaces, striking them on hard surfaces, and moistening or heating the boxes to soften the glues, but these methods typically are ineffective as they do not cause the shoes to conform to the feet and also may damage the shoes or shorten their usable lifetimes.[13] Pointe shoes usually are only broken in by professional dancers who use pointe shoes for multiple hours every day. Non-professional dancers and dancers beginning to learn pointe typically do not break in their pointe shoes by hand so that they last longer.
Accessories[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A dancer may experience discomfort while wearing a pointe shoe even after the shoe has been broken in. Several devices are commonly used to mitigate the discomfort:
Toe pads are pouches that encapsulate and cushion the toes from the unyielding box and prevent friction that can cause blistering. These are typically made from thin, fabric-covered gel sheets.
Gel toe spacers of various shapes and sizes are inserted between toes; these serve to adjust toe spacing and alignment so as to alleviate pain at the bunion joint between the big toe and first toe.
Lambswool is stretched and wrapped around toes to reduce chafing and the likelihood of blisters. After several uses, the lambswool becomes densely packed and custom fitted to the dancer's foot.
Tape is wrapped around toes to reduce chafing and blisters.
Blister pads are small gel squares that prevent damage from rubbing and friction.
Toe padsToe spacers
Lifetime[edit]
In the course of normal use, there are three predominant types of wear on a pointe shoe that will determine its useful lifetime. The most important of these is shank wear. As the body of the shoe is repetitively flexed, the shank gradually weakens and loses its ability to provide support. A pointe shoe is no longer serviceable when the shank breaks or becomes too soft to provide support. The second is the softening of the box and especially the platform on which the dancer balances. When a pointe shoe has been worn to the point where it is no longer safe to wear, the shoe is typically referred to as  dead. 
The other primary type of wear involves the exterior fabric. In pointe work the front face and bottom edge of the toe box are subjected to friction against the performance surface. This friction will eventually wear through the shoe's outer fabric covering, thereby exposing the toe box and creating loose, frayed fabric edges. Unlike a weakened shank, damaged outer fabric does not affect the performance of a shoe. Due to its unprofessional appearance, however, damaged fabric may render the shoe unfit to wear in situations other than informal practice or rehearsal. 
 Typical pointe shoe wear, in which the fabric has worn through to expose the box.
Under moderate usage, a pair of pointe shoes will typically last through ten to twenty hours of wear. For dance students, this often translates into weeks or months of serviceable use from a pair of pointe shoes. Professional dancers typically wear out pointe shoes much more quickly; a new pair may wear out in a single performance. For example, in 2013 New York City Ballet ordered 8,500 pairs (for 180 dancers)[18][19] and the Royal Ballet used approximately 12,000 pairs of pointe shoes.[20][21]
The lifetime of a pointe shoe depends on many factors, including:
Usage: More aggressive dance styles and more frequent, longer durations of use will hasten wear.
Dance technique: Improper technique subjects shoes to unusual stresses that may lead to premature failure.
Fit: Well fitting pointe shoes encourage proper technique, which in turn leads to longer shoe life.
Weight: Greater dancer weight exerts proportionally greater stresses to the shoes, leading to faster wear.
Construction: Varying qualities and types of construction will yield different life expectancies.
Shank material: The stiffness and integrity of various shank materials will degrade at varying rates.
Breaking-in: The breaking-in process simulates accelerated wear, and thus may shorten the life of a shoe.
Performance surface: Rough surfaces cause rapid wear of the exterior fabric, in contrast to smooth surfaces such as Marley floors, which minimize the rate of fabric wear.
Foot Strength: Stronger arch muscles exert greater force on the shank, causing it to bend more and thus accelerating its wear.
See also[edit]
Ballet shoe
Pointe technique
Category:Pointe shoe manufacturers
References[edit]
^ "Process of making a ballet toe shoe". Retrieved December 19, 2022.
^ Greenfield, Rebecca. "Celebrity Invention: Bill Nye's Ballet Slipper". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 19, 2022.
^ Knapp, S.D. (2000). The Contemporary Thesaurus of Search Terms and Synonyms: A Guide for Natural Language Computer Searching. Oryx Press. p. 60. ISBN 978-1-57356-107-5. Retrieved 28 Dec 2022.
^ Lesko, K.M. (2017). Jeanne Devereaux, Prima Ballerina of Vaudeville and Broadway: "She Ran Between the Raindrops". McFarland, Incorporated, Publishers. p. 82. ISBN 978-1-4766-2749-6. Retrieved 28 Dec 2022.
^ "History of the pointe shoe". www.brown.edu. Retrieved 2021-02-15.
^ a b c Guiheen, Julia (4 August 2020). "The History of Pointe Shoes: The Landmark Moments That Made Ballet's Signature Shoe What It Is Today". Pointe Magazine. Retrieved 20 October 2020.
^ "When the Shoe Fits, Dance In It". www.arts.gov. Retrieved 2021-02-15.
^ a b c Weinman, Joanna (2013-10-21). "Pointe Shoe Evolution". Gaynor Minden. Retrieved 2021-02-15.
^ Sourcing, 11 21 2015 | Fashion Fabric (2015-11-21). "Fashion Archives: The History of the Ballet Flat". StartUp FASHION. Retrieved 2020-05-18.
^ Stimpert, Desiree. "Shoe Glossary: Ballerina Flats". LiveAbout. Retrieved 2020-05-18.
^ Fisher, Jennifer (2014). "Why Ballet Men Do Not Stand on Their Toes (but Georgian Men Do)". The World of Music, 2014, Music, Movement, and Masculinities. 3 (2): 59 77. JSTOR 24318176. Retrieved 19 October 2020.
^ Selinah Shah  Pointe shoes complicate the biomechanics of ballet  LER April 2010. R.G.Torba & D.A.Rice  Pressure analysis of the ballet shoe while en pointe.  Proceedings of the Twelfth Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference, New Orleans. LA, USA 1993, pp48-50. Doi10.1109/SBEC.1993.247350.
^ a b c d e f g Barringer, Janice; Schlesinger, Sarah (2012) [1998]. The Pointe Book (3rd ed.). Princeton Book Company, Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87127-355-0.
^ Shah, Selina (November 2009). "Determining a Young Dancer's Readiness for Dancing on Pointe". Current Sports Medicine Reports. 8 (6): 295 299. doi:10.1249/JSR.0b013e3181c1ddf1. PMID 19904068. S2CID 43706514.
^ Reinhardt, Angela (2008) [2008]. Pointe shoes, tips and tricks (1st ed.). Dance Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1-85273-115-1.
^ Cyprus, Diving in (2019-09-20). "10 Burning questions about Pointe Shoes". DANCE | LIFE | BALANCE. Retrieved 2021-02-15.
^ 
"Dancing Shoes". The Ballet Bag. Retrieved 2013-03-22.
^ "Why It Takes 8,500 Pairs Of Pointe Shoes To Put On 'The Nutcracker'". Huffpost. December 18, 2013. To ensure that all dancers have enough shoes, the company orders about 8,500 pairs every year.
^ "Meet Our Dancers". New York City Ballet.
^ "Watch: See The Royal Ballet from the perspective of a pointe shoe". Royal Opera House. 13 December 2013. Each Season our Royal Ballet dancers use about 12,000 pairs of shoes. Combined with the character shoes, elastic, ribbons and detailing relevant to each production, the total cost for footwear is over  250,000 a year.
^ "Dancers". Royal Opera House.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pointe shoes.
vteBalletGeneral information
Company
Glossary
History
Music
Timeline
Terminology
Aplomb
Arabesque
Ballon
Barre
Battement
Divertissement
Entr e de ballet
Grand pas
Pas de deux
Pas de quatre
Pas de trois
Pi ce d'occasion
Pointe
Turnout
Variation
Ballet by genre
Ballet d'action
Ballet blanc
Ballets de cour
Chamber ballet
Classical
Com die-ballet
Contemporary
Comic ballet
Grotesque dance
Narrative ballet
Neoclassical
Op ra-ballet
Romantic ballet
Ballet by region
Azerbaijani
British
French
Italian
Russian
Technique
Balanchine
Bournonville
Cecchetti
Pointe technique
Positions (arms)
Positions (feet)
Vaganova
Occupations and ranks
Ballet dancer
Character dancers
Corps de ballet
Demi-soloist
Soloist
Principal dancer (Danseur  toile, Danseur noble)
Prima ballerina assoluta
Ballet master (R p titeur)
Ballet apparel
Ballet shoe
Dance belt
Leg warmer
Leotard
Pointe shoe
Tights
Tutu
Unitard
Awards
Prix Benois de la Danse
Prix de Lausanne 
Telstra Ballet Dancer Awards
Organisations
Ballet Society
Publications
Ballet Review
Dance and Dancers
Dance International
Pointe
Related articles
Ballet (documentary film)
Choreography
Royal Academy of Dance
Western stereotype of the male ballet dancer
Lists
Ballets
Characters
Companies
Dancers
Schools
vteFootwearDress shoes
Blucher
Brogues
Brothel creepers
Derby
Monks
Oxfords
Spectator shoes (Co-respondent shoes)
Winklepickers
Wholecuts
Slip-on shoes
Court shoes
Prince Albert slippers
Loafers
Venetian-style shoes
Women's
Ballet flats
High-heeled footwear
Mary Janes
Mojari
Mules
Peep-toe shoes
Saddle shoes
Slingbacks
Winklepickers
Other shoes
Driving moccasins
Flip-flops
Galoshes
Platform shoes
Sandals
Self-tying shoes
Slides
Slippers (Uwabaki)
Veldskoens
Z ri
Wooden footwear
Bakya
British clogs
Cantabrian albarcas
Clogs
Geta
Klompen
Namaksin
Okobo
Padukas
Pattens
Sabot
Tr skor
BootsMilitary
Ammunition boots
Bunny boots
Combat boots
Jackboots
Jump boots
Jungle boots
Tanker boots
Trench boots
Munson Last
Work
Australian work boots
Cowboy boots
Engineer boots
Hip boots
Jika-tabi
Rigger boots
Steel-toe boots
Waders
Fashion boots
Chelsea boots (Beatle boots)
Chukka boots
Go-go boots
Knee-high boots
Over-the-knee boots
Platform boots
Sinatra boots
Thigh-high boots
Ugg boots
Other
Jodhpur boots
Wellington boots
Ballet boots
Sport-related footwear
Athletic shoes
Ballet shoes
Boat shoes
Climbing shoes
Cross country running shoes
Cycling shoes
Football boots
Ghillies
Hiking boots
Ice skates
Inline skates
Kung fu shoes
Minimalist shoes
Motorcycle boots
Mountaineering boots
Plimsolls
Racing flats
Racing shoes
Riding boots
Roller shoes
Roller skates
Safari boots
Skate shoes
Ski boots
Sneakers
Swimfins
Water shoes
Wrestling shoes
Folk footwear
Abacas
Abarkas
Alpargatas
Avarcas
Balghas
Bast shoes
Clogs
Espadrilles
Furlane
Galesh
Geta
Giveh
Haferlschuh
Hnyat-phanats
Huarache
Hwa
Jipsin
Jorabs
Kamiks
Kolhapuri chappals
Moccasins
Mojaris
Mukluks
Nalins
Okobo
Opanci
Peshawari chappals
Snowshoes
Tsarouchi
Takunya
Upanah
Valenkis
Waraji
Z ri
Historical footwear
Areni-1 shoes
Buskins
Caligae
Chopines
Crakow
Hessians
Pampooties
Pirate boots
Sabatons
Shoe construction
Bespoke shoes
Blake construction
Goodyear welt
Shoe buckle
Shoelaces
High heels
Clear heels
Kitten heels
Spool heels
Stiletto heels
Wedges
Hosiery
Anklets
Bobby socks
Dress socks
Footwraps
Knee highs
Pantyhose
Sock
Stocking
Tights
Toe socks
Tabi
 List of shoe styles
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pointe_shoe&oldid=1148847478"