Phenomenon of US political rhetoric after WWII
 American anti-communist propaganda of the 1950s, specifically addressing the entertainment industry
Part of a series onDiscrimination
Forms
Institutional
Structural
Attributes
Age
Disability
Genetics
Hair color
Hair texture
Height
Looks
Size
Language
Race / Ethnicity
Nordicism
Skin color
Rank
Caste
Class
Religion
Sex
Sexual orientation
Social
Acephobia
Arophobia
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-drug addicts
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Aporophobia
Audism
Biphobia
Cronyism
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Fatphobia
Gayphobia
Gerontophobia
Heterosexism
HIV/AIDS stigma
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Perpetual foreigner
Pregnancy
Sectarianism
Supremacism
Black
White
Transphobia
Non-binary
Transmisogyny
Trans men
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia
Religious
Ahmadiyya
Atheism
Bah  Faith
Buddhism
Catholicism
Christianity
post Cold War era
Druze
Falun Gong
Hinduism
Persecution
Untouchability
Islam
Persecution
Jehovah's Witnesses
Judaism
Persecution
LDS or Mormon
Neopaganism
non-Muslims
Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Copts
Protestantism
Rastafari
Sikhs
Shi'ism
Sufism
Sunnism
Zoroastrianism
Ethnic/national
African
Albanian
American
Arab
Armenian
Australian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Bosnian
British
Canadian
Catalan
Chechen
Chilean
Chinese
Croat
English
Filipino
Finnish
French
Fulani
Georgian
German
Greek
Haitian
Hazara
Hispanic
Hungarian
Igbo
Indian
Canadian and US indigenous peoples
Indonesian
Iranian
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Japanese
Jewish
Khmer
Korean
Kurdish
Malay
Mexican
Middle Eastern
Mongolian
Montenegrin
Muhajirs
Pakistani
Palestinian
Pashtun
Polish
Quebec
Romani
Romanian
Russian
Scottish
Serb
Slavic
Somali
Tatar
Thai
Tibetan
Turkish
Ukrainian
Uyghur
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Manifestations
Blood libel
Bullying
online
LGBT
Compulsory sterilization
Corrective rape
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Defamation
Democide
Disability hate crime
Dog-whistle politics
Eliminationism
Economic
Education
Employment
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic conflict
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital modification and mutilation
Genocide
examples
Glass ceiling
Hate crime
LGBT
Hate group
Hate speech
online
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
Infantilization
Language minoritization
Lavender scare
Lynching
Mortgage
Murder music
Native American mascots
Occupational segregation
Opposition to immigration
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Religious terrorism
Religious violence
Religious war
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Violence against transgender people
Victimisation
Violence against men
Violence against women
White flight
White genocide conspiracy theory
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt
Policies
Age of candidacy
Babel Proclamation
Blood purity
Blood quantum
Citizen, speak Turkish!
Crime of apartheid
Dialect card
Disabilities
Catholic
Jewish
Environmental racism
Ethnocracy
Ethnopluralism
Gender pay gap
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Ketuanan Melayu
Article 153
Kinder der Landstrasse
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donation restrictions
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Segregation
age
racial
religious
sexual
Sodomy law
State atheism
State religion
Symbole
Ugly law
Vergonha
Voter suppression
Welsh Not
White Australia policy
Countermeasures
Affirmative action
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Diversity training
Empowerment
Environmental justice
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Hate speech laws by country
Human rights
Intersex rights
LGBT rights
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Reappropriation
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Related topics
Bias
Dehumanization
Go back to where you came from
Oppression
Internalized
Power distance
Prejudice
Reverse discrimination
Social exclusion
Social stigma
Stereotype
threat
Civil liberties
Diversity
Intersectionality
Multiculturalism
Polyculturalism
Political correctness
White privilege
Racial bias in criminal news (US)
Racism by country
Reverse racism
Japanese privilege
The talk (US)
Woke (US)
Amatonormativity
Gender roles
Heteronormativity
Male privilege
Masculism
Second-generation gender bias
Medical model of disability
autism
Neurodiversity
Social model of disability
Allophilia
Ethnic penalty
Oikophobia
Christian privilege
Religious intolerance
Eugenics
Net bias
Snobbery
Speciesism
Police brutality
Prisoner abuse
vte
Part of a series onSocialism inthe United States
HistoryUtopian socialism
Bishop Hill Commune
Brook Farm
Icarians
Looking Backward
New Harmony
Oneida Community
Progressive Era
1877 St. Louis general strike
1912 Lawrence textile strike
Catholic Worker Movement
Green Corn Rebellion
Labor unionization
Haymarket affair
May Day
Women's suffrage
Repression and persecution
American Defense Society
American Protective League
Communist Party USA and African Americans
Communists in the labor movement
1919 1937
1937 1957
Espionage Act of 1917
First Red Scare
John Birch Society
McCarthyism
Seattle General Strike
Smith Act
Smith Act trials
Anti-war and civil rights movements
Black Power movement
COINTELPRO
"I Have a Dream"
March on Washington
New Left
Poor People's Campaign
Contemporary
1999 Seattle WTO protests
Financial crisis of 2007 08
Occupy Wall Street
People
Abern
Andrews
Avrich
Balagroon
Bellamy (Edward)
Bellamy (Francis)
Berger
Berkman
Bookchin
Brisbane
Brooks
Browder
Butler
Cabet
Cannon
Carmichael
Chomsky
Cockburn
Davis (Angela)
Davis (Mike)
Dean
Day
Debs
Dennis
De Leon
Dreiser
Du Bois
Fearing
Feinberg
Ford
Foster
Gitlow
Gilmore
Goldman
Graeber
Greene
Guthrie
Hall
Hammett
Hampton
Harrington
Hay
Haywood (Bill)
Haywood (Harry)
Hawkins
Hedges
Heywood (Angela)
Heywood (Ezra)
Hill
Hillquit
Hoan
Hoffman
Jameson
Keller
Labadie
London
Lovestone
Lum
Marcy
McReynolds
Moore
Most
Mitchell
Newton
Noyes
Ocasio-Cortez
Ochs
Parenti
Parsons (Albert)
Parsons (Lucy)
Piker
Piven
Randolph
Ripley
Reed
Rocker
Roediger
Rustin
Ruthenberg
Sacco
Sandburg
Sanders
Sakai
Sawant
Seale
Seidel
Shachtman
Stone
Sweezy
Thomas
Turner
West
Wolff
Wood
Zeidler
Zerzan
Zinn
Active organizations
American Party of Labor
Black Riders Liberation Party
Black Socialists in America
Communist Party USA
Democratic Socialists of America
Freedom Road Socialist Organization
Freedom Socialist Party
Green Mountain Peace and Justice Party
Green Party of the United States
Industrial Workers of the World
New Afrikan Black Panther Party
Party for Socialism and Liberation
Peace and Freedom Party
Progressive Labor Party
Redneck Revolt
Revolutionary Communist Party, USA
Socialist Action
Socialist Alternative
Socialist Equality Party
Socialist Party USA
Socialist Rifle Association
Socialist Workers Party
Solidarity
Spark
Spartacist League
Vermont Progressive Party
Workers World Party
Working Class Party
World Socialist Party of the United States
Inactive or defunct organizations
American Labor Party
American Union of Associationists
American Workers Party
Black Panther Party
Colorado Springs Socialists
Communist League of America
Communist League of Struggle
Communist Workers' Party
Democratic Socialist Federation
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee
Freedom Party of New York
Human Rights Party
Independent Socialist League
International Socialists
International Socialist Organization
Maoist Internationalist Movement
Red Guards
New American Movement
Nonpartisan League
Proletarian Party of America
Puerto Rican Socialist Party
Revolutionary Socialist League
Revolutionary Youth Movement
Social Democracy of America
Social Democratic Federation
Social Democratic Party of America
Social Democrats, USA
Socialist Labor Party of America
Socialist Party of America
Students for a Democratic Society
Weather Underground
White Panther Party
Working Families Party
Workers Party of the United States
Youth International Party
Literature
Appeal to Reason
Current Affairs
Daily Worker
Dissent
International Socialist Review
Jacobin
The Jungle
Looking Backward
Monopoly Capital
Monthly Review
The Other America
A People's History of the United States
Voluntary Socialism
Why Socialism?
Z
Related topics
American Left
Anarchism
Anarchism in the United States
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Bill of Rights socialism
Democratic socialism
Green anarchism
Individualist anarchism
Individualist anarchism in the United States
Labor history
Labor laws
Labor unions
Libertarian socialism
Marxism
Marxism Leninism
Minimum wage
Mutualism
Post-left anarchy
Scientific socialism
Social democracy
Socialism
Trotskyism
Utopian socialism
 Socialism portal
 United States portalvte
Part of a series onMarxism Leninism
Concepts
Administrative-command system
Anti-imperialism
Anti-revisionism
Central planning
Soviet-type economic planning
Collective farming
Collective leadership
Commanding heights of the economy
Democratic centralism
Dialectical logic
Dialectical materialism
Foco
Intensification of the class struggleunder socialism
Labor aristocracy
Marxist Leninist atheism
One-party state
Partiinost'
People's democracy
Popular front
Proletarian internationalism
Protracted people's war
Self-criticism
Social fascism
Socialism in one country
Socialist patriotism
Soviet
Yugoslav
State
Socialist
Theory of the productive forces
Third Period
Vanguardism
Wars of national liberation
Variants
Castroism
Guevarism
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Hoxhaism
Husakism
K d rism
Khrushchevism
Maoism
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Stalinism
Titoism
People
Joseph Stalin
Mao Zedong
Ernst Th lmann
Khorloogiin Choibalsan
Ehmetjan Qasim
Jos  D az
Maurice Thorez
Palmiro Togliatti
Ho Chi Minh
V  Nguy n Gi p
Earl Browder
Nikita Khrushchev
Walter Ulbricht
Josip Broz Tito
M ty s R kosi
Lazar Kaganovich
Georgi Dimitrov
Boles aw Bierut
Valko Chervenkov
Klement Gottwald
Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej
Enver Hoxha
Kaysone Phomvihane
Khalid Bakdash
Leonid Brezhnev
Deng Xiaoping
Pol Pot
Nikos Zachariadis
Che Guevara
Fidel Castro
Agostinho Neto
Mengistu Haile Mariam
Kim Il-sung
Chin Peng
Hardial Bains
Sanz  Nosaka
Nicolae Ceau escu
Gust v Hus k
J nos K d r
Erich Honecker
W adys aw Gomu ka
Samora Machel
Thomas Sankara
Mathieu K r kou
Siad Barre
Nur Muhammad Taraki
Alfonso Cano
Rohana Wijeweera
Gus Hall
Harry Pollitt
Harpal Brar
Gennady Zyuganov
Xi Jinping
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Todor Zhivkov
Theoretical works
Foundations of Leninism
Dialectical and Historical Materialism
The History of the Communist Partyof the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)
Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR
A Critique of Soviet Economics
Fundamentals of Marxism Leninism
Guerrilla Warfare
Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung
President Ho Chi Minh's Testament
The Governance of China
History
Soviet Union
1927 1953
1953 1964
1964 1982
1982 1991
Great Break
Collectivization in the Soviet Union
Industrialization in the Soviet Union
Great Purge
Spanish Civil War
World War II
Great Patriotic War
Greek Civil War
Cold War
Eastern Bloc
Chinese Revolution
China
1949 1976
1976 1989
1989 2002
2002 present
Korean War
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
De-Stalinization
Warsaw Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
Vietnam War
Sino-Soviet split
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Great Leap Forward
Portuguese Colonial War
Black power movement
Nicaraguan Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Naxalite insurgency
Revolutions of 1989
Nepalese Civil War
By country
Afghanistan
Albania
Angola
Benin
Bulgaria
Cambodia
China
Congo
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Czechia
Slovakia
East Germany
Ethiopia
Grenada
Hungary
Laos
Mongolia
Mozambique
North Korea
Poland
Romania
Somalia
South Yemen
Soviet Union
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Byelarus
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yugoslavia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Macedonia
Montenegro
Serbia
Slovenia
Organizations
Comecon
Comintern
Chinese Communist Party
Communist Party of Cuba
Communist Party of India
Communist Party of Kampuchea
Communist Party of the Russian Federation
Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Communist Party of Vietnam
French Communist Party
Indochinese Communist Party
Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party
Lao People's Revolutionary Party
Nepal Communist Party
Party of Labour of Albania
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
Sandinista National Liberation Front
Workers' Party of Korea
Related topics
Bolshevism
Leninism
Marxism Leninism Maoism
Trotskyism
See also
All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)
Anti-communism
Mass killings
Crimes against humanityunder communist regimes
Mass killings
Criticism of communist party rule
Cult of personality
Marxist schools of thought
National Bolshevism
New class
Post-communism
Red fascism
Red Scare
Second
Second World
State capitalism
State socialism
State ideology of China
State ideology of the Soviet Union
Third-Worldism
Totalitarianism
 Communism portal
 Politics portal
 Socialism portalvte
McCarthyism, also known as the second Red Scare, was the political repression and persecution of left-wing individuals and a campaign spreading fear of alleged communist and socialist influence on American institutions and of Soviet espionage in the United States during the late 1940s through the 1950s.[1] After the mid-1950s, U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy, who had spearheaded the campaign, gradually lost his public popularity and credibility after several of his accusations were found to be false.[2][3] The U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren made a series of rulings on civil and political rights that overturned several key laws and legislative directives, and helped bring an end to the Second Red Scare.[4][5][6] Historians have suggested since the 1980s that as McCarthy's involvement was less central than that of others, a different and more accurate term should be used instead that more accurately conveys the breadth of the phenomenon, and that the term McCarthyism is now outdated. Ellen Schrecker has suggested that Hooverism after FBI Head J. Edgar Hoover is more appropriate.[7]
What would become known as the McCarthy era began before McCarthy's rise to national fame. Following the breakdown of the wartime East-West alliance with the Soviet Union, and with many remembering the First Red Scare, President Harry S. Truman signed an executive order in 1947 to screen federal employees for possible association with organizations deemed "totalitarian, fascist, communist, or subversive", or advocating "to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means." The following year, the Czechoslovak coup by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia heightened concern in the West about Communist parties seizing power and the possibility of subversion. In 1949, a high-level State Department official was convicted of perjury in a case of espionage, and the Soviet Union tested a nuclear bomb. The Korean War started the next year, significantly raising tensions and fears of impending communist upheavals in the United States. In a speech in February 1950, McCarthy claimed to have a list of members of the Communist Party USA working in the State Department, which attracted substantial press attention, and the term McCarthyism was published for the first time in late March of that year in The Christian Science Monitor, along with a political cartoon by Herblock in The Washington Post. The term has since taken on a broader meaning, describing the excesses of similar efforts to crack down on alleged "subversive" elements. In the early 21st century, the term is used more generally to describe reckless and unsubstantiated accusations of treason and far-left extremism, along with demagogic personal attacks on the character and patriotism of political adversaries.
The primary targets for persecution were government employees, prominent figures in the entertainment industry, academics, left-wing politicians, and labor union activists. Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive and questionable evidence, and the level of threat posed by a person's real or supposed leftist associations and beliefs were often exaggerated. Many people suffered loss of employment and the destruction of their careers and livelihoods as a result of the crackdowns on suspected communists, and some were outright imprisoned. Most of these reprisals were initiated by trial verdicts that were later overturned,[8] laws that were later struck down as unconstitutional,[9] dismissals for reasons later declared illegal[10] or actionable,[11] and extra-judiciary procedures, such as informal blacklists by employers and public institutions, that would come into general disrepute, though by then many lives had been ruined. The most notable examples of McCarthyism include the investigations of alleged communists that were conducted by Senator McCarthy, and the hearings conducted by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).
Origins[edit]
 One of the earliest uses of the term McCarthyism was in a cartoon by Herbert Block ("Herblock"), published in The Washington Post, March 29, 1950.
President Harry S. Truman's Executive Order 9835 of March 21, 1947, required that all federal civil-service employees be screened for "loyalty". The order said that one basis for determining disloyalty would be a finding of "membership in, affiliation with or sympathetic association" with any organization determined by the attorney general to be "totalitarian, fascist, communist or subversive" or advocating or approving the forceful denial of constitutional rights to other persons or seeking "to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means".[12]
The historical period that came to be known as the McCarthy era began well before Joseph McCarthy's own involvement in it. Many factors contributed to McCarthyism, some of them with roots in the First Red Scare (1917 20), inspired by communism's emergence as a recognized political force and widespread social disruption in the United States related to unionizing and anarchist activities. Owing in part to its success in organizing labor unions and its early opposition to fascism, and offering an alternative to the ills of capitalism during the Great Depression, the Communist Party of the United States increased its membership through the 1930s, reaching a peak of about 75,000 members in 1940 41.[13] While the United States was engaged in World War II and allied with the Soviet Union, the issue of anti-communism was largely muted. With the end of World War II, the Cold War began almost immediately, as the Soviet Union installed communist puppet r gimes in areas it had occupied across Central and Eastern Europe. In a March 1947 address to Congress, Truman enunciated a new foreign policy doctrine that committed the United States to opposing Soviet geopolitical expansion. This doctrine came to be known as the Truman Doctrine, and it guided United States support for anti-communist forces in Greece and later in China and elsewhere.[14]
Although the Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley affairs had raised the issue of Soviet espionage in 1945, events in 1949 and 1950 sharply increased the sense of threat in the United States related to communism. The Soviet Union tested an atomic bomb in 1949, earlier than many analysts had expected, raising the stakes in the Cold War. That same year, Mao Zedong's communist army gained control of mainland China despite heavy American financial support of the opposing Kuomintang. In 1950, the Korean War began, pitting U.S., U.N., and South Korean forces against communists from North Korea and China.
During the following year, evidence of increased sophistication in Soviet Cold War espionage activities was found in the West. In January 1950, Alger Hiss, a high-level State Department official, was convicted of perjury. Hiss was in effect found guilty of espionage; the statute of limitations had run out for that crime, but he was convicted of having perjured himself when he denied that charge in earlier testimony before the HUAC. In Britain, Klaus Fuchs confessed to committing espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union while working on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory during the War. Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were arrested in 1950 in the United States on charges of stealing atomic-bomb secrets for the Soviets, and were executed in 1953.
Other forces encouraged the rise of McCarthyism. The more conservative politicians in the United States had historically referred to progressive reforms, such as child labor laws and women's suffrage, as "communist" or "Red plots", trying to raise fears against such changes.[15] They used similar terms during the 1930s and the Great Depression when opposing the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Many conservatives equated the New Deal with socialism or Communism, and thought the policies were evidence of too much influence by allegedly communist policy makers in the Roosevelt administration.[16] In general, the vaguely defined danger of "Communist influence" was a more common theme in the rhetoric of anti-communist politicians than was espionage or any other specific activity.
 Senator Joseph McCarthy
McCarthy's involvement in these issues began publicly with a speech he made on Lincoln Day, February 9, 1950, to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia. He brandished a piece of paper, which he claimed contained a list of known communists working for the State Department. McCarthy is usually quoted as saying: "I have here in my hand a list of 205 a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department."[17] This speech resulted in a flood of press attention to McCarthy and helped establish his path to becoming one of the most recognized politicians in the United States.
The first recorded use of the term "McCarthyism" was in the Christian Science Monitor on March 28, 1950 ("Their little spree with McCarthyism is no aid to consultation").[18] The paper became one of the earliest and most consistent critics of the Senator.[19] The next recorded use happened on the following day, in a political cartoon by Washington Post editorial cartoonist Herbert Block (Herblock). The cartoon depicts four leading Republicans trying to push an elephant (the traditional symbol of the Republican Party) to stand on a platform atop a teetering stack of ten tar buckets, the topmost of which is labeled "McCarthyism". Block later wrote:
"nothing [was] particularly ingenious about the term, which is simply used to represent a national affliction that can hardly be described in any other way. If anyone has a prior claim on it, he's welcome to the word and to the junior senator from Wisconsin along with it. I will also throw in a set of free dishes and a case of soap."[20]
Institutions[edit]
A number of anti-communist committees, panels, and "loyalty review boards" in federal, state, and local governments, as well as many private agencies, carried out investigations for small and large companies concerned about possible Communists in their work forces.
In Congress, the primary bodies that investigated Communist activities were the HUAC, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Between 1949 and 1954, a total of 109 investigations were carried out by these and other committees of Congress.[21]
On December 2, 1954, the United States Senate voted 67 to 22[22] to condemn McCarthy for "conduct that tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute".
Executive branch[edit]
Loyalty-security reviews[edit]
 Executive Order 9835, signed by President Truman in 1947
In the federal government, President Truman's Executive Order 9835 initiated a program of loyalty reviews for federal employees in 1947. It called for dismissal if there were "reasonable grounds ... for belief that the person involved is disloyal to the Government of the United States."[23] Truman, a Democrat, was probably reacting in part to the Republican sweep in the 1946 Congressional election and felt a need to counter growing criticism from conservatives and anti-communists.[24]
When President Dwight Eisenhower took office in 1953, he strengthened and extended Truman's loyalty review program, while decreasing the avenues of appeal available to dismissed employees. Hiram Bingham, chairman of the Civil Service Commission Loyalty Review Board, referred to the new rules he was obliged to enforce as "just not the American way of doing things."[25] The following year, J. Robert Oppenheimer, scientific director of the Manhattan Project that built the first atomic bomb, then working as a consultant to the Atomic Energy Commission, was stripped of his security clearance after a four-week hearing. Oppenheimer had received a top-secret clearance in 1947, but was denied clearance in the harsher climate of 1954.
Similar loyalty reviews were established in many state and local government offices and some private industries across the nation. In 1958, an estimated one of every five employees in the United States was required to pass some sort of loyalty review.[26] Once a person lost a job due to an unfavorable loyalty review, finding other employment could be very difficult. "A man is ruined everywhere and forever," in the words of the chairman of President Truman's Loyalty Review Board. "No responsible employer would be likely to take a chance in giving him a job."[27]
The Department of Justice started keeping a list of organizations that it deemed subversive beginning in 1942. This list was first made public in 1948, when it included 78 groups. At its longest, it comprised 154 organizations, 110 of them identified as Communist. In the context of a loyalty review, membership in a listed organization was meant to raise a question, but not to be considered proof of disloyalty. One of the most common causes of suspicion was membership in the Washington Bookshop Association, a left-leaning organization that offered lectures on literature, classical music concerts, and discounts on books.[28]
J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI[edit]
 J. Edgar Hoover in 1961
FBI director J. Edgar Hoover designed President Truman's loyalty-security program, and its background investigations of employees were carried out by FBI agents. This was a major assignment that led to the number of agents in the bureau being increased from 3,559 in 1946 to 7,029 in 1952. Hoover's sense of the communist threat and the standards of evidence applied by his bureau resulted in thousands of government workers losing their jobs. Due to Hoover's insistence upon keeping the identity of his informers secret, most subjects of loyalty-security reviews were not allowed to cross-examine or know the identities of those who accused them. In many cases, they were not even told of what they were accused.[29]
Hoover's influence extended beyond federal government employees and beyond the loyalty-security programs. The records of loyalty review hearings and investigations were supposed to be confidential, but Hoover routinely gave evidence from them to congressional committees such as HUAC.[30]
From 1951 to 1955, the FBI operated a secret "Responsibilities Program" that distributed anonymous documents with evidence from FBI files of communist affiliations on the part of teachers, lawyers, and others. Many people accused in these "blind memoranda" were fired without any further process.[31]
The FBI engaged in a number of illegal practices in its pursuit of information on communists, including burglaries, opening mail, and illegal wiretaps.[32] The members of the left-wing National Lawyers Guild (NLG) were among the few attorneys who were willing to defend clients in communist-related cases, and this made the NLG a particular target of Hoover's; the office of the NLG was burgled by the FBI at least 14 times between 1947 and 1951.[33] Among other purposes, the FBI used its illegally obtained information to alert prosecuting attorneys about the planned legal strategies of NLG defense lawyers.[34][35]
The FBI also used illegal undercover operations to disrupt communist and other dissident political groups. In 1956, Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department's ability to prosecute communists. At this time, he formalized a covert "dirty tricks" program under the name COINTELPRO.[32] COINTELPRO actions included planting forged documents to create the suspicion that a key person was an FBI informer, spreading rumors through anonymous letters, leaking information to the press, calling for IRS audits, and the like. The COINTELPRO program remained in operation until 1971.
Historian Ellen Schrecker calls the FBI "the single most important component of the anti-communist crusade" and writes: "Had observers known in the 1950s what they have learned since the 1970s, when the Freedom of Information Act opened the Bureau's files, 'McCarthyism' would probably be called 'Hooverism'."[36]
Allen Dulles and the CIA[edit]
In March 1950, McCarthy had initiated a series of investigations into potential infiltration of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) by communist agents and came up with a list of security risks that matched one previously compiled by the Agency itself. At the request of CIA director Allen Dulles, President Eisenhower demanded that McCarthy discontinue issuing subpoenas against the CIA. Documents made public in 2004 revealed that the CIA, under Dulles' orders, had broken into McCarthy's Senate office and fed disinformation to him in order to discredit him and stop his investigation from proceeding any further.[37]
Congress[edit]
House Committee on Un-American Activities[edit]
Main article: House Un-American Activities Committee
The House Committee on Un-American Activities (commonly referred to as the HUAC) was the most prominent and active government committee involved in anti-communist investigations. Formed in 1938 and known as the Dies Committee, named for Rep. Martin Dies, who chaired it until 1944, HUAC investigated a variety of "activities", including those of German-American Nazis during World War II. The committee soon focused on communism, beginning with an investigation into communists in the Federal Theatre Project in 1938. A significant step for HUAC was its investigation of the charges of espionage brought against Alger Hiss in 1948. This investigation ultimately resulted in Hiss's trial and conviction for perjury, and convinced many of the usefulness of congressional committees for uncovering communist subversion.
HUAC achieved its greatest fame and notoriety with its investigation into the Hollywood film industry. In October 1947, the committee began to subpoena screenwriters, directors, and other movie-industry professionals to testify about their known or suspected membership in the Communist Party, association with its members, or support of its beliefs. At these testimonies, this question was asked: "Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party of the United States?"[38][39] Among the first film industry witnesses subpoenaed by the committee were ten who decided not to cooperate. These men, who became known as the "Hollywood Ten", cited the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech and free assembly, which they believed legally protected them from being required to answer the committee's questions. This tactic failed, and the ten were sentenced to prison for contempt of Congress. Two of them were sentenced to six months, the rest to a year.
In the future, witnesses (in the entertainment industries and otherwise) who were determined not to cooperate with the committee would claim their Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination. William Grooper and Rockwell Kent, the only two visual artists to be questioned by McCarthy, both took this approach, and emerged relatively unscathed by the experience.[40] However, while this usually protected witnesses from a contempt-of-Congress citation, it was considered grounds for dismissal by many government and private-industry employers. The legal requirements for Fifth Amendment protection were such that a person could not testify about his own association with the Communist Party and then refuse to "name names" of colleagues with communist affiliations.[41] Thus, many faced a choice between "crawl[ing] through the mud to be an informer," as actor Larry Parks put it, or becoming known as a "Fifth Amendment Communist" an epithet often used by Senator McCarthy.[42]
Senate committees[edit]
In the Senate, the primary committee for investigating communists was the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee (SISS), formed in 1950 and charged with ensuring the enforcement of laws relating to "espionage, sabotage, and the protection of the internal security of the United States". The SISS was headed by Democrat Pat McCarran and gained a reputation for careful and extensive investigations. This committee spent a year investigating Owen Lattimore and other members of the Institute of Pacific Relations. As had been done numerous times before, the collection of scholars and diplomats associated with Lattimore (the so-called China Hands) were accused of "losing China", and while some evidence of pro-communist attitudes was found, nothing supported McCarran's accusation that Lattimore was "a conscious and articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy". Lattimore was charged with perjuring himself before the SISS in 1952. After many of the charges were rejected by a federal judge and one of the witnesses confessed to perjury, the case was dropped in 1955.[43]
McCarthy headed the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 1953 and 1954, and during that time, used it for a number of his communist-hunting investigations. McCarthy first examined allegations of communist influence in the Voice of America, and then turned to the overseas library program of the State Department. Card catalogs of these libraries were searched for works by authors McCarthy deemed inappropriate. McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro-communist authors before his subcommittee and the press. Yielding to the pressure, the State Department ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves "material by any controversial persons, Communists, fellow travelers, etc." Some libraries actually burned the newly forbidden books.[44] Though he did not block the State Department from carrying out this order, President Eisenhower publicly criticized the initiative as well, telling the graduating class of Dartmouth College President in 1953:  Don t join the book burners!   Don t be afraid to go to the library and read every book so long as that document does not offend our own ideas of decency that should be the only censorship. [45] The president then settled for a compromise by retaining the ban on Communist books written by Communists, while also allowing the libraries to keep books on Communism written by anti-Communists.[46]
McCarthy's committee then began an investigation into the United States Army. This began at the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth. McCarthy garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the Army researchers, but ultimately nothing came of this investigation.[47]
McCarthy next turned his attention to the case of a U.S. Army dentist who had been promoted to the rank of major despite having refused to answer questions on an Army loyalty review form. McCarthy's handling of this investigation, including a series of insults directed at a brigadier general, led to the Army McCarthy hearings, with the Army and McCarthy trading charges and counter-charges for 36 days before a nationwide television audience. While the official outcome of the hearings was inconclusive, this exposure of McCarthy to the American public resulted in a sharp decline in his popularity.[48] In less than a year, McCarthy was censured by the Senate, and his position as a prominent force in anti-communism was essentially ended.[49]
Blacklists[edit]
Main article: Hollywood blacklist
On November 25, 1947, the day after the House of Representatives approved citations of contempt for the Hollywood Ten, Eric Johnston, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, issued a press release on behalf of the heads of the major studios that came to be referred to as the Waldorf Statement. This statement announced the firing of the Hollywood Ten and stated: "We will not knowingly employ a Communist or a member of any party or group which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States..." This marked the beginning of the Hollywood blacklist. In spite of the fact that hundreds were denied employment, the studios, producers, and other employers did not publicly admit that a blacklist existed.
At this time, private loyalty review boards and anti-communist investigators began to appear to fill a growing demand among certain industries to certify that their employees were above reproach. Companies that were concerned about the sensitivity of their business, or which, like the entertainment industry, felt particularly vulnerable to public opinion, made use of these private services. For a fee, these teams investigated employees and questioned them about their politics and affiliations.
At such hearings, the subject usually did not have a right to the presence of an attorney, and as with HUAC, the interviewee might be asked to defend himself against accusations without being allowed to cross-examine the accuser. These agencies kept cross-referenced lists of leftist organizations, publications, rallies, charities, and the like, as well as lists of individuals who were known or suspected communists. Books such as Red Channels and newsletters such as Counterattack and Confidential Information were published to keep track of communist and leftist organizations and individuals.[50] Insofar as the various blacklists of McCarthyism were actual physical lists, they were created and maintained by these private organizations.[citation needed][further explanation needed]
Laws and arrests[edit]
See also: Smith Act trials of communist party leaders
Efforts to protect the United States from the perceived threat of communist subversion were particularly enabled by several federal laws. The Hatch Act of 1939 banned membership in subversive organizations, which was interpreted as being anti-labor legislation.[51] The Hatch Act would allow for the reduction of influence of the Workers' Alliance, which was claimed to have been created by the Soviet Union based on a model of their unemployed councils.[51] The Alien Registration Act or Smith Act of 1940 made the act of "knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise or teach the ... desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or of any State by force or violence, or for anyone to organize any association which teaches, advises or encourages such an overthrow, or for anyone to become a member of or to affiliate with any such association" a criminal offense.
Hundreds of communists and others were prosecuted under this law between 1941 and 1957. Eleven leaders of the Communist Party were convicted under the Smith Act in 1949 in the Foley Square trial. Ten defendants were given sentences of five years and the eleventh was sentenced to three years. The defense attorneys were cited for contempt of court and given prison sentences.[52] In 1951, 23 other leaders of the party were indicted, including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, a founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union. Many were convicted on the basis of testimony that was later admitted to be false.[53] By 1957, 140 leaders and members of the Communist Party had been charged under the law, of whom 93 were convicted.[54]
The McCarran Internal Security Act, which became law in 1950, has been described by scholar Ellen Schrecker as "the McCarthy era's only important piece of legislation"[55] (the Smith Act technically antedated McCarthyism). However, the McCarran Act had no real effect beyond legal harassment. It required the registration of Communist organizations with the U.S. Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate possible communist-action and communist-front organizations so they could be required to register. Due to numerous hearings, delays, and appeals, the act was never enforced, even with regard to the Communist Party of the United States itself, and the major provisions of the act were found to be unconstitutional in 1965 and 1967.[56] In 1952, the Immigration and Nationality, or McCarran Walter, Act was passed. This law allowed the government to deport immigrants or naturalized citizens engaged in subversive activities and also to bar suspected subversives from entering the country.
The Communist Control Act of 1954 was passed with overwhelming support in both houses of Congress after very little debate. Jointly drafted by Republican John Marshall Butler and Democrat Hubert Humphrey, the law was an extension of the Internal Security Act of 1950, and sought to outlaw the Communist Party by declaring that the party, as well as "Communist-Infiltrated Organizations" were "not entitled to any of the rights, privileges, and immunities attendant upon legal bodies." While the Communist Control Act had an odd mix of liberals and conservatives among its supporters, it never had any significant effect.
The act was successfully applied only twice. In 1954 it was used to prevent Communist Party members from appearing on the New Jersey state ballot, and in 1960, it was cited to deny the CPUSA recognition as an employer under New York state's unemployment compensation system. The New York Post called the act "a monstrosity", "a wretched repudiation of democratic principles," while The Nation accused Democratic liberals of a "neurotic, election-year anxiety to escape the charge of being 'soft on Communism' even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights."[57]
Repression in the individual states[edit]
In addition to the federal laws and responding to the worries of the local opinion, several states enacted anti-communist statutes.
By 1952, several states had enacted statutes against criminal anarchy, criminal syndicalism, and sedition; banned  communists and "subversives" from public employment, or even from receiving public aid; demanded on loyalty oaths from public servants; and severely restricted or banned the Communist Party. In addition, six states had equivalents to the HUAC.[58] The California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities[59] and the Florida Legislative Investigation Committee were established by their respective legislatures.
Some of these states had very severe, or even extreme, laws against communism. In 1950, Michigan enacted life imprisonment for subversive propaganda; the following year, Tennessee enacted the death penalty for advocating the violent overthrow of the government.[58] The death penalty for membership in the Communist Party was discussed in Texas by Governor Allan Shivers, who described it as "worse than murder."[60][61]
Municipalities and counties also enacted anti-communist ordinances: Los Angeles banned any communist or "Muscovite model of police-state dictatorship" from owning arms, while Birmingham, Alabama and Jacksonville, Florida banned any communist from being within the city's limits.[58]
Popular support[edit]
 Flier issued in May 1955 by the Keep America Committee urging readers to "fight communistic world government" by opposing public health programs
McCarthyism was supported by a variety of groups, including the American Legion and various other anti-communist organizations. One core element of support was a variety of militantly anti-communist women's groups such as the American Public Relations Forum and the Minute Women of the U.S.A. These organized tens of thousands of housewives into study groups, letter-writing networks, and patriotic clubs that coordinated efforts to identify and eradicate what they saw as subversion.[62]
Although right-wing radicals were the bedrock of support for McCarthyism, they were not alone. A broad "coalition of the aggrieved" found McCarthyism attractive, or at least politically useful. Common themes uniting the coalition were opposition to internationalism, particularly the United Nations; opposition to social welfare provisions, particularly the various programs established by the New Deal; and opposition to efforts to reduce inequalities in the social structure of the United States.[63]
One focus of popular McCarthyism concerned the provision of public health services, particularly vaccination, mental health care services, and fluoridation, all of which were denounced by some to be communist plots to poison or brainwash the American people. Such viewpoints led to collisions between McCarthyite radicals and supporters of public-health programs, most notably in the case of the Alaska Mental Health Bill controversy of 1956.[64]
William F. Buckley Jr., the founder of the influential conservative political magazine National Review, wrote a defense of McCarthy, McCarthy and his Enemies, in which he asserted that "McCarthyism ... is a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks."[65]
In addition, as Richard Rovere points out, many ordinary Americans became convinced that there must be "no smoke without fire" and lent their support to McCarthyism. The Gallup poll found that at his peak in January 1954, 50% of the American public supported McCarthy, while 29% had an unfavorable opinion. His support fell to 34% in June 1954.[66] Republicans tended to like what McCarthy was doing and Democrats did not, though McCarthy had significant support from traditional Democratic ethnic groups, especially Catholics, as well as many unskilled workers and small-business owners. (McCarthy himself was a Catholic.) He had very little support among union activists and Jews.[67]
Portrayals of Communists[edit]
Those who sought to justify McCarthyism did so largely through their characterization of communism, and American communists in particular. Proponents of McCarthyism claimed that the CPUSA was so completely under Moscow's control that any American communist was a puppet of the Soviet intelligence services. This view, if restricted to the Communist Party's leadership[68] is supported by recent documentation from the archives of the KGB[69] as well as post-war decodes of wartime Soviet radio traffic from the Venona project,[70] showing that Moscow provided financial support to the CPUSA and had significant influence on CPUSA policies. J. Edgar Hoover commented in a 1950 speech, "Communist members, body and soul, are the property of the Party."
According to historian Richard G. Powers, McCarthy added "bogus specificity" to "sweeping accusation[s]", gaining support among "countersubversive anticommunists" on one hand, who sought to find and punish perceived communists. On the other hand, "liberal anticommunists" believed that the Communist Party was "despicable and annoying" but ultimately politically irrelevant.[71]
President Harry Truman, who pursued the anti-Soviet Truman Doctrine, called McCarthy "the greatest asset the Kremlin has" by "torpedo[ing] the bipartisan foreign policy of the United States."[72]
Historian Landon R. Y. Storrs writes that the CPUSA's "secretiveness, its authoritarian internal structure, and the loyalty of its leaders to the Kremlin were fundamental flaws that help explain why and how it was demonized. On the other hand, most American Communists were idealists attracted by the party s militance against various forms of social injustice." Furthermore, based on later declassified evidence, "The paradoxical lesson from several decades of scholarship is that the same organization that inspired democratic idealists in the pursuit of social justice also was secretive, authoritarian, and morally compromised by ties to the Stalin regime."[73]
In the mid 20th century, this attitude was not confined to arch-conservatives. In 1940, the American Civil Liberties Union ejected founding member Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, saying that her membership in the Communist Party was enough to disqualify her as a civil libertarian. In the government's prosecutions of Communist Party members under the Smith Act (see above), the prosecution case was based not on specific actions or statements by the defendants, but on the premise that a commitment to violent overthrow of the government was inherent in the doctrines of Marxism Leninism. Passages of the CPUSA constitution that specifically rejected revolutionary violence were dismissed as deliberate deception.[74]
In addition, it was often claimed that the party didn't allow members to resign; thus someone who had been a member for a short time decades previously could be thought a current member. Many of the hearings and trials of McCarthyism featured testimony by former Communist Party members such as Elizabeth Bentley, Louis Budenz, and Whittaker Chambers, speaking as expert witnesses.[75][76]
Various historians and pundits have discussed alleged Soviet-directed infiltration of the U.S. government and the possible collaboration of high U.S. government officials.[77][78][79][80]
Victims of McCarthyism[edit]
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (January 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: List of films by the Hollywood Ten, Hollywood blacklist, and Lavender scare
Estimating the number of victims of McCarthy is difficult. The number imprisoned is in the hundreds, and some ten or twelve thousand lost their jobs.[81] In many cases, simply being subpoenaed by HUAC or one of the other committees was sufficient cause to be fired.[82]
For the vast majority, both the potential for them to do harm to the nation and the nature of their communist affiliation were tenuous.[83] After the extremely damaging "Cambridge Five" spy scandal (Guy Burgess, Donald Maclean, Kim Philby, Anthony Blunt, et al.), suspected homosexuality was also a common cause for being targeted by McCarthyism. The hunt for "sexual perverts", who were presumed to be subversive by nature, resulted in over 5,000 federal workers being fired, and thousands were harassed and denied employment.[84][85] Many have termed this aspect of McCarthyism the "lavender scare".[86][87]
Homosexuality was classified as a psychiatric disorder in the 1950s.[88] However, in the context of the highly politicized Cold War environment, homosexuality became framed as a dangerous, contagious social disease that posed a potential threat to state security.[88] As the family was believed to be the cornerstone of American strength and integrity,[89] the description of homosexuals as "sexual perverts" meant that they were both unable to function within a family unit and presented the potential to poison the social body.[90] This era also witnessed the establishment of widely spread FBI surveillance intended to identify homosexual government employees.[91]
The McCarthy hearings and according "sexual pervert" investigations can be seen to have been driven by a desire to identify individuals whose ability to function as loyal citizens had been compromised.[90] McCarthy began his campaign by drawing upon the ways in which he embodied traditional American values to become the self-appointed vanguard of social morality.[92]
 Dalton Trumbo and his wife, Cleo, at the HUAC in 1947
In the film industry, more than 300 actors, authors, and directors were denied work in the U.S. through the unofficial Hollywood blacklist. Blacklists were at work throughout the entertainment industry, in universities and schools at all levels, in the legal profession, and in many other fields. A port-security program initiated by the Coast Guard shortly after the start of the Korean War required a review of every maritime worker who loaded or worked aboard any American ship, regardless of cargo or destination. As with other loyalty-security reviews of McCarthyism, the identities of any accusers and even the nature of any accusations were typically kept secret from the accused. Nearly 3,000 seamen and longshoremen lost their jobs due to this program alone.[93]
Some of the notable people who were blacklisted or suffered some other persecution during McCarthyism include:
Larry Adler, musician
Nelson Algren, writer[94]
Lucille Ball, actress, model, and film studio executive.[95]
Alvah Bessie, Abraham Lincoln Brigade, writer, journalist, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
Elmer Bernstein, composer and conductor[96]
Leonard Bernstein, conductor, pianist, composer[97]
David Bohm, physicist and philosopher[98]
Bertolt Brecht, poet, playwright, screenwriter
Archie Brown, Abraham Lincoln Brigade, veteran of World War II, union leader, imprisoned. Successfully challenged Landrum Griffin Act provision[99]
Esther Brunauer, forced from the U.S. State Department[100]
Luis Bu uel, film director, producer[101]
Charlie Chaplin, actor and director[102]
Aaron Copland, composer[103]
Bartley Crum, attorney[104]
Howard Da Silva, actor[105]
Jules Dassin, director[106]
Dolores del R o, actress[107]
Edward Dmytryk, director, Hollywood Ten
W.E.B. Du Bois, civil rights activist and author[108]
George A. Eddy, pre-Keynesian Harvard economist, US Treasury monetary policy specialist[109]
Albert Einstein, Nobel Prize-winning physicist, philosopher, mathematician, activist[110]
Hanns Eisler, composer[111]
Howard Fast, writer[112]
Lion Feuchtwanger, novelist and playwright[113]
Carl Foreman, writer of High Noon
John Garfield, actor[103]
C.H. Garrigues, journalist[114]
Jack Gilford, actor[105]
Ruth Gordon, actress[105]
Lee Grant, actress[115]
Dashiell Hammett, author[103]
Hananiah Harari, American painter and illustrator
Elizabeth Hawes, clothing designer, author, equal rights activist[116]
Lillian Hellman, playwright[103]
Dorothy Healey, union organizer, CPUSA official[117]
Lena Horne, singer[105]
Langston Hughes, writer, poet, playwright[103]
Marsha Hunt, actress
Sam Jaffe, actor[103]
Theodore Kaghan, diplomat[118]
Garson Kanin, writer and director[103]
Danny Kaye, comedian, singer[119][full citation needed]
Benjamin Keen, historian[120]
Otto Klemperer, conductor and composer[121]
Gypsy Rose Lee, actress and stripper[103]
Cornelius Lanczos, mathematician and physicist[122]
Ring Lardner Jr., screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
Arthur Laurents, playwright[105]
Philip Loeb, actor[123]
Joseph Losey, director[103]
Albert Maltz, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
Heinrich Mann, novelist[124]
Klaus Mann, writer[124]
Thomas Mann, Nobel Prize winning novelist and essayist[124]
Thomas McGrath, poet
Burgess Meredith, actor[103]
Arthur Miller, playwright and essayist[103]
Jessica Mitford, author, muckraker. Refused to testify to HUAC.
Dimitri Mitropoulos, conductor, pianist, composer[125]
Zero Mostel, actor[103]
Joseph Needham, biochemist, sinologist, historian of science
Dorothy Parker, writer, humorist[103]
Linus Pauling, chemist, Nobel prizes for Chemistry and Peace[126]
Samuel Reber, diplomat[127]
Al Richmond, union organizer, editor[128]
Martin Ritt, actor and director[129]
Paul Robeson, actor, athlete, singer, writer, political activist[130]
Edward G. Robinson, actor[103]
Waldo Salt, screenwriter[131]
Jean Seberg, actress[132]
Pete Seeger, folk singer, songwriter[103]
Artie Shaw, jazz musician, bandleader, author[103]
Irwin Shaw, writer[105]
William L. Shirer, journalist, author[133]
Lionel Stander, actor[134]
Dirk Jan Struik, mathematician, historian of maths[135]
Paul Sweezy, economist and founder-editor of Monthly Review[136]
Charles W. Thayer, diplomat[137]
Dalton Trumbo, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
Tsien Hsue-shen, physicist[138]
Sam Wanamaker, actor, director, responsible for recreating Shakespeare's Globe Theatre in London, England.
Gene Weltfish, anthropologist fired from Columbia University[139]
In 1953, Robert K. Murray, a young professor of history at Pennsylvania State University who had served as an intelligence officer in World War II, was revising his dissertation on the Red Scare of 1919 20 for publication until Little, Brown and Company decided that "under the circumstances ... it wasn't wise for them to bring this book out." He learned that investigators were questioning his colleagues and relatives. The University of Minnesota press published his volume, Red Scare: A Study in National Hysteria, 1919 1920, in 1955.[140]
Critical reactions[edit]
The nation was by no means united behind the policies and activities that have come to be associated with McCarthyism. The critics of various aspects of McCarthyism included many figures not generally noted for their liberalism. In his overridden veto of the McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950, President Truman wrote, "In a free country, we punish men for the crimes they commit, but never for the opinions they have."[141] Truman also unsuccessfully vetoed the Taft Hartley Act, which among other provisions denied trade unions National Labor Relations Board protection unless union leaders signed affidavits swearing they were not and had never been Communists. In 1953, after he left office, Truman criticized the current Eisenhower administration:
It is now evident that the present Administration has fully embraced, for political advantage, McCarthyism. I am not referring to the Senator from Wisconsin. He is only important in that his name has taken on the dictionary meaning of the word. It is the corruption of truth, the abandonment of the due process law. It is the use of the big lie and the unfounded accusation against any citizen in the name of Americanism or security. It is the rise to power of the demagogue who lives on untruth; it is the spreading of fear and the destruction of faith in every level of society.[142]
On June 1, 1950, Senator Margaret Chase Smith, a Maine Republican, delivered a speech to the Senate she called a "Declaration of Conscience". In a clear attack upon McCarthyism, she called for an end to "character assassinations" and named "some of the basic principles of Americanism: The right to criticize; the right to hold unpopular beliefs; the right to protest; the right of independent thought". She said "freedom of speech is not what it used to be in America", and decried "cancerous tentacles of 'know nothing, suspect everything' attitudes".[143] Six other Republican senators Wayne Morse, Irving M. Ives, Charles W. Tobey, Edward John Thye, George Aiken, and Robert C. Hendrickson joined Smith in condemning the tactics of McCarthyism.
 Joseph N. Welch (left) and Senator McCarthy, June 9, 1954
Elmer Davis, one of the most highly respected news reporters and commentators of the 1940s and 1950s, often spoke out against what he saw as the excesses of McCarthyism. On one occasion he warned that many local anti-communist movements constituted a "general attack not only on schools and colleges and libraries, on teachers and textbooks, but on all people who think and write ... in short, on the freedom of the mind".[144]
In 1952, the Supreme Court upheld a lower-court decision in Adler v. Board of Education, thus approving a law that allowed state loyalty review boards to fire teachers deemed "subversive". In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas wrote: "The present law proceeds on a principle repugnant to our society guilt by association.... What happens under this law is typical of what happens in a police state. Teachers are under constant surveillance; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty; their utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts."[145]
 Broadcast journalist Edward R. Murrow
One of the most influential opponents of McCarthyism was the famed CBS newscaster and analyst Edward R. Murrow. On October 20, 1953, Murrow's show See It Now aired an episode about the dismissal of Milo Radulovich, a former reserve Air Force lieutenant who was accused of associating with Communists. The show was strongly critical of the Air Force's methods, which included presenting evidence in a sealed envelope that Radulovich and his attorney were not allowed to open.
On March 9, 1954, See It Now aired another episode on the issue of McCarthyism, this one attacking Joseph McCarthy himself. Titled "A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy", it used footage of McCarthy speeches to portray him as dishonest, reckless, and abusive toward witnesses and prominent Americans. In his concluding comment, Murrow said:
We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty. We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law. We will not walk in fear, one of another. We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason, if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine, and remember that we are not descended from fearful men.[42]
This broadcast has been cited as a key episode in bringing about the end of McCarthyism.[146]
In April 1954, McCarthy was also under attack in the Army McCarthy hearings. These hearings were televised live on the new American Broadcasting Company network, allowing the public to view first-hand McCarthy's interrogation of individuals and his controversial tactics. In one exchange, McCarthy reminded the attorney for the Army, Joseph Welch, that he had an employee in his law firm who had belonged to an organization that had been accused of Communist sympathies. In an exchange that reflected the increasingly negative public opinion of McCarthy, Welch rebuked the senator: "Have you no sense of decency, sir? At long last, have you left no sense of decency?"[147]
Decline[edit]
In the mid and late 1950s, the attitudes and institutions of McCarthyism slowly weakened. Changing public sentiments heavily contributed to the decline of McCarthyism. Its decline may also be charted through a series of court decisions.
Notable events[edit]
A key figure in the end of the blacklisting of McCarthyism was John Henry Faulk. Host of an afternoon comedy radio show, Faulk was a leftist active in his union, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. He was scrutinized by AWARE, Inc., one of the private firms that examined individuals for signs of communist "disloyalty". Marked by AWARE as unfit, he was fired by CBS Radio. Almost uniquely among the many victims of blacklisting, Faulk decided to sue AWARE in 1957 and finally won the case in 1962.[148]
With this court decision, the private blacklisters and those who used them were put on notice that they were legally liable for the professional and financial damage they caused. Although some informal blacklisting continued, the private "loyalty checking" agencies were soon a thing of the past.[149] Even before the Faulk verdict, many in Hollywood had decided it was time to break the blacklist. In 1960, Dalton Trumbo, one of the best known members of the Hollywood Ten, was publicly credited with writing the films Exodus and Spartacus.
Warren Court[edit]
Much of the undoing of McCarthyism came at the hands of the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren.[2][3] As Richard Rovere wrote in his biography of Joseph McCarthy, "[T]he United States Supreme Court took judicial notice of the rents McCarthy was making in the fabric of liberty and thereupon wrote a series of decisions that have made the fabric stronger than before."[150] Two Eisenhower appointees to the court Earl Warren (who was made Chief Justice) and William J. Brennan, Jr. proved to be more liberal than Eisenhower had anticipated.[151]
The Warren Court made a series of rulings that helped bring an end to the McCarthyism.[4][5][6]
In 1956, the Warren Court heard the case of Slochower v. Board of Education. Harry Slochower was a professor at Brooklyn College who had been fired by New York City for invoking the Fifth Amendment when McCarthy's committee questioned him about his past membership in the Communist Party. The court prohibited such actions, ruling "...we must condemn the practice of imputing a sinister meaning to the exercise of a person's constitutional right under the Fifth Amendment  The privilege against self-incrimination would be reduced to a hollow mockery if its exercise could be taken as equivalent either to a confession of guilt or a conclusive presumption of perjury."[152] In addition, the 1956 Cole v. Young ruling also greatly weakened the ability to discriminate in the federal civilian workforce.[153]
Another key decision was in the 1957 case Yates v. United States, in which the convictions of fourteen Communists were reversed. In Justice Black's opinion, he wrote of the original "Smith Act" trials: "The testimony of witnesses is comparatively insignificant. Guilt or innocence may turn on what Marx or Engels or someone else wrote or advocated as much as a hundred years or more ago  When the propriety of obnoxious or unfamiliar view about government is in reality made the crucial issue,  prejudice makes conviction inevitable except in the rarest circumstances."[154]
Also in 1957, the Supreme Court ruled on the case of Watkins v. United States, curtailing the power of HUAC to punish uncooperative witnesses by finding them in contempt of Congress. Justice Warren wrote in the decision: "The mere summoning of a witness and compelling him to testify, against his will, about his beliefs, expressions or associations is a measure of governmental interference. And when those forced revelations concern matters that are unorthodox, unpopular, or even hateful to the general public, the reaction in the life of the witness may be disastrous."[155][156]
In its 1958 decision in Kent v. Dulles, the Supreme Court halted the State Department from using the authority of its own regulations to refuse or revoke passports based on an applicant's communist beliefs or associations.[157]
Repercussions[edit]
Study and reactions to Constitutional implications[edit]
The political divisions McCarthyism created in the United States continue to make themselves manifest, and the politics and history of anti-communism in the United States are still contentious. Portions of the massive security apparatus established during the McCarthy era still exist. Loyalty oaths are still required by the California Constitution for all officials and employees of the government of California (which is highly problematic for Quakers and Jehovah's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging absolute loyalty to the state).[158] At the federal level, a few portions of the McCarran Internal Security Act remain in effect. However, the act's detention provision was repealed in 1971.[159] The McCarran Act's Communist registration requirement was declared unconstitutional in the 1965 Supreme Court ruling in Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board as well. The McCarran Act's Subversive Activities Control Board, which enforced the law's investigation requirement for persons alleged to be involved in "subversive activities," was officially abolished through Congressional legislation in 1972 as well.[160]
Historical study on anti-communism and Soviet espionage[edit]
McCarthyism also attracts controversy purely as a historical issue. Through declassified documents from Soviet archives and Venona project decryptions of coded Soviet messages, the Soviet Union was found to have engaged in substantial espionage activities in the United States during the 1940s. The Communist Party USA also was substantially funded and its policies controlled by the Soviet Union, and accusations existed that CPUSA members were often recruited as spies.[161][162]
Liberal anti-communists like Edward Shils and Daniel Moynihan had a contempt for McCarthyism. Sociologist Edward Shils criticized an excessive policy of secrecy during the Cold War, that led to the misdirection of McCarthyism, which was addressed during the 1994 1997 Moynihan Commission. As Moynihan put it, "reaction to McCarthy took the form of a modish anti-anti-Communism that considered impolite any discussion of the very real threat Communism posed to Western values and security." After revelations of Soviet spy networks from the declassified Venona project, Moynihan wondered: "Might less secrecy have prevented the liberal overreaction to McCarthyism as well as McCarthyism itself?" He described the situation during the McCarthy era as "ignorant armies clashed by night". With McCarthy advocating an extremist view, the discussion of communist subversion was made into a civil rights issue instead of a counterintelligence one.[68]
In the view of some contemporary commentators, the revelations from Venona and other archives on espionage, stand as at least a partial vindication of McCarthyism.[163] Some such as Goldberg feel that a genuinely dangerous subversive element was in the United States, and that this danger justified extreme measures.[164] The opposing view holds that, recent revelations notwithstanding, by the time McCarthyism began in the late 1940s, the CPUSA was an ineffectual fringe group, and the damage done to U.S. interests by Soviet spies after World War II was minimal.[165] Historian Ellen Schrecker states, "in this country, McCarthyism did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever did."[166]
Historian John Earl Haynes, while acknowledging that inexcusable excesses occurred during McCarthyism, argues that some contemporary historians of McCarthyism underplay the un-democratic nature of the CPUSA.[167] At the same time, Haynes, who studied the Venona decryptions extensively, argued that McCarthy's attempts to "make anti-communism a partisan weapon" actually "threatened [the post-War] anti-Communist consensus", thereby ultimately harming anti-Communist efforts more than helping them.[168] Of the 159 people who were identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy, evidence only substantially proved that nine of them had aided Soviet espionage efforts while several hundred Soviet spies were actually known based on Venona and other evidence, most were never named by McCarthy.[169][170]
Later political usage of term[edit]
A number of observers have compared the oppression of liberals and leftists during the McCarthy period to 2000s-era actions against suspected terrorists, most of them Muslims. In The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism, author Haynes Johnson compares the "abuses suffered by aliens thrown into high-security U.S. prisons in the wake of 9/11" to the excesses of the McCarthy era.[171] Similarly, David D. Cole has written that the Patriot Act "in effect resurrects the philosophy of McCarthyism, simply substituting 'terrorist' for 'communist'."[172]
From the opposite pole, conservative writer Ann Coulter devotes much of her book Treason to drawing parallels between past opposition to McCarthy and McCarthyism and the policies and beliefs of modern-day liberals, arguing that the former hindered the anti-communist cause and the latter hinder the War on Terrorism.[173] Other authors who have drawn on a comparison between current anti-terrorism policies and McCarthyism include Geoffrey R. Stone,[174] Ted Morgan,[175] and Jonah Goldberg.[164]
Since the time of McCarthy, the word McCarthyism has entered American speech as a general term for a variety of practices: aggressively questioning a person's patriotism, making poorly supported accusations, using accusations of disloyalty to pressure a person to adhere to conformist politics or to discredit an opponent, subverting civil and political rights in the name of national security, and the use of demagoguery are all often referred to as McCarthyism.[176][177][178]
In popular culture[edit]
The 1951 novel The Troubled Air by Irwin Shaw tells the story of the director of a (fictional) radio show, broadcast live at the time, who is given a deadline to investigate his cast for alleged links to communism. The novel recounts the devastating effects on all concerned.[179]
The 1952 Arthur Miller play The Crucible used the Salem witch trials as a metaphor for McCarthyism, suggesting that the process of McCarthyism-style persecution can occur at any time or place. The play focused on the fact that once accused, a person had little chance of exoneration, given the irrational and circular reasoning of both the courts and the public. Miller later wrote: "The more I read into the Salem panic, the more it touched off corresponding images of common experiences in the fifties."[180]
The 1976 film The Front starring Woody Allen dealt with the McCarthy-era Hollywood blacklist. The film was made by those blacklisted: producer and director Martin Ritt; writer Walter Bernstein; and actors Zero Mostel, Herschel Bernardi, Michael Murphy, John Randolph, Lloyd Gough, and Joshua Shelley.[181]
Guilty by Suspicion is a 1991 American drama film about the Hollywood blacklist, McCarthyism, and the activities of the HUAC. Written and directed by Irwin Winkler, it starred Robert De Niro, Annette Bening, and George Wendt.
The 2005 film Good Night, and Good Luck by George Clooney starred David Strathairn as broadcast journalist Edward R. Murrow and contained archival footage of McCarthy.[182]
See also[edit]
Conservatism portalSocialism portalCommunism portalUnited States portal1950s portal
Cancel culture
Deplatforming
Enemy of the people
Litmus test (politics)
Mundt Ferguson Communist Registration Bill of 1950
Ostracism
Palmer Raids
Red-baiting
Red-tagging in the Philippines
Red Purge
Relational aggression
Social exclusion
Sycophancy
Witch-hunt
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (July 2, 2015). "McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare". American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6. ISBN 978-0199329175. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2018.
^ a b Lichtman, Robert M. "UI Press | Robert M. Lichtman | The Supreme Court and McCarthy-Era Repression: One Hundred Decisions". www.press.uillinois.edu. Archived from the original on May 12, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019.
^ a b "Revisiting McCarthyism in the Patriot Act Era". NPR.org. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019.
^ a b Horwitz, Morton J. (1999). The Warren Court and the Pursuit of Justice. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0809016259. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2020.
^ a b "Yates v. United States". Oyez. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019.
^ a b "Watkins v. United States". Oyez. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019.
^  Ellen Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America, (New York: Little, Brown & Company, 1998): 203[ISBN missing]
^ For example, Yates v. United States (1957) and Watkins v. United States (1957): Fried, Albert (1997). McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195097017. pp. 205, 207.
^ For example, California's "Levering Oath" law, declared unconstitutional in 1967: Fried (1997), p. 124.
^ For example, Slochower v. Board of Education (1956): Fried (1997), p. 203.
^ For example, Faulk vs. AWARE Inc., et al. (1962): Fried (1997), p. 197.
^ Robert J, Goldstein (2006). "Prelude to McCarthyism: The Making of a Blacklist". Prologue Magazine. Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017.
^ Weir (2007), pp. 148 149.
^ Merrill, Dennis (2006). "The Truman Doctrine: Containing Communism and Modernity". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 36 (1): 27 37. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00284.x.
^ Fried, Richard M. (1990). Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195043618., p. 41.
^ Brinkley (1995), p. 141; Fried (1990), pp. 6, 15, 78 80.
^ Griffith (1970), p. 49.
^ "McCarthyism, n.". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.); citing Christian Science Monitor, March 28, 1950, p. 20.
^ Strout, Lawrence N. (1999). Covering McCarthyism: how the 'Christian Science Monitor' handled Joseph R. McCarthy, 1950 1954. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. "Introduction".
^ Block (1952), p. 152.
^ Fried (1990), p. 150.
^ "U.S. Senate: On This Day: December 2, 1954". www.senate.gov.
^ McCoy, Donald R. (1991).  Fausold, Martin; Shank, Alan (eds.). The Constitution of the Truman Presidency and the Post World War II Era. The Constitution and the American Presidency. SUNY Press. p. 116. ISBN 978-0791404683.
^ Fried (1997).
^ Fried (1990), p. 133.
^ Brown (1958).
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 271.
^ Fried (1990), p. 70.
^ Schrecker (1998), pp. 211, 266 et seq.
^ Schrecker (2002), p. 65.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 212.
^ a b Cox and Theoharis (1988), p. 312.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 225.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 224
^ Yoder, Traci (April 2014). "Breach of Privilege: Spying on Lawyers in the United States" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 25, 2018. Retrieved February 5, 2019.
^ Schrecker (1998), pp. 239, 203.
^ Weiner 2007, pp. 105 106. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWeiner2007 (help)
^ Case, Sue-Ellen; Reinelt, Janelle G., eds. (1991). The Performance of Power: Theatrical Discourse and Politics. University of Iowa Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-1587290343. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2020.
^ Dmytryk, Edward (1996). Odd Man Out: A Memoir of the Hollywood Ten. Southern Illinois University Press. p. 59. ISBN 978-0809319992. In the early days of the Martin Dies Committee [...] the question had simply been, Are you a member of the Communist Party of the United States? As a countermeasure, the Party adopted a rule that automatically cancelled a Communist's membership the moment the question was asked. He could then answer 'No' without perjuring himself. The final wording [...] was adopted to circumvent the Party's tactic.
^ nublockmuseum (May 31, 2013). "Behind Blacklisted". Stories From The Block. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
^ Fried (1990), pp. 154 155; Schrecker (2002), p. 68.
^ a b "See it Now: A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy (transcript)". CBS-TV. March 9, 1954. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved March 16, 2007.
^ Fried (1990), pp. 145 150.
^ Griffith (1970), p. 216.
^ "The Horrible, Oppressive History of Book Burning in America". The New Republic. June 26, 1953. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2020.
^ Kareem Abdul-Jabbar; Raymond Obstfeld (2016). Writings on the Wall: Searching for a New Equality Beyond Black and White. Time Inc. Books. pp. 53 . ISBN 978-1618935434.
^ Stone (2004), p. 384.
^ Fried (1990), p. 138.
^ 83rd U.S. Congress (July 30, 1954). "Senate Resolution 301: Censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy". U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
^ Fried (1997), p. 116.
^ a b Goldstein, Robert Justin (2014). Little 'Red Scares' : Anti-Communism and Political Repression in the United States, 1921 1946. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-1472413772. OCLC 879022662.
^ Fried (1997), pp. 13, 15, 27, 110 112, 165 168.
^ Fried (1997), pp. 201 202.
^ Levin, Daniel, "Smith Act", in
Paul Finkelman, ed. (2006). Encyclopedia of American Civil Liberties. CRC Press. p. 1488. ISBN 0415943426.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 141.
^ Fried (1990), p. 187.
^ McAuliff (1978), p. 142.
^ a b c Linfield, Michael (1990). Freedom Under Fire: U.S. Civil Liberties in Times of War. South End Press. pp. 107 111. ISBN 978-0896083745.
^ "California Creates Un-American Activities Committee". Today in Civil Liberties History. 28 May 2013. Archived from the original on September 24, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.
^ Richards, Dave (August 19, 2009). "So Long to the Communist Threat". The Texas Observer. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.
^ McEnteer, James (2004). Deep in the Heart: The Texas Tendency in American Politics. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 87. ISBN 978-0275983062. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2017.
^ Nickerson, Michelle M., "Women, Domesticity, and Postwar Conservatism Archived March 10, 2003, at the Wayback Machine", OAH Magazine of History 17 (January 2003). ISSN 0882-228X.
^ Rovere (1959), pp. 21 22.
^ Marmor, Judd, Viola W. Bernard, and Perry Ottenberg, "Psychodynamics of Group Opposition to Mental Health Programs", in Judd Marmor (1994). Psychiatry in Transition (2nd ed.). Transaction. pp. 355 373. ISBN 1560007362.
^ Buckley (1954), p. 335.
^ Robert Griffith (1987). The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate. Univ of Massachusetts Press. p. 263. ISBN 0870235559.
^ Arthur Herman (2000). Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator. Simon and Schuster. pp. 160 161. ISBN 978-0684836256.
^ a b Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1998). Secrecy: The American Experience. Yale University Press. pp. 15 16. ISBN 978-0300080797.
^ Andrew, Christopher; Vasili Mitrokhin (1999). The Sword and the Shield. New York: Basic Books. pp. 108, 110, 122, 148, 164, 226, 236 237, 279 280, 294 306. ISBN 0465003109.
^ Haynes, John; Harvey Klehr (1999). Venona   Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. Connecticut: Yale University. pp. 221 226. ISBN 0300077718.
^ Powers, Richard Gid (1995). Not Without Honor: The History of American Anticommunism. Free Press. pp. 129, 214, 240. ISBN 978-0684824277.
^ "President Harry S. Truman Responds to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's Accusations of Disloyalty". historymatters.gmu.edu.
^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (2015-07-02). "McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6. ISBN 978-0199329175. Retrieved 2022-11-02.
^ Schrecker (1998), pp. 161, 193 194.
^ Chambers, Whittaker (1952). Witness. New York: Random House. p. 799. ISBN 978-0848809584.
^ Schrecker (1998), pp. 130 137.
^ Herman, Arthur (2000). Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator. Free Press. pp. 5 6.
^ Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in America   The Stalin Era (New York: Modern Library, 2000) ISBN 978-0375755361, pp. 48, 158, 162, 169, 229
^ M. Stanton Evans. Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight against America's Enemies. Crown Forum, 2007 pp. 19 21.
^ John Earl Haynes, Harvey Klehr. Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. Yale University Press, 1999, p. 18.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. xiii.
^ Schrecker (2002), pp. 63 64.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 4.
^ Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (2009). "5: The Legacy of Discriminatory State Laws, Policies, and Practices, 1945 Present". Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment (PDF). Los Angeles: The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at UCLA School of Law. p. 5-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 6, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017. From 1947 to 1961, more than 5,000 allegedly homosexual federal civil servants lost their jobs in the purges for no reason other than sexual orientation, and thousands of applicants were also rejected for federal employment for the same reason. During this period, more than 1,000 men and women were fired for suspected homosexuality from the State Department alone a far greater number than were dismissed for their membership in the Communist party. The Cold War and anticommunist efforts provided the setting in which a sustained attack upon gay men and lesbians took place. The history of this 'lavender scare' by the federal government has been extensively documented by historian David Johnson, who has demonstrated that during this era, government officials intentionally engaged in campaigns to associate homosexuality with Communism: 'homosexual' and 'pervert' became synonyms for 'Communist' and 'traitor.' LGBT people were treated as a national-security threat, demanding the attention of Congress, the courts, statehouses, and the media.
^ D'Emilio (1998), pp. 41 49.
^ David K. Johnson, The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.), p. 10
^ "An interview with David K. Johnson author of The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government". press.uchicago.edu. The University of Chicago. 2004. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved December 16, 2017. The Lavender Scare helped fan the flames of the Red Scare. In popular discourse, communists and homosexuals were often conflated. Both groups were perceived as hidden subcultures with their own meeting places, literature, cultural codes, and bonds of loyalty. Both groups were thought to recruit to their ranks the psychologically weak or disturbed. And both groups were considered immoral and godless. Many people believed that the two groups were working together to undermine the government.
^ a b Gary Kinsman and Patrizia Gentile. The Canadian War on Queers: National Security as Sexual Regulation. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2010, p. 65.
^ Elizabeth Lapovsky Kennedy and Madeline Davis. Boots of Leather, Slippers of Gold. New York: Routledge, 1993, p. 75.
^ a b Kinsman and Gentile, p. 8.
^ John D'Emilio and Estelle B. Freedman. Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in America, 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012, p. 316.
^ David K. Johnson, p. 96.
^ Schrecker (1998), p. 267.
^ Publication canceled after FBI contact: Horvath, Brooke (2005). Understanding Nelson Algren. University of South Carolina Press. p. 84. ISBN 1570035741.
^ Investigated by the FBI and brought before HUAC for having registered as a Communist supporter in 1936: "Lucille Ball". FBI Records: The Vault. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015.
^ On Hollywood "graylist": "Composer Elmer Bernstein Dead at 82". Today.com. Associated Press. August 19, 2004. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2009.
^ Schrecker, Ellen (2002). The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents. New York, Palgrave. p. 244. ISBN 0312294255.
^ Lost his job, exiled: Jessica Wang (1999). American Science in an Age of Anxiety: scientists, anticommunism, & the cold war. The University of North Carolina Press. pp. 277 278. ISBN 978-0807824474.
^ "Obituary" Archived March 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, November 25, 1990. Retrieved June 10, 2014.
^ "McCarthy Target Ousted" (PDF). The New York Times. November 21, 1952. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-03-01. Retrieved April 4, 2014.
^ Buhle, Paul & David Wagner (2003b). Blacklisted: The Film Lover's Guide to the Hollywood Blacklist. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 140396145X.
^ Harassed by anti-Communist groups, denied reentry to United States while traveling abroad: Lev, Peter (1999). Transforming the Screen, 1950 1959. University of California Press. p. 159. ISBN 0520249666.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p On the Red Channels blacklist of artists and entertainers: Schrecker (2002), p. 244.
^ Blacklisted in his profession, committed suicide in 1959: Bosworth, Patricia (1998). Anything Your Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story. Touchstone. ISBN 0684838486.
^ a b c d e f "The Authentic History Center: Red Channels, The Blacklist". Retrieved July 21, 2010.[dead link]
^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle and Wagner (2003), p. 105.
^ Harassed by anti-Communist groups, denied reentry to United States, thus prevented from acting in the movie Broken Lance: Ram n, David (1997). Dolores del R o. Cl o. p. 44. ISBN 9686932356.
^ Indicted under the Foreign Agents Registration Act: Du Bois, W.E.B. (1968). The Autobiography of W.E.B. Du Bois. International Publishers. ISBN 0717802345.
^ Craig, R. Bruce (2004). Treasonable Doubt. University Press of Kansas. p. 496. ISBN 978-0700613113.
^ Jerome, Fred (2002). The Einstein File: J. Edgar Hoover's Secret War Against the World's Most Famous Scientist. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312288565.
^ Herman, Jan (1995). A Talent for Trouble: The Life of Hollywood's Most Acclaimed Director, William Wyler. Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo. ISBN 030680798X.
^ Blacklisted, imprisoned for three months for contempt of Congress: Sabin (1999), p. 75.
^ Alexander, Stephan (2007).  berwacht. Ausgeb rgert. Exiliert: Schriftsteller und der Staat. Bielefeld: Aisthesis Verlag. pp. 36 52. ISBN 978-3895286346.
^ Investigation of Communist Activities in the Los Angeles Area   Part 5, United States Congress, House Committee on Un-American Activities
^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle and Wagner (2003), p. 31.
^ Berch, Bettina (1988). Radical By Design: The Life and Style of Elizabeth Hawes. Dutton Adult. ISBN 0525247157.
^ "Dorothy Healey Lifelong Communist Fought for Workers" Archived December 18, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times, Dennis McLellan, August 8, 2006. Retrieved June 11, 2014.
^ ""Theodore Kaghan, 77; Was in Foreign Service Archived 2020-11-13 at the Wayback Machine". The New York Times, August 11, 1989. Accessed March 7, 2011.
^ "Subject: Danny Kaye". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2013.
^ Keith Haynes "Benjamin Keen 1913 2002" Hispanic American Historical Review 83.2 (2003) 357 359
^ Heyworth, Peter (1996). Otto Klemperer: Vol. 2, 1933 1973: His Life and Times. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521244886.
^ Louis Komzsik (2003). The Lanczos Method:Evolution and Application. SIAM. p. 79. ISBN 978-0898715378.
^ Blacklisted and unemployed, committed suicide in 1955: Fried (1990), p. 156.
^ a b c Stephan, Alexander (1995). Im Visier des FBI: deutsche Exilschriftsteller in den Akten amerikanischer Geheimdienste. Metzler. ISBN 3476013812.
^ Trotter, William R. (1995). Priest of Music. The Life of Dimitri Mitropoulos. Amadeus Press. ISBN 0931340810.
^ Repeatedly denied passport: Thompson, Gail & R. Andrew Viruleg. "Linus Pauling". Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation. Archived from the original on December 24, 2007. Retrieved December 11, 2007.
^ Robert D. Dean, The Imperial Brotherhood: Gender and the Making of Cold War Foreign Policy (University of Massachusetts Press, 2001), 65, 127, 140
^ "Obituary" Archived May 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, November 9, 1987. Retrieved June 10, 2014.
^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle and Wagner (2003), p. 18.
^ Blacklisted, passport revoked: Manning, Marable; McMillian, John; Frazier ), Nishani, eds. (2003). Freedom on My Mind: The Columbia Documentary History of the African American Experience. Columbia University Press. p. 559. ISBN 0231108907.
^ On Hollywood blacklist: Buhle and Wagner (2003), p. 208.
^ Brodeur, Paul (1997). A Writer in the Cold War. Faber and Faber. pp. 159 165. ISBN 978-0571199075.
^ Herbert Mitgang. "William L. Shirer, Author, Is Dead at 89 Archived 2017-05-01 at the Wayback Machine". The New York Times, December 29, 1993. Accessed March 5, 2011.
^ Lawrence Van Gelder. "Lionel Stander Dies at 86; Actor Who Defied Blacklist Archived 2017-02-19 at the Wayback Machine". The New York Times, December 2, 1994. Accessed March 5, 2011.
^ [1] Archived March 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine p. 7
^ Subpoenaed by New Hampshire Attorney General, indicted for contempt of court: Heale, M. J. (1998). McCarthy's Americans: Red Scare Politics in State and Nation, 1935 1965. University of Georgia Press. p. 73. ISBN 0820320269.
^ Robert D. Dean, Imperial Brotherhood: Gender and the Making of Cold War Foreign Policy (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001), 141 144
^ Passport revoked, incarcerated: Chang, Iris (1996). Thread of the Silkworm. Basic Books. ISBN 0465006787.
^ David H. Price. 2004. Threatening Anthropology: McCarthyism and the FBI's Surveillance of Activist Anthropologists. Duke University Press, March 30, 2004
^ Organization of American Historians: Lee W. Formwalt, "Robert Murray's Two Red Scares," in OAH Newsletter, November 2003 Archived September 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, accessed January 28, 2011
^ Truman, Harry S. (September 1950). "Veto of the Internal Security Bill". Truman Presidential Museum and Library. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2006.
^ Doherty (2005), pp. 14 15.
^ Smith, Margaret Chase (June 1, 1950). "Declaration of Conscience". Margaret Chase Smith Library. Archived from the original on October 8, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2006.
^ Fried (1990), p. 29.
^ Fried (1997), p. 114.
^ Streitmatter (1998), p. 154.
^ Doherty (2005), p. 207.
^ Faulk, John Henry (1963). Fear on Trial. University of Texas Press. ISBN 029272442X.
^ Fried (1997), p. 197.
^ Rovere (1959), p. 264.
^ Sabin (1999), p. 5.
^ Fried (1997), p. 203.
^ "Cole v. Young 351 U.S. 536 (1956)". Justia. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved October 1, 2016.
^ Fried (1997), p. 205.
^ Fried (1997), p. 207.
^ full text Archived June 14, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Caselaw, Findlaw.
^ Fried (1997), p. 211.
^ Paddock, Richard C. (May 11, 2008), "Loyalty oath poses ethical dilemmas" Archived July 7, 2012, at archive.today, San Francisco Chronicle
^ Izumi, Masumi (May 2005). "Prohibiting "American Concentration Camps"". Pacific Historical Review. 74 (2): 166. doi:10.1525/phr.2005.74.2.165. JSTOR 10.1525/phr.2005.74.2.165.
^ Kesaris, Paul L. (ed.). "Records of the Subversive Activities Control Board" (PDF). University Publications of America. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2022-02-04.
^ Marshall, Joshua, "Exhuming McCarthy"[permanent dead link], American Prospect 10, no. 43 (1999).
^ Storrs, Landon R. Y. (2015-07-02). "McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.6. ISBN 978-0199329175.
^ David Aaronovitch McCarthy: There Were Reds Under the Bed Archived March 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine BBC Radio 4 airdate August 9, 2010
^ a b Goldberg, Jonah (February 26, 2003). "Two Cheers for "McCarthyism"?". National Review Online. Archived from the original on December 10, 2006. Retrieved January 25, 2007.
^ Theoharis, Athan (2002). Chasing Spies: How the FBI Failed in Counter-Intelligence But Promoted the Politics of McCarthyism in the Cold War Years. Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 1566634202.
^ Schrecker, Ellen (Winter 2000). "Comments on John Earl Haynes' The Cold War Debate Continues". Journal of Cold War Studies. Harvard University   Faculty of Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on May 15, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Emphasis in original.
^ Haynes, John Earl. "Reflections on Ellen Schrecker and Maurice Isserman's essay, "The Right's Cold War Revision"". Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2010.
^ Haynes, John Earl (February 2000). "Exchange with Arthur Herman and Venona book talk". Retrieved July 11, 2007.
^ Haynes, John Earl (2006). "Senator Joseph McCarthy's Lists and Venona". Retrieved August 31, 2006.
^ Haynes, John Earl; Klehr, Harvey (2000). Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300-084625.
^ Johnson, Haynes (2005). The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism. Harcourt. p. 471. ISBN 0151010625.
^ Cole, David, "National Security State Archived 2007-02-11 at the Wayback Machine", The Nation (December 17, 2001). See also Cole, David, "The New McCarthyism: Repeating History in the War on Terrorism", Harvard Civil Rights Civil Liberties Law Review 38, no. 1 (Winter 2003).
^ Coulter, Ann (2003). Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 1400050324.
^ Geoffrey R. Stone (October 17, 2004). "America's new McCarthyism". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved January 3, 2018.
^ Morgan, Ted (2004). Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America. Random House. p. 597 et seq. ISBN 081297302X.
^ Rosenthal, Jack (October 7, 1984). "President vs. Demagogue". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved December 20, 2017.
^ Boot, Max (April 2000). "Joseph McCarthy by Arthur Herman". Commentary. Archived from the original on July 21, 2010. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
^ What Qualifies as Demagoguery? (October 19, 2004). "What Qualifies as Demagoguery?". History News Network. Archived from the original on July 25, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2017.
^ "The Troubled Air". Open Road Media. 16 April 2013. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016.
^ Miller, Arthur (October 21, 1996). "Why I Wrote The Crucible". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved February 20, 2020.
^ Georgakas, Dan. "The Hollywood Blacklist". www.english.illinois.edu. Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 15, 2018.
^ "'Good Night and Good Luck': Murrow vs. McCarthy". NPR.org. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2018.
Sources[edit]
Block, Herbert (1952). The Herblock Book. Beacon. ISBN 149925346X.
Brinkley, Alan (1995). The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War. Vintage. ISBN 0679753141.
Brown, Ralph S. (1958). Loyalty and Security: Employment Tests in the United States. Yale University Press. ISBN 0306702185.
Buckley, William F. (1977). A Hymnal: The Controversial Arts. G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 0399122273.
Buckley, William F. (1954). McCarthy and His Enemies: The Record and Its Meaning. Regnery. ISBN 0895264722.
Buhle, Paul & David Wagner (2003). Hide in Plain Sight: The Hollywood Blacklistees in Film and Television, 1950 2002. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1403961441.
Cox, John Stuart & Athan G. Theoharis (1988). The Boss: J. Edgar Hoover and the Great American Inquisition. Temple University Press. ISBN 087722532X.
D'Emilio, John (1998). Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities (2d ed.). University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226142671.
Doherty, Thomas (2005). Cold War, Cool Medium: Television, McCarthyism, and American Culture. Columbia University Press. ISBN 023112953X.
Fried, Albert (1997). McCarthyism, The Great American Red Scare: A Documentary History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195097017.
Fried, Richard M. (1990). Nightmare in Red: The McCarthy Era in Perspective. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195043618.
Griffith, Robert (1970). The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate. University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 0870235559.
Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr (2000). Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America. Yale University Press. ISBN 0300-084625.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Herman, Arthur (2000). Joseph McCarthy: Reexamining the Life and Legacy of America's Most Hated Senator. The Free Press. ISBN 0684836254.
McAuliff, Mary Sperling (1978). Crisis on the Left: Cold War Politics and American Liberals, 1947 1954. University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 087023241X.
Rovere, Richard H. (1959). Senator Joe McCarthy. University of California Press. ISBN 0520204727.
Sabin, Arthur J. (1999). In Calmer Times: The Supreme Court and Red Monday. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 081223507X.
Schrecker, Ellen (1998). Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America. Little, Brown. ISBN 0316774707.
Schrecker, Ellen (2002). The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents (2d ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0312294255.
Stone, Geoffrey R. (2004). Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism. W. W. Norton. ISBN 0393-058808.
Streitmatter, Rodger (1998). Mightier Than the Sword: How the News Media Have Shaped American History. Westview Press. ISBN 0813332117.
Weir, Robert E. (2007). Class in America: An Encyclopedia. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0313337208.
Historiography[edit]
Haynes, John Earl. "The Cold War debate continues: A traditionalist view of historical writing on domestic Communism and anti-Communism." Journal of Cold War Studies 2.1 (2000): 76 115.
Hixson Jr, William B. Search for the American right wing: An analysis of the social science record, 1955 1987 (Princeton University Press, 2015).
Reeves, Thomas C. "McCarthyism: Interpretations since Hofstadter." Wisconsin Magazine of History (1976): 42 54. online
Selverstone, Marc J. "A Literature So Immense: The Historiography of Anticommunism." Organization of American Historians Magazine of History 24.4 (2010): 7 11.
Further reading[edit]
Andrew, Christopher; Mitrokhin, Vasili (2000). The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB. Basic Books. ISBN 0465-003125.
Byman, Jeremy (2004). Showdown at High Noon: Witch-hunts, Critics, and the End of the Western. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 0810849984. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2020.
Caballero, Raymond. McCarthyism vs. Clinton Jencks. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2019.
Caute, David (1978). The Great Fear: The Anti-Communist Purge Under Truman and Eisenhower. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0671226827.
Coulter, Ann (2003). Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism. Crown Forum. ISBN 1400050308.
Evans, M. Stanton (2007). Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senator Joe McCarthy and His Fight Against America's Enemies. Crown Publishing. ISBN 978-1400081059.
Haynes, John Earl (2000). Red Scare or Red Menace?: American Communism and Anti Communism in the Cold War Era. Ivan R. Dee. ISBN 156663-0916.
Haynes, John Earl & Harvey Klehr (2003). In Denial: Historians, Communism, and Espionage. Encounter. ISBN 1893554724.
Latham, Earl (ed.). The Meaning of McCarthyism (1965). excerpts from primary and secondary sources
Lichtman, Robert M. The Supreme Court and McCarthy-Era Repression: One Hundred Decisions. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2012.
McDaniel, Rodger. Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt. WordsWorth, 2013.
Morgan, Ted (2004). Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America. Random House. ISBN 081297302X.
Navasky, Victor S. (1980). Naming Names. Hill and Wang. ISBN 08090-01837.
Powers, Richard Gid (1997). Not Without Honor: A History of American Anticommunism. Free Press. ISBN 0300-07470-0.
Schrecker, Ellen (1994). The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with Documents. Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312-083491.
Storrs, Landon R.Y., The Second Red Scare and the Unmaking of the New Deal Left. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013.
Weinstein, Allen, and Alexander Vassiliev (2000). The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in America   The Stalin Era. Modern Library. ISBN 0375755365.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
External links[edit]
Wikiquote has quotations related to Joseph McCarthy.
Badash, Lawrence (October 30, 2007). "Science in the McCarthy Period: Training Ground for Scientists as Public Citizens". Oregon State University. Archived from the original on February 5, 2008. Retrieved January 16, 2008.
Beyer, Mary & Michael Beyer (January 2006). "McCarthyism Today". International Journal of Baudrillard Studies. Archived from the original on October 1, 2006. Retrieved November 2, 2006.
"McCarthyism / The "Red Scare"". Dwight D. Eisenhower Online Documents. Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, and Boyhood Home. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
Navasky, Victor S. (June 28, 2001). "Cold War Ghosts". The Nation. Archived from the original on April 14, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2006.
Rusher, William A. (Fall 2004). "A Closer Look Under The Bed". Claremont Review of Books. Claremont Institute. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2011.
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vteHistory of the United StatesTimeline
Geological history
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
Reagan Era
1991 2008
2008 present
Topics
Abortion
Agriculture
American Century
African Americans
Capital punishment
Cities
Corruption
The Constitution
Demography
Economy
Banking
Education
Higher education
Flag
Foreign policy
Diplomacy
Immigration
Labor
Law enforcement
LGBT
Lumber
Medicine
Merchant Marine
Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
Music
Native Americans
Postal service
Railway
Religion
Slavery
Sexual slavery
Sports
Taxation
Technology and industry
Territorial evolution
Historic regions
American frontier
Manifest destiny
Indian removal
Voting rights
Women
By region
New England
The South
The West
The West Coast
 Category
 Portal
vteDiscriminationForms
Institutional
Structural
Attributes
Age
Caste
Class
Dialect
Disability
Genetic
Hair texture
Height
Language
Looks
Mental disorder
Race / Ethnicity
Skin color
Rank
Sex
Sexual orientation
Species
Size
Viewpoint
Social
Acephobia
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-homelessness
Anti-drug addicts
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Antisemitism
Aporophobia
Audism
Biphobia
Clannism
Cronyism
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Fatphobia
Gayphobia
Gerontophobia
Heterosexism
HIV/AIDS stigma
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Perpetual foreigner
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Supremacism
Black
White
Transphobia
Non-binary
Transmisogyny
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia
Religious
Ahmadiyya
Atheism
Bah  Faith
Buddhism
Catholicism
Christianity
post Cold War era
Falun Gong
Hinduism
Persecution
Untouchability
Islam
Persecution
Jehovah's Witnesses
Judaism
Persecution
LDS or Mormon
Neopaganism
Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Protestantism
Rastafari
Shi'ism
Sufism
Zoroastrianism
Ethnic/National
African
Albanian
Arab
Armenian
Asian
France
United States
South Africa
Assyrian
Azerbaijani
Black people
African Americans
China
South Africa
Bengali
Catalan
Chechen
Chinese
Croat
Filipino
Finnish
Georgian
Greek
Haitian
Hazara
Hispanic
Hungarian
Igbo
Indian
Indigenous people
Australia
Canada
United States
Iranian
Irish
Israeli
Italian
Japanese
Jewish
Korean
Kurdish
Malay
Mexican
Middle Eastern
Mongolian
Pakistani
Palestinians
Pashtun
Polish
Quebec
Romani
Romanian
Russian
Serb
Slavic
Somali
Tatar
Thai
Turkish
Ukrainian
Uyghur
Uyghur genocide
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Manifestations
Blood libel
Bullying
Cancel culture
Compulsory sterilization
Corrective rape
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Defamation
Democide
Disability hate crime
Dog whistle
Economic
Education
Employment
Eliminationism
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic conflict
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital modification and mutilation
Genocide
examples
Glass ceiling
Hate crime
LGBT
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
Intersectionality
Lavender scare
LGBT grooming conspiracy theory
Lynching
Mortgage
Murder music
Native American mascot controversy
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Political repression
Purge
Religious persecution
Religious terrorism
Religious violence
Religious war
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White genocide conspiracy theory
Wife selling
Witch-hunt
Discriminatorypolicies
Age of candidacy
Blood purity
Blood quantum
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities
Catholic
Jewish
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Law for Protection of the Nation
MSM blood donation restrictions
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial segregation
Jim Crow laws
Nuremberg Laws
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Segregation
age
racial
religious
sexual
Social exclusion
Sodomy law
State atheism
State religion
Ugly law
Voter suppression
Countermeasures
Affirmative action
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Diversity training
Empowerment
Fat acceptance movement
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Hate speech laws by country
Human rights
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Reappropriation
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Related topics
Allophilia
Amatonormativity
Bias
Christian privilege
Civil liberties
Dehumanization
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Heteronormativity
Internalized oppression
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Medical model of disability
autism
Multiculturalism
Net bias
Neurodiversity
Oikophobia
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Polyculturalism
Power distance
Prejudice
Prisoner abuse
Racial bias in criminal news in the United States
Racism by country
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social model of disability
Social stigma
Speciesism
Stereotype
threat
The talk
White privilege
 Category
 Commons
vteSocialism in the United StatesHistoryUtopian socialism
Bishop Hill Commune
Brook Farm
Icarians
Looking Backward
New Harmony
Oneida Community
Progressive Era
1877 St. Louis general strike
1912 Lawrence textile strike
Catholic Worker Movement
Green Corn Rebellion
Labor unionization
Haymarket affair
May Day
Women's suffrage
Repression and persecution
American Defense Society
American Protective League
Communist Party USA and African Americans
Communists in the labor movement
1919 1937
1937 1957
Espionage Act of 1917
First Red Scare
John Birch Society
McCarthyism
Seattle General Strike
Smith Act
Smith Act trials
Anti-war and civil rights movements
Black Power movement
COINTELPRO
Great Society
"I Have a Dream"
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
New Left
Poor People's Campaign
War on poverty
Contemporary
1999 Seattle WTO protests
Financial crisis of 2007 08
Occupy Wall Street
2011 Wisconsin protests
2018 19 education workers' strikes in the United States
Parties and organizationsActive
Black Riders Liberation Party
Colorado Springs Socialists
Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism
Communist Party USA
Democratic Socialists of America
Freedom Road Socialist Organization
Freedom Socialist Party
Industrial Workers of the World
International Socialist Organization
Legal Marijuana Now Party
New Afrikan Black Panther Party
New Students for a Democratic Society
Party for Socialism and Liberation
Peace and Freedom Party
Progressive Labor Party
Redneck Revolt
Revolutionary Communist Party, USA
Social Democrats, USA
Socialist Action
Socialist Alternative
Socialist Equality Party
Socialist Party USA
Socialist Rifle Association
Socialist Workers Party
Spartacist League
Workers World Party
World Socialist Party of the United States
Former
American Labor Party
American Workers Party
Black Panther Party
Communist League of America
Communist Workers' Party
Democratic Socialist Federation
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee
Farmer Labor Party
Maoist Internationalist Movement
New American Movement
Proletarian Party of America
Puerto Rican Socialist Party
Social Democracy of America
Social Democratic Federation
Social Democratic Party of America
Socialist Labor Party of America
Socialist Party of America
Students for a Democratic Society
Weather Underground
White Panther Party
Workers Party of the United States
Youth International Party
People
Martin Abern
Stephen Pearl Andrews
Paul Avrich
Kuwasi Balagoon
Jack Barnes
Edward Bellamy
Victor L. Berger
Alexander Berkman
Murray Bookchin
Earl Browder
 tienne Cabet
James P. Cannon
Stokely Carmichael
Noam Chomsky
Voltairine de Cleyre
Angela Davis
Dorothy Day
Eugene V. Debs
Daniel De Leon
Farrell Dobbs
W. E. B. Du Bois
Albert Einstein
James W. Ford
William Z. Foster
Luigi Galleani
Benjamin Gitlow
Emma Goldman
William Batchelder Greene
Gus Hall
Michael Harrington
Harry Hay
Bill Haywood
Harry Haywood
Chris Hedges
Angela Heywood
Ezra Heywood
Joe Hill
Morris Hillquit
Daniel Hoan
Abbie Hoffman
Martin Luther King Jr.
Jo Labadie
Jay Lovestone
Dyer Lum
David McReynolds
Charlene Mitchell
Johann Most
Huey P. Newton
Phil Ochs
Robert Owen
Albert Parsons
Lucy Parsons
A. Philip Randolph
George Ripley
John Reed
Rudolf Rocker
Bayard Rustin
Charles Ruthenberg
Nicola Sacco
Bernie Sanders
Kshama Sawant
Bobby Seale
Emil Seidel
Max Shachtman
Upton Sinclair
Lysander Spooner
Paul Sweezy
Norman Thomas
Benjamin Tucker
Bartolomeo Vanzetti
Josiah Warren
Cornel West
Malcolm X
Frank Zeidler
John Zerzan
Literature
Appeal to Reason
Daily Worker
International Socialist Review
Jacobin
The Jungle
Looking Backward
Monopoly Capital
Monthly Review
The Other America
Voluntary Socialism
Why Socialism?
Related topics
American Left
Anarchism
Anarchism in the United States
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Democratic socialism
Green anarchism
Individualist anarchism
Individualist anarchism in the United States
Labor history
Labor laws
Labor unions
Libertarian socialism
Marxism
Marxism Leninism
Minimum wage
Mutualism
Post-left anarchy
Scientific socialism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utopian socialism
Politics portal
Socialism portal
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=McCarthyism&oldid=1148206743"