Independent agency of the U.S. federal government
"United States Post Office" redirects here. For individual post offices, see List of United States post offices.
"USPS" redirects here. For the non-profit boating safety and education organization, see United States Power Squadrons.
United States Postal ServiceGovernment signature used since 1993USPS HeadquartersAgency overviewFormedJuly 1, 1971; 51 years ago (1971-07-01)Washington, D.C., U.S.[1]TypeIndependentHeadquarters475 L'Enfant Plaza SWWashington, D.C. 20260-0004U.S.Employees653,167 (516,636 career personnel, 136,561 non-career personnel) as of 2021[2]Agency executivesLouis DeJoy, Postmaster General[3]Douglas Tulino, Deputy Postmaster GeneralKey documentPostal Clause of the United States ConstitutionWebsiteUSPS.comRevenue (2020) USD 73.133 billion[4]
Net income  (2020)  USD 9.176 billion[4][5]
 The full eagle logo, used in various versions from 1970 to 1993
The United States Postal Service (USPS), also known as the Post Office, U.S. Mail, or Postal Service, is an independent agency of the executive branch of the United States federal government responsible for providing postal service in the U.S., including its insular areas and associated states. It is one of the few government agencies explicitly authorized by the Constitution of the United States. The USPS, as of 2021, has 516,636 career employees and 136,531 non-career employees.[6]
The USPS traces its roots to 1775 during the Second Continental Congress, when Benjamin Franklin was appointed the first postmaster general; he also served a similar position for the colonies of the Kingdom of Great Britain.[7] The Post Office Department was created in 1792 with the passage of the Postal Service Act. It was elevated to a cabinet-level department in 1872, and was transformed by the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970 into the U.S. Postal Service as an independent agency.[8] Since the early 1980s, many direct tax subsidies to the USPS (with the exception of subsidies for costs associated with disabled and overseas voters) have been reduced or eliminated.[9]
The USPS has a monopoly on "letter" delivery within the U.S. and operates under a universal service obligation (USO), both of which are defined across a broad set of legal mandates, which obligate it to provide uniform price and quality across the entirety of its service area.[10] The Post Office has exclusive access[11] to letter boxes marked "U.S. Mail" and personal letterboxes in the U.S., but has to compete against private package delivery services, such as United Parcel Service, FedEx, and Amazon.[12]
History[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (December 2022)
Further information: United States Post Office Department and Postage stamps and postal history of the United States
On March 18, 1970, postal workers in New York City upset over low wages and poor working conditions, and emboldened by the Civil Rights Movement organized a strike against the United States government. The strike initially involved postal workers in only New York City, but it eventually gained support of over 210,000 U.S. Post Office Department workers across the nation.[13] While the strike ended without any concessions from the Federal government, it did ultimately allow for postal worker unions and the government to negotiate a contract which gave the unions most of what they wanted, as well as the signing of the Postal Reorganization Act by President Richard Nixon on August 12, 1970. The act replaced the cabinet-level Post Office Department with a new federal agency, the U.S. Postal Service,[14] and took effect on July 1, 1971.[15]
See also:
2020 United States Postal Service crisis
Postal Service Reform Act of 2022
Current operations[edit]
Deliveries[edit]
 USPS delivery truck
The USPS is by geography and volume the globe's largest postal system, delivering 47% of the world's mail.[16][better source needed] As of 2021, the USPS operates 31,330 post offices and locations in the U.S., and delivers 128.8 billion pieces of mail annually,[17][18] to 163 million delivery points (as of 2022).[19]
USPS delivers mail and packages Monday through Saturday as required by the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022; on Sundays only Priority Express and packages for Amazon.com are delivered.[20] During the four weeks preceding Christmas since 2013, packages from all mail classes and senders were delivered on Sunday in some areas.[21]
Parcels are also delivered on holidays, with the exception of Thanksgiving and Christmas.[22]
The period between Thanksgiving and Christmas is the busiest time of the year for the USPS with the agency delivering an estimated 900 million packages during the period of 2018.[23]
Fleet[edit]
 A Grumman LLV, the USPS' main type of delivery truck
The USPS operates one of the largest civilian vehicle fleets in the world, with an estimated 227,896 vehicles,[16] the majority of which are the distinctive and unique Chevrolet/Grumman LLV (long-life vehicle), and the similar, newer Ford-Utilimaster FFV (flexible-fuel vehicle), originally also referred to as the CRV (carrier route vehicle). The LLVs were built from 1987 to 1994 and lack air conditioning, airbags, anti-lock brakes, and space for the large modern volume of e-commerce packages, the Grumman fleet ended its expected 24-year lifespan in fiscal year 2017. The LLV replacement process began in 2015, and after numerous delays,[24] a $6 billion contract was awarded in February 2021 to Oshkosh Defense to finalize design and produce 165,000 vehicles over 10 years.[25]
The number of gallons of fuel used in 2009 was 444 million, at a cost of US$1.1 billion.[26] For every penny increase in the national average price of gasoline, the USPS spends an extra US$8 million per year to fuel its fleet.[27] Starting in 2026, all delivery truck purchases are scheduled to be electric vehicles,[19] partly in response to criticism from the Environmental Protection Agency and an environmental lawsuit.[28]
The fleet is notable in that many of its vehicles are right-hand drive, an arrangement intended to give drivers the easiest access to roadside mailboxes. Some rural letter carriers use personal vehicles.[29] All contractors use personal vehicles. Standard postal-owned vehicles do not have license plates. These vehicles are identified by a seven-digit number displayed on the front and rear.[30]
In May 2019, the Postal Service announced that it will be releasing a pilot of self-driving trucks to haul mail across the U.S. The 18-wheelers were developed by startup company, TuSimple. The pilot will last two weeks, making five total round trips to cities across the country.[31]
Military mail[edit]
The Department of Defense and the USPS jointly operate a postal system to deliver mail for the military; this is known as the Army Post Office (for Army and Air Force postal facilities) and the Fleet Post Office (for Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard postal facilities).[32]
Operation and budget[edit]
In Fiscal Year 2021, the Postal Service had $77.06 billion in revenue and expenses of $81.99 billion with a net loss of $4.93 billion.[33]
Revenue decline and planned cuts[edit]
In 2016, the USPS had its fifth straight annual operating loss, in the amount of $5.6 billion, of which $5.8 billion was the accrual of unpaid mandatory retiree health payments.[33]
Declining mail volume[edit]
First-class mail volume peaked in 2001 to 103.65 billion declining to 52.62 billion by 2020[34] due to the increasing use of email and the World Wide Web for correspondence and business transactions.[35] USPS also almost delivered the first email but did not do so.[36]
Private courier services, such as FedEx and United Parcel Service (UPS), directly compete with USPS for the delivery of urgent letters and packages.
Lower volume means lower revenues to support the fixed commitment to deliver to every address once a day, six days a week. According to an official report on November 15, 2012, the U.S. Postal Service lost $15.9 billion its 2012 fiscal year.[37]
Internal streamlining and delivery slowdown[edit]
In response, the USPS has increased productivity each year from 2000 to 2007,[38] through increased automation, route re-optimization, and facility consolidation.[35] Despite these efforts, the organization saw an $8.5 billion budget shortfall in 2010,[39] and was losing money at a rate of about $3 billion per quarter in 2011.[40]
On December 5, 2011, the USPS announced it would close more than half of its mail processing centers, eliminate 28,000 jobs and reduce overnight delivery of First-Class Mail. This will close down 252 of its 461 processing centers.[41] (At peak mail volume in 2006, the USPS operated 673 facilities.[42]) As of May 2012, the plan was to start the first round of consolidation in summer 2012, pause from September to December, and begin a second round in February 2014; 80% of first-class mail would still be delivered overnight through the end of 2013.[43] New delivery standards were issued in January 2015, and the majority of single-piece (not presorted) first-class mail is now being delivered in two days instead of one.[44] Large commercial mailers can still have first-class mail delivered overnight if delivered directly to a processing center in the early morning, though as of 2014 this represented only 11% of first-class mail.[44] Unsorted first-class mail will continue to be delivered anywhere in the contiguous United States within three days.[45]
Post office closures[edit]
In July 2011, the USPS announced a plan to close about 3,700 small post offices. Various representatives in Congress protested, and the Senate passed a bill that would have kept open all post offices farther than 10 miles (16 km) from the next office.[46] In May 2012, the service announced it had modified its plan. Instead, rural post offices would remain open with reduced retail hours (some as little as two hours per day) unless there was a community preference for a different option.[47] In a survey of rural customers, 54% preferred the new plan of retaining rural post offices with reduced hours, 20% preferred the "Village Post Office" replacement (where a nearby private retail store would provide basic mail services with expanded hours), 15% preferred merger with another Post Office, and 11% preferred expanded rural delivery services.[48] Approximately 40% of postal revenue already comes from online purchases or private retail partners including Walmart, Staples, Office Depot, Walgreens, Sam's Club, Costco, and grocery stores.[48] The National Labor Relations Board agreed to hear the American Postal Workers Union's arguments that these counters should be staffed by postal employees who earn far more and have "a generous package of health and retirement benefits".[49][50]
Elimination of Saturday delivery averted[edit]
On January 28, 2009, Postmaster General John E. Potter testified before the Senate[51] that, if the Postal Service could not readjust its payment toward the contractually funding earned employee retiree health benefits, as mandated by the Postal Accountability & Enhancement Act of 2006,[52] the USPS would be forced to consider cutting delivery to five days per week during June, July, and August.
H.R. 22, addressing this issue, passed the House of Representatives and Senate and was signed into law on September 30, 2009.[53] However, Postmaster General Potter continued to advance plans to eliminate Saturday mail delivery.[54]
On June 10, 2009, the National Rural Letter Carriers' Association (NRLCA) was contacted for its input on the USPS's current study of the effect of five-day delivery along with developing an implementation plan for a five-day service plan. A team of Postal Service headquarters executives and staff was given a time frame of sixty days to complete the study. The current concept examines the effect of five-day delivery with no business or collections on Saturday, with Post Offices with current Saturday hours remaining open.
On Thursday, April 15, 2010, the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform held a hearing to examine the status of the Postal Service and recent reports on short and long-term strategies for the financial viability and stability of the USPS entitled "Continuing to Deliver: An Examination of the Postal Service's Current Financial Crisis and its Future Viability". At which, PMG Potter testified that by 2020, the USPS cumulative losses could exceed $238 billion, and that mail volume could drop 15 percent from 2009.[55]
In February 2013, the USPS announced that in order to save about $2 billion per year, Saturday delivery service would be discontinued except for packages, mail-order medicines, Priority Mail, Express Mail, and mail delivered to Post Office boxes, beginning August 10, 2013.[56][57][58][59] However, the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2013, passed in March, reversed the cuts to Saturday delivery.[60]
Retirement funding and payment defaults[edit]
The Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2006 (PAEA)[61] obligated the USPS to fund the present value of earned retirement obligations (essentially past promises which have not yet come due) within a ten-year time span.[62]
The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) is the main bureaucratic organization responsible for the human resources aspect of many federal agencies and their employees. The PAEA created the Postal Service Retiree Health Benefit Fund (PSRHB) after Congress removed the Postal Service contribution to the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS).[clarification needed] Most other employees that contribute to the CSRS have 7% deducted from their wages. Currently, all new employees[which?] contribute into Federal Employee Retirement System (FERS) once they become a full-time regular employees.[63]
Running low on cash, in order to continue operations unaffected and continue to meet payroll, the USPS defaulted for the first time on a $5.5 billion retirement benefits payment due August 1, 2012, and a $5.6 billion payment due September 30, 2012.[64]
On September 30, 2014, the USPS failed to make a $5.7 billion payment on this debt, the fourth such default.[65] In 2017, the USPS defaulted on some of the last lump-sum payments required by the 2006 law, though other payments were also still required.[66]
Proposals to cancel the funding obligation and plan a new schedule for the debt were introduced in Congress as early as 2016.[67] A 2019 bill entitled the "USPS Fairness Act", which would have eliminated the pension funding obligation, passed the House but did not proceed further.[68] As of March 8, 2022, the Postal Service Reform Act of 2022, which includes a section entitled "USPS Fairness Act" cancelling the obligation, has passed both the House and the Senate;[69][70] President Joe Biden signed the bill into law on April 6, 2022.[71]
Rate increases[edit]
Congress has limited rate increases for First-Class Mail to the cost of inflation, unless approved by the Postal Regulatory Commission.[72] A three-cent surcharge above inflation increased the 1 oz (28 g) rate to 49  in January 2014, but this was approved by the commission for two years only.[73]
As of July 10, 2022, first-class postage for up to 1 ounce is $0.60.[74]
Reform proposals and delivery changes[edit]
Robert Reisner - Digital - Email[edit]
Robert Reisner, an undergraduate degree holder from Yale and an MBA degree holder from Harvard, was the agency's first chief president of technology applications in 1993. He helped USPS launch its first website in 1994. He tried to bring USPS into the digital age. He brought a new digital postmark which allowed email to be certified just as the traditional postmark did paper envelopes. Another improvement he did allowed customers to create fliers and catalogs on their home computers and e-mail them to the USPS that delivered them as hard copies. Reisner wanted to bring email service to the USPS. William Henderson, a past Postmaster General, was also interested. Henderson had a plan for every American to get a free email address. He says now,  If we could control millions of mailboxes in the United States effectively, we can certainly control e-mail addresses.   Reisner, tried but was unsuccessful to bring the USPS into the digital age with an email service for the public. Bloomberg Businessweek s Devin Leonard wrote in his book, Neither Snow nor Rain: A History of the United States Postal Service, that if things had gone differently, the first email would have been delivered by your USPS mailman. On the whole there were a failed visionaries, such as Robert Reisner, who tried to turn the United States Postal Service into an internet pioneer but ultimately could not due to it being a bureaucracy that was not willing to adapt.[75]
During the Obama administration[edit]
 A USPS Mailbox
Comprehensive reform packages considered in the 113th Congress include S.1486[76] and H.R.2748.[77] These include the efficiency measure, supported by Postmaster General Patrick Donahoe[78] of ending door-to-door delivery of mail for some or most of the 35 million addresses that currently receive it, replacing that with either curbside boxes or nearby "cluster boxes". This would save $4.5 billion per year out of the $30 billion delivery budget; door-to-door city delivery costs annually on average $353 per stop, curbside $224, and cluster box $160 (and for rural delivery, $278, $176, and $126, respectively).[79][80]
S.1486,[81] also with the support of Postmaster General Donahoe,[82] would also allow the USPS to ship alcohol in compliance with state law, from manufacturers to recipients with ID to show they are over 21. This is projected to raise approximately $50 million per year.[82] (Shipping alcoholic beverages is currently illegal under 18 U.S.C. 1716(f).)
In 2014, the Postal Service was requesting reforms to workers' compensation, moving from a pension to defined contribution retirement savings plan, and paying senior retiree health care costs out of Medicare funds, as is done for private-sector workers.[83]
During the Trump administration[edit]
As part of a June 2018 governmental reorganization plan, the Donald Trump administration proposed turning USPS into "a private postal operator" which could save costs through measures like delivering mail fewer days per week, or delivering to central locations instead of door to door. There was strong bipartisan opposition to the idea in Congress.[84]
In April 2020, Congress approved a $10 billion loan from the Treasury to the post office. According to The Washington Post, officials under Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin suggested using the loan as leverage to give the Treasury Department more influence on USPS operations, including making them raise their charges for package deliveries, a change long sought by President Trump.[85]
In May 2020, in a controversial move, President Trump appointed Louis DeJoy, the first postmaster general in the last two decades who had no prior experience within the United States Postal Service.[86]
DeJoy until 2014 CEO of New Breed Logistics (a controversial Postal Service contractor),[87] and until 2018 a board member its new parent, XPO Logistics, whose postal contracts expanded during DeJoy's postmaster general role was a major donor and fundraiser for the Republican Party[88][89] (from 2017, a deputy finance chairman of the Republican National Committee, until appointed postmaster general, and later million-dollar donor to the 2020 Trump campaign while postmaster general).[88][89][90][91][92][93][94]
DeJoy immediately began taking measures to reduce costs, such as banning overtime and extra trips to deliver mail.[95][96][97] While DeJoy admitted that these measures were causing delays in mail delivery, he said they would eventually improve service.[98]
More than 600 high-speed mail sorting machines were scheduled to be dismantled and removed from postal facilities,[99] raising concerns that mailed ballots for the November 3 election might not reach election offices on time.[100]
Mail collection boxes were removed from the streets in many cities; after photos of boxes being removed were spread on social media, a postal service spokesman said they were being moved to higher traffic areas but that the removals would stop until after the election.[101]
The inspector general for the postal service opened an investigation into the recent changes.[102] On August 16 the House of Representatives was called back from its summer recess to consider a bill rolling back all of the changes.[103]
On August 18, 2020, after days of heavy criticism and the day after lawsuits against the Postal Service and DeJoy personally were filed in federal court by several individuals,[104] DeJoy announced that he would roll back all the changes until after the November election. He said he would reinstate overtime hours, roll back service reductions, and halt the removal of mail-sorting machines and collection boxes.[105] However, 95 percent of the mail sorting machines that were planned for removal had already been removed,[106] and according to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, DeJoy said he has no intention of replacing them or the mail collection boxes.[107]
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 forgave the previous $10 billion loan.[108]
Coronavirus pandemic and voting by mail[edit]
See also: 2020 United States Postal Service crisis
Voting by mail has become an increasingly common practice in the United States, with 25% of voters nationwide mailing their ballots in 2016 and 2018. The coronavirus pandemic of 2020 was predicted to cause a large increase in mail voting because of the possible danger of congregating at polling places.[109] For the 2020 election, a state-by-state analysis concluded that 76% of Americans were eligible to vote by mail in 2020, a record number. The analysis predicted that 80 million ballots could be cast by mail in 2020   more than double the number in 2016.[110] The Postal Service sent a letter to 46 states in July 2020, warning that the service might not be able to meet the state's deadlines for requesting and casting last-minute absentee ballots.[111]
The House of Representatives voted to include an emergency grant of $25 billion to the post office to facilitate the predicted flood of mail ballots.[112] Trump conceded that the post office would need additional funds to handle the additional mail-in voting, but said he would oppose any additional funding so that "universal mail-in voting" would not be possible.[113] On August 14, 2020, President
Trump said he was willing to approve USPS funding if concessions were made to some funding asks in coronavirus relief package.[114]
Governance and organization[edit]
The Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service sets policy, procedure, and postal rates for services rendered. It has a similar role to a corporate board of directors. Of the eleven members of the Board, nine are appointed by the president and confirmed by the U.S. Senate (see 39 U.S.C. 202). The nine appointed members then select the United States postmaster general, who serves as the board's tenth member, and who oversees the day-to-day activities of the service as chief executive officer (see 39 U.S.C. 202 203). The ten-member board then nominates a deputy postmaster general, who acts as chief operating officer, to the eleventh and last remaining open seat.
The independent Postal Regulatory Commission (formerly the Postal Rate Commission) is also controlled by appointees of the president confirmed by the Senate. It oversees postal rates and related concerns, having the authority to approve or reject USPS proposals.
The USPS is often mistaken for a state-owned enterprise or government-owned corporation (e.g., Amtrak) because it operates much like a business. It is, however, an "establishment of the executive branch of the Government of the United States", (39 U.S.C. 201) as it is controlled by presidential appointees and the postmaster general. As a government agency, it has many special privileges, including sovereign immunity, eminent domain powers, powers to negotiate postal treaties with foreign nations, and an exclusive legal right to deliver first-class and third-class mail. Indeed, in 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a unanimous decision "The Postal Service is not subject to antitrust liability. In both form and function, it is not a separate antitrust person from the United States but is part of the Government, and so is not controlled by the antitrust laws" such as the Sherman Antitrust Act.[115] Unlike a state-owned enterprise, the USPS lacks a transparent ownership structure and is not subject to standard rules and norms that apply to commercial entities. The USPS also lacks commercial discretion and control.[116]
The U.S. Supreme Court has also upheld the USPS's statutory monopoly on access to letter boxes against a First Amendment freedom of speech challenge; it thus remains illegal in the U.S. for anyone, other than the employees and agents of the USPS, to deliver mailpieces to letter boxes marked "U.S. Mail".[117]
The Postal Service also has a Mailers' Technical Advisory Committee and local Postal Customer Councils, which are advisory and primarily involve business customers.[118]
The USPS assigns city names to various postal addresses; these assignments do not always correspond with municipal boundaries. Mailing address names may stay the same even if city boundaries change.[119]
Privatization proposals[edit]
Since the 1990s, Republicans have been discussing the idea of privatizing the U.S. Postal Service.[120] President Trump's administration proposed turning USPS into "a private postal operator" as part of a June 2018 governmental reorganization plan, although there was strong bipartisan opposition to the idea in Congress.[84]
On December 17, 2017, President Trump criticized the postal service's relationship with Amazon. In a post on Twitter, he stated: "Why is the United States Post Office, which is losing many billions of dollars a year, while charging Amazon and others so little to deliver their packages, making Amazon richer and the Post Office dumber and poorer? Should be charging MUCH MORE!"[121] Amazon maintains that the Postal Service makes a profit from its contract with the company.[122]  On June 21, 2018, Trump proposed a sweeping reorganization but Congress did not act.[123]
Lisa Graves has documented decades-long efforts to privatize the U.S. Postal Service through driving the public service to financial collapse.[124][125][126] The Council on Foreign Relations brings up the idea of bringing USPS online with a digital identity via an email address.[127] USPS explored a digital identity using an email address in its "Digital Identity   Opportunities for the Postal Service" report in 2012.[128]
Universal service obligation and monopoly status[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Legal basis and rationale[edit]
Article I, section 8, Clause 7 of the U.S. Constitution grants Congress the power to establish post offices and post roads,[129] which has been interpreted as a de facto Congressional monopoly over the delivery of first-class residential mail which has been defined as non-urgent residential letters (not packages). Accordingly, no other system for delivering first-class residential mail public or private has been tolerated, absent Congress's consent.[citation needed]
The mission of the Postal Service is to provide the American public with trusted universal postal service. While not explicitly defined, the Postal Service's universal service obligation (USO) is broadly outlined in statute and includes multiple dimensions: geographic scope, range of products, access to services and facilities, delivery frequency, affordable and uniform pricing, service quality, and security of the mail. While other carriers may claim to voluntarily provide delivery on a broad basis, the Postal Service is the only carrier with a legal obligation to provide all the various aspects of universal service.[130]
Proponents of universal service principles claim that since any obligation must be matched by the financial capability to meet that obligation, the postal monopoly was put in place as a funding mechanism for the USO, and it has been in place for over a hundred years. It consists of two parts: the Private Express Statutes (PES) and the mailbox access rule. The PES refer to the Postal Service's monopoly on the delivery of letters, and the mailbox rule refers to the Postal Service's exclusive access to customer mailboxes.[131]
Proponents of universal service principles further claim that eliminating or reducing the PES or mailbox rule would affect the ability of the Postal Service to provide affordable universal service. If, for example, the PES and the mailbox rule were to be eliminated, and the USO maintained, then either billions of dollars in tax revenues or some other source of funding would have to be found.[131]
Some proponents[by whom?][132] of universal service principles suggest that private communications that are protected by the veil of government promote the exchange of free ideas and communications. This separates private communications from the ability of a private for-profit or non-profit organization to corrupt. Security for the individual is in this way protected by the United States Post Office, maintaining confidentiality and anonymity, as well as government employees being much less likely to be instructed by superiors to engage in nefarious spying.[citation needed] It is seen by some[by whom?] as a dangerous step to extract the universal service principle from the post office, as the untainted nature of private communications is preserved as assurance of the protection of individual freedom of privacy.[133]
However, as the recent notice of a termination of mail service to residents of the Frank Church River of No Return Wilderness indicates, mail service has been contracted to private firms such as Arnold Aviation for many decades. KTVB-TV reported:[134]
"We cannot go out every week and pick up our mail ... it's impossible", said Heinz Sippel. "Everyone gets their mail. Why can't we?" said Sue Anderson. Getting mail delivered, once a week, by airplane is not a luxury, it's a necessity for those who live in Idaho's vast wilderness those along the Salmon and Selway rivers. It's a service that's been provided to them for more than half a century mostly by Ray Arnold of Arnold Aviation.
The decision was reversed; U.S. Postmaster General John Potter indicated that acceptable service to back country customers could not be achieved in any other fashion than continuing an air mail contract with Arnold Aviation to deliver the mail.[135]
2008 report on universal postal service and the postal monopoly[edit]
The Postal Act of 2006 required the Postal Regulatory Commission (PRC) to submit a report to the president and Congress on universal postal service and the postal monopoly in December 2008. The report must include any recommended changes. The Postal Service report supports the requirement that the PRC is to consult with and solicit written comments from the Postal Service. In addition, the Government Accountability Office was required to evaluate broader business model issues by 2011.
On October 15, 2008, the Postal Service submitted a report[10] to the PRC on its position related to the Universal Service Obligation (USO). It said no changes to the USO and restriction on mailbox access were necessary at that time, but increased regulatory flexibility was required to ensure affordable universal service in the future.
In February 2013, the Postal Service announced that starting August 2013, Saturday delivery would be discontinued. Congress traditionally includes a provision in an annual continuing resolution that requires six-day delivery; it did so again in March 2013, and the Postal Service was forced to continue Saturday delivery.[136]
Obligations of the USO include uniform prices, quality of service, access to services, and six-day delivery to every part of the country. To assure financial support for these obligations, the postal monopoly provides the Postal Service the exclusive right to deliver letters and restricts mailbox access solely for mail. The report argued that eliminating or reducing either aspect of the monopoly "would have a devastating impact on the ability ... to provide the affordable universal service that the country values so highly". Relaxing access to the mailbox would also pose security concerns, increase delivery costs, and hurt customer service, according to the Post Office. The report notes:
It is somewhat misleading to characterize the mailbox rule as a "monopoly," because the enforcement of 18 U.S.C. 1725 leaves customers with ample alternative means of delivering their messages. Customers can deliver their messages either by paying postage, by placing messages on or under a door or a doormat, by using newspaper or non-postal boxes, by telephoning or emailing, by engaging in person-to-person delivery in public areas, by tacking or taping their notices on a door post, or by placing advertisements in local newspapers. These methods are comparable in efficacy to communication via the mailbox. 
Most of these alternatives are not actually free in some communities. For example, in the Chicago metropolitan area and many other major metros one must get a background check from police and pay a daily fee for the right to solicit or post commercial messages on private property.[citation needed]
Regarding the monopoly on delivery of letters, the report notes that the monopoly is not complete, as there is an exception for letters where either the amount paid for private carriage of the letter equals at least six times the current rate for the first ounce of a single-piece First-Class Mail letter (also known as the "base rate" or "base tariff") or the letter weighs at least 12.5 ounces.
The Postal Service said that the USO should continue to be broadly defined and there should be no changes to the postal monopoly. Any changes would have far-reaching effects on customers and the trillion dollar mailing industry. "A more rigidly defined USO would  ... ultimately harm the American public and businesses," according to the report, which cautions that any potential change must be studied carefully and the effects fully understood.
Competitors[edit]
 USPS Terminal Annex building in Los Angeles
FedEx and United Parcel Service (UPS) directly compete with USPS Express Mail and package delivery services, making nationwide deliveries of urgent letters and packages. Due to the postal monopoly, they are not allowed to deliver non-urgent letters and may not directly ship to U.S. Mail boxes at residential and commercial destinations. However, both companies have transit agreements with the USPS in which an item can be dropped off with either FedEx or UPS who will then provide shipment up to the destination post office serving the intended recipient where it will be transferred for delivery to the U.S. Mail destination, including Post Office Box destinations.[137][138] These services also deliver packages which are larger and heavier than USPS will accept. DHL Express was the third major competitor until February 2009, when it ceased domestic delivery operations in the United States.
A variety of other transportation companies in the United States move cargo around the country, but either have limited geographic scope for delivery points, or specialize in items too large to be mailed. Many of the thousands of courier companies focus on same-day delivery, for example, by bicycle messenger.
Although USPS and FedEx are direct competitors, USPS contracts with FedEx for air transport of 2 3 Day Priority Mail [139] and Priority Mail Express (typically delivered overnight).[140] Amazon controls one-fifth of the delivery market, and is on track to overtake UPS and even the US Postal Service (USPS), according to data from the logistics firm Pitney Bowes.[141] Amazon Drone Delivery service is in USPS territory as well.[142]
Alternative transmission methods[edit]
The Post Office Department owned and operated the first public telegraph lines in the United States, starting in 1844 from Washington to Baltimore, and eventually extending to New York, Boston, Buffalo, and Philadelphia. In 1847, the telegraph system was privatized, except for a period during World War I, when it was used to accelerate the delivery of letters arriving at night.[143]
Between 1942 and 1945, "V-Mail" (for "Victory Mail") service was available for military mail. Letters were converted into microfilm and reprinted near the destination, to save room on transport vehicles for military cargo.[144]
In 1970, Western Union in co-operation with the Postal Service introduced the "Mailgram", a special type of telegram offered by Western Union intended for bulk mailing to multiple addressees. The sender would contact WU and submit to them the message to be sent and a list of addressees to mail the requested Mailgrams to. The message and address data were then sent electronically over Western Union's terrestrial network normally used for standard telegrams, with WU's Westar 1 satellite used instead starting in 1974 with its launch, for Mailgram transmission to participating Postal Service centers, who would then print and mail the Mailgrams to the requested addressees.
Similar to WU's Mailgrams was Electronic Computer Originated Mail, offered by the Postal Service from 1982 to 1985. Also known as E-COM, it too was used for bulk mailings. Text was transmitted electronically to one of 25 post offices nationwide. The Postal Service would print the mail and put it in special envelopes bearing a blue E-COM logo. Delivery was assured within two days.[145]
To improve accuracy and efficiency, the Postal Service introduced the Intelligent Mail program to complement the ZIP code system. This system, which was intended to replace the deprecated POSTNET system, allows bulk mailers to use pre-printed bar codes to assist in mail delivery and sorting. Additional features, called Enhanced, or Full-Service, Intelligent Mail Barcodes allow for mail tracking of bulk mail through the postal system up to the final delivery Post Office.[146]
Criticism of the universal service requirement and the postal monopoly[edit]
Critics of the universal service requirement and the statutory postal monopoly include several professional economists advocating for the privatization of the mail delivery system, or at least a relaxation of the universal service model that currently exists.[147] Rick Geddes argued in 2000:[148]
First, basic economics implies that rural customers are unlikely to be without service under competition; they would simply have to pay the true cost of delivery to them, which may or may not be lower than under monopoly.
Second, basic notions of fairness imply that the cross-subsidy should be eliminated. To the extent that people make choices about where they live, they should assume the costs of that decision.
Third, there is no reason why the government monopoly is necessary to ensure service to sparsely populated areas. The government could easily award competitive contracts to private firms for that service.
Fourth, early concerns that rural residents of the United States would somehow become isolated without federally subsidized mail delivery today are simply unfounded. ... Once both sender and receiver have access to a computer, the marginal cost of sending an electronic message is close to zero.
Furthermore, some economists have argued that because public enterprises may pursue objectives different than profit maximization, they might have more of an incentive than profit-maximizing firms to behave anticompetitively through policies such as predatory pricing, misstating costs, and creating barriers to entry.[149] To resolve those issues, one economist proposes a cost-allocation model that would determine the optimal allocation of USPS's common costs by finding the share of costs that would maximize USPS profits from its competitive products.[150] Postal regulators could use such a cost model to ensure that the Postal Service is not abusing its statutory monopoly by subsidizing price cuts in competitive product markets with revenue obtained from the monopolized market.[151]
Law enforcement agencies[edit]
Under the Mail Cover Program USPS photographs the front and back of every piece of U.S. mail as part of the sorting process, enabling law enforcement to obtain address information and images of the outsides of mail as part of an investigation without the need for a warrant.[152]
 The Food and Drug Administration inspects packages for illegal drug shipments
Postal Inspection Service[edit]
The United States Postal Inspection Service (USPIS) is one of the oldest law enforcement agencies in the U.S. Founded by Benjamin Franklin on August 7, 1775, its mission is to protect the Postal Service, its employees, and its customers from crime and protect the nation's mail system from criminal misuse.[153]
Postal Inspectors enforce over 200 federal laws providing for the protection of mail in investigations of crimes that may adversely affect or fraudulently use the U.S. Mail, the postal system or postal employees.
The USPIS has the power to enforce the USPS monopoly by conducting search and seizure raids on entities they suspect of sending non-urgent mail through overnight delivery competitors. According to the American Enterprise Institute, a private conservative think tank, the USPIS raided Equifax offices in 1993 to ascertain if the mail they were sending through Federal Express was truly "extremely urgent". It was found that the mail was not, and Equifax was fined $30,000.[154][155]
The PIS oversees the activities of the Postal Police Force who patrol and secure major postal facilities in the United States.[156]
Office of Inspector General[edit]
The United States Postal Service Office of Inspector General (OIG) was authorized by law in 1996. Prior to the 1996 legislation, the Postal Inspection Service performed the duties of the OIG. The inspector general, who is independent of postal management, is appointed by and reports directly to the nine presidentially appointed, Senate confirmed members of the Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service.
The primary purpose of the OIG is to prevent, detect and report fraud, waste and program abuse, and promote efficiency in the operations of the Postal Service. The OIG has "oversight" responsibility for all activities of the Postal Inspection Service.
How delivery services work[edit]
Elements of addressing and preparing domestic mail[edit]
See also: Address  United States
All mailable articles (e.g., letters, flats, machinable parcels, irregular parcels, etc.) shipped within the United States must comply with an array of standards published in the USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM).[157] Before addressing the mailpiece, one must first comply with the various mailability standards relating to attributes of the actual mailpiece such as: minimum/maximum dimensions[158] and weight, acceptable mailing containers, proper mailpiece sealing/closure, utilization of various markings, and restrictions relating to various hazardous (e.g., explosives, flammables, etc.) and restricted (e.g., cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, etc.) materials, as well as others articulated in  601 of the DMM.[159]
The USPS specifies the following key elements when preparing the face of a mailpiece:
Proper Placement: The Delivery Address should be left-justified and located roughly in the center of mailpiece's largest side. More precisely, on a letter-size piece, the recommended address placement is within the optical character reader (OCR) read area, which is a space on the address side of the mailpiece defined by these boundaries: Left: 1 2 inch (13 mm) from the left edge of the piece; Right: 1 2 inch (13 mm) from the right edge of the piece; Top: 2+3 4 inches (70 mm) from the bottom edge of the piece; Bottom: 5 8 inch (16 mm) from the bottom edge of the piece.[160] Preferred placement of a return address is in the upper left portion of the mailpiece on the side of the piece bearing postage.[161] Finally, postage (e.g., stamps, meter imprints, information-based indicia (IBI), etc.) is to be affixed in the upper right corner of the address side of the mail cover. Any stamp/indicia partly concealed or otherwise obscured by an overlapping stamp/indicia may not be counted as valid postage.[162]
Delivery Address (party receiving mail): The mail piece must have the address of the intended recipient, visible and legible, only on the side of the mail piece bearing postage. Generally, the name of the addressee should be included above the address itself. A ZIP+4 code will facilitate delivery.[163]
Return Address (party sending mail): A return address tells the USPS where the sender wants the mail returned if it is undeliverable. Usage of a return address is required for some postal services (including Priority Mail, Express Mail, Periodicals in envelopes or wrappers, Insured Mail, Registered Mail, and parcel services).[164]
Postage Payment: All mailpieces must include appropriate valid postage. Postage payment may be in the form of stamps, stamped stationery, precanceled stamps, postage meter imprints and PC Postage products ("Postage Evidencing Systems"), or permit imprint (indicia).[165] Members of the U.S. Congress, among others, have franking privileges, which require only a signature. Domestic First-Class Mail costs 58  for envelopes (40 cents for post cards) and upwards, depending on the weight and dimensions of the letter and the class.
Mail going to naval vessels is known as the Fleet Post Office (FPO) and to Army or Air Force installations use the city abbreviation APO (Army Post Office or Air Force Post Office).
Undeliverable mail that cannot be readily returned, including mail without a return address, is treated as dead mail at a Mail Recovery Center in Atlanta, Georgia or Saint Paul, Minnesota.
 Sticker promoting ZIP Code use
The format of the address is as follows:
Line 1: Name of recipient
Line 2: Street address or P.O. Box
Line 3: City, State (ISO 3166-2:US code or APO/FPO code) and ZIP+4 code
Example:
Customer Name
1 Montgomery Street
San Francisco CA 94104-5516
The USPS maintains a list of proper abbreviations.[166]
The format of a return address is similar. Though some style manuals recommend using a comma between the city and state name when typesetting addresses in other contexts, for optimal automatic character recognition, the Post Office does not recommend this when addressing mail. The official recommendation is to use all upper case block letters with proper formats and abbreviations, and leave out all punctuation except for the hyphen in the ZIP+4 code. If the address is unusually formatted or illegible enough, it will require hand-processing, delaying that particular item. The USPS publishes the entirety of their postal addressing standards.[167]
Postal address verification tools and services are offered by the USPS and third-party companies to help ensure mail is deliverable by fixing formatting, appending information such as ZIP Code and validating the address is a valid delivery point. Customers can look up ZIP Codes and verify addresses using USPS Web Tools available on the official USPS website and Facebook page, as well as on third-party sites.[168]
Delivery Point Validation[edit]
Delivery Point Validation (DPV) provides the highest level of address accuracy checking. In a DPV process, the address is checked against the AMS data file to ensure that it exists as an active delivery point.[169] The USPS provides DPV on their website as part of the ZIP Code Lookup tool; there are also companies that offer services to perform DPV in bulk.
Paying postage[edit]
The actual postage can be paid via:[170]
Stamps purchased online at usps.com, at a post office, from a stamp vending machine or "Automated Postal Center" which can also handle packages, or from a third party (such as a grocery store)
Pre-cancelled stamps for bulk mailings[171]
Postal meter
Prepaid envelope
Shipping label purchased online and printed by the customer on standard paper (e.g., with Click-N-Ship, or via a third-party such as PayPal or Amazon shipping)
All unused U.S. postage stamps issued since 1861 are still valid as postage at their indicated value. Stamps with no value shown or denominated by a letter are also still valid, although the value depends upon the particular stamp. For some stamps issued without a printed value, the current value is the original value. But some stamps beginning in 1988 or earlier, including Forever Stamps (issued from April 2007) and all first-class, first-ounce stamps issued from January 21, 2011, the value is the current value of a first-class-mail first-ounce stamp. The USPS calls these Forever Stamps but the generic name is non-denominated postage.
Forever stamps are sold at the First-Class Mail postage rate at the time of purchase, but will always be valid for First-Class Mail, up to 1 ounce (28 g), no matter how rates rise in the future.[172] Britain has had a similar stamp since 1989. The cost of mailing a 1 oz (28 g) First-Class letter increased to 60 cents on July 10, 2022.[173]
Postage meters[edit]
Main article: Postage meter
A postage meter is a mechanical device used to create and apply physical evidence of postage (or franking) to mailed matter. Postage meters are regulated by a country's postal authority; for example, in the United States, the United States Postal Service specifies the rules for the creation, support, and use of postage meters. A postage meter imprints an amount of postage, functioning as a postage stamp, a cancellation and a dated postmark all in one. The meter stamp serves as proof of payment and eliminates the need for adhesive stamps.
PC Postage[edit]
In addition to using standard stamps, postage can now be printed in the form of an electronic stamp, or e-stamp, from a personal computer using a system called Information Based Indicia. This online PC Postage method relies upon application software on the customer's computer contacting a postal security device at the office of the postal service.[174]
PC Postage providers include:
Stamps.com (founded 1996, headquartered in El Segundo, California)
EasyPost (founded 2012, headquartered in San Francisco, California)[175]
Other electronic postage payment methods[edit]
Electronic Verification System (eVS)[176] is the Postal Service's integrated mail management technology that centralizes payment processing and electronic postage reports. Part of an evolving suite of USPS electronic payment services called PostalOne!,[177] eVS allows mailers shipping large volumes of parcels through the Postal Service a way to circumvent use of hard-copy manifests, postage statements and drop-shipment verification forms. Instead, mailers can pay postage automatically through a centralized account and track payments online.
Beginning in August 2007, the Postal Service began requiring mailers shipping Parcel Select packages using a permit imprint to use eVS for manifesting their packages.
Stamp copyright and reproduction[edit]
All U.S. postage stamps issued under the former United States Post Office Department and other postage items that were released before 1978 are not subject to copyright, but stamp designs since 1978 are copyrighted.[178] The United States Copyright Office in section 313.6(C)(1) of the Third Edition of the Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices holds that "Works prepared by officers or employees of the U.S. Postal Service ... are not considered works of the U.S. Government"[179] and are therefore eligible for registration. Thus, the USPS holds copyright to such materials released since 1978 under Title 17 of the United States Code. Written permission is required for use of copyrighted postage stamp images, although under USPS rules, permission is "generally" not required for "educational use", "news reporting" or "philatelic advertising use", but users must cite USPS as the source of the image and include language such as "United States Postal Service. All rights reserved."[180]
Service level choices[edit]
This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (September 2016)
General domestic services[edit]
 Former Tyvek envelope design for Express Mail before July 28, 2013
As of April 2011, domestic postage levels for low-volume mailers include:
Priority Mail Express (formerly Express Mail): Overnight delivery guaranteed to most locations[181]
1 or 2 day delivery guarantee
Delivery guaranteed by 6 PM (as of May 23, 2021[update])[182]
$100 insurance included.
Tracking included.
Flat Rate envelopes are available $26.35 postage. Otherwise, pricing varies by weight and distance.
Priority Mail: Day specific delivery service ranging from 1 to 3 days depending on origin of shipment (not guaranteed)
As of January 27, 2013, tracking via Delivery Confirmation is now included on all Priority Mail shipments.[181]
Flat Rate envelopes and boxes (various sizes) are available free from the Postal Store. Otherwise, pricing varies by weight, size and distance.
$50 insurance for retail/$100 insurance for commercial starting on July 28, 2013.
Tracking Included
First-Class Mail
2- to 3-day delivery.[181]
In most cases for letters and small packages.
Rate varies by size and weight, but not distance.
Postcards (5    3.5    0.007 to 6    4.25    0.016    [127   89   0.18 to 152   108   0.4 mm]): 40 
Letters (up to 11.5    6.125    0.25   , 3.5 oz [292   156   6.4 mm, 100 g]): 58  + 20  for each additional ounce stamped, 53  + 20  for each additional ounce metered
Large Envelope or Flat (up to 15    12    0.75   , 13 oz [381   305   19 mm, 370 g]): $1.16 + 20  each additional ounce (28 g). Must be rectangular, uniformly thick, and not too rigid.
First class package service
Rate varies by weight and distance.
Package/Parcel (Up to 108 inches (270 cm) length plus girth, 13 ounces (370 g): $3.80-$4.20 up to 4 ounces, $4.60-$5.00 up to 8 ounces, $5.90-$6.50 up to 13 ounces
USPS Retail Ground (formerly Parcel Post)
Slowest but cheapest service for packages too large or heavy for First Class uses surface transport.
2- to 9-day service to contiguous U.S., 4 14 days internal to AK/HI/territories, 3 6 weeks between mainland and outlying areas (travels by ship).[181]
Variable pricing by weight, size and distance.
Free forwarding if recipient has filed change-of-address form, or return if the item is undeliverable.
Media Mail formerly "Book Rate"
Books and recorded media only.
No advertising.
Pricing by weight only.
Transit time similar to Parcel Post.
Cheaper than Parcel Post but only due to increased restrictions on package contents.
Library Mail
Similar to Media Mail, but cheaper and restricted to academic institutions, public libraries, museums, etc.
The Post Office will not deliver packages heavier than 70 pounds (32 kg) or if the length (the package's longest dimension) plus the girth (the measurement around the package at its largest point in the two shorter dimensions) is greater than 108 inches (270 cm) combine or 130 inches [330 cm] for Retail Ground.[181]
Bulk mail[edit]
See also: Bulk mail
 USPS Dodge Caravan used for residential delivery in Omaha, Nebraska
 USPS-operated minivan serving in the LLV's role
 A USPS truck in the snow
Discounts are available for large volumes of mail. Depending on the postage level, certain conditions might be required or optional for an additional discount:
Minimum number of pieces
Weight limits
Ability for the USPS to process by machine
Addresses formatting standardized
USPS-readable barcode
Sorted by three-digit ZIP code prefix, five-digit ZIP code, ZIP+4, or 11-digit delivery point
Delivered in trays, bundles, or pallets partitioned by destination
Delivered directly to a regional Bulk Mail Center, destination SCF, or destination Post Office
Certification of mailing list accuracy and freshness (e.g., correct ZIP codes, purging of stale addresses, processing of change-of-address notifications)
In addition to bulk discounts on Express, Priority, and First-Class Mail, the following postage levels are available for bulk mailers:
Periodicals
Standard Mail (A)
Automation
Enhanced Carrier Route
Regular
Standard Mail (B)
Parcel Post
Bound Printed Matter   Cheaper than Media Mail, for advertising catalogs, phone books, etc. up to 15 lb[183]
Special Standard Mail
Library Mail
Nonprofit
Extra services[edit]
 A Long Life Vehicle seen in Guam
Depending on the type of mail, additional services are available for an additional fee:[184]
Certificate of Mailing provides proof of the date a package was mailed.
Certified Mail provides proof of mailing, and a delivery record. Used for serving legal documents and for sending U.S. Government classified information, up to the "confidential" level.
Collect on Delivery (C.O.D.) allows merchants to offer customers an option to pay upon delivery, up to $1,000. Includes insurance.
USPS Tracking provides proof of delivery to sorting facilities, local post office and destination, but no signature is required.
Insurance is shipping insurance against loss or damage for the value of the goods mailed. Amount of coverage can be specified, up to $5,000.
Registered Mail is used for highly valuable or irreplaceable items, and classified information up to the "secret" level.[185] Registered mail is transported separately from other mail, in locked containers. Tracking is included and insurance up to $25,000 is available.[186]
Restricted Delivery requires delivery to a specific person or their authorized agent, not just to a mailbox.
Return Receipt actively sends signature confirmation back to the sender by postcard or emailed PDF (as opposed to merely putting this information into the online tracking system).
Signature Confirmation requires a delivery signature, which is kept on file. The online tracking system displays the first initial and last name of the signatory.
Special Handling is for unusual items, like live animals.
International services[edit]
 Packages awaiting inspection at the International Mail Facility in JFK airport
In May 2007, the USPS restructured international service names to correspond with domestic shipping options. Formerly, USPS International services[187] were categorized as Airmail (Letter Post), Economy (Surface) Parcel Post, Airmail Parcel Post, Global Priority, Global Express, and Global Express Guaranteed Mail. The former Airmail (Letter Post) is now First-Class Mail International,[188][189] and includes small packages weighing up to four pounds (1.8 kg). Economy Parcel Post was discontinued for international service, while Airmail Parcel Post was replaced by Priority Mail International. Priority Mail International Flat-Rate packaging in various sizes was introduced, with the same conditions of service previously used for Global Priority. Global Express is now Express Mail International, while Global Express Guaranteed is unchanged. The international mailing classes with a tracking ability are Express, Express Guaranteed, and Priority (except that tracking is not available for Priority Mail International Flat Rate Envelopes or Priority Mail International Small Flat Rate Boxes).[190]
One of the major changes in the new naming and services definitions is that USPS-supplied mailing boxes for Priority and Express mail are now allowed for international use. These services are offered to ship letters and packages to almost every country and territory on the globe. The USPS provides much of this service by contracting with a private parcel service, FedEx.[191]
 An m-bag
The USPS provides an M-bag[192] service for international shipment of printed matter;[193] previously surface M-bags existed, but with the 2007 elimination of surface mail, only airmail M-bags remain.[194] The term "M-bag" is not expanded in USPS publications; M-bags are simply defined as "direct sacks of printed matter ... sent to a single foreign addressee at a single address";[193] however, the term is sometimes referred to informally as "media bag", as the bag can also contain "discs, tapes, and cassettes", in addition to books, for which the usual umbrella term is "media"; some also refer to them as "mail bags".
Military mail is billed at domestic rates when being sent from the United States to a military outpost, and is free when sent by deployed military personnel. The overseas logistics are handled by the Military Postal Service Agency in the Department of Defense.[195] Outside of forward areas and active operations, military mail First-Class takes 7 10 days, Priority 10 15 days, and Parcel Post about 24 days.[181]
Three independent countries with a Compact of Free Association with the U.S. (Palau, the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia) have a special relationship with the United States Postal Service:
Each associated state maintains its own government-run mail service for delivery to and pickup from retail customers.[196][197][198]
The associated states are integrated into the USPS addressing and ZIP code system.
The USPS is responsible for transporting mail between the United States and the associated states,[196] and between the individual states of the Federated States of Micronesia.[198]
The associated states synchronize postal services and rates with the USPS.
The USPS treats mail to and from the associated states as domestic mail.[199] Incoming mail does require customs declarations because, like some U.S. territories, the associated states are outside the main customs territory of the United States.[200]
The discontinuation of international surface mail[edit]
For more information about surface mail, see Surface mail.
In 2007, the US Postal Service discontinued its outbound international surface mail ("sea mail") service,[201] mainly because of increased costs. Returned undeliverable surface parcels had become an expensive problem for the USPS, since it was often required to take such parcels back.[202]
Domestic surface mail (now "Retail Ground" or "Commercial Parcel Select") remains available.
Alternatives to international surface mail include:
International Surface Air Lift (ISAL). The service includes neither tracking nor insurance;[203] but it may be possible to purchase shipping insurance from a third-party company.
USPS Commercial ePacket. The service is trackable.
Ordinary first-class international airmail.
Senders can access the International Surface Air Lift and ePacket services through postal wholesalers. Some examples of such wholesalers include:
Asendia USA (accessible through the Shippo website to users who have an Asendia account),[204]
Globegistics (now owned by Asendia), and
APC Postal Logistics.
If a sender sends an ISAL mailing directly through the USPS (without a wholesaler as an intermediary), the minimum weight is 50 pounds per mailing.[205]
Sorting and delivery process[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Mail flow through national infrastructure
Processing of standard sized envelopes and cards is highly automated, including reading of handwritten addresses. Mail from individual customers and public USPS mailboxes is collected by letter carriers into plastic tubs, which are taken to one of approximately 251 Processing and Distribution Centers (P&DCs) across the United States. Each P&DC sorts mail for a given region (typically with a radius of around 200 miles (320 km)) and connects with the national network for interregional mail.[206] During the 2010s, the USPS consolidated mail sorting for large regions into the P&DCs on the basis that most mail is addressed to faraway destinations,[207] but for cities at the edge of a P&DC's region, this means all locally addressed mail must now travel long distances (that is, to and from the P&DC for sorting) to reach nearby addresses.[208]
At the P&DC, mail is emptied into hampers which are then automatically dumped into a Dual Pass Rough Cull System (DPRCS). As mail travels through the DPRCS, large items, such as packages and mail bundles, are removed from the stream. As the remaining mail enters the first machine for processing standard mail, the Advanced Facer-Canceler System (AFCS), pieces that passed through the DPRCS but do not conform to physical dimensions for processing in the AFCS (e.g., large envelopes or overstuffed standard envelopes) are automatically diverted from the stream. Mail removed from the DPRCS and AFCS is manually processed or sent to parcel sorting machines.
In contrast to the previous system, which merely canceled and postmarked the upper right corner of the envelope, thereby missing any stamps which were inappropriately placed, the AFCS locates indicia (stamp or metered postage mark) regardless of the orientation of the mailpiece as it enters the machine, and cancels it by applying a postmark. Detection of indicia enables the AFCS to determine the orientation of each mailpiece and sort it accordingly. The AFCS rotates and flips over mailpieces as needed, so all mail is sorted right-side up and faced in the same direction in each output bin.
Mail is sorted by the AFCS into three categories: mail already affixed with a bar code and addressed (such as business reply envelopes and cards); mail with machine printed (typed) addresses; and mail with handwritten addresses.
Mail with typed addresses goes to a Multiline Optical Character Reader (MLOCR) which reads the ZIP Code and address information and prints the appropriate bar code onto the envelope (formerly POSTNET, now Intelligent Mail). Mail with handwritten addresses and illegible typed addresses is diverted from the mailstream to the Remote Bar Coding System (RBCS). Images of such mailpieces are transmitted through RBCS to the Remote Encoding Center, where humans (data entry clerks) read each image and type in the most likely address. Each mailpiece held for RBCS processing is sprayed with an ID Tag, a fluorescent bar code. When address data comes back from the Remote Encoding Center, RBCS uses the ID Tag bar code to identify the corresponding mailpiece and prints the appropriate bar code, then returns the mailpiece to the mailstream.
Processed mail is imaged by the Mail Isolation Control and Tracking (MICT) system to allow easier tracking of hazardous substances. Images are taken at more than 200 mail processing centers, and are destroyed after being retained for 30 days.[209]
If a customer has filed a change of address card and his or her mail is detected in the mailstream with the old address, the mailpiece is sent to a machine that automatically connects to a Computerized Forwarding System database to determine the new address. If this address is found, the machine will paste a label over the former address with the current address and the appropriate bar code. The mail is returned to the mailstream to be forwarded to the addressee's new location.
Mail with addresses that cannot be read and bar coded by any of the foregoing automated systems is separated for human intervention. Local postal workers can read the address and manually codes and sorts mail according to the ZIP Code on the article. If the address still cannot be read, mail is either returned to the sender (First-Class Mail with a valid return address) or is sent to the Mail Recovery Center in Atlanta, Georgia (formerly known as the dead letter office). At this office, the mail is opened to try to find an address to forward to. If an address is found, the contents are resealed and delivered. Otherwise, the items are held for 90 days in case of inquiry by the customer; if they are not claimed, they are either destroyed or auctioned off at the monthly Postal Service Unclaimed Parcel auction to raise money for the service.
Once the mail is bar coded, it is automatically sorted by a Delivery Bar Code Sorter (DBCS) that reads the bar code, identifies the destination of the mailpiece, and sends it to an appropriate tray that corresponds to the next segment of its journey.
There are necessarily two P&DCs for every domestic mailpiece which correspond to the regions in which the sender and recipient are located. The USPS calls these, respectively, the origination and destination P&DCs. Mail for which they are the same (because the senders are located in the same region as the recipients) is either trucked to the appropriate local post office, or kept in the building for carrier routes served directly from the P&DC itself. Out-of-region mail is trucked to the closest airport and then flown, usually as baggage on commercial airlines, to the airport nearest the destination station. At the destination P&DC, mail is once again read by a DBCS which sorts items to local post offices; this includes grouping mailpieces by individual letter-carrier route.
At the carrier route level, 95% of letters arrive pre-sorted;[206] the remaining mail must be sorted by hand. The Post Office is working to increase the percentage of automatically sorted mail, including a pilot program to sort "flats".[210]
FedEx provides air transport service to USPS for Priority and Express Mail. Priority Mail and Express Mail are transported from Priority Mail processing centers to the closest FedEx-served airport, where they are handed off to FedEx. FedEx then flies them to the destination airport and hands them back to USPS for transport to the local post office and delivery.
After consolidating sorting work into the P&DCs, the USPS in August 2022 initiated a pilot program to consolidate delivery work into Sorting and Delivery Centers (S&DCs). As of 2022, the USPS was still running "delivery units" out of most of its post offices, meaning that most carrier routes are based at post offices and there are dozens of delivery units in each metropolitan area. The USPS plans to merge many delivery units in each metropolitan area into S&DCs, which implies many letter carriers will have to endure longer commutes to S&DCs and drive longer delivery routes, while many post offices will be reduced to retail stores with no back-end mail processing capability on site. However, the USPS hopes to save money on the trucking fleet moving mail between its facilities.[211]
Types of postal facilities[edit]
 Historic main post office in Tomah, Wisconsin
 A typical post office station in the Spring Branch area of Houston, Texas
 A combined Post Office, Customs House, and Federal Court House in Galveston, Texas
 Floating post office, Halibut Cove, Alaska
Although its retail postal facilities are called post offices in regular speech, the USPS recognizes several types of postal facilities, including the following:
A main post office (formerly known as a general post office) is the primary postal facility in a community.
A station or post office station is a postal facility that is not the main post office, but that is within the corporate limits of the community.
A branch or post office branch[212] is a postal facility that is not the main post office and that is outside the corporate limits of the community.
A classified unit is a station or branch operated by USPS employees in a facility owned or leased by the USPS.
A contract postal unit (or CPU) is a station or branch operated by a contractor, typically in a store or other place of business.[213]
A community post office (or CPO) is a contract postal unit providing services in a small community in which other types of post office facilities have been discontinued.
An approved shipper is an independent shipping business licensed to use certain USPS branding and signage, but which does not receive any financial compensation from USPS and may opt to charge higher rates for postage. Approved Shippers may also accept packages for other carriers such as UPS or FedEx.[214]
A finance unit is a station or branch that provides window services and accepts mail, but does not provide delivery.
A village post office (VPO) is an entity such as a local business or government center that provides postal services through a contract with the USPS. First introduced in 2011 as an integral part of the USPS plan to close low volume post offices, village post offices will fill the role of the post office within a ZIP Code.[215]
A processing and distribution center (P&DC, or processing and distribution facility, formerly known as a General Mail Facility) is a central mail facility that processes and dispatches incoming and outgoing mail to and from a designated service area (251 nationwide).[206][216]
A sectional center facility (SCF) is a P&DC for a designated geographical area defined by one or more three-digit ZIP Code prefixes.
An international service center (ISC) is an international mail processing facility. There are only five such USPS facilities in the continental United States, located in Chicago, New York, Miami, Los Angeles and San Francisco.[217]
A network distribution center, formerly known as a bulk mail center (BMC), is a central mail facility that processes bulk rate parcels as the hub in a hub and spoke network.
An auxiliary sorting facility (ASF) is a central mail facility that processes bulk rate parcels as spokes in a hub and spoke network.
A remote encoding center (REC) is a facility at which clerks receive images of problem mail pieces (those with hard-to-read addresses, etc.) via secure Internet-type feeds and manually type the addresses they can decipher, using a special encoding protocol. The mail pieces are then sprayed with the correct addresses or are sorted for further handling according to the instructions given via encoding. The total number of RECs is down from 55 in 1998 to just 1 center in December 2016. The last REC is in Salt Lake City, Utah.[218]
While common usage refers to all types of postal facilities as "substations", the USPS Glossary of Postal Terms does not define or even list that word.[213] Post Offices often share facilities with other governmental organizations located within a city's central business district. In those locations, often Courthouses and Federal Buildings, the building is owned by the General Services Administration while the U.S. Postal Services operates as a tenant.[219] The USPS retail system has approximately 36,000 post offices, stations, and branches.[220]
Automated Postal Centers[edit]
 A 24-hour Automated Postal Center kiosk inside the Webster, Texas main post office
In the year 2004, the USPS began deploying Automated Postal Centers (APCs).[221] APCs are unattended kiosks that are capable of weighing, franking, and storing packages for later pickup as well as selling domestic and international postage stamps. Since its introduction, APCs do not take cash payments   they only accept credit or debit cards. Similarly, traditional vending machines are available at many post offices to purchase stamps, though these are being phased out in many areas.[222] Due to increasing use of Internet services, as of June 2009, no retail post office windows are open 24 hours; overnight services are limited to those provided by an Automated Postal Center.[223]
Evolutionary Network Development (END) program[edit]
In February 2006, the USPS announced that they plan to replace the nine existing facility-types with five processing facility-types:[224]
Regional Distribution Centers (RDCs), which will process all classes of parcels and bundles and serve as Surface Transfer Centers;
Local Processing Centers (LPCs), which will process single-piece letters and flats and cancel mail;
Destination Processing Centers (DPC), sort the mail for individual letter-carrier route;
Airport Transfer Centers (ATCs), which will serve as transfer points only; and
Remote Encoding Centers (RECs).
Over a period of years, these facilities are expected to replace Processing & Distribution Centers, Customer Service Facilities, Bulk Mail Centers, Logistic and Distribution Centers, annexes, the Hub and Spoke Program, Air Mail Centers, and International Service Centers.
The changes are a result of the declining volumes of single-piece First-Class Mail, population shifts, the increase in drop shipments by advertising mailers at destinating postal facilities, advancements in equipment and technology, redundancies in the existing network, and the need for operational flexibility.
The program was ended in early 2007 after an analysis revealed that the significant amount of capital investment required to implement the END network concept would not generate the benefits originally anticipated.[225]
Airline and rail division[edit]
 A former United States Postal Service Boeing 727-200 aircraft at Miami International Airport in 1999
The United States Postal Service does not directly own or operate any aircraft or trains, although both were formerly operated. The mail and packages are flown on airlines with which the Postal Service has a contractual agreement. The contracts change periodically. Contract airlines have included: UPS, Emery Worldwide, Ryan International Airlines, FedEx Express, American Airlines, United Airlines, and Express One International. Amtrak carried some mail between cities, such as Chicago and Minneapolis Saint Paul, but this terminated in October 2004.[226]
The last air delivery route in the continental U.S., to residents in the Frank Church River of No Return Wilderness, was scheduled to be ended in June 2009. The weekly bush plane route, contracted out to an air taxi company, had in its final year an annual cost of $46,000, or $2400/year per residence, over ten times the average cost of delivering mail to a residence in the United States.[227] This decision has been reversed by the U.S. postmaster general.[228]
Parcel forwarding and private interchange[edit]
Private US parcel forwarding or US mail forwarding companies focusing on personal shopper, relocation, Ex-pat and mail box services often interface with the United States Postal Service for transporting of mail and packages for their customers.[229]
Delivery timing[edit]
 USPS contractor-driven semi-trailer truck seen near Mendota, California
 1998 United States Postal Service Ford Windstar, showing the larger driver's side door
Delivery days[edit]
From 1810, mail was delivered seven days a week. In 1828, local religious leaders noticed a decline in Sunday-morning church attendance because of local post offices' doubling as gathering places. These leaders appealed to the government to intervene and close post offices on Sundays. The government, however, declined, and mail was delivered seven days a week until 1912.[230][231]
Today, U.S. Mail (with the exception of Express Mail)[232] is not delivered on Sunday.
Saturday delivery was temporarily suspended in April 1957, because of lack of funds, but quickly restored.[233][234]
Budget problems prompted consideration of dropping Saturday delivery starting around 2009. This culminated in a 2013 announcement that regular mail services would be cut to five days a week, which was reversed by Congress before it could take effect. (See the section Revenue decline and planned cuts.)
Direct delivery vs. customer pickup[edit]
Originally, mail was not delivered to homes and businesses, but to post offices. In 1863, "city delivery" began in urban areas with enough customers to make this economical. This required streets to be named, houses to be numbered, with sidewalks and lighting provided, and these street addresses to be added to envelopes.[235] The number of routes served expanded over time. In 1891, the first experiments with Rural Free Delivery began in less densely populated areas. There is currently an effort to reduce direct delivery in favor of mailbox clusters.[citation needed]
To compensate for high mail volume and slow long-distance transportation which saw mail arrive at post offices throughout the day, deliveries were made multiple times a day. This ranged from twice for residential areas to up to seven times for the central business district of Brooklyn, New York.[236] In the late 19th century, mail boxes were encouraged, saving carriers the time it took to deliver directly to the addressee in person; in the 1910s and 1920s, they were phased in as a requirement for service.[235] In the 1940s, multiple daily deliveries began to be reduced, especially on Saturdays. By 1990, the last twice-daily deliveries in New York City were eliminated.
Today, mail is delivered once a day on-site to most private homes and businesses. The USPS still distinguishes between city delivery (where carriers generally walk and deliver to mailboxes hung on exterior walls or porches, or to commercial reception areas) and rural delivery (where carriers generally drive).[237] With "curbside delivery", mailboxes are at the ends of driveways, on the nearest convenient road. "Central point delivery" is used in some locations, where several nearby residences share a "cluster" of individual mailboxes in a single housing.
Some customers choose to use post office boxes for an additional fee, for privacy or convenience. This provides a locked box at the post office to which mail is addressed and delivered (usually earlier in the day than home delivery). Customers in less densely populated areas where there is no city delivery and who do not qualify for rural delivery may receive mail only through post office boxes. High-volume business customers can also arrange for special pick-up.[238][239]
Another option is the old-style general delivery, for people who have neither post office boxes nor street addresses. Mail is held at the post office until they present identification and pick it up.
Some customers receive free post office boxes if the USPS declines to provide door-to-door delivery to their location or a nearby box.[240] People with medical problems can request door-to-door delivery.[241] Homeless people are also eligible for post office boxes at the discretion of the local postmaster, or can use general delivery.[242]
Special delivery[edit]
From 1885 to 1997, a service called special delivery was available, which caused a separate delivery to the final location earlier in the day than the usual daily rounds.
Same-day trials[edit]
In December 2012, the USPS began a limited one-year trial of same-day deliveries directly from retailers or distribution hubs to residential addresses in the same local area, a service it dubbed "Metro Post".[243][244] The trial was initially limited to San Francisco and the only retailer to participate in the first few weeks was 1-800-FLOWERS.[245]
In March 2013, the USPS faced new same-day competition for e-commerce deliveries from Google Shopping Express.
In November 2013, the Postal Service began regular package delivery on Sundays for Amazon customers in New York and Los Angeles,[246] which it expanded to 15 cities in May 2014.[247] Amazon Sunday delivery has now been expanded to most major markets as of September 2015.
Other competition in this area includes online grocers such as AmazonFresh, Webvan, and delivery services operated by grocery stores like Peapod and Safeway.
Forwarding and holds[edit]
Residential customers can fill out a form to forward mail to a new address, and can also send pre-printed forms to any of their frequent correspondents. They can also put their mail on "hold", for example, while on vacation. The Post Office will store mail during the hold, instead of letting it overflow in the mailbox. These services are not available to large buildings and customers of a commercial mail receiving agency,[248] where mail is subsorted by non-Post Office employees into individual mailboxes.
First-class packages[edit]
In April 2022, the USPS announced it would slow deliveries of almost one third of first-class packages as it sought to rely less on air transportation and find cost savings.[249][250][251][252]
Financial services[edit]
Postal money orders provide a safe alternative to sending cash through the mail, and are available in any amount up to $1,000. Like a bank check, money orders are cashable only by the recipient. Unlike a personal bank check, they are prepaid and therefore cannot be returned because of insufficient funds.[253] Money orders are a declining business for the USPS, as companies like PayPal, Venmo and others are offering electronic replacements.
From 1911 to 1967, the Postal Service also operated the United States Postal Savings System, not unlike a savings and loan association with the amount of the deposit limited.[254]
A January 2014 report by the inspector general of the USPS suggested that the agency could earn $8.9 billion per year in revenue by providing financial services, especially in areas where there are no local banks but there is a local post office, and to customers who currently do not have bank accounts.[255]
Employment[edit]
 A Rural Letter Carrier from Fort Myers, Florida
The Postal Service is the nation's second-largest civilian employer.[256] As of 2020[update], it employed 495,941 career employees and 148,092 non-career personnel, divided among offices, processing centers, and actual post offices.[257] The United States Postal Service would rank 44th on the 2019 Fortune 500 list, if considered a private company[258] and ranks 136 on Global Fortune 500 list.[259]
Labor unions representing USPS employees include: The American Postal Workers Union (APWU), which represents postal clerks and maintenance, motor vehicle, mail equipment shops, material distribution centers, and operating services and facilities services employees, postal nurses, and IT and accounting;[260] the National Association of Letter Carriers (NALC), which represents city letter carriers; the National Rural Letter Carriers' Association (NRLCA), which represents rural letter carriers; and the National Postal Mail Handlers Union (NPMHU).
USPS employees are divided into major crafts according to the work they engage in:
Letter carriers, also referred to as mailmen or mail carriers, prepare and deliver mail and parcels. They are divided into two categories: City Letter Carriers, who are represented by the NALC, and Rural Letter Carriers, who are represented by the NRLCA. City Carriers are paid hourly with automatic overtime paid after 8 hours or 40 hours a week of duty. City Carriers are required to work in any kind of weather, daylight or dark and carry three bundles of mail (letters in one hand with magazines and other larger mail pieces) on the forearm carrying the mail. Advertisement mail, Every door direct (EDD) and smaller parcels all go in the carriers satchel). Larger parcels, up to a total of 70 lbs. may be delivered at various times of the day or with the mail. Mail routes are outfitted with a number of scanpoints (mailbox barcodes) on random streets every 30 to 40 minutes apart to keep track of the carriers whereabouts in real-time.
Rural carriers are under a form of salary called "evaluated hours", usually with overtime built into their pay. The evaluated hours are created by having all mail counted for a period of two or four weeks, and a formula used to create the set dollar amount they will be paid for each day worked until the next time the route is counted.
Mail handlers and processors, prepare, separate, load and unload mail and parcels, by delivery ZIP code and station, for the clerks. They work almost exclusively at the plants or larger mail facilities now after having their duties excessed and reassigned to clerks in Post Offices and Station branches.
Clerks, have a dual function by design of where their assignment is. Window clerks directly handle customer service needs at the counter, sort box mail and sort first-class letters, standard and bulk-rate mail for the carriers on the work floor. Clerks may also work alongside mail handlers in large sorting facilities, outside of the public view, sorting mail. Data Conversion Operators, who encode address information at Remote Encoding Centers, are also members of the clerk craft. Mail handlers and Clerks are represented by the NPMHU and the APWU, respectively.
Other non-managerial positions in the USPS include:
Maintenance and custodians, who see to the overall operation and cleaning of mail sorting machines, work areas, public parking and general facility operations.
City Carrier Assistants. (CCAs) With the Das Arbitration award the designation of PTF City Carrier has been abolished. TE City Carriers will have the opportunity to become CCAs. A CCA is a non-career employee who is hired for a 360-day term, similar to what TEs had. CCAs earn annual leave. CCAs, unlike TEs do have a direct path to becoming career employees. When excess City Carrier positions exist the CCA in that work installation with the highest "relative standing" will be promoted to a career employee and be assigned to the vacant position.
Career, Part Time Flexible and Transitional employees (Career, PTF & TE) There are a variety of other non-managerial positions in such crafts as accounting, information technology, and the remote encoding center. These are under a different contract than plant workers or letter carriers.[261]
Contractors are not USPS employees, but work for the USPS under a written contract and usually paid per mile. They do not get benefits including health insurance, leave, life insurance, and pension. They must use their own vehicle and pay any cost to maintain, insure, or replace. Contractors generally make less than employees. Just like regular carriers they deliver packages and letters to mailboxes and doors.
Though the USPS employs many individuals, as more Americans send information via email, fewer postal workers are needed to work dwindling amounts of mail. Post offices and mail facilities are constantly downsizing, replacing craft positions with new machines and consolidating mail routes through the MIARAP (Modified Interim Alternate Route Adjustment Process) agreement. A major round of job cuts, early retirements, and a construction freeze were announced on March 20, 2009.[262]
Workplace violence[edit]
See also: Edmond post office shooting and List of postal killings  United States
In the early 1990s, widely publicized workplace shootings by disgruntled employees at USPS facilities led to a Human Resource effort to provide care for stressed workers and resources for coworker conflicts.[263] Due to media coverage, postal employees gained a reputation among the general public as more likely to be mentally ill. The USPS Commission on a Safe and Secure Workplace found that "Postal workers are only a third as likely as those in the national workforce to be victims of homicide at work."[264] In the documentary Murder by Proxy: How America Went Postal, it was argued that this number failed to factor out workers killed by external subjects rather than by fellow employees.
This series of events in turn has influenced American culture, as seen in the slang term "going postal"[265][266] and the computer game Postal. Also, in the opening sequence of Naked Gun 33+1 3: The Final Insult, a yell of "Disgruntled postal workers" is heard, followed by the arrival of postal workers with machine guns. In an episode of Seinfeld, the mailman character, Newman, explained in a dramatic monologue that postal workers "go crazy and kill everyone" because the mail never stops. In The Simpsons episode "Sunday, Cruddy Sunday", Nelson Muntz asks Postmaster Bill if he has "ever gone on a killing spree"; Bill replies, "The day of the gun-toting, disgruntled postman shooting up the place went out with the Macarena".[267]
The series of massacres led the USPS to issue a rule prohibiting the possession of any type of firearms (except for those issued to Postal Inspectors) in all designated USPS facilities.[268]
In fiction[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In the film Miracle on 34th Street (1947), the identity of Kris Kringle (played by Edmund Gwenn) as the one and only "Santa Claus" was validated by a state court, based on the delivery of 21 bags of mail (famously carried into the courtroom) to the character in question. The contention was that it would have been illegal for the United States Post Office to deliver mail that was addressed to "Santa Claus" to the character "Kris Kringle" unless he were, in fact, the one and only Santa Claus. Judge Henry X. Harper (played by Gene Lockhart) ruled that since the U.S. Government had demonstrated through the delivery of the bags of mail that Kris Kringle was Santa Claus, the State of New York did not have the authority to overrule that decision.
The novel Post Office (1971), written by poet and novelist Charles Bukowski, is a semi-autobiographical account of his life over the years as a letter carrier. Bukowski would, under duress, quit and years later return as a mail clerk. His personal account would detail the work at lengths as frustrating, menial, boring, and degrading.
David Brin's novel The Postman (1985) portrays the USPS and its returned services as a staple to revive the United States government in a post-apocalyptic world. It was adapted as a film starring Kevin Costner and Larenz Tate in 1997.
The comedy film Dear God (1996), starring Greg Kinnear and Laurie Metcalf, portrays a group of quirky postal workers in a dead letter office that handle letters addressed to the Easter Bunny, Elvis, and even God himself.
In 2015, The Inspectors, which depicts a group of postal inspectors investigating postal crimes, debuted on CBS. The series uses the USPIS seal and features messages and tips from the Chief Postal Inspector at the end of each episode.
Signed, Sealed, Delivered (original title: Dead Letters), also known as Lost Letter Mysteries, is an American-Canadian drama/romantic comedy television series that aired on the Hallmark Channel from April 20 through June 22, 2014.
In the NBC sitcom Cheers, Cliff Clavin (played by John Ratzenberger) was a know-it-all bar regular and letter carrier.
See also[edit]
This "see also" section may contain an excessive number of suggestions. Please ensure that only the most relevant links are given, that they are not red links, and that any links are not already in this article.  (October 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
United States portalPhilately portal
List of U.S. state abbreviations
List of Zip Code Prefixes
United States Postal Service creed
USPS Post Office Box Lobby Recycling program
History[edit]
William Goddard (publisher)   Worked with Benjamin Franklin in establishing the U.S. postal system.
American Letter Mail Company
History of United States postage rates
Owney (dog)
Post Office Murals
Postage stamps and postal history of the United States
Railway Mail Service
International associations[edit]
International Postal Union (IPU)
Postal Union of the Americas, Spain and Portugal
Key related, comparable, and competing entities[edit]
Pony Express
Wells Fargo, particularly:
Wells Fargo (1852 1998)
Courier service
U.S. Military Postal Service (MPS)
Airmails of the United States
United Parcel Service
Federal Express
Amazon
Telecommunications
Broadcasting
Mail bag types[edit]
Catcher pouch
Mail pouch
Mail sack
Mail satchel
Pony Express mochila
Portmanteau
Workplace violence[edit]
List of postal killings
References[edit]
^ "On This Day in Postal History: Notable Events by Month/Day/Year" (PDF). United States Postal Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 2, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
^ "Size and scope". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
^ "Who We Are: Leadership". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
^ a b "U.S. Postal Service | 2021 Global 500". Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2021.
^ "U.S. Post Office losses more than double to $8.8 billion for the year, while revenue rises". MarketWatch. November 14, 2019. Archived from the original on April 20, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ "Benjamin Franklin. World of Influence. Man of Letters | PBS". www.pbs.org. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2021.
^ Postal Reorganization Act, Pub. Law No. 91-375, 84 Stat. 719, at 720 (August 12, 1970), codified at 39 U.S.C. 201.
^ "The U.S. Postal Service; PBS". PBS. November 13, 2011. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
^ a b "Report on Universal Postal Service and the Postal Monopoly". USPS. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021.
^ "Information About Restrictions on Mailbox Access" (PDF). United States General Accounting Office. May 30, 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 24, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2020.
^ "Universal Service and the Postal Monopoly: A Brief History" (PDF). The United States Postal Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2013.
^ "The Great 1970 Mail Strike that Stunned the Country". Labor History Articles. American Postal Workers Union. March 2017. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019.
^ Boyd, Deanna; Chen, Kendra (2019). "Postal Strike and Reorganization: Reinventing the System". The History and Experience of African Americans in America's Postal Service. National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2018. Retrieved April 22, 2019.
^ Piazza, Daniel (April 15, 2008). "8-cent Postal Service Emblem". Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved April 22, 2019.
^ a b "Size and scope". About USPS. United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 8, 2018.
^ March 9, USPS Fact #671 |; 2021. "Size and scope". Postal Facts - U.S. Postal Service. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ a b The Postal Service pledges to move to an all-electric delivery fleet
^ "Amazon Sunday delivery: Key facts to know as USPS rolls out service nationally". GeekWire. July 16, 2014. Archived from the original on April 5, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ "Postal Service to Deliver Packages on Sundays Before Christmas". NBC Chicago. December 14, 2013. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017.
^ United States Postal Service (July 15, 2007). "Mailing Standards of the United States Postal Service, Domestic Mail Manual" (PDF). United States Postal Service. p. 1070. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
^ Porter, David (December 12, 2018). "Sting uses fake Amazon boxes, GPS to catch would-be thieves". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2018.
^ "Postal Service Delays Production Contract for New Mail Truck". May 12, 2020. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2020.
^ "U.S. Postal Service Awards Contract to Launch Multi-Billion-Dollar Modernization of Postal Delivery Vehicle Fleet". USPS. United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021.
^ "Postal Facts 2010" (PDF). U.S. Postal Service. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 28, 2010. Retrieved September 28, 2010.
^ Johnson, Erica (June 20, 2008). "Gas Prices Affecting Mail". Keloland Television. Archived from the original on April 19, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
^ States sue the U.S. Postal Service over its decision to buy gas-powered trucks
^ USPS. "Rural Carrier   Right-Hand Drive Instructions" (PDF). USPS. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
^ Hartzell, Dan (June 22, 2009). "Mail trucks deliver without license". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
^ Ohnsman, Alan (May 21, 2019). "U.S. Postal Service Delivers Mail Using TuSimple's Self-Driving Trucks". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
^ Military Postal Service Agency (June 2008). "APO/FPO Guide for AAFES Suppliers   The USPS Relationship with Military Service Members" (PDF). Military Postal Service Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
^ a b "United States Postal Service FY2021 Annual Report to Congress" (PDF). United States Postal Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ "First-Class Mail Volume Since 1926" (PDF). USPS. March 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2018.
^ a b "USPS   Area Mail Processing". USPS. 2009. Archived from the original on September 23, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2009.
^ "The Post Office Almost Delivered Your First E-Mail". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021.
^ "2012 Annual Report to Congress and Comprehensive Statement". about.usps.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved January 25, 2018.
^ "Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations 2008". USPS. 2008. Archived from the original on May 8, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2009.
^ McElhatton, Jim "Postal Service Reports $8 billion in Losses" Archived September 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, The Washington Times, November 12, 2010, accessed August 4, 2011.
^ "NACS Magazine | Going Postal". Nacsonline.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2012.
^ Postal Service to Delay Cutbacks Until Mid-May, Staving Off Bankruptcy Archived January 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Fox News. Accessed: December 13, 2011.
^ USPS. "Fact Sheet: Modified Network Realignment Plan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012.
^ USPS (May 17, 2012). "Postal Service Moves Ahead with Modified Network Consolidation Plan". Archived from the original on October 3, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012.
^ a b "USPS Delivery Standards and Statistics fact sheet". USPS. March 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 30, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "Key facts on network rationalization". USPS. March 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 30, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ Sanburn, Josh (April 12, 2013). "Post Office Keeps Saturday Delivery Thanks to Congress". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ USPS. "Fact Sheet / New Strategy Preserves Post Offices in Rural America" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012.
^ a b USPS. "New Strategy to Preserve the Nation's Smallest Post Offices". Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012.
^ Hananel, Sam (January 19, 2014). "Unions Angered by Postal Service's Staples Outlets". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 20, 2014. Retrieved January 19, 2014.
^ Rein, Lisa (July 8, 2015). "USPS's controversial deal with Staples headed to showdown over legality". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015.
^ "Postmaster General/CEO John E. Potter Before the Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 30, 2009. Retrieved January 28, 2009.
^ "Postal Accountability & Enhancement Act of 2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 1, 2008. Retrieved February 11, 2009.
^ "Text of the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act". www.govtrack.us. United States Government. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2014.
^ Memmott, Mark (March 2, 2010). "Would You Miss Saturday Mail Delivery?". NPR. Retrieved September 9, 2022.
^ "Statement of Postmaster General/CEO John E. Potter Before the Committee on Government on Oversight & Government Reform United States House of Representatives & Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 9, 2010. Retrieved April 15, 2010.
^ "Postal Service Announces New Delivery Schedule". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013.
^ "U.S. Postal Service: Saturday letter delivery to end in August". CBS News. February 6, 2013. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
^ "Postal Service Announces New Delivery Schedule". February 6, 2013. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
^ "Postal Service to end Saturday mail delivery in bid to cut costs". Fox News. February 6, 2013. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved February 6, 2013.
^ "Statement from the U.S. Postal Service Board of Governors". April 10, 2013. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014.
^ "Postal Civil Service Retirement System Funding Reform Act of 2003" (PDF). April 23, 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2012.
^ Barro, Josh (August 2, 2012). "Understanding the Post Office's Benefits Mess". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg View. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "CSRS" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2013.
^ Peralta, Eyder (August 2012). "USPS Defaults on $5.5 Billion Payment to Treasury". NPR. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021.
^ "U.S. Postal Service Reports Revenue Increase, $5.5 Billion Loss in Fiscal 2014". USPS. November 14, 2014. Archived from the original on May 21, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "USPS Defaults on Billions in Mandatory Payments, Despite Scheduled Relief". Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021.
^ Chaffetz, Jason (December 8, 2016). "Text - H.R.5714 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): Postal Service Reform Act of 2016". www.congress.gov. Retrieved March 15, 2022.
^ DeFazio, Peter A. (February 10, 2020). "Text - H.R.2382 - 116th Congress (2019-2020): USPS Fairness Act". www.congress.gov. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2022.
^ Maloney, Carolyn B. (March 8, 2022). "Text - H.R.3076 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Postal Service Reform Act of 2022". www.congress.gov. Retrieved March 15, 2022.
^ LeBlanc, Paul (March 8, 2022). "What the USPS overhaul bill means for you". CNN. Retrieved March 15, 2022.
^ Durkee, Alison. "Biden Signs Postal Service Reform Bill Into Law Here's What It Means For Your Mail". Forbes. Retrieved April 6, 2022.
^ Pence, Herbert (November 6, 2011). "Congress didn't do US Postal Service any favors". Nashua Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved March 25, 2012.
^ Klapper, Bradley (December 24, 2013). "First-class stamps to cost 49 cents as of Jan. 26". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 12, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "USPS Rate Change Effective July 10th, 2022". Retrieved July 16, 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "The Post Office Almost Delivered Your First E-Mail". Bloomberg.com.
^ "Text   S.1486   113th Congress (2013 2014): Postal Reform Act of 2014". US Congress. July 31, 2014. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "Text   H.R.2748   113th Congress (2013 2014): Postal Reform Act of 2013". US Congress. July 19, 2013. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ Miga, Andrew (August 2, 2013). "USPS suggests lifting alcohol delivery ban". Spokesman-Review. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ Liberto, Jennifer (July 23, 2013). "Postal Service moving away from at-your-door delivery". CNN. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "The Postal Service delivers the last mile, almost: Changing modes of delivery". Save the Post Office. June 10, 2013. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "S 1486- Postal Reform Act of 2014". Scribd.com. August 1, 2013. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ a b Miga, Andrew (August 2, 2013). "U.S. Postal Service Wants To Deliver Alcohol To Your Doorstep". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "U.S. Postal Service Testifies Before Congress Urging Elimination of Unfunded Liabilities". USPS. March 13, 2014. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ a b Davidson, Joe (September 24, 2018). "Congressional opposition to Trump's postal cuts, privatization plan grows". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020.
^ Bogage, Jacob; Rein, Lisa (April 23, 2020). "Trump administration considers leveraging emergency coronavirus loan to force Postal Service changes". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ "Congress urges Postal Service to undo changes slowing mail". Associated Press. AP News. August 6, 2020. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2020.
^ "Postal contracts awarded to DeJoy-run company were questioned in 2001 Postal Service audit". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved September 14, 2020.
^ a b Izaguirre, Anthony; Slodysko, Brian (August 20, 2020). "Embattled postal leader is Trump donor with deep GOP ties". Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020.
^ a b Armus, Teo (August 17, 2020). "As the House demands an interview with Postal Service chief Louis DeJoy, protesters picket his homes". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2020.
^ Desiderio, Andrew; Levine, Marianne; Lippman, Daniel (August 21, 2020). "DeJoy defends proposed changes amid Postal Service furor". Politico. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020.
^ Estes, Adam Clark (August 7, 2020). "What's wrong with the mail". Vox. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020.
^ Pierce, Charles P. (August 10, 2020). "Destroying the Postal Service Is the Most Republican Thing Trump Has Ever Done". Esquire. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020.
^ Bernstein, Andrea; Marritz, Ilya (May 26, 2017). "The President, His Business Partner, and the Fundraiser". WNYC. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020.
^ Finnegan, Daniel (May 7, 2020). "Lead fundraiser for Charlotte RNC named postmaster general. He starts in June". Triad Business Journal. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020.
^ Katz, Eric (July 20, 2020). "Looking to Cut Costs, New USPS Leader Takes Aim at Overtime and Late Trips". Government Executive. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020.
^ Broadwater, Luke; Healy, Jack; Shear, Michael D.; Fuchs, Hailey (August 15, 2020). "Postal Crisis Ripples Across Nation as Election Looms". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ Bogage, Jacob (July 14, 2020). "Postal Service memos detail 'difficult' changes, including slower mail delivery". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ Gardner, Amy; Dawsey, Josh; Kane, Paul (August 13, 2020). "Trump opposes election aid for states and Postal Service bailout, threatening Nov. 3 vote". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Gordon, Aaron (August 13, 2020). "The Post Office Is Deactivating Mail Sorting Machines Ahead of the Election". Vice. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Behrmann, Savannah (August 13, 2020). "What's going on with the post office? Here's what we know". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Bogage, Jacob (August 14, 2020). "Postal Service will stop removing mailboxes". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ Segers, Grace (August 15, 2020). "U.S. Postal Service inspector general is investigating changes at post offices". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ Cochrane, Emily; Edmondson, Catie (August 16, 2020). "Pelosi to Recall House for Postal Service Vote as Democrats Press for DeJoy to Testify". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 17, 2020.
^ Wallace, Danielle; Mears, Bill (August 17, 2020). "First in expected flood of lawsuits against USPS, Trump filed in NY federal court". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 17, 2020.
^ Bogage, Jacob (August 18, 2020). "Postmaster general announces he is 'suspending' policies that were blamed for causing mail delays". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2020.
^ Gordon, Aaron (August 19, 2020). "DeJoy's USPS Policy Rollbacks Don't Appear to Change Much". VICE. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020.
^ Pelosi, Nancy (August 19, 2020). "Earlier today, I spoke with Postmaster General DeJoy regarding his alleged pause in operational changes. During our conversation, he admitted he has no intention of replacing the sorting machines, blue mailboxes and other infrastructure that have been removed". Twitter. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020.
^ "Highlights of $900 billion COVID-19 relief, wrapup bills". The Associated Press. December 21, 2020. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2022.
^ Editorial Board (June 15, 2020). "Coronavirus makes voting by mail even more important". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ "A Record 76% of Americans Can Vote by Mail in 2020". The New York Times. August 14, 2020. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Phillips, Morgan (August 14, 2020). "USPS warns 46 states it cannot guarantee mail-in ballots will arrive in time for election". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020.
^ Sprunt, Barbara (August 13, 2020). "Trump Opposes Postal Service Funding But Says He'd Sign Bill Including It". NPR. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Bogage, Jacob (August 12, 2020). "Trump says Postal Service needs money for mail-in voting, but he'll keep blocking funding". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.
^ Samuels, Brett (August 14, 2020). "Trump says he'll sign USPS funding if Democrats make concessions". TheHill. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
^ United States Postal Serv. v. Flamingo Indus. (USA) Ltd., 540 U.S. 736 (2004).
^ Crew, Michael A.; Brennan, Timothy J (2014). The Role of the Postal and Delivery Sector in a Digital Age. Edward Elgar Pub. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78254-633-7. Misconceptions surround the United States Postal Service's (USPS) current organizational structure...USPS, although clearly a federally owned entity, is not a state-owned enterprise (SOE) in the sense that this term is normally understood in the United States and in other advanced economies. It is instead an independent government organization (IGO) within the federal government, and thus lacks standard attributes of an SOE.
^ United States Postal Serv. v. Greenburgh Civic Ass'ns, 453 U.S. 114 (1981).
^ USPS.com Archived May 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (September 17, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "City of Houston Annexation FAQ". City of Houston. October 31, 1996. Archived from the original on October 31, 1996. Retrieved August 3, 2022. The U.S. Postal Service establishes ZIP codes and mailing addresses[...]{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Popiel, Leslie Albrecht (February 7, 1995). "Republicans Eye US Postal Service For Privatization Push". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020.
^ Banker, Steve (December 29, 2017). "President Trump, Here's Why The Postal Service Is Charging Amazon 'So Little'". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 31, 2018. Retrieved October 31, 2018.
^ Gold, Michael, and Katie Rogers (March 29, 2018).  "The Facts Behind Trump's Tweets on Amazon, Taxes and the Postal Service." Archived June 21, 2019, at the Wayback Machine The New York Times. Retrieved November 9, 2019.
^ Smith, Jennifer (June 22, 2018). "Trump's Fix for Postal Service: Privatize It". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved October 31, 2018.
^ Graves, Lisa, The Billionaire Behind Efforts to Kill the U.S. Postal Service Archived August 22, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, In The Public Interest, July 2020
^ "ITPI   In The Public Interest". July 9, 2020. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved August 22, 2020.
^ Moyers, Bill, Bill Moyers Talks with Lisa Graves about the Ongoing Threat to the US Postal Service Archived August 22, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Moyers on Democracy, August 19, 2020
^ "To Save the Postal Service, Bring It Online". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 20, 2022. Retrieved December 5, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ "The Constitution of the United States: A Transcription". National Archives. November 4, 2015. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ "Mission statement" (PDF). about.usps.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2017.
^ a b "Report On Universal Postal Service and The Postal Monopoly" (PDF). USPS. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 19, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ Webb, Amy (June 12, 2013). "Why It's So Much Harder for the Government to Spy on Your Snail Mail Than Your Email". Slate Magazine. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019.
^ Gilliland, Donald (May 25, 2019). "Perhaps we need the US Postal Service to restore trust in digital communication". TheHill. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019.
^ Postal Service to renew Idaho back country mail route Archived March 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Alyson Outen, KTVB-TV, April 10, 2009
^ Minnick, Walt (May 7, 2009). "Idaho delegation gets reversal on backcountry mail delivery decision". Press Releases. Congressman Walt Minnick. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved July 1, 2013.
^ "Congress votes to keep USPS Saturday delivery". MSNBC. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021.
^ "FedEx SmartPost Shipping & Tracking for Low Weight Packages". FedEx. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2012.
^ "UPS Mail Innovations   Overview". United Parcel Service. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2012.
^ "Priority Mail   USPS". www.usps.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2013.
^ "Priority Mail Express   USPS". www.usps.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
^ "Amazon now delivers more US packages than FedEx". Quartz. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
^ "Amazon Drone Delivery". Amazon. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
^ "Telegraph: Early Postal Role" (PDF). Postal History. USPS. July 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 31, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
^ "V-Mail" (PDF). Postal History. USPS. July 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 8, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2011.
^ "E-COM, Electronic Computer Originated Mail" (PDF). USPS. July 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 8, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2011.
^ "Intelligent Mail" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 30, 2012.
^ Geddes, Rick. "Do Vital Economists Reach a Policy Conclusion on Postal Reform?" (April 2004).
econjournalwatch.org Archived October 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Neither Snow nor Sleet ... Can Dampen This Monopoly". Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
^ Sappington, David E. M.; Sidak, J. Gregory (2003). "Incentives for Anticompetitive Behavior by Public Enterprises" (PDF). Review of Industrial Organization. 22 (3): 183 206. doi:10.1023/A:1023607223501. S2CID 189900074. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2015.
^ Sidak, J. Gregory (2015). "Maximizing the Postal Service's Profits from Competitive Products". Journal of Competition Law & Economics. 11 (3): 617. doi:10.1093/joclec/nhv026. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017.
^ Id.
^ Melendez, Steven (October 25, 2018.)  "Suspicious Packages Spotlight Vast Postal Surveillance System." Archived May 11, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Fast Company. Retrieved November 9, 2019.
^ "History of USPIS". United States Postal Inspection Service. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
^ Geddes, Rick (June 1, 2003). "Opportunities for Anticompetitive Behavior in Postal Services". American Enterprise Institute. Archived from the original on January 9, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
^ "Why Can't You Start a Rival Post Office?". November 19, 2010. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017.
^ "Annual Report: FY 2014" (PDF). U.S. Postal Inspection Service. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2019.
^ Mailing Standards of the United States Postal Service Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    600: Basic Standards For All Mailing Services Archived January 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    101: Physical Standards Archived February 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    601: Mailability Archived March 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com (August 20, 1912). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)   Section 102.2.1: Exhibit 2.1 OCR Read Area Archived March 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    602.1.5: Elements of Addressing   Return Address Archived March 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)   Section 102.2.1: Exhibit 2.1 OCR Read Area Archived March 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "A Customer's Guide to Mailing" (PDF). Archived from the original on August 25, 2009. Retrieved January 25, 2013.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    602.1.5.3 Addressing Required Use of Return Addresses Archived March 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Domestic Mail Manual (DMM)    604 Postage Payment Methods Archived March 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.gov. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS list of abbreviations Archived July 28, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Usps.com. Retrieved on September 11, 2012.
^ USPS postal addressing standards Archived August 28, 2005, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.gov. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "Zip". USPS. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016.
^ "2004 Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations Chapter 2 Postal Operations". USPS. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. 2004 Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations Chapter 2 Postal Operations
^ USPS.com Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS.com Archived July 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ New Prices Coming May 12, 2008 Archived August 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Usps.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ United States Postal Service. "July 2022 Postage Price Changes". Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022.
^ van Tilborg, Henk C. A. (2005). "Electronic Postage". Encyclopedia of cryptography and security. Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-23473-1. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2015.
^ "About Us   EasyPost". EasyPost. Archived from the original on February 5, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019.
^ Advanced Preparation and Special Postage Payment Systems   Manifest Mailing System   Electronic Verification System Archived April 30, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.gov. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS Memo To Mailers   August 2006 "Making It E-Easy For High-Volume Shippers" Archived August 22, 2006, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Stamp Collecting: What other stamp materials can I collect?". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015.
^ "Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices,  313.6(C)(1)" (PDF). United States Copyright Office. December 22, 2014. pp. 36 37. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 6, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015.
^ "Rights and Permission Overview". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2010.
^ a b c d e f USPS FAQ   Domestic Classes of Mail Estimated Delivery Time Archived April 10, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Priority Mail Express Delivery Times to Change Effective May 23, 2021 - Postal Times". April 8, 2021. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2021.
^ "Postage Payment for Bound Printed Matter Limited to Permit Imprint". USPS. September 11, 2008. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013.
^ USPS.com Archived June 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ Executive Order No. 10501 Archived October 31, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Fas.org. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS.com Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "International Delivery Options". USPS. Archived from the original on September 18, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2010.
^ USPS International Mail Manual, Issue 35 Archived November 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Pe.usps.gov. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ First-Class Mail International. USPS (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Archived June 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
^ USPS.com Archived December 31, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved November 16, 2010.
^ USPS press release, June 8, 2004, Release No. 40, FedEx to deliver premium postal int'l service Archived May 8, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 10, 2007.
^ Styling for "M-bag" is inconsistent   the term is styled both as M-bag (with a hyphen) and M bag (with an en-dash).
^ a b Postal Explorer>IMM Issue 37   International Mail Manual > 2 Conditions for Mailing > 260 Direct Sacks of Printed Matter to One Addressee (M bags) Archived August 17, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
^ "USPS Working Hour". May 31, 2019. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2019.
^ USPS FAQ   Mailing to military personnel. about.usps.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ a b "U.S. and Palau Agreement". US Department of the Interior. November 30, 2011. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "Under Construction". Mipsa.biz. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ a b "FSM Communications". Government of the Federated States of Micronesia. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "USPS Domestic Mail Service Returns to the FSM and RMI". US Embassy in Kolonia. November 5, 2007. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2014.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ "USPS International Mail - Frequently Asked Questions". Archived from the original on September 29, 2007.
^ DWTripp. "USPS mail changes - international surface mail going away". BoardGameGeek "Chit Chat" forum. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Internal newsletters detailed a huge loss for the USPS in the failed delivery of packages sent from the USA via surface. Since the USPS cannot dictate how scores of different countries handle surface mail, and since its agreements required the USPS to take back undeliverable parcels, the losses were mounting.
^ "Why nobody offers USPS International Surface Air Lift for international shipment?". BoardGameGeek "General Gaming" forum. Retrieved February 23, 2017. The reason, probably, why no other dealers offer it: ... it is very difficult and time-consuming to do. Plus, there is no tracking, no insurance, and lots of complaints   as those packages can easily take 60 days to arrive.
^ hlmacdon (June 28, 2018). "Has anyone used Asendia Priority Tracked International Postage through Chit Chat?". eBay Canada "Seller Central" forum. Retrieved December 23, 2019.
^ "International Mail Manual  International Surface Air Lift (ISAL) Service". United States Postal Service.
^ a b c Author unknown (date unknown). Direct Marketing Direct Mail. Allbusiness.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011 from "Equipment Scheduling at Mail Processing and Distribution Centers". Archived from the original on March 11, 2008. Retrieved April 4, 2009.
^ Wade, Madison (April 9, 2015). "Changes announced for Redding mail processing center". KRCR News Channel ABC 7. Redding: Bonten Media Group. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2017.
^ Benda, David (February 23, 2012). "Mail sorting facility will close; move will affect 90 jobs in Redding". Redding Record-Searchlight. Gannett. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2017.
^ Miga, Andrew (August 2, 2013). "AP Interview: Postal Service takes photos of all mail, keeps images for up to a month". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on April 19, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
^ USPS.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011 from "Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations 2008". Archived from the original on May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 31, 2009.
^ Katz, Eric (August 26, 2022). "USPS Lists Hundreds of Post Offices and Other Facilities Where It Will Consolidate Operations". Government Executive. Retrieved March 26, 2023.
^ "Address, Phone Number, Hours, Location for USPS by state in united states". Postal Offices. Retrieved September 24, 2022.
^ a b Publication 32   Glossary of Postal Terms Archived May 8, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. (PDF) . Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "Approved Postal Provider Programs". USPS. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022.
^ "USPS VPO Fact Sheet" (PDF). usps.com. July 26, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 5, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2011.
^ "Fact Sheet: Processing Facilities" (PDF). USPS News Kit: Our Future Network (PDF). United States Postal Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2012. Retrieved June 27, 2013.
^ "USPS Postal News Release No. 08-063". usps.com. June 5, 2008. Archived from the original on May 11, 2009. Retrieved September 1, 2009.
^ Piper, Matthew. "The first and last of its kind, a Salt Lake City postal facility looks to grow". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
^ "Texas Federal Buildings:Galveston U.S. Post Office and Courthouse". General Services Administration. Archived from the original on November 17, 2009. Retrieved December 20, 2009.
^ USPS.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011 from "Comprehensive Statement on Postal Operations 2008". Archived from the original on May 9, 2009. Retrieved April 5, 2009.
^ "Lunewsviews.com". Lunewsviews.com. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. Retrieved July 18, 2012.
^ USPS.com Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ Corley, Cheryl (June 5, 2009). "Chicago's 24-Hour Postal Service Comes To An End". All Things Considered. National Public Radio. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2018.
^ "Lunewsviews.com". Lunewsviews.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved July 18, 2012.
^ "Postal Accountability And Enhancement Act  302 Network Plan". Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved May 5, 2020.
^ "USPS: Mail by Rail" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 24, 2013. Retrieved October 28, 2019.
^ Where to Buy Stamps Archived September 3, 2018, at the Wayback Machine'
^ "Idaho delegation gets reversal on backcountry mail delivery decision". Press release. House.gov. May 7, 2009. Archived from the original on May 27, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2013.
^ "Forward Mail | USPS". www.usps.com. Archived from the original on January 25, 2018. Retrieved January 25, 2018.
^ About.com, "Sunday Mail Service in a Christian Nation", Austin Cline, February 19, 2006 Archived September 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 10, 2007.
^ "The Unlikely Alliance That Ended Sunday Mail Delivery ... in 1912" Archived February 14, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
^ USPS   Express Mail Delivery Chart Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 10, 2007.
^ Historyorb.com Archived January 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, events April 13.
^ Historyorb.com Archived January 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, events April 15
^ a b "City Delivery" (PDF). Postal History. USPS. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
^ Deliveries per Day Archived May 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. (PDF) . Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ Home Delivery Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS FAQ   Caller Service, multiple pickups for a fee[dead link]
^ USPS FAQ   Firm Holdout Service, free pickup once a day[dead link]
^ USPS FAQ   Do I qualify for free box service? Archived March 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Faq.usps.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.[dead link]
^ USPS FAQ   Hardship / Medical Problems Archived March 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Faq.usps.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ USPS FAQ   Mail service available for the homeless Archived March 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Faq.usps.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.[dead link]
^ "Post office tests same-day delivery". Associated Press. November 23, 2012. Archived from the original on June 29, 2017. Retrieved June 22, 2017.
^ Target (March 28, 2011). "USPS.com   Metro Post". Usps.com. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
^ Corbin, Kenneth (January 14, 2013). "USPS Adding Retailers to Same Day Delivery Trial". EcommerceBytes.com.
^ Adinolfi, Joseph (November 14, 2013). "Terms Of Deal For US Postal Service (USPS) To Deliver Amazon (AMZN) Packages Not Revealed By USPS Or Amazon". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ Bishop, Todd (May 7, 2014). "Amazon and USPS expand Sunday delivery to 15 more cities, will reach 'large portion' of U.S. this year". GeekWire. Archived from the original on February 23, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ USPS FAQ   Commercial Mail Receiving Agency (CMRA) Archived March 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Faq.usps.com (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.[dead link]
^ Seal, Dean (April 18, 2022). "U.S. Postal Service to Slow First-Class Package Delivery". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved April 28, 2022.
^ Chappell, Bill (April 21, 2022). "Why your USPS mail package delivery is about to get slower". NPR. Retrieved April 28, 2022.
^ Manfredi, Lucas (April 19, 2022). "US Postal Service to slow down nearly a third of first-class package deliveries". FOXBusiness. Retrieved April 28, 2022.
^ "Here's why packages might not arrive as quickly as they used to". Deseret News. April 25, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022.
^ Domestic Money Orders Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USPS (November 26, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011.
^ "Postal Savings System by HISTORIAN, UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE, JULY 2008" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved July 18, 2012.
^ "Providing Non-Bank Financial Services for the Underserved" (PDF). January 17, 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
^ "2011 Postal Facts" (PDF). U.S. Postal Service. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2011.  There is also a web version of the content Archived September 24, 2011, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Postal Facts". USPS. March 8, 2021. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021.
^ "Size and scope". Postal Facts   U.S. Postal Service. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
^ "U.S. Postal Service". Fortune. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020.
^ Collective Bargaining Agreement between APWU and USPS
^ "IT/ASC & OS Employees". APWU. Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
^ "Postal service to slash more than 3,000 jobs, offer early retirements". CNN. March 20, 2009. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010. Retrieved May 26, 2010.
^ "Human Resources". About.usps.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
^ USPS Commission on a Safe and Secure Workplace, January 31, 2006 Archived June 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 10, 2007.
^ Vick, Karl, "Violence at work tied to loss of esteem", St. Petersburg Times, December 17, 1993
^ "The Year in Review 1993", Los Angeles Times, December 31, 1993
^ "The Simpsons Episode Scripts: AABF08   Sunday, Cruddy Sunday". Springfieldspringfield.co.uk. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2015.
^ "43 Firearms | Postal Explorer". pe.usps.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2018. Retrieved January 25, 2018.
Further reading[edit]
Adelman, Joseph M. "'A Constitutional Conveyance of Intelligence, Public and Private': The Post Office, the Business of Printing, and the American Revolution", Enterprise & Society (2010) 11#4 pp 709 52. in Project MUSE
Carpenter, D. (2000). State Building through Reputation Building: Coalitions of Esteem and Program Innovation in the National Postal System, 1883 1913. Studies in American Political Development, 14(2), 121 155.
Fuller, Wayne. American Mail: Enlarger of the Common Life (1972)
Gallagher, Winifred. How the Post Office Created America (New York: Penguin, 2017). 326 pp
Henkin, David M. The Postal Age: The Emergence of Modern Communications in Nineteenth-Century America (2007) excerpt and text search
John, Richard R. Spreading the News: The American Postal System From Franklin to Morse (1998) excerpt and text search
Kielbowicz, R. (1994). Government Goes into Business: Parcel Post in the Nation's Political Economy, 1880 1915. Studies in American Political Development, 8(1), 150 172.
Kielbowicz, Richard. "The Press, Post Office, and Flow of News in the Early Republic", Journal of the Early Republic (1983) 3: 255 80.
Kielbowicz, Richard. News in the Mail: The Press, Post Office, and Public Information, 1700 1860s (1989)  excerpt and text search
Leonard, Devin (2016). Neither Snow nor Rain: A History of the United States Postal Service. Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-2458-6.
McCaleb, Walter Flavius (1906). "The Organization of the Post-Office Department of the Confederacy". The American Historical Review. 12 (1): 66 74. doi:10.2307/1832885. JSTOR 1832885.
Musacco Ph.D., Stephen. "Beyond Going Postal: Shifting from Workplace Tragedies and Toxic Work Environments to a Safe and Healthy Organization", (2009) Booksurge Publishing, Book Trailer
Rich, Wesley Everett. The History of the United States Post Office to the Year 1829 (Harvard University Press, 1924)
Smith, William (1916). "The Colonial Post-Office". The American Historical Review. 21 (2): 258 75. doi:10.2307/1835049. JSTOR 1835049.
United States Postal Service (2022). The United States Postal Service: An American History (PDF). Washington, D.C.: United States Postal Service. ISBN 978-0-9630952-5-1. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Publication 100
White, Leonard D. The Federalists: A study in administrative history: 1789 1801 (1948), pp 173 98
White, Leonard D. The Jeffersonians: A study in administrative history: 1801 29 (1950), pp 299 335
White, Leonard D. The Jacksonians: A study in administrative history: 1829 61 (1954), pp 251 83
White, Leonard D. The Republican Era: A study in administrative history: 1869 1901 (1963), pp 257 77
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Postal Service.
Official website 
United States Postal Service in the Federal Register
vteUnited States Postal ServiceOrganizations
American Letter Mail Company
American Postal Workers Union
Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service
Bureau of Transportation
Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee
National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees
National Association of Letter Carriers
National Association of Presort Mailers
National Postal Mail Handlers Union
National Rural Letter Carriers' Association
Postal Regulatory Commission
Postal Transportation Service
PostalWatch Incorporated
United States Postal Inspection Service
United States Postal Service Office of Inspector General
Systems
Address Management System
Advanced Facer-Canceler System
Coding Accuracy Support System
Delivery Bar Code Sorter
Flats Sequencing System
Locatable Address Conversion System
United States Postal Savings System
Services
Click-N-Ship
Express mail in the United States
National Change Of Address
Permit mail
Permit Reply Mail
Postal notes
Railway Mail Service
Registered mail
Special Delivery
Special handling
Facilities
Air mail facility
Boat railway post office
Community post office
Dead letter office
Highway post office
J. W. Westcott II
List of United States post offices
National Postal Museum
Network distribution center
Railway mail service library
Red Brick Roads
Sectional center facility
Streetcar railway post office
Terminal railway post office
Legal
Comstock laws
Post Office Act
Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act
Postal Reorganization Act
Postal Service Act
Postal Service Reform Act of 2022
Private Express Statutes
Rural Post Roads Act of 1916
Title 39 of the United States Code
Related
2020 United States Postal Service crisis
United States airmail service
CAR-RT SORT
Catcher pouch
Cimarron Redoubt
Domestic Mail Manual
Facing Identification Mark
Flats
Grumman LLV
Information-Based Indicia
The Inspectors
Intelligent Mail barcode
Label 228
List of postal killings
List of U.S. state abbreviations
List of United States airmail stamps
Mail bag
Mail cover
Mail hook
Mail Isolation Control and Tracking
Mail jumping
Mail pouch
Mail sack
Mail satchel
The Mail Story
Nixie
ORM-D
Owney (dog)
Pony Express mochila
Postage stamps and postal history of the United States
Postal Alpha Numeric Encoding Technique
Postal Clause
Postal voting in the United States
Postal worker
Postmaster General
Prohibitory Order
Remote Bar Coding System
Rural Free Delivery
Rural letter carrier
STD-4C
United States post office murals
List of murals
USPS Post Office Box Lobby Recycling program
United States Postal Service creed
vteMail and postal systemsHistory
Timeline of postal history
African countries
Asian countries
European countries
Oceanian countries
Pan-American countries
Postal censorship
Components
Advertising mail
Bulk mail
Envelope
Indicia
Information-Based Indicia
Letter box
Mail
Mail bag
Meter stamp
Parcel
Parcel locker
Post box / Mailbox
Relay box
Post office
Post-office box
Postage meter
Postage stamp
Postal code
Postal marking
Delivery
Airmail
Express
Package delivery
Registered
Surface
Surface Air Lifted (SAL)
Staff
Mail carrier
Postal worker
Postmaster
Postmaster General
Processing
Intelligent Mail barcode
Mail Isolation Control and Tracking
Multiline Optical Character Reader
Mail cover
Mail sorting
Package forwarding
PLANET
POSTNET
Institutionsand systems
Postal entities
Postal museums
Postal services
Postal systems by country
Trade unions
Related
Courier
Philately
most expensive philatelic items
Stamp collecting
notable stamps
catalogues
Philatelic terminology
List of entities that have issued postage stamps
A E
F L
M Z
 Philately portal
 Category
 Commons
vtePostal administrations of North America
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cura ao
Dominica
El Salvador
Greenland
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Montserrat
Netherlands (Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba)
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Maarten
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
vtePost of the Americas
United States and Canada
Latin America and the Caribbean
Central America and the Caribbean
Latin America
Hispanic
North America
Northern
Caribbean
Central America
South America
Sovereign states
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Dependencies andother territories
Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Cura ao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saba
Saint Barth lemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
U.S. Virgin Islands
Authority control International
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Artists
Te Papa (New Zealand)
People
Trove
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Postal_Service&oldid=1148603603"