Form of government
For other uses, see Monarchy (disambiguation).
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the article. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Monarchy" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of the Politics seriesMonarchy
Central concepts
MonarchMonarchismDivine right of kingsMandate of HeavenRoyal prerogative
Types
Absolute
Chinese Legalist
Composite
Constitutional
Crowned republic
Diarchy
Dual
Elective
Emirate
Ethnarch
Federal
Hereditary
Non-sovereign
Pentarchy
Personal union
Popular
Regency
Coregency
Signoria
Tetrarch
Triarchy
Universal
Philosophers
Aquinas
Dante
Bodin
Bellarmine
Filmer
Hobbes
Bossuet
Maistre
Chateaubriand
Balzac
Cr tineau-Joly
Gogol
Balmes
Kierkegaard
Youwei
Maurras
Seca
Kuehnelt-Leddihn
Bogdanor
Scruton
Hoppe
Politicians
Mazarin
Pius VI
Ruffo
Consalvi
Plessis
Vill le
Polignac
Decazes
Cort s
Castillo
Bismarck
Mella
Churchill
Renouvin
Zhirinovsky
Popescu-T riceanu
Zourabichvili
History
Birth of the Roman Empire
Magna Carta
Foundation of the Ottoman Empire
Tsarist autocracy
Birth of the Dutch Republic
Glorious RevolutionFrench Revolution
Establishment of the Dutch monarchy
Trienio LiberalFirst French Empire
Liberal WarsSecond French Empire
Unification of ItalyMeiji Restoration
Austro-Hungarian Compromise
German unification
5 October 1910 Revolution
Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil
Chinese RevolutionRussian Revolution
Siamese revolution of 1932
Birth of the Italian Republic
Spanish transition to democracy
Iranian RevolutionModern Cambodia
Nepalese Civil War
Polity
Aristocracy
Autocracy
Oligarchy
Administration
Court
Appointment
Great Officers
Household
Retinue
Camarilla
Courtier
Privy council
Crown
Makhzen
Related ideologies
Conservatism
Despotism
Enlightened absolutism
Legitimists
Orl anist
Royalism
Ultra-royalist
Tory
Related topics
Criticism
Dynasty
Lists
Family
Family trees
Illegitimate
Figurehead
Kingmaker
List of monarchies
Current
Former
Non-sovereign
Nobility
Peerage
Realm
Philosopher king
Pretender
List
Rank
Regicide
Regnal number
Style
Succession
Anti-king
Crisis
Interregnum
Rebellion
War
Usurper
 Politics portalvte
Part of the Politics seriesPolitics
Outline
Index
Category
Primary topics
Outline of political science
Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy
Political systems
Anarchy
City-state
Democracy
Dictatorship
Directorial
Federacy
Feudalism
Hybrid regime
Meritocracy
Monarchy
Parliamentary
Presidential
Republic
Semi-parliamentary
Semi-presidential
Theocracy
Academic disciplines
Political science (political scientists)
International relations (theory)
Comparative politics
Political analysis
Political theory
Policy studies
Political psychology
Political sociology
Public administration
Bureaucracy (street-level)
Technocracy
Adhocracy
Policy
Public policy (doctrine)
Domestic policy
Foreign policy
Civil society
Public interest
Government branches
Separation of powers
Legislature
Executive
Judiciary
Election commission
Related topics
Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Critique of political economy
Subseries
Electoral systems
Elections
voting
Unitarism
Federalism
Government
forms
Ideology
Political campaigning
Political parties
 Politics portalvte
A monarchy is a form of government in which a person, the monarch, is head of state for life or until abdication. The political legitimacy and authority of the monarch may vary from restricted and largely symbolic (constitutional monarchy), to fully autocratic (absolute monarchy), and can span across executive, legislative, and judicial domains.[1]
The succession of monarchs in many cases has been hereditical, often building dynastic periods. However, elective and self-proclaimed monarchies have also been established throughout history.[2] Aristocrats, though not inherent to monarchies, often serve as the pool of persons to draw the monarch from and fill the constituting institutions (e.g. diet and court), giving many monarchies oligarchic elements.
Monarchs can carry various titles such as emperor, empress, king, and queen. Monarchies can form federations, personal unions and realms with vassals through personal association with the monarch, which is a common reason for monarchs carrying several titles.
Monarchies were the most common form of government until the 20th century, by which time republics had replaced many monarchies. Today forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch, including fifteen Commonwealth realms that share King Charles III as their head of state. Other than that, there is a range of sub-national monarchical entities. Most of the modern monarchies tend to be constitutional monarchies, retaining under a constitution unique legal and ceremonial roles for the monarch, exercising limited or no political power, similar to heads of state in a parliamentary republic.
Etymology[edit]
Further information: King (title), Rex (title), and Realm
The word "monarch" (Late Latin: monarchia) comes from the Ancient Greek word   (mon rkh s), derived from   (m nos, "one, single") and   ( rkh , "to rule"): compare   ( rkh n, "ruler, chief"). It referred to a single at least nominally absolute ruler. In current usage the word monarchy usually refers to a traditional system of hereditary rule, as elective monarchies are quite rare.
History[edit]
 Statue of Tigranes the Great in Yerevan, Armenia
 The Weld-Blundell Prism, inscribed with the Sumerian King List
The similar form of societal hierarchy known as chiefdom or tribal kingship is prehistoric. Chiefdoms provided the concept of state formation, which started with civilizations such as Mesopotamia, Ancient Egypt and the Indus Valley civilization.[3] In some parts of the world, chiefdoms became monarchies.[4] Some of the oldest recorded and evidenced monarchies were Narmer, Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt c. 3100 BCE, and Enmebaragesi, a Sumerian King of Kish c. 2600 BCE.
From earliest records, monarchs could be directly hereditary, while others were elected from among eligible members. With the Egyptian, Indian,[5] Mesopotamian, Sudanic,[6] reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion, and others, the monarch held sacral functions directly connected to sacrifice and was sometimes identified with having divine ancestry, possibly establishing a notion of the divine right of kings.
Polybius identified monarchy as one of three "benign" basic forms of government (monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy), opposed to the three "malignant" basic forms of government (tyranny, oligarchy, and ochlocracy). The monarch in classical antiquity is often identified as "king" or "ruler" (translating archon, basileus, rex, tyrannos, etc.) or as "queen" (basilinna). Polybius originally understood monarchy[note 1] as a component of republics, but since antiquity monarchy has contrasted with forms of republic, where executive power is wielded by free citizens and their assemblies. The 4th-century BCE Hindu text Arthasastra laid out the ethics of monarchism.[7] In antiquity, some monarchies were abolished in favour of such assemblies in Rome (Roman Republic, 509 BCE), and Athens (Athenian democracy, 500 BCE).
 Map of monarchies and republics in Europe, 1648
By the 17th century, monarchy was challenged by evolving parliamentarism e.g. through regional assemblies (such as the Icelandic Commonwealth, the Swiss Landsgemeinde and later Tagsatzung, and the High Medieval communal movement linked to the rise of medieval town privileges) and by modern anti-monarchism e.g. of the temporary overthrow of the English monarchy by the Parliament of England in 1649, the American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution of 1789. One of many opponents of that trend was Elizabeth Dawbarn, whose anonymous Dialogue between Clara Neville and Louisa Mills, on Loyalty (1794) features "silly Louisa, who admires liberty, Tom Paine and the US, [who is] lectured by Clara on God's approval of monarchy" and on the influence women can exert on men.[8]
Since then advocacy of the abolition of a monarchy or respectively of republics has been called republicanism, while the advocacy of monarchies is called monarchism. As such republics have become the opposing and alternative form of government to monarchy,[9][10][11] despite some having seen infringements through lifelong or even hereditary heads of state, such as in North Korea.[12]
With the rise of republicanism, a diverse division between republicanism developed in the 19th-century politics (such as anti-monarchist radicalism) and conservative or even reactionary monarchism. In the following 20th century many countries abolished the monarchy and became republics, especially in the wake of World War I and World War II.
Today forty-three sovereign nations in the world have a monarch, including fifteen Commonwealth realms that have Charles III as the head of state. Most modern monarchs are constitutional monarchs, who retain a unique legal and ceremonial role but exercise limited or no political power under a constitution. Many are so-called crowned republics, surviving particularly in small states.[13]
In some nations, however, such as Morocco, Qatar, Liechtenstein, and Thailand, the hereditary monarch has more political influence than any other single source of authority in the state, even if it is by a constitutional mandate.
According to a 2020 study, monarchy arose as a system of governance because of an efficiency in governing large populations and expansive territories during periods when coordinating such populations was difficult. The authors argue that monarchy declined as an efficient regime type with innovations in communications and transportation technology, as the efficiency of monarchy relative to other regime types declined.[14]
Characteristics and role[edit]
 King George III of the United Kingdom, portrait by Allan Ramsay, 1762
Monarchies are associated with hereditary reign, in which monarchs reign for life[note 2] and the responsibilities and power of the position pass to their child or another member of their family when they die. Most monarchs, both historically and in the modern-day, have been born and brought up within a royal family, the centre of the royal household and court. Growing up in a royal family (called a dynasty when it continues for several generations), future monarchs are often trained for their expected future responsibilities as monarch.[15]
Different systems of hereditary succession have been used, such as proximity of blood, primogeniture, and agnatic seniority (Salic law). While most monarchs in history have been male, many female monarchs also have reigned.[16] The term "queen regnant" refers to a ruling monarch, while "queen consort" refers to the wife of a reigning king. Rule may be hereditary in practice without being considered a monarchy: there have been some family dictatorships[note 3] (and also political families) in many democracies.[note 4]
The principal advantage of hereditary monarchy is the immediate continuity of leadership (as evidenced in the classic phrase "The King is dead. Long live the King!").
Some monarchies are not hereditary. In an elective monarchy, monarchs are elected or appointed by some body (an electoral college) for life or a defined period. Four elective monarchies exist today: Cambodia, Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates are 20th-century creations, while one (the papacy) is ancient.[17]
A self-proclaimed monarchy is established when a person claims the monarchy without any historical ties to a previous dynasty. There are examples of republican leaders who have proclaimed themselves monarchs: Napoleon I of France declared himself Emperor of the French and ruled the First French Empire after having held the title of First Consul of the French Republic for five years from his seizing power in the coup of 18 Brumaire. President Jean-B del Bokassa of the Central African Republic declared himself Emperor of the Central African Empire in 1976.[18] Yuan Shikai, the first formal President of the Republic of China, crowned himself Emperor of the short-lived "Empire of China" a few years after the Republic of China was founded.[19]
Powers of the monarch[edit]
 King Salman of Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarch.
In an absolute monarchy, the monarch rules as an autocrat, with absolute power over the state and government for example, the right to rule by decree, promulgate laws, and impose punishments.
In a constitutional monarchy, the monarch's power is subject to a constitution. In most current constitutional monarchies, the monarch is mainly a ceremonial figurehead symbol of national unity and state continuity. Although nominally sovereign, the electorate (through the legislature) exercises political sovereignty. Constitutional monarchs' political power is limited. Typical monarchical powers include granting pardons, granting honours, and reserve powers, e.g. to dismiss the prime minister, refuse to dissolve parliament, or veto legislation ("withhold Royal Assent"). They often also have privileges of inviolability and sovereign immunity. A monarch's powers and influence will depend on tradition, precedent, popular opinion, and law.
Semi-constitutional monarchies exhibit fewer parliamentary powers or simply monarchs with more authority.[20] The term "parliamentary monarchy" may be used to differentiate from semi-constitutional monarchies.
Monarchical reign has often been linked with military authority. In the late Roman Empire, the Praetorian Guard several times deposed Roman emperors and installed new emperors. Similarly, in the Abbasid Caliphate, the Ghilmans (slave soldiers) deposed Caliphs once they became prominent, allowing new ones to come to power. The Hellenistic kings of Macedon and of Epirus were elected by the army, which was similar in composition to the ecclesia of democracies, the council of all free citizens; military service was often linked with citizenship among the male members of the royal house. The military has dominated the monarch in modern Thailand and in medieval Japan (where a hereditary military chief, the sh gun, was the de facto ruler, although the Japanese emperor nominally reigned). In Fascist Italy, the Savoy monarchy under King Victor Emmanuel III coexisted with the Fascist single-party rule of Benito Mussolini; Romania under the Iron Guard and Greece during the first months of the Colonels' regime were similar. Spain under Francisco Franco was officially a monarchy, although there was no monarch on the throne. Upon his death, Franco was succeeded as head of state by the Bourbon heir, Juan Carlos I, and Spain became a democracy with the king as a figurehead constitutional monarch.
Person of monarch[edit]
 Postcard of ruling monarchs, taken in 1909, between February (accession of King Manuel II of Portugal) and November (death of the Guangxu Emperor)
Most monarchies only have a single person acting as monarch at any given time, although two monarchs have ruled simultaneously in some countries, a situation known as diarchy. Historically this was the case in the ancient Greek city-state of Sparta. There are examples of joint sovereignty of spouses, parent and child or other relatives (such as William III and Mary II in the kingdoms of England and Scotland, Tsars Peter I and Ivan V of Russia, and Charles I and Joanna of Castile).
Andorra currently is the world's only constitutional diarchy, a co-principality. Located in the Pyrenees between Spain and France, it has two co-princes: the bishop of Urgell in Spain (a prince-bishop) and the president of France (derived ex officio from the French kings, who themselves inherited the title from the counts of Foix). It is the only case in which an independent country's (co-)monarch is democratically elected by the citizens of another country.
In a personal union, separate independent states share the same person as monarch, but each realm retains separate laws and government. The fifteen separate Commonwealth realms are sometimes described as being in a personal union with King Charles III as monarch; however, they can also be described as being in a shared monarchy.
A regent may rule when the monarch is a minor, absent, or debilitated.
A pretender is a claimant to an abolished throne or a throne already occupied by somebody else.
Abdication is the act of formally giving up one's monarchical power and status.
Monarchs may mark the ceremonial beginning of their reigns with a coronation or enthronement.
Role of monarch[edit]
Monarchy, especially absolute monarchy, is sometimes linked to religious aspects; many monarchs once claimed the right to rule by the will of a deity (Divine Right of Kings, Mandate of Heaven), or a special connection to a deity (sacred king), or even purported to be divine kings, or incarnations of deities themselves (imperial cult). Many European monarchs have been styled Fidei defensor (Defender of the Faith); some hold official positions relating to the state religion or established church.
In the Western political tradition, a morally based, balanced monarchy was stressed as the ideal form of government, and little attention was paid to modern-day ideals of egalitarian democracy: e.g. Saint Thomas Aquinas unapologetically declared: "Tyranny is wont to occur not less but more frequently on the basis of polyarchy [rule by many, i.e. oligarchy or democracy] than on the basis of monarchy." (On Kingship). However, Thomas Aquinas also stated that the ideal monarchical system would also have at lower levels of government both an aristocracy and elements of democracy in order to create a balance of power. The monarch would also be subject to both natural and divine law, and to the Church in matters of religion.
In Dante Alighieri's De Monarchia, a spiritualised, imperial Catholic monarchy is strongly promoted according to a Ghibelline world-view in which the "royal religion of Melchizedek" is emphasised against the priestly claims of the rival papal ideology.
In Saudi Arabia, the king is a head of state who is both the absolute monarch of the country and the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques of Islam (     ).
The roles of monarchs can overlap with other monarchies through personal union or dynastic union, with maybe becoming institutional real union and possibly a larger federal, composite or unitary monarchy, realm and state.
Titles of monarchs[edit]
See also: Composite monarchy
 Tewodros II, Emperor of Ethiopia
Monarchs can have various titles. Common European titles of monarchs (in that hierarchical order of nobility) are emperor or empress (from Latin: imperator or imperatrix), king or queen, grand duke or grand duchess, prince or princess, duke or duchess.[21] Some early modern European titles (especially in German states) included elector (German: Kurf rst, Prince-Elector, literally "electing prince"), margrave (German: Markgraf, equivalent to the French title marquis, literally "count of the borderland"), and burgrave (German: Burggraf, literally "count of the castle"). Lesser titles include count and princely count. Slavic titles include knyaz and tsar ( ) or tsaritsa ( ), a word derived from the Roman imperial title Caesar.
In the Muslim world, titles of monarchs include caliph (successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad and a leader of the entire Muslim community), padishah (emperor), sultan or sultana, sh hansh h (emperor), shah, malik (king) or malikah (queen), emir (commander, prince) or emira (princess), sheikh or sheikha, imam (used in Oman). East Asian titles of monarchs include hu ngd  (emperor) or n hu ng (empress regnant), ti nz  (son of heaven), tenn  (emperor) or josei tenn  (empress regnant), wang (king) or yeowang (queen regnant), hwangje (emperor) or yeoje (empress regnant). South Asian and South East Asian titles included mah r ja (high king) or maharani (high queen), raja (king) and rana (king) or rani (queen) and ratu (South East Asian queen). Historically, Mongolic and Turkic monarchs have used the title khan and khagan (emperor) or khatun and khanum; Ancient Egyptian monarchs have used the title pharaoh for men and women. In Ethiopian Empire, monarchs used title n gus  n g st (king of kings) or n g st  n g st (queen of kings).
Many monarchs are addressed with particular styles or manners of address, like "Majesty", "Royal Highness", "By the Grace of God", Am r al-Mu'min n ("Leader of the Faithful"), H nkar-i Khanedan-i  l-i Osman, "Sovereign of the Sublime House of Osman"), Duli Yang Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda ("Majesty"), Jeonha ("Majesty"), Tenn  Heika (literally "His Majesty the heavenly sovereign"), B xi  ("Bottom of the Steps").
Sometimes titles are used to express claims to territories that are not held in fact (for example, English claims to the French throne), or titles not recognised (antipopes). Also, after a monarchy is deposed, often former monarchs and their descendants are given alternative titles (the King of Portugal was given the hereditary title Duke of Braganza).
Non-sovereign monarchies[edit]
Main article: Non-sovereign monarchy
A non-sovereign monarchy is one where the monarch is subject to a temporal authority higher than their own. Some are dependent on other powers (see vassals, suzerainty, puppet state, hegemony). In the British colonial era, indirect rule under a paramount power existed, such as the princely states under the British Raj.
In Botswana, South Africa, Ghana and Uganda, the ancient kingdoms and chiefdoms that were met by the colonialists when they first arrived on the continent are now constitutionally protected as regional or sectional entities.
Furthermore, in Nigeria, though the hundreds of sub-regional polities that exist there are not provided for in the current constitution, they are nevertheless legally recognised aspects of the structure of governance that operates in the nation. For example, the Yoruba city-state of Akure in south-western Nigeria is something of an elective monarchy: its reigning Oba Deji has to be chosen by an electoral college of nobles from amongst a finite collection of royal princes of the realm upon the death or removal of an incumbent.
In addition to these five countries, non-sovereign monarchies of varied sizes and complexities exist all over the rest of the continent of Africa.
Statehood[edit]
Monarchies pre-date polities like nation states[22] and even territorial states. A nation or constitution is not necessary in a monarchy since a person, the monarch, binds the separate territories and political legitimacy (e.g. in personal union) together.
Monarchies, though, have applied state symbols like insignia or abstracts like the concept of the Crown to create a state identity, which is to be carried and occupied by the monarch, but represents the monarchy even in absence and succession of the monarch.
Nevertheless, monarchies can also be bound to territories (e.g., the King of Norway) and peoples (e.g., the King of the Belgians).
Succession[edit]
Hereditary monarchies[edit]
 Current European monarchies by succession method:  Absolute primogeniture  Male-preference cognatic primogeniture, to be changed to absolute primogeniture  Male-preference cognatic primogeniture  Agnatic primogeniture  Elective
In a hereditary monarchy, the position of monarch is inherited according to a statutory or customary order of succession, usually within one royal family tracing its origin through a historical dynasty or bloodline. This usually means that the heir to the throne is known well in advance of becoming monarch to ensure a smooth succession.[23][24]
Primogeniture, in which the eldest child of the monarch is first in line to become monarch, is the most common system in hereditary monarchy. The order of succession is usually affected by rules on gender. Historically "agnatic primogeniture" or "patrilineal primogeniture" was favoured, that is inheritance according to seniority of birth among the sons of a monarch or head of family, with sons and their male issue inheriting before brothers and their issue, and male-line males inheriting before females of the male line.[25] This is the same as semi-Salic primogeniture. Complete exclusion of females from dynastic succession is commonly referred to as application of the Salic law (see Terra salica).
Before primogeniture was enshrined in European law and tradition, kings would often secure the succession by having their successor (usually their eldest son) crowned during their own lifetime, so for a time there would be two kings in coregency a senior king and a junior king. Examples were Henry the Young King of England and the early Direct Capetians in France. Sometimes, however, primogeniture can operate through the female line.
 King Leopold I, an elected founder of the hereditary monarchy of Belgium
In 1980, Sweden became the first European monarchy to declare equal (full cognatic) primogeniture, meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne.[26] Other kingdoms (such as the Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in 1991, Denmark in 2009, and Luxembourg[27] in 2011) have since followed suit. The United Kingdom adopted absolute (equal) primogeniture (subject to the claims of existing heirs) on April 25, 2013, following agreement by the prime ministers of the sixteen Commonwealth Realms at the 22nd Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.[28]
In the absence of children, the next most senior member of the collateral line (for example, a younger sibling of the previous monarch) becomes monarch. In complex cases, this can mean that there are closer blood relatives to the deceased monarch than the next in line according to primogeniture. This has often led, especially in Europe in the Middle Ages, to conflict between the principle of primogeniture and the principle of proximity of blood.
Other hereditary systems of succession included tanistry, which is semi-elective and gives weight to merit and Agnatic seniority. In some monarchies, such as Saudi Arabia, succession to the throne first passes to the monarch's next eldest brother, and only after that to the monarch's children (agnatic seniority). However, on June 21, 2017, King Salman of Saudi Arabi revolted against this style of monarchy and elected his son to inherit the throne.[29]
Elective monarchies[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Pope Francis, Sovereign of the Vatican City State
In an elective monarchy, monarchs are elected or appointed by somebody (an electoral college) for life or a defined period, but then reign like any other monarch. There is no popular vote involved in elective monarchies, as the elective body usually consists of a small number of eligible people. Historical examples of elective monarchy are the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors but often coming from the same dynasty) and the free election of kings of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth. For example, Pepin the Short (father of Charlemagne) was elected King of the Franks by an assembly of Frankish leading men;[30] nobleman Stanis aw August Poniatowski of Poland was an elected king, as was Frederick I of Denmark. Gallic and Germanic peoples also had elective monarchies.
Six forms of elective monarchies exist today. The pope of the Roman Catholic Church (who rules as Sovereign of the Vatican City State) is elected for life by the College of Cardinals. In the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, the Prince and Grand Master is elected for life tenure by the Council Complete of State from within its members. In Malaysia, the federal king, called the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Paramount Ruler, is elected for a five-year term from among and by the hereditary rulers (mostly sultans) of nine of the federation's constitutive states, all on the Malay peninsula. The United Arab Emirates also chooses its federal leaders from among emirs of the federated states. Furthermore, Andorra has a unique constitutional arrangement as one of its heads of state is the President of the French Republic in the form of a Co-Prince. This is the only instance in the world where the monarch of a state is elected by the citizens of a different country. In New Zealand, the Maori King, head of the Kingitanga Movement, is elected by a council of Maori elders at the funeral of their predecessor, which is also where their coronation takes place. All of the Heads of the Maori King Movement have been descendants of the first Maori King, Potatau Te Wherowhero, who was elected and became King in June 1858. The current monarch is King Tuheitia Potatau Te Wherowhero VII, who was elected and became King on 21 August 2006, the same day as the funeral of his mother, Te Arikinui Dame Te Atairangikaahu, the first Maori Queen. As well as being King and head of the Kingitanga Movement, King Tuheitia is also ex officio the Paramount Chief of the Waikato-Tainui tribe.
Appointment by the current monarch is another system, used in Jordan. It also was used in Imperial Russia; however, it was soon changed to semi-Salic because the instability of the appointment system resulted in an age of palace revolutions. In this system, the monarch chooses the successor, who is always his relative.
See also: jure uxoris
Other ways of succession[edit]
See also: Order of succession, Self-proclaimed monarchy, and Legitimacy (political)
Other ways to success a monarchy can be through claiming alternative votes (e.g. as in the case of the Western Schism), claims of a mandate to rule (e.g. a popular or divine mandate), military occupation, a coup d' tat, a will of the previous monarch or treaties between factions inside and outside of a monarchy (e.g. as in the case of the War of the Spanish Succession).
By accession[edit]
See also: Enthronement
The legitimacy and authorities of monarchs are often proclaimed and recognized through occupying and being invested with insignia, seats, deeds and titles, like in the course of coronations.
This is especially employed to legitimize and settle disputed successions, changes in ways of succession, status of a monarch (e.g. as in the case of the privilegium maius deed) or new monarchies altogether (e.g. as in the case of the coronation of Napoleon I).
Dynasties[edit]
Succession is often based on the expected continuation of a dynastic period or association in a dynastic union, which is sometimes challenged by diverging lineage and legitimism.
Succession crisis[edit]
Further information: Succession crisis
In cases of succession challenges, it can be instrumental for pretenders to secure or install legitimacy through the above, for example proof of accession like insignia, through treaties or a claim of a divine mandate to rule (e.g. by Hong Xiuquan and his Taiping Heavenly Kingdom).
Current monarchies[edit]
Main article: List of current monarchs of sovereign states
This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Monarchy" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  Absolute monarchies  Semi-constitutional monarchies  Parliamentary monarchies  Commonwealth realms (parliamentary monarchies in personal union)  Subnational monarchies
Part of the Politics seriesBasic forms of government
List of forms of government
Source of power
Democracy (rule by many)
Demarchy
Direct
Liberal
Representative
Social
Socialist
Others
Oligarchy (rule by few)
Anocracy
Aristocracy
Gerontocracy
Kleptocracy
Kritarchy
Meritocracy
Noocracy
Particracy
Plutocracy
Stratocracy
Technocracy
Theocracy
Autocracy (rule by one)
Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship
Tyranny
Anarchy (rule by none)
Anarchism
Free association
Stateless
Power ideology
MonarchyRepublic (socio-political ideologies)
Absolute
Constitutional
Directorial
Legalist
Parliamentary
Presidential
Semi-presidential
Socialist
AuthoritarianLibertarian (socio-economic ideologies)
Anarchism
Colonialism
Communism
Despotism
Distributism
Fascism
Feudalism
Socialism
Totalitarianism
Tribalism
ReligiousSecular
State religion
Secular state
State atheism
GlobalLocal (geo-cultural ideologies)
City-state
Intergovernmental organisation
National government
World government
Nationalism
Internationalism
Globalism
Power structure
Unitarism
Unitary state
Empire
Principality
Client state
Associated state
Dependent territory
Dominion
Protectorate
Puppet state
Puppet monarch
Satellite state
Self-governing colony
Tributary state
Buffer state
Vassal state
Viceroyalty
Federalism
Confederation
Devolution
Federation
Superstate
Supranational union
International relations
Small power
Regional power
Middle power
Great power
Superpower
Hyperpower
Administrative division
Related
Hybrid regimes
Democratic backsliding
Democratisation
 Politics portalvte
Systems of government
Republican forms of government:
 Presidential republics with an executive presidency separate from the legislature
 Semi-presidential system with both an executive presidency and a separate head of government that leads the rest of the executive, who is appointed by the president and accountable to the legislature
 Parliamentary republics with a ceremonial and non-executive president, where a separate head of government leads the executive and is dependent on the confidence of the legislature
 Republics in which a combined head of state and government is elected by, or nominated by, the legislature and may or may not be subject to parliamentary confidence
Monarchical forms of government:
 Constitutional monarchies with a ceremonial and non-executive monarch, where a separate head of government leads the executive
 Semi-constitutional monarchies with a ceremonial monarch, but where royalty still hold significant executive or legislative power
 Absolute monarchies where the monarch leads the executive
 One-party states (in principle republics)
 Countries where constitutional provisions for government have been suspended
 Countries which do not fit any of the above systems (e.g. provisional government or unclear political situations)
Currently, there are 43 nations and a population of roughly half a billion people in the world with a monarch as head of state. They fall roughly into the following categories:
Commonwealth realms[edit]
King Charles III is, separately, monarch of fifteen Commonwealth realms (Antigua and Barbuda, the Commonwealth of Australia, the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, New Zealand, the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). They evolved out of the British Empire into fully independent states within the Commonwealth of Nations that retain the King as head of state. All fifteen realms are constitutional monarchies and full democracies where the King has limited powers or a largely ceremonial role. The King is head of the Church of England (the established church of England), while the other 14 realms do not have a state religion.
Other European constitutional monarchies[edit]
The Principality of Andorra, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Spain, and the Kingdom of Sweden are fully democratic states in which the monarch has a limited or largely ceremonial role. In some cases, there is a Christian religion established as the official church in each of these countries. This is the Lutheran form of Protestantism in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, while Andorra is a Roman Catholic country. Spain, Belgium, and the Netherlands have no official state religion. Luxembourg, which is predominantly Roman Catholic, has five so-called officially recognized cults of national importance (Roman Catholicism, Protestantism, Greek Orthodoxy, Judaism, and Islam), a status which gives those religions some privileges like the payment of a state salary to their priests.
Andorra is unique among all existing monarchies, as it is a diarchy, with the co-princes being shared by the president of France and the bishop of Urgell. This situation, based on historical precedence, has created a peculiar situation among monarchies, as:
neither of the co-princes is of Andorran descent;
one is elected by citizens of a foreign country (France), but not by Andorrans as they cannot vote in the French presidential elections; and
the other, the bishop of Urgell, is appointed by a foreign head of state, the pope.
European semi constitutional monarchies[edit]
A semi-constitutional monarchy is a monarchy where the monarch rules according to a democratic constitution but still retains substantial powers. The Principality of Liechtenstein and the Principality of Monaco are European semi constitutional monarchies. For example, the 2003 Constitution referendum gave the Prince of Liechtenstein the power to veto any law that the Landtag (parliament) proposes, while the Landtag can veto any law that the Prince tries to pass. The prince can appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee. However, he is not an absolute monarch, as the people can call for a referendum to end the monarch's reign. When Hereditary Prince Alois threatened to veto a referendum to legalize abortion in 2011, it came as a surprise because the prince had not vetoed any law for over 30 years.[note 5] The prince of Monaco has simpler powers; he cannot appoint or dismiss any elective member or government employee to or from his or her post, but he can elect the minister of state, government council and judges. Both Albert II, Prince of Monaco, and Hans-Adam II, Prince of Liechtenstein, are theoretically very powerful within their small states, but they have very limited power compared to the Islamic monarchs (see below). They also own huge tracts of land and are shareholders in many companies.
Monarchies in the Muslim world[edit]
The monarchies of the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Brunei Darussalam, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the State of Kuwait, Malaysia, the Kingdom of Morocco, the Sultanate of Oman, the State of Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates generally retain far more powers than their European or Commonwealth counterparts. Brunei Darussalam, Oman, and Saudi Arabia remain absolute monarchies; Bahrain, Kuwait, and United Arab Emirates are classified as mixed, meaning there are representative bodies of some kind, but the monarch retains most of his powers. Jordan, Malaysia, and Morocco are constitutional monarchies, but their monarchs still retain more substantial powers than European equivalents.
East and Southeast Asian constitutional monarchies[edit]
The kingdoms of Bhutan, Cambodia, Thailand, and Japan are constitutional monarchies where the monarch has a limited or merely ceremonial role. Bhutan made the change in 2008.[31] Cambodia had its own monarchy after independence from the French colonial empire, but it was deposed after the Khmer Rouge came into power. The monarchy was subsequently restored in the peace agreement of 1993. Thailand transitioned into a constitutional monarchy over the course of the 20th Century. Japan has had a monarchy, an emperor, according to legend, since Emperor Jimmu (reigned 660-585 BCE), making it the world's oldest existing monarchy.[32] After their defeat in the Second World War, Japan made great strides in limiting the power of the Emperor, giving most of it to the democratically elected National Diet.
Other monarchies[edit]
Five monarchies do not fit into any of the above groups by virtue of geography or class of monarchy: the Kingdom of Tonga in Polynesia; the Kingdom of Eswatini and the Kingdom of Lesotho in Africa and the Vatican City State in Europe. Of these, Lesotho and Tonga are constitutional monarchies, while Eswatini and the Vatican City are absolute monarchies.
Eswatini is unique among these monarchies, often being considered a diarchy: the King, or Ngwenyama, rules alongside his mother, the Ndlovukati, as dual heads of state.[33][citation needed] This was originally intended to provide a check on political power. The Ngwenyama, however, is considered the administrative head of state, while the Ndlovukati is considered the spiritual and national head of state, a position which more or less has become symbolic in recent years.[34]
The Pope is the absolute monarch of the Vatican City State (a separate entity from the Holy See) by virtue of his position as head of the Roman Catholic Church and Bishop of Rome; he is an elected rather than a hereditary ruler, and does not have to be a citizen of the territory prior to his election by the cardinals.[35][citation needed]
The Order of Malta describes itself as a "sovereign subject" based on its unique history and unusual present circumstances, but its exact status in international law is a subject of debate.
In Samoa, the position of head of state is described in Part III of the 1960 Samoan constitution. At the time the constitution was adopted, it was anticipated that future heads of state would be chosen from among the four Tama a 'Aiga "royal" paramount chiefs. However, this is not required by the constitution, and, for this reason, Samoa can be considered a republic rather than a constitutional monarchy.
The ruling Kim family in North Korea (Kim Il-sung, Kim Jong-il and Kim Jong-un) has been described as a de facto absolute monarchy[36][37][38] or a "hereditary dictatorship".[39] In 2013, Clause 2 of Article 10 of the new edited Ten Fundamental Principles of the Korean Workers' Party states that the party and revolution must be carried "eternally" by the "Baekdu (Kim's) bloodline".[40] This though does not mean it is a de jure absolute monarchy, as the country's name is the Democratic Republic of Korea.
The al-Assad ruling Syria (Hafez al-Assad and Bashar al-Assad ) have also been described as a de facto absolute monarchy[36][37][38] or a "hereditary dictatorship".[39] After the death of Hafez Al-Assad in 2000, the Constitution of Syria was amended for the minimum age of the President to change from 40 to 34, which allowed 34 year old Bashar al-Assad to become president.[40] This though does not mean it is a de jure absolute monarchy, as the country's name is the Syrian Arab Republic.
Long form titles for the country[edit]
Kingdom:  Bahrain,  Belgium,  Bhutan,  Cambodia,  Denmark,  Eswatini,  Jordan,  Lesotho,  Morocco,  Netherlands,  Norway,  Saudi Arabia,  Spain,  Sweden,  Thailand,  Tonga,  United Kingdom
State:  Kuwait,  Qatar,  Japan (de facto),  Vatican City
Principality:  Andorra,  Liechtenstein,  Monaco
Federation:  Saint Kitts and Nevis,  Malaysia (de facto)
Commonwealth:  Australia,  Bahamas
Sultanate:  Oman
Nation:  Brunei Darussalam
Grand Duchy:  Luxembourg
Independent State:  Papua New Guinea
Emirate:  United Arab Emirates
None:  Antigua and Barbuda,  Belize,  Canada,  Grenada,  Jamaica,  Japan,  Malaysia,  New Zealand,  Saint Lucia,  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,  Solomon Islands,  Tuvalu
See also[edit]
Monarchy portal
Absolute monarchy
Abolition of monarchy
Autocracy
Cloistered rule
Criticism of monarchy
Diarchy
Empire
Family as a model for the state
Federal monarchy
Hereditary monarchy
List of current constituent monarchs
List of current monarchies
List of current monarchs of sovereign states
List of living former sovereign monarchs
List of fictional monarchs
List of monarchies
List of monarchs by nickname
List of royalty by net worth
List of usurpers
Monarchism
Order of succession
President for life
Pretender
Personal union
Royal and noble ranks
Universal monarchy
Notes and references[edit]
Notes[edit]
^ Now substituted with the concept of autocracy.
^ Malaysia is a special case. Malaysia s head of state, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (often translated as "King"), is elected to serve a five-year term. However, he is elected from among the federation's subnational monarchies, each of whom inherit their position and rule for life.
^ Examples are Oliver Cromwell and Richard Cromwell in the Commonwealth of England, Kim il-Sung and Kim Jong-il in North Korea, the Somoza family in Nicaragua, Fran ois Duvalier and Jean-Claude Duvalier in Haiti, and Hafez al-Assad and Bashar al-Assad in Syria.
^ For example, the Kennedy family in the United States and the Nehru-Gandhi family in India. See list of political families.
^ In the end, this referendum failed to make it to a vote.
References[edit]
^ "Monarchy | Definition, Examples, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023.
^ "The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth". In Our Time. October 14, 2021. BBC Radio 4. Retrieved March 29, 2023.
^ Conrad Phillip Kottak (1991). Cultural Anthropology. McGraw-Hill. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-07-035615-3.
^ A. Adu Boahen; J. F. Ade Ajayi; Michael Tidy (1986). Topics in West African History. Longman Group. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-582-58504-1.
^ Political Violence in Ancient India, p.23, "In later Vedic texts, the frequency of the word  dharma  decreased and its connotations shrank; it came to be especially connected with kingship and with the royal consecration ritual known as the r jas ya."
^ Traditions and encounters. McGraw Hill Education. p. 63. By about 5000 b.c.e. many Sudanic peoples had formed small monarchies ruled by kings who were viewed as divine or semidivine beings.
^ The Arthasastra: Selections from the Classic Indian Work on Statecraft. Hackett Publishing. September 15, 2012. ISBN 9781603849029.
^ The Feminist Companion to Literature in English, ed. Virginia Blain, Patricia Clements and Isobel Grundy, (London: Batsford, 1990), p. 272.
^ Bohn, H. G. (1849). The Standard Library Cyclopedia of Political, Constitutional, Statistical and Forensic Knowledge. p. 640. A republic, according to the modern usage of the word, signifies a political community which is not under monarchical government ... in which one person does not possess the entire sovereign power.
^ "Definition of Republic". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved February 18, 2017. a government having a chief of state who is not a monarch ... a government in which supreme power resides in a body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by elected officers and representatives responsible to them and governing according to law
^ "The definition of republic". Dictionary.com. Retrieved February 18, 2017. a state in which the supreme power rests in the body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by representatives chosen directly or indirectly by them. ... a state in which the head of government is not a monarch or other hereditary head of state.
^ Mansourov, Alexandre. "Korean Monarch Kim Jong Il: Technocrat Ruler of the Hermit Kingdom Facing the Challenge of Modernity". The Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2007.
^ W. Veenendaal, "Monarchy and Democracy in Small States: An Ambiguous Symbiosis," in S. Wolf, ed., State Size Matters: Politik und Recht I'm Kontext von Kleinstaatlichkeit und Monarchie (Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2016), pp. 183 198, doi:10.1007/978-3-658-07725-9_9, ISBN 978-3-658-07724-2.
^ Gerring, John; Wig, Tore; Veenendaal, Wouter; Weitzel, Daniel; Teorell, Jan; Kikuta, Kyosuke (July 12, 2020). "Why Monarchy? The Rise and Demise of a Regime Type". Comparative Political Studies. 54 (3 4): 585 622. doi:10.1177/0010414020938090. hdl:10852/84589. ISSN 0010-4140. S2CID 225612565.
^ UCL (November 8, 2021). "What is the role of the monarchy?". The Constitution Unit. Retrieved February 28, 2023.
^ Beemer, Cristy (2011). "The Female Monarchy: A Rhetorical Strategy of Early Modern Rule". Rhetoric Review. 30 (3): 258 274. doi:10.1080/07350198.2011.581937. ISSN 0735-0198. JSTOR 23064026. S2CID 144455583.
^ "The Definition of an Elective Monarchy". The Classroom | Empowering Students in Their College Journey. Retrieved August 30, 2021.
^ Marlowe, Lara. "The Central African Republic, where Emperor Bokassa ruled with violence and greed". The Irish Times. Retrieved February 5, 2019.
^ Spence, Jonathan D. (1999) The Search for Modern China, W.W. Norton and Company. p. 274. ISBN 0-393-97351-4.
^ Anckar, Carsten; Akademi,  bo (2016). "Semi presidential systems and semi constitutional monarchies: A historical assessment of executive power-sharing". European Consortium for Political Research (ECPR). Retrieved August 14, 2019.
^ Meyers Taschenlexikon Geschichte 1982 vol.1 p21
^ Wimmer, Andreas; Feinstein, Yuval (October 8, 2010). "The Rise of the Nation-State across the World, 1816 to 2001". American Sociological Review. 75 (5): 764 790. doi:10.1177/0003122410382639. S2CID 10075481. Sovereignty has a domestic and an external component. Domestically, a written constitution claims a nationally defined community of equal citizens as the political (and moral) foundation of the state and foresees some institutional representation of this community (not necessarily a freely elected parliament). Internal sovereignty thus stands in opposition to dynasticism, theocracy, feudal privilege, and mass slavery. [page 773]
^ Kurrild-Klitgaard, Peter (2000). "The constitutional economics of autocratic succession". Public Choice. 103 (1/2): 63 84. doi:10.1023/A:1005078532251. ISSN 0048-5829. S2CID 154097838.
^ Kurrild-Klitgaard, Peter (2004). "Autocratic succession". Encyclopedia of Public Choice. 103: 358 362. doi:10.1007/978-0-306-47828-4_39. ISBN 978-0-306-47828-4.
^ Murphy, Michael Dean (2001). "A Kinship Glossary: Symbols, Terms, and Concepts". Anthropology.UA.edu. Archived from the original on October 5, 2006. Retrieved October 5, 2006.
^ SOU 1977:5 Kvinnlig tronf ljd, p. 16.
^ "Overturning Centuries of Royal Rules" (2011-10-28). BBC.com. Retrieved 2018-11-02.
^ "New rules on royal succession come into effect". BBC News. March 26, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2019.
^ Chara, Jihan (October 1, 2018). "Saudi Arabia: A prince's revolution". European View. 17 (2): 227 234. doi:10.1177/1781685818803525. ISSN 1781-6858.
^ Middleton, John (2015). World monarchies and dynasties. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7656-8050-1. OCLC 920786632.
^ Xavier, Constantino (July 8, 2020). "Bhutan's democratic transition and ties to India". Brookings. Retrieved April 16, 2022.
^ "Emperor of Japan". World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved April 16, 2022.
^ Africa Research Bulletin: Political, Social and Cultural Series. 36 (1). February 22, 1999. doi:10.1111/arbp.1999.36.issue-1. ISSN 0001-9844 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/arbp.1999.36.issue-1. {{cite journal}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Thom, Liezl (April 28, 2021). "Princess Sikhanyiso Dlamini of Eswatini is looking to the future while embracing her roots". ABC News. Retrieved August 8, 2021.
^ Marans, Noam E. (April 9, 2015). "The Pope Francis Effect and Catholic-Jewish Relations". Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations. 10 (1). doi:10.6017/scjr.v10i1.8659. ISSN 1930-3777.
^ a b Young W. Kihl, Hong Nack Kim. North Korea: The Politics of Regime Survival. Armonk, New York, USA: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 2006. Pp 56.
^ a b Robert A. Scalapino, Chong-Sik Lee. The Society. University of California Press, 1972. Pp. 689.
^ a b Bong Youn Choy. A history of the Korean reunification movement: its issues and prospects. Research Committee on Korean Reunification, Institute of International Studies, Bradley University, 1984. Pp. 117.
^ a b Sheridan, Michael (September 16, 2007). "A tale of two dictatorships: The links between North Korea and Syria". The Times. London. Retrieved April 9, 2010.
^ a b The Twisted Logic of the N.Korean Regime, Chosun Ilbo, 2013-08-13, Accessed date: 2017-01-11
External links[edit]
Look up royalty in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Monarchy.
Look up monarchy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikivoyage has travel information for Monarchies.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Monarchy.
The Constitutional Monarchy Association in the UK
"Monarchy" . Encyclop dia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Kings and queens.
vteMonarchies
Monarch
Imperial, royal and noble ranks
List of current sovereign monarchs
List of current non-sovereign monarchs
List of monarchy referendums
Type
Absolute
Constitutional
Diarchy
Elective
Federal
Hereditary
Non-sovereign
Personal union
Regency
Topics
Abdication
Abolition of monarchy
Aristocracy
Criticism of monarchy
Democratization
Decolonization
Dynasty
Government
Head of state
Legitimacy (political)
Oligarchy
Order of succession
Republicanism
Self-proclaimed monarchy
Sovereignty
Titles
Chhatrapati
Emperor
King
Queen regnant
Prince regnant
Raja
khan
Tsar
Sultan
Shah
Pharaoh
CurrentAfrica
Eswatini
Lesotho
Morocco
list
Asia
Bahrain
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Thailand
United Arab Emirates
list
Europe
Andorra
Belgium
Denmark
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Monaco
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Vatican City
Oceania
Tonga
Commonwealth realms
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Belize
Canada
Grenada
Jamaica
New Zealand
Cook Islands
Niue
Papua New Guinea
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
FormerAfrica
Adamawa
Ankole
Aussa
Barotseland
Bagirmi
Bornu
Burundi
Central Africa
Dahomey
Egypt
Ethiopia
Ghana
Gomma
Gumma
Kaffa
Kongo
Libya
Luba
Madagascar
Mali
Maore
Maravi
Mwali
Ndzuwani
Ngazidja
Rwanda
Shilluk
Islands of Refreshment
Tunisia
Wituland
Wassoulou
Yeke
Zanzibar
Zimbabwe
and other
Americas
Araucan a
Aztec
Brazil
Haiti
Inca
Mexico
Miskito
Suriname
Talamanca
Trinidad
Thirteen Colonies
Asia
Afghanistan
Asir
Bangladesh
Bukhara
Burma
Cebu
Chehab
China
Dapitan
Hejaz
Indonesia
Iran (Qajar)
Iraq
Jabal Shammar
Kandy (Sri Lanka)
Kathiri
Khiva
Korea
Kumul
Kurdistan
Laos
Maguindanao
Mahra
Maldives
Manchukuo
Mongolia
Najran
Nepal
Qu'aiti
Ryukyu
Sarawak
Shan
Sikkim
Sip Song Chau Tai
Sulu
Syria
Tibet
Taiwan
Upper Asir
Upper Yafa
Vietnam
Yemen (South Yemen)
Europe
Albania
Aragon
Asturias
Austria
Austria-Hungary
Bavaria
Bosnia
Brittany
Bulgaria
Crimea
Cilicia
Corsica
Cyprus
Finland
France
Galicia
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Granada
Hanover
Hungary
Iceland
Imereti
Ireland
Italy
Kartli-Kakheti
Lithuania
Majorca
Man
Moldavia
Montenegro
Navarre
Neuch tel
Ottoman Empire
Papal States
Piedmont-Sardinia
Poland Lithuania
Portugal
Prussia
Romania
Russia
Samos
Saxony
Savoy
Scotland
Serbia
Tavolara
Two Sicilies
Tuscany
Ukraine
United Baltic Duchy
Yugoslavia
Valencia
W rttemberg
Oceania
Abemama
Bora Bora
Easter Island
Kingdom of Fiji
Hawaii
Huahine
Mangareva
Niu -Fekai
Nuku Hiva
Raiatea
Rapa Iti
Rarotonga
Rimatara
Rurutu
Tahuata
Tahiti
Commonwealth realms
Barbados
Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
Fiji
The Gambia
Ghana
Guyana
India (British Raj, princely states)
Irish Free State / Ireland
Kenya
Malawi
Malta
Mauritius
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rhodesia
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Tanganyika
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
Links to related articles
vteCrownsAustria
Archducal hat of Austria
Imperial Crown of Austria
Brilliant Crown of Empress Elisabeth
Archducal hat of Tyrol
Ducal hat of Styria
Archducal hat of Joseph II
Balkans
Crown of Zvonimir (Croatia)
Crown of Greece
Diamond Crown (Bulgaria)
Crown of Skanderbeg (Albania)
Bohemia
Crown of Saint Wenceslas
Crown of the  roda Treasure
Brazil
Crown of Pedro I
Imperial Crown of Brazil
Coronet of the Imperial Prince of Brazil
Coronet of Laurels of Princess Isabel
British Isles
Crown of Princess Blanche
Crown of Scotland
St Edward's Crown
Crown of Mary of Modena
Tudor Crown
State Crown of George I
Coronet of Frederick, Prince of Wales
Coronation Crown of George IV
Diamond Diadem
Crown of Queen Adelaide
Imperial State Crown
Small Diamond Crown of Queen Victoria
Crown of Queen Alexandra
Coronet of George, Prince of Wales
Crown of Queen Mary
Imperial Crown of India
Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother
Coronet of Charles, Prince of Wales
Denmark
Crown of Christian IV
Crown of Christian V
France
Crown of Charlemagne
Sainte Couronne
Crown of Louis XV
Crown of Napoleon I
Crown of Charles X
Crown of Napoleon III
Crown of Empress Eug nie
Germany
German State Crown
Prussia:
Crown of Frederick I
Crown of Sophia Charlotte of Hanover
Crown of Wilhelm I
Crown of Wilhelm II
Bavaria:
Royal Crown of Bavaria
Crown of the Queen of Bavaria
Crown of Queen Therese of Bavaria
Saxony:
Electoral Hat of Saxony
Crown of Augustus II the Strong
Funeral Crown of Augustus II the Strong
Hanover:
Royal Crown of Hanover
W rttemberg:
Royal Crown of W rttemberg
Baden:
Grand Ducal Crown of Baden
Mecklenburg:
Wendish Crown
Holy RomanEmpire
Imperial Crown of the Holy Roman Empire (Vienna)
Iron Crown (Monza)
Crown of Rudolf II (Vienna)
Imperial Crowns of Charles VII (Munich)
Essen Crown (Essen)
Kamelaukion of Constance of Sicily or Frederick II (Palermo)
Crown of Margaret of York (Aachen)
Reliquary Crown of John the Baptist (Aachen)
Reliquary Crown of Charlemagne (Aachen)
Crown of Empress Cunigunde (Munich)
Lily Crown of Empress Cunigunde (Munich)
Reliquary Crown of Henry II (Munich)
Salian Funeral Crowns of Spires (Speyer)
Reliquary Crown of Otto II (Halle)
Holy See
Papal tiara
Napoleon Tiara
Hungary
Holy Crown of Hungary
Crown of Stephen Bocskai
Iran
Sasanian crowns
Empress's Crown
Kiani Crown
Pahlavi Crown
Italy
Crown of Italy
Napoleonic Crown of Italy
Iron Crown
Grand Ducal Crown of Tuscany
Korea
Crown of Baekje
Crown of Gaya
Crowns of Silla
Madagascar
Crown of Madagascar
Crown of Ranavalona III
Lithuania
Gediminas' Cap
Norway
Norwegian Crown Prince's Coronet
Crown of Norway
Crown of the Queen of Norway
Oceania
Crown of Hawaii
Crown of Tahiti
Crown of Tonga
Poland
Crown of Boles aw I the Brave
Swedish Crown
Muscovy Crown
Hungarian Crown
Homagial Crown
Funeral Crown
Queen's Crown
Crown of Augustus II
Funeral Crown of Augustus II
Crown of Augustus III
Crown of Maria Josepha
P ock Diadem
Portugal
Crown of Jo o VI
Diadem of the Stars
Romania
Crown of Elisabeta
Crown of Maria
Steel Crown of Romania
Russia
"Cap of Monomakh"
Crown of Kazan Tzardom
Crown of Tsar Michael Fyodorovich
Cap of Monomakh of the second set
Diamond Crown of Tsar Peter I
Diamond Crown of Tsar Ivan V
Altabas crown of the third set
Crown of Empress Catherine I
Crown of Empress Anna Ivanovna
Great Imperial Crown
Maltese Crown
Small Imperial Crown
Serbia
Crown of Serbia
Nemanji  Crown
Crown of Peter I (Serbia and Yugoslavia)
Spain
Royal Crown of Spain
Crown of Sancho IV
Crown of the Virgin of the Kings
Sweden
Crown of Eric XIV
Crown of the Queen
Crown of Queen Christina
Crown of the Heir Apparent
Africa
Crowns of Egypt
Silver Crown of Emperor Tewodros (Ethiopia)
America
Crown of Faustin I (Haiti)
Imperial Crown of Mexico
Asia
Raven Crown (Bhutan)
Yishanguan (China)
Shreepech (Nepal)
Crown of Sri Vikrama Rajasinha of Sri Lanka
Great Crown of Victory (Thailand)
Europe
Ducal hat of Liechtenstein
Crown of the Netherlands
Crown of Rus (Ukraine)
See also
Coronation
Crown jewels
Heir apparent
Heir presumptive
King
Monarchy
Queen
Regalia
Royal family
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarchy&oldid=1147630692"