Colossal sculpture in New York Harbor
For other uses, see Statue of Liberty (disambiguation).
Statue of LibertyLiberty Enlightening the WorldLocationLiberty IslandNew York CityCoordinates40 41 21 N 74 2 40 W  /  40.68917 N 74.04444 W  / 40.68917; -74.04444Coordinates: 40 41 21 N 74 2 40 W  /  40.68917 N 74.04444 W  / 40.68917; -74.04444Height
Height of copper statue (to torch): 151 feet 1 inch (46 meters)
From ground level to torch: 305 feet 1 inch (93 meters)
DedicatedOctober 28, 1886Restored1938, 1984 1986, 2011 2012SculptorFr d ric Auguste BartholdiVisitors3.2 million (in 2009)[1]Governing bodyNational Park ServiceWebsitewww.nps.gov/stli
UNESCO World Heritage SiteTypeCulturalCriteriai, viDesignated1984 (8th session)Reference no.307RegionEurope and North America
U.S. National MonumentDesignatedOctober 15, 1924Designated byPresident Calvin Coolidge[2]
U.S. National Register of Historic PlacesOfficial nameThe Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World[3][4]DesignatedSeptember 14, 2017Reference no.100000829
New Jersey Register of Historic PlacesOfficial nameStatue of Liberty National Monument, Ellis Island and Liberty IslandDesignatedMay 27, 1971Reference no.1535[5]
New York City LandmarkTypeIndividualDesignatedSeptember 14, 1976[6]Reference no.0931
The Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World; French: La Libert   clairant le monde) is a colossal neoclassical sculpture on Liberty Island in New York Harbor in New York City, in the United States. The copper statue, a gift from the people of France, was designed by French sculptor Fr d ric Auguste Bartholdi and its metal framework was built by Gustave Eiffel. The statue was dedicated on October 28, 1886.
The statue is a figure of Libertas, the Roman Goddess of Liberty. She holds a torch above her head with her right hand, and in her left hand carries a tabula ansata inscribed JULY IV MDCCLXXVI (July 4, 1776 in Roman numerals), the date of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. A broken chain and shackle lie at her feet as she walks forward, commemorating the national abolition of slavery following the American Civil War.[7] After its dedication, the statue became an icon of freedom and of the United States, seen as a symbol of welcome to immigrants arriving by sea.
Bartholdi was inspired by a French law professor and politician,  douard Ren  de Laboulaye, who is said to have commented in 1865 that any monument raised to U.S. independence would properly be a joint project of the French and American peoples. The Franco-Prussian War delayed progress until 1875, when Laboulaye proposed that the French finance the statue and the United States provide the site and build the pedestal. Bartholdi completed the head and the torch-bearing arm before the statue was fully designed, and these pieces were exhibited for publicity at international expositions.
The torch-bearing arm was displayed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876, and in Madison Square Park in Manhattan from 1876 to 1882. Fundraising proved difficult, especially for the Americans, and by 1885 work on the pedestal was threatened by lack of funds. Publisher Joseph Pulitzer, of the New York World, started a drive for donations to finish the project and attracted more than 120,000 contributors, most of whom gave less than a dollar (equivalent to $30 in 2021). The statue was built in France, shipped overseas in crates, and assembled on the completed pedestal on what was then called Bedloe's Island. The statue's completion was marked by New York's first ticker-tape parade and a dedication ceremony presided over by President Grover Cleveland.
The statue was administered by the United States Lighthouse Board until 1901 and then by the Department of War; since 1933 it has been maintained by the National Park Service as part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument, and is a major tourist attraction. Limited numbers of visitors can access the rim of the pedestal and the interior of the statue's crown from within; public access to the torch has been barred since 1916.
Design and construction process
 Statue of Liberty in 2010
Origin
 Both the Roman goddess Libertas and Sun god Sol Invictus ("The Unconquered Sun", pictured) influenced the design of Liberty Enlightening the World.
According to the National Park Service, the idea of a monument presented by the French people to the United States was first proposed by  douard Ren  de Laboulaye, president of the French Anti-Slavery Society and a prominent and important political thinker of his time. The project is traced to a mid-1865 conversation between Laboulaye, a staunch abolitionist, and Fr d ric Bartholdi, a sculptor. In after-dinner conversation at his home near Versailles, Laboulaye, an ardent supporter of the Union in the American Civil War, is supposed to have said: "If a monument should rise in the United States, as a memorial to their independence, I should think it only natural if it were built by united effort a common work of both our nations."[8] The National Park Service, in a 2000 report, however, deemed this a legend traced to an 1885 fundraising pamphlet, and that the statue was most likely conceived in 1870.[9] In another essay on their website, the Park Service suggested that Laboulaye was minded to honor the Union victory and its consequences, "With the abolition of slavery and the Union's victory in the Civil War in 1865, Laboulaye's wishes of freedom and democracy were turning into a reality in the United States. In order to honor these achievements, Laboulaye proposed that a gift be built for the United States on behalf of France. Laboulaye hoped that by calling attention to the recent achievements of the United States, the French people would be inspired to call for their own democracy in the face of a repressive monarchy."[10]
According to sculptor Fr d ric Auguste Bartholdi, who later recounted the story, Laboulaye's alleged comment was not intended as a proposal, but it inspired Bartholdi.[8] Given the repressive nature of the regime of Napoleon III, Bartholdi took no immediate action on the idea except to discuss it with Laboulaye. Bartholdi was in any event busy with other possible projects; in the late 1860s, he approached Isma'il Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, with a plan to build Progress or Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia,[11] a huge lighthouse in the form of an ancient Egyptian female fellah or peasant, robed and holding a torch aloft, at the northern entrance to the Suez Canal in Port Said. Sketches and models were made of the proposed work, though it was never erected. There was a classical precedent for the Suez proposal, the Colossus of Rhodes: an ancient bronze statue of the Greek god of the sun, Helios. This statue is believed to have been over 100 feet (30 m) high, and it similarly stood at a harbor entrance and carried a light to guide ships.[12] Both the khedive and Lesseps declined the proposed statue from Bartholdi, citing the expensive cost.[13] The Port Said Lighthouse was built instead, by Fran ois Coignet in 1869.
Any large project was further delayed by the Franco-Prussian War, in which Bartholdi served as a major of militia. In the war, Napoleon III was captured and deposed. Bartholdi's home province of Alsace was lost to the Prussians, and a more liberal republic was installed in France.[8] As Bartholdi had been planning a trip to the United States, he and Laboulaye decided the time was right to discuss the idea with influential Americans.[14] In June 1871, Bartholdi crossed the Atlantic, with letters of introduction signed by Laboulaye.[15]
Arriving at New York Harbor, Bartholdi focused on Bedloe's Island (now named Liberty Island) as a site for the statue, struck by the fact that vessels arriving in New York had to sail past it. He was delighted to learn that the island was owned by the United States government it had been ceded by the New York State Legislature in 1800 for harbor defense. It was thus, as he put it in a letter to Laboulaye: "land common to all the states."[16] As well as meeting many influential New Yorkers, Bartholdi visited President Ulysses S. Grant, who assured him that it would not be difficult to obtain the site for the statue.[17] Bartholdi crossed the United States twice by rail, and met many Americans who he thought would be sympathetic to the project.[15] But he remained concerned that popular opinion on both sides of the Atlantic was insufficiently supportive of the proposal, and he and Laboulaye decided to wait before mounting a public campaign.[18]
 Bartholdi's 1880 sculpture, Lion of Belfort
Bartholdi had made a first model of his concept in 1870.[19] The son of a friend of Bartholdi's, artist John LaFarge, later maintained that Bartholdi made the first sketches for the statue during his visit to La Farge's Rhode Island studio. Bartholdi continued to develop the concept following his return to France.[19] He also worked on a number of sculptures designed to bolster French patriotism after the defeat by the Prussians. One of these was the Lion of Belfort, a monumental sculpture carved in sandstone below the fortress of Belfort, which during the war had resisted a Prussian siege for over three months. The defiant lion, 73 feet (22 m) long and half that in height, displays an emotional quality characteristic of Romanticism, which Bartholdi would later bring to the Statue of Liberty.[20]
Design, style, and symbolism
 Detail from a 1855 56 fresco by Constantino Brumidi in the Capitol in Washington, D.C., showing two early symbols of America: Columbia (left) and the Indian princess
Bartholdi and Laboulaye considered how best to express the idea of American liberty.[21] In early American history, two female figures were frequently used as cultural symbols of the nation.[22] One of these symbols, the personified Columbia, was seen as an embodiment of the United States in the manner that Britannia was identified with the United Kingdom, and Marianne came to represent France. Columbia had supplanted the traditional European Personification of the Americas as an "Indian princess", which had come to be regarded as uncivilized and derogatory toward Americans.[22] The other significant female icon in American culture was a representation of Liberty, derived from Libertas, the goddess of freedom widely worshipped in ancient Rome, especially among emancipated slaves. A Liberty figure adorned most American coins of the time,[21] and representations of Liberty appeared in popular and civic art, including Thomas Crawford's Statue of Freedom (1863) atop the dome of the United States Capitol Building.[21]
The statue's design evokes iconography evident in ancient history including the Egyptian goddess Isis, the ancient Greek deity of the same name, the Roman Columbia and the Christian iconography of the Virgin Mary.[23][24]
 Thomas Crawford's Statue of Freedom (1854 1857) tops the dome of the Capitol building in Washington
Artists of the 18th and 19th centuries striving to evoke republican ideals commonly used representations of Libertas as an allegorical symbol.[21] A figure of Liberty was also depicted on the Great Seal of France.[21] However, Bartholdi and Laboulaye avoided an image of revolutionary liberty such as that depicted in Eug ne Delacroix's famed Liberty Leading the People (1830). In this painting, which commemorates France's July Revolution, a half-clothed Liberty leads an armed mob over the bodies of the fallen.[22] Laboulaye had no sympathy for revolution, and so Bartholdi's figure would be fully dressed in flowing robes.[22] Instead of the impression of violence in the Delacroix work, Bartholdi wished to give the statue a peaceful appearance and chose a torch, representing progress, for the figure to hold.[25]
Crawford's statue was designed in the early 1850s. It was originally to be crowned with a pileus, the cap given to emancipated slaves in ancient Rome. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Southerner who would later serve as President of the Confederate States of America, was concerned that the pileus would be taken as an abolitionist symbol. He ordered that it be changed to a helmet.[26] Delacroix's figure wears a pileus,[22] and Bartholdi at first considered placing one on his figure as well. Instead, he used a radiate diadem, or crown, to top its head.[27] In so doing, he avoided a reference to Marianne, who invariably wears a pileus.[28] The seven rays form a halo or aureole.[29] They evoke the sun, the seven seas, and the seven continents,[30] and represent another means, besides the torch, whereby Liberty enlightens the world.[25]
Bartholdi's early models were all similar in concept: a female figure in neoclassical style representing liberty, wearing a stola and pella (gown and cloak, common in depictions of Roman goddesses) and holding a torch aloft. According to popular accounts, the face was modeled after that of Charlotte Beysser Bartholdi, the sculptor's mother,[31] but Regis Huber, the curator of the Bartholdi Museum is on record as saying that this, as well as other similar speculations, have no basis in fact.[32] He designed the figure with a strong, uncomplicated silhouette, which would be set off well by its dramatic harbor placement and allow passengers on vessels entering New York Bay to experience a changing perspective on the statue as they proceeded toward Manhattan. He gave it bold classical contours and applied simplified modeling, reflecting the huge scale of the project and its solemn purpose.[25] Bartholdi wrote of his technique:
The surfaces should be broad and simple, defined by a bold and clear design, accentuated in the important places. The enlargement of the details or their multiplicity is to be feared. By exaggerating the forms, in order to render them more clearly visible, or by enriching them with details, we would destroy the proportion of the work. Finally, the model, like the design, should have a summarized character, such as one would give to a rapid sketch. Only it is necessary that this character should be the product of volition and study, and that the artist, concentrating his knowledge, should find the form and the line in its greatest simplicity.[33]
 Liberty is depicted with a raised right foot, showing that she is walking forward amidst a broken shackle and chain.
Bartholdi made alterations in the design as the project evolved. Bartholdi considered having Liberty hold a broken chain, but decided this would be too divisive in the days after the Civil War. The erected statue does stride over a broken chain, half-hidden by her robes and difficult to see from the ground.[27] Bartholdi was initially uncertain of what to place in Liberty's left hand; he settled on a tabula ansata,[34] used to evoke the concept of law.[35] Though Bartholdi greatly admired the United States Constitution, he chose to inscribe JULY IV MDCCLXXVI on the tablet, thus associating the date of the country's Declaration of Independence with the concept of liberty.[34]
Bartholdi interested his friend and mentor, architect Eug ne Viollet-le-Duc, in the project.[32] As chief engineer,[32] Viollet-le-Duc designed a brick pier within the statue, to which the skin would be anchored.[36]
After consultations with the metalwork foundry Gaget, Gauthier & Co., Viollet-le-Duc chose the metal which would be used for the skin, copper sheets, and the method used to shape it, repouss , in which the sheets were heated and then struck with wooden hammers.[32][37] An advantage of this choice was that the entire statue would be light for its volume, as the copper need be only 0.094 inches (2.4 mm) thick. Bartholdi had decided on a height of just over 151 feet (46 m) for the statue, double that of Italy's Sancarlone and the German statue of Arminius, both made with the same method.[38]
Announcement and early work
By 1875, France was enjoying improved political stability and a recovering postwar economy. Growing interest in the upcoming Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia led Laboulaye to decide it was time to seek public support.[39] In September 1875, he announced the project and the formation of the Franco-American Union as its fundraising arm. With the announcement, the statue was given a name, Liberty Enlightening the World.[40] The French would finance the statue; Americans would be expected to pay for the pedestal.[41] The announcement provoked a generally favorable reaction in France, though many Frenchmen resented the United States for not coming to their aid during the war with Prussia.[40] French monarchists opposed the statue, if for no other reason than it was proposed by the liberal Laboulaye, who had recently been elected a senator for life.[41] Laboulaye arranged events designed to appeal to the rich and powerful, including a special performance at the Paris Opera on April 25, 1876, that featured a new cantata by composer Charles Gounod. The piece was titled La Libert   clairant le monde, the French version of the statue's announced name.[40]
 Stereoscopic image of right arm and torch of the Statue of Liberty, 1876 Centennial Exposition
Initially focused on the elites, the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society. Schoolchildren and ordinary citizens gave, as did 181 French municipalities. Laboulaye's political allies supported the call, as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War. Less idealistically, contributions came from those who hoped for American support in the French attempt to build the Panama Canal. The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in Visnes, Norway,[42] though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples.[43] According to Cara Sutherland in her book on the statue for the Museum of the City of New York, 200,000 pounds (91,000 kg) was needed to build the statue, and the French copper industrialist Eug ne Secr tan donated 128,000 pounds (58,000 kg) of copper.[44]
Although plans for the statue had not been finalized, Bartholdi moved forward with fabrication of the right arm, bearing the torch, and the head. Work began at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop.[45] In May 1876, Bartholdi traveled to the United States as a member of a French delegation to the Centennial Exhibition,[46] and arranged for a huge painting of the statue to be shown in New York as part of the Centennial festivities.[47] The arm did not arrive in Philadelphia until August; because of its late arrival, it was not listed in the exhibition catalogue, and while some reports correctly identified the work, others called it the "Colossal Arm" or "Bartholdi Electric Light". The exhibition grounds contained a number of monumental artworks to compete for fairgoers' interest, including an outsized fountain designed by Bartholdi.[48] Nevertheless, the arm proved popular in the exhibition's waning days, and visitors would climb up to the balcony of the torch to view the fairgrounds.[49] After the exhibition closed, the arm was transported to New York, where it remained on display in Madison Square Park for several years before it was returned to France to join the rest of the statue.[49]
During his second trip to the United States, Bartholdi addressed a number of groups about the project, and urged the formation of American committees of the Franco-American Union.[50] Committees to raise money to pay for the foundation and pedestal were formed in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia.[51] The New York group eventually took on most of the responsibility for American fundraising and is often referred to as the "American Committee".[52] One of its members was 19-year-old Theodore Roosevelt, the future governor of New York and president of the United States.[50] On March 3, 1877, on his final full day in office, President Grant signed a joint resolution that authorized the President to accept the statue when it was presented by France and to select a site for it. President Rutherford B. Hayes, who took office the following day, selected the Bedloe's Island site that Bartholdi had proposed.[53]
Construction in France
 The statue's head on exhibit at the Paris World's Fair, 1878
On his return to Paris in 1877, Bartholdi concentrated on completing the head, which was exhibited at the 1878 Paris World's Fair. Fundraising continued, with models of the statue put on sale. Tickets to view the construction activity at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop were also offered.[54] The French government authorized a lottery; among the prizes were valuable silver plate and a terracotta model of the statue. By the end of 1879, about 250,000 francs had been raised.[55]
The head and arm had been built with assistance from Viollet-le-Duc, who fell ill in 1879. He soon died, leaving no indication of how he intended to transition from the copper skin to his proposed masonry pier.[56] The following year, Bartholdi was able to obtain the services of the innovative designer and builder Gustave Eiffel.[54] Eiffel and his structural engineer, Maurice Koechlin, decided to abandon the pier and instead build an iron truss tower. Eiffel opted not to use a completely rigid structure, which would force stresses to accumulate in the skin and lead eventually to cracking. A secondary skeleton was attached to the center pylon, then, to enable the statue to move slightly in the winds of New York Harbor and as the metal expanded on hot summer days, he loosely connected the support structure to the skin using flat iron bars[32] which culminated in a mesh of metal straps, known as "saddles", that were riveted to the skin, providing firm support. In a labor-intensive process, each saddle had to be crafted individually.[57][58] To prevent galvanic corrosion between the copper skin and the iron support structure, Eiffel insulated the skin with asbestos impregnated with shellac.[59]
Eiffel's design made the statue one of the earliest examples of curtain wall construction, in which the exterior of the structure is not load bearing, but is instead supported by an interior framework. He included two interior spiral staircases, to make it easier for visitors to reach the observation point in the crown.[60] Access to an observation platform surrounding the torch was also provided, but the narrowness of the arm allowed for only a single ladder, 40 feet (12 m) long.[61] As the pylon tower arose, Eiffel and Bartholdi coordinated their work carefully so that completed segments of skin would fit exactly on the support structure.[62] The components of the pylon tower were built in the Eiffel factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret.[63]
The change in structural material from masonry to iron allowed Bartholdi to change his plans for the statue's assembly. He had originally expected to assemble the skin on-site as the masonry pier was built; instead, he decided to build the statue in France and have it disassembled and transported to the United States for reassembly in place on Bedloe's Island.[64]
In a symbolic act, the first rivet placed into the skin, fixing a copper plate onto the statue's big toe, was driven by United States Ambassador to France Levi P. Morton.[65] The skin was not, however, crafted in exact sequence from low to high; work proceeded on a number of segments simultaneously in a manner often confusing to visitors.[66] Some work was performed by contractors one of the fingers was made to Bartholdi's exacting specifications by a coppersmith in the southern French town of Montauban.[67] By 1882, the statue was complete up to the waist, an event Barthodi celebrated by inviting reporters to lunch on a platform built within the statue.[68] Laboulaye died in 1883. He was succeeded as chairman of the French committee by Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the Suez Canal. The completed statue was formally presented to Ambassador Morton at a ceremony in Paris on July 4, 1884, and de Lesseps announced that the French government had agreed to pay for its transport to New York.[69] The statue remained intact in Paris pending sufficient progress on the pedestal; by January 1885, this had occurred and the statue was disassembled and crated for its ocean voyage.[70]
 Richard Morris Hunt's pedestal under construction in June 1885
The committees in the United States faced great difficulties in obtaining funds for the construction of the pedestal. The Panic of 1873 had led to an economic depression that persisted through much of the decade. The Liberty statue project was not the only such undertaking that had difficulty raising money: construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years; it would ultimately take over three-and-a-half decades to complete.[71] There was criticism both of Bartholdi's statue and of the fact that the gift required Americans to foot the bill for the pedestal. In the years following the Civil War, most Americans preferred realistic artworks depicting heroes and events from the nation's history, rather than allegorical works like the Liberty statue.[71] There was also a feeling that Americans should design American public works the selection of Italian-born Constantino Brumidi to decorate the Capitol had provoked intense criticism, even though he was a naturalized U.S. citizen.[72] Harper's Weekly declared its wish that "M. Bartholdi and our French cousins had 'gone the whole figure' while they were about it, and given us statue and pedestal at once."[73] The New York Times stated that "no true patriot can countenance any such expenditures for bronze females in the present state of our finances."[74] Faced with these criticisms, the American committees took little action for several years.[74]
Design
 Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, June 1885, showing (clockwise from left) woodcuts of the completed statue in Paris, Bartholdi, and the statue's interior structure
The foundation of Bartholdi's statue was to be laid inside Fort Wood, a disused army base on Bedloe's Island constructed between 1807 and 1811. Since 1823, it had rarely been used, though during the Civil War, it had served as a recruiting station.[75] The fortifications of the structure were in the shape of an eleven-point star. The statue's foundation and pedestal were aligned so that it would face southeast, greeting ships entering the harbor from the Atlantic Ocean.[76]
In 1881, the New York committee commissioned Richard Morris Hunt to design the pedestal. Within months, Hunt submitted a detailed plan, indicating that he expected construction to take about nine months.[77] He proposed a pedestal 114 feet (35 m) in height; faced with money problems, the committee reduced that to 89 feet (27 m).[78]
Hunt's pedestal design contains elements of classical architecture, including Doric portals, as well as some elements influenced by Aztec architecture.[32] The large mass is fragmented with architectural detail, in order to focus attention on the statue.[78] In form, it is a truncated pyramid, 62 feet (19 m) square at the base and 39.4 feet (12.0 m) at the top. The four sides are identical in appearance. Above the door on each side, there are ten disks upon which Bartholdi proposed to place the coats of arms of the states (between 1876 and 1889, there were 38 of them), although this was not done. Above that, a balcony was placed on each side, framed by pillars. Bartholdi placed an observation platform near the top of the pedestal, above which the statue itself rises.[79] According to author Louis Auchincloss, the pedestal "craggily evokes the power of an ancient Europe over which rises the dominating figure of the Statue of Liberty".[78] The committee hired former army General Charles Pomeroy Stone to oversee the construction work.[80] Construction on the 15-foot-deep (4.6 m) foundation began in 1883, and the pedestal's cornerstone was laid in 1884.[77] In Hunt's original conception, the pedestal was to have been made of solid granite. Financial concerns again forced him to revise his plans; the final design called for poured concrete walls, up to 20 feet (6.1 m) thick, faced with granite blocks.[81][82] This Stony Creek granite came from the Beattie Quarry in Branford, Connecticut.[83] The concrete mass was the largest poured to that time.[82]
Norwegian immigrant civil engineer Joachim Goschen Gi ver designed the structural framework for the Statue of Liberty. His work involved design computations, detailed fabrication and construction drawings, and oversight of construction. In completing his engineering for the statue's frame, Gi ver worked from drawings and sketches produced by Gustave Eiffel.[84]
Fundraising
Fundraising in the US for the pedestal had begun in 1882. The committee organized a large number of money-raising events.[85] As part of one such effort, an auction of art and manuscripts, poet Emma Lazarus was asked to donate an original work. She initially declined, stating she could not write a poem about a statue. At the time, she was also involved in aiding refugees to New York who had fled antisemitic pogroms in eastern Europe. These refugees were forced to live in conditions that the wealthy Lazarus had never experienced. She saw a way to express her empathy for these refugees in terms of the statue.[86] The resulting sonnet, "The New Colossus", including the lines "Give me your tired, your poor/Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free", is uniquely identified with the Statue of Liberty in American culture and is inscribed on a plaque in its museum.[87]
 "Liberty Enlightening the World, or The Statue of Liberty," a stained glass window commissioned by Joseph Pulitzer to commemorate fundraising for the pedestal. Originally installed in the New York World Building, it is currently located in Pulitzer Hall at Columbia University.[88]
Even with these efforts, fundraising lagged. Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York, vetoed a bill to provide $50,000 for the statue project in 1884. An attempt the next year to have Congress provide $100,000, sufficient to complete the project, also failed. The New York committee, with only $3,000 in the bank, suspended work on the pedestal. With the project in jeopardy, groups from other American cities, including Boston and Philadelphia, offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it.[89]
Joseph Pulitzer, publisher of the New York World, a New York newspaper, announced a drive to raise $100,000 (equivalent to $3,016,000 in 2021). Pulitzer pledged to print the name of every contributor, no matter how small the amount given.[90] The drive captured the imagination of New Yorkers, especially when Pulitzer began publishing the notes he received from contributors. "A young girl alone in the world" donated "60 cents, the result of self denial."[91] One donor gave "five cents as a poor office boy's mite toward the Pedestal Fund." A group of children sent a dollar as "the money we saved to go to the circus with."[92] Another dollar was given by a "lonely and very aged woman."[91] Residents of a home for alcoholics in New York's rival city of Brooklyn the cities would not merge until 1898 donated $15; other drinkers helped out through donation boxes in bars and saloons.[93] A kindergarten class in Davenport, Iowa, mailed the World a gift of $1.35.[91] As the donations flooded in, the committee resumed work on the pedestal.[94] France raised about $250,000 to build the statue while the United States had to raise up to $300,000 to build the pedestal.[95][96]
Construction
On June 17, 1885, the French steamer Is re [fr] arrived in New York with the crates holding the disassembled statue on board. New Yorkers displayed their newfound enthusiasm for the statue. Two hundred thousand people lined the docks and hundreds of boats put to sea to welcome the ship.[97][98] After five months of daily calls to donate to the statue fund, on August 11, 1885, the World announced that $102,000 had been raised from 120,000 donors, and that 80 percent of the total had been received in sums of less than one dollar (equivalent to $30 in 2021).[99]
Even with the success of the fund drive, the pedestal was not completed until April 1886. Immediately thereafter, reassembly of the statue began. Eiffel's iron framework was anchored to steel I-beams within the concrete pedestal and assembled.[100] Once this was done, the sections of skin were carefully attached.[101] Due to the width of the pedestal, it was not possible to erect scaffolding, and workers dangled from ropes while installing the skin sections.[102] Bartholdi had planned to put floodlights on the torch's balcony to illuminate it; a week before the dedication, the Army Corps of Engineers vetoed the proposal, fearing that ships' pilots passing the statue would be blinded. Instead, Bartholdi cut portholes in the torch which was covered with gold leaf and placed the lights inside them.[103] A power plant was installed on the island to light the torch and for other electrical needs.[104] After the skin was completed, landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, co-designer of Manhattan's Central Park and Brooklyn's Prospect Park, supervised a cleanup of Bedloe's Island in anticipation of the dedication.[105] General Charles Stone claimed on the day of dedication that no man had died during the construction of the statue. This was not true, however, as Francis Longo, a thirty-nine-year-old Italian laborer, had been killed when an old wall fell on him.[106]
Dedication
 Unveiling of the Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World (1886) by Edward Moran. Oil on canvas. The J. Clarence Davies Collection, Museum of the City of New York.
A ceremony of dedication was held on the afternoon of October 28, 1886. President Grover Cleveland, the former New York governor, presided over the event.[107] On the morning of the dedication, a parade was held in New York City; estimates of the number of people who watched it ranged from several hundred thousand to a million. President Cleveland headed the procession, then stood in the reviewing stand to see bands and marchers from across America. General Stone was the grand marshal of the parade. The route began at Madison Square, once the venue for the arm, and proceeded to the Battery at the southern tip of Manhattan by way of Fifth Avenue and Broadway, with a slight detour so the parade could pass in front of the World building on Park Row. As the parade passed the New York Stock Exchange, traders threw ticker tape from the windows, beginning the New York tradition of the ticker-tape parade.[108]
A nautical parade began at 12:45 p.m., and President Cleveland embarked on a yacht that took him across the harbor to Bedloe's Island for the dedication.[109] De Lesseps made the first speech, on behalf of the French committee, followed by the chairman of the New York committee, Senator William M. Evarts. A French flag draped across the statue's face was to be lowered to unveil the statue at the close of Evarts's speech, but Bartholdi mistook a pause as the conclusion and let the flag fall prematurely. The ensuing cheers put an end to Evarts's address.[108] President Cleveland spoke next, stating that the statue's "stream of light shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man's oppression until Liberty enlightens the world".[110] Bartholdi, observed near the dais, was called upon to speak, but he declined. Orator Chauncey M. Depew concluded the speechmaking with a lengthy address.[111]
No members of the general public were permitted on the island during the ceremonies, which were reserved entirely for dignitaries. The only women granted access were Bartholdi's wife and de Lesseps's granddaughter; officials stated that they feared women might be injured in the crush of people. The restriction offended area suffragists, who chartered a boat and got as close as they could to the island. The group's leaders made speeches applauding the embodiment of Liberty as a woman and advocating women's right to vote.[110] A scheduled fireworks display was postponed until November 1 because of poor weather.[112]
Shortly after the dedication, The Cleveland Gazette, an African American newspaper, suggested that the statue's torch not be lit until the United States became a free nation "in reality":
"Liberty enlightening the world," indeed! The expression makes us sick. This government is a howling farce. It can not or rather does not protect its citizens within its own borders. Shove the Bartholdi statue, torch and all, into the ocean until the "liberty" of this country is such as to make it possible for an inoffensive and industrious colored man to earn a respectable living for himself and family, without being ku-kluxed, perhaps murdered, his daughter and wife outraged, and his property destroyed. The idea of the "liberty" of this country "enlightening the world," or even Patagonia, is ridiculous in the extreme.[113]
After dedication
Lighthouse Board and War Department (1886 1933)
 Government poster using the Statue of Liberty to promote the sale of Liberty Bonds
When the torch was illuminated on the evening of the statue's dedication, it produced only a faint gleam, barely visible from Manhattan. The World characterized it as "more like a glowworm than a beacon."[104] Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light, but this proved too expensive. The United States Lighthouse Board took over the Statue of Liberty in 1887 and pledged to install equipment to enhance the torch's effect; in spite of its efforts, the statue remained virtually invisible at night. When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893, he made additional suggestions, all of which proved ineffective. He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue, allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel's design.[104] In 1901, President Theodore Roosevelt, once a member of the New York committee, ordered the statue's transfer to the War Department, as it had proved useless as a lighthouse.[114] A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe's Island until 1923, after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction.[115]
Wars and other upheavals in Europe prompted large-scale emigration to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th century; many entered through New York and saw the statue not as a symbol of enlightenment, as Bartholdi had intended, but as a sign of welcome to their new home. The association with immigration only became stronger when an immigrant processing station was opened on nearby Ellis Island. This view was consistent with Lazarus's vision in her sonnet she described the statue as "Mother of Exiles" but her work had become obscure. In 1903, the sonnet was engraved on a plaque that was affixed to the base of the statue.[116]
Oral histories of immigrants record their feelings of exhilaration on first viewing the Statue of Liberty. One immigrant who arrived from Greece recalled:
I saw the Statue of Liberty. And I said to myself, "Lady, you're such a beautiful! [sic] You opened your arms and you get all the foreigners here. Give me a chance to prove that I am worth it, to do something, to be someone in America." And always that statue was on my mind.[117]
The statue rapidly became a landmark.[117] Originally, it was a dull copper color, but shortly after 1900 a green patina, also called verdigris, caused by the oxidation of the copper skin, began to spread. As early as 1902 it was mentioned in the press; by 1906 it had entirely covered the statue.[118] Believing that the patina was evidence of corrosion, Congress authorized US$62,800 (equivalent to $1,894,000 in 2021) for various repairs, and to paint the statue both inside and out.[119] There was considerable public protest against the proposed exterior painting.[120] The Army Corps of Engineers studied the patina for any ill effects to the statue and concluded that it protected the skin, "softened the outlines of the Statue and made it beautiful."[121] The statue was painted only on the inside. The Corps of Engineers also installed an elevator to take visitors from the base to the top of the pedestal.[121]
 Bedloe's Island in 1927, showing the statue and army buildings. The eleven-pointed walls of Fort Wood, which still form the statue's base, are visible.
On July 30, 1916, during World War I, German saboteurs set off a disastrous explosion on the Black Tom peninsula in Jersey City, New Jersey, in what is now part of Liberty State Park, close to Bedloe's Island. Carloads of dynamite and other explosives that were being sent to Britain and France for their war efforts were detonated. The statue sustained minor damage, mostly to the torch-bearing right arm, and was closed for ten days. The cost to repair the statue and buildings on the island was about $100,000 (equivalent to about $2,490,000 in 2021). The narrow ascent to the torch was closed for public-safety reasons, and it has remained closed ever since.[111]
That same year, Ralph Pulitzer, who had succeeded his father Joseph as publisher of the World, began a drive to raise $30,000 (equivalent to $747,000 in 2021) for an exterior lighting system to illuminate the statue at night. He claimed over 80,000 contributors, but failed to reach the goal. The difference was quietly made up by a gift from a wealthy donor a fact that was not revealed until 1936. An underwater power cable brought electricity from the mainland and floodlights were placed along the walls of Fort Wood. Gutzon Borglum, who later sculpted Mount Rushmore, redesigned the torch, replacing much of the original copper with stained glass. On December 2, 1916, President Woodrow Wilson pressed the telegraph key that turned on the lights, successfully illuminating the statue.[122]
After the United States entered World War I in 1917, images of the statue were heavily used in both recruitment posters and the Liberty bond drives that urged American citizens to support the war financially. This impressed upon the public the war's stated purpose to secure liberty and served as a reminder that embattled France had given the United States the statue.[123]
In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge used his authority under the Antiquities Act to declare the statue a national monument.[114] A suicide occurred five years later when a man climbed out of one of the windows in the crown and jumped to his death.[124]
Early National Park Service years (1933 1982)
In 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the statue to be transferred to the National Park Service (NPS). In 1937, the NPS gained jurisdiction over the rest of Bedloe's Island.[114] With the Army's departure, the NPS began to transform the island into a park.[125] The Works Progress Administration (WPA) demolished most of the old buildings, regraded and reseeded the eastern end of the island, and built granite steps for a new public entrance to the statue from its rear. The WPA also carried out restoration work within the statue, temporarily removing the rays from the statue's halo so their rusted supports could be replaced. Rusted cast-iron steps in the pedestal were replaced with new ones made of reinforced concrete;[126] the upper parts of the stairways within the statue were replaced, as well. Copper sheathing was installed to prevent further damage from rainwater that had been seeping into the pedestal.[127] The statue was closed to the public from May until December 1938.[126]
During World War II, the statue remained open to visitors, although it was not illuminated at night due to wartime blackouts. It was lit briefly on December 31, 1943, and on D-Day, June 6, 1944, when its lights flashed "dot-dot-dot-dash", the Morse code for V, for victory. New, powerful lighting was installed in 1944 1945, and beginning on V-E Day, the statue was once again illuminated after sunset. The lighting was for only a few hours each evening, and it was not until 1957 that the statue was illuminated every night, all night.[128] In 1946, the interior of the statue within reach of visitors was coated with a special plastic so that graffiti could be washed away.[127]
In 1956, an Act of Congress officially renamed Bedloe's Island as Liberty Island, a change advocated by Bartholdi generations earlier. The act also mentioned the efforts to found an American Museum of Immigration on the island, which backers took as federal approval of the project, though the government was slow to grant funds for it.[129] Nearby Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by proclamation of President Lyndon Johnson in 1965.[114] In 1972, the immigration museum, in the statue's base, was finally opened in a ceremony led by President Richard Nixon. The museum's backers never provided it with an endowment to secure its future and it closed in 1991 after the opening of an immigration museum on Ellis Island.[100]
In 1970, Ivy Bottini led a demonstration at the statue where she and others from the National Organization for Women's New York chapter draped an enormous banner over a railing which read "WOMEN OF THE WORLD UNITE!"[130][131]
Beginning December 26, 1971, 15 anti-Vietnam War veterans occupied the statue, flying a US flag upside down from her crown. They left December 28 following a federal court order.[132] The statue was also several times taken over briefly by demonstrators publicizing causes such as Puerto Rican independence, opposition to abortion, and opposition to US intervention in Grenada. Demonstrations with the permission of the Park Service included a Gay Pride Parade rally and the annual Captive Baltic Nations rally.[133]
A powerful new lighting system was installed in advance of the American Bicentennial in 1976. The statue was the focal point for Operation Sail, a regatta of tall ships from all over the world that entered New York Harbor on July 4, 1976, and sailed around Liberty Island.[134] The day concluded with a spectacular display of fireworks near the statue.[135]
Renovation and rededication (1982 2000)
Main article: Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty
See also: Liberty Weekend
 July 4, 1986: First Lady Nancy Reagan (in red) reopens the statue to the public.
The statue was examined in great detail by French and American engineers as part of the planning for its centennial in 1986.[136] In 1982, it was announced that the statue was in need of considerable restoration. Careful study had revealed that the right arm had been improperly attached to the main structure. It was swaying more and more when strong winds blew and there was a significant risk of structural failure. In addition, the head had been installed 2 feet (0.61 m) off center, and one of the rays was wearing a hole in the right arm when the statue moved in the wind. The armature structure was badly corroded, and about two percent of the exterior plates needed to be replaced.[137] Although problems with the armature had been recognized as early as 1936, when cast iron replacements for some of the bars had been installed, much of the corrosion had been hidden by layers of paint applied over the years.[138]
In May 1982, President Ronald Reagan announced the formation of the Statue of Liberty Ellis Island Centennial Commission, led by Chrysler Corporation chair Lee Iacocca, to raise the funds needed to complete the work.[139][140][141] Through its fundraising arm, the Statue of Liberty Ellis Island Foundation, Inc., the group raised more than $350 million in donations for the renovations of both the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.[142] The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign. A 1983 promotion advertised that for each purchase made with an American Express card, the company would contribute one cent to the renovation of the statue. The campaign generated contributions of $1.7 million to the restoration project.[143]
In 1984, the statue was closed to the public for the duration of the renovation. Workers erected the world's largest free-standing scaffold,[32] which obscured the statue from view. Liquid nitrogen was used to remove layers of paint that had been applied to the interior of the copper skin over decades, leaving two layers of coal tar, originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion. Blasting with baking soda powder removed the tar without further damaging the copper.[144] The restorers' work was hampered by the asbestos-based substance that Bartholdi had used ineffectively, as inspections showed to prevent galvanic corrosion. Workers within the statue had to wear protective gear, dubbed "Moon suits", with self-contained breathing circuits.[145] Larger holes in the copper skin were repaired, and new copper was added where necessary.[146] The replacement skin was taken from a copper rooftop at Bell Labs, which had a patina that closely resembled the statue's; in exchange, the laboratory was provided some of the old copper skin for testing.[147] The torch, found to have been leaking water since the 1916 alterations, was replaced with an exact replica of Bartholdi's unaltered torch.[148] Consideration was given to replacing the arm and shoulder; the National Park Service insisted that they be repaired instead.[149] The original torch was removed and replaced in 1986 with the current one, whose flame is covered in 24-karat gold.[35] The torch reflects the Sun's rays in daytime and is lighted by floodlights at night.[35]
The entire puddled iron armature designed by Gustave Eiffel was replaced. Low-carbon corrosion-resistant stainless steel bars that now hold the staples next to the skin are made of Ferralium, an alloy that bends slightly and returns to its original shape as the statue moves.[150] To prevent the ray and arm making contact, the ray was realigned by several degrees.[151] The lighting was again replaced night-time illumination subsequently came from metal-halide lamps that send beams of light to particular parts of the pedestal or statue, showing off various details.[152] Access to the pedestal, which had been through a nondescript entrance built in the 1960s, was renovated to create a wide opening framed by a set of monumental bronze doors with designs symbolic of the renovation.[153] A modern elevator was installed, allowing handicapped access to the observation area of the pedestal.[154] An emergency elevator was installed within the statue, reaching up to the level of the shoulder.[155]
July 3 6, 1986, was designated "Liberty Weekend", marking the centennial of the statue and its reopening. President Reagan presided over the rededication, with French President Fran ois Mitterrand in attendance. July 4 saw a reprise of Operation Sail,[156] and the statue was reopened to the public on July 5.[157] In Reagan's dedication speech, he stated, "We are the keepers of the flame of liberty; we hold it high for the world to see."[156]
Closures and reopenings (2001 present)
 The Statue of Liberty on September 11, 2001 as the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center burn in the background
 The new staircase to the crown
Immediately following the September 11 attacks, the statue and Liberty Island were closed to the public. The island reopened at the end of 2001, while the pedestal and statue remained off-limits. The pedestal reopened in August 2004,[157] but the National Park Service announced that visitors could not safely be given access to the statue due to the difficulty of evacuation in an emergency. The Park Service adhered to that position through the remainder of the Bush administration.[158] New York Congressman Anthony Weiner made the statue's reopening a personal crusade.[159] On May 17, 2009, President Barack Obama's Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar, announced that as a "special gift" to America, the statue would be reopened to the public as of July 4, but that only a limited number of people would be permitted to ascend to the crown each day.[158]
 The Statue of Liberty's original torch (1886 1984) displayed in the Statue of Liberty Museum on Liberty Island
The statue, including the pedestal and base, closed on October 29, 2011, for installation of new elevators and staircases and to bring other facilities, such as restrooms, up to code. The statue was reopened on October 28, 2012,[160][161][162] but then closed again a day later in advance of Hurricane Sandy.[163] Although the storm did not harm the statue, it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty and Ellis Islands, including the dock used by the ferries that ran to Liberty and Ellis Islands. On November 8, 2012, a Park Service spokesperson announced that both islands would remain closed for an indefinite period for repairs to be done.[164] Since Liberty Island had no electricity, a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night. The superintendent of Statue of Liberty National Monument, David Luchsinger whose home on the island was severely damaged stated that it would be "optimistically ... months" before the island was reopened to the public.[165] The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4, 2013.[166] Ellis Island remained closed for repairs for several more months but reopened in late October 2013.[167]
The Statue of Liberty has also been closed due to government shutdowns and protests, as well as for disease pandemics. During the October 2013 United States federal government shutdown, Liberty Island and other federally funded sites were closed.[168] In addition, Liberty Island was briefly closed on July 4, 2018, after a woman protesting against American immigration policy climbed onto the statue.[169] However, the island remained open during the 2018 19 United States federal government shutdown because the Statue of Liberty Ellis Island Foundation had donated funds.[170] It closed beginning on March 16, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.[171] On July 20, 2020, the Statue of Liberty reopened partially under New York City's Phase IV guidelines, with Ellis Island remaining closed.[172][173] The crown did not reopen until October 2022.[174]
On October 7, 2016, construction started on the new Statue of Liberty Museum on Liberty Island.[175] The new $70 million, 26,000-square-foot (2,400 m2) museum may be visited by all who come to the island,[176] as opposed to the museum in the pedestal, which only 20% of the island's visitors had access to.[175] The new museum, designed by FXFOWLE Architects, is integrated with the surrounding parkland.[177][178] Diane von F rstenberg headed the fundraising for the museum, and the project received over $40 million in fundraising by groundbreaking.[177] The museum opened on May 16, 2019.[179][180]
Access and attributes
Location and access
 Tourists aboard a Circle Line ferry arriving at Liberty Island, June 1973
The statue is situated in Upper New York Bay on Liberty Island south of Ellis Island, which together comprise the Statue of Liberty National Monument. Both islands were ceded by New York to the federal government in 1800.[181] As agreed in an 1834 compact between New York and New Jersey that set the state border at the bay's midpoint, the original islands remain New York territory though located on the New Jersey side of the state line. Liberty Island is one of the islands that are part of the borough of Manhattan in New York. Land created by reclamation added to the 2.3-acre (0.93 ha) original island at Ellis Island is New Jersey territory.[182]
No charge is made for entrance to the national monument, but there is a cost for the ferry service that all visitors must use,[183] as private boats may not dock at the island. A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities, replacing Circle Line, which had operated the service since 1953.[184] The ferries, which depart from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and the Battery in Lower Manhattan, also stop at Ellis Island when it is open to the public, making a combined trip possible.[185] All ferry riders are subject to security screening, similar to airport procedures, prior to boarding.[186]
Visitors intending to enter the statue's base and pedestal must obtain pedestal access for a nominal fee when purchasing their ferry ticket.[183][187] Those wishing to climb the staircase within the statue to the crown must purchase a special ticket, which may be reserved up to a year in advance. A total of 240 people per day can ascend: ten per group, three groups per hour. Climbers may bring only medication and cameras lockers are provided for other items and must undergo a second security screening.[188] The balcony around the torch was closed to the public following the munitions explosion on Black Tom Island in 1916.[111] The balcony can however be seen live via webcam.[189]
Inscriptions, plaques, and dedications
 The Statue of Liberty stands on Liberty Island
There are several plaques and dedicatory tablets on or near the Statue of Liberty.
A plaque on the copper just under the figure in front declares that it is a colossal statue representing Liberty, designed by Bartholdi and built by the Paris firm of Gaget, Gauthier et Cie (Cie is the French abbreviation analogous to Co.).[190]
A presentation tablet, also bearing Bartholdi's name, declares the statue is a gift from the people of the Republic of France that honors "the Alliance of the two Nations in achieving the Independence of the United States of America and attests their abiding friendship."[190]
A tablet placed by the American Committee commemorates the fundraising done to build the pedestal.[190]
The cornerstone bears a plaque placed by the Freemasons.[190]
In 1903, a bronze tablet that bears the text of Emma Lazarus's sonnet, "The New Colossus" (1883), was presented by friends of the poet. Until the 1986 renovation, it was mounted inside the pedestal; later, it resided in the Statue of Liberty Museum, in the base.[190]
"The New Colossus" tablet is accompanied by a tablet given by the Emma Lazarus Commemorative Committee in 1977, celebrating the poet's life.[190]
A group of statues stands at the western end of the island, honoring those closely associated with the Statue of Liberty. Two Americans Pulitzer and Lazarus and three Frenchmen Bartholdi, Eiffel, and Laboulaye are depicted. They are the work of Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner.[191]
Historical designations
President Calvin Coolidge officially designated the Statue of Liberty as part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument in 1924.[2][192] The monument was expanded to also include Ellis Island in 1965.[193][194] The following year, the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island were jointly added to the National Register of Historic Places,[195] and the statue individually in 2017.[4] On the sub-national level, the Statue of Liberty National Monument was added to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places in 1971,[5] and was made a New York City designated landmark in 1976.[6]
In 1984, the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The UNESCO "Statement of Significance" describes the statue as a "masterpiece of the human spirit" that "endures as a highly potent symbol inspiring contemplation, debate and protest of ideals such as liberty, peace, human rights, abolition of slavery, democracy and opportunity."[196]
Measurements
 As viewed from the ground on Liberty Island
Feature[76]
Imperial
Metric
Height of copper statue
151 ft 1 in
46 m
Foundation of pedestal (ground level) to tip of torch
305 ft 1 in
93 m
Heel to top of head
111 ft 1 in
34 m
Height of hand
16 ft 5 in
5 m
Index finger
8 ft 1 in
2.44 m
Circumference at second joint
3 ft 6 in
1.07 m
Head from chin to cranium
17 ft 3 in
5.26 m
Head thickness from ear to ear
10 ft 0 in
3.05 m
Distance across the eye
2 ft 6 in
0.76 m
Length of nose
4 ft 6 in
1.48 m
Right arm length
42 ft 0 in
12.8 m
Right arm greatest thickness
12 ft 0 in
3.66 m
Thickness of waist
35 ft 0 in
10.67 m
Width of mouth
3 ft 0 in
0.91 m
Tablet, length
23 ft 7 in
7.19 m
Tablet, width
13 ft 7 in
4.14 m
Tablet, thickness
2 ft 0 in
0.61 m
Height of pedestal
89 ft 0 in
27.13 m
Height of foundation
65 ft 0 in
19.81 m
Weight of copper used in statue
60,000 pounds
27.22 tonnes
Weight of steel used in statue
250,000 pounds
113.4 tonnes
Total weight of statue
450,000 pounds
204.1 tonnes
Thickness of copper sheeting
3/32 of an inch
2.4 mm
Depictions
See also: Replicas of the Statue of Liberty and Statue of Liberty in popular culture
 Replica on Odaiba in Tokyo Bay, Japan, near the Rainbow Bridge
 Statue of Liberty from Pont de Grenelle, Paris
Hundreds of replicas of the Statue of Liberty are displayed worldwide.[197] A smaller version of the statue, one-fourth the height of the original, was given by the American community in Paris to that city. It now stands on the  le aux Cygnes, facing west toward her larger sister.[197] A replica 30 feet (9.1 m) tall stood atop the Liberty Warehouse on West 64th Street in Manhattan for many years;[197] it now resides at the Brooklyn Museum.[198] In a patriotic tribute, the Boy Scouts of America, as part of their Strengthen the Arm of Liberty campaign in 1949 1952, donated about two hundred replicas of the statue, made of stamped copper and 100 inches (2.5 m) in height, to states and municipalities across the United States.[199] Though not a true replica, the statue known as the Goddess of Democracy temporarily erected during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 was similarly inspired by French democratic traditions the sculptors took care to avoid a direct imitation of the Statue of Liberty.[200] Among other recreations of New York City structures, a replica of the statue is part of the exterior of the New York-New York Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.[201]
As an American icon, the Statue of Liberty has been depicted on the country's coinage and stamps. It appeared on commemorative coins issued to mark its 1986 centennial, and on New York's 2001 entry in the state quarters series.[202] An image of the statue was chosen for the American Eagle platinum bullion coins in 1997, and it was placed on the reverse, or tails, side of the Presidential Dollar series of circulating coins.[30] Two images of the statue's torch appear on the current ten-dollar bill.[203] The statue's intended photographic depiction on a 2010 forever stamp proved instead to be of the replica at the Las Vegas casino.[204]
Depictions of the statue have been used by many regional institutions. Between 1986[205] and 2000,[206] New York State issued license plates with an outline of the statue.[205][206] The Women's National Basketball Association's New York Liberty use both the statue's name and its image in their logo, in which the torch's flame doubles as a basketball.[207] The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League depicted the statue's head on their third jersey, beginning in 1997.[208] The National Collegiate Athletic Association's 1996 Men's Basketball Final Four, played at New Jersey's Meadowlands Sports Complex, featured the statue in its logo.[209] The Libertarian Party of the United States uses the statue in its emblem.[210]
The statue is a frequent subject in popular culture. In music, it has been evoked to indicate support for American policies, as in Toby Keith's 2002 song "Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)", and in opposition, appearing on the cover of the Dead Kennedys' album Bedtime for Democracy, which protested the Reagan administration.[211] In film, the torch is the setting for the climax of director Alfred Hitchcock's 1942 movie Saboteur.[212] The statue makes one of its most famous cinematic appearances in the 1968 picture Planet of the Apes, in which it is seen half-buried in sand.[211][213] It is knocked over in the science-fiction film Independence Day [214] and in Cloverfield the head is ripped off.[215] In Jack Finney's 1970 time-travel novel Time and Again, the right arm of the statue, on display in the early 1880s in Madison Square Park, plays a crucial role.[216] Robert Holdstock, consulting editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, wondered in 1979:
Where would science fiction be without the Statue of Liberty? For decades it has towered or crumbled above the wastelands of deserted Earth giants have uprooted it, aliens have found it curious ... the symbol of Liberty, of optimism, has become a symbol of science fiction's pessimistic view of the future.[217]
A replica of the Statue of Liberty forms part of the exterior decor at the New York-New York Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip
Head of Liberty, U.S. airmail stamp, 1971
Reverse side of a Presidential Dollar coin
3D model. Click to interact.
See also
 Approximate heights of various notable statues:Statue of Unity 240 m (790 ft) (incl. 58 m (190 ft) base)Spring Temple Buddha 153 m (502 ft) (incl. 25 m (82 ft) pedestal and 20 m (66 ft) throne)Statue of Liberty 93 m (305 ft) (incl. 47 m (154 ft) pedestal)The Motherland Calls  87 m (285 ft) (incl. 2 m (6 ft 7 in) pedestal)Christ the Redeemer 38 m (125 ft) (incl. 8 m (26 ft) pedestal)Michelangelo's David  5.17 m (17.0 ft) (excl. 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) plinth)
Goddess of Liberty, 1888 statue by Elijah E. Myers atop the Texas State Capitol dome in Austin, Texas
List of tallest statues
List of the tallest statues in the United States
Miss Freedom, 1889 statue on the dome of the Georgia State Capitol (US)
Place des  tats-Unis, in Paris, France
Statue of Freedom, 1863 sculpture by Thomas Crawford atop the dome of the US Capitol
The Statue of Liberty (film), a 1985 Ken Burns documentary film
Statues and sculptures in New York City
References
Citations
^ Schneiderman, R.M. (June 28, 2010). "For tourists, Statue of Liberty is nice, but no Forever 21". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 24, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ a b "National Monument Proclamations under the Antiquities Act". National Park Service. January 16, 2003. Archived from the original on October 25, 2011. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ "Liberty Enlightening the World". Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. Archived from the original on January 1, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2020.
^ a b Weekly List of Actions Taken on Properties: 9/08/2017 through 9/14/2017, National Park Service, September 14, 2017, archived from the original on December 29, 2018, retrieved July 13, 2019.
^ a b "New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places   Hudson County". New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection   Historic Preservation Office. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2014.
^ a b "Statue of Liberty National Monument" (PDF). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. September 14, 1976. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 26, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ "Abolition". Statue of Liberty National Monument. National Park Service. February 26, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019.
^ a b c Harris 1985, pp. 7 9.
^ Joseph, Rebecca M.; Rosenblatt, Brooke; Kinebrew, Carolyn (September 2000). "The Black Statue of Liberty Rumor". National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2012.
^ "Abolition". National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 7, 2014.
^ "The Statue of Liberty and its Ties to the Middle East" (PDF). University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 20, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2017.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 7 8.
^ Karabell, Zachary (2003). Parting the desert: the creation of the Suez Canal. Alfred A. Knopf. p. 243. ISBN 0-375-40883-5.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 60 61.
^ a b Moreno 2000, pp. 39 40.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 12 13.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 102 103.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 16 17.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 85.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 10 11.
^ a b c d e Sutherland 2003, pp. 17 19.
^ a b c d e Bodnar, John (2006). "Monuments and Morals: The Nationalization of Civic Instruction".  In Warren, Donald R.; Patrick, John J. (eds.). Civic and Moral Learning in America. Macmillan. pp. 212 214. ISBN 978-1-4039-7396-2. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2020.
^ The encyclopedia of ancient history. Bagnall, Roger S. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 2013. ISBN 978-1-4051-7935-5. OCLC 230191195.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ Roberts, J. M. (John Morris), 1928-2003. (1993). History of the world. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-521043-3. OCLC 28378422.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b c Turner, Jane (2000). The Grove Dictionary of Art: From Monet to C zanne : Late 19th-century French Artists. Oxford University Press US. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-312-22971-9. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2020.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 96 97.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 105 108.
^ Blume, Mary (July 16, 2004). "The French icon Marianne   la mode". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ "Get the Facts (Frequently Asked Questions about the Statue of Liberty)". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ a b "Lady Liberty Reverse Statue of Liberty (1886)". Presidential $1 coin. United States Mint. Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 52 53, 55, 87.
^ a b c d e f g Interviewed for Watson, Corin. Statue of Liberty: Building a Colossus (TV documentary, 2001)
^ Bartholdi, Fr d ric (1885). The Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World. North American Review. North American Review. p. 42.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 108 111.
^ a b c "Frequently asked questions". Statue of Liberty National Monument. National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved August 10, 2010.
^ Khan 2010, p. 120.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 118, 125.
^ Harris 1985, p. 26.
^ Khan 2010, p. 121.
^ a b c Khan 2010, pp. 123 125.
^ a b Harris 1985, pp. 44 45.
^ "News of Norway". 1999. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2010.
^ "Answers about the Statue of Liberty, Part 2". The New York Times. July 2, 2009. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ Sutherland 2003, p. 36.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 126 128.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 25.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 26.
^ Khan 2010, p. 130.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 49.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 134.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 30.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 94.
^ Khan 2010, p. 135.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 137.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 32.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 136 137.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 22.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 139 143.
^ Harris 1985, p. 30.
^ Harris 1985, p. 33.
^ Harris 1985, p. 32.
^ Harris 1985, p. 34.
^ "La tour a vu le jour   Levallois". Le Parisien (in French). April 30, 2004. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2012.
^ Khan 2010, p. 144.
^ "Statue of Liberty". pbs.org. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 36 38.
^ Harris 1985, p. 39.
^ Harris 1985, p. 38.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 37.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 38.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 159 160.
^ Khan 2010, p. 163.
^ Khan 2010, p. 161.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 160.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 91.
^ a b "Statistics". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. August 16, 2006. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 169.
^ a b c Auchincloss, Louis (May 12, 1986). "Liberty: Building on the Past". New York. p. 87. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ Bartholdi, Fr d ric (1885). The Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World. North American Review. North American Review. p. 62.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 71 72.
^ Sutherland 2003, pp. 49 50.
^ a b Moreno 2000, pp. 184 186.
^ "Branford's History Is Set in Stone". Connecticut Humanities. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2013.
^ "STRUCTUREmag   Structural Engineering Magazine, Tradeshow: Joachim Gotsche Giaver". November 27, 2012. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 163 164.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 165 166.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 172 175.
^ "A World Room Welcome". blogs.cul.columbia.edu. January 23, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023.
^ Levine, Benjamin; Story, Isabelle F. (1961). "Statue of Liberty". National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, pp. 40 41.
^ a b c Harris 1985, p. 105.
^ Sutherland 2003, p. 51.
^ Harris 1985, p. 107.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 110 111.
^ "Statue of Liberty arrives in New York Harbor".
^ "Why the Statue of Liberty Almost Didn't Get Built".
^ Harris 1985, p. 112.
^ "The Isere-Bartholdi Gift Reaches the Horseshoe Safely" (PDF). The Evening Post. June 17, 1885. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 12, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2013.
^ Harris 1985, p. 114.
^ a b Moreno 2000, p. 19.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 49.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 64.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 36.
^ a b c Harris 1985, pp. 133 134.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 65.
^ Mitchell, Elizabeth (2014). Liberty's Torch: The Great Adventure to Build the Statue of Liberty. Atlantic Monthly Press. p. 259. ISBN 978-0-8021-9255-4.
^ Khan 2010, p. 176.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 177 178.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 52.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 127.
^ a b c Moreno 2000, p. 71.
^ Harris 1985, p. 128.
^ "Postponing Bartholdi's statue until there is liberty for colored as well". The Cleveland Gazette. Cleveland, Ohio. November 27, 1886. p. 2.
^ a b c d Moreno 2000, p. 41.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 24.
^ "The immigrants' statue". National Park Service. February 26, 2015. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2020.
^ a b Sutherland 2003, p. 78.
^ "Answers about the Statue of Liberty". The New York Times. July 1, 2009. Archived from the original on September 22, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ "To paint Miss Liberty". The New York Times. July 19, 1906. p. 1. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ "How shall "Miss Liberty"'s toilet be made?". The New York Times. July 29, 1906. pp. SM2. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2011.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 168.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 136 139.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 148 151.
^ Harris 1985, p. 147.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 136.
^ a b Moreno 2000, p. 202.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 169.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 141 143.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 147 148.
^ "Honorees". Lapride.org. January 4, 2007. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved November 6, 2012.
^ "The Feminist Chronicles, 1953 1993   1970   Feminist Majority Foundation". Feminist.org. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved November 6, 2012.
^ 1973 World Almanac and Book of Facts, p. 996.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 72 73.
^ Harris 1985, p. 143.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 20.
^ Harris 1985, p. 165.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 169 171.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 38.
^ "Repairs due for Miss Liberty". Asbury Park Press. Associated Press. June 20, 1982. p. 3. Archived from the original on October 10, 2021. Retrieved June 5, 2019   via newspapers.com .
^ Krebs, Albin; Thomas, Robert McG. Jr. (May 19, 1982). "NOTES ON PEOPLE; Iacocca to Head Drive to Restore Landmarks". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 8, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2019.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 204 205.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 216 218.
^ Daw, Jocelyne (March 2006). Cause Marketing for Nonprofits: Partner for Purpose, Passion, and Profits. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-471-71750-8.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 81.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 76.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 55.
^ Harris 1985, p. 172.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 153.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 75.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, pp. 74 76.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 57.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 153.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 71.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 84.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 88.
^ a b Sutherland 2003, p. 106.
^ a b "History and Culture". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b Chan, Sewell (May 8, 2009). "Statue of Liberty's Crown Will Reopen July 4". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Neuman, William (July 5, 2007). "Congress to Ask Why Miss Liberty's Crown is Still Closed to Visitors". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "Statue of Liberty National Monument". National Park Service. December 31, 2007. Archived from the original on July 31, 2014. Retrieved October 12, 2011.
^ Raja, Nina (August 10, 2010). "Liberty Island to remain open during statue's renovation". CNN. Archived from the original on July 3, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "Statue of Liberty interior to re-open next month". AP via Fox News. September 11, 2012. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016.
^ Powlowski, A. (November 2, 2012). "Statue of Liberty closed for 'foreseeable future'". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved November 2, 2012.
^ McGeehan, Patrick (November 8, 2012). "Storm leaves Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island cut off from visitors". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2012.
^ Barron, James (November 30, 2012). "Statue of Liberty was unscathed by hurricane, but its home took a beating". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2012. Retrieved December 1, 2012.
^ Long, Colleen (July 4, 2013). "Statue of Liberty reopens as US marks July Fourth". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on July 7, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2013.
^ Foderaro, Lisa (October 28, 2013). "Ellis Island Welcoming Visitors Once Again, but Repairs Continue". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2014.
^ Armaghan, Sarah (October 1, 2013). "Statue of Liberty Closed in Shutdown". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 18, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2017.
^ Shannon, James. "Woman Climbs Base of the Statue of Liberty After ICE Protest". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
^ "Additional funds will keep Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island open during federal shutdown". NorthJersey.com. January 15, 2019. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019.
^ Kim, Allen (March 16, 2020). "Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island close due to coronavirus outbreak". CNN. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2020.
^ "Statue of Liberty to Open Early Next Week, Ellis Island Kept Closed". NBC New York. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020.
^ "Reopen News: Liberty Island to only partially reopen Monday, Ellis Islands will remain closed". ABC7 New York. July 17, 2020. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020.
^ Delaney, Jillian (October 10, 2022). "Statue of Liberty's crown to open for first time since COVID-19 pandemic". Staten Island Advance. Retrieved October 10, 2022.
^ a b Durkin, Erin (October 6, 2016). "Statue of Liberty getting new $70M museum set to open in 2019". NY Daily News. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016.
^ "See Behind the Scenes as the Statue of Liberty's Original Torch Moves to Its New Home". Time. February 18, 2019. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2019.
^ a b Plagianos, Irene (October 6, 2016). "See Designs for the New Statue of Liberty Museum". DNAinfo New York. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016.
^ Pereira, Ivan (October 6, 2016). "Statue of Liberty Museum to open in 2019". am New York. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016.
^ Rosenberg, Zoe (May 1, 2019). "Statue of Liberty will ban tour guides from some of its most popular areas". Curbed NY. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
^ "Everyone's Welcome at the Statue of Liberty. Except Tour Guides". The New York Times. April 1, 2019. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
^ "Early History of Bedloe's Island". Statue of Liberty Historical Handbook. National Park Service. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "New Jersey v. New York 523 U.S. 767". Supreme Court of the United States. 1998. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b "Fees & Passes". Statue Of Liberty National Monument (U.S. National Park Service). May 20, 2019. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019. Retrieved June 16, 2019.
^ Ramirez, Anthony (June 29, 2007). "Circle Line Loses Pact for Ferries to Liberty Island". New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "NPS: Liberty and Ellis Island ferry map". Ferry Map. National Park Service. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "For Your Safety and Security". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2011.
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "Frequently asked questions: Reserving tickets to visit the crown". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "Live from the Golden Torch". EarthCam. EarthCam. Retrieved December 20, 2021.
^ a b c d e f Moreno 2000, pp. 222 223.
^ Harris 1985, p. 163.
^ "Liberty Statue Made a National Monument, Its Base a Park, by Coolidge Proclamation". The New York Times. December 10, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2019.
^ Healy, Paul (May 12, 1965). "Ellis Island Finds Shelter With Miss Liberty". New York Daily News. p. 3. Archived from the original on October 10, 2021. Retrieved June 5, 2019   via newspapers.com .
^ "Proclamation 3656   Adding Ellis Island to the Statue of Liberty National Monument". April 5, 2010. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved July 4, 2019.
^ National Park Service (1994). National Register of Historic Places, 1966 1994: Cumulative List Through January 1, 1994. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. p. 502. ISBN 978-0-89133-254-1.
^ "Statue of Liberty". World Heritage. UNESCO. Archived from the original on August 28, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b c Moreno 2000, pp. 200 201.
^ "Collections: American Art: Replica of the Statue of Liberty, from Liberty Storage & Warehouse, 43 47 West 64th Street, NYC". Brooklyn Museum. Archived from the original on June 24, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Attoun, Marti (October 2007). "Little Sisters of Liberty". Scouting. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved August 1, 2010.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 103 104.
^ Goldberger, Paul (January 15, 1997). "New York-New York, it's a Las Vegas town". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "Statue of Liberty postage stamps". Statue of Liberty Ellis Island Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "The redesigned $10 note". newmoney.gov. Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Severson, Kim; Healey, Matthew (April 14, 2011). "This Lady Liberty is a Las Vegas teenager". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b "State to start issuing new license plates July 1". The New York Times. January 24, 1986. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ a b "State license plates to get new look". The New York Times. January 11, 2000. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ "'Liberty' for New York club". The New York Times. February 14, 1997. Archived from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Lapointe, Joe (January 12, 1997). "Lady Liberty laces up at the Garden". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Sandomir, Richard (March 29, 1996). "Final Four: States put aside their rivalry and try a little cooperation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Axinn, Mark (October 28, 2011). "The Statue of Liberty after 125 years   by LPNY Chair Mark Axinn". Libertarian Party of the United States. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
^ a b Morris, Tracy S. "The Statue of Liberty in Popular Culture". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Spoto, Donald (1983). The Dark Side of Genius: The Life of Alfred Hitchcock. Ballantine. pp. 262 263. ISBN 978-0-345-31462-8.
^ Greene, Eric; Slotkin, Richard (1998). Planet of the Apes as American myth: race, politics, and popular culture. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-8195-6329-3. Retrieved October 20, 2011. statue of liberty planet of the apes.
^ "10 Movies That Hated The Statue Of Liberty >> Page 6 of 10". March 13, 2014. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "'Cloverfield' Release Will Be Test of Online Hype : NPR". NPR.org. Archived from the original on April 14, 2008. Retrieved March 24, 2014.{{cite news}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Darrach, Brad (June 26, 1970). "The spy who came in from 1882". Life. p. 16. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Nicholls, Peter (1979). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St Albans, Herts, UK: Granada Publishing Ltd. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-586-05380-5.
General and cited references
Bell, James B.; Abrams, Richard L. (1984). In Search of Liberty: The Story of the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Co. ISBN 978-0-385-19624-6.
Harris, Jonathan (1985). A Statue for America: The First 100 Years of the Statue of Liberty. New York City: Four Winds Press (a division of Macmillan Publishing Company). ISBN 978-0-02-742730-1.
Hayden, Richard Seth; Despont, Thierry W. (1986). Restoring the Statue of Liberty. New York City: McGraw-Hill Book Company. ISBN 978-0-07-027326-9.
Khan, Yasmin Sabina (2010). Enlightening the World: The Creation of the Statue of Liberty. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-4851-5.
Moreno, Barry (2000). The Statue of Liberty Encyclopedia. New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7385-3689-7.
Sutherland, Cara A. (2003). The Statue of Liberty. New York City: Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 978-0-7607-3890-0.
External links
Statue of Liberty  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTravel information from Wikivoyage
Statue of Liberty National Monument
Statue of Liberty Ellis Island Foundation
Statue of Liberty   UNESCO World Heritage
"A Giant's Task  Cleaning Statue of Liberty", Popular Mechanics (February 1932)
Views from the webcams affixed to the Statue of Liberty
Made in Paris The Statue of Liberty 1877 1885   many historical photographs
Front page of The Evening Post (New York) extensively describing October 28, 1886 dedication
Statue of Liberty at Structurae
Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. NY-138, "Statue of Liberty, Liberty Island, Manhattan, New York City County, NY", 404 photos, 59 color transparencies, 41 measured drawings, 10 data pages, 33 photo caption pages
HAER No. NY-138-A, "Statue of Liberty, Administration Building", 6 photos, 6 measured drawings, 1 photo caption page
HAER No. NY-138-B, "Statue of Liberty, Concessions Building", 12 photos, 6 measured drawings, 1 photo caption page
The Statue of Liberty, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Robert Gildea, Kathleen Burk & John Keane (In Our Time, February 14, 2008)
vteStatue of LibertyLiberty Enlightening the WorldCreators
 douard Ren  de Laboulaye, originator
Fr d ric Auguste Bartholdi, sculptor
Gustave Eiffel, builder
company
Eug ne Secr tan, donated copper
Richard Morris Hunt, pedestal
Joseph Pulitzer, pedestal funding
Engineers
Eug ne Viollet-le-Duc
Maurice Koechlin
Joachim Gi ver
Location
Liberty Island
Statue of Liberty National Monument
Original torch: Statue of Liberty Museum
Original statue: Mus e des Arts et M tiers
Formerlocations
Right arm and torch: Centennial Exposition (1876)
Madison Square Park (1876 1882)
Head: Paris World's Fair (1878)
Replicas
 le aux Cygnes, Paris
Flame of Liberty
Las Vegas
Leicester
Strengthen the Arm of Liberty
Austin, Texas
Fayetteville, Arkansas
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Overland Park, Kansas
Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Seattle
Legacy
In popular culture
"The New Colossus" (1883 sonnet)
Working on the Statue of Liberty (1946 painting)
Miss Liberty (1949 musical)
The Statue of Liberty (1985 documentary)
Statue of Liberty play (American football)
Liberty Weekend, 1986
Liberty Fanfare
Medal of Liberty
Liberty Issue (1954 1965 stamps)
Statue of Liberty Forever stamp
Statue of Liberty commemorative coins
American Platinum Eagle coin
Presidential dollar coins
American Innovation dollars
Statue of Liberty Division
Related
1984-1986 conservation and restoration
Statue of Liberty Museum
Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia
Libertas
personification of Liberty
Ellis Island
Black Tom explosion
Mus e Bartholdi
vteFr d ric Auguste BartholdiSculptures
Marquis de Lafayette (1876)
The Fountain of Light and Water (Bartholdi Fountain) (1876)
Lion of Belfort (1880)
Liberty Enlightening the World (Statue of Liberty) (1886)
Fontaine Bartholdi (1889)
Columbus (1893)
Strassburger memorial (1895)
Planned work
Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia
Related
Mus e Bartholdi
Medal of Liberty
Statue of Liberty Museum
Replicas of the Statue of Liberty
The Statue of Liberty (1985 documentary)
vteNational symbols of the United StatesSymbols
Flag
Great Seal
Bald eagle
Uncle Sam
Columbia
Phrygian cap
General Grant (tree)
American Creed
Pledge of Allegiance
Rose
Oak
Bison
Landmarks
Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World)
Liberty Bell
Mount Rushmore
National Mall
West Potomac Park
Mottos
In God We Trust
E pluribus unum
Novus ordo seclorum
Annuit c ptis
Songs
"The Star-Spangled Banner"
"Dixie"
"America the Beautiful"
"Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean"
"The Stars and Stripes Forever"
"Hail to the Chief"
"Hail, Columbia"
"America (My Country, 'Tis of Thee)"
"God Bless America"
"Lift Every Voice and Sing"
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
"Anchors Aweigh"
"Marines' Hymn"
"Semper Fidelis"
"The Air Force Song"
"Semper Paratus"
"Semper Supra"
"National Emblem March"
"The Washington Post March"
"Battle Hymn of the Republic"
"Yankee Doodle"
"You're a Grand Old Flag"
"When Johnny Comes Marching Home"
"This Land Is Your Land"
"Battle Cry of Freedom"
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteNational personifications
Albania
Mother Albania
Argentina
Effigies of Argentina
Armenia
Mother Armenia
Australia
Little Boy from Manly
Bangladesh
Bangamata
Belgium
Leo Belgicus
Brazil
Ef gie da Rep blica
Cambodia
Preah Thong and Neang Neak
Canada
Johnny Canuck
Chile
Roto
China
Panda
Chinese dragon
Jade Emperor
Croatia
Mother Croatia
Czech Republic
 echie
Czech Va ek
 vejk
Denmark
Holger Danske
Mother Denmark
Europe
Europa
Europa regina
Finland
Finnish Maiden
France
Marianne
Gallic rooster
Georgia
Kartvlis Deda
Germany
Deutscher Michel
Germania
Greece
Hellas
Haiti
Ezili Dantor
Catherine Flon
Hungary
Lady of Hungaria
Iceland
Lady of the Mountain
India
Bharat Mata
Indian Elephant
Indonesia
Ibu Pertiwi
Ireland
 riu
Hibernia
Kathleen Ni Houlihan
Israel
Srulik
Italy
Italia turrita
Roma
Japan
Amaterasu
Kenya
Wanjiku
Korea
Dangun
Ungnyeo
Lebanon
Abu Abed
Malaysia
Hang Tuah
Malta
Melita
Netherlands
Dutch Maiden
New Zealand
Southern man
Zealandia
Norway
Ola Nordmann
Pakistan
Shaheen
M der-e Millat
Palestine
Handala
Philippines
Juan dela Cruz
Maria Clara
Poland
Polonia
Portugal
Ef gie da Rep blica
Z  Povinho
Russia
Mother Russia
Russian Bear
Russian Winter
Serbia
Kosovo Maiden
Mother Serbia
Singapore
Merlion
Spain
Hispania
Sweden
Mother Svea
Switzerland
Helvetia
Thailand
Siam Devadhiraj
Ukraine
Cossack Mamay
United Kingdom
Britannia
John Bull
Dame Wales
Welsh Dragon
United States
Brother Jonathan
Columbia
Lady Liberty
Uncle Sam
Billy Yank
Northern states
Johnny Reb
Southern states
Other symbols of Liberty
Other articles related to the Statue of Liberty
vteLighthouses of New YorkMain: List of lighthouses in the United States
Ambrose Tower
Aunt Phebe Rock
Barber's Point
Barcelona
Blackwell Island
Bluff Point
Braddock Point
Buffalo Light
Buffalo Harbor North and South entrance Lights
Buffalo Harbor South Entrance Light
Buffalo North breakwater East end Light
Buffalo North Breakwater South End Light
Cape Vincent
Carleton Island
Cedar Island
Charlotte Genesee
Cold Spring Harbor
Coney Island
Coxsackie
Crossover Island
Crown Point
Cumberland Head
Dunkirk
East Charity Shoal
Eatons Neck
Elm Tree Beacon
Esopus Meadows
Execution Rocks
Fair Haven
Fire Island
Fort Niagara
Fort Lafayette
Fort Tompkins
Fort Wadsworth
Frenchman Island
Galloo Island
Gardiners Point
Horse Island
Horton Point
Hudson-Athens
Huntington Harbor
Kings Point
Latimer Reef
Little Gull Island
Little Red
Montauk Point
Moriches
New Dorp
North Brother Island
North Dumpling
Oak Orchard
Old Field Point
Old Orchard Shoal
Ogdensburg Harbor
Orient Long Beach Bar
Orient Point
Oswego Harbor West Pierhead
Plattsburgh Beacon
Plum Island
Point Aux Roches
Prince's Bay
Race Rock
Rock Island
Romer Shoal
Rondout
Sands Point
Saugerties
Selkirk
Shinnecock
Sodus Outer
Sodus Point
South Brother Island Channel Range
South Buffalo North Side
Split Rock Point
Staten Island
Statue of Liberty
Stepping Stones
Stony Point (Henderson)
Stony Point (Hudson)
Strawberry Island Upper Cut Range
Stuyvesant
Sunken Meadows
Sunken Rock
Tarrytown
Thirty Mile Point
Three Sisters Island
Throgs Neck
Tibbetts Point
Turkey Point
Watervliet
West Point
West Bank
Whitehall Narrows
Whitestone Point
vteProtected areas of New YorkFederalNational HistoricSites and Historical Parks
Eleanor Roosevelt
Harriet Tubman
Home of Franklin D. Roosevelt
Martin Van Buren
Sagamore Hill
Saint Paul's Church
Saratoga
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace
Theodore Roosevelt Inaugural
Women's Rights
Kate Mullany
affiliated
Thomas Cole
affiliated
National Memorials
Federal Hall
General Grant
Hamilton Grange
Statue of Liberty
National monuments
African Burial Ground
Castle Clinton
Fort Stanwix
Governors Island
Stonewall
National Trails
Appalachian Trail
North Country Trail
National Seashores and Recreation Areas
Fire Island
Gateway
Upper Delaware
National WildlifeRefuges
Iroquois
Long Island Complex
Amagansett
Conscience Point
Elizabeth A. Morton
Lido Beach
Oyster Bay
Sayville
Seatuck
Target Rock
Wertheim
Montezuma
Shawangunk Grasslands
Wallkill River
National Forests
Finger Lakes
Wilderness Areas
Otis Pike Fire Island High Dune
State parks
Allen H. Treman
Allegany
Amherst
Amsterdam Beach
Battle Island
Bayard Cutting Arboretum
Bayswater Point
Bear Mountain
Beaver Island
Beechwood
Belmont Lake
Bethpage
Betty & Wilbur Davis
Big Six Mile Creek
Blauvelt
Bonavista
Bowman Lake
Braddock Bay
Brentwood
Bristol Beach
Brookhaven
Buckhorn Island
Buffalo Harbor
Burnham Point
Buttermilk Falls
Caleb Smith
Camp Hero
Canandaigua Lake
Canoe-Picnic Point
Captree
Catharine Valley Trail
Caumsett
Cayuga Lake
Cedar Island
Cedar Point
Chenango Valley
Cherry Plain
Chimney Bluffs
Chittenango Falls
Clarence Fahnestock
Clark Reservation
Clay Pit Ponds
Cold Spring Harbor
Coles Creek
Conesus Lake
Connetquot River
Crab Island
Croil Island
Cumberland Bay
Darien Lakes
De Veaux Woods
Deans Cove
Delta Lake
Devil's Hole
Dewolf Point
Donald J. Trump
Earl W. Brydges Artpark
Eel Weir
Empire   Fulton Ferry
Evangola
Fair Haven Beach
Fillmore Glen
Fort Niagara
Four Mile Creek
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Franny Reese
Frenchman Island
Galop Island
Gantry Plaza
Genesee Valley Greenway
Gilbert Lake
Gilgo
Glimmerglass
Golden Hill
Goosepond Mountain
Grafton Lakes
Grass Point
Green Lakes
Hallock
Hamlin Beach
Harriet Hollister Spencer
Harriman
Hart's Brook
Haverstraw Beach
Heckscher
Helen L. McNitt
Hempstead Lake
High Tor
Highland Lakes
Higley Flow
Hither Hills
Honeoye
Hook Mountain
Hudson Highlands
Hudson River Islands
Hudson River
Hunts Pond
Iona Island
Irondequoit Bay
Jacques Cartier
James Baird
John Boyd Thacher
Jones Beach
Joseph Davis
Keewaydin
Keuka Lake
Knox Farm
Kring Point
Lake Erie
Lake Lauderdale
Lake Superior
Lake Taghkanic
Lakeside Beach
Letchworth
Lock 32
Lodi Point
Long Point - Finger Lakes
Long Point - Thousand Islands
Long Point on Lake Chautauqua
Macomb Reservation
Margaret Lewis Norrie
Marsha P. Johnson
Mark Twain
Mary Island
Max V. Shaul
Mexico Point
Midway
Mine Kill
Minnewaska
Mohawk River
Montauk Downs
Montauk Point
Moreau Lake
Napeague
Newtown Battlefield
Niagara Falls
Nissequogue River
Nyack Beach
Oak Orchard
Ogden Mills & Ruth Livingston Mills
Old Croton Aqueduct
Old Erie Canal
Oquaga Creek
Orient Beach
Peebles Island
Pinnacle
Pixley Falls
Point Au Roche
Reservoir
Riverbank
Robert G. Wehle
Robert H. Treman
Robert Moses - Long Island
Robert Moses - Thousand Islands
Robert V. Riddell
Roberto Clemente
Rockefeller
Rock Island Lighthouse
Rockland Lake
Sampson
Sandy Island Beach
Saratoga Lake
Saratoga Spa
Schodack Island
Schunemunk Mountain
Selkirk Shores
Seneca Lake
Shadmoor
Shirley Chisholm
Silver Lake
Sonnenberg Gardens
Southwick Beach
St. Lawrence
State Park at the Fair
Sterling Forest
Steuben Memorial
Stony Brook
Storm King
Strawberry Island
Sunken Meadow
Taconic
Tallman Mountain
Taughannock Falls
Thompson's Lake
Two Rivers
Trail View
Valley Stream
Verona Beach
Walkway over the Hudson
Waterson Point
Watkins Glen
Wellesley Island
Westcott Beach
Whetstone Gulf
Whirlpool
Wildwood
Wilson-Tuscarora
Wonder Lake
Woodlawn Beach
State historic sites
Bennington Battlefield
Caumsett
Clermont
Clinton House
Crailo
Crown Point
Darwin Martin House
Fort Montgomery
Fort Ontario
Ganondagan
Grant Cottage
Herkimer Home
Hyde Hall
John Brown Farm
John Burroughs Memorial (Woodchuck Lodge)
John Hay Homestead
Johnson Hall
Knox's Headquarters
Lorenzo
New Windsor Cantonment
Olana
Old Croton Aqueduct
Old Erie Canal
Old Fort Niagara
Oriskany Battlefield
Philipse Manor Hall
Plantings Fields Arboretum
Sackets Harbor Battlefield
Schoharie Crossing
Schuyler Mansion
Senate House
Sonnenberg Gardens & Mansion
Staatsburgh
Steuben Memorial
Stony Point Battlefield
Walt Whitman Birthplace
Washington's Headquarters
Preserves and sanctuariesPublicpreserves
Albany Pine Bush
Forest Preserve
Adirondack Park
Saint Regis Canoe Area
Santanoni Preserve
wilderness areas
Catskill Park
Hudson River Estuary
Long Island Pine Barrens
Reinstein Woods
Rome Sand Plains
Tahawus
Vischer Ferry
Welwyn
The NatureConservacy
Accabonac Harbor
Andy Warhol Visual Arts
Arthur W. Butler Memorial
Atlantic Double Dunes
Bear Swamp
Calverton Ponds
Chaumont Barrens
Clintonville Pine Barrens
Coon Mountain
Deer Lick
Denton
El Dorado Beach
Eugene and Agnes Meyer
Everton Falls
Freund
Gadway Sandstone Pavement Barrens
Hannacroix Ravine
Henry Morgenthau
Indian Brook Assemblage
Ironsides Island
Kenrose
Limestone Rise
Lisha Kill
Long Island Center for Conservation
Long Pond
Lordsland
Lower Poultney River and Saddles
Marrion Yarrow
Mashomack
Mianus River Gorge
Mildred E. Grierson Memorial
Moccasin Kill
Montauk Mountain
Moss Lake
Mount Holly
Nellie Hill
Neversink
O.D. von Engeln
Otter Creek
Pawling
Peconic Estuary Big Woods
Pine Neck
Roger Perry Memorial
Ruth Wales
Schunemunk Mountain
Shadmoor
Silver Lake Bog
Spring Pond Bog
Stewart
Lewis A. Swyer
Thompson Pond and Stissing Mountain
Uplands Farm
West Branch
Whitbeck Memorial Grove
Otherpreserves
Angle Fly
Baxter
Bergen-Byron Swamp
Black Rock Forest
Brandreth Park
Calder Center
Louis C. Clark
Cornell Botanic Gardens
Ferncliff Forest
Heiberg Memorial Forest
James
Lime Hollow
Mohonk
Peabody
Plotter Kill
Sagamore Camp
Sam's Point
Teatown Lake
Turkey Mountain
Turner Brook
Theodore Roosevelt
Wallkill Valley
Woodlawn
Zurich Bog
Other (lists)
National Historic Landmarks
National Natural Landmarks
Botanical gardens
Nature centers
New York City parks
POPS
WWI
New York state
forests
wild
historic sites
parks
wildlife management areas
Trails
rail trails
 Category
Erie County
Nassau County
New York City
NYS DEC
NYS OPRHP
 Commons
vteProtected areas of New York CityFederalNational Historic Sites
Lower East Side Tenement Museum
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace
National monumentsand memorials
African Burial Ground
Castle Clinton
Federal Hall
General Grant
Governors Island
Hamilton Grange
Statue of Liberty
Stonewall
National recreation areas
Gateway National Recreation Area - Jamaica Bay
Floyd Bennett Field
Fort Tilden
Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge
Jacob Riis
Gateway National Recreation Area - Staten Island
Fort Wadsworth
Great Kills
Hoffman Island
Miller Field
Swinburne Island
StateState Parks
Bayswater Point
Clay Pit Ponds
Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Gantry Plaza
Marsha P. Johnson
Riverbank
Roberto Clemente
Shirley Chisholm
State recreation lands
Mount Loretto Unique Area
Udalls Cove
City parks and preservesManhattan
79th Street Boat Basin
Abingdon Square
Albert Capsouto
Asphalt Green
Asser Levy
Battery
Bella Abzug (Hudson)
Bennett
British Garden at Hanover Square
Bowling Green
Bryant
Captain Patrick J. Brown Walk
Carl Schurz
Central
Diana Ross Playground
Great Lawn Rec Center
Heckscher Playground
North Meadow Rec Center
Chelsea
City Hall
Coleman Playground
Collect
Columbus
Corlears Hook
Dag Hammarskj ld Plaza
Damrosch
Dante
DeSalvio Playground
DeWitt Clinton
Drumgoole Plaza
Duane
East River Greenway
East River Esplanade
East River
Pier 42
Stuyvesant Cove
Elizabeth H. Berger Plaza
Father Demo Square
Finn Square
Foley Square
Fort Tryon
Fort Washington
Gorman
Governors Island
Gramercy
Greenacre
Hamilton Fish
Hanover Square
Harlem River
Hell's Kitchen
Herald Square
High Line
Highbridge
Fort George Seating Area
Holcombe Rucker
Hudson River
Ilka Tanya Pay n
Imagination Playground
Inwood Hill
Isham
J. Hood Wright
Jackie Robinson
Jackson Square
John Jay
Liberty
Little Island
Louis Cuvillier
Madison Square
Manhattan Waterfront Greenway
Marcus Garvey
McKenna Square
Millennium
Mill Rock
Mitchell Square
Morningside
Murphy's Brother's Playground
Muscota Marsh
Open Road
Paley
Peretz Square
Peter Cooper
Plaza Lafayette
Queen Elizabeth II September 11th Garden
Ralph Bunche
Randalls Island
Richard Tucker Square
Riverside
Robert Moses Playground
Roosevelt Triangle
Rucker
Sakura
Samuel N. Bennerson 2nd Playground
Sara Delano Roosevelt
Septuagesimo Uno
Seward
Sheridan Square
Sherman Square
Spring Street
St. John's
St. Nicholas
St. Vartan
Straus
Stuyvesant Square
Swindler Cove
Teardrop
Theodore Roosevelt
Thomas Jefferson
Thomas Paine
Tompkins Square
Tribeca
Union Square
Verdi Square
Vesuvio Playground
Vietnam Veterans Plaza
Wagner
Wards Island
Washington Market
Washington Square
West Side Community Garden
William A. Harris Garden
Winston Churchill
Zuccotti
The BronxEast Bronx
Bicentennial Veterans
Castle Hill
City Island Wetlands
Ferry Point
Givans Creek Woods
Haffen
Harding
Hart Island
Magenta Playground
Pelham Bay
Hunter Island
Orchard Beach
Rodman's Neck
Pelham Parkway
Pugsley Creek
Richman
Seton Falls
Seton
Soundview
Starlight
West Bronx
Aqueduct Walk
Bridge
Bronx
Bronx Skate Park
Devoe
Ewen
Harris
Henry Hudson
Jerome
Mosholu Parkway
Poe
Raoul Wallenberg Forest
Riverdale
Spuyten Duyvil Shorefront
St. James
University Woods
Van Cortlandt
Vidalia
Vinmont Veteran
Washington's Walk
Williamsbridge Oval
South Bronx
Baretto Point
Bill Rainey
Carlos J. Lozada Playground
Claremont
Concrete Plant
Crotona
Estella Diggs
Grant
Hunts Point Riverside
Joseph Rodman Drake
Joyce Kilmer
Julius Richman
Macombs Dam
Mill Pond
Mullaly
North and South Brother Islands
Playground 52
Printer's
Richman
St. Mary's
Taqwa Community Farm
Tremont
Brooklyn
Alben Square
American Veterans Memorial Pier
Amersfort
Anthony Catanzaro Square
Asser Levy
Ascenzi Square
Bath Beach
Betsy Head
Bensonhurst
Bocchino-Dente Memorial Plaza
Breukelen Ballfields
Brooklyn Bridge
Brooklyn Heights Promenade
Brooklyn Queens Greenway
Brooklyn Waterfront Greenway
Brower
Bushwick
Byrne
Cadman Plaza
Canarsie
Carroll
Calvert Vaux
Chief Charles A. Joshua Plaza
City Line
Coffey
Columbus
Commodore Barry
Coney Island Beach & Boardwalk
Coney Island Creek
Coney Island Cyclone
Continental Army Plaza
Cooper
Domino
Dyker Beach
Eastern Parkway
Fort Greene
Four Sparrow Marsh
Frank M. Charles
Fresh Creek Nature Preserve
Friends Field
Fulton
Golconda Skate Park
Gravesend
Green Central Knoll
Herbert Von King
Highland
Irving Square
JJ Byrne
Jamaica Bay
John J. Carty
John Paul Jones
Kaiser
Kelly
Leif Ericson
Leon S. Kaiser Playground
Lieutenant Joseph Petrosino
Lincoln Terrace
Linden
Lindower
Linton
Macri Triangle
Manhattan Beach
Maria Hernandez
Marine
McCarren
McGolrick
McKinley
Mt. Prospect
Nellie Bly
Ocean Parkway
Owl's Head
Paerdegat Basin
Paerdegat
Prospect
Red Hook
Robert E. Venable
Russell D. Ramsey Triangle
Saratoga
Scarangella
Seaside
Seth Low
Shore
Spring Creek
Steeplechase
Sternberg
St. Johns
Sunset
Tompkins
Trinity
Van Voorhees
Walt Whitman
Wingate
WNYC Transmitter
Zion Triangle
Queens
Admiral
Alley Pond
Andrews Grove
Astoria
Baisley Pond
Bayside Fields
Bayswater
Beach Channel
Big Bush
Bowne
Brant Point Wildlife Sanctuary
Breininger
Broad Channel American
Broad Channel
Broad Channel Wetlands
Brooklyn Queens Greenway
Brookville
Bulova
Captain Tilly
Catholic War Veterans Triangle
Chris Postiglione Triangle
College Point Fields
Crocheron
Cunningham
Det. Keith L. Williams
Det. William T. Gunn
Dr. Charles R. Drew
Dubos Point Wildlife Sanctuary
Doughboy
Douglaston
Elmhurst
Evergreen
Far Rockaway Skate Park
Feehan Triangle
Flushing Fields
Flushing Meadows-Corona
Foch Sitting Area
Forest
Fort Tilden
Fort Totten
Francis Lewis
Frank Golden
Frank Principe
Haggerty
Harvey
Highland
Hillcrest Veterans Square
Hinton
Hoffman
Hook Creek
Hunter's Point
Idlewild
Jamaica Bay
John Golden
Judge Moses Weinstein Playground
Juniper Valley
Kissena
Kohlreiter Square
Kopytko Triangle
Libra Triangle
Linden
Linnaeus
Little Bay
LoCicero Triangle
Louis Pasteur
Lynch Triangle
Mafera
Macneil
Marconi
Marie Curie
Montbellier
O'Donohue
One Room Schoolhouse
Overlook
Park of the Americas
Phil "Scooter" Rizzuto
Playground Seventy Five
Ofc. Edward Byrne
Powell's Cove
Proctor-Hopson Circle
Queens County Farm Museum
Queensbridge
Rachel Carson
Railroad
Ralph Demarco
Remsen Cemetery
Rochdale
Rockaway Beach and Boardwalk
Rockaway Community
Roy Wilkins
Rufus King
Seagirt Avenue Wetlands
Socrates Sculpture
Spring Creek
Springfield
St. Albans
Travers
Travis Triangle
Triangle 54
Tribute
Tudor
Turtle Playground
Underbridge Dog Run
Vleigh Playground
Walter J. Wetzel Triangle
Wayanda
Staten IslandNorth Shore (Community District 1)
Allison Pond
Austen House
Buono Beach
Barrett
Clove Lakes
Clove's Tail
Corporal Thompson
Eibs Pond
Faber
Forest Grove
Fort Hill
Gaeta
Graniteville Quarry
Graniteville Swamp
Hero
Ingram Woods
Jones Woods
Joseph Manna
Maple Woods
Northerleigh
Richmond Terrace Wetlands
Sailors' Snug Harbor
Shooters Island
Silver Lake
Sobel Court
Tappen
Tompkinsville
Von Briesen
Walker
Westerleigh
Mid-Island (Community District 2)
Blood Root Valley
Bradys Pond
Deere
Father Macris
FDR Boardwalk
Gen. MacArthur
High Rock
Last Chance
Midland Field
Ocean Breeze
Old Place Creek
Prall's Island
Saw Mill Creek Marsh
Schmul
South Beach Wetlands
St. George
Staten Island Industrial
Westwood
Willowbrook
Mid-Island & South Shore (Community Districts 2 &  3)
Freshkills
LaTourette
Meredith Woods
William T. Davis Wildlife Refuge
South Shore (Community District 3)
Aesop
Amundsen Circle
Annadale
Arbutus Woods
Arden Woods
Bayview Terrace
Bloomingdale
Blue Heron
Blueberry
Bunker Ponds
Carlton
Conference House
Crescent Beach
Fairview
Great Kills
Huguenot Ponds
Hybrid Oak Woods
Isle of Meadows
King Fisher
Kingdom Pond
Lemon Creek
Long Pond
Olmstead-Beil House
Reed's Basket Willow Swamp
Seaside Wildlife Nature
Siedenburg
Tottenville Shore
Wegener
Wolfe's Pond
OtherNature centers
Alley Pond 
Belvedere Castle
Blue Heron
Crotona
Dana Discovery Center
Forest
Fort Greene
Fort Totten
Greenbelt
High Rock
Inwood Hill
Orchard Beach
Prospect
Salt Marsh
Van Cortlandt
Zoos
Bronx
Central Park
Prospect Park
Queens
Staten Island
Botanical gardens
Brooklyn Botanic
Conservatory
New York Botanical
Queens Botanical
Staten Island Botanical
New York Chinese Scholar's
Wave Hill
Roosevelt Island
Lighthouse
Southpoint
Other lists
World War I-related parks
Vietnam War-related parks
Hispanic and Latino-related parks
 Category
Department of Parks and Recreation
New York State
 Commons
vteWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesNortheast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawai i Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papah naumoku kea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Multiple locations
The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site in Puerto Rico
1 Shared with Canada
vteTourist attractions in New York CityMore than 10 millionannual visitors
Times Square (50 M)
Central Park (40 M)
Grand Central Terminal (21.6 M)
Broadway (13.2 M)
South Street Seaport (12 M)
Rockefeller Center
1 to 10 millionannual visitors
High Line (7.6 M)
Metropolitan Museum of Art (6.3 M)
American Museum of Natural History (5.0 M)
National September 11 Memorial & Museum (5.0 M)
Empire State Building (3.5 M)
Museum of Modern Art (2.8 M)
Statue of Liberty (2.4 M)
One World Trade Center (2.3 M)
Bronx Zoo (1.8 M)
Ellis Island (1.7 M)
Note: Visitor numbers are estimates only.See also: Tourism in New York City
vteU.S. National Register of Historic Places in New YorkTopics
Contributing property
Keeper of the Register
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
National Park Service
Property types
Listsby county
Albany
Allegany
Bronx
Broome
Cattaraugus
Cayuga
Chautauqua
Chemung
Chenango
Clinton
Columbia
Cortland
Delaware
Dutchess
Erie
Essex
Franklin
Fulton
Genesee
Greene
Hamilton
Herkimer
Jefferson
Kings (Brooklyn)
Lewis
Livingston
Madison
Monroe
Montgomery
Nassau
New York (Manhattan)
Niagara
Oneida
Onondaga
Ontario
Orange
Orleans
Oswego
Otsego
Putnam
Queens
Rensselaer
Richmond (Staten Island)
Rockland
Saratoga
Schenectady
Schoharie
Schuyler
Seneca
St. Lawrence
Steuben
Suffolk
Sullivan
Tioga
Tompkins
Ulster
Warren
Washington
Wayne
Westchester
Northern
Southern
Wyoming
Yates
Listsby city
Albany
Buffalo
New Rochelle
New York City
Bronx
Brooklyn
Queens
Staten Island
Manhattan
Below 14th St.
14th 59th St.
59th 110th St.
Above 110th St.
Minor islands
Niagara Falls
Peekskill
 Poughkeepsie
Rhinebeck
Rochester
Syracuse
Yonkers
Other lists
Bridges and tunnels
National Historic Landmarks
 Category
 List
 National Register of Historic Places Portal
vteMuseums in ManhattanFinancial District and Battery Park(Below Chambers St)
Castle Clinton
China Institute
Federal Hall National Memorial
Fraunces Tavern
George Gustav Heye Center
Mmuseumm
Museum of American Finance
Museum of Jewish Heritage
National September 11 Memorial & Museum
New York City Police Museum
Skyscraper Museum
South Street Seaport
Lower Manhattan(Chambers-14th Sts)
Asian American Arts Centre
Drawing Center
Eldridge Street Synagogue
FusionArts Museums
International Center of Photography
Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian Art
Lower East Side Tenement Museum
Merchant's House Museum
Museum of Chinese in America
New Museum
New York City Fire Museum
The Theatre Museum
Ukrainian Museum
Whitney Museum of American Art
Chelsea, Flatiron, Gramercy(14th-34th Sts)
Center for Jewish History
Fotografiska New York
International Print Center New York
John J. Harvey
The Museum at FIT
Museum of Sex
National Museum of Mathematics
Poster House
Rubin Museum of Art
The Shed
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace
Tibet House
Midtown(34th-59th Sts)
Girl Scout Museum and Archives
Houdini Museum of New York
Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum
Japan Society
John M. Mossman Lock Museum
Madame Tussauds New York
Morgan Library & Museum
Museum of Arts and Design
Museum of Modern Art
New York Public Library Main Branch
New York Transit Museum
Paley Center for Media
Scandinavia House
United Nations Art Collection
Upper West Side(59th-125th Sts west of 5th Av)
American Folk Art Museum
American Museum of Natural History
Rose Center for Earth and Space
Children's Museum of Manhattan
New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
New-York Historical Society
Nicholas Roerich Museum
Rose Museum
Upper East Side and East Harlem(59th-125th Sts on or near 5th Av)
The Africa Center
Asia Society
Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum
El Museo del Barrio
Frick Collection
Frick Madison
Gracie Mansion
Grolier Club
Guggenheim Museum
Jewish Museum
Metropolitan Museum of Art
Mount Vernon Hotel Museum
Museum of Motherhood
Museum of the City of New York
National Academy Museum and School
Neue Galerie New York
Upper Manhattan(Above 125th St)
American Academy of Arts and Letters
The Cloisters
Dyckman House
Hamilton Grange National Memorial
Hispanic Society of America
Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center
Morris Jumel Mansion
National Jazz Museum in Harlem
National Track and Field Hall of Fame
Yeshiva University Museum
Studio Museum in Harlem
Islands
Ellis Island
Statue of Liberty
Statue of Liberty Museum
Defunct
Chelsea Art Museum
Dahesh Museum of Art
Forbes Galleries
Met Breuer
Museum of Biblical Art
Museum of Comic and Cartoon Art
Museum of Primitive Art
Rock&Roll Hall of Fame: NYC
Related
Museum Mile
vteHudson River watershedTributaries
Batavia Kill
Batten Kill
Birch Creek
Black Meadow Creek
Boreas River
Bowery Creek
Bowmans Creek
Breakneck Brook
Brimstone Creek
Canajoharie Creek
Caroga Creek
Casperkill
Catskill Creek
Cayadutta Creek
Cedar River
Claverack Creek
Clove Brook
Cobleskill Creek
Coeymans Creek
Coxsackie Creek
Cross River
Croton River
East Branch Croton River
East Branch Sacandaga River
East Canada Creek
East Kill
Eightmile Creek
Esopus Creek
Fall Kill
Fishkill Creek
Fonteyn Kill
Fulmer Creek
Hannacrois Creek
Honnedaga Brook
Hoosic River
Indian River
Jackson Creek
Jan De Bakkers Kill
Kaaterskill Creek
Kayaderosseras
Kinderhook Creek
Kisco River
Lake Creek
Little Shawangunk Kill
Maritje Kill
Miami River
Mill Creek
Mohawk River
Moodna Creek
Moordener Kill
Moyer Creek
Muddy Kill
Neepaulakating Creek
Normans Kill
Nowadaga Creek
Ohisa Creek
Onesquethaw Creek
Opalescent River
Oriskany Creek
Otsquago Creek
Otter Kill
Papakating Creek
Peekskill Hollow Creek
Plattekill Creek
Platter Kill
Pocantico River
Pochuck Creek
Poesten Kill
Potic Creek
Quassaick Creek
Roeliff Jansen Kill
Rondout Creek
Sacandaga River
Sauquoit Creek
Saw Kill
Saw Mill River
Sawyer Kill
Schoharie Creek
Schroon River
Shawangunk Kill
Sparkill Creek
Sprout Creek
Steele Creek
Stockport Creek
Stony Clove Creek
Taghkanic Creek
Tenmile Creek
Tin Brook
Titicus River
Verkeerder Kill
Vloman Kill
Wallkill River
Walloomsac River
Wappinger Creek
Wawayanda Creek
West Branch Papakating Creek
West Branch Sacandaga River
West Canada Creek
West Kill
Wynants Kill
Lakes
Alcove Reservoir
Ashokan Reservoir
Basic Creek Reservoir
Beacon Reservoir
Bog Brook Reservoir
Cedar Lake
Chadwick Lake
Chub Lake
Cross River Reservoir
Croton Falls Reservoir
Dyken Pond
East Branch Reservoir
East Caroga Lake
Fall Lake
Franklinton Vlaie
Garnet Lake
Glenmere Lake
Great Sacandaga Lake
Great Vlaie
Henderson Lake
Honnedaga Lake
Indian Lake
Lizard Pond
Lake Maratanza
Muscoot Reservoir
Lake Neepaulin
New Croton Reservoir
Notch Lake
Piseco Lake
Lake Pleasant
Queechy Lake
Rondout Reservoir
Sacandaga Lake
Saratoga Lake
Sturgeon Pool
Surprise Lake
Sylvan Lake
Lake Tear of the Clouds
Thompson Pond
Titicus Reservoir
Trout Lake
West Caroga Lake
Whaley Lake
Winnisook Lake
TownsNew York
Albany
Amsterdam
Beacon
Bedford
Beekman
Bennington
Bethlehem
Blooming Grove
Briarcliff Manor
Carmel
Catskill
Clifton Park
Cohoes
Colonie
Cortlandt
East Fishkill
East Greenbush
Fishkill
Glenville
Gloversville
Greenburgh
Guilderland
Halfmoon
Herkimer
Haverstraw
Hyde Park
Kingston
Kirkland
LaGrange
Lloyd
Malta
Middletown
Milton
Monroe
Montgomery
Moreau
Mount Pleasant
New Castle
New Hartford
New Paltz
New Windsor
New York City
Newburgh
Niskayuna
North Adams
Nyack
Ossining
Peekskill
Plattekill
Poughkeepsie
Queensbury
Rome
Rotterdam
Saugerties
Schenectady
Shawangunk
Sleepy Hollow
Somers
Southeast
Troy
Utica
Wallkill
Wappinger
Warwick
West Point
Whitestown
Wilton
Yonkers
Yorktown
New Jersey
Alpine
Bayonne
Cliffside Park
Edgewater
Englewood Cliffs
Fort Lee
Hoboken
Jersey City
North Bergen
Sparta
Tenafly
Weehawken
West New York
Landmarks
Adirondack Mountains
Adirondack Park
Ashokan Bridge
Blenheim Bridge
Buskirk Bridge
Catskill Mountains
Champlain Canal
Cohoes Falls
Copeland Bridge
Delaware and Hudson Canal
Eagleville Bridge
East River
Erie Canal
George Washington Bridge
Harlem River
Helderberg Escarpment
Holland Tunnel
Hudson Highlands State Park
Kaaterskill Clove
Kaaterskill Falls
Kill Van Kull
Kingston Rhinecliff Bridge
Lincoln Tunnel
Mid-Hudson Bridge
Newburgh Beacon Bridge
Tappan Zee Bridge (2017 present)
The Palisades
Perrine's Bridge
Plotter Kill Preserve
Pollepel Island
Popolopen
Rexleigh Bridge
Rip Van Winkle Bridge
Salisbury Center Bridge
Schoharie Bridge
Shushan Bridge
Statue of Liberty
Taconic Mountains
Verkeerder Kill Falls
Walkway over the Hudson
Wallkill River National Wildlife Refuge
West Canada Lake Wilderness Area
vte France United States relations Diplomatic posts
Embassy of France, Washington, D.C.
Ambassadors of France to the United States
French ambassador's residence
Embassy of the United States, Paris
Ambassadors of the United States to France
H tel de Pontalba
French Consulate General, Atlanta
French Consulate General, Miami
French Consulate General, New York City
French Consulate General, San Francisco
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
Diplomacy
Louisiana Purchase
Mellon Berenger Agreement
Treaty of Guarantee
Conference of Ambassadors
Blum Byrnes agreement
Washington Naval Treaty
Anglo-French Financial Commission
United Nations Security Council Resolution 135
Statue of Liberty
Museum
Guadeloupe Conference
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
Conflicts
Quasi-War
Convention of 1800
Incidents
Little v. Barreme
Embargo Act of 1807
The Schooner Exchange v. M'Faddon
Blackmer v. United States
Valentine v. United States
Chicken tax
Michael Mastro
French Guantanamo Bay detainees
Military relations
American Revolutionary War
France's role
Treaty of Alliance (1778)
Treaty of Amity and Commerce
Franco-American alliance
Roderigue Hortalez and Company
France and the American Civil War
United States Zouave Cadets
Supreme War Council
Liberation of France
Rape during the liberation of France
Allied Control Council
Four-Power Authorities
Four Power Naval Commission
Alliance Base
CIA activities in France
United States Air Force in France
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
Bulo Marer hostage rescue attempt
Related
Anti-French sentiment in the United States
Cheese-eating surrender monkeys
Freedom fries
French language in the United States
United States and the Haitian Revolution
France Republic of Texas relations
French Legation
Texas Legation
Alliance Fran aise de Chicago
American Committee for Devastated France
American Friends Mus e d'Orsay
April in Paris Ball
CFM International
Committee of American Students of the School of Beaux-Arts, Paris
French-American Foundation
La French Touch Conference
Friendship Train
Merci Train
MICEFA
Democracy in America
112 Gripes About the French
Deauville American Film Festival
Sacramento French Film Festival
Place des  tats-Unis
Prix Blumenthal
Florence Meyer Blumenthal
Apollo Cable System
Honotua
TAT-4
TAT-6
TAT-8
TAT-11
TAT-12/13
 Category:France United States relations
Portals: New York City New York (state) New Jersey National Register of Historic Places United States Architecture Visual arts
Authority control International
FAST
VIAF
WorldCat
2
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Geographic
Structurae
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statue_of_Liberty&oldid=1147764686"