Term for a political community founded for the common good
This article is about the generic term. For the intergovernmental organisation, see Commonwealth of Nations. For other uses, see Commonwealth (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Commonwealth" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A commonwealth is a traditional English term for a political community founded for the common good. Historically, it has been synonymous with "republic".[1] The noun "commonwealth", meaning "public welfare, general good or advantage", dates from the 15th century.[2] Originally a phrase (the common-wealth or the common wealth   echoed in the modern synonym "public wealth"), it comes from the old meaning of "wealth", which is "well-being", and is itself a loose translation of the Latin res publica (republic).[3] The term literally meant "common well-being". In the 17th century, the definition of "commonwealth" expanded from its original sense of "public welfare" or "commonweal" to mean "a state in which the supreme power is vested in the people; a republic or democratic state".[4][5]
The term evolved to become a title to a number of political entities. Three countries   Australia, the Bahamas, and Dominica   have the official title "Commonwealth", as do four U.S. states and two U.S. territories. Since the early 20th century, the term has been used to name some fraternal associations of states, most notably the Commonwealth of Nations, an organisation primarily of former territories of the British Empire. The organisation is not to be confused with the realms of the Commonwealth.
Historical use[edit]
Rome[edit]
Main articles: Res publica and Roman Republic
Translations of Ancient Roman writers' works to English have on occasion translated "Res publica", and variants thereof, to "the commonwealth", a term referring to the Roman state as a whole.
England[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of England
The Commonwealth of England was the official name of the political unit (de facto military rule in the name of parliamentary supremacy) that replaced the Kingdom of England (after the English Civil War) from 1649 53 and 1659 60, under the rule of Oliver Cromwell and his son and successor Richard. From 1653 to 1659, although still legally known as a Commonwealth, the republic, united with the former Kingdom of Scotland, operated under different institutions (at times as a de facto monarchy) and is known by historians as the Protectorate. In a British context, it is sometimes referred to as the "Old Commonwealth".[citation needed]
Iceland[edit]
Main article: Icelandic Commonwealth
The Icelandic Commonwealth or the Icelandic Free State (Icelandic:  j veldi ) was the state existing in Iceland between the establishment of the Althing in 930 and the pledge of fealty to the Norwegian king in 1262. It was initially established by a public consisting largely of recent immigrants from Norway who had fled the unification of that country under King Harald Fairhair.
Philippines[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of the Philippines
The Commonwealth of the Philippines was the administrative body that governed the Philippines from 1935 to 1946, aside from a period of exile in the Second World War from 1942 to 1945 when Japan occupied the country. It replaced the Insular Government, a United States territorial government, and was established by the Tydings McDuffie Act.  The Commonwealth was designed as a transitional administration in preparation for the country's full achievement of independence, which was achieved in 1946. The Commonwealth of the Philippines was a founding member of the United Nations.[6]
Poland Lithuania[edit]
Main article: Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth
Republic is still an alternative translation of the traditional name Rzeczpospolita of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth. Wincenty Kad ubek (Vincent Kadlubo, 1160 1223) used for the first time the original Latin term res publica in the context of Poland in his "Chronicles of the Kings and Princes of Poland". The name was used officially for the confederal union formed by Poland and Lithuania 1569 1795.
It is also often referred as "Nobles' Commonwealth" (1505 1795, i.e., before the union). In the contemporary political doctrine of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth, "our state is a Republic (or Commonwealth) under the presidency of the King". The Commonwealth introduced a doctrine of religious tolerance called Warsaw Confederation, had its own parliament Sejm (although elections were restricted to nobility and elected kings, who were bound to certain contracts Pacta conventa from the beginning of the reign).
"A commonwealth of good counsaile" was the title of the 1607 English translation of the work of Wawrzyniec Grzyma a Go licki "De optimo senatore" that presented to English readers many of the ideas present in the political system of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Catalonia[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of Catalonia
Between 1914 and 1925, Catalonia was an autonomous region of Spain. Its government during that time was given the title mancomunidad (Catalan: mancomunitat), which is translated into English as "commonwealth". The Commonwealth of Catalonia had limited powers and was formed as a federation of the four Catalan provinces. A number of Catalan-language institutions were created during its existence.
Liberia[edit]
See also: Commonwealth of Liberia
Between 1838 and 1847, Liberia was officially known as the "Commonwealth of Liberia". It changed its name to the "Republic of Liberia" when it declared independence (and adopted a new constitution) in 1847.[7]
Current use[edit]
Australia[edit]
Main articles: Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Government
"Commonwealth" was first proposed as a term for a federation of the six Australian crown colonies at the 1891 constitutional convention in Sydney. Its adoption was initially controversial, as it was associated by some with the republicanism of Oliver Cromwell (see above), but it was retained in all subsequent drafts of the constitution.[8] The term was finally incorporated into law in the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, which established the federation. Australia operates under a federal system, in which power is divided between the federal (national) government and the state governments (the successors of the six colonies). So, in an Australian context, the term "Commonwealth" (capitalised), which is often abbreviated to Cth, refers to the federal government, and "Commonwealth of Australia" is the official name of the country.
The Bahamas[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of the Bahamas
The Bahamas, a Commonwealth realm, has used the official style Commonwealth of The Bahamas since its independence in 1973.
Dominica[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of Dominica
The small Caribbean republic of Dominica has used the official style Commonwealth of Dominica since 1978.
Certain U.S. states and territories[edit]
Main articles: Commonwealth (U.S. state) and Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)
States[edit]
Four states of the United States of America officially designate themselves as "commonwealths". All four were part of Great Britain's possessions along the Atlantic coast of North America prior to the American Revolution. As such, they share a strong influence of English common law in some of their laws and institutions. The four are:
Kentucky is designated a commonwealth by the Kentucky Constitution as the "Commonwealth of Kentucky".[9]
Massachusetts is a commonwealth,[10] declaring itself as such in its constitution, which states: "[T]he body politic is formed by a voluntary association of individuals: it is a social compact, by which the whole people covenants with each citizen, and each citizen with the whole people, that all shall be governed by certain laws for the common good."[11]
Pennsylvania uses the "Commonwealth of Pennsylvania" constitutionally and in its official title.[12]
Virginia has been known as the "Commonwealth of Virginia" since before the American Revolutionary War, and is referred to as a commonwealth in its constitution.[13]
Territories[edit]
Two organized but unincorporated U.S. territories are called commonwealths. The two are:
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, since 1952
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, since 1978
In 2016, the Washington, D.C. city council also selected "Douglass Commonwealth" as the potential name of State of Washington, D.C., following the 2016 statehood referendum, at least partially in order to retain the initials "D.C." as the state's abbreviation.[14]
International bodies[edit]
Commonwealth of Nations[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of Nations
The Commonwealth of Nations formerly the British Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 54 independent sovereign states, most of which were once part of the British Empire. The Commonwealth's membership includes both republics and monarchies. The Head of the Commonwealth was Queen Elizabeth II, who also reigned as monarch directly in the 16 member states known as Commonwealth realms until her death in 2022.
Commonwealth of Independent States[edit]
Main article: Commonwealth of Independent States
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) is a loose alliance or confederation consisting of nine of the 15 former Soviet Republics, the exceptions being Turkmenistan (a CIS associate member), Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Ukraine, and Georgia. Georgia left the CIS in August 2008 following the 2008 invasion of the Russian military into South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Its creation signalled the dissolution of the Soviet Union, its purpose being to "allow a civilised divorce" between the Soviet Republics. The CIS has developed as a forum by which the member-states can co-operate in economics, defence, and foreign policy.[15]
Proposed use[edit]
United Kingdom[edit]
See also: Republicanism in the United Kingdom
Labour MP Tony Benn sponsored a Commonwealth of Britain Bill several times between 1991 and 2001, intended to abolish the monarchy and establish a British republic. It never reached second reading.
See also[edit]
Confederation
Democracy
Federation
League
References[edit]
^ Barclay, James (1791). Barclay's English Dictionary. Nicholson & Company.
^ "Origin and meaning of commonwealth". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2020-07-20.
^ A, J (1796). The Monthly Magazine And British Register. Vol. 1. pp. 179 180. Our English word commonwealth or commonweal, is precisely analogous to respublica
^ Boyd, James Penny (1888). The Political History of the United States, Or, Popular Sovereignty and Citizenship. International Publishing Company. You find in your reading other terms used to convey the same idea as "democracy" or "republic." The word "commonwealth" is one of them.
^ Barclay, James (1791). Barclay's English Dictionary. Nicholson & Company. COMMONWEAL, or COMMONWEALTH ... a republic; a democracy.
^ "United Nations website listing founding members".
^ "The Commonwealth of Liberia".
^ Helen Irving. Australian Federation Archived 2015-07-15 at the Wayback Machine   Civics and Citizenship Education. Retrieved 15 July 2015.
^ "Kentucky.gov". Kentucky.gov. Retrieved 2013-10-11.
^ "Mass.Gov". Mass.Gov. 2013-09-26. Retrieved 2013-10-11.
^ "Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts". Malegislature.gov. Retrieved 2013-10-11.
^ "Commonwealth of Pennsylvania | The Keystone State". Pa.gov. Retrieved 2013-10-11.
^ "Home". Virginia.gov. Retrieved 2013-10-11.
^ Kurzius, Rachel (October 18, 2016). "Council Tosses 'New Columbia,' Changes Constitution To 'The State Of Washington D.C.'". DCist. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2020.
^ Constantine, Michalopoulos, and Tarr David. "The economics of customs unions in the Commonwealth of Independent States." Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 38, no. 3 (1997): 125-143.
External links[edit]
Look up Commonwealth or commonwealth in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Commonwealth of Nations
The Commonwealth UK government site
Commonwealth of Nations Secretariat
Commonwealth Foundation
Royal Commonwealth Society
Commonwealth of Independent States
CIS Executive Committee
CIS Statistical Committee
Countries
Commonwealth of Australia
United States
Commonwealth of Kentucky
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Commonwealth of Virginia
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
Commonwealth of Diverse Cultures: Poland's Heritage
Commonwealth New
The Commonwealth Secretariat Archived 2020-11-17 at the Wayback Machine
Commonwealth News at YOCOMM NEWS
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commonwealth&oldid=1149772387"