Cultural region in the Eastern United States
This article is about the region in the United States. For other uses, see Appalachia (disambiguation).
Region in United States of AmericaAppalachiaRegionLeft-right from top: 
Pittsburgh skyline
New River Gorge Bridge
campus of West Virginia University
Smoky Mountains
Roanoke skyline
mountains of north Georgia
view from the Appalachian Trail
Areas included under the Appalachian Regional Commission's charterSubregions of Appalachia. Published by the Appalachian Regional Commission in 2009.Coordinates: 38 48 N 81 00 W  /  38.80 N 81.00 W  / 38.80; -81.00CountryUnited States of AmericaCounties or county-equivalents420States13Largest cityPittsburghArea[2] Total206,000 sq mi (530,000 km2)Population (2020) Total26.1 million[1](Appalachian Regional Commission estimate) Density126.7/sq mi (48.9/km2)DemonymAppalachianDialect(s)Appalachian English
Appalachia (/ p l t , -le t , -le /)[3] is a cultural region in the Eastern United States that stretches from the Southern Tier of New York State to northern Alabama and Georgia.[4] While the Appalachian Mountains stretch from Belle Isle in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, to Cheaha Mountain in Alabama, Appalachia typically refers only to the cultural region of  the central and southern portions of the range, from the Catskill Mountains of New York southwest to the Blue Ridge Mountains which run southwest from southern Pennsylvania to northern Georgia, and the Great Smoky Mountains of Tennessee and North Carolina. In 2020, the region was home to an estimated 26.1 million people, of whom roughly 80% are white.[1]
Since its recognition as a distinctive region in the late 19th century, Appalachia has been a source of enduring myths and distortions regarding the isolation, temperament, and behavior of its inhabitants. Early 20th century writers often engaged in yellow journalism focused on sensationalistic aspects of the region's culture, such as moonshining and clan feuding, and often portrayed the region's inhabitants as uneducated and prone to impulsive acts of violence. Sociological studies in the 1960s and 1970s helped to re-examine and dispel these stereotypes.[5] Stereotypes about Appalachian people being ignorant, anti-progress, and racist are still grappled in the region by portrayals in media and press publications.[6]
While endowed with abundant natural resources, Appalachia has long struggled economically and been associated with poverty. In the early 20th century, large-scale logging and coal mining firms brought wage-paying jobs and modern amenities to Appalachia, but by the 1960s the region had failed to capitalize on any long-term benefits[7] from these two industries. Beginning in the 1930s, the federal government sought to alleviate poverty in the Appalachian region with a series of New Deal initiatives, specifically the Tennessee Valley Authority. This was responsible for the construction of hydroelectric dams that provide a vast amount of  electricity and that support programs for better farming practices, regional planning, and economic development. On March 9, 1965, the Appalachian Regional Commission[8] was created to further alleviate poverty in the region, mainly by diversifying the region's economy and helping to provide better health care and educational opportunities to the region's inhabitants. By 1990, Appalachia had largely joined the economic mainstream but still lagged behind the rest of the nation in most economic indicators.[5]
Defining the Appalachian region[edit]
See also: Social and economic stratification in Appalachia and List of Appalachian Regional Commission counties
 William G. Frost, an American Greek scholar who was credited with coining the phrase "Appalachian American."[9]
Since Appalachia lacks definite physiographical or topographical boundaries, there has been some disagreement over what exactly the region encompasses. The most commonly used modern definition of Appalachia is the one initially defined by the Appalachian Regional Commission in 1965 and expanded over subsequent decades.[5] The region defined by the Commission currently includes 420 counties and eight independent cities in 13 states, including all 55 counties in West Virginia, 14 counties in New York, 52 in Pennsylvania, 32 in Ohio, 3 in Maryland, 54 in Kentucky, 25 counties and 8 cities in Virginia,[10] 29 in North Carolina, 52 in Tennessee, 6 in South Carolina, 37 in Georgia, 37 in Alabama, and 24 in Mississippi.[4] When the Commission was established, counties were added based on economic need, however, rather than any cultural parameters.[5]
The first major attempt to map Appalachia as a distinctive cultural region came in the 1890s with the efforts of Berea College president William Goodell Frost, whose "Appalachian America" included 194 counties in 8 states.[11]: 11 14  In 1921, John C. Campbell published The Southern Highlander and His Homeland in which he modified Frost's map to include 254 counties in 9 states. A landmark survey of the region in the following decade by the United States Department of Agriculture defined the region as consisting of 206 counties in 6 states. In 1984, Karl Raitz and Richard Ulack expanded the ARC's definition to include 445 counties in 13 states, although they removed all counties in Mississippi and added two in New Jersey. Historian John Alexander Williams, in his 2002 book Appalachia: A History, distinguished between a "core" Appalachian region consisting of 164 counties in West Virginia, Kentucky, Virginia, Tennessee, North Carolina, and Georgia, and a greater region defined by the ARC.[5]
In the Encyclopedia of Appalachia (2006), Appalachian State University historian Howard Dorgan suggested the term "Old Appalachia" for the region's cultural boundaries, noting an academic tendency to ignore the southwestern and northeastern extremes of the ARC's pragmatic definition.[12] Sean Trende, senior elections analyst at RealClearPolitics, defines "Greater Appalachia" in his 2012 book The Lost Majority as including both the Appalachian Mountains region (western Virginia and North Carolina, the Piedmont region in western South Carolina, West Virginia, southern Ohio, the Cumberland Plateau in eastern Kentucky, East Tennessee, northern Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi) and the Upland South (southern Indiana and Illinois, the Bluegrass, Mississippi Plateau, Western Coal Field, and Jackson Purchase regions in central and western Kentucky, Middle and West Tennessee, Missouri, the Ozarks in Arkansas, Little Dixie and Southwestern Oklahoma, North and East Texas, and the Texas Hill Country) following Protestant Scotch-Irish migrations to the Southern and Midwestern United States in the 18th and 19th centuries.[13]
Toponymy and pronunciation[edit]
 Detail of Gutierrez' 1562 map showing the first known cartographic appearance of a variant of the name "Appalachia"
While exploring inland along the northern coast of Florida in 1528, the members of the Narv ez expedition, including  lvar N ez Cabeza de Vaca, found a village of indigenous peoples near present-day Tallahassee, Florida, whose name they transcribed as Apalchen or Apalachen (IPA: [a pal(a)t en]). The name was soon altered by the Spanish to Apalache (Apalachee) and used as a name for the tribe and region spreading well inland to the north. P nfilo de Narv ez's expedition first entered Apalachee territory on June 15, 1528, and applied the name. Now spelled "Appalachian", it is the fourth oldest surviving European place-name in the U.S.[14] After the de Soto expedition in 1540, Spanish cartographers began to apply the name of the tribe to the mountains themselves. The first cartographic appearance of Apalchen is on Diego Guti rrez's map of 1562; the first use for the mountain range is the map of Jacques le Moyne de Morgues in 1565.[15] Le Moyne was also the first European to apply "Apalachen" specifically to a mountain range as opposed to a village, native tribe, or a southeastern region of North America.[16]
The name was not commonly used for the whole mountain range until the late 19th century. A competing and often more popular name was the "Allegheny Mountains", "Alleghenies", and even "Alleghania".[17]
In southern U.S. dialects, the mountains are called the / p l t nz/, and the cultural region of Appalachia is pronounced / p l t (i) /, both with a third syllable like the "la" in "latch".[18][19] This pronunciation is favored in the "core" region in central and southern parts of the Appalachian range. In northern U.S. dialects, the mountains are pronounced / p le t nz/ or / p le nz/. The cultural region of Appalachia is pronounced / p le t (i) /, also / p le (i) /, all with a third syllable like "lay". The use of northern pronunciations is controversial to some in the region, especially near Appalachia, Virginia.[20] Despite not being in Appalachia, Appalachian Trail organizations in New England popularized the occasional use of the "sh" sound for the "ch" in northern dialects in the early 20th century.[11]: 11 14 
History[edit]
Early history[edit]
Native American hunter-gatherers first arrived in what is now Appalachia over 16,000 years ago. The earliest discovered site is the Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Washington County, Pennsylvania, which some scientists claim is pre-Clovis culture. Several other Archaic period (8000 1000 BC) archaeological sites have been identified in the region, such as the St. Albans site in West Virginia and the Icehouse Bottom site in Tennessee. The presence of Africans in the Appalachian Mountains dates back to the sixteenth century with the arrival of European colonists. Enslaved Africans were first brought to America during the 16th century Spanish expeditions to the mountainous regions of the South. In 1526 enslaved Africans were brought to the Pedee River region of western North Carolina by Spanish explorer, Lucas Vazquez de Ayll n. Enslaved Africans also accompanied the expeditions of Fernando de Soto in 1540 and Juan Pardo, in 1566 who both traveled through Appalachia.[21]
In the 16th century, the de Soto and Juan Pardo expeditions explored the mountains of South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Georgia, and encountered complex agrarian societies consisting of Muskogean-speaking inhabitants. De Soto indicated that much of the region west of the mountains was part of the domain of Coosa, a paramount chiefdom centered around a village complex in northern Georgia.[22] By the time English explorers arrived in Appalachia in the late 17th century, the central part of the region was controlled by Algonquian tribes (namely the Shawnee) and the southern part of the region was controlled by the Cherokee. The French based in modern-day Quebec also made inroads into the northern areas of the region in modern-day New York state and Pennsylvania. By the mid 18th century the French had outposts such as Fort Duquesne and Fort Le Boeuf controlling the access points of the Allegheny River valley and upper Ohio valley after exploration by Celeron de Bienville. Daniel Boone Escorting Settlers through the Cumberland Gap (George Caleb Bingham, oil on canvas, 1851 52)
European migration into Appalachia began in the 18th century. As lands in eastern Pennsylvania, the Tidewater region of Virginia and the Carolinas filled up, immigrants began pushing further and further westward into the Appalachian Mountains. A relatively large proportion of the early backcountry immigrants were Ulster Scots later known as "Scotch-Irish", a group mostly originating from southern Scotland and northern England, many of whom had settled in Ulster Ireland prior to migrating to America[23][24][25][26]   who were seeking cheaper land and freedom from Quaker leaders, many of whom considered the Scotch-Irish "savages". Others included Germans from the Palatinate region and English settlers from the Anglo-Scottish border country. Between 1730 and 1763, immigrants trickled into western Pennsylvania, the Shenandoah Valley area of Virginia, and western Maryland. Thomas Walker's discovery of the Cumberland Gap in 1750 and the end of the French and Indian War in 1763 lured settlers deeper into the mountains, namely to upper east Tennessee, northwestern North Carolina, upstate South Carolina, and central Kentucky.
During the 18th century, enslaved Africans were brought to Appalachia by European settlers of trans-Appalachia Kentucky and the upper Blue Ridge Valley. According to the first census of 1790, more than 3,000 enslaved Africans were transported across the mountains into East Tennessee and more than 12,000 into the Kentucky mountains.[27] Between 1790 and 1840, a series of treaties with the Cherokee and other Native American tribes opened up lands in north Georgia, north Alabama, the Tennessee Valley, the Cumberland Plateau regions, and the Great Smoky Mountains along what is now the Tennessee-North Carolina border.[11]: 30 44  The last of these treaties culminated in the removal of the bulk of the Cherokee population (as well as Choctaw, Chickasaw and others) from the region via the Trail of Tears from 1831 until 1838.
Appalachian frontier[edit]
 The Earnest Fort-house in Greene County, Tennessee. Built around 1782 during the Cherokee American wars, it is located just south of Chuckey on the banks of the Nolichucky River.
Appalachian frontiersmen have long been romanticized for their ruggedness and self-sufficiency. A typical depiction of an Appalachian pioneer involves a hunter wearing a coonskin cap and buckskin clothing, and sporting a long rifle and shoulder-strapped powder horn. Perhaps no single figure symbolizes the Appalachian pioneer more than Daniel Boone (1734 1820), a long hunter and surveyor instrumental in the early settlement of Kentucky and Tennessee. Like Boone, Appalachian pioneers moved into areas largely separated from "civilization" by high mountain ridges, and had to fend for themselves against the elements. As many of these early settlers were living on Native American lands, attacks from Native American tribes were a continuous threat until the 19th century.[28]: 7 13, 19 
As early as the 18th century, Appalachia (then known simply as the "backcountry") began to distinguish itself from its wealthier lowland and coastal neighbors to the east. Frontiersmen often bickered with lowland and tidewater "elites" over taxes, sometimes to the point of armed revolts such as the Regulator Movement (1767 1771) in North Carolina.[29]: 59 69  In 1778, at the height of the American Revolution, backwoodsmen from Pennsylvania, Virginia, and what is now Kentucky took part in George Rogers Clark's Illinois campaign. Two years later, a group of Appalachian frontiersmen known as the Overmountain Men routed British forces at the Battle of Kings Mountain after rejecting a call by the British to disarm.[11]: 64 68  After the war, residents throughout the Appalachian backcountry especially the Monongahela region in western Pennsylvania, and antebellum northwestern Virginia (now the north-central part of West Virginia)   refused to pay a tax placed on whiskey by the new American government, leading to what became known as the Whiskey Rebellion.[11]: 118 19  The resulting tighter Federal controls in the Monongahela valley resulted in many whiskey/bourbon makers migrating via the Ohio River to Kentucky and Tennessee where the industry could flourish.
Early 19th century[edit]
In the early 19th century, the rift between the yeoman farmers of Appalachia and their wealthier lowland counterparts continued to grow, especially as the latter dominated most state legislatures. People in Appalachia began to feel slighted over what they considered unfair taxation methods and lack of state funding for improvements (especially for roads). In the northern half of the region, the lowland "elites" consisted largely of industrial and business interests, whereas in the parts of the region south of the Mason Dixon line, the lowland elites consisted of large-scale land-owning planters.[29]: 59 69  The Whig Party, formed in the 1830s, drew widespread support from disaffected Appalachians.
Tensions between the mountain counties and state governments sometimes reached the point of mountain counties threatening to break off and form separate states. In 1832, bickering between western Virginia and eastern Virginia over the state's constitution led to calls on both sides for the state's separation into two states.[11]: 141  In 1841, Tennessee state senator (and later U.S. president) Andrew Johnson introduced legislation in the Tennessee Senate calling for the creation of a separate state in East Tennessee. The proposed state would have been known as "Frankland" and would have invited like-minded mountain counties in Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama to join it.[30]
Proposal to rename the United States[edit]
In 1839 Washington Irving proposed to rename the United States "Alleghania" or "Appalachia" in place of "America", since the latter name belonged to Latin America too.[11] Edgar Allan Poe later took up the idea, and considered Appalachia a much better name than America or Alleghania; he thought it better defined the United States as a distinct geographical entity, separate from the rest of the Americas, and he also thought it did honor to both Irving and the natives who the Appalachian Mountains had been named after.[31] At the time, however, the United States had already reached far beyond the greater Appalachian region, but the "magnificence" of Appalachia Poe considered enough to rechristen the nation with a name that would be unique to its own character. However, Poe's popular influence only grew decades after his death, and so the name was never seriously considered.
U.S. Civil War[edit]
 Map of the county secession votes of 1860 1861 in Appalachia within the ARC definition. Virginia and Tennessee show the public votes, while the other states show the vote by county delegates to the conventions.
By 1860, the Whig Party had disintegrated. Sentiments in northern Appalachia had shifted to the pro-abolitionist Republican Party. In southern Appalachia, abolitionists still constituted a radical minority, although several smaller opposition parties (most of which were both pro-Union and pro-slavery) were formed to oppose the planter-dominated Southern Democrats. As states in the southern United States moved toward secession, a majority of Southern Appalachians still supported the Union.[32] In 1861, a Minnesota newspaper identified 161 counties in Southern Appalachia which the paper called "Alleghenia" where Union support remained strong, and which might provide crucial support for the defeat of the Confederacy.[11]: 11 14  However, many of these Unionists especially in the mountain areas of North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama were "conditional" Unionists in that they opposed secession, but also opposed violence to prevent secession, and thus when their respective state legislatures voted to secede, their support shifted to the Confederacy.[11]: 160 65  Kentucky sought to remain neutral at the outset of the conflict, opting not to supply troops to either side. After Virginia voted to secede, several mountain counties in northwestern Virginia rejected the ordinance and with the help of the Union Army established a separate state, admitted to the Union as West Virginia in 1863. However, half the counties included in the new state, comprising two-thirds of its territory, were secessionist and pro-Confederate.[33]
This caused great difficulty for the new Unionist state government in Wheeling, both during and after the war.[34] A similar effort occurred in East Tennessee, but the initiative failed after Tennessee's governor ordered the Confederate Army to occupy the region, forcing East Tennessee's Unionists to flee to the north or go into hiding.[11]: 160 65  The one exception was the so-called Free and Independent State of Scott.[35]
Both central and southern Appalachia suffered tremendous violence and turmoil during the Civil War. While there were two major theaters of operation in the region namely the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia (and present-day West Virginia) and the Chattanooga area along the Tennessee-Georgia border much of the violence was caused by bushwhackers and guerrilla war. The northernmost battles of the entire war were fought in Appalachia with the Battle of Buffington Island and the Battle of Salineville resulting from Morgan's Raid. Large numbers of livestock were killed (grazing was an important part of Appalachia's economy), and numerous farms were destroyed, pillaged, or neglected.[32] The actions of both Union and Confederate armies left many inhabitants in the region resentful of government authority and suspicious of outsiders for decades after the war.[29]: 109 23  [28]: 39 45 
Late 19th and early 20th centuries[edit]
Economic boom[edit]
 Entrance to mine shaft in West Virginia, photographed by Lewis Hine in 1908
After the Civil War, northern parts of Appalachia experienced an economic boom, while economies in the southern parts of the region stagnated, especially as Southern Democrats regained control of their respective state legislatures at the end of Reconstruction.[32] Pittsburgh as well as Knoxville grew into major industrial centers, especially regarding iron and steel production. By 1900, the Chattanooga area and north Georgia and northern Alabama had experienced similar changes due to manufacturing booms in Atlanta and Birmingham at the edge of the Appalachian region. Railroad construction between the 1880s and early 20th century gave the greater nation access to the vast coalfields in central Appalachia, making the economy in that part of the region practically synonymous with coal mining. As the nationwide demand for lumber skyrocketed, lumber firms turned to the virgin forests of southern Appalachia, using sawmill and logging railroad innovations to reach remote timber stands. The Tri-Cities area of Tennessee and Virginia and the Kanawha Valley of West Virginia became major petrochemical production centers.[29]: 131 141 
Stereotypes[edit]
Main article: Appalachian stereotypes
The late 19th and early 20th centuries also saw the development of various regional stereotypes. Attempts by President Rutherford B. Hayes to enforce the whiskey tax in the late 1870s led to an explosion in violence between Appalachian "moonshiners" and federal "revenuers" that lasted through the Prohibition period in the 1920s.[11]: 187 193  The breakdown of authority and law enforcement during the Civil War may have contributed to an increase in clan feuding, which by the 1880s was reported to be a problem across most of Kentucky's Cumberland region as well as Carter County in Tennessee, Carroll County in Virginia, and Mingo and Logan counties in West Virginia.[29]: 109 23  [11]: 187 93  Regional writers from this period such as Mary Noailles Murfree and Horace Kephart liked to focus on such sensational aspects of mountain culture, leading readers outside the region to believe they were more widespread than in reality. In an 1899 article in The Atlantic, Berea College president William G. Frost attempted to redefine the inhabitants of Appalachia as "noble mountaineers" relics of the nation's pioneer period whose isolation had left them unaffected by modern times.[29]: 109 23 
Today, residents of Appalachia are viewed by many Americans as uneducated and unrefined, resulting in culture-based stereotyping and discrimination in many areas, including employment and housing. Such discrimination has prompted some to seek redress under prevailing federal and state civil rights laws.[36]
Feuds[edit]
Appalachia, and especially Kentucky, became nationally known for its violent feuds, especially in the remote mountain districts. They pitted the men in extended clans against each other for decades, often using assassination and arson as weapons, along with ambushes, gunfights, and pre-arranged shootouts. The infamous Hatfield-McCoy Feud of the 19th century was the best known of these family feuds. Some of the feuds were continuations of violent local Civil War episodes.[37] Journalists often wrote about the violence, using stereotypes that "city folks" had developed about Appalachia; they interpreted the feuds as the natural products of profound ignorance, poverty, and isolation, and perhaps even inbreeding. In reality, the leading participants were typically well-to-do local elites with networks of clients who, like the Northeast and Chicago political machines, fought for their own power over local and regional politics.[38]
Modern Appalachia[edit]
Logging firms' rapid devastation of the forests of the Appalachians sparked a movement among conservationists to preserve what remained and allow the land to "heal". In 1911, Congress passed the Weeks Act, giving the federal government authority to create national forests east of the Mississippi River and control timber harvesting. Regional writers and business interests led a movement to create national parks in the eastern United States similar to Yosemite and Yellowstone in the west, culminating in the creation of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee and North Carolina, Shenandoah National Park in Virginia, Cumberland Gap National Historical Park in Kentucky,  Virginia and Tennessee, and the Blue Ridge Parkway (connecting the two) in the 1930s.[29]: 200 210  During the same period, New England forester Benton MacKaye led the movement to build the 2,175-mile (3,500 km) Appalachian Trail, stretching from Georgia to Maine.
Several significant moments of investment by the United States government into areas of science and technology were established in the mid-20th century, notably with NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, crucial with the design of Apollo program launch vehicles and propulsion of the Space Shuttle program,[39] and at adjacent facilities Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the Y-12 National Security Complex in Oak Ridge, Tennessee with the Manhattan Project and advancements in supercomputing and nuclear power.[40]
By the 1950s, poor farming techniques and the loss of jobs to mechanization in the mining industry had left much of central and southern Appalachia poverty-stricken. The lack of jobs also led to widespread difficulties with outmigration. Beginning in the 1930s, federal agencies such as the Tennessee Valley Authority began investing in the Appalachian region.[11]: 310 12  Sociologists such as James Brown and Cratis Williams and authors such as Harry Caudill and Michael Harrington brought attention to the region's plight in the 1960s, prompting Congress to create the Appalachian Regional Commission in 1965. The commission's efforts helped to stem the tide of outmigration and diversify the region's economies.[29]: 200 210  Although there have been drastic improvements in the region's economic conditions since the commission's founding, the ARC still listed 80 counties as "distressed" in 2020, with nearly half of them (38) in Kentucky.[41]
Since the 1980s, population growth in the Southern Appalachian section of the region has brought about concerns of farmland loss and hazards to the local environment. Regarding housing development, exurban development, characterized by its low-density housing, has violated the habitats of native species and contributed significantly to the decline in agricultural land-use in larger Appalachia.[42]
There are growing IT sectors in many parts of the region.[43][44] Summit, the fastest supercomputer in the world as of 2019, is currently housed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory near Knoxville, Tennessee.[45]
Cities[edit]
 Asheville, North Carolina at dusk
 Knoxville, Tennessee skyline
Due to topographic considerations, several cities which are themselves or are in metropolitan areas that are near or part of the Appalachian region are not included in most definitions of Appalachia. These include Cleveland, Ohio, Nashville, Tennessee, and Atlanta, Georgia. Pittsburgh is the largest city by population to be wholly within the Appalachian region.
Based upon population reporting from the 2020 United States Census, notable cities and city equivalents with at least 40,000 residents within Appalachia include:
Altoona, Pennsylvania (pop. 43,963)
Asheville, North Carolina (pop. 94,589)
Binghamton, New York (pop. 47,969)
Birmingham, Alabama (pop. 200,733)
Blacksburg, Virginia (pop. 44,826)
Charleston, West Virginia (pop. 48,864)
Chattanooga, Tennessee (pop. 181,099)
Cleveland, Tennessee (pop. 47,356)
Decatur, Alabama (pop. 57,938)
Erie, Pennsylvania (pop. 94,831)
Florence, Alabama (pop. 40,184)
Gainesville, Georgia (pop. 42,296)
Greenville, South Carolina (pop. 70,720)
Hagerstown, Maryland (pop. 43,527)
Huntington, West Virginia (pop. 46,842)
Huntsville, Alabama (pop. 215,006)
Johnson City, Tennessee (pop.  71,046)
Kingsport, Tennessee (pop. 55,442)
Knoxville, Tennessee (pop. 190,740)
Peachtree Corners, Georgia (pop. 42,243)
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (pop. 302,971)
Roanoke, Virginia (pop. 100,011)
Scranton, Pennsylvania (pop. 76,328)
State College, Pennsylvania (pop. 40,501)
Tuscaloosa, Alabama (pop. 100,618)
Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania (pop. 44,328)
Winston-Salem, North Carolina (pop. 249,545)
Youngstown, Ohio (pop. 60,068)
Culture[edit]
Ethnic groups[edit]
An estimated 90%[46] of Appalachia's earliest European settlers originated from the Anglo-Scottish border country namely the English counties of Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, County Durham, Lancashire and Yorkshire, and the Lowland Scottish counties of Ayrshire, Dumfriesshire, Roxburghshire, Berwickshire and Wigtownshire. Most of these were from families who had been resettled in the Ulster Plantation in northern Ireland in the 17th century,[47][48] but some came directly from the Anglo-Scottish border region.[49] In America, these people are often grouped under the single name "Scotch-Irish" or "Scots-Irish". While various 20th century writers tried to associate Appalachia with Scottish highlanders, Highland Scots were a relatively insignificant percentage of the region's early European immigrants.[49]
Although Swedes and Finns formed only a tiny portion of the Appalachian settlers it was Swedish and Finnish settlers of New Sweden who brought the northern European woodsman skills such as log cabin construction which formed the basis of backwoods Appalachian material culture.[50]
Germans were a major pioneer group to migrate to Appalachia, settling mainly in western Pennsylvania and southwest Virginia. Smaller numbers of Germans were also among the initial wave of migrants to the southern mountains.[11]: 30 44  In the 19th century, Welsh immigrants were brought into the region for their mining and metallurgical expertise, and by 1900 over 100,000 Welsh immigrants were living in western Pennsylvania alone.[51] Thousands of German-speaking Swiss migrated to Appalachia in the second half of the 19th century, and their descendants remain in places such as East Bernstadt, Kentucky, and Gruetli-Laager, Tennessee.[52] The coal mining and manufacturing boom in the late 19th and early 20th centuries brought large numbers of Italians and Eastern Europeans to Appalachia, although most of these families left the region when the Great Depression shattered the economy in the 1930s. African Americans have been present in the region since the 18th century, and currently make up 8% of the ARC-designated region, mostly concentrated in urban areas and former mining and manufacturing towns;[53] the African-American component of Appalachia is sometimes termed Affrilachia.[54]
Native Americans, the region's original inhabitants, are now only a small percentage of the region's present population, their most notable concentration being the reservation of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians in North Carolina. The Melungeons, a group of mixed African, European, and Native American ancestry, are scattered across northeastern Tennessee, eastern Kentucky, and southwestern Virginia.[55]
According to the American Factfinder's 2013 data,  the Southern Appalachia has a white majority, comprising 84% of the population. African Americans are 7% and Hispanics or Latinos are 6% of the population. Asians and Pacific Islanders are 1.5% of the population. The counties have great differences among themselves, in terms of racial and ethnic diversity.[56]
Religion[edit]
 Baptism in Morehead, Kentucky, photographed by Marion Post Wolcott in 1940
Christianity is the main religion in Appalachia, which is characterized by a sense of independence and a distrust of religious hierarchies, both rooted in the evangelical tendencies of the region's pioneers, many of whom had been influenced by the Holiness movement and "New Light" movement in England. Many of the denominations brought from Europe underwent modifications or factioning during the Second Great Awakening (especially the Holiness movement) in the early 19th century. A number of 18th and 19th-century religious traditions are still practiced in parts of Appalachia, including natural water (or "creek") baptism, rhythmically chanted preaching, congregational shouting, snake handling, and foot washing. While most church-goers in Appalachia attend fairly well organized churches affiliated with regional or national bodies, small unaffiliated congregations are not uncommon in rural mountain areas.[57][58]
Protestantism is the most dominant denomination in Appalachia, although there is a significant Roman Catholic presence in the northern half of the region and in urban areas, such as Pittsburgh and Scranton. The region's early Lowland and Ulster Scot immigrants brought Presbyterianism to Appalachia, eventually organizing into bodies such as the Cumberland Presbyterian Church.[59] English Baptists most of whom had been influenced by the Separate Baptist and Regular Baptist movements were also common on the Appalachian frontier, and today are represented in the region by groups such as the Free Will Baptists, the Southern Baptists, Missionary Baptists, and "old-time" groups such as the United Baptists and Primitive Baptists.[58] Circuit riders such as Francis Asbury helped spread Methodism to Appalachia in the early 19th century, and today 9.2% of the region's population is Methodist, represented by such bodies as the United Methodist Church, the Free Methodist Church, and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church.[60] Pentecostal movements within the region include the Church of God (based in Cleveland, Tennessee) and the Assemblies of God.[61] Scattered Mennonite colonies exist throughout the region.[62]
Dialect[edit]
See also: Appalachian English
The Appalachian dialect is a dialect of Midland American English known as the Southern Midland dialect, and is spoken primarily in central and southern Appalachia. The Northern Midland dialect is spoken in the northern parts of the region, while Pittsburgh English (more commonly known as "Pittsburghese") is strongly influenced by Appalachian dialect.[63] The Southern Appalachian dialect is considered part of the Southern American dialect,[64][65] although the two are distinguished by the rhotic nature of the Appalachian dialect. Early 20th century writers believed the Appalachian dialect to be a surviving relic of Old World Scottish or Elizabethan dialects. Recent research suggests, however, that while the dialect has a stronger Scottish influence than other American dialects, most of its distinguishing characteristics have developed in the United States.[66]
Education[edit]
 Students walking through Sanford Mall at Appalachian State University in Boone, North Carolina
For much of the region's history, education in Appalachia has lagged behind the rest of the nation due in part to struggles with funding from respective state governments and an agrarian-oriented population that often did not see a practical need for formal education. Early education in the region evolved from teaching Christian morality and learning to read the Bible in small, one-room schoolhouses that convened in months when children were not needed to help with farm work. After the Civil War, mandatory education laws and state assistance helped larger communities begin to establish grade schools and high schools. During the same period, many of the region's institutions of higher education were established or greatly expanded.[67] In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, service organizations such as Pi Beta Phi and various religious organizations established settlement schools and mission schools in the region's more rural areas.[68]
In the 20th century, national trends began to have more of an effect on education in Appalachia, sometimes clashing with the region's traditional values. The Scopes Trial the nation's most publicized debate over the teaching of the theory of evolution took place in Dayton, Tennessee, in southern Appalachia in 1925. In spite of consolidation and centralization, schools in Appalachia struggled to keep up with federal and state demands into the 21st century. Since 2001, a number of the region's public schools were threatened with loss of funding due to difficulties fulfilling the demands of No Child Left Behind.[67]
Music[edit]
 Tyler Childers, labeled by Rolling Stone as the "21st-century voice of Appalachia", addresses systemic issues facing Appalachian people in his music.[69]
Main article: Appalachian music
Appalachian music is one of the best-known manifestations of Appalachian culture. Traditional Appalachian music is derived primarily from the English and Scottish ballad tradition and Irish and Scottish fiddle music. African-American blues musicians played a significant role in developing the instrumental aspects of Appalachian music, most notably with the introduction of the five-stringed banjo one of the region's iconic symbols in the late 18th century. Another instrument known in Appalachian culture was the Appalachian dulcimer which, in a practical way, is a guitar-shaped instrument laid on its side with a flat bottom and the strings plucked in a manner to make alternating notes.
In the years following World War I, British folklorist Cecil Sharp brought attention to Southern Appalachia when he noted that its inhabitants still sang hundreds of English and Scottish ballads that had been passed down to them from their ancestors. Commercial recordings of Appalachian musicians in the 1920s would have a significant impact on the development of country music, bluegrass, and old-time music. Appalachian music saw a resurgence in popularity during the American folk music revival of the 1960s, when musicologists such as Mike Seeger, John Cohen, and Ralph Rinzler traveled to remote parts of the region in search of musicians unaffected by modern music. Today, dozens of annual music festivals held throughout the region preserve the Appalachian music tradition.[70]
Cuisine[edit]
Main article: Appalachian cuisine
Literature[edit]
 Former site of Proctor, North Carolina, setting of Kephart's book, Our Southern Highlanders
Early Appalachian literature typically centered on the observations of people from outside the region, such as Henry Timberlake's Memoirs (1765) and Thomas Jefferson's Notes on the State of Virginia (1784), although there are notable exceptions, including Davy Crockett's A Narrative of the Life of Davy Crockett (1834). Travellers' accounts published in 19th-century magazines gave rise to Appalachian local color, which reached its height with George Washington Harris's Sut Lovingood character of the 1860s and native novelists such as Mary Noailles Murfree. Works such as Rebecca Harding Davis's Life in the Iron Mills (1861), Emma Bell Miles' The Spirit of the Mountains (1905), Catherine Marshall's Christy (1912), Horace Kephart's Our Southern Highlanders (1913) marked a shift in the region's literature from local color to realism. The transition from an agrarian society to an industrial society and its effects on Appalachia are captured in works such as Olive Tilford Dargan's Call Home to the Heart (1932), Agnes Sligh Turnbull's The Rolling Years (1936), James Still's The River of Earth (1940), Harriette Simpson Arnow's The Dollmaker (1954), and Harry Caudill's Night Comes to the Cumberlands (1962). In the 1970s and 1980s, the rise of authors like Breece D'J Pancake, Dorothy Allison, and Lisa Alther brought greater literary diversity to the region.[71]
Along with the above-mentioned, some of Appalachia's best known writers include James Agee (A Death in the Family), Anne W. Armstrong (This Day and Time), Wendell Berry (Hannah Coulter, The Unforeseen Wilderness: An Essay on Kentucky's Red River Gorge, Selected Poems of Wendell Berry), Jesse Stuart (Taps for Private Tussie, The Thread That Runs So True), Denise Giardina (The Unquiet Earth, Storming Heaven), Lee Smith (Fair and Tender Ladies, On Agate Hill), Silas House (Clay's Quilt, A Parchment of Leaves), Wilma Dykeman (The Far Family, The Tall Woman), Keith Maillard (Alex Driving South, Light in the Company of Women, Hazard Zones, Gloria, Running, Morgantown, Lyndon Johnson and the Majorettes, Looking Good)  Maurice Manning (Bucolics, A Companion for Owls), Anne Shelby (Appalachian Studies, We Keep a Store), George Ella Lyon (Borrowed Children, Don't You Remember?), Pamela Duncan (Moon Women, The Big Beautiful), David Joy (Where All Light Tends to Go, The Weight of This World), Chris Offutt (No Heroes, The Good Brother), Charles Frazier (Cold Mountain, Thirteen Moons), Sharyn McCrumb (The Hangman's Beautiful Daughter), Robert Morgan (Gap Creek), Jim Wayne Miller (The Brier Poems), Gurney Norman (Divine Right's Trip, Kinfolks), Ron Rash (Serena), Elizabeth Madox Roberts (The Great Meadow, The Time of Man), Thomas Wolfe (Look Homeward Angel, You Can't Go Home Again), Rachel Carson (The Sea Around Us, Silent Spring; Presidential Medal of Freedom), and Jeannette Walls (The Glass Castle).
Appalachian literature crosses with the larger genre of Southern literature. Internationally renowned writers such as William Faulkner and Cormac McCarthy have made notable contributions to the American canon with tales set within Appalachia. McCarthy's Suttree (1979) is an intense vision of the squalidness and brutality of life along the Tennessee River, in the heart of Appalachia. Other McCarthy novels set in Appalachia include The Orchard Keeper (1968) and Child of God (1973). Appalachia also serves as the origin point for the kid, the protagonist of McCarthy's Western masterpiece Blood Meridian. Faulkner's hometown of Oxford, Mississippi, is on the borderlands of what is considered Appalachia, but his fictional Yoknapatawpha should be considered part of the region.[citation needed] Almost all of the fiction which earned him the Nobel Prize is set there, including Light in August and Absalom, Absalom.
Folklore and legends[edit]
 Statue of legendary railroad worker John Henry in Talcott, West Virginia
Appalachian folklore has a strong mixture of European, Native American (especially Cherokee), and Biblical influences. The Cherokee taught the region's early European pioneers how to plant and cultivate crops such as corn and squash and how to find edible plants such as ramps.[72] The Cherokee also passed along their knowledge of the medicinal properties of hundreds of native herbs and roots, and how to prepare tonics from such plants.[72] Before the introduction of modern agricultural techniques in the region in the 1930s and 1940s, many Appalachian farmers followed the Biblical tradition of planting by "the signs", such as the phases of the moon, or when certain weather conditions occurred.[72]
Cherokee folklore continues to influence storytelling in the Appalachians, including depictions and characteristics of regional animals. As told by Eastern Band Cherokee and western North Carolina storyteller Jerry Wolfe, these creatures include the chipmunk, also known as "seven stripes" from an angry bear scratching him down the back four claw marks and the spaces in between making seven and the copperhead who sneaks and thieves his way into becoming venomous.[73]
Appalachian folk tales are rooted in English, Scottish, and Irish fairy tales, as well as regional heroic figures and events. Jack tales, which tend to revolve around the exploits of a simple-but-dedicated figure named "Jack", are popular at story-telling festivals. Other stories involve wild animals, such as hunting tales. In the industrial areas of western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia the composite Joe Magarac steelworker story has been handed down. Regional folk heroes such as the railroad worker John Henry and frontiersmen Davy Crockett, Mike Fink and Johnny Appleseed are examples of real-life figures that evolved into popular folk tale subjects. Murder stories, such as Omie Wise and John Hardy, are popular subjects for Appalachian ballads. Ghost stories, or "haint tales" in regional English,[74] are a common feature of southern oral and literary tradition.[75] Ghost stories native to the region include the story of the Greenbrier Ghost, which is rooted in a Greenbrier County, West Virginia, murder.[72]
Several urban legends and horror stories have been rooted in the Appalachia region. Since the 1960s the Point Pleasant, West Virginia, legend of Mothman has originated and been explored in popular culture including the 2002 film The Mothman Prophecies loosely retelling the original tale.[76] Since the 1910s, reports of glowing orbs around the Brown Mountain ridgeline in North Carolina have been the subject of paranormal theories including the ghost of slaves or Cherokee tribal warriors. Known as the Brown Mountain lights, the story has been adapted in popular culture, including an episode of the 1990s sci-fi drama The X-Files.[77] The infamous story of the Bell Witch haunting in Tennessee has influenced several major films of the horror genre, including Poltergeist, The Blair Witch Project, and the Paranormal Activity series.[77][78]
Urban Appalachians[edit]
Main article: Urban Appalachians
Urban Appalachians are people from Appalachia who are living in metropolitan areas outside the Appalachian region. In the decades following the Great Depression and World War II, many Appalachian residents moved to industrial cities in the north and west in a migration that became known as the "Hillbilly Highway". Mechanization of coal mining during the 1950s and 1960s was the major source of unemployment in central Appalachia. Many migration streams covered relatively short distances, with West Virginians moving to Cleveland and other cities in eastern and central Ohio, and eastern Kentuckians moving to Cincinnati and southwest Ohio in search of jobs. More distant cities like Detroit and Chicago attracted migrants from many states. Enclaves of Appalachian culture can still be found in some of these communities.[79]
Communications[edit]
In the 1940s through the 1960s, Wheeling, West Virginia, became a cultural center of the region because it had a clear-channel AM radio station, WWVA, which could be heard throughout the entirety of the eastern United States at night. Although Pittsburgh's KDKA was a 50 kilowatt clear channel station that dated back to the early 1920s (as well as spanning all the East Coast in signal strength), WWVA prided itself on rural and farm programming that appealed to a wider audience in the rural region.  Cincinnati's WLW also was relied on by many in the central and northern areas of Appalachia.
In the southern part of the region, WSB-AM Atlanta and WSM-AM Nashville, flagship of the Grand Ole Opry, were major stations for the region's population during the 20th century, and remain strong in the sub-region.
Appalachian studies[edit]
Main article: Appalachian studies
Appalachia as an academic interest was the product of a critical scholarship that emerged across the disciplines in the 1960s and 1970s. With a renewed interest in issues of power, scholars could not dismiss the social inequity, class conflict, and environmental destruction encountered by America's so-called "hillbillies". Appalachia's emergence in academia is a result of the intersection between social conditions and critical academic interests, and has resulted in the development of many Appalachian studies programs in colleges and universities across the region, as well as in the Appalachian Studies Association.
Economy[edit]
The economy of Appalachia traditionally rested on agriculture, mining, timber, and in the cities, manufacturing. Since the late 20th century, tourism and second-home developments have assumed an increasingly major role.
Agriculture[edit]
 A highland pasture near Maggie Valley, North Carolina
While the climate of the Appalachian region is suitable for agriculture, the region's hilly terrain greatly limits the size of the average farm, a problem exacerbated by population growth in the latter half of the 19th century. Subsistence farming was the backbone of the Appalachian economy throughout much of the 19th century, and while economies in places such as western Pennsylvania, the Great Valley of Virginia, and the upper Tennessee Valley in east Tennessee, transitioned to a large-scale farming or manufacturing base around the time of the Civil War, subsistence farming remained an important part of the region's economy until the 1950s. In the early 20th century, Appalachian farmers were struggling to mechanize, and abusive farming practices had over the years left much of the already-limited farmland badly eroded. Various federal entities intervened in the 1930s to restore damaged areas and introduce less-harmful farming techniques. In recent decades, the concept of sustainable agriculture has been applied to the region's small farms, with some success. Nevertheless, the number of farms in the Appalachian region continues to dwindle, plunging from 354,748 farms on 47 million acres (190,000 km2) in 1969 to 230,050 farms on 35 million acres (140,000 km2) in 1997.[80]
Early Appalachian farmers grew both crops introduced from their native Europe as well as crops native to North America (such as corn and squash). Tobacco has long been an important cash crop in Southern Appalachia, especially since the land is ill-suited for cash crops such as cotton. Apples have been grown in the region since the late 18th century, their cultivation being aided by the presence of thermal belts in the region's mountain valleys.  Hogs, which could free range in the region's abundant forests, often on chestnuts, were the most popular livestock among early Appalachian farmers. The American chestnut was also an important human food source until the chestnut blight struck in the 20th century. The early settlers also brought cattle and sheep to the region, which they would typically graze in highland meadows known as balds during the growing season when bottomlands were needed for crops. Cattle, mainly the Hereford, Angus, and Charolais breeds, are now the region's chief livestock.[80]
Logging[edit]
 Sawmill and millpond in Erwin, West Virginia, photographed by Marion Post Wolcott in 1938
The mountains and valleys of Appalachia once contained what seemed to be an inexhaustible supply of timber. The poor roads, lack of railroads, and general inaccessibility of the region, however, prevented large-scale logging in most of the region throughout much of the 19th century. While logging firms were established in the Carolinas and the Kentucky River valley before the Civil War, most major firms preferred to harvest the more accessible timber stands in the Midwestern and Northeastern parts of the country. By the 1880s, these stands had been exhausted, and a spike in the demand for lumber forced logging firms to seek out the virgin forests of Appalachia.[81] The first major logging ventures in Appalachia transported logs using mule teams or rivers, the latter method sometimes employing splash dams.[82] In the 1890s, innovations such as the Shay locomotive, the steam-powered loader, and the steam-powered skidder allowed massive harvesting of the most remote forest sections.[81]
Logging in Appalachia reached its peak in the early 20th century, when firms such as the Ritter Lumber Company cut the virgin forests on an alarming scale, leading to the creation of national forests in 1911 and similar state entities to better manage the region's timber resources. Arguably the most successful logging firm in Appalachia was the Georgia Hardwood Lumber Company, established in 1927 and renamed Georgia-Pacific in 1948 when it expanded nationally. Although logging in Appalachia declined as the industry shifted focus to the Pacific Northwest in the 1950s, rising overseas demand in the 1980s brought a resurgence in Appalachian logging. In 1987, there were 4,810 lumber firms operating in the region. In the late 1990s, the Appalachian lumber industry was a multibillion-dollar industry, employing 50,000 people in Tennessee, 26,000 in Kentucky, and 12,000 in West Virginia alone.[81] By 1999, 1.4 million acres were extinguished as a result of deforestation by natural resource industries.[clarification needed] Pollution from mining processes and disruption of the land ensued numerous environmental issues. Removal of vegetation and other alterations in the land increased erosion and flooding of surrounding areas. Water quality and aquatic life were also affected.[83]
Coal mining[edit]
See also: Environmental justice and coal mining in Appalachia
 Coal company houses in Jenkins, Kentucky, photographed by Ben Shahn in 1935
Coal mining is the industry most frequently associated with the region in outsiders' minds,[84][85] due in part to the fact that the region once produced two-thirds of the nation's coal. At present, however, the mining industry employs just 2% of the Appalachian workforce. The region's vast coalfield covers 63,000 square miles (160,000 km2) between northern Pennsylvania and central Alabama, mostly along the Cumberland Plateau and Allegheny Plateau regions. Most mining activity has been concentrated in eastern Kentucky, southwestern Virginia, West Virginia, and western Pennsylvania, with smaller operations in western Maryland, Tennessee and Alabama. The Pittsburgh coal seam, which has produced 13 billion tons of coal since the early 19th century, has been called the world's most valuable mineral deposit. There are over 60 major coal seams in West Virginia, and over 80 in eastern Kentucky. Most of the coal mined is bituminous, although significant anthracite deposits exist on the fringe of the region in central Pennsylvania.[86] About two-thirds of Appalachia's coal is produced by underground mining, the rest by surface mining.[87] Mountaintop removal, a form of surface mining, is a highly controversial mining practice in central Appalachia due to its negative impacts on the environment and health of local residents.[86]
In the late 19th century, the post-Civil War Industrial Revolution and the expansion of the nation's railroads brought a soaring demand for coal, and mining operations expanded rapidly across Appalachia. Hundreds of thousands of workers poured into the region from across the United States and from overseas, essentially overhauling the cultural makeup of eastern Kentucky, West Virginia, and western Pennsylvania. Mining corporations gained considerable influence in state and municipal governments, especially as they often owned the entire towns in which the miners lived. The mining industry was vulnerable to economic downturns, however, and booms and busts were frequent, with major booms occurring during World War I and II, and the worst bust occurring during the Great Depression. The Appalachian mining industry also saw some of the nation's bloodiest labor strife between the 1890s and the 1930s. Mining-related injuries and deaths were not uncommon, and ailments such as black lung disease afflicted miners throughout the 20th century. After World War II, innovations in mechanization (such as longwall mining) and competition from oil and natural gas led to a decline in the region's mining operations.[86] Environmental restrictions, such as those placed on high-sulfur coal in the 1980s, brought further mine closures. While with annual earnings of $55,000, Appalachian miners make more than most other local workers, Appalachian coal mining employed just under 50,000 in 2004.[88][89]
Coal mining has made a comeback in some regions in the early 21st century because of the increased prominence of Consol Energy, based in Pittsburgh. The Quecreek Mine rescue in 2002 and continuing mine subsidence problems in abandoned coal mines in western Pennsylvania as well as the Sago Mine disaster and Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in West Virginia and other regions have also been highlighted in recent times.[citation needed]
Manufacturing[edit]
 Storage tanks at the Institute plant along the Kanawha River in West Virginia, photographed late 1930s/early 1940s
The manufacturing industry in Appalachia is rooted primarily in the ironworks and steelworks of early Pittsburgh and Birmingham, and in the textile mills that sprang up in North Carolina's Piedmont region in the mid-19th century. Factory construction increased greatly after the Civil War, and the region experienced a manufacturing boom between 1890 and 1930. This economic shift led to a mass migration from small farms and rural areas to large urban centers, causing the populations of cities such as Birmingham, Knoxville, Tennessee, and Asheville, North Carolina, to swell exponentially. Manufacturing in the region suffered a setback during the Great Depression, but recovered during World War II and peaked in the 1950s and 1960s. However, difficulties paying retiree benefits, environmental struggles, and the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 led to a decline in the region's manufacturing operations. Pittsburgh lost 44% of its factory jobs in the 1980s, and between 1970 and 2001, the number of apparel workers in the Appalachian region decreased from 250,000 to 83,000 and the number of textile workers decreased from 275,000 to 193,000.[90]
U.S. Steel, founded in Pittsburgh in 1901, was the world's first corporation with more than a billion dollars in initial capitalization.[90] Another Pittsburgh company, Alcoa, helped establish the nation's aluminum industry in the early 20th century, and has had a significant impact on the economies of western Pennsylvania and east Tennessee.[91] Union Carbide built the world's first petrochemical plant in Clendenin, West Virginia, in 1920, and in subsequent years the Kanawha Valley became known as the "Chemical Capital of the World".[92] Eastman Chemical, also established in 1920, is Tennessee's largest single employer. Companies such as Champion Fibre and Bowater established large pulp operations in Canton, North Carolina, and Greenville, South Carolina, respectively, although the former was dogged by battles with environmentalists throughout the 20th century.[93]
Tourism[edit]
 The Homestead, a resort hotel in Bath County, Virginia, photographed in 1903
One of the region's oldest industries, tourism became a more important part of the Appalachian economy in the latter half of the 20th century as mining and manufacturing steadily declined.[94] In 2000 2001, tourism in Appalachia accounted for nearly $30 billion and over 600,000 jobs.[95] The mountain terrain with its accompanying scenery and outdoor recreational opportunities provide the region's primary attractions.[94] The region is home to one of the world's most well-known hiking trails (the Appalachian Trail), the nation's most-visited national park (the Great Smoky Mountains National Park),[96] and the nation's most visited national parkway (the Blue Ridge Parkway).[97] The craft industry, including the teaching, selling, and display or demonstration of regional crafts, also accounts for an important part of the Appalachian economy, bringing (for example) over $100 million annually to the economy of western North Carolina and over $80 million to the economy of West Virginia.[98] Important heritage tourism attractions in the region include the Biltmore Estate and the Eastern Band of the Cherokee reservation in North Carolina, Cades Cove in Tennessee, and Harpers Ferry in West Virginia. Important theme parks include Dollywood and Ghost Town Village, both on the periphery of the Great Smoky Mountains.
The mineral-rich mountain springs of the Appalachians which for many years were thought to have health-restoring qualities were drawing visitors to the region as early as the 18th century with the establishment of resorts at Hot Springs, Virginia, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, and what is now Hot Springs, North Carolina. Along with the mineral springs, the cool and clear air of the range's high elevations provided an escape for lowland elites, and elaborate hotels such as The Greenbrier in West Virginia and the Balsam Mountain Inn in North Carolina were built throughout the region's remote valleys and mountain slopes. The end of World War I (which opened up travel opportunities to Europe) and the arrival of the automobile (which changed the nation's vacation habits) led to the demise of all but a few of the region's spa resorts. The establishment of national parks in the 1930s brought an explosion of tourist traffic to the region, but created problems with urban sprawl in the various host communities. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, states have placed greater focus on sustaining tourism while preserving host communities.[94]
Poverty[edit]
See also: Social and economic stratification in Appalachia
 A 1930s-era TVA photograph showing a young girl in front of her family's house in the lower Clinch River valley in East Tennessee
Poverty had plagued Appalachia for many years but was not brought to the attention of the rest of the United States until 1940, when James Agee and Walker Evans published Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, a book that documented families in Appalachia during the Great Depression in words and photos. In 1963, John F. Kennedy established the President's Appalachian Regional Commission. His successor, Lyndon B. Johnson, crystallized Kennedy's efforts in the form of the Appalachian Regional Commission, which passed into law in 1965.[99]
In Appalachia, severe poverty and desolation were paired with the necessity for careful cultural sensitivity. Many Appalachian people feared that the birth of a new modernized Appalachia would lead to the death of their traditional values and heritage. Because of the isolation of the region, Appalachian people had been unable to catch up to the modernization that lowlanders have achieved. In the 1960s, many people in Appalachia had a standard of living comparable to Third World countries'. Lyndon B. Johnson declared a "War on Poverty" while standing on the front porch of an Inez, Kentucky, home whose residents had been suffering from a long-ignored problem.[100] The Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965 stated:
The Appalachian region of the United States, while abundant in natural resources and rich in potential, lags behind the rest of the Nation... its people have not shared properly in the Nation's prosperity.[101]
Since the creation of the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) in 1965, the region has seen dramatic progress. New roads, schools, health care facilities, water and sewer systems, and other improvements have brought a better life to many Appalachian residents. In the 1960s, 219 counties in the 13-state Appalachian Region were considered economically distressed. Now that list has been cut by more than half, to 82 counties, but these are "hard-core" pockets of poverty, seemingly impervious to all efforts at improving their lot.[102] Martin County, Kentucky, the site of Johnson's 1964 speech, is one such county still ranked as "distressed" by the ARC. As of 2000, the per capita income in Martin County was $10,650, and 37% of its residents lived below the poverty line.
Like Johnson, President Bill Clinton brought attention to the remaining areas of poverty in Appalachia. On July 5, 1999, he made a public statement concerning the situation in Tyner, Kentucky. Clinton told the enthusiastic crowd:
I'm here to make a simple point. This is the time to bring more jobs and investment to parts of the country that have not participated in this time of prosperity. Any work that can be done by anybody in America can be done in Appalachia.[102]
The region's poverty has been documented often since the early 1960s. John Cohen documents rural lifestyle and culture in The High Lonesome Sound, while photojournalist Earl Dotter has been visiting and documenting poverty, healthcare and mining in Appalachia for nearly forty years.[103] Another photojournalist, Shelby Lee Adams, has been photographing Appalachian families and lifestyle for decades.
Poverty has caused health problems in the region.  The diseases of despair, including the opioid epidemic in the United States, and some diseases of poverty are prevalent in Appalachia.
Tax revenue and absentee land ownership[edit]
In 1982 a seven-volume study conducted by the Appalachian Land Ownership Task Force was issued by the Appalachian Regional Commission which investigated the issue of absentee land ownership. The study covered 80 counties in six states approximating the area designated "Southern Appalachia" as defined by Thomas R. Ford's 1962 work. The states selected were Alabama (15 counties), Kentucky (12 counties), North Carolina (12 counties), Tennessee (14 counties), Virginia (12 counties), and West Virginia (15 counties).
 Map showing the 80 counties included in the 1982 report by the Appalachian Land Ownership Task Force
In its summary the report stated that "over 55,000 parcels of property in 80 counties were studied, representing some 20,000,000 acres of land and mineral rights..." It found that "41% of the 20 million acres of land and minerals...are held by only 50 private owners and 10 government agencies. The federal government is the single largest owner in Appalachia, holding over 2,000,000 acres." The study found that the extractive industries, i.e., timber, coal, etc., were "greatly underassessed for property tax purposes. Over 75% of the mineral owners in this survey pay under 25 cents per acre in property taxes." In the major coal counties surveyed the average tax per ton of known coal reserves is only $.0002 (1/50th of a cent).
The government-held lands are tax exempt, but the government makes a payment in lieu of taxes, which is usually less than the normal tax rates.
"Taken together, the failure to tax minerals adequately, the underassessment of surface lands, and the revenue loss from concentrated federal holdings has a marked impact on local governments in Appalachia. The effect, essentially, is to produce a situation in which a) the small owners carry a disproportionate share of the tax burden; b) counties depend upon federal and state funds to provide revenues, while the large, corporate and absentee owners of the regions's resources go relatively tax-free; and c) citizens face a poverty of needed services despite the presence in their counties of taxable property wealth, especially in the form of coal and other natural resources."[104]
In 2013, a similar study that concentrated solely on West Virginia found that 25 private owners hold 17.6% of the state's private land of 13 million acres. The federal government owns 1,133,587 acres in West Virginia, 7.4% of the total state acreage of 15,410,560 acres.[105] In 11 counties the top ten absentee landowners own 41% to almost 72% of the private land in each county.[106]
Appalachian Regional Commission[edit]
Main article: Appalachian Regional Commission
The Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) was created by the U.S. Congress in 1965 to bring poor areas of the 13 U.S. states of the main (southern) range of the Appalachians into the mainstream of the American economy. The commission is a partnership of federal, state, and local governments, and was created to promote economic growth and improve the quality of life in the region. The region as defined by the ARC[107] includes 420 counties, including all of West Virginia; counties in 12 other states: Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia; and also eight cities in Virginia, where state law makes cities administratively separate from counties. The ARC is a planning, research, advocacy and funding organization; it does not have any governing powers.
The ARC's geographic range of coverage was defined broadly so as to cover as many economically underdeveloped areas as possible; it extends well beyond the area usually thought of as "Appalachia". For instance, parts of Alabama and Mississippi were included in the commission because of problems with unemployment and poverty similar to those in Appalachia proper, and the ARC region extends into the Northeastern states, which are not traditionally considered part of Appalachia culturally (though a "northern Appalachia" identity has emerged in recent times in parts of both NY and PA, particularly in rural areas). More recently, the Youngstown, Ohio, region was declared part of Appalachia by the ARC due to the collapse of the steel industry in the region in the early 1980s and the continuing unemployment problems in the region since, though aside from Columbiana County, Ohio, the Youngstown DMA isn't traditionally or culturally considered part of the region.[108] The ARC's wide scope also grew out of the "pork barrel" phenomenon, as politicians from outside the traditional Appalachia area saw a new way to bring home federal money to their areas. However, former Ohio governor Bob Taft has stated, "What is good for Appalachia is good for all of Ohio."[109]
Transportation[edit]
 The New River Gorge Bridge in West Virginia is the longest steel span in the western hemisphere and at 876 feet (267 m), the third highest in the United States.
Main article: Transportation in Appalachia
Transportation has been the most challenging and expensive issue in Appalachia since the arrival of the first European settlers in the 18th century. With the exception of the October 1, 1940, opening of the Pennsylvania Turnpike, the region's mountainous terrain continuously thwarted major federal intervention attempts at major road construction until the 1970s. This left large parts of the region virtually isolated and slowing economic growth. Before the Civil War, major cities in the region were connected via wagon roads to lowland areas, and flatboats provided an important means for transporting goods out of the region. By 1900, railroads connected most of the region with the rest of the nation, although the poor roads made travel beyond railroad hubs difficult. When the Appalachian Regional Commission was created in 1965, road construction was considered its most important initiative, and in subsequent decades the commission spent more on road construction than all other projects combined.[110]
The effort to connect Appalachia with the outside world has required numerous civil engineering feats. Millions of tons of rock were removed to build road segments such as Interstate 40 through the Pigeon River Gorge at the Tennessee-North Carolina state line and U.S. Route 23 in Letcher County, Kentucky. Large tunnels were built through mountain slopes at Cumberland Gap in 1996 to speed up travel along U.S. Route 25E, which acts as a regional arterial connecting Appalachia to the East Coast and the Great Lakes regions. The New River Gorge Bridge in West Virginia, completed in 1977, was the longest and is now the fourth-longest single-arch bridge in the world. The Blue Ridge Parkway's Linn Cove Viaduct, the construction of which required the assembly of 153 pre-cast segments 4,000 feet (1,200 m) up the slopes of Grandfather Mountain,[110] has been designated a historic civil engineering landmark.[111]
Physiographic provinces[edit]
See also: Geology of the Appalachians
The six physiographic provinces that in whole or in part are commonly treated as components of Appalachia are:
Appalachian Plateau
Allegheny Mountains
Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians
Great Appalachian Valley
Blue Ridge Mountains
Piedmont
In popular culture[edit]
 "The Moonshine Man of Kentucky", an 1877 illustration from Harper's Weekly
Depictions of Appalachia and its inhabitants in popular media are typically negative, making the region an object of humor, derision, and social concern.[112] Ledford writes, "Always part of the mythical South, Appalachia continues to languish backstage in the American drama, still dressed, in the popular mind at least, in the garments of backwardness, violence, poverty, and hopelessness."[113] Otto argues that comic strips Li'l Abner by Al Capp and Barney Google by Billy DeBeck, which both began in 1934, caricatured the laziness and weakness for "corn squeezin's" (moonshine) of these "hillbillies". The popular 1960s Andy Griffith Show and The Beverly Hillbillies on television and James Dickey's 1970 novel Deliverance perpetuated the stereotype, although the region itself underwent so many changes after 1945 that it scarcely resembles the comic images.[114]
English composer Frederick Delius wrote a theme and variations entitled Appalachia; he first composed this music, subtitled "Variations on an Old Slave Song with final chorus", in 1896.[115]
The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come (1903), The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (1908), and other early 20th-century novels of John Fox Jr., set in the Appalachian town of Big Stone Gap, Virginia, and surrounding areas, gave readers an image of frontier life in Appalachia and were made into popular films. Fox himself graduated from Harvard and was a bon vivant newspaperman in New York City. He returned home to the Cumberland Mountains of Tennessee to write his stories because of poor health.[116]
Some comic strips often featured Appalachia, especially "Li'l Abner" by Al Capp. Inge notes that this comic strip, which ran 1934 77, largely ignored religion, politics, blacks and the Civil War, but instead focused its humor on the morality of Dogpatch, examining its memorable and often eccentric people who typically relied on violence to control the social order, and held deep to their faith in land, home, self-sufficiency, and antipathy to outsiders.[117] Arnold finds that starting with World War II Capp increasingly emphasized sex and violence.[118]
Appalachian Spring (1944) is the name of a musical composition by Aaron Copland and a ballet of the same name by Martha Graham. Copland did not intend for his music, which he composed for Graham and which incorporates Shaker melodies, to have an Appalachian theme. Graham gave the work its name; her ballet told the story of a young couple living on the frontier in western Pennsylvania.[119]
Author Catherine Marshall wrote Christy (1967), loosely based on her mother's years as a teacher in the Appalachian region. The novel was highly popular and became the basis of a short-lived television series of the same name in 1994.[120]
The 1972 film Deliverance takes place in southern Appalachia. The film perpetuated extremely negative stereotypes.[121]
The Waltons was a 1972-1981 television show which depicted a rural Virginia family during the Great Depression through World War 2.[122]
"Face of Appalachia" is a song that appeared first on the album Tarzana Kid by John Sebastian in 1974. The song, co-written by Sebastian and Lowell George, was described by Joel Canfield as follows: "Sebastian's lyrics weave a heart-rending picture of an old man's struggle to impart his childhood memories to his grandson; memories of places and people who no longer exist; of an era long gone."[123] Cover versions of the song have been recorded by Valerie Carter (1977), Wendy Matthews (1992) and Julie Miller (1997).[124]
The motion pictures Where the Lilies Bloom (1974) and Coal Miner's Daughter (1980) attempt an accurate portrayal of life in Appalachia which stresses the tensions between Appalachian traditions and the values of urbanized America.[125]
Alan Hovhaness in 1985 composed a tone poem named To the Appalachian Mountains (Symphony no. 60).[126]
Large-format photographer Shelby Lee Adams, himself a son of Appalachian emigrants, has portrayed the Appalachian family life sympathetically in several books (1993 2003).[127]
The 1999 drama film October Sky focuses on the true story of NASA engineer Homer Hickam and his peers known as the Rocket Boys, who constructed a jet-propulsed rocket in the declining Appalachian coal town of Coalwood, West Virginia as a result of the Space Race.[128]
The novel Prodigal Summer (2000) by Barbara Kingsolver explores the ecology of the region and how the removal of the predators, wolves and coyotes, affected the environment.[129]
Songcatcher (2000) takes place in rural Appalachia in 1907 and features the "lost" ballads of the Scots-Irish brought over in the 19th century and a musicologist's quest to preserve them.[130]
Stranger With A Camera (2000) is a documentary film from Appalshop about the representation of Appalachian communities by outsiders in film and video.[131]
Much of the popular book series The Hunger Games (2008) is set in "an area that used to be called Appalachia" which is referred to in the book as District 12. Much of the surroundings and culture reflect present-day Appalachia, such as reliance on coal mining as an industry.[132]
The 2013 film Out of the Furnace is the story of two brothers living in a dying Appalachian Pennsylvania town, struggling for jobs, who get wrapped up in the world of meth-dealing in the mountains.[133]
Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis is a 2016 memoir by J. D. Vance that opines on the Appalachian region and people, drawing from the Ohio-born author's view of his extended family in Kentucky. While the book's portrayal of Appalachia was met with controversy and derision from many Appalachians,[134] it was made into a 2020 film directed by Ron Howard.[135]
Author Barbara Kingsolver seeks to redress Appalachian stereotypes in her novel Demon Copperhead (2022), a retelling of Charles Dickens' David Copperfield that explores the opioid crisis in the region.[136]
See also[edit]
United States portal
Appalachian Center for Wilderness Medicine
Appalachian Ohio
Childbirth in rural Appalachia
Environmental justice and coal mining in Appalachia
Museum of Appalachia
Ozark culture
Upland South
References[edit]
^ a b "Population and Age in Appalachia". Appalachian Regional Commission. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
^ "About the Appalachian Region". Appalachian Regional Commission. Retrieved February 24, 2023.
^ "Definition of APPALACHIA". www.merriam-webster.com.
^ a b "Appalachian Region". Appalachian Regional Commission. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved November 27, 2008.
^ a b c d e Abramson, Rudy. Introduction to Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. xix xxv.
^ Banker, Mark (February 16, 2022). "When grappling with Appalachian identity, don't resort to stereotypes". Knoxville News Sentinel. Retrieved March 13, 2022.
^ Sokol, Anna. "Economic Redevelopment in Appalachia: The Appalachian Regional Commission". University of Michigan. Retrieved August 9, 2013.
^ Ziliak, James P. (September 16, 2010). "The Appalachian Regional Development Act and Economic Change" (PDF).
^ Wilson, Shannon. "Library Homepage: William Goodell Frost: Race and Region: Essay". libraryguides.berea.edu.
^ In Virginia, all municipalities incorporated as "cities" are legally separate from counties.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n John Alexander Williams, Appalachia: A History (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002)
^ Abramson, Rudy, and Jean Haskell, eds., Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1287 88.
^ Trende, Sean (2012). The Lost Majority: Why the Future of Government Is Up for Grabs and Who Will Take It. St. Martin's Press. pp. xxii xxviii. ISBN 978-0230116467.
^ After Florida, Dry Tortugas and Cape Canaveral: Stewart, George (1945). Names on the Land: A Historical Account of Place-Naming in the United States. New York: Random House. pp. 11 13, 17 18.
^ Walls, David (1977), "On the Naming of Appalachia", in An Appalachian Symposium, pp. 56 76.
^ Blaustein, Richard (2003), The Thistle and the Brier: Historical Links and Cultural Parallels Between Scotland and Appalachia, p. 21.
^ Stewart, George R. (1967). Names on the Land. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
^ Walls, David (2006). "Appalachia". The Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press), pp. 1006 07.
^ Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged (Springfield, Mass.: Merriam-Webster, 1993), p. 102.
^ Ivey, Mike (1986). "A rose by another name is a damned brier". Appalachian Heritage. The University of North Carolina Press. 14 (3): 53 54. doi:10.1353/aph.1986.0112.
^ Turner, William Hobart. Cabbell, Edward J., 1946- (1985). Blacks in Appalachia. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 0-8131-1518-3. OCLC 11532916.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Hudson, Charles. The Juan Pardo Expeditions: Explorations of the Carolinas and Tennessee, 1566 1568 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2005), p. 17.
^ Rouse, Parke Jr. (1992). The Great Wagon Road: From Philadelphia to the South (1st ed.). Dietz Press. ISBN 978-0875170657.
^ Leyburn, James G. (1989) [1962]. The Scotch-Irish: A Social History (Reprint ed.). University of North Carolina Press. pp. 317 319. ISBN 978-0807842591.
^ Jones, Maldwyn A. (1980). "Scotch-Irish".  In Thernstrom, Stephan; Orlov, Ann; Handlin, Oscar (eds.). Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp. 895 908. ISBN 978-0674375123. OCLC 1038430174.
^ David Hackett Fischer, Albion's Seed (Oxford University Press, 1989), p. 605-782
^ Straw, Richard Alan. Blethen, Tyler. (2004). High mountains rising : Appalachia in time and place. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02916-X. OCLC 53020340.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b Caudill, Harry. Night Comes to the Cumberlands
^ a b c d e f g h Drake, Richard. A History of Appalachia (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2001)
^ Lacy, Eric. Vanquished Volunteers: East Tennessee Sectionalism from Statehood to Secession (Johnson City: East Tennessee State University Press, 1965), pp. 122 26.
^ Poe, Edgar Allan (2006). "The Name of the Nation".  In Kennedy, Gerald (ed.). The Portable Edgar Allan Poe. Penguin Books. p. 600.
^ a b c Gordon McKinney, "The Civil War". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1579 81.
^ Curry, Richard O. A House Divided, Statehood Politics & the Copperhead Movement in West Virginia, Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, 1964, pgs. 141 147. Twenty-four of the most mountainous counties of West Virginia had voted for the Secession Ordinance on May 23, 1861.
^ "Most of West Virginia went through the Civil War not as an asset to the Union but as a troublesome battleground, while the Unionist Ohio River counties struggled to cope with the tide of refugees fleeing to their sanctuary from the interior." Weigley, Russell F. A Great Civil War, W.W. Norton, 2003, p. 55
^ Binnicker, Margaret D., "Scott County", Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture Encyclopedia, Tennesseeencyclopedia.net, retrieved February 8, 2011
^ E.g. see Walker, Matthew H. "Discrimination Based on National Origin and Ancestry: How the Goals of Equality Have Failed to Address the Pervasive Stereotyping of the Appalachian Tradition", 38 U. Dayton L. Rev. 335 (2013).
^ Otterbein, Keith F. "Five Feuds: An Analysis of Homicides in Eastern Kentucky in the Late Nineteenth Century", American Anthropologist, June 2000, Vol. 102 Issue 2, pp 231 43, provides a theoretical analysis.
^ Billings, Dwight B., and Kathleen M. Blee, "'Where the Sun Set Crimson and the Moon Rose Red': Writing Appalachia and the Kentucky Mountain Feuds", Southern Cultures, Summer 1996, Vol. 2 Issue 3/4, pp 329 352
^ Staff (April 16, 2006). "Appalachia: Hillbillies and Haute Cuisine. (Seriously.)". Newsweek. Retrieved April 20, 2022.
^ Freeman, Lindsey. "Memories of an Atomic Childhood in Appalachia: Summertime in a Nuclear Town". Literary Hub. Retrieved April 20, 2022.
^ "ARC-Designated Distressed Counties, Fiscal Year 2010". Appalachian Regional Commission. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2020.
^ Weaver, Nathaniel. "INFLUENCE OF EXURBAN NEIGHBORHOODS ON RIPARIAN VEGETATION AND STREAM SALAMANDERS IN THE SOUTHERN APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS". Clemson University. Clemson University Press. Retrieved April 12, 2021.
^ Bryant, Linda (August 12, 2016). "Tennessee's a hot job market (If you're in the right field)". Nashville Ledger. Retrieved November 6, 2016. Most importantly, this Brookings report indicates that our state is getting higher-paying jobs that will have a meaningful impact on Tennessee residents, with big gains among engineering, computer science and automotive-related jobs since 2013.
^ Smith, Rick (March 23, 2016). "Is Red Hat at its peak? Earnings beat generates little heat". WRAL TechWire. Retrieved November 6, 2016.
^ "Top500 List". TOP500. November 2019. Archived from the original on November 19, 2019. Retrieved November 19, 2019.
^ Newhall, David, "English". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 253 55.
^ Rouse, Parke Jr., The Great Wagon Road, Dietz Press, 2004, p. 32
^ Leyburn, James G., The Scotch-Irish: A Social History, Univ. of NC Press, 1962, p. 180
^ a b Fischer, David Hackett, Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), pp. 620 30.
^ "DANIEL BOONE S CULTURAL ANCESTORS, if not actually his genetic ones,..." Stoll, Steven. Ramp Hollow: The Ordeal of Appalachia (p. 86-88). Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Kindle Edition.
^ Ellis, John, "Welsh". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), p. 282.
^ Betler, Bruce, "Swiss". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 281 82.
^ Billings, Dwight, and Kathleen Blee, "African-American Families and Communities". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 155 56.
^ Barbour-Payne, Yunina, "Carolina Chocolate Drops: Performative Expressions and Reception of Affrilachian Identity", Appalachia Revisited (2016), ed. by William Schumann, Rebecca Adkins Fletcher, pp. 43-49
^ Stephens, Ima, "Black Dutch". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), p. 248.
^ "Racial Composition | Southern Appalachian Vitality Index". southernappalachianvitalityindex.org. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
^ Dorgan, Howard, Introduction to the "Religion" section, Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1281 89.
^ a b Grammich, Clifford, "Baptists, the Old-Time Groups". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1298 300.
^ Ostwalt, Conrad, "Presbyterian, Denominational Family". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1342 44.
^ Bean, Heather Ann Ackley, "Methodists". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1330 32.
^ Burgess, Stanley, Patrick Alexander, and Gary McGee, "Pentecostals". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1336 39.
^ Neufeldt, Harvey, "Mennonites". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1327 29.
^ Johnstone, Barbara. "Steel Town Speak". Language Magazine. Retrieved September 1, 2011.
^ Labov, William, Sharon Ash & Charles Boberg, Atlas of North American English, Mouton de Gruyter, 2005
^ "South Regional Map". www.ling.upenn.edu.
^ Montgomery, Montgomery, "Language   Introduction", The Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 999 1004.
^ a b DeYoung, Alan, Introduction to Education section, Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1517 21.
^ Alvic, Philis, "Settlement, Mission, and Sponsored Schools", Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), p. 1551.
^ Moss, Marissa R. (August 24, 2018). "How Songwriter Tyler Childers Became the 21st Century Voice of Appalachia". Rolling Stone.
^ Olson, Ted, "Music   Introduction". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1109 20.
^ Edwards, Grace Toney, "Literature   Introduction", Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 1035 39.
^ a b c d Deborah Thompson and Irene Moser, "Appalachian Folklife". A Handbook to Appalachia: An Introduction to the Region (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 143 56.
^ Kelley, Saundra Gerrell (2011). Southern Appalachian Storytellers: Interviews with Sixteen Keepers of the Oral Tradition. Jefferson: McFarland Publishing. p. 205 07.
^ Dictionary of American Regional English, Belknap Press, 1985
^ Flora, Joseph M., Lucinda Hardwick MacKethan, Todd W. Taylor, The Companion to Southern Literature, Louisiana State University Press, 2001, p. 304.
^ Brunvand, Jan Harold (1994). The Baby Train and Other Lusty Urban Legends. W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 98 . ISBN 978-0-393-31208-9.
^ a b Dinan, Kim. "Appalachian Legends". Blue Ridge Outdoors. Retrieved April 20, 2022.
^ Rose, Lloyd (August 1, 1999). "NIGHT OF THE HAUNTER". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 22, 2018.
^ Appalachian Odyssey, ed. Phillip J. Obermiller et al. (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2000).
^ a b Best, Michael, and Curtis Wood, Introduction to the Agriculture section in the Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 395 402.
^ a b c Paulson, Linda Daily, "Lumber Industry". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 501 04.
^ Weals, Vic. The Last Train to Elkmont (Knoxville, Tennessee: Olden Press, 1993), pp. 1 8.
^ Jones, E. B. Dale III; Helfman, Gene S.; Harper, Joshua O.; Bolstad, Paul V. (January 1, 1999). "Effects of Riparian Forest Removal on Fish Assemblages in Southern Appalachian Streams". Conservation Biology. 13 (6): 1454 1465. doi:10.1046/j.1523-1739.1999.98172.x. JSTOR 2641969. S2CID 73656170.
^ "Coal-Bearing Areas of the United States" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 22, 2004.
^ "Coal mines and facilities" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 15, 2007.
^ a b c Abramson, Rudy, "Bituminous Coal Industry". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 457 60.
^ "U.S. Coal Production by State, Region and Method of Mining   2007" (PDF). National Mining Association.
^ "Profile of the U.S. Coal Miner   2007" (PDF). National Mining Association.
^ "U.S. Coal Mine Employment by State, Region and Method of Mining   2007" (PDF). National Mining Association.
^ a b Hurst, Jack, Introduction to Business, Technology, and Industry section, Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee, 2006), pp. 441 47.
^ Barnett, Janice Willis, "Aluminum Industry", Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 449 51.
^ Egan, Martha Avaleen, "Chemical Industry", Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee, 2006), pp. 468 71.
^ Varat, Daniel, "Champion Fibre", Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 466 67.
^ a b c Howell, Benita, "Tourism". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 611 16.
^ "Economic Effects of Tourism in Appalachia" Archived August 14, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Appalachian Regional Commission Online Resource Center. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
^ Gatlinburg, Mailing Address: 107 Park Headquarters Road; Us, TN 37738 Phone:436-1200 Contact. "Great Smoky Mountains National Park (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
^ Blue Ridge Parkway. Official site. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
^ Appalachian Regional Commission Tourism Council, Roadmap for Tourism & Craft Archived August 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. July 2003. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
^ "ARC History". Archived from the original on December 22, 2005.
^ Jackson, David (April 23, 2008). "McCain's economics talk follows LBJ path". USA Today.
^ "United States Code Title 40 Subtitle IV   Appalachian Regional Development". Appalachian Regional Commission. Archived from the original on October 5, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2010.
^ a b Appalachian Regional Commission Arc.gov Archived April 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Coalfield Generations: Health, Mining, and the Environment". Southern Spaces. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
^ Land Ownership Patterns and Their Impacts on Appalachian Communities. A Survey of 80 Counties, pgs. 27 29
^ "Federal Land Ownership: Overview and Data" (PDF).
^ "Who Owns West Virginia in the 21st Century?". November 20, 2017.
^ "Counties in Appalachia". Appalachian Regional Commission. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2008.
^ Monthly, Metro (September 1, 2007). "Youngstown, Appalachia?". Metro Monthly. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
^ "Progress through Partnership: Reflections on ARC's 40th Anniversary   Appalachian Regional Commission". www.arc.gov. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013.
^ a b Burton, Mark, and Richard Hatcher, Introduction to Transportation section, Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 685 90.
^ "Designated Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks". American Society of Civil Engineers. Archived from the original on October 25, 2009. Retrieved September 14, 2009.
^ Crane, D. Russell; Heaton, Tim B. (2008). Handbook of Families and Poverty. SAGE. p. 111. ISBN 978-1-4129-5042-8.
^ Ledford, Katherine (2000). Back Talk from Appalachia: Confronting Stereotypes. Univ. Press of Kentucky. pp. 9 10. ISBN 978-0-8131-9001-3.
^ Otto, John Solomon (1986). "'Hillbilly Culture': The Appalachian Mountain Folk in History and Popular Culture". Southern Quarterly. 24 (3): 25 34.
^ Woodstra, Chris; Brennan, Gerald; Schrott, Allen (2005). All Music Guide to Classical Music: The Definitive Guide to Classical Music. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 364. ISBN 978-0-87930-865-0.
^ Tucker, Edward L (1972). "John Fox, Jr., Bon Vivant and Mountain Chronicler". Virginia Cavalcade. 21 (4): 18 29.
^ Inge, M. Thomas (2001). "Al Capp's South: Appalachian Humor in Li'l Abner". Studies in American Humor. 3 (8): 4 20.
^ Arnold, Edwin T (1997). "Abner Unpinned: Al Capp's 'Li'l Abner,' 1940 1955". Appalachian Journal. 24 (4): 420 436.
^ Kapilow, Robert; Adams, John (1999), "Milestones of the Millennium: "Appalachian Spring" by Aaron Copland", NPR's Performance Day, National Public Radio
^ Satterwhite, Emily. Dear Appalachia: Readers, Identity, and Popular Fiction Since 1878 (2011) Chapter 4, Part I
^ O'Brien, John. At Home in the Heart of Appalachia (2002), p. 15
^ "'The Waltons' fans have plenty to celebrate in this corner of the Blue Ridge Mountains". Chicago Tribune.
^ Canfield, Joel. "Ride of the Tarzana Kid". Know your music. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
^ "Face of Appalachia". SecondHandSongs. Retrieved November 27, 2016.
^ Banes, Ruth A (1985). "Mythology in Music: The Ballad of Loretta Lynn". Canadian Review of American Studies. 16 (3): 283 300. doi:10.3138/cras-016-03-03. S2CID 159960792.
^ March, Ivan; Greenfield, Edward; Layton, Robert; Czajkowski, Paul (2008). The Penguin Guide to Recorded Music. Penguin. p. 588. ISBN 978-0-14-103335-8.
^ Drake, Richard B. (2003). A History of Appalachia. University Press of Kentucky. p. 263. ISBN 978-0-8131-9060-0.
^ Ebert, Roger (February 19, 1999). "October Sky". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved December 27, 2022.
^ Kingsolver, Barbara; Mendes, Guy (2001). "Messing with the Sacred: An Interview with Barbara Kingsolver". Appalachian Journal. 28 (3): 304 324.
^ Holloway, Kimberley M. (2003). From a race of storytellers: Essays on the ballad novels of Sharyn McCrumb. Mercer University Press. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-86554-893-0.
^ "Appalshop | Making Media in the Mountains Since 1969". Appalshop.
^ Gresh, Lois H. The Hunger Games Companion: The Unauthorized Guide to the Series (2011) p. 188
^ Truitt, Brian. "'Out of the Furnace' town a key character". USA TODAY. Retrieved December 27, 2022.
^ Garner, Dwight (February 25, 2019). "'Hillbilly Elegy' Had Strong Opinions About Appalachians. Now, Appalachians Return the Favor". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 27, 2022.
^ Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 10, 2017). "Imagine Lands J.D. Vance's Rust Belt Memoir 'Hillbilly Elegy;' Ron Howard To Direct Film". Deadline. Retrieved December 27, 2022.
^ "How a bestselling US author used a Dickens classic to tell hellish story of US opioid crisis". ABC News. December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 27, 2022.
Sources[edit]
Abramson, Rudy, and Haskell, Jean, editors (2006). Encyclopedia of Appalachia, University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 1-57233-456-8
Becker, Jane S. Inventing Tradition: Appalachia and the Construction of an American Folk, 1930 1940 (1998).
Biggers, Jeff (2006). The United States of Appalachia: How Southern Mountaineers Brought Independence, Culture and Enlightenment to America (New ed.). Shoemaker and Hoard. ISBN 1-59376-031-0.
Caudill, Harry M. (1962). Night Comes to the Cumberlands. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-13212-8.
Davis, Donald Edward. Where There Are Mountains: An Environmental History of the Southern Appalachians, 2000.
Dawley, Thomas R. Jr. (March 1910). "Our Southern Mountaineers: Removal the Remedy for the Evils That Isolation and Poverty Have Brought". The World's Work: A History of Our Time. XIX: 12704 14. Retrieved July 10, 2009.
Dotter, Earl. "Coalfield Generations: Health, Mining and the Environment" Southern Spaces, July 16, 2008.
Drake, Richard B. A History of Appalachia (2001)
Eller, Ronald D. (2008). Uneven Ground: Appalachia Since 1945. The University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2523-7.
Eller, Ronald D. Miners, Millhands, and Mountaineers: Industrialization of the Appalachian South, 1880 1930 1982.
Ford, Thomas R. ed. The Southern Appalachian Region: A Survey. (1967), includes highly detailed statistics.
Kephart, Horace (1922). Our Southern Highlanders (New and revised ed.). Macmillan. ISBN 0-87049-203-9. text online
Inscoe, John C. Movie-Made Appalachia: History, Hollywood, and the Highland South (U of North Carolina Press, 2020_ online review
Lee, Tom, "Southern Appalachia's Nineteenth-Century Bright Tobacco Boom: Industrialization, Urbanization, and the Culture of Tobacco", Agricultural History 88 (Spring 2014), 175 206. online
Lewis, Ronald L. Transforming the Appalachian Countryside: Railroads, Deforestation, and Social Change in West Virginia, 1880 1920 (1998) online edition
Light, Melanie and Ken Light (2006). Coal Hollow. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24654-6
Noe, Kenneth W. and Shannon H. Wilson, Civil War in Appalachia (1997)
Obermiller, Phillip J., Thomas E. Wagner, and E. Bruce Tucker, editors (2000). Appalachian Odyssey: Historical Perspectives on the Great Migration. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 0-275-96851-0
Olson, Ted (1998). Blue Ridge Folklife. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 1-57806-023-0
Pudup, Mary Beth, Dwight B. Billings, and Altina L. Waller, eds. Appalachia in the Making: The Mountain South in the Nineteenth Century. (1995).
Sarnoff, Susan; Yoon, Hong-Sik (2003). "Central Appalachia   Still the Other America". Journal of Poverty. The Haworth Press. 7 (1 & 2): 123 39. doi:10.1300/J134v07n01_06. S2CID 145175350. Archived from the original on February 22, 2007.
Slap, Andrew L., (ed.) (2010). Reconstructing Appalachia: The Civil War's Aftermath Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky.
Stewart, Bruce E. (ed.) (2012). Blood in the Hills: A History of Violence in Appalachia. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky.
Walls, David (1977). "On the Naming of Appalachia" Archived May 28, 2010, at the Wayback Machine An Appalachian Symposium. Edited by J. W. Williamson. Boone, NC: Appalachian State University Press.
Williams, John Alexander. Appalachia: A History (2002) online edition
Woodard, Colin American Nations:  A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America (2011)
Further reading[edit]
Dispatch Staff Reporters (September 26 30, 1999). "Appalachia: Hollow Promises". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on February 3, 2006. A comprehensive series of articles on the region and the ARC.
Obermiller, Phillip J.; Maloney, Michael E. (May 2011). "The Uses and Misuses of Appalachian Culture" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 4, 2012.
Palumbo, Jacqui (January 20, 2021). "Challenging reductive stereotypes of rural Appalachian life -- in photos". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
West Virginia University Libraries. "Appalachian Studies Bibliography". Archived from the original on September 6, 2015.
Journals[edit]
Appalachian Journal Scholarly articles from 1972 present.
Space, Place, and Appalachia.  A series about real and imagined spaces and places of Appalachia and their global connections in Southern Spaces.
External links[edit]
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Appalachia.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Appalachia.
Wikisource has the text of a 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article about Appalachia.
1965 Original Congressional definition
Appalachian Center for Civic Life at Emory and Henry College
Appalachian Center for Craft at Tennessee Tech
Appalachian Center for the Arts
Appalachian Studies at the University of North Carolina
Digital Library of Appalachia
Loyal Jones Appalachian Center at Berea College
University of Kentucky Appalachian Center
Appalachia at Curlie
vteRegions of the United StatesAdministrativeUnits
U.S. state
District of Columbia
Territory
Insular area
Minor Outlying Island
Maritime territory
Time zones
Chamorro
Samoa
Hawaii Aleutian
Alaska
Pacific
Mountain
Central
Eastern
Atlantic
Census
West
Pacific
Mountain
Midwest
E N Central
W N Central
Northeast
New England
Middle Atlantic
South
S Atlantic
E S Central
W S Central
Courts ofappeals
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
PhysicalPhysiographic
Pacific Mountain
Intermontane Plateaus
Rocky Mountain
Laurentian Upland
Interior Plains
Interior Highlands
Appalachian
Atlantic Plain
Tidewater
Coastal
Arctic
West
Great Lakes
Gulf
East
HistoricalAcquisitions
Thirteen Colonies
Northwest Territory
Southwest Territory
Louisiana Purchase
Gadsden Purchase
Treaty of 1818
Adams On s Treaty
Texas annexation
Oregon Treaty
Mexican Cession
Alaska Purchase
Newlands Resolution
Acquisition of Puerto Rico and Guam
Cession of Tutuila
Cession of Manu'a
Treaty of the Danish West Indies
Acquisition of the Northern Mariana Islands
Civil War
Union
Border states
Confederacy
Old South
Dixie
Slave and free states
Divided
Pacific Northwest
Atlantic Northeast
Prairie Pothole
Columbia
Oregon Country
The Californias
Sonoran Desert
Samoan Islands
Virgin Islands
Other
Appalachia
Border states
Red states and blue states
Central
Eastern
Four Corners
Great Plains
High Plains
Intermountain
Mariana Islands
Northern
Northwest
Cascadia
South Central
Southern
Deep
New
Solid
Mid
Upland
Southeast
Southwest
Upper Midwest
List
Category
vteEarth's primary regions and subregionsAfrica
Mediterranean
Saharan
Northern
Maghreb
Middle East
MENA
Sub-Saharan
Western
East
Horn
Great Lakes
Central
Southern
Islands
North America
Northern
Pacific Northwest
Northeastern United States
New England
Midwest
Mid-Atlantic
Western United States
Southwest
Mountain states
South Central United States
Southern United States
East Coast
West Coast
Bible Belt
Appalachia
Great Lakes
Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
Northern Mexico
Aridoamerica
Caribbean
West Indies
Central
Middle
Mesoamerica
Anglo
French
Latin
Ibero
Hispanic
Portuguese
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
South America
Southern
Northern (Guianan states)
Western
West Indies
Patagonia
Amazon
LAC
Asia
Central
Aral Sea
Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Far East
Russian
Eastern
Northeastern
Inner Asia
Southeastern
Mainland
Maritime
Northern
Siberia
Southern
Indian subcontinent
Western
Levant
Mediterranean
Caucasus
South Caucasus
Middle East
MENA
Near East
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Central
Northern
British Isles
Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Baltic
Eastern
Southeastern
Balkans
Caucasus
South Caucasus
North Caucasus
Southern Russia
European Russia
Southern
Iberia
Italian Peninsula
Balkans
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Middle East
Western
Low Countries
Northwestern
Germanic
Romance
Celtic
Slavic
Oceania
Australasia
Australia
New Guinea
Zealandia
Pacific Islands
Micronesia
Melanesia
Polynesia
Polar
Antarctic
Arctic
Oceans
World (Sea)
Arctic
Atlantic
Indian
Pacific
Great Barrier Reef
Mariana Trench
Ring of Fire
Southern
Convergence
List of seas
 Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth
vteAppalachiaPeople of the Appalachian Mountains in the Eastern United StatesEthnic groups
Black-Dutch
Cherokee (Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians)
Chestnut Ridge people
Melungeon
Scotch-Irish
formerly Kanawha Valley people, Koasati, Shawnee, and Yuchi
History
Battle of Blair Mountain
Coal Creek War
Coal strike of 1902
French Eversole feud
Hatfield McCoy feud (Battle of the Grapevine Creek)
Lincoln County feud
Hillbilly Highway (Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit)
Kentucky County, Virginia
Overmountain Men
Paint Creek Cabin Creek strike of 1912
Southwest Territory
Trans-Appalachia
Wilderness Road
West Virginia coal wars
1920 Alabama coal strike
Society
Appalachia
Social and economic stratification in Appalachia
Appalachian Americans
Appalachian English
Childbirth in rural Appalachia
Settlement school
Urban Appalachians
Cuisine
apple butter
chicken fried steak
chow-chow
country ham
Goo Goo Clusters
Shucky beans
sorghum syrup
soup beans
Traditional music
Appalachian music
Appalachian dulcimer
Blackberry Blossom (tune)
Bluegrass fiddle
Bluegrass music
Clogging
Cripple Creek (folk song)
Cumberland Gap (folk song)
East Tennessee Blues
Hootenanny
In the Pines
Nottamun Town
Shady Grove (song)
Tom Dooley (song)
Historical individuals
Francis Asbury
Daniel Boone
Davy Crockett
John Gordon (militia captain)
Devil Anse Hatfield
Abraham Lincoln
Belle Starr
In popular culture
Appalachian stereotypes
Appalachian studies
The Beverly Hillbillies
Deliverance
Hillbilly
Moonshine in popular culture
Mountain white
Poor White
Redneck
Redneck joke
The Hatfields and the McCoys
Part of a series on hill people around the world
Authority control National
Israel
United States
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Appalachia&oldid=1149020212"