Book series published by Encyclop dia Britannica
For The Learning Channel's series about great books, see Great Books (TV program).
 The Great Books (second edition)
Great Books of the Western World is a series of books originally published in the United States in 1952, by Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc., to present the great books in a 54-volume set.
The original editors had three criteria for including a book in the series drawn from Western Civilization: the book must have been relevant to contemporary matters, and not only important in its historical context; it must be rewarding to re-read repeatedly with respect to liberal education; and it must be a part of "the great conversation about the great ideas", relevant to at least 25 of the 102 "Great Ideas" as identified by the editor of the series's comprehensive index, what they dubbed the Syntopicon, to which they belonged. The books were not chosen on the basis of ethnic and cultural inclusiveness, (historical influence being seen as sufficient by itself to be included), nor on whether the editors agreed with the views expressed by the authors.[1]
A second edition was published in 1990 in 60 volumes. Some translations were updated, some works were removed, and there were significant additions from the 20th century located in six new, separate volumes.
History[edit]
The project for the Great Books of the Western World began at the University of Chicago, where the president, Robert Hutchins, collaborated with Mortimer Adler to develop a course there of a type which had been originated by John Erskine at Columbia University in 1921 with the innovation of a "round table"-type approach to reading and discussing great books among professors and undergraduates.[2] generally aimed at businessmen.  The purposes they had in mind were for filling the gaps in their liberal education (notably including Hutchins' own self-confessed gaps) and to render the reader as an intellectually-rounded man or woman familiar with the Great Books of the Western canon and knowledgeable of the Great Ideas visited in the "Great Conversation" over the course of three millennia.
An original student of the project was William Benton (later a U.S. senator, and then chief executive officer of the Encyclop dia Britannica publishing company) who in 1943 proposed selecting the greatest books of the Western canon, and that Hutchins and Adler produce unabridged editions for publication, by Encyclop dia Britannica. Hutchins was at first wary of the idea, fearing that commodifying the books would devalue them as cultural artifacts; nevertheless, he agreed to the business deal and was paid $60,000 for his work on the project.  Benton at first refused the deal on the basis that the set of works selected would be just that, artifacts, and never actually read.
By chance, Adler was re-reading a source he was using for a book he was writing at the time called How to Think about War and Peace. He noted to the person who had provided the book for him that, while he remembered reading this book as a source for the book he was writing, he had missed the instructive passage this person was pointing out to him and wondered why that had happened.  They realized that Adler had read the book focusing on one idea about war and peace and missed the particular significance and importance of the passage about a different subject.  Adler struck on the idea to accede to assume the task of producing an index for the whole set for Hutchins by means of which readers could have a sort of "random access" to the works, with the hoped-for result that they would develop a greater interest in the works themselves.[3]
Failure to come to terms[edit]
After deciding what subjects and authors to include, and how to present the materials, the indexing part of the project was begun, with a budget of another $60,000.  Adler began compiling what his group called the "Greek index" bearing on the works selected from ancient Greece, expecting completion of the entire project within six months.  After two years, the Greek index was declared to be a resounding failure.  The inferior terms under the Great Ideas across the centuries in which the Greek-language works were written had shifted in their significance, and the preliminary index reflected that, the ideas presented not having "come to terms" with each other.[4]
During those times, Adler had a flash of insight.  He set his group re-reading each work preliminarily with a single assigned subordinate idea in mind in the form of a fairly elaborate phrase.  If any instances of the idea appeared, they could collate them with co-ordinate ideas of a similar type collected the same way, use the material thus noted to better re-frame the larger idea structure and then finally start re-reading the work in its entirety with revised phrasing to do the complete indexing, of ideas.[5]
Eventual popular success[edit]
In 1945, Adler began writing the initial forms of the essays for the Great Ideas and six years and $940,000 more later, on April 15, 1952, the Great Books of the Western World were presented at a publication party in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, in New York City. In his speech, Hutchins said, "This is more than a set of books, and more than a liberal education. Great Books of the Western World is an act of piety. Here are the sources of our being. Here is our heritage. This is the West. This is its meaning for mankind." The first two sets of books were given to Elizabeth II, Queen of the United Kingdom, and to Harry S. Truman, the incumbent U.S. President.  Adler appeared on the cover of Time magazine for a story about the set of works and its idea index and inventory of Western topics of thought at large, of sorts.[6]
The initial sales of the book sets were poor, with only 1,863 sets sold in 1952, and less than one-tenth of that number of book sets were sold in 1953. A financial debacle loomed until Encyclop dia Britannica altered the sales strategy, and sold the book set through experienced door-to-door encyclop dia-salesmen, as Hutchins had feared; but, through that method, 50,000 sets were sold in 1961. In 1963 the editors published Gateway to the Great Books, a ten-volume set of readings meant to introduce the authors and the subjects of the Great Books. Each year, from 1961 to 1998, the editors published The Great Ideas Today, an annual updating about the applicability of the Great Books to contemporary life.[7][8] According to Alex Beam, Great Books of the Western World eventually sold a million sets.[9] The Internet and the E-book reader have made available some of the Great Books of the Western World in an on-line format.[10]
Volumes[edit]
Originally published in 54 volumes, The Great Books of the Western World covers categories including fiction, history, poetry, natural science, mathematics, philosophy, drama, politics, religion, economics, and ethics. Hutchins wrote the first volume, titled The Great Conversation, as an introduction and discourse on liberal education. Adler sponsored the next two volumes, "The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon", as a way of emphasizing the unity of the set and, by extension, of Western thought in general. A team of indexers spent months compiling references to such topics as "Man's freedom in relation to the will of God" and "The denial of void or vacuum in favor of a plenum". They grouped the topics into 102 chapters, for which Adler wrote the 102 introductions. Four colors identify each volume by subject area Imaginative Literature, Mathematics and the Natural Sciences, History and Social Science, and Philosophy and Theology.  The volumes contained the following works:
Volume 1[edit]
The Great Conversation
Volume 2[edit]
Syntopicon I: Angel, Animal, Aristocracy, Art, Astronomy, Beauty, Being, Cause, Chance, Change, Citizen, Constitution, Courage, Custom and Convention, Definition, Democracy, Desire, Dialectic, Duty, Education, Element, Emotion, Eternity, Evolution, Experience, Family, Fate, Form, God, Good and Evil, Government, Habit, Happiness, History, Honor, Hypothesis, Idea, Immortality, Induction, Infinity, Judgment, Justice, Knowledge, Labor, Language, Law, Liberty, Life and Death, Logic, and Love
Volume 3[edit]
Syntopicon II: Man, Mathematics, Matter, Mechanics, Medicine, Memory and Imagination, Metaphysics, Mind, Monarchy, Nature, Necessity and Contingency, Oligarchy, One and Many, Opinion, Opposition, Philosophy, Physics, Pleasure and Pain, Poetry, Principle, Progress, Prophecy, Prudence, Punishment, Quality, Quantity, Reasoning, Relation, Religion, Revolution, Rhetoric, Same and Other, Science, Sense, Sign and Symbol, Sin, Slavery, Soul, Space, State, Temperance, Theology, Time, Truth, Tyranny, Universal and Particular, Virtue and Vice, War and Peace, Wealth, Will, Wisdom, and World
Volume 4[edit]
Homer (rendered into English prose by Samuel Butler)
The Iliad
The Odyssey
Volume 5[edit]
Aeschylus (translated into English verse by G.M. Cookson)
The Suppliant Maidens
The Persians
Seven Against Thebes
Prometheus Bound
The Oresteia
Agamemnon
Choephoroe
The Eumenides
Sophocles (translated into English prose by Sir Richard C. Jebb)
The Oedipus Cycle
Oedipus the King
Oedipus at Colonus
Antigone
Ajax
Electra
The Trachiniae
Philoctetes
Euripides (translated into English prose by Edward P. Coleridge)
Rhesus
Medea
Hippolytus
Alcestis
Heracleidae
The Suppliants
The Trojan Women
Ion
Helen
Andromache
Electra
Bacchantes
Hecuba
Heracles Mad
The Phoenician Women
Orestes
Iphigenia in Tauris
Iphigenia in Aulis
Cyclops
Aristophanes (translated into English verse by Benjamin Bickley Rogers)
The Acharnians
The Knights
The Clouds
The Wasps
Peace
The Birds
The Frogs
Lysistrata
Thesmophoriazusae
Ecclesiazousae
Plutus
Volume 6[edit]
Herodotus
The History (translated by George Rawlinson)
Thucydides
History of the Peloponnesian War (translated by Richard Crawley and revised by R. Feetham)
Volume 7[edit]
Plato
The Dialogues (translated by Benjamin Jowett)
Charmides
Lysis
Laches
Protagoras
Euthydemus
Cratylus
Phaedrus
Ion
Symposium
Meno
Euthyphro
Apology
Crito
Phaedo
Gorgias
The Republic
Timaeus
Critias
Parmenides
Theaetetus
Sophist
Statesman
Philebus
Laws
The Seventh Letter (translated by J. Harward)
Volume 8[edit]
Aristotle
Categories
On Interpretation
Prior Analytics
Posterior Analytics
Topics
Sophistical Refutations
Physics
On the Heavens
On Generation and Corruption
Meteorology
Metaphysics
On the Soul
Minor biological works
On Sense and the Sensible
On Memory and Reminisence
On Sleep and Sleeplessness
On Dreams
On Prophesying by Dreams
On Longevity and Shortness of Life
On Youth and Old Age, On Life and Death, On Breathing
Volume 9[edit]
Aristotle
History of Animals
Parts of Animals
On the Motion of Animals
On the Gait of Animals
On the Generation of Animals
Nicomachean Ethics
Politics
The Athenian Constitution
Rhetoric
Poetics
Volume 10[edit]
Hippocrates
Works
The Hippocratic Oath
On Ancient Medicine
On Airs, Water, and Places
The Book of Prognostics
On Regimen in Acute Diseases
Of the Epidemics
On Injuries of the Head
On the Surgery
On Fractures
On the Articulations
Instruments of Reduction
Aphorisms
The Law
The Ulcer
On Fistulae
On Hemorrhoids
On the Sacred Disease
Galen
On the Natural Faculties
Volume 11[edit]
Euclid
The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements
Archimedes
On the Sphere and Cylinder
Measurement of a Circle
On Conoids and Spheroids
On Spirals
On the Equilibrium of Planes
The Sand Reckoner
The Quadrature of the Parabola
On Floating Bodies
Book of Lemmas
The Method Treating of Mechanical Problems
Apollonius of Perga
On Conic Sections
Nicomachus of Gerasa
Introduction to Arithmetic
Volume 12[edit]
Lucretius
On the Nature of Things (translated by H.A.J. Munro)
Epictetus
The Discourses (translated by George Long)
Marcus Aurelius
The Meditations (translated by George Long)
Volume 13[edit]
Virgil (translated into English verse by James Rhoades)
Eclogues
Georgics
Aeneid
Volume 14[edit]
Plutarch
The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans (translated by John Dryden)
Volume 15[edit]
P. Cornelius Tacitus (translated by Alfred John Church and William Jackson Brodribb)
The Annals 
The Histories
Volume 16[edit]
Ptolemy
Almagest, (translated by R. Catesby Taliaferro)
Nicolaus Copernicus
On the Revolutions of Heavenly Spheres (translated by Charles Glenn Wallis)
Johannes Kepler (translated by Charles Glenn Wallis)
Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (Books IV V)
The Harmonies of the World (Book V)
Volume 17[edit]
Plotinus
The Six Enneads (translated by Stephen MacKenna and B. S. Page)
Volume 18[edit]
Augustine of Hippo
The Confessions
The City of God
On Christian Doctrine
Volume 19[edit]
Thomas Aquinas
Summa Theologica (First part complete, selections from second part, translated by the Fathers of the English Dominican Province and revised by Daniel J. Sullivan)
Volume 20[edit]
Thomas Aquinas
Summa Theologica (Selections from second and third parts and supplement, translated by the Fathers of the English Dominican Province and revised by Daniel J. Sullivan)
Volume 21[edit]
Dante Alighieri
Divine Comedy (Translated by Charles Eliot Norton)
Volume 22[edit]
Geoffrey Chaucer
Troilus and Criseyde
The Canterbury Tales
Volume 23[edit]
Niccol  Machiavelli
The Prince
Thomas Hobbes
Leviathan
Volume 24[edit]
Fran ois Rabelais
Gargantua and Pantagruel, but only up to book 4.
Volume 25[edit]
Michel Eyquem de Montaigne
Essays
Volume 26[edit]
William Shakespeare
The First Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Third Part of King Henry the Sixth
The Tragedy of Richard the Third
The Comedy of Errors
Titus Andronicus
The Taming of the Shrew
The Two Gentlemen of Verona
Love's Labour's Lost
Romeo and Juliet
The Tragedy of King Richard the Second
A Midsummer Night's Dream
The Life and Death of King John
The Merchant of Venice
The First Part of King Henry the Fourth
The Second Part of King Henry the Fourth
Much Ado About Nothing
The Life of King Henry the Fifth
Julius Caesar
As You Like It
Volume 27[edit]
William Shakespeare
Twelfth Night; or, What You Will
The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark
The Merry Wives of Windsor
Troilus and Cressida 
All's Well That Ends Well
Measure for Measure
Othello, the Moor of Venice
King Lear
Macbeth
Antony and Cleopatra
Coriolanus
Timon of Athens
Pericles, Prince of Tyre
Cymbeline
The Winter's Tale
The Tempest
The Famous History of the Life of King Henry the Eighth
Sonnets
Volume 28[edit]
William Gilbert
On the Loadstone and Magnetic Bodies
Galileo Galilei
Dialogues Concerning the Two New Sciences
William Harvey
On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals
On the Circulation of Blood
On the Generation of Animals
Volume 29[edit]
Miguel de Cervantes
The History of Don Quixote de la Mancha (translated by John Ormsby)
Volume 30[edit]
Sir Francis Bacon
The Advancement of Learning
Novum Organum
New Atlantis
Volume 31[edit]
Ren  Descartes
Rules for the Direction of the Mind
Discourse on the Method
Meditations on First Philosophy
Objections Against the Meditations and Replies
The Geometry
Benedict de Spinoza
Ethics
Volume 32[edit]
John Milton
English Minor Poems
On the Morning of Christ's Nativity
A Paraphrase on Psalm 114
Psalm 136
The Passion
On Time
Upon the Circumcision
At a Solemn Musick
An Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester
Song on May Morning
On Shakespeare
On the University Carrier
Another on the same
L'Allegro
Il Penseroso
Arcades
Lycida
Comus
On the Death of a Fair Infant
At a Vacation Exercise
The Fifth Ode of Horace
Sonnets (I, and VII XIX)
On the New Forcers of Conscience
On the Lord General Fairfax at the Siege of Colchester
To the Lord General Cromwell
To Sir Henry Vane the Younger
To Mister Cyriack the Skinner upon his Blindness
Psalms (I VIII & LXXX LXXXVIII)
Paradise Lost
Samson Agonistes
Areopagitica
Volume 33[edit]
Blaise Pascal
The Provincial Letters
Pens es
Scientific and mathematical essays
Volume 34[edit]
Sir Isaac Newton
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy
Optics
Christiaan Huygens
Treatise on Light
Volume 35[edit]
John Locke
A Letter Concerning Toleration
Concerning Civil Government, Second Essay
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding
George Berkeley
The Principles of Human Knowledge
David Hume
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
Volume 36[edit]
Jonathan Swift
Gulliver's Travels
Laurence Sterne
The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman
Volume 37[edit]
Henry Fielding
The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling
Volume 38[edit]
Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu
The Spirit of the Laws
Jean Jacques Rousseau
A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality
A Discourse on Political Economy
The Social Contract
Volume 39[edit]
Adam Smith
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
Volume 40[edit]
Edward Gibbon
The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Part 1)
Volume 41[edit]
Edward Gibbon
The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Part 2)
Volume 42[edit]
Immanuel Kant
Critique of Pure Reason
Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals
Critique of Practical Reason
Excerpts from The Metaphysics of Morals
Preface and Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics with a note on Conscience
General Introduction to the Metaphysic of Morals
The Science of Right
The Critique of Judgement
Volume 43[edit]
American State Papers
Declaration of Independence
Articles of Confederation
The Constitution of the United States of America
Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, John Jay
The Federalist
John Stuart Mill
On Liberty
Considerations on Representative Government
Utilitarianism
Volume 44[edit]
James Boswell
The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D.
Volume 45[edit]
Antoine Laurent Lavoisier
Elements of Chemistry
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier
Analytical Theory of Heat
Michael Faraday
Experimental Researches in Electricity
Volume 46[edit]
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
The Philosophy of Right
The Philosophy of History
Volume 47[edit]
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Faust
Volume 48[edit]
Herman Melville
Moby Dick; or, The Whale
Volume 49[edit]
Charles Darwin
The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection
The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex
Volume 50[edit]
Karl Marx
Capital
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
Manifesto of the Communist Party
Volume 51[edit]
Count Leo Tolstoy
War and Peace
Volume 52[edit]
Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky
The Brothers Karamazov
Volume 53[edit]
William James
The Principles of Psychology
Volume 54[edit]
Sigmund Freud
The Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
Selected Papers on Hysteria
The Sexual Enlightenment of Children
The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy
Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis
The Interpretation of Dreams
On Narcissism
Instincts and Their Vicissitudes
Repression
The Unconscious
A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego
The Ego and the Id
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
Thoughts for the Times on War and Death
Civilization and Its Discontents
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
Second edition[edit]
The second edition of Great Books of the Western World, 1990, saw an increase from 54 to 60 volumes, with updated translations.  The six new volumes concerned the 20th century, an era of which the first edition's sole representative was Freud. Some of the other volumes were re-arranged, with even more pre-20th century material added but with four texts deleted: Apollonius' On Conic Sections, Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy, Henry Fielding's Tom Jones, and Joseph Fourier's Analytical Theory of Heat. Adler later expressed regret about dropping On Conic Sections and Tom Jones. Adler also voiced disagreement with the addition of Voltaire's Candide, and said that the Syntopicon should have included references to the Koran. He addressed criticisms that the set was too heavily Western European and did not adequately represent women and minority authors.[11] Four women authors were included, where previously there were none.[12]
The added pre-20th century texts appear in these volumes (some of the accompanying content of these volumes differs from the first edition volume of that number):
Volume 20[edit]
John Calvin
Institutes of the Christian Religion (Selections)
Volume 23[edit]
Erasmus
The Praise of Folly
Volume 31[edit]
Moli re
The School for Wives
The Critique of the School for Wives
Tartuffe
Don Juan
The Miser
The Would-Be Gentleman
The Imaginary Invalid
Jean Racine
B r nice
Ph dre
Volume 34[edit]
Voltaire
Candide
Denis Diderot
Rameau's Nephew
Volume 43[edit]
S ren Kierkegaard
Fear and Trembling
Friedrich Nietzsche
Beyond Good and Evil
Volume 44[edit]
Alexis de Tocqueville
Democracy in America
Volume 45[edit]
Honor  de Balzac
Cousin Bette
Volume 46[edit]
Jane Austen
Emma
George Eliot
Middlemarch
Volume 47[edit]
Charles Dickens
Little Dorrit
Volume 48[edit]
Mark Twain
Huckleberry Finn
Volume 52[edit]
Henrik Ibsen
A Doll's House
The Wild Duck
Hedda Gabler
The Master Builder
The contents of the six volumes of added 20th-century material:
Volume 55[edit]
William James
Pragmatism
Henri Bergson
"An Introduction to Metaphysics"
John Dewey
Experience and Education
Alfred North Whitehead
Science and the Modern World
Bertrand Russell
The Problems of Philosophy
Martin Heidegger
What Is Metaphysics?
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Philosophical Investigations
Karl Barth
The Word of God and the Word of Man
Volume 56[edit]
Henri Poincar 
Science and Hypothesis
Max Planck
Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers
Alfred North Whitehead
An Introduction to Mathematics
Albert Einstein
Relativity: The Special and the General Theory
Arthur Eddington
The Expanding Universe
Niels Bohr
Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (selections)
Discussion with Einstein on Epistemology
G. H. Hardy
A Mathematician's Apology
Werner Heisenberg
Physics and Philosophy
Erwin Schr dinger
What Is Life?
Theodosius Dobzhansky
Genetics and the Origin of Species
C. H. Waddington
The Nature of Life
Volume 57[edit]
Thorstein Veblen
The Theory of the Leisure Class
R. H. Tawney
The Acquisitive Society
John Maynard Keynes
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money
Volume 58[edit]
Sir James George Frazer
The Golden Bough (selections)
Max Weber
Essays in Sociology (selections)
Johan Huizinga
The Autumn of the Middle Ages
Claude L vi-Strauss
Structural Anthropology (selections)
Volume 59[edit]
Henry James
The Beast in the Jungle
George Bernard Shaw
Saint Joan
Joseph Conrad
Heart of Darkness
Anton Chekhov
Uncle Vanya
Luigi Pirandello
Six Characters in Search of an Author
Marcel Proust
Remembrance of Things Past: "Swann in Love"
Willa Cather
A Lost Lady
Thomas Mann
Death in Venice
James Joyce
A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Volume 60[edit]
Virginia Woolf
To the Lighthouse
Franz Kafka
The Metamorphosis
D. H. Lawrence
The Prussian Officer
T. S. Eliot
The Waste Land
Eugene O'Neill
Mourning Becomes Electra
F. Scott Fitzgerald
The Great Gatsby
William Faulkner
A Rose for Emily
Bertolt Brecht
Mother Courage and Her Children
Ernest Hemingway
The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber
George Orwell
Animal Farm
Samuel Beckett
Waiting for Godot
Criticisms and responses[edit]
Authors[edit]
The choice of authors has come under attack, with some dismissing the project as a celebration of European men, ignoring contributions of women and non-European authors.[13][14] The criticism swelled in tandem with the feminist and civil rights movements.[15] Similarly, in his Europe: A History, Norman Davies criticizes the compilation for overrepresenting selected parts of the western world, especially Britain and the U.S., while ignoring the other, particularly Central and Eastern Europe. According to his calculation, in 151 authors included in both editions, there are 49 English or American authors, 27 Frenchmen, 20 Germans, 15 ancient Greeks, 9 ancient Romans, 4 Russians, 4 Scandinavians, 3 Spaniards, 3 Italians, 3 Irishmen, 3 Scots, and 3 Eastern Europeans. Prejudices and preferences, he concludes, are self-evident.
In response, such criticisms have been derided as ad hominem and biased in themselves. The counter-argument maintains that such criticisms discount the importance of books solely because of generic, imprecise and possibly irrelevant characteristics of the books' authors, rather than because of the content of the books themselves.[16]
Works[edit]
Others thought that while the selected authors were worthy, too much emphasis was placed on the complete works of a single author rather than a wider selection of authors and representative works (for instance, all of Shakespeare's plays are included).  The second edition of the set already contained 130 authors and 517 individual works.  The editors point out that the guides to additional reading for each topic in the Syntopicon refer the interested reader to many more authors.[17]
Difficulty[edit]
The scientific and mathematical selections came under criticism for being incomprehensible to the average reader, especially with the absence of any sort of critical apparatus. The second edition did drop two scientific works, by Apollonius and Fourier, in part because of their perceived difficulty for the average reader. Nevertheless, the editors steadfastly maintain that average readers are capable of understanding far more than the critics deem possible. Robert Hutchins stated this view in the introduction to the first edition:
Because the great bulk of mankind have never had the chance to get a liberal education, it cannot be "proved" that they can get it. Neither can it be "proved" that they cannot. The statement of the ideal, however, is of value in indicating the direction that education should take.[18]
Rationale[edit]
Since the great majority of the works were still in print, one critic noted that the company could have saved two million dollars and simply written a list. Dense formatting also did not help readability. Nonetheless, Encyclop dia Britannica's aggressive promotion produced solid sales.[19]
The second edition selected translations that were generally considered an improvement, though the cramped typography remained. Through reading plans and the Syntopicon, the editors attempted to guide readers through the set.[20]
Response to criticisms[edit]
The editors responded that the set contains wide-ranging debates representing many viewpoints on significant issues, not a monolithic school of thought. Mortimer Adler argued in the introduction to the second edition:
Presenting a wide variety and divergence of views or opinions, among which there is likely to be some truth but also much more error, the Syntopicon [and by extension the larger set itself] invites readers to think for themselves and make up their own minds on every topic under consideration.[21]
See also[edit]
Gateway to the Great Books
Syntopicon
Other series of classics:
Ancient Classics for English Readers
Great Illustrated Classics
Harvard Classics
Loeb Classical Library
Modern Library
Oxford World's Classics
Penguin classics (several articles)
Sacred Books of the East
Educational perennialism
References[edit]
^ "Selecting Works for the 1990 Edition of the Great Books of the Western World" Archived 2017-12-08 at the Wayback Machine, Dr. Mortimer Adler
^ Adler, Mortimer Jerome (1988). Reforming Education, Geraldine Van Doren, ed. (New York: MacMillan), p. xx.
^ Adler, Mortimer J. (1977). Philosopher at Large (New York: MacMillan), p. 237.
^ Adler, Mortimer J. (1977). Philosopher at Large (New York: MacMillan), pp. 244-246.
^ Adler, Mortimer (aft. 1957). "The Joy of Learning". The Radical Academy website.
^ Time, March 17, 1952
^ Milton Meyer (1993). "Robert Maynard Hutchins: A Memoir". University of California Press. Retrieved 2007-05-30. This biography of Robert M. Hutchins contains an extensive discussion of the Great Books project.
^ Carrie Golus (2002-07-11). "Special Collections tells the story of a cornerstone of American education". The University of Chicago Chronicle. Retrieved 2007-05-30.
^ Beam, Alex (November 10, 2008). "A great idea at the time." Kirkus Reviews.
^ "Great Books of the Western World - eBooks@Adelaide". Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2012.
^ Venant, Elizabeth (3 December 1990). "A Curmudgeon Stands His Ground". The Los Angeles Times.
^ McDowell, Edwin (October 25, 1990). "'Great Books' Takes In Moderns and Women". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2019.
^ Sabrina Walters (2001-07-01). "Great Books won Adler fame, scorn". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010. Retrieved 2007-07-01.
^ Peter Temes (2001-07-03). "Death of a Great Reader and Philosopher". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 2007-11-04. Retrieved 2007-07-11.
^ Berlau, John (August 2001). "What Happened to the Great Ideas?   Mortimer J. Adler's Great Books programs". Insight Magazine Insight on the News. 17 (32): 16. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Harvard University's Henry Louis Gates blasted the Great Books for showing 'profound disrespect for the intellectual capacities of people of color red, brown or yellow.'
^ Mortimer Adler (September 1997). "Selecting works for the 1990 edition of Great Books of the Western World". Great Books Index. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-05-29. We did not base our selections on an author's nationality, religion, politics, or field of study; nor on an author's race or gender. Great books were not chosen to make up quotas of any kind; there was no "affirmative action" in the process.
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). "Bibliography of Additional Readings". The Syntopicon: II. Great Books of the Western World, vol. 1 2 (2nd ed.). Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. pp. 909 996. ISBN 0-85229-531-6.
^ Robert M. Hutchins (1952). "Chapter VI: Education for All". The Great Conversation. Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. p. 44.
^ Macdonald, Dwight. "The Book-of-the-Millennium Club". 29 November 1952 with later appendix. The New Yorker. Retrieved 2007-05-29. I also wonder how many of the over 100,000 customers who have by now caved in under the pressure of Mr. Harden and his banner-bearing colleagues are doing much browsing in these upland pastures?
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). The Great Conversation (2nd ed.). Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. pp. 33 34 for discussion of new translations, pp. 74 98 for reading plans and guides. ISBN 0-85229-531-6.
^ Mortimer J. Adler (1990). "Section 1: The Great Books and the Great Ideas". The Great Conversation (2nd ed.). Encyclop dia Britannica, Inc. p. 27. ISBN 0-85229-531-6.
External links[edit]
Center for the Study of the Great Ideas Archived 2021-02-14 at the Wayback Machine Mortimer Adler web pages with extensive discussion of the Great Books
Greater Books   a site documenting lists of "great books," classics, canons, including the Great Books of the Western World
"Encyclop dia Britannica - Great Books Of The Western World". Internet Archive. (54 volumes.)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Books_of_the_Western_World&oldid=1144289284"