Surprise attack by the Japanese Navy on the US Pacific Fleet in Hawaii
"December 7, 1941" redirects here. For the date, see December 1941  December 7, 1941 (Sunday).
Attack on Pearl HarborPart of the Asiatic-Pacific Theater of World War IIPhotograph of Battleship Row taken from a Japanese plane at the beginning of the attack. The explosion in the center is a torpedo strike on USS West Virginia. Two attacking Japanese planes can be seen: one over USS Neosho and one over the Naval Yard.DateDecember 7, 1941; 81 years ago (1941-12-07)LocationOahu, Territory of Hawaii, USResult
Japanese victory
Precipitated the entry of the United States into World War II on the side of the Allies
See other consequencesBelligerents
 United States
 Empire of JapanCommanders and leaders
Husband E. Kimmel
Walter Short
Isoroku Yamamoto
Ch ichi Nagumo
Mitsuo Fuchida
Units involved
 US Pacific Fleet
 1st Air Fleet
Strength
8 battleships
8 cruisers
30 destroyers
4 submarines
3 USCG cutters[nb 1]
47 other ships[3]
390 aircraft
6 aircraft carriers
2 battleships
2 heavy cruisers
1 light cruiser
9 destroyers
8 tankers
23 fleet submarines
5 midget submarines
414 aircraft (353 took part in the raid)
Casualties and losses
4 battleships sunk
4 battleships damaged
1 ex-battleship sunk
1 harbor tug sunk
3 light cruisers damaged[nb 2]
3 destroyers damaged
3 other ships damaged
188 aircraft destroyed
159 aircraft damaged
109 Marines killed
208 soldiers killed[5]
2,335 total killed
1,143 wounded
4 midget submarines sunk
1 midget submarine grounded
29 aircraft destroyed
74 aircraft damaged
64 killed
1 sailor captured[6]
Civilian casualties
68 killed[7][8]
35 wounded[9]
3 aircraft shot down
class=notpageimage| Location within HawaiiShow map of HawaiiAttack on Pearl Harbor (Pacific Ocean)Show map of Pacific Ocean
vteHawaiian Islands Campaign
Pearl Harbor
Niihau
1st Midway
Johnston and Palmyra
2nd Midway
Operation K
3rd Midway
vteJapanese offensives, 1940 19421940
Manchukuo
Chongqing
South Guangxi
Zaoyang Yichang
French Indochina
Kaimingjie
Central Hubei
1941
Panjiayu
South Henan
Western Hubei
Shanggao
South Shanxi
2nd Changsha
Malaya
Pearl Harbor
Thailand
Hong Kong
Philippines
Guam
Wake
Sand Island
Niihau
Gilbert Islands
Indian Ocean
Borneo
Dutch East Indies
3rd Changsha
1942
Timor
Burma
New Guinea
Qantas Short Empire shootdown
Singapore
Darwin
Ellwood
Broome
KNILM Douglas DC-3 shootdown
Operation K
Andaman and Nicobar
Christmas Island
Ceylon
Solomons
Tulagi
Coral Sea
Nauru and Ocean Islands
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Madagascar
Aleutian Islands
Midway
Sydney
Newcastle
Fort Stevens
Dureenbee
Mount Emily
vtePacific War
Central Pacific
Pearl Harbor
Marshalls Gilberts raids
K
Doolittle Raid
Midway
Gilberts and Marshalls
Marianas and Palau
Volcano and Ryukyu
Truk
Ocean Island
Indian Ocean (1941 1945)
Japanese merchant raids
Andaman Islands
Homfreyganj massacre
Christmas Island
1st Indian Ocean
Ceylon
 Bay of Bengal
2nd Indian Ocean
Southeast Asia
Indochina (1940)
Franco-Thai War
Thailand
Malaya
Hong Kong
Singapore
Indochina (1945)
Malacca Strait
Jurist
Tiderace
Zipper
Strategic bombing (1944 45)
Burma and India
Burma (1941 42)
Burma (1942 43)
Burma and India (1944)
Burma (1944 45)
Southwest Pacific
Dutch East Indies (1941 42)
Philippines (1941 42)
RY
Solomon Islands
Coral Sea
Timor
Australia
New Guinea
New Britain
Philippines (1944 45)
Borneo (1945)
North America
Ellwood
Aleutian Islands
Estevan Point Lighthouse
Fort Stevens
Lookout Air Raids
Fire balloon bombs
Project Hula
PX
Japan
Air raids
Tokyo
Yokosuka
Kure
Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Mariana Islands
Volcano and Ryukyu Islands
Starvation
Naval bombardments
Sagami Bay
South Sakhalin
Kuril Islands
Shumshu
Downfall
Japanese surrender
Manchuria and Northern Korea
Kantokuen
Manchuria (1945)
Mutanchiang
Chongjin
Second Sino-Japanese War
The attack on Pearl Harbor[nb 3][10] was a surprise military strike by the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service upon the United States against the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor in Honolulu, Territory of Hawaii, just before 8:00 a.m. (local time) on Sunday, December 7, 1941. The United States was a neutral country at the time; the attack led to its formal entry into World War II the next day. The Japanese military leadership referred to the attack as the Hawaii Operation and Operation AI,[11][nb 4] and as Operation Z during its planning.[13]
The attack was preceded by months of negotiations between the U.S. and Japan over the future of the Pacific. Japanese demands included that the U.S. end its sanctions against Japan, cease aiding China in the Second Sino-Japanese war, and allow Japan to access the resources of the Dutch East Indies. Anticipating a negative response from the US, Japan sent out its naval attack groups in November 1941 just prior to receiving the Hull note the U.S. demand that Japan withdraw from China and Indochina.[14]
Japan intended the attack as a preventive action. Its aim was to prevent the United States Pacific Fleet from interfering with its planned military actions in Southeast Asia against overseas territories of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and those of the United States. Over the course of seven hours there were coordinated Japanese attacks on the U.S.-held Philippines, Guam, and Wake Island and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong.[15]
The attack commenced at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time (6:18 p.m. GMT).[nb 5][16] The base was attacked by 353[17] Imperial Japanese aircraft (including fighters, level and dive bombers, and torpedo bombers) in two waves, launched from six aircraft carriers.[17] Of the eight U.S. Navy battleships present, all were damaged, with four sunk. All but USS Arizona were later raised, and six were returned to service and went on to fight in the war. The Japanese also sank or damaged three cruisers, three destroyers, an anti-aircraft training ship,[nb 6] and one minelayer. More than 180 US aircraft were destroyed.[19] A total of 2,403 Americans were killed and 1,178 others were wounded.[20] Important base installations such as the power station, dry dock, shipyard, maintenance, and fuel and torpedo storage facilities, as well as the submarine piers and headquarters building (also home of the intelligence section) were not attacked. Japanese losses were light: 29 aircraft and five midget submarines lost, and 64 servicemen killed. Kazuo Sakamaki, the commanding officer of one of the submarines, was captured.[21]
Japan announced declarations of war on the United States and the British Empire later that day (December 8 in Tokyo), but the declarations were not delivered until the following day. The British government declared war on Japan immediately after learning that their territory had also been attacked, while the following day (December 8) the United States Congress declared war on Japan. On December 11, though they had no formal obligation to do so under the Tripartite Pact with Japan, Germany and Italy each declared war on the U.S., which responded with a declaration of war against Germany and Italy. There were numerous historical precedents for the unannounced military action by Japan, but the lack of any formal warning (required by part III of the Hague Convention of 1907), particularly while negotiations were still apparently ongoing, led President Franklin D. Roosevelt to proclaim December 7, 1941, "a date which will live in infamy". Because the attack happened without a declaration of war and without explicit warning, the attack on Pearl Harbor was later judged in the Tokyo Trials to be a war crime.[22][23]
Background[edit]
Main article: Events leading to the attack on Pearl Harbor
Diplomacy[edit]
War between Japan and the United States had been a possibility that each nation had been aware of, and planned for, since the 1920s. Japan had been wary of American territorial and military expansion in the Pacific and Asia since the late 1890s, followed by the annexation of islands, such as Hawaii and the Philippines, which they felt were close to or within their sphere of influence.[24][page needed][25][page needed][26][27]
Although Japan had begun to take a hostile policy against the United States after the rejection of the Racial Equality Proposal,[28] the relationship between the two countries was cordial enough that they remained trading partners.[29][30] Tensions did not seriously grow until Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Over the next decade, Japan expanded into China, leading to the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937. Japan spent considerable effort trying to isolate China and endeavored to secure enough independent resources to attain victory on the mainland. The "Southern Operation" was designed to assist these efforts.[25][page needed][31][page needed]
 Pearl Harbor on October 30, 1941, looking southwest. Ford Island is at its center.
Starting in December 1937, events such as the Japanese attack on USS Panay, the Allison incident, and the Nanking Massacre swung Western public opinion sharply against Japan. The US unsuccessfully proposed a joint action with the British to blockade Japan.[32] In 1938, following an appeal by President Roosevelt, US companies stopped providing Japan with implements of war.[33]
In 1940 Japan invaded French Indochina, attempting to stymie the flow of supplies reaching China. The United States halted shipments of airplanes, parts, machine tools, and aviation gasoline to Japan, which the latter perceived as an unfriendly act.[nb 7] The United States did not stop oil exports, however, partly because of the prevailing sentiment in Washington that given Japanese dependence on American oil, such an action was likely to be considered an extreme provocation.[24][page needed][35]
In mid-1940 President Franklin D. Roosevelt moved the Pacific Fleet from San Diego to Hawaii.[36] He also ordered a military buildup in the Philippines, taking both actions in the hope of discouraging Japanese aggression in the Far East. Because the Japanese high command was (mistakenly) certain any attack on the United Kingdom's Southeast Asian colonies, including Singapore,[37] would bring the US into the war, a devastating preventive strike appeared to be the only way to prevent American naval interference.[38][page needed] An invasion of the Philippines was also considered necessary by Japanese war planners. The US War Plan Orange had envisioned defending the Philippines with an elite force of 40,000 men; this option was never implemented due to opposition from Douglas MacArthur, who felt he would need a force ten times that size.[citation needed] By 1941, U.S. planners expected to abandon the Philippines at the outbreak of war. Late that year, Admiral Thomas C. Hart, commander of the Asiatic Fleet, was given orders to that effect.[39]
The U.S. finally ceased oil exports to Japan in July 1941, following the seizure of French Indochina after the Fall of France, in part because of new American restrictions on domestic oil consumption.[40] Because of this decision, Japan proceeded with plans to take the oil-rich Dutch East Indies.[nb 8] On August 17, Roosevelt warned Japan that America was prepared to take opposing steps if "neighboring countries" were attacked.[42][page needed] The Japanese were faced with a dilemma: either withdraw from China and lose face or seize new sources of raw materials in the resource-rich European colonies of Southeast Asia.[citation needed]
Japan and the U.S. engaged in negotiations during 1941, attempting to improve relations. In the course of these negotiations, Japan offered to withdraw from most of China and Indochina after making peace with the Nationalist government. It also proposed to adopt an independent interpretation of the Tripartite Pact and to refrain from trade discrimination, provided all other nations reciprocated. Washington rejected these proposals. Japanese Prime Minister Konoye then offered to meet with Roosevelt, but Roosevelt insisted on reaching an agreement before any meeting.[42][page needed][43] The US ambassador to Japan repeatedly urged Roosevelt to accept the meeting, warning that it was the only way to preserve the conciliatory Konoye government and peace in the Pacific.[44] However, his recommendation was not acted upon. The Konoye government collapsed the following month when the Japanese military rejected a withdrawal of all troops from China.[45]
Japan's final proposal, delivered on November 20, offered to withdraw from southern Indochina and to refrain from attacks in Southeast Asia, so long as the United States, United Kingdom, and Netherlands supplied one million U.S. gallons (3.8 million liters) of aviation fuel, lifted their sanctions against Japan, and ceased aid to China.[46][45] The American counter-proposal of November 26 (November 27 in Japan), the Hull note, required Japan completely evacuate China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with Pacific powers. On November 26 in Japan, the day before the note's delivery, the Japanese task force left port for Pearl Harbor.[citation needed]
The Japanese intended the attack as a preventive action to keep the United States Pacific Fleet from interfering with its planned military actions in Southeast Asia against overseas territories of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and the United States. Over the course of seven hours there were coordinated Japanese attacks on the US-held Philippines, Guam, and Wake Island and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong.[15] Additionally, from the Japanese viewpoint, it was seen as a preemptive strike "before the oil gauge ran empty."[24][page needed]
Military planning[edit]
Preliminary planning for an attack on Pearl Harbor to protect the move into the "Southern Resource Area" (the Japanese term for the Dutch East Indies and Southeast Asia generally) had begun very early in 1941 under the auspices of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, then commanding Japan's Combined Fleet.[47] He won assent to formal planning and training for an attack from the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff only after much contention with Naval Headquarters, including a threat to resign his command.[48] Full-scale planning was underway by early spring 1941, primarily by Rear Admiral Ry nosuke Kusaka, with assistance from Captain Minoru Genda and Yamamoto's Deputy Chief of Staff, Captain Kameto Kuroshima.[49] The planners studied the 1940 British air attack on the Italian fleet at Taranto intensively.[nb 9][nb 10]
Over the next several months, pilots were trained, equipment was adapted, and intelligence was collected. Despite these preparations, Emperor Hirohito did not approve the attack plan until November 5, after the third of four Imperial Conferences called to consider the matter.[52] Final authorization was not given by the emperor until December 1, after a majority of Japanese leaders advised him the "Hull Note" would "destroy the fruits of the China incident, endanger Manchukuo and undermine Japanese control of Korea".[53]
By late 1941, many observers believed that hostilities between the US and Japan were imminent. A Gallup poll just before the attack on Pearl Harbor found that 52% of Americans expected war with Japan, 27% did not, and 21% had no opinion.[54] While US Pacific bases and facilities had been placed on alert on many occasions, US officials doubted Pearl Harbor would be the first target; instead, they expected the Philippines would be attacked first. This presumption was due to the threat that the air bases throughout the country and the naval base at Manila posed to sea lanes, as well as to the shipment of supplies to Japan from territory to the south.[nb 11] They also incorrectly believed that Japan was not capable of mounting more than one major naval operation at a time.[38][page needed]
Objectives[edit]
The Japanese attack had several major aims. First, it intended to destroy important American fleet units, thereby preventing the Pacific Fleet from interfering with the Japanese conquest of the Dutch East Indies and Malaya and enabling Japan to conquer Southeast Asia without interference. Second, it was hoped to buy time for Japan to consolidate its position and increase its naval strength before shipbuilding authorized by the 1940 Vinson-Walsh Act erased any chance of victory.[56][57] Third, to deliver a blow to America's ability to mobilize its forces in the Pacific, battleships were chosen as the main targets, since they were the prestige ships of any navy at the time.[56] Finally, it was hoped that the attack would undermine American morale such that the U.S. government would drop its demands contrary to Japanese interests and would seek a compromise peace with Japan.[58][page needed][59][page needed]
Striking the Pacific Fleet at anchor in Pearl Harbor carried two distinct disadvantages: the targeted ships would be in very shallow water, so it would be relatively easy to salvage and possibly repair them, and most of the crews would survive the attack since many would be on shore leave or would be rescued from the harbor. A further important disadvantage was the absence from Pearl Harbor of all three of the U.S. Pacific Fleet's aircraft carriers (Enterprise, Lexington, and Saratoga). Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) top command was attached to Admiral Mahan's "decisive battle" doctrine, especially that of destroying the maximum number of battleships. Despite these concerns, Yamamoto decided to press ahead.[38][page needed][60][page needed][61][page needed]
Japanese confidence in their ability to win a short war also meant other targets in the harbor, especially the navy yard, oil tank farms, and submarine base, were ignored since by their thinking the war would be over before the influence of these facilities would be felt.[60][page needed]
 Route followed by the Japanese fleet to Pearl Harbor and back
 An Imperial Japanese Navy Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter on the aircraft carrier Akagi
Approach and attack[edit]
See also: Order of battle of the Attack on Pearl Harbor
On November 26, 1941, a Japanese task force (the Striking Force) of six aircraft carriers  Akagi, Kaga, S ry , Hiry , Sh kaku, and Zuikaku  departed Hittokapu Bay on Kasatka (now Iterup) Island in the Kuril Islands, en route to a position northwest of Hawaii, intending to launch its 408 aircraft to attack Pearl Harbor: 360 for the two attack waves and 48 on defensive combat air patrol (CAP), including 9 fighters from the first wave.
The first wave was to be the primary attack, while the second wave was to attack carriers as its first objective and cruisers as its second, with battleships as the third target.[62] The first wave carried most of the weapons to attack capital ships, mainly specially adapted Type 91 aerial torpedoes which were designed with an anti-roll mechanism and a rudder extension that let them operate in shallow water.[63] The aircrews were ordered to select the highest value targets (battleships and aircraft carriers) or, if these were not present, any other high-value ships (cruisers and destroyers). First-wave dive bombers were to attack ground targets. Fighters were ordered to strafe and destroy as many parked aircraft as possible to ensure they did not get into the air to intercept the bombers, especially in the first wave. When the fighters' fuel got low they were to refuel at the aircraft carriers and return to combat. Fighters were to serve CAP duties where needed, especially over US airfields.[citation needed]
Before the attack commenced, the Imperial Japanese Navy launched reconnaissance floatplanes from cruisers Chikuma and Tone, one to scout over Oahu and the other over Lahaina Roads, Maui, respectively, with orders to report on US fleet composition and location.[citation needed] Reconnaissance aircraft flights risked alerting the US,[64] and were not necessary. US fleet composition and preparedness information in Pearl Harbor were already known due to the reports of the Japanese spy Takeo Yoshikawa. A report of the absence of the U.S. fleet in Lahaina anchorage off Maui was received from the Tone's floatplane and fleet submarine I-72.[65] Another four scout planes patrolled the area between the Japanese carrier force (the Kid  Butai) and Niihau, to detect any counterattack.[66]
Submarines[edit]
Fleet submarines I-16, I-18, I-20, I-22, and I-24 each embarked a Type A midget submarine for transport to the waters off Oahu.[67] The five I-boats left Kure Naval District on November 25, 1941.[67] On December 6, they came to within 10 nmi (19 km; 12 mi) of the mouth of Pearl Harbor[68] and launched their midget subs at about 01:00 local time on December 7.[69] At 03:42 Hawaiian Time, the minesweeper Condor spotted a midget submarine periscope southwest of the Pearl Harbor entrance buoy and alerted the destroyer Ward.[70][71] The midget may have entered Pearl Harbor. However, Ward sank another midget submarine at 06:37[71][nb 12] in the first American shots in the Pacific Theater. A midget submarine on the north side of Ford Island missed the seaplane tender Curtiss with her first torpedo and missed the attacking destroyer Monaghan with her other one before being sunk by Monaghan at 08:43.[71]
A third midget submarine, Ha-19, grounded twice, once outside the harbor entrance and again on the east side of Oahu, where it was captured on December 8.[73] Ensign Kazuo Sakamaki swam ashore and was captured by Hawaii National Guard Corporal David Akui, becoming the first Japanese prisoner of war.[nb 13] A fourth had been damaged by a depth charge attack and was abandoned by its crew before it could fire its torpedoes.[74] It was found outside the harbor in 1960. Japanese forces received a radio message from a midget submarine at 00:41 on December 8 claiming damage to one or more large warships inside Pearl Harbor.[75]
In 1992, 2000, and 2001 Hawaii Undersea Research Laboratory's submersibles found the wreck of the fifth midget submarine lying in three parts outside Pearl Harbor. The wreck was in the debris field where much surplus U.S. equipment was dumped after the war, including vehicles and landing craft. Both of its torpedoes were missing. This correlates with reports of two torpedoes fired at the light cruiser St. Louis at 10:04 at the entrance of Pearl Harbor, and a possible torpedo fired at destroyer Helm at 08:21.[76] There is dispute over this official chain of events though. The "torpedo" that St. Louis saw was also reportedly a porpoising minesweeping float being towed by the destroyer Boggs.[77] A photo taken by a Japanese naval aviator of Battleship Row during the Attack on Pearl Harbor was declassified in the 1990s and publicized in the 2000s to the public. According to numerous historians and naval architects this photo shows that the fifth midget submarine appeared to have fired a torpedo at West Virginia and another one at Oklahoma. These torpedoes were twice the size of the aerial torpedoes so it was possible that both torpedoes fired by the unaccounted for fifth submarine heavily contributed to the sinkings of both ships and especially helped to capsize Oklahoma because Oklahoma was the only battleship that day to suffer catastrophic damage to her belt armor at the waterline from a torpedo. Admiral Chester Nimitz in a report to Congress confirmed that one midget submarine's torpedo (possibly from the other midget submarine that fired torpedoes but failed to hit a target) which was fired but didn't explode was recovered in Pearl Harbor and it was much larger than the aerial torpedoes.[78][79]
[80]
Japanese declaration of war[edit]
See also: Japanese war crimes
The attack took place before any formal declaration of war was made by Japan, but this was not Admiral Yamamoto's intention. He originally stipulated that the attack should not commence until thirty minutes after Japan had informed the United States that peace negotiations were at an end.[81] However, the attack began before the notice could be delivered. Tokyo transmitted the 5000-word notification (commonly called the "14-Part Message") in two blocks to the Japanese Embassy in Washington. Transcribing the message took too long for the Japanese ambassador to deliver it at 1 pm Washington time, as ordered; in the event, it was not presented until more than an hour after the attack began. (In fact, US code breakers had already deciphered and translated most of the message hours before he was scheduled to deliver it.)[82][83]: pp.2ff  The final part is sometimes described as a declaration of war. While it was viewed by a number of senior U.S government and military officials as a very strong indicator negotiations were likely to be terminated[84] and that war might break out at any moment,[85] it neither declared war nor severed diplomatic relations. A declaration of war was printed on the front page of Japan's newspapers in the evening edition of December 8 (late December 7 in the US),[86] but not delivered to the US government until the day after the attack.
For decades, conventional wisdom held that Japan attacked without first formally breaking diplomatic relations only because of accidents and bumbling that delayed the delivery of a document hinting at war to Washington.[87] In 1999, however, Takeo Iguchi, a professor of law and international relations at International Christian University in Tokyo, discovered documents that pointed to a vigorous debate inside the government over how, and indeed whether, to notify Washington of Japan's intention to break off negotiations and start a war, including a December 7 entry in the war diary saying, "[O]ur deceptive diplomacy is steadily proceeding toward success." Of this, Iguchi said, "The diary shows that the army and navy did not want to give any proper declaration of war, or indeed prior notice even of the termination of negotiations ... and they clearly prevailed."[88][89]
In any event, even if the Japanese had decoded and delivered the 14-Part Message before the beginning of the attack, it would not have constituted either a formal break of diplomatic relations or a declaration of war.[90] The final two paragraphs of the message read:[91]
 Thus the earnest hope of the Japanese Government to adjust Japanese-American relations and to preserve and promote the peace of the Pacific through cooperation with the American Government has finally been lost.The Japanese Government regrets to have to notify hereby the American Government that in view of the attitude of the American Government it cannot but consider that it is impossible to reach an agreement through further negotiations.
U.S. Naval intelligence officers were alarmed by the unusual timing for delivering the message   1 pm on a Sunday, which was 7:30 am in Hawaii   and attempted to alert Pearl Harbor. But due to communication problems the warning was not delivered before the attack.[83]: Ch. 1 
First wave composition[edit]
The first attack wave of 183 planes was launched north of Oahu, led by Commander Mitsuo Fuchida.[92] Six planes failed to launch due to technical difficulties.[66] The first attack included three groups of planes:[nb 14]
 The Japanese attacked in two waves. The first wave was detected by United States Army radar at 136 nautical miles (252 km), but was misidentified as United States Army Air Forces bombers arriving from the American mainland.Top: A: Ford Island NAS. B: Hickam Field. C: Bellows Field. D: Wheeler Field. E: Kaneohe NAS. F: Ewa MCAS. R-1: Opana Radar Station. R-2: Kawailoa RS. R-3: Kaaawa RS. G: Kahuku. H: Haleiwa. I: Wahiawa. J: Kaneohe. K: Honolulu. 0: B-17s from mainland. 1: First strike group. 1-1: Level bombers. 1 2: Torpedo bombers. 1 3: Dive bombers. 2: Second strike group. 2-1: Level bombers. 2-1F: Fighters. 2-2: Dive bombers.Bottom: A: Wake Island. B: Midway Islands. C: Johnston Island. D: Hawaii. D-1: Oahu. 1: Lexington. 2: Enterprise. 3: First Air Fleet.
1st Group (targets: battleships and aircraft carriers)[94]
49 Nakajima B5N Kate bombers armed with 800 kg (1760 lb) armor-piercing bombs, organized in four sections (one failed to launch)
40 B5N bombers armed with Type 91 torpedoes, also in four sections
2nd Group   (targets: Ford Island and Wheeler Field)
51 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general-purpose bombs (3 failed to launch)
3rd Group   (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)
43 Mitsubishi A6M "Zero" fighters for air control and strafing[93] (2 failed to launch)
As the first wave approached Oahu, it was detected by the U.S. Army SCR-270 radar at Opana Point near the island's northern tip. This post had been in training mode for months, but was not yet operational.[95] The operators, Privates George Elliot Jr. and Joseph Lockard, reported a target to Private Joseph P. McDonald, a private stationed at Fort Shafter's Intercept Center near Pearl Harbor.[96][97][98] But Lieutenant Kermit A. Tyler, a newly assigned officer at the thinly manned Intercept Center, presumed it was the scheduled arrival of six B-17 bombers from California. The Japanese planes were approaching from a direction very close (only a few degrees difference) to the bombers,[99] and while the operators had never seen a formation as large on radar, they neglected to tell Tyler of its size.[100] Tyler, for security reasons, could not tell the operators of the six B-17s that were due (even though it was widely known).[100]
As the first wave of planes approached Oahu, they encountered and shot down several U.S. aircraft. At least one of these radioed a somewhat incoherent warning. Other warnings from ships off the harbor entrance were still being processed or awaiting confirmation when the Japanese air assault began at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time[16] (3:18 a.m. December 8 Japanese Standard Time, as kept by ships of the Kido Butai),[101] with the attack on Kaneohe. A total of 353[17] Japanese planes reached Oahu in two waves. Slow, vulnerable torpedo bombers led the first wave, exploiting the first moments of surprise to attack the most important ships present (the battleships), while dive bombers attacked U.S. air bases across Oahu, starting with Hickam Field, the largest, and Wheeler Field, the main U.S. Army Air Forces fighter base. The 171 planes in the second wave attacked the Army Air Forces' Bellows Field near Kaneohe on the windward side of the island and Ford Island. The only aerial opposition came from a handful of P-36 Hawks, P-40 Warhawks, and some SBD Dauntless dive bombers from the carrier Enterprise.[citation needed][nb 15]
  City  Army base  Navy baseAttacked targets: 1: USS California. 2: USS Maryland. 3: USS Oklahoma. 4: USS Tennessee. 5: USS West Virginia. 6: USS Arizona. 7: USS Nevada. 8: USS Pennsylvania. 9: Ford Island NAS. 10: Hickam field.Ignored infrastructure targets: A: Oil storage tanks. B: CINCPAC headquarters building. C: Submarine base. D: Navy Yard.
In the first-wave attack, about eight of the forty-nine 800 kg (1760 lb) armor-piercing bombs dropped hit their intended battleship targets. At least two of those bombs broke up on impact, another detonated before penetrating an unarmored deck, and one was a dud. Thirteen of the forty torpedoes hit battleships, and four torpedoes hit other ships.[102] Men aboard US ships awoke to the sounds of alarms, bombs exploding, and gunfire, prompting bleary-eyed men to dress as they ran to General Quarters stations. (The famous message, "Air raid Pearl Harbor. This is not drill.",[nb 16] was sent from the headquarters of Patrol Wing Two, the first senior Hawaiian command to respond.) The defenders were very unprepared. Ammunition lockers were locked, aircraft parked wingtip to wingtip in the open to prevent sabotage,[103] guns unmanned (none of the Navy's 5"/38s, only a quarter of its machine guns, and only four of 31 Army batteries got in action).[103] Despite this low alert status, many American military personnel responded effectively during the attack.[nb 17] Ensign Joseph Taussig Jr., aboard Nevada, commanded the ship's antiaircraft guns and was severely wounded but continued to be on post. Lieutenant Commander F. J. Thomas commanded Nevada in the captain's absence and got her underway until the ship was grounded at 9:10 a.m.[105] One of the destroyers, Aylwin, got underway with only four officers aboard, all ensigns, none with more than a year's sea duty; she operated at sea for 36 hours before her commanding officer managed to get back aboard.[106] Captain Mervyn Bennion, commanding West Virginia, led his men until he was cut down by fragments from a bomb which hit Tennessee, moored alongside.[107]
Second wave composition[edit]
The second planned wave consisted of 171 planes: 54 B5Ns, 81 D3As, and 36 A6Ms, commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Shigekazu Shimazaki.[93] Four planes failed to launch because of technical difficulties.[66] This wave and its targets also comprised three groups of planes:[93]
1st Group   54 B5Ns armed with 550 lb (249 kg) and 132 lb (60 kg) general-purpose bombs[94]
27 B5Ns   aircraft and hangars on Kaneohe, Ford Island, and Barbers Point
27 B5Ns   hangars and aircraft on Hickam Field
2nd Group (targets: aircraft carriers and cruisers)
78 D3As armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general-purpose bombs, in four sections (3 aborted)
3rd Group   (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)
35 A6Ms for defense and strafing (1 aborted)
The second wave was divided into three groups. One was tasked to attack K ne ohe, the rest Pearl Harbor proper. The separate sections arrived at the attack point almost simultaneously from several directions.
American casualties and damage[edit]
Arizona during the attackNevada, on fire and down at the bow, attempting to leave the harbor before being deliberately beachedWest Virginia was sunk by six torpedoes and two bombs during the attack.A destroyed Vindicator at Ewa field, the victim of one of the smaller attacks on the approach to Pearl Harbor
Ninety minutes after it began, the attack was over. 2,008 sailors were killed and 710 others wounded; 218 soldiers and airmen (who were part of the Army prior to the independent United States Air Force in 1947) were killed and 364 wounded; 109 Marines were killed and 69 wounded; and 68 civilians were killed and 35 wounded. In total, 2,403 Americans were killed, and 1,143 were wounded.[108] Eighteen ships were sunk or run aground, including five battleships.[9][109] All of the Americans killed or wounded during the attack were legally non-combatants, given that there was no state of war when the attack occurred.[22][23][110]
Of the American fatalities, nearly half were due to the explosion of Arizona's forward magazine after it was hit by a modified 16-inch (410 mm) shell.[nb 18] Author Craig Nelson wrote that the vast majority of the U.S. sailors killed at Pearl Harbor were junior enlisted personnel. "The officers of the Navy all lived in houses and the junior people were the ones on the boats, so pretty much all of the people who died in the direct line of the attack were very junior people", Nelson said. "So everyone is about 17 or 18 whose story is told there."[111]
Among the notable civilian casualties were nine Honolulu Fire Department (HFD) firefighters who responded to Hickam Field during the bombing in Honolulu, becoming the only fire department members on American soil to be attacked by a foreign power in history. Fireman Harry Tuck Lee Pang of Engine 6 was killed near the hangars by machine-gun fire from a Japanese plane. Captains Thomas Macy and John Carreira of Engine 4 and Engine 1 respectively died while battling flames inside the hangar after a Japanese bomb crashed through the roof. An additional six firefighters were wounded from Japanese shrapnel. The wounded later received Purple Hearts (originally reserved for service members wounded by enemy action while partaking in armed conflicts) for their peacetime actions that day on June 13, 1944; the three firefighters killed did not receive theirs until December 7, 1984, at the 43rd anniversary of the attack. This made the nine men the only non-military firefighters to receive such an award in US history.[112]
 This message denotes the first US ship, St. Louis to clear Pearl Harbor. (National Archives and Records Administration) (Note that this is in answer to question "Is channel clear?" and faint writing at bottom concerning the answer being held until St. Louis had successfully cleared.)
Already damaged by a torpedo and on fire amidships, Nevada attempted to exit the harbor. She was targeted by many Japanese bombers as she got under way and sustained more hits from 250 lb (113 kg) bombs, which started further fires. She was deliberately beached to avoid blocking the harbor entrance. California was hit by two bombs and two torpedoes. The crew might have kept her afloat, but were ordered to abandon ship just as they were raising power for the pumps. Burning oil from Arizona and West Virginia drifted down on her and probably made the situation look worse than it was. The disarmed target ship Utah was holed twice by torpedoes. West Virginia was hit by seven torpedoes, the seventh tearing away her rudder. Oklahoma was hit by four torpedoes, the last two above her belt armor, which caused her to capsize. Maryland was hit by two of the converted 16" shells, but neither caused serious damage.
Although the Japanese concentrated on battleships (the largest vessels present), they did not ignore other targets. The light cruiser Helena was torpedoed, and the concussion from the blast capsized the neighboring minelayer Oglala. Two destroyers in dry dock, Cassin and Downes, were destroyed when bombs penetrated their fuel bunkers. The leaking fuel caught fire; flooding the dry dock in an effort to fight fire made the burning oil rise, and both were burned out. Cassin slipped from her keel blocks and rolled against Downes. The light cruiser Raleigh was holed by a torpedo. The light cruiser Honolulu was damaged but remained in service. The repair vessel Vestal, moored alongside Arizona, was heavily damaged and beached. The seaplane tender Curtiss was also damaged. The destroyer Shaw was badly damaged when two bombs penetrated her forward magazine.[113]
Of the 402 American aircraft in Hawaii, 188 were destroyed and 159 damaged, 155 of them on the ground.[17] Almost none were actually ready to take off to defend the base. Eight Army Air Forces pilots managed to get airborne during the attack,[114] and six were credited with downing at least one Japanese aircraft during the attack: 1st Lieutenant Lewis M. Sanders, 2nd Lieutenant Philip M. Rasmussen, 2nd Lieutenant Kenneth M. Taylor, 2nd Lieutenant George S. Welch, 2nd Lieutenant Harry W. Brown, and 2nd Lieutenant Gordon H. Sterling Jr.[115][116] Of 33 PBYs in Hawaii, 30 were destroyed and three on patrol at the time of the attack returned undamaged. Friendly fire brought down some U.S. planes on top of that, including four from an inbound flight from Enterprise.[117]
At the time of the attack, nine civilian aircraft were flying in the vicinity of Pearl Harbor. Of these, three were shot down.[118]
Japanese losses[edit]
Fifty-five Japanese airmen and nine submariners were killed in the attack, and one, Kazuo Sakamaki, was captured. Of Japan's 414[93] available planes, 350 took part in the raid in which twenty-nine were lost; nine in the first wave (three fighters, one dive bomber, and five torpedo bombers) and twenty in the second wave (six fighters and fourteen dive bombers)[119][nb 19] with another 74 damaged by antiaircraft fire from the ground.[citation needed]
Possible third wave[edit]
According to some accounts, several Japanese junior officers including Fuchida and Genda urged Nagumo to carry out a third strike in order to sink more of the Pearl Harbor's remaining warships, and damage the base's maintenance shops, drydock facilities, and oil tank yards.[47] Most notably, Fuchida gave a firsthand account of this meeting several times after the war. However, some historians have cast doubt on this and many other of Fuchida's later claims, which sometimes conflict with documented historic records.[120] Genda, who opined during the planning for the attack that without an invasion three strikes were necessary to fully disable the Pacific Fleet,[121] denied requesting an additional attack.[122] Regardless, it is undisputed that the captains of the other five carriers in the task force reported they were willing and ready to carry out a third strike soon after the second returned,[123] but Nagumo decided to withdraw for several reasons:
American anti-aircraft performance had improved considerably during the second strike, and two-thirds of Japan's losses were incurred during the second wave.[124]
Nagumo felt if he launched a third strike, he would be risking three-quarters of the Combined Fleet's strength to wipe out the remaining targets (which included the facilities) while suffering higher aircraft losses.[124]
The location of the American carriers remained unknown. In addition, the admiral was concerned his force was now within range of American land-based bombers.[124] Nagumo was uncertain whether the US had enough surviving planes remaining on Hawaii to launch an attack against his carriers.[125]
A third wave would have required substantial preparation and turnaround time, and would have meant returning planes would have had to land at night. At the time, only the Royal Navy had developed night carrier techniques, so this was a substantial risk.[126] The first two waves had launched the entirety of the Combined Fleet's air strength. A third wave would have required landing both the first and second wave before launching the first wave again. Compare Nagumo's situation in the Battle of Midway where an attack returning from Midway kept Nagumo from launching an immediate strike on American carriers.
The task force's fuel situation did not permit him to remain in waters north of Pearl Harbor much longer since he was at the very limit of logistical support. To do so risked running unacceptably low on fuel, perhaps even having to abandon destroyers en route home.[127]
He believed the second strike had essentially accomplished the mission's main objective (neutralizing the US Pacific Fleet) and did not wish to risk further losses.[128] Moreover, it was IJN practice to prefer the conservation of strength over the total destruction of the enemy.[129]
Although a hypothetical third strike would have likely focused on the base's remaining warships,[130] military historians have suggested any potential damage to the shore facilities would have hampered the US Pacific Fleet far more seriously.[60][page needed][61][page needed] If they had been wiped out, "serious [American] operations in the Pacific would have been postponed for more than a year";[131] according to Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, later Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet, "it would have prolonged the war another two years".[132]
At a conference aboard his flagship the following morning, Yamamoto supported Nagumo's withdrawal without launching a third wave.[128] In retrospect, sparing the vital dockyards, maintenance shops, and the oil tank farm meant the US could respond relatively quickly to Japanese activities in the Pacific. Yamamoto later regretted Nagumo's decision to withdraw and categorically stated it had been a great mistake not to order a third strike.[133]
Ships lost or damaged[edit]
Further information: Ships of Pearl Harbor attack
Twenty-one American ships were damaged or lost in the attack, of which all but three were repaired and returned to service.[134]
Battleships[edit]
Arizona (Rear Admiral Isaac C. Kidd's flagship of Battleship Division One): hit by four armor-piercing bombs, exploded; total loss, not salvaged. 1,177 dead.
Oklahoma: hit by five torpedoes, capsized; total loss, salvaged and scrapped. 429 dead.
West Virginia: hit by two bombs, seven torpedoes, sunk; returned to service July 1944. 106 dead.
California: hit by two bombs, two torpedoes, sunk; returned to service January 1944. 104 dead.[135]
Nevada: hit by six bombs, one torpedo, beached; returned to service October 1942. 60 dead.
Pennsylvania (Admiral Husband E. Kimmel's flagship of the United States Pacific Fleet):[136] in dry dock with Cassin and Downes, hit by one bomb and debris from USS Cassin; remained in service. 9 dead.
Tennessee: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 5 dead.
Maryland: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 4 dead (including floatplane pilot shot down).
Ex-battleship (target/AA training ship)[edit]
Utah: hit by two torpedoes, capsized; total loss, salvage stopped. 64 dead.
Cruisers[edit]
Helena: hit by one torpedo; returned to service January 1942. 20 dead.
Raleigh: hit by one torpedo; returned to service February 1942.
Honolulu: near miss, light damage; remained in service.
Destroyers[edit]
Cassin: in drydock with Downes and Pennsylvania, hit by one bomb, burned; reconstructed and returned to service February 1944.
Downes: in drydock with Cassin and Pennsylvania, caught fire from Cassin, burned; reconstructed and returned to service November 1943.
Helm: underway to West Loch, damaged by two near-miss bombs;[137] continued patrol; dry-docked January 15, 1942, and sailed January 20, 1942.
Shaw: hit by three bombs; returned to service June 1942.
Auxiliaries[edit]
Oglala (minelayer): damaged by torpedo hit on Helena, capsized; returned to service (as engine-repair ship) February 1944.
Vestal (repair ship): hit by two bombs, blast and fire from Arizona, beached; returned to service by August 1942.
Curtiss (seaplane tender): hit by one bomb, one crashed Japanese aircraft; returned to service January 1942. 19 dead.
Sotoyomo (harbor tug): damaged by explosion and fires in Shaw; sunk; returned to service August 1942.
YFD-2 (yard floating dock): damaged by bombs; sunk; returned to service January 25, 1942, servicing Shaw.
 Captain Homer N. Wallin (center) supervises salvage operations aboard USS California, early 1942.
Salvage[edit]
After a systematic search for survivors, Captain Homer N. Wallin was ordered to lead a formal salvage operation.[138][nb 20]
Around Pearl Harbor, divers from the Navy (shore and tenders), the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard, and civilian contractors (Pacific Bridge Company and others) began work on the ships that could be refloated. They patched holes, cleared debris, and pumped water out of ships. Navy divers worked inside the damaged ships. Within six months, five battleships and two cruisers were patched or refloated so they could be sent to shipyards in Pearl Harbor and on the mainland for extensive repair.[140]
Intensive salvage operations continued for another year, a total of some 20,000 man-hours under water.[141][page needed] Arizona and the target ship Utah were too heavily damaged for salvage and remain where they were sunk,[142] with Arizona becoming a war memorial. Oklahoma, while successfully raised, was never repaired and capsized while under tow to the mainland in 1947. The Nevada proved particularly difficult to raise and repair; two men involved in the operation died after inhaling poisonous gases that had accumulated in the ship's interior.[140] When feasible, armament and equipment were removed from vessels too damaged to repair and put to use aboard other craft.[citation needed]
News coverage[edit]
The initial announcement of the attack on Pearl Harbor was made by the White House Press Secretary, Stephen Early, at 2:22 p.m. Eastern time (8:52 a.m. Hawaiian time): "The Japanese have attacked Pearl Harbor from the air and all naval and military activities on the island of Oahu, principal American base in the Hawaiian islands."[143] As information developed, Early made a number of additional announcements to approximately 150 White House reporters over the course of the afternoon.[144]
Initial reports of the attack moved on news wires at approximately 2:25 p.m. Eastern time. The first radio coverage (which, at the time, represented the earliest opportunity for ordinary people to learn of the attack) was on the CBS radio network's scheduled news program, World News Today, at 2:30 p.m. Eastern time. John Charles Daly read the initial report, then switched to London, where Robert Trout ad-libbed on the possible London reaction. The first report on NBC cut into a play, a dramatization of The Inspector-General, at 2:33 p.m. Eastern time and lasted only 21 seconds. Unlike the later practice with major news stories, there were only brief interruptions of scheduled commercial programming.[145]
A contemporaneous newspaper report compared the attack to the Battle of Port Arthur in which the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked the Imperial Russian Navy, triggering the Russo-Japanese War, 37 years prior.[146] Modern writers have continued to note parallels between the attacks, albeit more dispassionately.[147]
 Pennsylvania, behind the wreckage of Downes and Cassin
Aftermath[edit]
Main articles: Consequences of the attack on Pearl Harbor and Day of Infamy speech
The day after the attack, Roosevelt delivered his famous Day of Infamy speech to a Joint Session of Congress, calling for a formal declaration of war on the Empire of Japan. Congress obliged his request less than an hour later. On December 11, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States, even though the Tripartite Pact did not require it.[nb 21] Congress issued a declaration of war against Germany and Italy later that same day.
The United Kingdom had already been at war with Germany since September 1939 and with Italy since June 1940, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had promised to declare war "within the hour" of a Japanese attack on the United States.[151] Upon learning of the Japanese attacks on Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong, Churchill promptly determined there was no need to either wait or further consult the US government and immediately summoned the Japanese Ambassador. As a result, the UK declared war on Japan nine hours before the US did.
The attack was an initial shock to all the Allies in the Pacific Theater. Further losses compounded the alarming setback. Japan attacked the Philippines hours later (because of the time difference, it was December 8 in the Philippines). Only three days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the battleships Prince of Wales and Repulse were sunk off the coast of Malaya, causing Churchill later to recollect "In all the war I never received a more direct shock. As I turned and twisted in bed the full horror of the news sank in upon me. There were no British or American capital ships in the Indian Ocean or the Pacific except the American survivors of Pearl Harbor who were hastening back to California. Over this vast expanse of waters, Japan was supreme and we everywhere were weak and naked."[152]
 Poster by Allen Saalburg issued in 1942 by the United States Office of War Information
Throughout the war, Pearl Harbor was frequently used in American propaganda.[153]
One further consequence of the attack on Pearl Harbor and its aftermath (notably the Niihau incident) was that Japanese-American residents and citizens were relocated to nearby Japanese-American internment camps. Within hours of the attack, hundreds of Japanese-American leaders were rounded up and taken to high-security camps such as Sand Island at the mouth of Honolulu harbor and Kilauea Military Camp on the island of Hawaii.[154][page needed][155] Eventually, more than 110,000 Japanese Americans, nearly all who lived on the West Coast, were forced into interior camps, but in Hawaii, where the 150,000-plus Japanese Americans composed over one-third of the population, only 1,200 to 1,800 were interned.[156][page needed][157][158]
The attack also had international consequences. The Canadian province of British Columbia, bordering the Pacific Ocean, had long had a large population of Japanese immigrants and their Japanese Canadian descendants. Pre-war tensions were exacerbated by the Pearl Harbor attack, leading to a reaction from the Government of Canada. On February 24, 1942, Order-in-Council P.C. no. 1486 was passed under the War Measures Act, allowing for the forced removal of any and all Canadians of Japanese descent from British Columbia, as well as prohibiting them from returning to the province. On March 4, regulations under the Act were adopted to evacuate Japanese-Canadians.[159] As a result, 12,000 were interned in interior camps, 2,000 were sent to road camps, and another 2,000 were forced to work in the prairies on sugar beet farms.[160]
In the wake of the attack, 15 Medals of Honor, 51 Navy Crosses, 53 Silver Stars, four Navy and Marine Corps Medals, one Distinguished Flying Cross, four Distinguished Service Crosses, one Distinguished Service Medal, and three Bronze Star Medals were awarded to the American servicemen who distinguished themselves in combat at Pearl Harbor.[161] Additionally, a special military award, the Pearl Harbor Commemorative Medal, was later authorized for all military veterans of the attack.
 Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi's aircraft ten days after it crashed
Niihau Incident[edit]
Main article: Niihau incident
Japanese planners of the Pearl Harbor attack had determined that some means were required for rescuing fliers whose aircraft were damaged too badly to return to the carriers. The island of Niihau, only thirty minutes by air from Pearl Harbor, was designated as the rescue point.[citation needed]
During the second wave, one Zero fighter flown by Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi of the Hiryu was damaged in the attack on Wheeler, so he flew to the rescue point. The aircraft was further damaged on the crash landing. Nishikaichi was helped from the wreckage by one of the Native Hawaiians, who, aware of the tension between the United States and Japan, took the pilot's pistol, maps, codes, and other documents. The island's residents had no telephones or radios and were completely unaware of the attack on Pearl Harbor. Nishikaichi enlisted the support of three Japanese American residents in an attempt to recover the documents. During the ensuing struggles, Nishikaichi was killed, and a Hawaiian civilian was wounded; one collaborator committed suicide, and his wife and the third collaborator were sent to prison.[citation needed]
The ease with which the local ethnic Japanese residents had apparently gone to Nishikaichi's assistance was a source of concern for many and tended to support those who believed that local Japanese could not be trusted.[162]
Strategic implications[edit]
Admiral Hara Tadaichi summed up the Japanese result by saying, "We won a great tactical victory at Pearl Harbor and thereby lost the war."[163]
While the attack accomplished its intended objective, it turned out to be largely unnecessary. Unbeknownst to Yamamoto, who conceived the original plan, the U.S. Navy had decided as far back as 1935 to abandon 'charging' across the Pacific towards the Philippines in response to an outbreak of war (in keeping with the evolution of Plan Orange).[38][page needed] The U.S. instead adopted "Plan Dog" in 1940, which emphasized keeping the IJN out of the eastern Pacific and away from the shipping lanes to Australia, while the U.S. concentrated on defeating Nazi Germany.[164][better source needed]
Fortunately for the United States, the American aircraft carriers were untouched; otherwise the Pacific Fleet's ability to conduct offensive operations would have been crippled for a year or more (given no diversions from the Atlantic Fleet). As it was, the U.S. Navy was left with no choice but to rely on carriers and submarines, the very weapons with which the US Navy halted and eventually reversed the Japanese advance. While six of the eight battleships were repaired and returned to service, their relatively low speed and high fuel consumption limited their deployment, and they served mainly in shore bombardment roles (their only major action being the Battle of Surigao Strait in October 1944). A major flaw of Japanese strategic thinking was a belief that the ultimate Pacific battle would be fought by battleships, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan. As a result, Yamamoto (and his successors) hoarded battleships for a "decisive battle" that never happened.[60][page needed][165][page needed]
The Japanese confidence in their ability to win a quick victory meant that they neglected Pearl Harbor's navy repair yards, oil tank farms, submarine base, and old headquarters building.[60][page needed] All of these targets were omitted from Genda's list, yet they proved more important than any battleship to the American war effort in the Pacific. The survival of the repair shops and fuel depots allowed Pearl Harbor to maintain logistical support to the US Navy's operations,[166][167] such as the Doolittle Raid and the Battles of the Coral Sea and Midway. It was submarines that immobilized the Imperial Japanese Navy's heavy ships and brought Japan's economy to a virtual standstill by crippling the importation of oil and raw materials: by the end of 1942, the amount of raw materials brought in was cut in half, "to a disastrous ten million tons", while oil "was almost completely stopped".[nb 22] Lastly, the basement of the Old Administration Building was the home of the cryptanalytic unit which contributed significantly to the Midway ambush and the Submarine Force's success.[168]
Retrospective debate on American intelligence[edit]
Main article: Pearl Harbor advance-knowledge conspiracy theory
 USS Arizona Memorial
Ever since the Japanese attack, there has been debate as to how and why the United States had been caught unaware, and how much and when American officials knew of Japanese plans and related topics. As early as 1924, Chief of U.S. Air Service Mason Patrick displayed a concern for military vulnerabilities in the Pacific, having sent General Billy Mitchell on a survey of the Pacific and the East. Patrick called Mitchell's subsequent report, which identified vulnerabilities in Hawaii, a "theoretical treatise on employment of airpower in the Pacific, which, in all probability undoubtedly will be of extreme value some 10 or 15 years hence".[169]
At least two naval war games, one in 1932 and another in 1936, proved that Pearl was vulnerable to such an attack. Admiral James Richardson was removed from command shortly after protesting President Roosevelt's decision to move the bulk of the Pacific fleet to Pearl Harbor.[170][page needed][171] The decisions of military and political leadership to ignore these warnings have contributed to conspiracy theories. Several writers, including decorated World War II veteran and journalist Robert Stinnett, author of Day of Deceit, and former United States Rear Admiral Robert Alfred Theobald, author of The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor: The Washington Background of the Pearl Harbor Attack, have argued that various parties high in the US and British governments knew of the attack in advance and may even have let it happen or encouraged it in order to force the US into war via the so-called "back door". However, this conspiracy theory is rejected by mainstream historians.[172][page needed][173][174][page needed][175][nb 23]
In popular culture[edit]
Main article: Attack on Pearl Harbor in popular culture
See also[edit]
Air warfare of World War II
Bombing of Dublin in World War II
Bombings of Switzerland in World War II
Casus Belli
Japanese Attack on Howland Island
List of attacks on U.S. territory
List of Medal of Honor recipients for the Attack on Pearl Harbor
List of United States Navy ships present at Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941
Nagao Kita
National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day
Operation K
Pacific Theater aircraft carrier operations during World War II
Pearl Harbor National Memorial
Pearl Harbor Survivors Association
Winds Code
References[edit]
Notes[edit]
^ USCGC Taney (WHEC-37), USCGC Reliance (WSC-150), USCGC Tiger (WSC-152).[1][2]
^ Unless otherwise stated, all vessels listed were salvageable.[4]
^ Also known as the Battle of Pearl Harbor
^ For the Japanese designator of Oahu.[12]
^ In 1941, Hawaii was half an hour different from the majority of other time zones. See UTC 10:30.
^ USS Utah (AG-16, formerly BB-31); Utah was moored in the space intended to have been occupied by the aircraft carrier Enterprise which, returning with a task force, had been expected to enter the channel at 0730 on December 7; delayed by weather, the task force did not reach Pearl Harbor until dusk the following day.[18]
^ After it was announced in September that iron and steel scrap export would also be prohibited, Japanese Ambassador Horinouchi protested to Secretary Hull on October 8, 1940, warning this might be considered an "unfriendly act".[34]
^ This was mainly a Japanese Navy preference; the Japanese Army would have chosen to attack the Soviet Union.[38][page needed][41][page needed]
^ "The Dorn report did not state with certainty that Kimmel and Short knew about Taranto. There is, however, no doubt that they did know, as did the Japanese. Lt. Cdr. Takeshi Naito, the assistant naval attach  to Berlin, flew to Taranto to investigate the attack first hand, and Naito subsequently had a lengthy conversation with Cdr. Mitsuo Fuchida about his observations. Fuchida led the Japanese attack on December 7, 1941."[50]
^ "A torpedo bomber needed a long, level flight, and when released, its conventional torpedo would plunge nearly a hundred feet deep before swerving upward to strike a hull. Pearl Harbor deep averages 42 feet. But the Japanese borrowed an idea from the British carrier-based torpedo raid on the Italian naval base of Taranto. They fashioned auxiliary wooden tail fins to keep the torpedoes horizontal, so they would dive to only 35 feet, and they added a breakaway "nosecone" of soft wood to cushion the impact with the surface of the water."[51]
^ Noted by Arthur MacArthur in the 1890s.[55]
^ She was located by a University of Hawaii research submersible on August 28, 2002, in 400 m (1,300 ft) of water, 6 nmi (11 km) outside the harbor.[72]
^ While the nine sailors who died in the attack were quickly lionized by the Japanese government as Ky gunshin ("The Nine War Heroes"), the news of Sakamaki's capture, which had been publicized in US news broadcasts, was kept secret. Even after the war, however, he received recriminating correspondence from those who despised him for not sacrificing his own life.
^ The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor, Planning and Execution. First wave: 189 planes, 50 Kates w/bombs, 40 Kates with torpedoes, 54 Vals, 45 Zekes Second wave: 171 planes, 54 Kates w/bombs, 81 Vals, 36 Zekes. The Combat Air Patrol over the carriers alternated 18 plane shifts every two hours, with 18 more ready for takeoff on the flight decks and an additional 18 ready on hangar decks.[93]
^ In the twenty-five sorties flown, USAF Historical Study No.85 credits six pilots with ten planes destroyed: 1st Lt Lewis M. Sanders (P-36) and 2nd Lts Philip M Rasmussen (P-36), Gordon H. Sterling Jr. (P-36, killed in action), Harry W. Brown (P-36), Kenneth M. Taylor (P-40, 2), and George S. Welch (P-40, 4). Three of the P-36 kills were not verified by the Japanese and may have been shot down by naval anti-aircraft fire.[full citation needed]
^ Odd though it may sound, "not" is correct, in keeping with standard Navy telegraphic practice. This was confirmed by Beloite and Beloite after years of research and debate.
^ The gunners that did get in action scored most of the victories against Japanese aircraft that morning, including the first of the attack by Tautog, and Dorie Miller's Navy Cross-worthy effort. Miller was an African-American cook aboard West Virginia who took over an unattended anti-aircraft gun on which he had no training. He was the first African-American sailor to be awarded the Navy Cross.[104]
^ The wreck has become a memorial to those lost that day, most of whom remain within the ship. She continues to leak small amounts of fuel oil, decades after the attack.
^ USAAF pilots of the 46th and 47th Pursuit Squadrons, 15th Pursuit Group, claim to have destroyed ten. Overall, the Americans claimed to have shot down 41 Japanese aircraft.
^  Wallin had been assigned to go to Massawa in East Africa. The harbor there was blocked by scuttled Italian and German ships, which prevented British use of the port. Commander Edward Ellsberg was sent instead.[139][page needed] 
^ The pact had one of its objectives limiting US intervention in conflicts involving the three nations.[148][149][150]
^ In less than eleven months, most of Japan's elite naval aviators who had been at Pearl Harbor were lost in subsequent battles. Lack of fuel and an inflexible training policy meant that they could not be replaced.[38][page needed]
^ Gordon Prange specifically addresses some revisionist works, including Charles A. Beard, President Roosevelt and the Coming War 1941; William Henry Chamberlin, America's Second Crusade; John T. Flynn, The Roosevelt Myth; George Morgenstern, Pearl Harbor; Frederic R. Sanborn, Design for War; Robert Alfred Theobald, The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor; Harry E. Barnes, ed., Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace and The Court Historians versus Revisionism; Husband E. Kimmel, Admiral Kimmel's Story.[176]
Citations[edit]
^ Thiesen, William H. (December 7, 2017), "The Long Blue Line: The Attack on Pearl Harbor   "a date that will live in infamy"", Coast Guard Compass, archived from the original on December 9, 2017, retrieved December 8, 2017
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Units in Hawaii: December 7, 1941" (PDF), media.defense.gov, 2017, archived (PDF) from the original on December 9, 2017, retrieved December 8, 2017
^ "Ships and District Craft Present at Pearl Harbor, 0800 7 December 1941", The Navy Department Library, Naval History and Heritage Command, November 13, 2020, archived from the original on November 18, 2021, retrieved December 8, 2021
^ Nimitz 1942.
^ 
name=USN>"Overview of The Pearl Harbor Attack, 7 December 1941", The Navy Department Library, Naval History and Heritage Command, December 2, 2020, archived from the original on June 2, 2021, retrieved December 8, 2021
^ Gilbert 2004, p. 272.
^ Gailey 1997, p. 96: "There were 103 civilian casualties, including 68 dead."
^ Full Pearl Harbor Casualty List, USSWestVirginia.org, archived from the original on January 17, 2013, retrieved December 8, 2021
^ a b Conn, Engelman & Fairchild 2000, p. 194.
^ Morison 2001, pp. 101, 120, 250.
^ Goldstein & Dillon 2000, pp. 17ff.
^ Wilford 2002, p. 32 fn. 81.
^ Fukudome 1955b.
^ Chapter V: The Decision for War Morton, Louis.  Strategy and Command: The First Two Years  1961
^ a b Gill 1957, p. 485
^ a b Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1988, p. 174
^ a b c d Parillo 2006, p. 288
^ Thomas 2007, pp. 57 59.
^ "Pearl Harbor attack | Date, History, Map, Casualties, Timeline, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved April 11, 2022.
^ Rosenberg, Jennifer (January 23, 2019), "Facts About the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor", ThoughtCo. Humanities > History & Culture, archived from the original on October 24, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021
^ "Kazuo Sakamaki, 81, Pacific P.O.W. No. 1", The New York Times, December 21, 1999, archived from the original on September 11, 2020, retrieved March 5, 2020
^ a b Totani 2009, p. 57.
^ a b McCaffrey 2004, pp. 210 229.
^ a b c Worth 2014.
^ a b Bailey & Farber 2019.
^ Burress, Charles (July 19, 2001), "Biased history helps feed U.S. fascination with Pearl Harbor", The Japan Times, archived from the original on August 12, 2021, retrieved February 28, 2021
^ "United States Maritime Expansion across the Pacific during the 19th Century", Milestones: 1830 1860, US Department of State, Office of the Historian, archived from the original on March 21, 2021, retrieved February 28, 2021
^ Axelrod, Josh (August 11, 2019), "A Century Later: The Treaty Of Versailles And Its Rejection Of Racial Equality", NPR.org, archived from the original on April 13, 2021, retrieved February 28, 2021
^ Lauren 1978.
^ Department of State 1943, pp. 94, 96
^ Barnhart 1987.
^ Gruhl 2007, p. 39
^ Gruhl 2007, p. 40
^ Department of State 1943, p. 96
^ Department of State 1943, p. 94
^ Belair, Felix Jr. (June 23, 1940), "Shift of Our Fleet to Atlantic Studied" (PDF), The New York Times. "Except for the Atlantic Battle Squadron, the entire fleet is now in the Pacific, based at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii."
^ Harper, Tim (August 7, 2009), "Japan's Gigantic Second World War Gamble", The Guardian, ISSN 0261-3077, archived from the original on August 24, 2019, retrieved December 7, 2016
^ a b c d e f Evans & Peattie 1997.
^ Miller 2007, p. 63.
^ Department of State 1943, p. 125
^ Hayashi 1959.
^ a b Matloff & Snell 1980.
^ Morton 1962, ch. IV: The Fatal Turn
^ Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack   "Review of the Diplomatic Conversations" 1946, p. 314.
^ a b Morton 1962, ch. V: The Decision for War
^ "Battle Order Number One: Nov. 28, 1941". www.cv6.org. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2020.
^ a b Gailey 1997, p. 68
^ Gailey 1997, p. 70
^ Lord 1957, pp. 12 14
^ Borch & Martinez 2005, pp. 53 54.
^ Gannon 1996, p. 49
^ Wetzler 1998, p. 39.
^ Bix 2000, p. 417, citing the Sugiyama memo
^ The Canadian Institute of Public Opinion (December 8, 1941). "Gallup Poll Found 52 p.c. of Americans Expected War". Ottawa Citizen. p. 1. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved November 28, 2011.
^ Manchester 1978, p. [page needed].
^ a b Willmott 1983, p. 14.
^ Fukudome 1955, p. 150
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981.
^ Zimm 2011.
^ a b c d e Willmott 1983.
^ a b Blair 1975.
^ Zimm 2011, p. 132
^ Peattie 2001, p. 145
^ Zimm 2011, pp. 173, 174
^ Zimm 2011, p. 153
^ a b c DiGiulian 2021
^ a b Stewart 1974, p. 56
^ Goldstein & Dillon 2000, p. 146
^ Stewart 1974, p. 57
^ Smith 1999, p. 36
^ a b c Stewart 1974, p. 58
^ "Japanese Midget Submarine". Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2014.
^ Stewart 1974, pp. 59 61
^ Stewart 1974, pp. 61 62
^ United States Strategic Bombing Survey 1946, p. 19
^ Zimm 2011, pp. 330 341
^ Owen, RAdm USN, Thomas B. (1989). Memories of the War Years. Vol. I. Washington: Unpublished memoir.
^ https://www.usni.org/magazines/naval-history-magazine/2004/december/pearl-harbor-midget-sub-picture . Retrieved 22 March 2023
^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCaTpn6F_Ik . Go to 25:10. Retrieved 22 March 2023
^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rhbN9NOSag . Retrieved 22 March 2023
^ "When was Pearl Harbor?". History. November 26, 2014. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved August 17, 2018.
^ Toland 1983.
^ a b Kahn, David (1996). The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret Communication from Ancient Times to the Internet. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781439103555.
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, pp. 424, 475.
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, pp. 493 494.
^ Emperor of Japan Hirohito (December 8, 1941), "Declaration of War against the United States and Britain" (PDF), archived (PDF) from the original on July 15, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021   via Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History
^ Sterngold, James (November 21, 1994), "Japan Admits It Bungled Notice of War in '41 (Published 1994)", The New York Times, ISSN 0362-4331, archived from the original on December 10, 2020, retrieved December 1, 2020
^ Howard W. French (December 9, 1999). "Pearl Harbor Truly a Sneak Attack, Papers Show". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2016. Retrieved February 14, 2017.
^ Kawabata, Tai (December 9, 2014), "Historian seeks to clear embassy of Pearl Harbor 'sneak attack' infamy", The Japan Times, archived from the original on May 16, 2021
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, p. 485. "[The] fourteenth part was not a formal declaration of war. It did not even rupture diplomatic relations. It merely broke off the discussions."
^ "Japanese 'Fourteen Part' Message of December 7, 1941" (Memorandum), December 7, 1941, archived from the original on September 17, 2017, retrieved December 10, 2021   via HyperWar Foundation
^ Fuchida 2011, chs. 19, 20
^ a b c d e "Aircraft Attack Organization". Ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
^ a b Yarnell 2003
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, pp. 730 731. "'Short mishandled radar ...' In his (Short's) words '... more for training than any idea it would be real'".
^ Evans 1998, p. 309
^ "Son recounts father's day during bombing of Pearl Harbor", New Haven Register, December 6, 2013, archived from the original on August 17, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021
^ Testimony of Joseph P. McDonald, Technician Fourth-Class; 580th Aircraft Warning (Report), Proceedings of Army Pearl Harbor Board, pp. 2121 2123, archived from the original on April 21, 2021   via iBiblio.org
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1988, p. 98
^ a b Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, pp. 500 501
^ Symonds 2011, p. 218
^ Hone 1977.
^ a b Parillo 2006, p. 293
^ "Miller, Doris". Naval History and Heritage Command. June 6, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2018.
^ Bonner 1996, p. 105
^ DANFS Aylwin
^ "Biographical Sketch of Mervyn S. Bennion". USSWestVirginia.org. Archived from the original on May 29, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021.
^ "How many people died at Pearl Harbor during the attack?", Pearl Harbor Visitors Bureau, archived from the original on August 17, 2018, retrieved August 17, 2018
^ Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack   "The Japanese Attack And Its Aftermath" 1946, pp. 64 65, Damage to United States Naval Forces and Installations as a Result of the Attack
^ Shepherd 2004, p. 57.
^ Chad Stewart (December 1, 2018). "9 Things You Might Not Know About the Attack on Pearl Harbor". United Service Organizations. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2019.
^ Paul Hashgen (November 1, 2011). "Fire History: Dec. 7, 1941: A Day of Infamy And Fire". Firehouse. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
^ DANFS Shaw
^ Dorr & Borch 2008.
^ Arakaki 1991, ch. IV.
^ Potter 1982.
^ Toland 1970, p. 235.
^ Watson 2007, p. 592
^ United States Strategic Bombing Survey 1946, p. 18
^ a b Parshall 2010.
^ Caravaggio 2014.
^ Willmott 2001, p. 156 157.
^ Horn 2005, p. 16.
^ a b c Hoyt 2000, p. 190.
^ Hoyt 2000, p. 191.
^ Stephen 1988, pp. 34 38.
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1988, p. [page needed].
^ a b Gailey 1997, p. 97.
^ Willmott 1983, p. 16.
^ Fuchida would later claim he had designated Pearl Harbor's oil storage facilities as the primary target, although this contradicted Japanese military doctrine and even several interviews on the subject he had given earlier in life [120]
^ Gailey 1997, pp. 97 98.
^ Yergin 1991, p. 327.
^ Gailey 1997, p. 98.
^ Wallin 1968, pp. 203 269.
^ https://www.dpaa.mil/News-Stories/News-Releases/PressReleaseArticleView/Article/2874015/uss-california-sailor-accounted-for-from-world-war-ii-simmons-t/ . Retrieved 25 March 2023
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1981, p. 49.
^ Wallin 1968, p. 198.
^ Wallin 1968, p. v.
^ Ellsberg 1946.
^ a b Grier, Peter (December 7, 2021). "Pearl Harbor resurrection: the warships that rose to fight again". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
^ Raymer 1996.
^ "Battleship Row". US National Park Service. July 2, 2019. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
^ "Planes Blast U.S. Naval Bases; No Warning Is Given", Lawton Constitution, December 7, 1941, Extra Edition, at 1.
^ "War Brings a Tense Day to White House Press Room", Washington Post, December 8, 1941, at 4.
^ McDonough, John (December 6, 1991), "Hear It Now: Pearl Harbor Day Radio", Wall Street Journal, p. A13
^ Butcher, Clifford F. (January 19, 1942), "Port Arthur Was 'the Pearl Harbor of 1904'", The Milwaukee Journal, archived from the original on May 15, 2016, retrieved June 27, 2015
^ Peck 2016.
^ Liddell Hart 1971, p. 206
^ Shirer 1960, p. 873
^ Keegan 1990, p. 130
^ "The U.S. At War, The Last Stage", Time, December 15, 1941, archived from the original on August 10, 2014, retrieved August 12, 2014
^ Churchill & Gilbert 2001, pp. 1593 1594
^ Rhodes 1987, p. 257
^ Levine 1995.
^ "The Untold Story", The Untold Story: Internment of Japanese Americans in Hawai i, Japanese Cultural Center of Hawai i, archived from the original on August 13, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021
^ Daniels 1972.
^ "What Happened After the Attack?". The Official Pearl Harbor Tour Site. Archived from the original on December 1, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2011.
^ "Japanese-American Internment Camps in New Mexico 1942-1946". New Mexico History.org. Archived from the original on October 17, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2021.
^ "Regulations made 4 March 1942". Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 23, 2016.
^ The Japanese Canadian Experience: The October Crisis, War Measures Act Conference (1977, McMaster University), London, Ontario: P. Anas Pub., 1978, pp. 12 14
^ Smith 1999[page needed].
^ Fuchida 2011, pp. 293 294
^ Haufler 2003, p. 127
^ Hakim 1995
^ Miller 2007.
^ "Attack on Pearl Harbor | Nihon Kaigun". Combinedfleet.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved March 6, 2014.
^ "Pearl Harbor vet remembers Dec. 7, 1941, sneak attack". The Kalona News. April 17, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2014.
^ Blair 1975, pp. 360, 816
^ Wolk 2007.
^ Wallin 1968.
^ "Commander at Pearl Harbor relieved of his duties", History.com, December 15, 2020, archived from the original on April 25, 2021, retrieved December 8, 2021
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1986.
^ Prados 1995, pp. 161 177.
^ Budiansky 2002.
^ Stevenson, Richard W. (August 3, 1994), "New Light Shed on Churchill and Pearl Harbor", The New York Times, archived from the original on July 15, 2014, retrieved March 4, 2014
^ Prange, Goldstein & Dillon 1991, p. 867.
Bibliography[edit]
Books[edit]
Arakaki, Leatrice R. (1991), 7 December 1941: The Air Force Story, Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii: Pacific Air Forces Office of History
Bailey, Beth; Farber, David, eds. (July 2019), Beyond Pearl Harbor: A Pacific History, University Press of Kansas, doi:10.2307/j.ctvqmp3br, ISBN 978-0-7006-2813-1, JSTOR j.ctvqmp3br, S2CID 240888293
Barnhart, Michael A. (1987), Japan Prepares for Total War: The Search for Economic Security, 1919 1941, Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-1915-7, retrieved December 8, 2021
Bix, Herbert P. (2000), Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan, Diane Pub Co, ISBN 978-0-7567-5780-9
Blair, Clay Jr. (1975), Silent Victory: The U.S. Submarine War Against Japan, Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company, ISBN 9780397007530
Bonner, Kermit (1996), Final Voyages, Turner Publishing, ISBN 9781563112898
Borch, Frederic L.; Martinez, Daniel (2005), Kimmel, Short, and Pearl Harbor: The Final Report Revealed, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-59114-090-0, archived from the original on April 26, 2015, retrieved June 27, 2015
Budiansky, Stephen (2002), Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-0743217347, retrieved December 9, 2021
Churchill, Winston; Gilbert, Martin (2001), "December 1941", The Churchill War Papers: The Ever-Widening War, vol. 3, London, New York: W.W. Norton, ISBN 0-393-01959-4, archived from the original on August 12, 2021, retrieved December 8, 2020
Conn, Stetson; Engelman, Rose C.; Fairchild, Byron (2000) [First Printed 1964], "VII   The Pearl Harbor Attack", Guarding the United States and Its Outposts, Washington D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History, CMD Pub 4-2, archived from the original on November 12, 2021, retrieved December 8, 2021
Daniels, Roger (1972), Concentration Camps USA: Japanese Americans and World War II, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston
Ellsberg, Edward (1946), Under the Red Sea Sun Commander, Dodd, Mead & Company, retrieved December 9, 2021
Evans, David C.; Peattie, Mark R. (1997), Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy 1887 1941, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 0-87021-192-7
Evans, Harold (1998), The American Century, London: Jonathan Cape
Fuchida, Mitsuo (2011), For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor, translated by Shinsato, Douglas; Urabe, Tadanori, Kamuela, Hawaii: eXperience, ISBN 978-0-9846745-0-3
Fukudome, Shigeru (1955), Shikan: Shinjuwan Kogeki   [History of the Pearl Harbor Attack] (in Japanese), Tokyo
Gailey, Harry A. (1997), The War in the Pacific: From Pearl Harbor to Tokyo Bay, Presidio, ISBN 0-89141-616-1
Gannon, Robert (1996), Hellions of the Deep: The Development of American Torpedoes in World War II, Penn State Press, ISBN 0-271-01508-X
Gilbert, Martin (2004) [First published 1989], The Second World War (Revised ed.), Henry Holt and Company, ISBN 0-8050-7623-9, retrieved December 8, 2021
Gill, G. Hermon (1957), Royal Australian Navy 1939 1942, Australia in the War of 1939 1945. Series 2   Navy, vol. I, Canberra: Australian War Memorial, p. 485, LCCN 58037940, retrieved December 9, 2021
Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V., eds. (2000), The Pearl Harbor Papers: Inside the Japanese Plans, Brassey's, ISBN 978-1-57488-222-3
Gruhl, Werner (2007), Imperial Japan's World War Two: 1931 1945, Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-0-7658-0352-8
Hakim, Joy (1995), A History of US: Book 9: War, Peace, and All that Jazz, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-509514-2
Haufler, Herve (2003), Codebreaker's Victory: How the Allied Cryptographers Won World War II, New York: New American Library
Hayashi, Saburo;  et al. (Alvin D. Coox) (1959), K gun: The Japanese Army in the Pacific War, Quantico, Virginia: Marine Corps Association
Horn, Steve (2005), The Second Attack on Pearl Harbor: Operation K and Other Japanese Attempts to Bomb America in World War II, Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-59114-388-8
Hoyt, Edwin P. (2000) [First published 1991], Pearl Harbor (Large-print ed.), G. K. Hall & Co., ISBN 0-7838-9303-5, retrieved December 9, 2021
Keegan, John (1990), The Second World War, New York: Viking, ISBN 0670823597
Levine, Ellen (1995), A Fence Away from Freedom: Japanese Americans and World War II, New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, ISBN 9780399226380
Liddell Hart, B. H. (1971) [First published 1970], History of the Second World War (First American ed.), New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons
Lord, Walter (1957), Day of Infamy (50th Anniversary ed.), Henry Holt and Company, ISBN 0-8050-1898-0, retrieved December 9, 2021
Manchester, William (1978), American Caesar
McCaffrey, Stephen C. (2004), Understanding International Law, AuthorHouse, pp. 210 229
Miller, Edward S. (2007) [First published 1991], War Plan Orange: The U.S. Strategy to Defeat Japan, 1897 1945 (New ed.), Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-59114-500-4
Morison, Samuel Eliot (2001), The Rising Sun in the Pacific, 1931   April 1942, History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, vol. III, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-06973-0
Parillo, Mark (2006), "The United States in the Pacific",  in Higham, Robin; Harris, Stephen (eds.), Why Air Forces Fail: the Anatomy of Defeat, The University Press of Kentucky, ISBN 978-0-8131-2374-5, archived from the original on October 1, 2014, retrieved June 27, 2015
Peattie, Mark R. (2001), Sunburst: The Rise of Japanese Naval Air Power, 1909 1941, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-59114-664-X
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1981), At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-050669-8
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1991) [1981], At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (New ed.), New York: Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0140157345
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1986), Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History, Penguin Books, ISBN 0-07-050668-X
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1988), December 7, 1941: The Day the Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 978-0-07-050682-4
Prados, John (1995), Combined Fleet Decoded: The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II, Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-55750-431-8
Raymer, E. C. (1996), Descent Into Darkness, Presidio Press
Rhodes, Anthony (1987) [First published 1976], Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion: World War II, The Wellfleet Press
Shepherd, Dennis W. (September 22, 2004), Returning Son: From Baghdad, Kentucky to Baghdad, Iraq (and Back), AuthorHouse
Shirer, William L. (1960), The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany, New York: Simon and Schuster
Smith, Carl (1999), Pearl Harbor 1941: The Day of Infamy, Campaign Series, vol. 62, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 1-85532-798-8
Symonds, Craig L. (2011), The Battle Of Midway, Oxford University Press
Stephen, Martin (1988),  Grove, Eric (ed.), Sea Battles in Close-up: World War 2, vol. 1, Shepperton, Surrey: Ian Allan, pp. 34 38, ISBN 0-7110-1596-1
Thomas, Evan (2007), Sea of Thunder: Four Commanders and the Last Great Naval Campaign 1941 1945, Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-7432-5222-5, archived from the original on September 6, 2015, retrieved June 27, 2015
Toland, John (1970), The Rising Sun: The Decline and Fall of the Japanese Empire, 1936-1945, Random House, ISBN 0-394-44311-X
Toland, John (1983), Infamy: Pearl Harbor and its Aftermath, New York: Berkley, ISBN 0-425-05991-X, OCLC 9331838
Totani, Yuma (2009), The Tokyo War Crimes Trial: The Pursuit of Justice in the Wake of World War II, Harvard University Asia Center, p. 57
Wallin, Homer N. (1968), "Ships Sunk at Pearl Harbor" (PDF), Pearl Harbor: Why, How, Fleet Salvage and Final Appraisal, Naval History Division, pp. 203 269, archived (PDF) from the original on July 30, 2018, retrieved July 30, 2018
Watson, Patrick (December 1, 2007), Watson's Really Big WWII Almanac, Volume 2: July to December, Xlibris, ISBN 9781425789930, retrieved December 9, 2021
Wetzler, Peter (1998), Hirohito and war: imperial tradition and military decision making in prewar Japan, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-1925-5, retrieved June 27, 2015
Willmott, H. P. (1983), The Barrier and the Javelin: Japanese and Allied Pacific Strategies, February to June 1942, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 0-87021-092-0, retrieved December 8, 2021
Willmott, H.P. (2001). Pearl Harbor. London, England: Cassell & Co. ISBN 978-0-304-35884-7.
Worth, Roland H. Jr. (2014), No Choice but War: The United States Embargo Against Japan and the Eruption of War in the Pacific, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, Incorporated, ISBN 978-0786477524
Yergin, Daniel (1991), The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power, New York: Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-671-79932-0
Zimm, Alan D. (2011), Attack on Pearl Harbor: Strategy, Combat, Myths, Deceptions, Havertown, Pennsylvania: Casemate Publishers, ISBN 978-1-61200-010-7, archived from the original on September 6, 2015, retrieved June 27, 2015
US government documents[edit]
Department of State (1943), Peace and War, United States Foreign Policy 1931 1941, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, archived from the original on May 12, 2008, retrieved December 8, 2007
Matloff, Maurice; Snell, Edwin M. (1980) [1952], "IV: The Showdown with Japan: August December 1941", Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941 1942, United States Army in World War II, Washington, D.C.: US Army Center of Military History, CMH Pub 1-3, retrieved December 10, 2021
Morton, Louis (1962), Strategy and Command: The First Two Years, United States Army in World War II, Washington, D.C.: US Army Center of Military History, CMD Pub 5-1, archived from the original on February 11, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021   via HyperWar Foundation
Nimitz, Chester (February 15, 1942), CINCPAC Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor, 7 December, 1941 (Report), Enclosure (C) Damages Sustained by Ships as a Results of the Japanese Raid, December 7, 1941, Cincpac File No. A16-3/Serial 0479, archived from the original on January 11, 2012   via HyperWar Foundation
United States Strategic Bombing Survey (Pacific), Naval Analysis Division (1946),  Daniels, Gordon (ed.), The Campaigns of the Pacific War, Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, retrieved December 7, 2021
U.S. Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor, United States National Archives, Modern Military Branch, 1942, archived from the original on January 13, 2008, retrieved December 25, 2007
"Part II: The Japanese Attack And Its Aftermath", Report of the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1946, archived from the original on May 1, 2019, retrieved December 8, 2007
"Appendix D: Review of the Diplomatic Conversations", Report of the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1946, archived from the original on April 29, 2013
"USS Aylwin III (DD-355)". Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. Navy Department, Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
"USS Shaw II (DD-373)". Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. Navy Department, Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved December 11, 2021.
Journal articles[edit]
Caravaggio, Angelo N. (Winter 2014), "'Winning' the Pacific War: The Masterful Strategy of Commander Minoru Genda", Naval War College Review, 67 (1): 85 118, archived from the original on July 14, 2014
Lauren, Paul Gordon (1978), "Human Rights in History: Diplomacy and Racial Equality at the Paris Peace Conference", Diplomatic History, 2 (3): 257 278, doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.1978.tb00435.x, ISSN 0145-2096, JSTOR 24909920, S2CID 154765654
Wilford, Timothy (January 2002), "Decoding Pearl Harbor: USN Cryptanalysis and the Challenge of JN-25B in 1941" (PDF), The Northern Mariner, XII (1): 17 37, doi:10.25071/2561-5467.571, S2CID 247550000, retrieved December 8, 2021
Parshall, Jonathan (March 21, 2010). "Reflecting on Fuchida or "A Tale of Three Whoppers"". Naval War College Review. Newport, Rhode Island, United States of America: Naval History and Heritage Command/United States Naval War College (United States Department of the Navy). 63 (2): 127 138. ISSN 0028-1484. JSTOR 26397106. LCCN 75617787. OCLC 01779130. Archived from the original on November 27, 2011. Retrieved August 15, 2021.
Potter, Joseph V. (Winter 1982), "A Handful of Pilots" (PDF), Journal of American Aviation Historical Society: 282 285, archived (PDF) from the original on April 17, 2021, retrieved December 10, 2021
Magazine articles[edit]
Dorr, Robert F.; Borch, Fred L. (December 8, 2008), "Pajama-clad pilot took on Japanese at Pearl Harbor", Army Times, archived from the original on January 2, 2013, retrieved October 27, 2022
Fukudome, Shigeru (December 1955b), "Hawaii Operation", Proceedings, United States Naval Institute, vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 13, 15 31
Hone, Thomas C. (December 1977), "The Destruction of the Battle Line at Pearl Harbor", Proceedings, United States Naval Institute, vol. 103, no. 12, pp. 56 57
Peck, Michael (August 5, 2016), "Russia's Pearl Harbor: The Battle of Port Arthur", The National Interest, archived from the original on August 14, 2020, retrieved June 26, 2019
Stewart, A. J. (December 1974), "Those Mysterious Midgets", Proceedings, United States Naval Institute
Wolk, Herman S. (July 2007), "Mason Patrick's Inside Game", Air Force Magazine, Air Force Association, archived from the original on July 15, 2019, retrieved July 13, 2019
Online sources[edit]
Bjorkman, James (March 2, 2019), "December 7, 1941: Japanese Attack Pearl Harbor", Filminspector.com, archived from the original on March 6, 2019, retrieved March 3, 2019
DiGiulian, Tony (March 7, 2021), "Order of Battle: Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941", Navweaps.com, archived from the original on June 30, 2011, retrieved December 10, 2021
Yarnell, Paul R. (November 2003), "Organization of the Japanese Air Attack Units December 7, 1941", NavSource Naval History, archived from the original on December 13, 2007, retrieved December 8, 2007
Further reading[edit]
Beach, Edward L. Jr. (1995), Scapegoats: A Defense of Kimmel and Short at Pearl Harbor, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-55750-059-2
Clausen, Henry C.; Lee, Bruce (2001), Pearl Harbor: Final Judgment, HarperCollins. An account of the secret "Clausen Inquiry" undertaken late in the war by order of Congress to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson. Clausen was given the authority to go anywhere and question anyone under oath. Ultimately, he traveled more than 55,000 miles and interviewed over a hundred US and British Army, Navy, and civilian personnel, in addition to being given access to all relevant Magic intercepts.
Condon-Rall, M. E. (1989), "The U.S. Army medical department and the attack on Pearl Harbor", J Mil Hist, 53 (1): 65 78, doi:10.2307/1986020, JSTOR 1986020, PMID 11617401. This article discusses the state of medical readiness prior to the attack, and the post-attack response by medical personnel.
Dorsey, James (2009), "Literary Tropes, Rhetorical Looping, and the Nine Gods of War: 'Fascist Proclivities' Made Real",  in Tansman, Alan (ed.), The Culture of Japanese Fascism, Durham, North Carolina / London: Duke University Press, pp. 409 431. A study of Japanese wartime media representations of the submarine component of the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Fish, Hamilton, III (1983), Tragic Deception: FDR and America's Involvement in World War II, Devin-Adair, ISBN 0-8159-6917-1
Gannon, Michael V. (2001), Pearl Harbor Betrayed, Henry Holt and Company. A recent examination of the issues surrounding the surprise of the attack.
Haynok, Robert J. (2009), "How the Japanese Did It", Naval History Magazine, vol. 23, no. 6, United States Naval Institute, archived from the original on June 7, 2013, retrieved February 6, 2013
Hixson, Walter L., ed. (2003), The United States and the Road to War in the Pacific, The American Experience in World War II, vol. 3, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-94031-1. Part of a twelve-volume series.
Holmes, W. J. (1979), Double-Edged Secrets: U.S. Naval Intelligence Operations in the Pacific During World War II, United States Naval Institute. Contains some important material, such as Holmes's argument that, had the US Navy been warned of the attack and put to sea, it would have likely resulted in an even greater disaster.
Hughes-Wilson, John (2004) [First published 1999], Military Intelligence Blunders and Cover-Ups (revised ed.), Robinson. Contains a brief but insightful chapter on the particular intelligence failures, and a broader overview of what causes them.
Kimmett, Larry; Regis, Margaret (2004), The Attack on Pearl Harbor: An Illustrated History, NavPublishing. Using maps, photos, unique illustrations, and an animated CD, this book provides a detailed overview of the surprise attack that brought the United States into World War II.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. (February 25, 2002), Lighting the Path Ahead: Field Exercises and Transformation (PDF) (Report), Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, archived (PDF) from the original on September 24, 2021, retrieved December 11, 2021. Contains a passage regarding the Yarnell attack, as well as reference citations.
Layton, Edwin T.; Pineau, Roger; Costello, John (1985), And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway   Breaking the Secrets, New York: W. Morrow, ISBN 978-0-688-06968-1. Layton, Kimmel's Combat Intelligence Officer, says that Douglas MacArthur was the only field commander who had received any substantial amount of Purple intelligence.
Madsen, Daniel (2003), Resurrection-Salvaging the Battle Fleet at Pearl Harbor, Naval Institute Press
McCollum, Arthur H. (October 7, 1940), Memorandum for the Director: Estimate of the Situation in the Pacific and Recommendations for Action by the United States (Memorandum), Office of Naval Intelligence. The McCollum memo is a 1940 memo from a Naval headquarters staff officer to his superiors outlining possible provocations to Japan, which might lead to war (declassified in 1994).
Melber, Takuma (2016), Pearl Harbor: Japans Angriff und der Kriegseintritt der USA [Pearl Harbor: Japan's Attack and the US Entry into the War] (in German), M nchen: C.H. Beck, ISBN 978-3-406-69818-7.
Moorhead, John J. (1942), "Surgical Experience at Pearl Harbor", The Journal of the American Medical Association, 118 (9): 712, doi:10.1001/jama.1942.62830090002009. An overview of different surgical procedures at the hospital at the scene of the event.
Morgenstern, George Edward (1947), Pearl Harbor: The Story of the Secret War, The Devin-Adair Company. Conspiracy theory.
Parker, Frederick D. (1994), Pearl Harbor Revisited: United States Navy Communications Intelligence 1924 1941, National Security Agency, Center for Cryptologic History   via Naval History and Heritage Command. Contains a detailed description of what the Navy knew from intercepted and decrypted Japan's communications prior to Pearl.
Rodgaard, John; Hsu, Peter K.; Lucas, Carroll L. & Biache, Andrew Jr. (December 1999), "Pearl Harbor   Attack from Below", Naval History, United States Naval Institute, vol. 13, no. 6, archived from the original on September 30, 2006
Seki, Eiji (2006), Mrs. Ferguson's Tea-Set, Japan and the Second World War: The Global Consequences Following Germany's Sinking of the SS Automedon in 1940, London: Brill/Global Oriental, ISBN 978-1-905246-28-1.
Stille, Mark E. (2011), Tora! Tora! Tora!: Pearl Harbor 1941, Raid Series, vol. 26, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 978-1-84908-509-0
Stinnett, Robert (1999), Day of Deceit: The Truth About FDR and Pearl Harbor, Free Press, ISBN 0-7432-0129-9, archived from the original on June 16, 2005. A study of the Freedom of Information Act documents that led Congress to direct clearance of Kimmel and Short.
Takeo, Iguchi (2010), Demystifying Pearl Harbor: A New Perspective From Japan, I-House Press
Theobald, Robert A. (1954), Final Secret of Pearl Harbor, Devin-Adair, ISBN 0-8159-5503-0. Foreword by Fleet Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr.
Toll, Ian W. (2011), Pacific Crucible: War at Sea in the Pacific, 1941 1942, New York: W. W. Norton
Wedemeyer, Albert C. (1958), Wedemeyer Reports!, Henry Holt Co., ISBN 0-89275-011-1
Wohlstetter, Roberta (1962), Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, Stanford University Press. The most cited scholarly work on the intelligence failure at Pearl Harbor. Her introduction and analysis of the concept of "noise" persist in understanding intelligence failures.
Wohlstetter, Roberta (1965), "Cuba and Pearl Harbor: Hindsight and Foresight" (PDF), Foreign Affairs, Council on Foreign Relations, 43 (4): 691 707, doi:10.2307/20039133, JSTOR 20039133, archived from the original (PDF) on December 10, 2017
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pearl Harbor attack.
Library resources about  Attack on Pearl Harbor 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Navy History Heritage Command Official Overview
History.com Account With Video
About Education Account
"Remembering Pearl Harbor:The USS Arizona Memorial", a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
Hawaii War Records Depository, Archives & Manuscripts Department, University of Hawaii at Manoa Library
7 December 1941, The Air Force Story
The "Magic" Background (PDFs or readable online)
The Congressional investigation
LTC Jeffrey J. Gudmens; COL Timothy R. Reese (2009). Staff Ride Handbook for the Attack on Pearl Harbor, 7 December 1941: A Study of Defending America (PDF) (Report). Combat Studies Institute.
Pearl Harbor collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Accounts[edit]
Guarding The United States And Its Outposts, in Guarding the United States and Its Outposts Archived December 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Official US Army history of Pearl Harbor by the United States Army Center of Military History
War comes to Hawaii Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Monday, September 13, 1999
Media[edit]
Video of first Newsreel from December 23, 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor
Pearl Harbour   British Movietone News, 1942
Historic footage of Pearl Harbor during and immediately following attack on December 7, 1941
Historical documents[edit]
WW2DB: US Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor
Second World War   USA Declaration of War on Japan
Collection of extensive Japanese preparation military documents
vtePearl Harbor attackAttack
Events leading to the attack
Order of battle
Present US ships
Battleship Row
Niihau incident
Japanesecarriersinvolved
Akagi
Kaga
S ry 
Hiry 
Sh kaku
Zuikaku
United Statesships sunk
Arizona
salvaged artifacts
California
Oglala
Oklahoma
Shaw
Sotoyomo
Utah
West Virginia
YFD-2
Aftermath
Consequences
Sleeping giant quote
Day of Infamy speech
U.S. declaration of war
U.K. declaration of war
Roberts Commissions
Pearl Harbor Committee
Medal of Honor recipients
Remembrance
Remembrance Day
USS Arizona Memorial
Survivors Association
Commemorative Medal
Books
Crisis: The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor and Southeast Asia (1992)
Days of Infamy series (2004 05)
Pacific War series (2007 08)
Films
Secret Agent of Japan (1942)
The War at Sea from Hawaii to Malaya (1942)
Air Force (1943)
This Is the Army (1943)
December 7th (1943)
Task Force (1949)
From Here to Eternity (1953)
The Revolt of Mamie Stover (1956)
Storm Over the Pacific (1960)
In Harm's Way (1965)
Tora! Tora! Tora! (1970)
1941 (1979)
The Final Countdown (1980)
Pearl Harbor (2001)
Midway (2019)
Other
Vulnerability of Pearl Harbor
Advance-knowledge conspiracy theory
In popular culture
vteUnited States in World War IIHome front
American music during World War II
United States aircraft production during World War II
Arizona during World War II
Nevada during World War II
New Mexico during World War II
G.I. Generation
Schools at War
American women
Women Airforce Service Pilots
Women's Army Corps
Woman's Land Army of America
Rosie the Riveter
 Minorities
Hispanic Americans in World War II
Native Americans and World War II
Puerto Ricans in World War II
 Military participation
 Army (Uniforms)
Army Air Force
 Marine Corps
Navy
 Service medals (Medal of Honor recipients)
Events
List of battles
Attack on Pearl Harbor
Normandy landings
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Minorities
African Americans (Tuskegee Airmen)
Asian Americans
Chinese Americans
Japanese Americans
Jewish Americans
Diplomatic participation
Lend-Lease
Destroyers-for-bases deal
Project Hula
vteEmpire of JapanOverview
Agriculture
Censorship
Demographics
Economy
Economic history
Education
Eugenics
Foreign commerce and shipping
Industrial production
Militarism
Nationalism
Politics
Statism
State Shinto
Kazoku
Emperors
Meiji (Mutsuhito)
Taish  (Yoshihito)
Sh wa (Hirohito)
Symbols
Flag of Japan
Rising Sun Flag
National seals of Japan
Imperial Seal
Government Seal
State Seal
Privy Seal
Kimigayo
Policies
Constitution
Charter Oath
Foreign relations
Imperial Rescript on Education
Imperial Rule Assistance Association
Kokutai
Mokusatsu
National Spiritual Mobilization Movement
Peace Preservation Law
Political parties
Supreme Court of Judicature
Tokk 
Tonarigumi
Greater East Asia Conference
GovernmentAdministration(ministries)
Imperial Household
Home Ministry
War
Army
Navy
Treasury
Foreign Affairs
Agriculture and Commerce
Commerce and Industry
Munitions
Colonial Affairs
Greater East Asia
East Asia Development Board (K ain)
Legislative anddeliberative bodies
Daij -kan
Privy Council
Gozen Kaigi
Imperial Diet
Peers
Representatives
MilitaryArmed Forces
Imperial General Headquarters
Imperial Japanese Army General Staff Office
Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff
Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors
Senjinkun military code
Nuclear weapons program
Kamikaze
War crimes
Supreme War Council
Conscription
Imperial Japanese Army
General Staff
Air Service
Railways and Shipping
Imperial Guard
Imperial Way Faction (K d ha)
Japanese holdout
Taiwan Army of Japan
Control Faction (T seiha)
Kenpeitai
Imperial Japanese Navy
General Staff
Air Service
Marines
Fleet Faction
Treaty Faction
HistoryMeiji era
Meiji Restoration
Beipu uprising
Boshin War
Two Lords Incident
Satsuma Rebellion
First Sino-Japanese War
Triple Intervention
Boxer Rebellion
Anglo Japanese Alliance
Russo-Japanese War
Invasion of Taiwan (1874)
Invasion of Taiwan (1895)
Taish  era
World War I
Siberian Intervention
General Election Law
Washington Naval Treaty
Manchuria Mongolia problem
Taisho Democracy
Tapani incident
Truku War
Racial Equality Proposal
Sh wa era
Sh wa financial crisis
Jinan incident
London Naval Treaty
Musha Incident
Pacification of Manchukuo
January 28 incident
Anti-Comintern Pact
Second Sino-Japanese War
Soviet Japanese border conflicts
Rape of Nanking
Tripartite Pact
Soviet Japanese Neutrality Pact
Japan during World War II
Pacific War
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Soviet Japanese War
Surrender (Potsdam Declaration, Hirohito surrender broadcast)
Occupation
TerritoriesColonies
Karafuto (naichi after 1943)
Ch sen
Kant -sh 
Nan'y 
Taiwan
Puppet states
Manchukuo
Mengjiang
Wang Jingwei regime
Second Philippine Republic
Empire of Vietnam
State of Burma
Azad Hind
Occupied territories
Borneo
Burma
Dutch East Indies
French Indochina
Hong Kong
Malaya
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Ideology
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere
Other topics
Sonn  j i
Fukoku ky hei
Hakk  ichiu
Japanese settlers in Manchuria
Internment camps
German pre World War II industrial co-operation
Shinmin no Michi
Sh wa Modan
Socialist thought
Taiwanese Imperial Japan Serviceman
Yasukuni Shrine
International Military Tribunal for the Far East
Political dissidence
vteWorld War II
Outline
Military engagements
Battles
Operations
Leaders
Allied
Axis
Commanders
Casualties
Conferences
GeneralTopics
Air warfare of World War II
In Europe
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Declarations of war
Diplomacy
Governments in exile
Home front
Australian
United Kingdom
United States
Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
British contribution
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Naval history
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology
Allied cooperation
Mulberry harbour
Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II
Theaters
Asia and Pacific
China
South-East Asia
Pacific
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific
Indian Ocean
Europe
Western Front
Eastern Front
Mediterranean and Middle East
North Africa
East Africa
Italy
West Africa
Atlantic
timeline
Americas
Aftermath
Chinese Civil War
Cold War
Decolonization
Division of Korea
First Indochina War
Expulsion of Germans
Greek Civil War
Indonesian National Revolution
Keelhaul
Marshall Plan
Occupation of Germany
Occupation of Japan
Osoaviakhim
Paperclip
Soviet occupations
Baltic
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Territorial changes of Germany
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
United Nations
War crimes
Allied war crimes
Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes
German war crimes
forced labour
Wehrmacht war crimes
The Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Nuremberg trials
Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes
Nanjing Massacre
Unit 731
Prosecution
Croatian war crimes
Genocide of Serbs
Persecution of Jews
Romanian war crimes
Sexual violence
German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Ianjo
Rape of Manila
Marocchinate
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland
ParticipantsAllies
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria (from September 1944)
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
Finland (from September 1944)
France
Free France
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
Newfoundland
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania (from August 1944)
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
Tuva
United Kingdom
British Empire
United States
Puerto Rico
Yugoslavia
Axis
Albania protectorate
Bulgaria (until September 1944)
Wang Jingwei regime
Croatia
Finland (until September 1944)
Germany
Hungary
Free India
French Indochina
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines
Romania (until August 1944)
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France
Neutral powers
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Vatican City
Resistance
Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Dutch East Indies
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jews
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Qu c d n  ng
 ng minh H i
Vi t Minh
Yugoslavia
POWs
Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
German prisoners
Soviet Union
Azerbaijan
United States
United Kingdom
Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners
Soviet Union
Soviet prisoners
Finland
atrocities by Germans
Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
TimelinePrelude
Africa
Asia
Europe
1939
Poland
Phoney War
Battle of South Guangxi
Winter War
Atlantic
First Battle of Changsha
1939 1940 Winter Offensive
1940
German invasion of Denmark (1940)
Norwegian campaign
German invasion of Luxembourg
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Battle of Zaoyang Yichang
Battle of Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
Hundred Regiments Offensive
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass
1941
Battle of South Henan
Battle of South Shanxi
East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union
Summer War
Finland (Silver Fox)
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor
Hong Kong
Philippines
Second Battle of Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941 1942)
Greek famine of 1941 1944
1942
Burma
Third Battle of Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
 Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
St Nazaire
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch
Chinese famine of 1942 1943
1943
Tunisia
Battle of West Hubei
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
 Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy
Armistice of Cassibile
Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde
Bengal famine of 1943
1944
Monte Cassino / Anzio
Narva
Korsun Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Philippines (1944 1945)
Leyte
Syrmian Front
Hungary
Budapest
Burma (1944 1945)
Ardennes
Bodenplatte
Dutch famine of 1944 1945
1945
Vistula Oder
Manila
Iwo Jima
Project Hula
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Guangxi
West Hunan
Italy (Spring 1945)
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Surrender of Germany
document
Borneo
Taipei
Naval bombardment of Japan
Manchuria
Atomic bombings
Debate
South Sakhalin
Kuril Islands
Shumshu
Vietnamese famine of 1945
Surrender of Japan
Potsdam Declaration
document
End of World War II in Asia
 World War II portal
 World portal
Bibliography
Category
Portal
vteStrategic bombing during World War II
Area bombardment
Aerial bombing of cities
Area bombing directive
Firestorm
Strategic bombing
V-weapons
European theatreDenmark
Nex 
R nne
France
Caen
Le Havre
Royan
Saint-Leu-d'Esserent
GermanyBattle of the Ruhr
Bochum
Cologne
Dortmund
Duisburg
D sseldorf
Essen
Gelsenkirchen
Krefeld
Wuppertal
Other cities
Aachen
Augsburg
Aschersleben
Berlin
Bocholt
Braunschweig
Bremen
Breslau
Chemnitz
Crailsheim
Darmstadt
Dessau
Dietzenbach
Dresden
Emden
Frankfurt
Freiburg
Friedrichshafen
Giessen
Halberstadt
Halle
Hamburg
Hanau
Hannover
Heilbronn
Hildesheim
Innsbruck
Jena
Kaiserslautern
Karlsruhe
Kassel
Kleve
K nigsberg
Leipzig
L beck
Mainz
Magdeburg
Mannheim
Moers
M nster
Munich
Nordhausen
Nuremberg
Osnabr ck
Paderborn
Pforzheim
Potsdam
Rostock
Saarbr cken
Schweinfurt
Siegen
Stuttgart
Ulm
Wesel
Wilhelmshaven
Worms
W rzburg
Italy
Alessandria
Ancona
Bari
Benevento
Bologna
Cagliari
Cassino
Catania
Ferrara
Foggia
Frascati
Genoa
Grosseto
Livorno
Messina
Milan
Naples
Padua
Palermo
Pescara
Pisa
Reggio Calabria
Rimini
Rome
Terni
Treviso
Trieste
Turin
Verona
Vicenza
Viterbo
Zadar
Netherlands
Eindhoven
Nijmegen
Rotterdam
The Hague
Poland
Frampol
Warsaw
Wielu 
Romania
Bucharest
Ploie ti
Soviet Union
Gorky
Leningrad
Minsk
Stalingrad
UnitedKingdom
Battle of Britain
Baedeker Blitz
The Blitz
Barrow-in-Furness
Bath
Belfast
Birmingham
Bournemouth
Brighton
Bristol
Cardiff
Clydebank
Coventry
Exeter
Greenock
Hull
Leeds
Liverpool
London
Manchester
Norwich
Nottingham
Plymouth
Sheffield
Southampton
Swansea
Yugoslavia
Belgrade
1941
1944
Podgorica
Sarajevo
Other cities
Budapest (Hungary)
Dublin (Ireland)
Hammerfest (Norway)
Helsinki (Finland)
Namsos (Norway)
Prague (Czechoslovakia)
Schaffhausen (Switzerland)
Sofia (Bulgaria)
Tallinn (Estonia)
Vienna (Austria)
Zagreb (Croatia)
Pacific WarBurma
Burma campaign
Mandalay
Allied Rangoon
China
Chongqing
Hong Kong
Nanjing
Shanghai
Indonesia
Sukabumi
Surabaya
Japan
Akita
Aomori
Fukui
Fukuoka
Gifu
Hamamatsu
Hiratsuka
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Kobe
K fu
Kure
Nagaoka
Nagoya
Naha
Numazu
Okazaki
Osaka
Rabaul
Sendai
Shizuoka
Tokyo (10 March 1945)
Toyohashi
Toyokawa
Utsunomiya
Yawata
June 1944
Yokkaichi
Colonies
Taipei (Taiwan)
Singapore
Allied Singapore
Axis Singapore
Australia
Broome
Darwin
United States
Pearl Harbor
Unalaska
Other cities
Bangkok (Thailand)
Colombo (Sri Lanka)
Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia)
Manila (Philippines)
Mediterranean andMiddle EastMandatory Palestine
Acre
Haifa
Jaffa
Tel Aviv
Other areas
Bahrain
Dhahran (Saudi Arabia)
Gibraltar
Malta
North AfricaChad
Fort Lamy
Authority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Portal: World War IIAttack on Pearl Harbor at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from Commons
Coordinates: 21 21 50 N 157 57 07 W  /  21.364 N 157.952 W  / 21.364; -157.952
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attack_on_Pearl_Harbor&oldid=1149333183"