Translations of the Bible
This article is about the general history of Bible translations. For translations into specific languages, see List of Bible translations by language.
 Collection of Bibles and New Testaments in several languages
Part of a series on theBible
Canons and books
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
Old Testament (OT)
New Testament (NT)
Deuterocanon
Antilegomena
Chapters and verses
Apocrypha
Jewish
OT
NT
Authorship and development
Authorship
Dating
Hebrew canon
Old Testament canon
New Testament canon
Composition of the Torah
Mosaic authorship
Pauline epistles
Petrine epistles
Johannine works
Translations and manuscripts
Dead Sea scrolls
Masoretic Text
Samaritan Pentateuch
Targumim
Septuagint
Peshitta
Vetus Latina
Vulgate
Gothic Bible
Luther Bible
English Bibles
by language
Biblical studies
Archeology
Artifacts
Dating
Historicity
Internal consistency
People
Places
Names
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia
Rahlfs' Septuagint
Novum Testamentum Graece
Documentary hypothesis
Synoptic problem
NT textual categories
Biblical criticism
Historical
Textual
Source
Form
Redaction
Canonical
Interpretation
Hermeneutics
Pesher
Midrash
Pardes
Allegorical interpretation
Historical-grammatical method
Inspiration
Literalism
Alcohol
Conspiracy theory
Ethics
Capital punishment
Homosexuality
Humor
Incest
Muhammad
Prophecy
Rape
Serpents
Sex
Slavery
Violence
Warfare
Women
Perspectives
Gnostic
Islamic
Quranic
Inerrancy
Infallibility
Criticism of the Bible
Biblical authority
Outline of Bible-related topics Bible portalvte
The Bible has been translated into many languages from the biblical languages of Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. As of September 2022[update] all of the Bible has been translated into 724 languages, the New Testament has been translated into an additional 1,617 languages, and smaller portions of the Bible have been translated into 1,248 other languages according to Wycliffe Global Alliance. Thus, at least some portions of the Bible have been translated into 3,589 languages.[1]
Early translators rendered biblical texts into Syriac, Latin, Ge'ez, Gothic and Slavonic languages, among others. Jerome's 4th-century Latin Vulgate version was dominant in Western Christianity during the Middle Ages. Since then, the Bible has been translated into many more languages.
English Bible translations have a rich and varied history of more than a millennium. (See List of English Bible translations.)
Textual variants in the New Testament include errors, omissions, additions, changes, and alternate translations. In some cases, different translations have been used as evidence for or have been motivated by doctrinal differences.
Original text[edit]
Hebrew Bible[edit]
The Hebrew Bible was mainly written in Biblical Hebrew, with some portions (notably in Daniel and Ezra) in Biblical Aramaic. From the 6th century to the 10th century AD, Jewish scholars, today known as Masoretes, compared the text of all known biblical manuscripts in an effort to create a unified, standardized text. A series of highly similar texts eventually emerged, and any of these texts are known as Masoretic Texts (MT). The Masoretes also added vowel points (called niqqud) to the text, since the original text contained only consonants. This sometimes required the selection of an interpretation; since some words differ only in their vowels their meaning can vary in accordance with the vowels chosen. In antiquity, variant Hebrew readings existed, some of which have survived in the Samaritan Pentateuch and other ancient fragments, as well as being attested in ancient versions in other languages.[2]
New Testament[edit]
The New Testament was written in Koine Greek.[3] The autographs, the Greek manuscripts written by the original authors, have not survived. Scholars surmise the original Greek text from the manuscripts that do survive. The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type, the Byzantine text-type, and the Western text-type.
Most variants among the manuscripts are minor, such as alternative spelling, alternative word order, the presence or absence of an optional definite article ("the"), and so on. Occasionally, a major variant happens when a portion of a text was missing or for other reasons. Examples of major variants are the endings of Mark, the Pericope Adulter , the Comma Johanneum, and the Western version of Acts.
The discovery of older manuscripts which belong to the Alexandrian text-type, including the 4th-century Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus, led scholars to revise their view about the original Greek text. Karl Lachmann based his critical edition of 1831 on manuscripts dating from the 4th century and earlier, to argue that the Textus Receptus must be corrected according to these earlier texts.
Early manuscripts of the Pauline epistles and other New Testament writings show no punctuation whatsoever.[4][5] The punctuation was added later by other editors, according to their own understanding of the text.
History[edit]
Ancient translations[edit]
Aramaic Targums[edit]
Main article: Targum
Some of the first translations of the Torah began during the Babylonian exile, when Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Jews. With most people speaking only Aramaic and not understanding Hebrew, the Targums were created to allow the common person to understand the Torah as it was read in ancient synagogues.
Greek Septuagint[edit]
Main article: Septuagint
By the 3rd century BC, Alexandria had become the center of Hellenistic Judaism, and during the 3rd to 2nd centuries BC translators compiled in Egypt a Koine Greek version of the Hebrew scriptures in several stages (completing the task by 132 BC). The Talmud ascribes the translation effort to Ptolemy II Philadelphus (r. 285 246 BC), who allegedly hired 72 Jewish scholars for the purpose, for which reason the translation is commonly known as the Septuagint (from the Latin septuaginta, "seventy"), a name which it gained in "the time of Augustine of Hippo" (354 430 AD).[6][7] The Septuagint (LXX), the very first translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, later became the accepted text of the Old Testament in the Christian church and the basis of its canon. Jerome based his Latin Vulgate translation on the Hebrew for those books of the Bible preserved in the Jewish canon (as reflected in the Masoretic text), and on the Greek text for the deuterocanonical books.
The translation now known as the Septuagint was widely used by Greek-speaking Jews, and later by Christians.[8] It differs somewhat from the later standardized Hebrew (Masoretic Text). This translation was promoted[by whom?] by way of a legend (primarily recorded as the Letter of Aristeas) that seventy (or in some sources, seventy-two) separate translators all produced identical texts; supposedly proving its accuracy.[9]
Versions of the Septuagint contain several passages and whole books not included in the Masoretic texts of the Tanakh. In some cases these additions were originally composed in Greek, while in other cases they are translations of Hebrew books or of Hebrew variants not present in the Masoretic texts. Recent discoveries have shown that more of the Septuagint additions have a Hebrew origin than previously thought. While there are no complete surviving manuscripts of the Hebrew texts on which the Septuagint was based, many[quantify] scholars believe that they represent a different textual tradition ("Vorlage") from the one that became the basis for the Masoretic texts.[2]
Late Antiquity[edit]
Origen's Hexapla placed side by side six versions of the Old Testament: the Hebrew consonantal text, the Hebrew text transliterated into Greek letters (the Secunda), the Greek translations of Aquila of Sinope and Symmachus the Ebionite, one recension of the Septuagint, and the Greek translation of Theodotion. In addition, he included three anonymous translations of the Psalms (the Quinta, Sexta and Septima). His eclectic recension of the Septuagint had a significant influence on the Old Testament text in several important manuscripts. The canonical Christian Bible was formally established by Bishop Cyril of Jerusalem in 350 (although it had been generally accepted by the church previously), confirmed by the Council of Laodicea in 363 (both lacked the Book of Revelation), and later established by Athanasius of Alexandria in 367 (with Revelation added), and Jerome's Vulgate Latin translation dates to between AD 382 and 405. Latin translations predating Jerome are collectively known as Vetus Latina texts.
Christian translations also tend to be based upon the Hebrew, though some denominations prefer the Septuagint (or may cite variant readings from both). Bible translations incorporating modern textual criticism usually begin with the masoretic text, but also take into account possible variants from all available ancient versions. The received text of the Christian New Testament is in Koine Greek,[a] and nearly all translations are based upon the Greek text.[citation needed]
Jerome began by revising the earlier Latin translations, but ended by going back to the original Greek, bypassing all translations, and going back to the original Hebrew wherever he could instead of the Septuagint.
The Bible was translated into Gothic in the 4th century by a group of scholars, possibly under the supervision of Ulfilas.[10][11] In the 5th century, Saint Mesrob translated the Bible using the Armenian alphabet invented by him. Also dating from the same period are the Syriac, Coptic, Old Nubian, Ethiopic and Georgian translations.[citation needed]
There are also several ancient translations, most important of which are in the Syriac dialect of Aramaic (including the Peshitta and the Diatessaron gospel harmony), in the Ethiopian language of Ge'ez, and in Latin (both the Vetus Latina and the Vulgate).
In 331, the Emperor Constantine commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople. Athanasius (Apol. Const. 4) recorded Alexandrian scribes around 340 preparing Bibles for Constans. Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation. For example, it is speculated that this may have provided motivation for canon lists, and that Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209, Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Alexandrinus are examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta, these are the earliest extant Christian Bibles.[12]
Middle Ages[edit]
Main article: Bible translations in the Middle Ages
 The Codex Gigas from the 13th century, held at the Royal Library in Sweden.
When ancient scribes copied earlier books, they wrote notes on the margins of the page (marginal glosses) to correct their text especially if a scribe accidentally omitted a word or line and to comment about the text. When later scribes were copying the copy, they were sometimes uncertain if a note was intended to be included as part of the text. See textual criticism. Over time, different regions evolved different versions, each with its own assemblage of omissions, additions, and variants (mostly in orthography).
The earliest surviving complete manuscript of the entire Bible in Latin is the Codex Amiatinus, a Latin Vulgate edition produced in 8th-century England at the double monastery of Wearmouth-Jarrow.
During the Middle Ages, translation, particularly of the Old Testament was discouraged. Nevertheless, there are some fragmentary Old English Bible translations, notably a lost translation of the Gospel of John into Old English by the Venerable Bede, which is said to have been prepared shortly before his death around the year 735. An Old High German version of the gospel of Matthew dates to 748. Charlemagne in c. 800 charged Alcuin with a revision of the Latin Vulgate. The translation into Old Church Slavonic was started in 863 by Cyril and Methodius.
Alfred the Great, a ruler in England, had a number of passages of the Bible circulated in the vernacular in around 900. These included passages from the Ten Commandments and the Pentateuch, which he prefixed to a code of laws he promulgated around this time. In approximately 990, a full and freestanding version of the four Gospels in idiomatic Old English appeared, in the West Saxon dialect; these are called the Wessex Gospels. Around the same time, a compilation now called the Old English Hexateuch appeared with the first six (or, in one version, seven) books of the Old Testament.
Pope Innocent III in 1199 banned unauthorized versions of the Bible as a reaction to the Cathar and Waldensian heresies. The synods of Toulouse and Tarragona (1234) outlawed possession of such renderings. There is evidence of some vernacular translations being permitted while others were being scrutinized.
The complete Bible was translated into Old French in the late 13th century. Parts of this translation were included in editions of the popular Bible historiale, and there is no evidence of this translation being suppressed by the Church.[13] The entire Bible was translated into Czech around 1360.
The most notable Middle English Bible translation, Wycliffe's Bible (1383), based on the Vulgate, was banned by the Oxford Synod in 1408. The Hungarian Hussite Bible appeared in 1416. In 1478, a Catalan translation was made in the dialect of Valencia. Many parts of the Bible were printed by William Caxton in his translation of the Golden Legend, and in Speculum Vitae Christi (The Mirror of the Blessed Life of Jesus Christ).
Reformation and Early Modern period[edit]
See also: Early Modern English Bible translations
 Czech Protestant Bible of Kralice (1593)
The earliest printed edition of the Greek New Testament appeared in 1516 from the Froben press, by Desiderius Erasmus, who reconstructed its Greek text from several recent manuscripts of the Byzantine text-type. He occasionally added a Greek translation of the Latin Vulgate for parts that did not exist in the Greek manuscripts. He produced four later editions of this text. Erasmus was Roman Catholic, but his preference for the Byzantine Greek manuscripts rather than the Latin Vulgate led some church authorities to view him with suspicion.
During 1517 and 1519 Francysk Skaryna printed a translation of the Bible in Old Belarusian language in twenty-two books.[14]
In 1521, Martin Luther was placed under the Ban of the Empire, and he retired to the Wartburg Castle. During his time there, he translated the New Testament from Greek into German. It was printed in September 1522. The first complete Dutch Bible, partly based on the existing portions of Luther's translation, was printed in Antwerp in 1526 by Jacob van Liesvelt.[15]
The first printed edition with critical apparatus (noting variant readings among the manuscripts) was produced by the printer Robert Estienne of Paris in 1550. The Greek text of this edition and of those of Erasmus became known as the Textus Receptus (Latin for "received text"), a name given to it in the Elzevier edition of 1633, which termed it as the text nunc ab omnibus receptum ("now received by all").
The use of numbered chapters and verses was not introduced until the Middle Ages and later. The system used in English was developed by Stephanus (Robert Estienne of Paris) (see Chapters and verses of the Bible)
Later critical editions incorporate ongoing scholarly research, including discoveries of Greek papyrus fragments from near Alexandria, Egypt, that date in some cases within a few decades of the original New Testament writings.[16] Today, most critical editions of the Greek New Testament, such as UBS4 and NA27, consider the Alexandrian text-type corrected by papyri, to be the Greek text that is closest to the original autographs. Their apparatus includes the result of votes among scholars, ranging from certain {A} to doubtful {E}, on which variants best preserve the original Greek text of the New Testament.
Critical editions that rely primarily on the Alexandrian text-type inform nearly all modern translations (and revisions of older translations). For reasons of tradition, however, some translators prefer to use the Textus Receptus for the Greek text, or use the Majority Text which is similar to it but is a critical edition that relies on earlier manuscripts of the Byzantine text-type. Among these, some argue that the Byzantine tradition contains scribal additions, but these later interpolations preserve the orthodox interpretations of the biblical text as part of the ongoing Christian experience and in this sense are authoritative. Distrust of the textual basis of modern translations has contributed to the King-James-Only Movement.
The churches of the Protestant Reformation translated the Greek of the Textus Receptus to produce vernacular Bibles, such as the German Luther Bible (1522), the Polish Brest Bible (1563), the Spanish "Biblia del Oso" (in English: Bible of the Bear, 1569) which later became the Reina-Valera Bible upon its first revision in 1602, the Czech Melantrich Bible (1549) and Bible of Kralice (1579-1593) and numerous English translations of the Bible. Tyndale's New Testament translation (1526, revised in 1534, 1535 and 1536) and his translation of the Pentateuch (1530, 1534) and the Book of Jonah were met with heavy sanctions given the widespread belief that Tyndale changed the Bible as he attempted to translate it. Tyndale's unfinished work, cut short by his execution, was supplemented by Myles Coverdale and published under a pseudonym to create the Matthew Bible, the first complete English translation of the Bible. Attempts at an "authoritative" English Bible for the Church of England would include the Great Bible of 1538 (also relying on Coverdale's work), the Bishops' Bible of 1568, and the Authorized Version (the King James Version) of 1611, the last of which would become a standard for English speaking Christians for several centuries.
The first complete French Bible was a translation by Jacques Lef vre d' taples, published in 1530 in Antwerp.[17] The Froschauer Bible of 1531 and the Luther Bible of 1534 (both appearing in portions throughout the 1520s) were an important part of the Reformation.
The first English translations of Psalms (1530), Isaiah (1531), Proverbs (1533), Ecclesiastes (1533), Jeremiah (1534) and Lamentations (1534), were executed by the Protestant Bible translator George Joye in Antwerp. In 1535 Myles Coverdale published the first complete English Bible also in Antwerp.[18]
By 1578 both Old and New Testaments were translated to Slovene by the Protestant writer and theologian Jurij Dalmatin. The work was not printed until 1583. The Slovenes thus became the 12th nation in the world with a complete Bible in their language. The translation of the New Testament was based on the work by Dalmatin's mentor, the Protestant Primo  Trubar, who published the translation of the Gospel of Matthew already in 1555 and the entire testament by parts until 1577.
Following the distribution of a Welsh New Testament and Prayer Book to every parish Church in Wales in 1567, translated by William Salesbury, Welsh became the 13th language into which the whole Bible had been translated in 1588, through a translation by William Morgan, the bishop of Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant.[19]
Samuel Bogus aw Chyli ski (1631 1668) translated and published the first Bible translation into Lithuanian.[20]
Nova Vulgata[edit]
The Nova Vulgata is the most recent translation to Latin. On 29 November 1965, Pope Paul VI instituted the Pontifical Commission for the Revised Standard Version of the Bible,[21] in order to prepare a new translation from Hebrew, Aramaic, and Koine Greek, to Latin. The result was the Nova Vulgata, promulgated by Pope John Paul II in 1979.
The purpose was to achieve more precision and clarity in the texts, and to remove the errors and obscure passages that were present in the version of Jerome of Stridon,[21] known as the Vulgate.
Modern translation efforts[edit]
See also: International Bible Society, Wycliffe Bible Translators, and Institute for Bible Translation
Bible Translation Statistics (for selected years) 
Year
Full Bible
New Testament
Portions
Total
1996
308
764
1014
2086
2006
426
1114
862
2402
2010
457
1211
897
2565
2011
513
1276
1015
2804
2012
518
1275
1005
2798
2013
513
1309
1028
2850
2014
531
1329
1023
2883
2015
554
1333
1045
2932
2016
636
1442
1145
3223
2017
670
1521
1121
3312
2018
683
1534
1133
3350
2019
698
1548
1138
3384
2020
704
1551
1160
3415
2021
717
1582
1196
3495
2022
724
1617
1248
3589
The Bible is the most translated book in the world. The United Bible Societies announced that as of 31 December 2007[22] the complete Bible was available in 438 languages, 123 of which included the deuterocanonical material as well as the Tanakh and New Testament. Either the Tanakh or the New Testament was available in an additional 1,168 languages, in some kind of translations, like the interlinear morpheme-by-morpheme translation (e.g. some Parallel Bible, with interlinear morphemic glossing).
In 1999, Wycliffe Bible Translators announced Vision 2025 a project that intends to commence Bible translation in every remaining language community by 2025. It was realised that, at the rates of Bible translation at that point, it would take until at least 2150 until Bible translation began in every language that was needing a translation. Since the launch of Vision 2025, Bible translation efforts have increased dramatically, in large part due to the technology that is now available. Due to the increase, at current rates, Bible translation will begin in every language by 2038, thus being 112 years faster.[23]
As of October 2022, they estimated that around 128.8 million people spoke those 1,680 languages where translation work still needs to begin. This represents 22.7% of all languages (based off an estimate of 7,388 total languages) and 1.7% of the human population (based of a global population of 7.36 billion).
In total, there are 3,799 languages without any bible translation at all, but an estimated 1,155 of these (with a population of 10.3 million people) are likely to never need a Bible because they are very similar to other languages, or spoken by very few speakers where the language will die out very soon.[1]
Bible translation is currently happening in 2,846 languages in 157 countries. This work impacts 1.11 billion people, or about 15 percent of all language users, who have (or will soon have) new access to at least some portions of Scripture in their first language.[1]
Differences in Bible translations[edit]
 This Gutenberg Bible is displayed by the United States Library of Congress
Further information: Dynamic and formal equivalence and Bible version debate
Dynamic or formal translation policy[edit]
A variety of linguistic, philological and ideological approaches to translation have been used. Inside the Bible-translation community, these are commonly categorized as:
Dynamic equivalence translation
Formal equivalence translation (similar to literal translation)
Idiomatic, or paraphrastic translation, as used by the late Kenneth N. Taylor
though modern linguists, such as Bible scholar Dr. Joel Hoffman, disagree with this classification.[24]
As Hebrew and Greek, the original languages of the Bible, like all languages, have some idioms and concepts not easily translated, there is in some cases an ongoing critical tension about whether it is better to give a word for word translation or to give a translation that gives a parallel idiom in the target language. For instance, in the Douay Rheims Bible, Revised Standard Version Catholic Edition, New American Bible Revised Edition, which are the English language Catholic translations, as well as Protestant translations like the King James Bible, the Darby Bible, the Recovery Version, the Literal Standard Version, the New Revised Standard Version, the Modern Literal Version, and the New American Standard Bible are seen as more literal translations (or "word for word"), whereas translations like the New International Version and New Living Translation sometimes attempt to give relevant parallel idioms. The Living Bible and The Message are two paraphrases of the Bible that try to convey the original meaning in contemporary language. The further away one gets from word for word translation, the easier the text becomes to read while relying more on the theological, linguistic or cultural understanding of the translator, which one would not normally expect a lay reader to require. On the other hand, as one gets closer to a word for word translation, the text becomes more literal but still relies on similar problems of meaningful translation at the word level and makes it difficult for lay readers to interpret due to their unfamiliarity with ancient idioms and other historical and cultural contexts.
Doctrinal differences and translation policy[edit]
Further information: Tetragrammaton in the New Testament
In addition to linguistic concerns, theological issues also drive Bible translations. Some translations of the Bible, produced by single churches or groups of churches, may be seen as subject to a point of view by the translation committee.
For example, the New World Translation, produced by Jehovah's Witnesses, provides different renderings where verses in other Bible translations support the deity of Christ.[25] The NWT also translates kurios as "Jehovah" rather than "Lord" when quoting Hebrew passages that used YHWH. The authors believe that Jesus would have used God's name and not the customary kurios. On this basis, the anonymous New World Bible Translation Committee inserted Jehovah into the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (New Testament) a total of 237 times while the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures (Old Testament) uses Jehovah a total of 6,979 times to a grand total of 7,216 in the entire 2013 Revision New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures while previous revisions such as the 1984 revision were a total of 7,210 times while the 1961 revision were a total of 7,199 times.[26]
A number of Sacred Name Bibles (e.g., the Sacred Scriptures Bethel Edition) have been published that are even more rigorous in transliterating the tetragrammaton using Semitic forms to translate it in the Old Testament and also using the same Semitic forms to translate the Greek word Theos (God) in the New Testament usually Yahweh, Elohim or some other variation.
Other translations are distinguished by smaller but distinctive doctrinal differences. For example, the Purified Translation of the Bible, by translation and explanatory footnotes, promoting the position that Christians should not drink alcohol, that New Testament references to "wine" are translated as "grape juice".
See also[edit]
Bible portal
Ancient and classical translations
Targum and Peshitta (Aramaic)
Greek versions of the Bible
Vetus Latina and Vulgate (Latin versions)
Syriac versions of the Bible
Coptic versions of the Bible
English translations
Bible translations into English
Other languages
Bible translations by language
Difficulties
Gender in Bible translation
Texas sharpshooter fallacy#Translation and interpretation
Translation#Fidelity and transparency
Others
Bibledit
Bible version debate
Byzantine text-type
Bible concordance
Exegesis
Hermeneutics
Institute for Bible Translation
List of languages by year of first Bible translation
Skopos theory
Textus Receptus
Textual variants in the New Testament
Translation
Notes[edit]
^ Some scholars hypothesize that certain books (whether completely or partially) may have been written in Aramaic before being translated for widespread dissemination. One very famous example of this is the opening to the Gospel of John, which some scholars argue to be a Greek translation of an Aramaic hymn.[citation needed]
References[edit]
^ a b c "2022 Global Scripture Access". wycliffe.net. Retrieved 3 November 2022.
^ a b Menachem Cohen, The Idea of the Sanctity of the Biblical Text and the Science of Textual Criticism in HaMikrah V'anachnu, ed. Uriel Simon, HaMachon L'Yahadut U'Machshava Bat-Z'mananu and Dvir, Tel-Aviv, 1979.
^ Herbert Weir Smyth, Greek Grammar. Revised by Gordon M. Messing. ISBN 9780674362505. Harvard University Press, 1956. Introduction F, N-2, p. 4A
^ "Greek Language and Linguistics - Ancient Greek, mostly Hellenistic".
^ http://www.stpaulsirvine.org/images/papyruslg.gif%7C[permanent dead link] shows an example of the text without punctuation
^ Sundberg, Albert C. Jr. (2002). "The Septuagint: The Bible of Hellenistic Judaism".  In McDonald, Lee Martin; Sanders, James A. (eds.). The Canon Debate. Hendrickson Publishers. p. 72. ISBN 978-1-56563-517-3.
^ The Canon Debate, McDonald & Sanders editors, chapter by Sundberg, page 72, adds further detail: "However, it was not until the time of Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE) that the Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures came to be called by the Latin term septuaginta. [70 rather than 72]
Jerome began by revising the earlier Latin translations, but ended by going back to the original Greek, bypassing all translations, and going back to the original Hebrew wherever he could instead of the Septuagint.
The New Testament and at least some of the Old Testament was translated into Gothic in the 4th century by Ulfilas. In the 5th century, Saint Mesrob translated the Bible into Armenian. Also dating from the same period are the Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic and Georgian translations.
In his City of God 18.42, while repeating the story of Aristeas with typical embellishments, Augustine adds the remark, "It is their translation that it has now become traditional to call the Septuagint" ...[Latin omitted]... Augustine thus indicates that this name for the Greek translation of the scriptures was a recent development. But he offers no clue as to which of the possible antecedents led to this development: Exod 24:1 8, Josephus [Antiquities 12.57, 12.86], or an elision. ...this name Septuagint appears to have been a fourth- to fifth-century development."
^ Karen Jobes and Moises Silva, Invitation to the Septuagint, ISBN 1-84227-061-3 (Paternoster Press, 2001).  The as of 2001[update] standard introductory work on the Septuagint.
^ 
Jennifer M. Dines, The Septuagint, Michael A. Knibb, Ed., London: T&T Clark, 2004.
^ Falluomini, Carla (2015). The Gothic Version of the Gospels and Pauline Epistles: Cultural background, transmission and character. Berlin: De Gruyter. doi:10.1515/9783110334692. ISBN 978-3110334692.
^ Ratkus, Art ras (2018). "Greek   in Gothic translation: Linguistics and theology at a crossroads". NOWELE. 71 (1): 3 34. doi:10.1075/nowele.00002.rat.
^ The Canon Debate, McDonald & Sanders editors, 2002, pp. 414 15, for the entire paragraph.
^ Sneddon, Clive R. 1993. "A neglected mediaeval Bible translation." Romance Languages Annual 5(1): 11 16 [1] Archived 2011-06-11 at the Wayback Machine
^       (           )  ,    ,  , 1994
^ Paul Arblaster, Gergely Juh sz, Guido Latr  (eds) Tyndale's Testament, Brepols 2002, ISBN 2-503-51411-1, p. 120.
^ Metzger, Bruce R. Manuscripts of the Greek Bible: An Introduction to Paleography (Oxford University Press, 1981) cf. Papyrus 52.
^ Paul Arblaster, Gergely Juh sz, Guido Latr  (eds) Tyndale's Testament, Brepols 2002, ISBN 2-503-51411-1, pp. 134 35.
^ Paul Arblaster, Gergely Juh sz, Guido Latr  (eds) Tyndale's Testament, Brepols 2002, ISBN 2-503-51411-1, pp. 143 45.
^ J. Davies, "Hanes Cymru". 1990, p. 236
^ S. L. Greenslade, The Cambridge History of the Bible: The West, from the Reformation to the Present Day. 1995, p. 134
^ a b "Nova Vulgata. Praefatio ad lectorem" (in Latin). Retrieved 14 May 2022.
^ United Bible Society (2008). "Statistical Summary of languages with the Scriptures". Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 2008-03-22.
^ Creson, Bob. "Bible Translation as We Approach 2025 What's Been Accomplished and What Remains". Mission Frontiers. Retrieved 26 October 2019.
^ "Formal Equivalence and Dynamic Equivalence: A False Dichotomy"
^ [2][dead link]
^ New World Translation appendix, pp. 1564 66. When discussing "Restoring the Divine Name," the New World Bible Translation Committee states: "To know where the divine name was replaced by the Greek words   and  , we have determined where the inspired Christian writers have quoted verses, passages and expressions from the Hebrew Scriptures and then we have referred back to the Hebrew text to ascertain whether the divine name appears there. In this way we determined the identity to give Ky ri os and The os  and the personality with which to clothe them." Explaining further, the Committee said: "To avoid overstepping the bounds of a translator into the field of exegesis, we have been most cautious about rendering the divine name in the Christian Greek Scriptures, always carefully considering the Hebrew Scriptures as a background. We have looked for agreement from the Hebrew versions to confirm our rendering." Such agreement from Hebrew versions exists in all the 237 places that the New World Bible Translation Committee has rendered the divine name in the body of its translation.
Further reading[edit]
Wills, Garry, "A Wild and Indecent Book" (review of David Bentley Hart, The New Testament:  A Translation, Yale University Press, 577 pp.), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXV, no. 2 (8 February 2018), pp. 34 35.  Discusses some pitfalls in interpreting and translating the New Testament.
Sharma, Sandeep (2018). "Chichewa and Hindi Back Translations of the Bible: A Comparative Check of Translation Techniques". Journal of Translation. 14 (1): 42 47. doi:10.54395/jot-69624.
External links[edit]
Bible translations at Curlie
Repackaging the Bible by Eric Marrapodi, CNN, December 24, 2008
Bible Versions and Translations on BibleStudyTools.com
Huge selection of Bibles in Foreign Languages    bibleinmylanguage.com
BibleGateway.com (has many translations to select)
vteEnglish-language translations of the Bible5th 11th century
Wessex Gospels
Hatton Gospels
Old English Hexateuch
Old English Bible translations
Middle English
Wycliffe
Middle English Bible translations
16th 17th century
Tyndale
Coverdale
Matthew
Great Bible
Taverner
Geneva
Bishops'
Douay Rheims (DRV)
King James (KJV)
18th 19th century
Challoner
Brenton's Septuagint
Webster's
Young's Literal (YLT)
Revised (RV)
Living Oracles
Darby
Emphatic Diaglott
Joseph Smith
Quaker
Julia E. Smith Parker Translation
20th century
American Standard (ASV)
Rotherham's Emphasized
Ferrar Fenton
Moffatt, New Translation
Knox
Basic English (BBE)
Revised Standard (RSV)
Anchor
New World (NWT)
Modern Language (MLB)
New English (NEB)
Living English (BLE)
New American Standard (NASB)
Good News (GNB)
Jerusalem (JB)
New American (NAB)
Living
New International (NIV)
New Century (NCV)
Bethel
New King James (NKJV)
New Jerusalem (NJB)
Green's Literal Translation (GLT)
Recovery
Christian Community (CCB)
New Revised Standard (NRSV)
Revised English (REB)
Contemporary English (CEV)
The Message (MSG)
Clear Word (TCW)
New Life (NLV)
21st Century King James (KJ21)
Third Millennium (TMB)
New International Reader's (NIrV)
New International Inclusive Language
God's Word
New Living (NLT)
Heinz Cassirer's translation
Complete Jewish Bible
International Standard (ISV)
Holman Christian Standard (HCSB)
The Holy Bible from Ancient Eastern Manuscripts
Hebrew Bible
Jewish Publication Society of America Version
New Jewish Publication Society of America Tanakh
New Testament
Worrell
Phillips
Partial
Four Prophets (Phillips)
21st century
World English (WEB)
World Messianic
English Standard (ESV)
Today's New International (TNIV)
New English (NET)
Ignatius (RSV2CE)
The Voice
Common English (CEB)
Apostolic Bible Polyglot
Open English (OEB)
Eastern / Greek Orthodox Bible (EOB)
New American Bible Revised Edition (NABRE)
Lexham English
The Orthodox Jewish
Original Aramaic Bible in Plain English
Divine Name King James
Names of God
Tree of Life Bible
Modern English (MEV)
Literal English (LEV)
Christian Standard (CSB)
Revised New Jerusalem (RNJB)
Evangelical Heritage (EHV)
New Heart English Bible, Jehovah Edition (NHEB-JE)
Legacy Standard (LSB)
Hebrew Bible
Alter
Septuagint
New English Translation of the Septuagint
Study Bibles
Haydock Bible
Life Application Study Bible
Oxford Annotated Bible
Reformation Study Bible
Scofield Reference Bible
Thompson Chain-Reference Bible
Dake Annotated Reference Bible
Logos International Study Bible
Hebrew-Greek Key Word Study Bible
MacArthur Study Bible
Ryrie Study Bible
The Wesley Study Bible
The Lutheran Study Bible
Orthodox Study Bible
Study Bible for NIV
Study Bible for ESV
Study Bible for NLT
Study Bible for GNT
Study Bible for NASB
New Interpreter's Study Bible
Reflecting God Study Bible
Archaeological Study Bible
The Life with God Study Bible
The Green Bible
Picture Bibles for Adults
Brick Testament
Manga Bible
The Action Bible
Modern Dialectal & Slang
Glasgow
LOLCat
Notable publishers
Cambridge University Press
Oxford University Press
American Bible Society
Zondervan
Thomas Nelson
Tyndale House
HarperCollins
Holman
Lockman Foundation
Crossway
Hendrickson Publisher
Ignatius Press
Saint Benedict Press
Baronius Press
Additional lists
List of English Bible translations
Old English (pre-1066)
Middle English (1066 1500)
Early Modern English (1500 1800)
Modern Christian (1800 )
Modern Jewish (1853 )
vteTranslationTypes
Legal
Literary
Bible
Quran
Kural
Linguistic validation
Medical
Regulatory
Technical
Interpretation
Cultural
Word-for-word
Sense-for-sense
Homophonic
Theory
Translation studies
Skopos theory
Translation project
Translation criticism
Dynamic and formal equivalence
Contrastive linguistics
Technologies
CAT
Machine translation
Mobile translation
Translation management system
Dubbing
Subtitling
Pre-editing
Postediting
Multimedia translation
Localization
Glocalization
Internationalization and localization
Language localization
Video game localization
Dub localization
Website localization
Software localization
Institutional
Associations
Awards
Organizations
Schools
Related topics
Transcription
Transliteration
Video relay service (VRS)
Telephone interpreting
Language barrier
Fan translation
Fansub
Fandub
Scanlation
Journalistic translation
Books and magazines on translation
Bible translations by language
Translated books
List of most translated works
Translators
Kural translations by language
Authority control: National 
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bible_translations&oldid=1141106838"