Extended or continuing storyline in episodic storytelling media
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Story arc" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A story arc (also narrative arc) is the chronological construction of plot in a novel or story. It can also mean an extended or continuing storyline in episodic storytelling media such as television, comic books, comic strips, board games, video games, and films with each episode following a dramatic arc.[1] On a television program, for example, the story would unfold over many episodes. In television, the use of the story arc is common in sitcoms, and even more so in soap operas. In a traditional Hollywood film, the story arc usually follows a three-act structure. Webcomics are more likely to use story arcs than newspaper comics, as most web comics have readable archives online that a newcomer to the strip can read in order to understand what is going on. Although story arcs have existed for decades, the term "story arc" was coined in 1988 in relation to the television series Wiseguy, and was quickly adapted for other uses.[citation needed]
Many American comic book series are now written in four- or six-issue arcs, within a continuing series. Short story arcs are easier to package as trade paperbacks for resale, and more accessible to the casual reader than the never-ending continuity that once characterized US comics.
A corollary to the absence of continuity, however, is that, as exemplified in 1950s DC Superman comics, no permanent change to characters or situations occurs, meaning no growth can take place. Thus, story lines repeat over time in a loop.
Dramatic structure and purpose[edit]
The purpose of a story arc is to move a character or a situation from one state to another, in other words, to effect change. This change or transformation often takes the form of either a tragic fall from grace or a reversal of that pattern. One common form in which this reversal is found is a character going from a situation of weakness to one of strength. For example, a poor woman goes on adventures and in the end makes a fortune for herself, or a lonely man falls in love and marries.
Another form of storytelling that offers a change or transformation of character is that of the "hero's journey," as laid out in Joseph Campbell's theory of the monomyth in his work, The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Christopher Vogler's The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers details the same theory specifically for western storytelling.
Many renowned novelists and writers claim to use a story arc to create characters, stories, even curriculum. Several have published their use of the story arc to create memorable tomes in record time.
In television and radio[edit]
See also: Serial (radio and television)
Story arcs on television and radio, and are common in many countries where multi-episode story lines are the norm. Examples are the UK's Doctor Who and most anime series.
Many arc-based series in past decades, such as V, were often short-lived and found it difficult to attract new viewers; they also rarely appear in traditional syndication. However, the rise of DVD box sets of complete seasons, as well as streaming, has worked in arc-based productions' favor as the standard season collection format allows the viewer to have easy access to the relevant episodes. One area of television where story arcs have always thrived, however, is in the realm of the soap opera, and often episodic series have been derisively referred to as "soap operas" when they have adopted story arcs.
Arc-based series draw and reward dedicated viewers, and fans of a particular show follow and discuss different story arcs independently from particular episodes. Story arcs are sometimes split into subarcs, if deemed significant by fans, making it easy to refer to certain episodes if their production order titles are unknown. Episodes not relevant to story arcs, such as "villain of the week" episodes) are sometimes dismissed as filler by fans, but might be referred to as self-contained or stand-alone episodes by producers.
Usage in manga and anime[edit]
Manga and anime are usually good examples of arc-based stories, to the point that most series shorter than twenty-six chapters are a single arc spanning all the chapters. This makes syndication difficult, as episodes watched in isolation often confuse viewers unless watched in conjunction with the series as a whole. Series of thirty chapters or longer usually have multiple arcs.
Neon Genesis Evangelion, for example, is a single story arc spanning twenty-six episodes. Other longer anime have multiple story arcs, such as Bleach, Gin Tama, One Piece, Naruto, Yu-Gi-Oh! and Fairy Tail. The anime Dragon Ball Z adapts four different story arcs from the Dragon Ball manga, each with its own ultimate antagonist, along with original story arcs created for the TV series.
See also[edit]
Character arc
Dramatic structure
Frame story
Limited series
Miniseries
Saga
Serial
Sjuzhet
Storytelling
Storyteller
References[edit]
^ "Narrative Arc   What is Narrative Arc in Literature?". ThoughtCo.
External links[edit]
Degann, Jonathan. "Game Theory 101 - Part I". The Games Journal.
vteNarrativeCharacter
Antagonist
Archenemy
Character arc
Character flaw
Characterization
Confidant
Deuteragonist
False protagonist
Focal character
Foil
Gothic double
Hamartia
Hero
Anti
Byronic
Tragic
Narrator
Protagonist
Stock character
Straight man
Supporting character
Title character
Tritagonist
Villain
Plot
Action
Backstory
Origin story
Chekhov's gun
Clich 
Cliffhanger
Conflict
Deus ex machina
Dialogue
Dramatic structure
Eucatastrophe
Foreshadowing
Flashback
Flashforward
Frame story
In medias res/Ab ovo
Kish tenketsu
MacGuffin
Pace
Plot device
Plot twist
Poetic justice
Red herring
Reveal
Shaggy dog story
Story arc
Subplot
Suspense
Trope
Setting
Alternate history
Backstory
Crossover
Dreamworld
Dystopia
Fictional location
city
country
universe
Utopia
Worldbuilding
Theme
Irony
Leitmotif
Metaphor
Moral
Motif
Deal with the Devil
Conflict between good and evil
Style
Allegory
Bathos
Comic relief
Diction
Figure of speech
Imagery
Mode
Mood
Narration
Narrative techniques
Show, don't tell
Stylistic device
Suspension of disbelief
Symbolism
Tone
Structure
Act
Act structure
Three-act structure
Freytag's Pyramid
Exposition/Protasis
Rising action/Epitasis
Climax/Peripeteia
Falling action/Catastasis
Denouement/Catastrophe
Linear narrative
Nonlinear narrative
films
television series
Premise
Types of fiction with multiple endings
Form
Drama
Fabliau
Flash fiction
Folklore
Fable
Fairy tale
Legend
Myth
Tall tale
Gamebook
Narrative poetry
Epic poetry
Novel
Novella
Parable
Short story
Vignette
Genre(List)
Fiction
Action fiction
Adventure
Comic
Crime
Docu
Epistolary
Ergodic
Erotic
Historical
Mystery
Nautical
Paranoid
Philosophical
Picaresque
Political
Pop culture
Psychological
Religious
Rogue
Romance
Chivalric
Prose
Saga
Satire
Speculative
Fantasy
Gothic
Horror
Magic realism
Science
Superhero
Theological
Thriller
Urban
Western
Nonfiction
Novel
Narration
First-person
Multiple narrators
Stream of consciousness
Stream of unconsciousness
Unreliable narrator
Diegesis
Self-insertion
Tense
Past
Present
Future
Related
Creative nonfiction
Dominant narrative
Fiction writing
Continuity
Canon
Reboot
Retcon
Prequel / Sequel
Literary science
Literary theory
Narrative therapy
Narratology
Political narrative
Rhetoric
Glossary
Screenwriting
Storytelling
Tellability
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Story_arc&oldid=1122873124"