Socially defined category of people who identify with each other
For other uses, see Ethnicity (disambiguation).
"Ethnicities" redirects here. For the academic journal, see Ethnicities (journal).
Part of a series onAnthropology
OutlineHistory
Types
Archaeological
Biological
Cultural
Linguistic
Social
Archaeological
Aerial
Aviation
Battlefield
Biblical
Bioarchaeological
Environmental
Ethnoarchaeological
Experiential
Feminist
Forensic
Maritime
Paleoethnobotanical
Zooarchaeological
Biological
Anthrozoological
Biocultural
Evolutionary
Forensic
Molecular
 Neurological
Nutritional
Paleoanthropological
Primatological
SocialCultural
Applied
Art
Cognitive
Cyborg
Development
Digital
Ecological
Environmental
Economic
Political economy
Feminist
Food
Historical
Institutional
Kinship
Legal
Media
Medical
Museums
Musical
Political
Psychological
Public
Religion
Symbolic
Transpersonal
Urban
Visual
Linguistic
Anthropological
Descriptive
Ethnological
Ethnopoetical
Historical
Semiotic
Sociological
Research framework
Anthropometry
Ethnography
cyber
Ethnology
Cross-cultural comparison
Participant observation
Holism
Reflexivity
Thick description
Cultural relativism
Ethnocentrism
Emic and etic
Key concepts
Culture
Development
Ethnicity
Evolution
sociocultural
Gender
Kinship and descent
Meme
Prehistory
Race
Society
Value
Colonialism / Postcolonialism
Key theories
Actor network theory
Alliance theory
Cross-cultural studies
Cultural materialism
Culture theory
Diffusionism
Feminism
Historical particularism
Boasian anthropology
Functionalism
Interpretive
Performance studies
Political economy
Practice theory
Structuralism
Post-structuralism
Systems theory
Lists
Anthropologists by nationality
Anthropology by year
Bibliography
Journals
List of indigenous peoples
Organizations
vte
An ethnicity or ethnic group is a grouping of people who identify with each other on the basis of shared attributes that distinguish them from other groups. Those attributes can include common sets of traditions, ancestry, language, history, society, nation, religion, or social treatment within their residing area.[1][2][3] The term ethnicity is often used interchangeably with the term nation, particularly in cases of ethnic nationalism.
Ethnicity may be construed as an inherited or as a societally imposed construct. Ethnic membership tends to be defined by a shared cultural heritage, ancestry, origin myth, history, homeland, language, dialect, religion, mythology, folklore, ritual, cuisine, dressing style, art, or physical appearance. Ethnic groups may share a narrow or broad spectrum of genetic ancestry, depending on group identification, with many groups having mixed genetic ancestry.[4][5][6] Ethnic groups often continue to speak related languages.
By way of language shift, acculturation, adoption and religious conversion, individuals or groups may over time shift from one ethnic group to another. Ethnic groups may be divided into subgroups or tribes, which over time may become separate ethnic groups themselves due to endogamy or physical isolation from the parent group. Conversely, formerly separate ethnicities can merge to form a pan-ethnicity and may eventually merge into one single ethnicity. Whether through division or amalgamation, the formation of a separate ethnic identity is referred to as ethnogenesis.
Although both organic and performative criteria characterise ethnic groups, debate in the past had dichotomised between primordialism and constructivism. Earlier 20th-century "Primordialists" viewed ethnic groups as real phenomena whose distinct characteristics have endured since the distant past.[7] Perspectives that developed after the 1960s increasingly viewed ethnic groups as social constructs, with identity assigned by societal rules.[8][9]
Terminology[edit]
The term ethnic is derived from the Greek word   ethnos (more precisely, from the adjective   ethnikos,[10] which was loaned into Latin as ethnicus). The inherited English language term for this concept is folk, used alongside the latinate people since the late Middle English period.
In Early Modern English and until the mid-19th century, ethnic was used to mean heathen or pagan (in the sense of disparate "nations" which did not yet participate in the Christian oikumene), as the Septuagint used ta ethne ("the nations") to translate the Hebrew goyim "the foreign nations, non-Hebrews, non-Jews".[11] The Greek term in early antiquity (Homeric Greek) could refer to any large group, a host of men, a band of comrades as well as a swarm or flock of animals. In Classical Greek, the term took on a meaning comparable to the concept now expressed by "ethnic group", mostly translated as "nation, tribe, a unique people group"; only in Hellenistic Greek did the term tend to become further narrowed to refer to "foreign" or "barbarous" nations in particular (whence the later meaning "heathen, pagan").[12]
In the 19th century, the term came to be used in the sense of "peculiar to a tribe, race, people or nation", in a return to the original Greek meaning. The sense of "different cultural groups", and in American English "tribal, racial, cultural or national minority group" arises in the 1930s to 1940s,[13] serving as a replacement of the term race which had earlier taken this sense but was now becoming deprecated due to its association with ideological racism. 
The abstract ethnicity had been used as a stand-in for "paganism" in the 18th century, but now came to express the meaning of an "ethnic character" (first recorded 1953).
The term ethnic group was first recorded in 1935 and entered the Oxford English Dictionary in 1972.[14] Depending on context, the term nationality may be used either synonymously with ethnicity or synonymously with citizenship (in a sovereign state). The process that results in emergence of an ethnicity is called ethnogenesis, a term in use in ethnological literature since about 1950. The term may also be used with the connotation of something unique and unusually exotic (cf. "an ethnic restaurant", etc.), generally related to cultures of more recent immigrants, who arrived after the dominant population of an area was established.
Depending on which source of group identity is emphasized to define membership, the following types of (often mutually overlapping) groups can be identified:
Ethno-linguistic, emphasizing shared language, dialect (and possibly script)  example: French Canadians
Ethno-national, emphasizing a shared polity or sense of national identity  example: Austrians
Ethno-racial, emphasizing shared physical appearance based on phenotype   example: African Americans
Ethno-regional, emphasizing a distinct local sense of belonging stemming from relative geographic isolation  example: South Islanders of New Zealand
Ethno-religious, emphasizing shared affiliation with a particular religion, denomination or sect  example: Sikhs
Ethno-cultural, emphasizing shared culture or tradition, often overlapping with other forms of ethnicity  example: Travellers
In many cases, more than one aspect determines membership: for instance, Armenian ethnicity can be defined by Armenian citizenship, having Armenian heritage, native use of the Armenian language, or membership of the Armenian Apostolic Church.
Definitions and conceptual history[edit]
 A group of ethnic Bengalis in Dhaka, Bangladesh. The Bengalis form the third-largest ethnic group in the world after the Han Chinese and Arabs.[15]
 The Javanese people of Indonesia are the largest Austronesian ethnic group.
Ethnography begins in classical antiquity; after early authors like Anaximander and Hecataeus of Miletus, Herodotus laid the foundation of both historiography and ethnography of the ancient world c. 480 BC. The Greeks had developed a concept of their own "ethnicity", which they grouped under the name of Hellenes. Herodotus (8.144.2) gave a famous account of what defined Greek (Hellenic) ethnic identity in his day, enumerating
shared descent (  homaimon, "of the same blood"),[16]
shared language (  homogl sson, "speaking the same language"),[17]
shared sanctuaries and sacrifices (Greek:             the n hidrumata te koina kai thusiai),[18]
shared customs (Greek:      thea homotropa, "customs of like fashion").[19][20][21]
Whether ethnicity qualifies as a cultural universal is to some extent dependent on the exact definition used. Many social scientists,[22] such as anthropologists Fredrik Barth and Eric Wolf, do not consider ethnic identity to be universal. They regard ethnicity as a product of specific kinds of inter-group interactions, rather than an essential quality inherent to human groups.[23][irrelevant citation]
According to Thomas Hylland Eriksen, the study of ethnicity was dominated by two distinct debates until recently.
One is between "primordialism" and "instrumentalism". In the primordialist view, the participant perceives ethnic ties collectively, as an externally given, even coercive, social bond.[24] The instrumentalist approach, on the other hand, treats ethnicity primarily as an ad hoc element of a political strategy, used as a resource for interest groups for achieving secondary goals such as, for instance, an increase in wealth, power, or status.[25][26] This debate is still an important point of reference in Political science, although most scholars' approaches fall between the two poles.[27]
The second debate is between "constructivism" and "essentialism". Constructivists view national and ethnic identities as the product of historical forces, often recent, even when the identities are presented as old.[28][29] Essentialists view such identities as ontological categories defining social actors.[30][31]
According to Eriksen, these debates have been superseded, especially in anthropology, by scholars' attempts to respond to increasingly politicized forms of self-representation by members of different ethnic groups and nations. This is in the context of debates over multiculturalism in countries, such as the United States and Canada, which have large immigrant populations from many different cultures, and post-colonialism in the Caribbean and South Asia.[32]
Max Weber maintained that ethnic groups were k nstlich (artificial, i.e. a social construct) because they were based on a subjective belief in shared Gemeinschaft (community). Secondly, this belief in shared Gemeinschaft did not create the group; the group created the belief. Third, group formation resulted from the drive to monopolize power and status. This was contrary to the prevailing naturalist belief of the time, which held that socio-cultural and behavioral differences between peoples stemmed from inherited traits and tendencies derived from common descent, then called "race".[33]
Another influential theoretician of ethnicity was Fredrik Barth, whose "Ethnic Groups and Boundaries" from 1969 has been described as instrumental in spreading the usage of the term in social studies in the 1980s and 1990s.[34] Barth went further than Weber in stressing the constructed nature of ethnicity. To Barth, ethnicity was perpetually negotiated and renegotiated by both external ascription and internal self-identification. Barth's view is that ethnic groups are not discontinuous cultural isolates or logical a priori to which people naturally belong. He wanted to part with anthropological notions of cultures as bounded entities, and ethnicity as primordialist bonds, replacing it with a focus on the interface between groups. "Ethnic Groups and Boundaries", therefore, is a focus on the interconnectedness of ethnic identities. Barth writes: "... categorical ethnic distinctions do not depend on an absence of mobility, contact, and information, but do entail social processes of exclusion and incorporation whereby discrete categories are maintained despite changing participation and membership in the course of individual life histories."[citation needed]
In 1978, anthropologist Ronald Cohen claimed that the identification of "ethnic groups" in the usage of social scientists often reflected inaccurate labels more than indigenous realities:
... the named ethnic identities we accept, often unthinkingly, as basic givens in the literature are often arbitrarily, or even worse inaccurately, imposed.[34]
In this way, he pointed to the fact that identification of an ethnic group by outsiders, e.g. anthropologists, may not coincide with the self-identification of the members of that group. He also described that in the first decades of usage, the term ethnicity had often been used in lieu of older terms such as "cultural" or "tribal" when referring to smaller groups with shared cultural systems and shared heritage, but that "ethnicity" had the added value of being able to describe the commonalities between systems of group identity in both tribal and modern societies. Cohen also suggested that claims concerning "ethnic" identity (like earlier claims concerning "tribal" identity) are often colonialist practices and effects of the relations between colonized peoples and nation-states.[34]
According to Paul James, formations of identity were often changed and distorted by colonization, but identities are not made out of nothing:
Categorizations about identity, even when codified and hardened into clear typologies by processes of colonization, state formation or general modernizing processes, are always full of tensions and contradictions. Sometimes these contradictions are destructive, but they can also be creative and positive.[35]
Social scientists have thus focused on how, when, and why different markers of ethnic identity become salient. Thus, anthropologist Joan Vincent observed that ethnic boundaries often have a mercurial character.[36] Ronald Cohen concluded that ethnicity is "a series of nesting dichotomizations of inclusiveness and exclusiveness".[34] He agrees with Joan Vincent's observation that (in Cohen's paraphrase) "Ethnicity ... can be narrowed or broadened in boundary terms in relation to the specific needs of political mobilization.[34] This may be why descent is sometimes a marker of ethnicity, and sometimes not: which diacritic of ethnicity is salient depends on whether people are scaling ethnic boundaries up or down, and whether they are scaling them up or down depends generally on the political situation.
Kanchan Chandra rejects the expansive definitions of ethnic identity (such as those that include common culture, common language, common history and common territory), choosing instead to define ethnic identity narrowly as a subset of identity categories determined by the belief of common descent.[37] J hanna Birnir similarly defines ethnicity as "group self-identification around a characteristic that is very difficult or even impossible to change, such as language, race, or location."[38]
Approaches to understanding ethnicity[edit]
Different approaches to understanding ethnicity have been used by different social scientists when trying to understand the nature of ethnicity as a factor in human life and society. As Jonathan M. Hall observes, World War II was a turning point in ethnic studies. The consequences of Nazi racism discouraged essentialist interpretations of ethnic groups and race. Ethnic groups came to be defined as social rather than biological entities. Their coherence was attributed to shared myths, descent, kinship, a commonplace of origin, language, religion, customs, and national character. So, ethnic groups are conceived as mutable rather than stable, constructed in discursive practices rather than written in the genes.[39]
Examples of various approaches are primordialism, essentialism, perennialism, constructivism, modernism, and instrumentalism.
"Primordialism", holds that ethnicity has existed at all times of human history and that modern ethnic groups have historical continuity into the far past. For them, the idea of ethnicity is closely linked to the idea of nations and is rooted in the pre-Weber understanding of humanity as being divided into primordially existing groups rooted by kinship and biological heritage.
"Essentialist primordialism" further holds that ethnicity is an a priori fact of human existence, that ethnicity precedes any human social interaction and that it is unchanged by it. This theory sees ethnic groups as natural, not just as historical. It also has problems dealing with the consequences of intermarriage, migration and colonization for the composition of modern-day multi-ethnic societies.[40]
"Kinship primordialism" holds that ethnic communities are extensions of kinship units, basically being derived by kinship or clan ties where the choices of cultural signs (language, religion, traditions) are made exactly to show this biological affinity. In this way, the myths of common biological ancestry that are a defining feature of ethnic communities are to be understood as representing actual biological history. A problem with this view on ethnicity is that it is more often than not the case that mythic origins of specific ethnic groups directly contradict the known biological history of an ethnic community.[40]
"Geertz's primordialism", notably espoused by anthropologist Clifford Geertz, argues that humans in general attribute an overwhelming power to primordial human "givens" such as blood ties, language, territory, and cultural differences. In Geertz' opinion, ethnicity is not in itself primordial but humans perceive it as such because it is embedded in their experience of the world.[40]
"Perennialism", an approach that is primarily concerned with nationhood but tends to see nations and ethnic communities as basically the same phenomenon holds that the nation, as a type of social and political organization, is of an immemorial or "perennial" character.[41] Smith (1999) distinguishes two variants: "continuous perennialism", which claims that particular nations have existed for very long periods, and "recurrent perennialism", which focuses on the emergence, dissolution and reappearance of nations as a recurring aspect of human history.[42]
"Perpetual perennialism" holds that specific ethnic groups have existed continuously throughout history.
"Situational perennialism" holds that nations and ethnic groups emerge, change and vanish through the course of history. This view holds that the concept of ethnicity is a tool used by political groups to manipulate resources such as wealth, power, territory or status in their particular groups' interests. Accordingly, ethnicity emerges when it is relevant as a means of furthering emergent collective interests and changes according to political changes in society. Examples of a perennialist interpretation of ethnicity are also found in Barth and Seidner who see ethnicity as ever-changing boundaries between groups of people established through ongoing social negotiation and interaction.
"Instrumentalist perennialism", while seeing ethnicity primarily as a versatile tool that identified different ethnics groups and limits through time, explains ethnicity as a mechanism of social stratification, meaning that ethnicity is the basis for a hierarchical arrangement of individuals. According to Donald Noel, a sociologist who developed a theory on the origin of ethnic stratification, ethnic stratification is a "system of stratification wherein some relatively fixed group membership (e.g., race, religion, or nationality) is used as a major criterion for assigning social positions".[43] Ethnic stratification is one of many different types of social stratification, including stratification based on socio-economic status, race, or gender. According to Donald Noel, ethnic stratification will emerge only when specific ethnic groups are brought into contact with one another, and only when those groups are characterized by a high degree of ethnocentrism, competition, and differential power. Ethnocentrism is the tendency to look at the world primarily from the perspective of one's own culture, and to downgrade all other groups outside one's own culture. Some sociologists, such as Lawrence Bobo and Vincent Hutchings, say the origin of ethnic stratification lies in individual dispositions of ethnic prejudice, which relates to the theory of ethnocentrism.[44] Continuing with Noel's theory, some degree of differential power must be present for the emergence of ethnic stratification. In other words, an inequality of power among ethnic groups means "they are of such unequal power that one is able to impose its will upon another".[43] In addition to differential power, a degree of competition structured along ethnic lines is a prerequisite to ethnic stratification as well. The different ethnic groups must be competing for some common goal, such as power or influence, or a material interest, such as wealth or territory. Lawrence Bobo and Vincent Hutchings propose that competition is driven by self-interest and hostility, and results in inevitable stratification and conflict.[44]
"Constructivism" sees both primordialist and perennialist views as basically flawed,[44] and rejects the notion of ethnicity as a basic human condition. It holds that ethnic groups are only products of human social interaction, maintained only in so far as they are maintained as valid social constructs in societies.
"Modernist constructivism" correlates the emergence of ethnicity with the movement towards nation states beginning in the early modern period.[45] Proponents of this theory, such as Eric Hobsbawm, argue that ethnicity and notions of ethnic pride, such as nationalism, are purely modern inventions, appearing only in the modern period of world history. They hold that prior to this ethnic homogeneity was not considered an ideal or necessary factor in the forging of large-scale societies.
Ethnicity is an important means by which people may identify with a larger group. Many social scientists, such as anthropologists Fredrik Barth and Eric Wolf, do not consider ethnic identity to be universal. They regard ethnicity as a product of specific kinds of inter-group interactions, rather than an essential quality inherent to human groups.[23] The process that results in emergence of such identification is called ethnogenesis. Members of an ethnic group, on the whole, claim cultural continuities over time, although historians and cultural anthropologists have documented that many of the values, practices, and norms that imply continuity with the past are of relatively recent invention.[46][47]
Ethnic groups can form a cultural mosaic in a society. That could be in a city like New York City or Trieste, but also the fallen monarchy of the Austro-Hungarian Empire or the United States. Current topics are in particular social and cultural differentiation, multilingualism, competing identity offers, multiple cultural identities and the formation of Salad bowl and melting pot.[48][49][50][51] Ethnic groups differ from other social groups, such as subcultures, interest groups or social classes, because they emerge and change over historical periods (centuries) in a process known as ethnogenesis, a period of several generations of endogamy resulting in common ancestry (which is then sometimes cast in terms of a mythological narrative of a founding figure); ethnic identity is reinforced by reference to "boundary markers"  characteristics said to be unique to the group which set it apart from other groups.[52][53][54][55][56][57]
Ethnicity theory in the United States[edit]
Ethnicity theory argues that race is a social category and is only one of several factors in determining ethnicity. Other criteria include "religion, language, 'customs', nationality, and political identification".[58] This theory was put forward by sociologist Robert E. Park in the 1920s. It is based on the notion of "culture".
This theory was preceded by more than 100 years during which biological essentialism was the dominant paradigm on race. Biological essentialism is the belief that some races, specifically white Europeans in western versions of the paradigm, are biologically superior and other races, specifically non-white races in western debates, are inherently inferior. This view arose as a way to justify enslavement of African Americans and genocide of Native Americans in a society that was officially founded on freedom for all. This was a notion that developed slowly and came to be a preoccupation with scientists, theologians, and the public. Religious institutions asked questions about whether there had been multiple creations of races (polygenesis) and whether God had created lesser races. Many of the foremost scientists of the time took up the idea of racial difference and found that white Europeans were superior.[59]
The ethnicity theory was based on the assimilation model. Park outlined four steps to assimilation: contact, conflict, accommodation, and assimilation. Instead of attributing the marginalized status of people of color in the United States to their inherent biological inferiority, he attributed it to their failure to assimilate into American culture. They could become equal if they abandoned their inferior cultures.
Michael Omi and Howard Winant's theory of racial formation directly confronts both the premises and the practices of ethnicity theory. They argue in Racial Formation in the United States that the ethnicity theory was exclusively based on the immigration patterns of the white population and did take into account the unique experiences of non-whites in the United States.[60] While Park's theory identified different stages in the immigration process  contact, conflict, struggle, and as the last and best response, assimilation  it did so only for white communities.[60] The ethnicity paradigm neglected the ways in which race can complicate a community's interactions with social and political structures, especially upon contact.
Assimilation  shedding the particular qualities of a native culture for the purpose of blending in with a host culture  did not work for some groups as a response to racism and discrimination, though it did for others.[60] Once the legal barriers to achieving equality had been dismantled, the problem of racism became the sole responsibility of already disadvantaged communities.[61] It was assumed that if a Black or Latino community was not "making it" by the standards that had been set by whites, it was because that community did not hold the right values or beliefs, or were stubbornly resisting dominant norms because they did not want to fit in. Omi and Winant's critique of ethnicity theory explains how looking to cultural defect as the source of inequality ignores the "concrete sociopolitical dynamics within which racial phenomena operate in the U.S."[62] It prevents critical examination of the structural components of racism and encourages a "benign neglect" of social inequality.[62]
Ethnicity and nationality[edit]
Further information: Nation state and minority group
Part of a series onPolitical andlegal anthropology
Basic concepts
Status and rank
Ascribed status
Achieved status
Social status
Caste
Age grade/Age set
Leveling mechanism
Leadership
Big man
Patriarchy
Matriarchy
Elder
Pantribal sodalities
Chief
Paramount chief
Polities
Band society
Segmentary lineage
Tribe
Chiefdom
Petty kingdom
House society
Ethnic group
Theatre state
Law and custom
Customary law
Legal culture
Case studies
Acephelous
Societies without hierarchical leaders
African Political Systems
Papuan Big man system
The Art of Not Being Governed
State
Non-western state systems
Negara
Mandala
Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa
Legal systems
Kapu
Colonialism and resistance
Europe and the People Without History
Cargo cult
Major theorists
E. Adamson Hoebel
Georges Balandier
F. G. Bailey
Fredrik Barth
Jeremy Boissevain
Robert L. Carneiro
Henri J. M. Claessen
Jean Comaroff
John Comaroff
Pierre Clastres
E. E. Evans-Pritchard
Wolfgang Fikentscher
Meyer Fortes
Morton Fried
Ernest Gellner
Lesley Gill
Ulf Hannerz
Thomas Blom Hansen
Ted C. Lewellen
Edmund Leach
Ralph Linton
Elizabeth Mertz
Sidney Mintz
Sally Falk Moore
Rodney Needham
Marshall Sahlins
James C. Scott
Elman Service
Aidan Southall
Jonathan Spencer
Bjorn Thomassen
Douglas R. White
Eric Wolf
Related articles
Circumscription theory
Legal anthropology
Left right paradigm
State formation
Political economy in anthropology
Network Analysis and Ethnographic Problems
Social and cultural anthropologyvte
In some cases, especially involving transnational migration or colonial expansion, ethnicity is linked to nationality. Anthropologists and historians, following the modernist understanding of ethnicity as proposed by Ernest Gellner[63] and Benedict Anderson[64] see nations and nationalism as developing with the rise of the modern state system in the 17th century. They culminated in the rise of "nation-states" in which the presumptive boundaries of the nation coincided (or ideally coincided) with state boundaries.
Thus, in the West, the notion of ethnicity, like race and nation, developed in the context of European colonial expansion, when mercantilism and capitalism were promoting global movements of populations at the same time state boundaries were being more clearly and rigidly defined.
In the 19th century, modern states generally sought legitimacy through their claim to represent "nations". Nation-states, however, invariably include populations who have been excluded from national life for one reason or another. Members of excluded groups, consequently, will either demand inclusion based on equality or seek autonomy, sometimes even to the extent of complete political separation in their nation-state.[65] Under these conditions when people moved from one state to another,[66] or one state conquered or colonized peoples beyond its national boundaries  ethnic groups were formed by people who identified with one nation, but lived in another state.
Multi-ethnic states can be the result of two opposite events, either the recent creation of state borders at variance with traditional tribal territories, or the recent immigration of ethnic minorities into a former nation-state.
Examples for the first case are found throughout Africa, where countries created during decolonization inherited arbitrary colonial borders, but also in European countries such as Belgium or United Kingdom. Examples for the second case are countries such as Netherlands, which were relatively ethnically homogeneous when they attained statehood but have received significant immigration in the 17th century and even more so in the second half of the 20th century. States such as the United Kingdom, France and Switzerland comprised distinct ethnic groups from their formation and have likewise experienced substantial immigration, resulting in what has been termed "multicultural" societies, especially in large cities.
The states of the New World were multi-ethnic from the onset, as they were formed as colonies imposed on existing indigenous populations.
In recent decades feminist scholars (most notably Nira Yuval-Davis)[67] have drawn attention to the fundamental ways in which women participate in the creation and reproduction of ethnic and national categories. Though these categories are usually discussed as belonging to the public, political sphere, they are upheld within the private, family sphere to a great extent.[68] It is here that women act not just as biological reproducers but also as "cultural carriers", transmitting knowledge and enforcing behaviors that belong to a specific collectivity.[69] Women also often play a significant symbolic role in conceptions of nation or ethnicity, for example in the notion that "women and children" constitute the kernel of a nation which must be defended in times of conflict, or in iconic figures such as Britannia or Marianne.
Ethnicity and race[edit]
 The racial diversity of Asia's ethnic groups. (Original caption: Asiatiska folk), Nordisk familjebok (1904)
Ethnicity is used as a matter of cultural identity of a group, often based on shared ancestry, language, and cultural traditions, while race is applied as a taxonomic grouping, based on physical similarities among groups. Race is a more controversial subject than ethnicity, due to common political use of the term.[citation needed] Ram n Grosfoguel (University of California, Berkeley) argues that "racial/ethnic identity" is one concept and concepts of race and ethnicity cannot be used as separate and autonomous categories.[70]
Before Weber (1864 1920), race and ethnicity were primarily seen as two aspects of the same thing. Around 1900 and before, the primordialist understanding of ethnicity predominated: cultural differences between peoples were seen as being the result of inherited traits and tendencies.[71] With Weber's introduction of the idea of ethnicity as a social construct, race and ethnicity became more divided from each other.
In 1950, the UNESCO statement "The Race Question", signed by some of the internationally renowned scholars of the time (including Ashley Montagu, Claude L vi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.), said:
National, religious, geographic, linguistic and cultural groups do not necessarily coincide with racial groups: and the cultural traits of such groups have no demonstrated genetic connection with racial traits. Because serious errors of this kind are habitually committed when the term "race" is used in popular parlance, it would be better when speaking of human races to drop the term "race" altogether and speak of "ethnic groups".[72]
In 1982, anthropologist David Craig Griffith summed up forty years of ethnographic research, arguing that racial and ethnic categories are symbolic markers for different ways people from different parts of the world have been incorporated into a global economy:
The opposing interests that divide the working classes are further reinforced through appeals to "racial" and "ethnic" distinctions. Such appeals serve to allocate different categories of workers to rungs on the scale of labor markets, relegating stigmatized populations to the lower levels and insulating the higher echelons from competition from below. Capitalism did not create all the distinctions of ethnicity and race that function to set off categories of workers from one another. It is, nevertheless, the process of labor mobilization under capitalism that imparts to these distinctions their effective values.[73]
According to Wolf, racial categories were constructed and incorporated during the period of European mercantile expansion, and ethnic groupings during the period of capitalist expansion.[74]
Writing in 1977 about the usage of the term "ethnic" in the ordinary language of Great Britain and the United States, Wallman noted
The term "ethnic" popularly connotes "[race]" in Britain, only less precisely, and with a lighter value load. In North America, by contrast, "[race]" most commonly means color, and "ethnics" are the descendants of relatively recent immigrants from non-English-speaking countries. "[Ethnic]" is not a noun in Britain. In effect there are no "ethnics"; there are only "ethnic relations".[75]
In the U.S., the OMB says the definition of race as used for the purposes of the US Census is not "scientific or anthropological" and takes into account "social and cultural characteristics as well as ancestry", using "appropriate scientific methodologies" that are not "primarily biological or genetic in reference".[76]
Ethno-national conflict[edit]
Further information: Ethnic conflict
Sometimes ethnic groups are subject to prejudicial attitudes and actions by the state or its constituents. In the 20th century, people began to argue that conflicts among ethnic groups or between members of an ethnic group and the state can and should be resolved in one of two ways. Some, like J rgen Habermas and Bruce Barry, have argued that the legitimacy of modern states must be based on a notion of political rights of autonomous individual subjects. According to this view, the state should not acknowledge ethnic, national or racial identity but rather instead enforce political and legal equality of all individuals. Others, like Charles Taylor and Will Kymlicka, argue that the notion of the autonomous individual is itself a cultural construct. According to this view, states must recognize ethnic identity and develop processes through which the particular needs of ethnic groups can be accommodated within the boundaries of the nation-state.
The 19th century saw the development of the political ideology of ethnic nationalism, when the concept of race was tied to nationalism, first by German theorists including Johann Gottfried von Herder. Instances of societies focusing on ethnic ties, arguably to the exclusion of history or historical context, have resulted in the justification of nationalist goals. Two periods frequently cited as examples of this are the 19th-century consolidation and expansion of the German Empire and the 20th century Nazi Germany. Each promoted the pan-ethnic idea that these governments were acquiring only lands that had always been inhabited by ethnic Germans. The history of late-comers to the nation-state model, such as those arising in the Near East and south-eastern Europe out of the dissolution of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian Empires, as well as those arising out of the former USSR, is marked by inter-ethnic conflicts. Such conflicts usually occur within multi-ethnic states, as opposed to between them, as in other regions of the world. Thus, the conflicts are often misleadingly labeled and characterized as civil wars when they are inter-ethnic conflicts in a multi-ethnic state.
Ethnic groups by continent[edit]
Africa[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in Africa
This section contains information of unclear or questionable importance or relevance to the article's subject matter. Please help improve this section by clarifying or removing indiscriminate details. If importance cannot be established, the section is likely to be moved to another article, pseudo-redirected, or removed.Find sources: "Ethnicity" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Ethnic groups in Africa number in the hundreds, each generally having its own language (or dialect of a language) and culture.
Asia[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in Asia
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Assyrians are one of the indigenous peoples of Northern Iraq.
Ethnic groups are abundant throughout Asia, with adaptations to the climate zones of Asia, which can be the Arctic, subarctic, temperate, subtropical or tropical. The ethnic groups have adapted to mountains, deserts, grasslands, and forests.
On the coasts of Asia, the ethnic groups have adopted various methods of harvest and transport. Some groups are primarily hunter-gatherers, some practice transhumance (nomadic lifestyle), others have been agrarian/rural for millennia and others becoming industrial/urban. Some groups/countries of Asia are completely urban, such as those in Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Singapore. The colonization of Asia was largely ended in the 20th century, with national drives for independence and self-determination across the continent.
In Indonesia alone, there are more than 1,300 ethnic groups recognized by the government, which are located on 17,000 islands in the Indonesian archipelago
Russia has more than 185 recognized ethnic groups besides the eighty percent ethnic Russian majority. The largest group is the Tatars, 3.8 percent. Many of the smaller groups are found in the Asian part of Russia (see Indigenous peoples of Siberia).
Europe[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in Europe
 The Basque people constitute an indigenous ethnic minority in both France and Spain.
 S mi family in Lapland of Finland, 1936
 The Irish are an ethnic group indigenous to Ireland of which 70 80 million people worldwide claim ancestry.[77]
Europe has a large number of ethnic groups; Pan and Pfeil (2004) count 87 distinct "peoples of Europe", of which 33 form the majority population in at least one sovereign state, while the remaining 54 constitute ethnic minorities within every state they inhabit (although they may form local regional majorities within a sub-national entity). The total number of national minority populations in Europe is estimated at 105 million people or 14% of 770 million Europeans.[78]
A number of European countries, including France[79] and Switzerland, do not collect information on the ethnicity of their resident population.
An example of a largely nomadic ethnic group in Europe is the Roma, pejoratively known as Gypsies. They originated from India and speak the Romani language.
The Serbian province of Vojvodina is recognizable for its multi-ethnic and multi-cultural identity.[80][81] There are some 26 ethnic groups in the province,[82] and six languages are in official use by the provincial administration.[83]
North America[edit]
Main articles: Ethnic origins of people in Canada, Ethnic groups in Central America, Demographics of Greenland, Demographics of Mexico, Ethnic groups in the United States, Indigenous peoples of the Americas  North America, Native Americans in the United States, Indigenous peoples in Canada, Indigenous peoples of Mexico, and Caribbean people
The indigenous people in North America are Native Americans. During European colonization, Europeans arrived in North America. Most Native Americans died due to Spanish diseases and other European diseases such as smallpox during the European colonization of the Americas. The largest ethnic group in the United States is White Americans. Hispanic and Latino Americans (Mexican Americans in particular) and Asian Americans have immigrated to the United States recently. In Mexico, most Mexicans are mestizo, a mixture of Spanish and Native American ancestry. Some Hispanic and Latino Americans living in the United States are not mestizos.[citation needed]
African slaves were brought to North America from the 16th to 19th centuries during the Atlantic slave trade. Many of them were sent to the Caribbean. Ethnic group that live in the Caribbean are Indigenous peoples, Africans, Indians, white Europeans, the Chinese and the Portuguese. The first white Europeans to arrive in the Dominican Republic were the Spanish in 1492. The Caribbean was also colonized and discovered by the Portuguese, English, Dutch and French.[84]
A sizeable number of people in the United States have mixed-race identities. In 2021, the number of Americans who identified as non-Hispanic and more than one race was 13.5 million. The number of Hispanic Americans who identified as multiracial was 20.3 million.[85] Over the course of the 2010s decade, there was a 127% increase in non-Hispanic Americans who identified as multiracial.[85]
The largest ethnic groups in the United States are Germans, African Americans, Mexicans, Irish, English, 
Americans, Italians, Poles, French, Scottish, Native Americans, Puerto Ricans, Norwegians, Dutch people, Swedish people, Chinese people, West Indians, Russians and Filipinos.[86]
In Canada, European Canadians are the largest ethnic group. In Canada, the indigenous population is growing faster than the non-indigenous population. Most immigrants in Canada come from Asia.[87]
South America[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in South America
In South America, although highly varying between regions, people are commonly mixed-race, indigenous, European, black African, and to a lesser extent also Asian.
Oceania[edit]
Main articles: Europeans in Oceania, Indigenous peoples of Oceania, and Pacific Islander
Nearly all states in Oceania have majority indigenous populations, with notable exceptions being Australia, New Zealand and Norfolk Island, who have majority European populations.[88] States with smaller European populations include Guam, Hawaii and New Caledonia (whose Europeans are known as Caldoche).[89][90] Indigenous peoples of Oceania are Australian Aboriginals, Austronesians and Papuans, and they originated from Asia.[91] The Austronesians of Oceania are further broken up into three distinct groups; Melanesians, Micronesians and Polynesians.
Oceanic South Pacific islands nearing Latin America were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans in the 16th century, with nothing to indicate prehistoric human activity by Indigenous peoples of the Americas or Oceania.[92][93][94] Contemporary residents are mainly mestizos and Europeans from the Latin American countries whom administer them,[95] although none of these islands have extensive populations.[96] Easter Island are the only oceanic island politically associated with Latin America to have an indigenous population, the Polynesian Rapa Nui people.[97] Their current inhabitants include indigenous Polynesians and mestizo settlers from political administrators Chile, in addition to mixed-race individuals with Polynesian and mestizo/European ancestry.[97] The British overseas territory of Pitcairn Islands, to the west of Easter Island, have a population of approximately 50 people. They are mixed-race Euronesians who descended from an initial group of British and Tahitian settlers in the 18th century. The islands were previously inhabited by Polynesians; they had long abandoned Pitcairn by the time the settlers had arrived.[98] Norfolk Island, now an external territory of Australia, is also believed to have been inhabited by Polynesians prior to its initial European discovery in the 18th century. Some of their residents are descended from mixed-race Pitcairn Islanders that were relocated onto Norfolk due to overpopulation in 1856.[99]
The once uninhabited Bonin Islands, later politically integrated into Japan, have a small population consisting of Japanese mainlanders and descendants of early European settlers.[97] Archeological findings from the 1990s suggested there was possible prehistoric human activity by Micronesians prior to European discovery in the 16th century.[100]
Several political entities associated with Oceania are still uninhabited, including Baker Island, Clipperton Island, Howland Island and Jarvis Island.[101] There were brief attempts to settle Clipperton with Mexicans and Jarvis with Native Hawaiians in the early 20th century. The Jarvis settlers were relocated from the island due to Japanese advancements during World War II, while most of the settlers on Clipperton ended up dying from starvation and murdering one and other.[102]
Australia[edit]
Main articles: Indigenous Australians and Native white Australians
The first evident ethnic group to live in Australia were the Australian Aboriginals, a group considered related to the Melanesian Torres Strait Islander people. Europeans, primarily from England arrived first in 1770.
The 2016 Census shows England and New Zealand are the next most common countries of birth after Australia, the proportion of people born in China and India has increased since 2011 (from 6.0 per cent to 8.3 per cent, and 5.6 per cent to 7.4 per cent, respectively).
The proportion of people identifying as being of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander origin increased from 2.5 per cent of the Australian population in 2011 to 2.8 per cent in 2016.
See also[edit]
Society portal
Ancestor
Clan
Diaspora
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic flag
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocultural empathy
Ethnogenesis
Ethnocide
Ethnographic group
Ethnography
Genealogy
Genetic genealogy
Homeland
Human Genome Diversity Project
Identity politics
Ingroups and outgroups
Intersectionality
Kinship
List of contemporary ethnic groups
List of indigenous peoples
Meta-ethnicity
Minority group
Multiculturalism
Nation
National symbol
Passing (sociology)
Polyethnicity
Population genetics
Race (human categorization)
Race and ethnicity in censuses
Race and ethnicity in the United States Census
Race and health
Segmentary lineage
Stateless nation
Tribe
Y-chromosome haplogroups in populations of the world
References[edit]
^ Chandra, Kanchan (2012). Constructivist theories of ethnic politics. Oxford University Press. pp. 69 70. ISBN 978-0-19-989315-7. OCLC 829678440. Archived from the original on 2022-07-30. Retrieved 2020-09-11.
^ "ethnicity: definition of ethnicity". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013.
^ People, James; Bailey, Garrick (2010). Humanity: An Introduction to Cultural Anthropology (9th ed.). Wadsworth Cengage learning. p. 389. In essence, an ethnic group is a named social category of people based on perceptions of shared social experience or one's ancestors' experiences. Members of the ethnic group see themselves as sharing cultural traditions and history that distinguish them from other groups. Ethnic group identity has a strong psychological or emotional component that divides the people of the world into opposing categories of 'us' and 'them'. In contrast to social stratification, which divides and unifies people along a series of horizontal axes based on socioeconomic factors, ethnic identities divide and unify people along a series of vertical axes. Thus, ethnic groups, at least theoretically, cut across socioeconomic class differences, drawing members from all strata of the population.
^ "Insight into Ethnic Differences". National Institutes of Health (NIH). 2015-05-25. Archived from the original on 2021-08-02. Retrieved 2021-08-02.
^ Banda, Yambazi; Kvale, Mark N.; Hoffmann, Thomas J.; Hesselson, Stephanie E.; Ranatunga, Dilrini; Tang, Hua; Sabatti, Chiara; Croen, Lisa A.; Dispensa, Brad P.; Henderson, Mary; Iribarren, Carlos (2015-08-01). "Characterizing Race/Ethnicity and Genetic Ancestry for 100,000 Subjects in the Genetic Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging (GERA) Cohort". Genetics. 200 (4): 1285 1295. doi:10.1534/genetics.115.178616. ISSN 0016-6731. PMC 4574246. PMID 26092716. Archived from the original on 2021-08-02. Retrieved 2021-08-02.
^ Salter, Frank; Harpending, Henry (2013-07-01). "J.P. Rushton's theory of ethnic nepotism". Personality and Individual Differences. 55 (3): 256 260. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2012.11.014. ISSN 0191-8869. Archived from the original on 2021-08-02. Retrieved 2021-08-02.
^ Bayar, Murat (2009-10-14). "Reconsidering primordialism: an alternative approach to the study of ethnicity". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 32 (9): 1639 1657. doi:10.1080/01419870902763878. S2CID 143391013. Archived from the original on 2022-03-03. Retrieved 2021-01-05.
^ Angela Onwuachi-Willig (6 September 2016). "Race and Racial Identity Are Social Constructs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2020.
^ Chandra Ford; Nina T Harawa (29 April 2010). "A new conceptualization of ethnicity for social epidemiologic and health equity research". Soc Sci Med. 71 (2): 251 258. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.04.008. PMC 2908006. PMID 20488602.
^   Archived 2021-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ ThiE. Tonkin, M. McDonald and M. Chapman, History and Ethnicity (London 1989), pp. 11 17 (quoted in J. Hutchinson & A.D. Smith (eds.), Oxford readers: Ethnicity (Oxford 1996), pp. 18 24)
^   Archived 2021-02-24 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^  Oxford English Dictionary Second edition, online version as of 2008-01-12, "ethnic, a. and n.". Cites Sir Daniel Wilson, The arch ology and prehistoric annals of Scotland 1851 (1863) and Huxley & Haddon (1935), We Europeans, pp. 136,181
^ Cohen, Ronald. (1978) "Ethnicity: Problem and Focus in Anthropology", Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 1978. 7:379 403; Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan (1975) Ethnicity  Theory and Experience, Cambridge, Massachusetts Harvard University Press.
The modern usage definition of the Oxford English Dictionary is:
a[djective]
...
2.a. About race; peculiar to a specific tribe, race or nation; ethnological. Also, about or having common tribal, racial, cultural, religious, or linguistic characteristics, esp. designating a racial or other group within a larger system; hence (U.S. colloq.), foreign, exotic.
b ethnic minority (group), a group of people differentiated from the majority of the community by racial origin or cultural background, and usu. claiming or enjoying official recognition of their group identity. Also attrib.
n[oun]
...
3 A member of an ethnic group or minority. Equatorians
(Oxford English Dictionary Second edition, online version as of 2008-01-12, s.v. "ethnic, a. and n.")
^ roughly 300 million worldwide (CIA Factbook 2014 estimates, numbers subject to rapid population growth).
^   Archived 2021-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^   Archived 2021-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ I. Polinskaya, "Shared sanctuaries and the gods of others: On the meaning Of 'common' in Herodotus 8.144", in R. Rosen & I. Sluiter (eds.), Valuing others in Classical Antiquity (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 43 70.
^   Archived 2021-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus)
^ Herodotus, 8.144.2: "The kinship of all Greeks in blood and speech, and the shrines of gods and the sacrifices that we have in common, and the likeness of our way of life."
^ Athena S. Leoussi, Steven Grosby, Nationalism and Ethnosymbolism: History, Culture, and Ethnicity in the Formation of Nations, Edinburgh University Press, 2006, p. 115
^ "Challenges of measuring an ethnic world". Publications.gc.ca. The Government of Canada. April 1, 1992. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Ethnicity is a fundamental factor in human life: it is a phenomenon inherent in human experience.
^ a b Fredrik Barth, ed. 1969 Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of Cultural Difference; Eric Wolf 1982 Europe and the People Without History p. 381
^ Geertz, Clifford, ed. (1967) Old Societies and New States: The Quest for Modernity in Africa and Asia. New York: The Free Press.
^ Cohen, Abner (1969) Custom and Politics in Urban Africa: A Study of Hausa Migrants in a Yoruba Town. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
^ Abner Cohen (1974) Two-Dimensional Man: An essay on power and symbolism in complex society. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
^ J. Hutchinson & A.D. Smith (eds.), Oxford readers: Ethnicity (Oxford 1996), "Introduction", 8 9
^ Gellner, Ernest (1983) Nations and Nationalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
^ Ernest Gellner (1997) Nationalism. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
^ Smith, Anthony D. (1986) The Ethnic Origins of Nations. Oxford: Blackwell.
^ Anthony Smith (1991) National Identity. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
^ T.H. Eriksen "Ethnic identity, national identity and intergroup conflict: The significance of personal experiences" in Ashmore, Jussim, Wilder (eds.): Social identity, intergroup conflict, and conflict reduction, pp. 42 70. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2001
^ Banton, Michael. (2007) "Weber on Ethnic Communities: A critique", Nations and Nationalism 13 (1), 2007, 19 35.
^ a b c d e Ronald Cohen 1978 "Ethnicity: Problem and Focus in Anthropology", Annual Review of Anthropology 7: 383 384 Palo Alto: Stanford University Press
^ James, Paul (2015). "Despite the Terrors of Typologies: The Importance of Understanding Categories of Difference and Identity". Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies. 17 (2): 174 195. doi:10.1080/1369801X.2014.993332. S2CID 142378403. Archived from the original on 2021-08-17. Retrieved 2016-03-12.
^ Vincent, Joan (1974), "The Structure of Ethnicity" in Human Organization 33(4): 375 379
^ Chandra, Kanchan (2006). "What is Ethnic Identity and Does it Matter?". Annual Review of Political Science. 9 (1): 397 424. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.9.062404.170715. ISSN 1094-2939.
^ Birnir, J hanna Krist n (2006). Ethnicity and Electoral Politics. Cambridge University Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-139-46260-0. Archived from the original on 2022-04-22. Retrieved 2022-03-21.
^ "David Konstan, "Defining Ancient Greek Ethnicity", Diaspora: A Journal of Transnational Studies, vol. 6, 1 (1997), pp. 97 98. Overview of J.M. Hall's book "Ethnic Identity in Greek Antiquity", Cambridge University Press, 1997" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-04-17. Retrieved 2018-06-02.
^ a b c (Smith 1999, p. 13)
^ Smith (1998), 159.
^ Smith (1999), 5.
^ a b Noel, Donald L. (1968). "A Theory of the Origin of Ethnic Stratification". Social Problems. 16 (2): 157 172. doi:10.2307/800001. JSTOR 800001.
^ a b c Bobo, Lawrence; Hutchings, Vincent L. (1996). "Perceptions of Racial Group Competition: Extending Blumer's Theory of Group Position to a Multiracial Social Context". American Sociological Review. American Sociological Association. 61 (6): 951 972. doi:10.2307/2096302. JSTOR 2096302.
^ (Smith 1999, pp. 4 7)
^ Hobsbawm and Ranger (1983), The Invention of Tradition
^ Sider 1993 Lumbee Indian Histories.
^ Kolb, Eva (2009). The Evolution of New York City's Multiculturalism: Melting Pot or Salad Bowl. ISBN 9783837093032.
^ Levine, Randy; Serbeh-Dunn, Gifty (Spring 1999). "Mosaic vs. Melting Pot". Voices. Vol. 1, no. 4. Archived from the original on 2020-11-12. Retrieved 2021-10-01.
^ Pieter M. Judson "The Habsburg Empire. A New History" (Harvard 2016)
^ Patricia Engelhorn "Wie Wien mit Meersicht: Ein Tag in der Hafenstadt Triest" In: NZZ 15.2.2020; Roberto Scarciglia Trieste multiculturale: comunit  e linguaggi di integrazione (2011); Ibanez B. Penas, Ma. Carmen L pez S enz. "Interculturalism: Between Identity and Diversity". (Bern) 2006. p 15.
^ Camoroff, John L. and Jean Camoroff 2009: Ethnicity Inc. Chicago: Chicago Press.
^ The Invention of Tradition
^ Sider 1993 Lumbee Indian Histories
^ O'Neil, Dennis. "Nature of Ethnicity". Palomar College. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2013.
^ Seidner,(1982), Ethnicity, Language, and Power from a Psycholinguistic Perspective, pp. 2 3
^ Smith 1987 pp. 21 22
^ Omi & Winant 1986, p. 15
^ Omi & Winant 1986, p. 58
^ a b c Omi & Winant 1986, p. 17
^ Omi & Winant 1986, p. 19
^ a b Omi & Winant 1986, p. 21
^ Gellner 2006 Nations and Nationalism Blackwell Publishing
^ Anderson 2006 Imagined Communities Version
^ Walter Pohl, "Conceptions of Ethnicity in Early Medieval Studies" Archived 2015-04-23 at the Wayback Machine, Debating the Middle Ages: Issues and Readings, ed. Lester K. Little and Barbara H. Rosenwein, (Blackwell), 1998, pp 13 24, notes that historians have projected the 19th-century conceptions of the nation-state backward in time, employing biological metaphors of birth and growth: "that the peoples in the Migration Period had little to do with those heroic (or sometimes brutish) clich s is now generally accepted among historians," he remarked. Early medieval peoples were far less homogeneous than often thought, and Pohl follows Reinhard Wenskus, Stammesbildung und Verfassung. (Cologne and Graz) 1961, whose researches into the "ethnogenesis" of the German peoples convinced him that the idea of common origin, as expressed by Isidore of Seville Gens est multitudo ab uno principio orta ("a people is a multitude stemming from one origin") which continues in the original Etymologiae IX.2.i) "sive ab Alia national Secundum program collection distinct ("or distinguished from another people by its properties") was a myth.
^ Aihway Ong 1996 "Cultural Citizenship in the Making" in Current Anthropology 37(5)
^ Nira Yuval-Davis, "Gender & Nation" (London: SAGE Publications Ltd, 1997)
^ Nira Yuval-Davis, "Gender & Nation" (London: SAGE Publications Ltd, 1997) pp. 12 13
^ Floya Anthias and Nira Yuval-Davis "Woman Nation-State" (London: Macmillan, 1989), p. 9
^ Grosfoguel, Ram n (September 2004). "Race and Ethnicity or Racialized Ethnicities? Identities within Global Coloniality". Ethnicities. 315 336. 4 (3): 315. doi:10.1177/1468796804045237. S2CID 145445798. Archived from the original on 2013-02-06. Retrieved 2012-08-06.
^ Banton, Michael. (2007) "Weber on Ethnic Communities: A critique", Nations and Nationalism 13 (1), 2007, 19 35.
^ A. Metraux (1950) "United Nations Economic and Security Council Statement by Experts on Problems of Race", American Anthropologist 53(1): 142 145)
^ Griffith, David Craig, Jones's minimal: low-wage labor in the United States, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1993, p.222
^ Eric Wolf, 1982, Europe and the People Without History, Berkeley: University of California Press. 380 381
^ Wallman, S. "Ethnicity research in Britain", Current Anthropology, v. 18, n. 3, 1977, pp. 531 532.
^ "A Brief History of the OMB Directive 15". American Anthropological Association. 1997. Archived from the original on 2012-04-19. Retrieved 2007-05-18.
^ "The Scottish Diaspora and Diaspora Strategy: Insights and Lessons from Ireland". www2.gov.scot. 29 May 2009. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2018.
^ Christoph Pan, Beate Sibylle Pfeil, Minderheitenrechte in Europa. Handbuch der europ ischen Volksgruppen (2002)., English translation 2004.
^ (in French) article 8 de la loi Informatique et libert s Archived 2019-03-20 at the Wayback Machine, 1978: "Il est interdit de collecter ou de traiter des donn es   caract re personnel qui font appara tre, directement ou indirectement, les origines raciales ou ethniques, les opinions politiques, philosophiques ou religieuses ou l'appartenance syndicale des personnes, ou qui sont relatives   la sant  ou   la vie sexuelle de celles-ci."
^ Lux, G bor; Horv th, Gyula (2017). The Routledge Handbook to Regional Development in Central and Eastern Europe. Taylor & Francis. p. 190.
^ Filep, B la (2016). The Politics of Good Neighbourhood: State, civil society and the enhancement of cultural capital in East Central Europe. Taylor & Francis. p. 71.
^ "Serbian Government   Official Presentation". serbia.gov.rs. Archived from the original on 8 August 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2018.
^ "Beogradski centar za ljudska prava   Belgrade Centre for Human Rights". bgcentar.org.rs. 29 March 2015. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2018.
^ "OUR PEOPLE". Archived from the original on 2021-03-29. Retrieved 2022-05-22.
^ a b Tavernise, Sabrina (13 August 2021). "Behind the Surprising Jump in Multiracial Americans, Several Theories". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2022.
^ "Largest Ethnic Groups And Nationalities In The United States". 18 July 2019. Archived from the original on 2022-05-09. Retrieved 2022-05-22.
^ "21.9% of Canadians are immigrants, the highest share in 85 years: StatsCan". Archived from the original on 2022-05-30. Retrieved 2022-05-22.
^ Aldrich, Robert (1993). France and the South Pacific Since 1940. University of Hawaii Press. p. 347. ISBN 9780824815585. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2022. Britain's high commissioner in New Zealand continues to administer Pitcairn, and the other former British colonies remain members of the Commonwealth of Nations, recognizing the British Queen as their titular head of state and vesting certain residual powers  in the British government or the Queen's representative in the islands. Australia did not cede control of the Torres Strait Islands, inhabited by a Melanesian population, or Lord Howe and Norfolk Island, whose residents are of European ancestry. New Zealand retains indirect rule over Niue and Tokelau and has kept close relations with another former possession, the Cook Islands, through a compact of free association. Chile rules Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and Ecuador rules the Galapagos Islands. The Aboriginals of Australia, the Maoris of New Zealand and the native Polynesians of Hawaii, despite movements demanding more cultural recognition, greater economic and political considerations or even outright sovereignty, have remained minorities in countries where massive waves of migration have completely changed society. In short, Oceania has remained one of the least completely decolonized regions on the globe.
^ "ISEE - Salaires". Isee.nc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2017.
^ Census shows Hawaii is becoming whiter Archived 2008-08-29 at the Wayback Machine, starbulletin.com
^ "Australian Aboriginal peoples | History, Facts, & Culture | Britannica". Archived from the original on 2022-03-26. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ Terrell, John E. (1988). Prehistory in the Pacific Islands. Cambridge University Press. p. 91. ISBN 9780521369565. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2022.
^ Crocombe, R. G. (2007). Asia in the Pacific Islands: Replacing the West. University of the South Pacific. Institute of Pacific Studies. p. 13. ISBN 9789820203884. Archived from the original on 9 February 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2022.
^ Flett, Iona; Haberle, Simon (2008). "East of Easter: Traces of human impact in the far-eastern Pacific" (PDF).  In Clark, Geoffrey; Leach, Foss; O'Connor, Sue (eds.). Islands of Inquiry. ANU Press. pp. 281 300. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.593.8988. hdl:1885/38139. ISBN 978-1-921313-89-9. JSTOR j.ctt24h8gp.20. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-12-31. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ Mountford, H. S.; Villanueva, P.; Fern ndez, M. A.; Jara, L.; De Barbieri, Z.; Carvajal-Carmona, L. G.; Cazier, J. B.; Newbury, D. F. (2020). "Frontiers | The Genetic Population Structure of Robinson Crusoe Island, Chile | Genetics". Frontiers in Genetics. Frontiersin.org. 11: 669. doi:10.3389/fgene.2020.00669. PMC 7333314. PMID 32676101.
^ Sebeok, Thomas Albert (1971). Current Trends in Linguistics: Linguistics in Oceania. the University of Michigan. p. 950. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2022. Most of this account of the influence of the Hispanic languages in Oceania has dealt with the Western Pacific, but the Eastern Pacific has not been without some share of the presence of the Portuguese and Spanish. The Eastern Pacific does not have the multitude of islands so characteristic of the Western regions of this great ocean, but there are some: Easter Island, 2000 miles off the Chilean coast, where a Polynesian tongue, Rapanui, is still spoken; the Juan Fernandez group, 400 miles west of Valparaiso; the Galapagos archipelago, 650 miles west of Ecuador; Malpelo and Cocos, 300 miles off the Colombian and Costa Rican coasts respectively; and others. Not many of these islands have extensive populations   some have been used effectively as prisons   but the official language on each is Spanish.
^ a b c Todd, Ian (1974). Island Realm: A Pacific Panorama. Angus & Robertson. p. 190. ISBN 9780207127618. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2022. [we] can further define the word culture to mean language. Thus we have the French language part of Oceania, the Spanish part and the Japanese part. The Japanese culture groups of Oceania are the Bonin Islands, the Marcus Islands and the Volcano Islands. These three clusters, lying south and south-east of Japan, are inhabited either by Japanese or by people who have now completely fused with the Japanese race. Therefore they will not be taken into account in the proposed comparison of the policies of non - Oceanic cultures towards Oceanic peoples. On the eastern side of the Pacific are a number of Spanish language culture groups of islands. Two of them, the Galapagos and Easter Island, have been dealt with as separate chapters in this volume. Only one of the dozen or so Spanish culture island groups of Oceania has an Oceanic population   the Polynesians of Easter Island. The rest are either uninhabited or have a Spanish - Latin - American population consisting of people who migrated from the mainland. Therefore, the comparisons which follow refer almost exclusively to the English and French language cultures.
^ "History of Pitcairn Island | Pitcairn Island Immigration". Archived from the original on 2022-04-22. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ "Norfolk Island | History, Population, Map, & Facts | Britannica". Archived from the original on 2020-11-17. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ " ". Archived from the original on 2019-09-09. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ "Education Resources: Regional Information, Jarvis Island | PacIOOS". Pacific Islands Ocean Observing System (PacIOOS). Archived from the original on 2022-05-10. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "Discovering the Deep: Exploring Remote Pacific MPAs: Background: The Hui Panal au Story of the Equatorial Pacific Islands of Howland, Baker, and Jarvis: 1935 1942: NOAA Office of Ocean Exploration and Research". oceanexplorer.noaa.gov. Archived from the original on 2022-06-01. Retrieved 2022-03-26.
Further reading[edit]
Abizadeh, Arash, "Ethnicity, Race, and a Possible Humanity" Archived 2021-02-04 at the Wayback Machine World Order, 33.1 (2001): 23 34. (Article that explores the social construction of ethnicity and race.)
Barth, Fredrik (ed). Ethnic groups and boundaries. The social organization of culture difference, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1969
Beard, David and Kenneth Gloag. 2005. Musicology, The Key Concepts. London and New York: Routledge.
Billinger, Michael S. (2007), "Another Look at Ethnicity as a Biological Concept: Moving Anthropology Beyond the Race Concept" Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine, Critique of Anthropology 27, 1:5 35.
Craig, Gary, et al., eds. Understanding 'race'and ethnicity: theory, history, policy, practice (Policy Press, 2012)
Danver, Steven L. Native Peoples of the World: An Encyclopedia of Groups, Cultures and Contemporary Issues (2012)
Eriksen, Thomas Hylland (1993) Ethnicity and Nationalism: Anthropological Perspectives, London: Pluto Press
Eysenck, H.J., Race, Education and Intelligence (London: Temple Smith, 1971) (ISBN 0-85117-009-9)
Healey, Joseph F., and Eileen O'Brien. Race, ethnicity, gender, and class: The sociology of group conflict and change (Sage Publications, 2014)
Hartmann, Douglas. "Notes on Midnight Basketball and the Cultural Politics of Recreation, Race and At-Risk Urban Youth", Journal of Sport and Social Issues. 25 (2001): 339 366.
Hobsbawm, Eric, and Terence Ranger, editors, The Invention of Tradition. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Hutcheon, Linda (1998). "Crypto-Ethnicity" (PDF). PMLA: Publications of the Modern Language Association of America. 113 (1): 28 51. doi:10.2307/463407. JSTOR 463407. S2CID 155794856. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-08-18. Retrieved 2018-02-18.
Kappeler, Andreas. The Russian empire: A multi-ethnic history (Routledge, 2014)
Levinson, David, Ethnic Groups Worldwide: A Ready Reference Handbook, Greenwood Publishing Group (1998), ISBN 978-1-57356-019-1.
Magocsi, Paul Robert, ed. Encyclopedia of Canada's Peoples (1999)
Merriam, A.P. 1959. "African Music", in R. Bascom and, M.J. Herskovits (eds), Continuity and Change in African Cultures, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Morales-D az, Enrique; Gabriel Aquino; & Michael Sletcher, "Ethnicity", in Michael Sletcher, ed., New England, (Westport, CT, 2004).
Omi, Michael; Winant, Howard (1986). Racial Formation in the United States from the 1960s to the 1980s. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul, Inc.
Seeger, A. 1987. Why Suy  Sing: A Musical Anthropology of an Amazonian People, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Seidner, Stanley S. Ethnicity, Language, and Power from a Psycholinguistic Perspective. (Bruxelles: Centre de recherche sur le pluralinguisme1982).
Sider, Gerald, Lumbee Indian Histories (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Smith, Anthony D. (1987). "The Ethnic Origins of Nations". Blackwell. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Smith, Anthony D. (1998). Nationalism and modernism. A Critical Survey of Recent Theories of Nations and Nationalism. London; New York: Routledge.
Smith, Anthony D. (1999). "Myths and memories of the Nation". Oxford University Press. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
Steele, Liza G.; Bostic, Amie; Lynch, Scott M.; Abdelaaty, Lamis (2022). "Measuring Ethnic Diversity". Annual Review of Sociology. 48 (1).
Thernstrom, Stephan A. ed. Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups (1981)
^ U.S. Census Bureau State & County QuickFacts: Race.
External links[edit]
Look up ethnicity, ethnic, nationality, or nation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ethnic groups.
Library resources about  Ethnicity 
Resources in your library
Ethnicity at Curlie
Ethnicity at EScholarship.org
Office of Ethnic Minority Affairs   American Psychological Association
Ethnic Power Relations (EPR) Atlas
List of ethnic groups by country
vteEthnicityConcepts
Clan
Ethnic group
Ethnographic group
Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group
Ethnographic realism
Hyphenated ethnicity
Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe
Ethnology
Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology
Ethnobotany
Ethnomycology
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology
Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography
Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Institutional
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video
Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnostatistics
Ethnomedicine
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopsychopharmacology
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy
Groups by region
Africa
Americas
Indigenous
Canada
Greenland
Mexico
United States
Central America
Caribbean
South America
Asia
Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia
Australia
Aboriginal groups
Torres Strait Islanders
Europe
Oceania
Indigenous
European
Identity and ethnogenesis
Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnarch
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mythomoteur
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Statistext
Tribal name
Tribalism
Detribalization
Neo-Tribalism
Urheimat
White ethnic
Multiethnic society
Consociationalism
Cultural appropriation
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Ethnopluralism
Ethnographic film
Ethnographic village
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state
Ideology andethnic conflict
Allophilia
Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Indigenization
Separatist movements
Xenocentrism
Xenophilia
Xenophobia
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnicity&oldid=1149031682"