This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations for an encyclopedic entry. Please help improve the article by presenting facts as a neutrally worded summary with appropriate citations. Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or, for entire works, to Wikisource. (June 2011)
Private school in South AfricaOprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for GirlsSign at the academy entrance   April 2015LocationHenley on KlipSouth AfricaInformationTypePrivate schoolEstablished1 January 2009Superintendent799Faculty666Grades8 to 12Enrollment322Websitewww.owlag.co.za
The Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls   South Africa  (OWLAG) is a boarding school for girls, grades 8 12, in Henley on Klip, Gauteng Province, South Africa.Coordinates: 26 32 49 S 28 03 19 E  /  26.54694 S 28.05528 E  / -26.54694; 28.05528 The school is a project begun by the American entrepreneur and philanthropist Oprah Winfrey in 2002, born out of a discussion she had with South African president Nelson Mandela in 2000. OWLAG opened in 2007 and its inaugural class of 72 girls graduated in 2011.
Inspired by her own disadvantaged childhood, Winfrey stated that she founded the Leadership Academy to provide educational and leadership opportunities for academically gifted girls from impoverished backgrounds in South Africa who exhibited leadership qualities for making a difference in the world.[1] She wanted to help girls who grew up like her, "economically disadvantaged, but not poor in mind or spirit".[2]
The school teaches the Independent Examinations Board (IEB) curriculum writes the South African National Senior Certificate.
In May 2021, Lindiwe Tsope became the first graduate of the Academy to be awarded a PhD.[3]
Design and construction[edit]
Structured as a campus, facilities include classrooms, computer and science laboratories, library, an auditorium/gymnasium, amphitheatre, sports fields, modern dormitories and a dining hall.  The school was designed by Rose Mashabane Architects and built between 2006 and 2007 by Concor Construction.
Criticisms and controversies[edit]
Winfrey received much criticism surrounding the "extravagance" of the school, with mention, among other things, about the need for high thread-count sheets for the dormitory beds, a beauty salon, two theatres (one indoor, one outdoor) and a yoga classroom to educate girls in an impoverished region of South Africa. In an article about the school's unveiling, Allison Samuels of Newsweek questioned whether the $40 million spent might have benefited a far greater number of students had the money been spent with less emphasis on luxurious surroundings and more emphasis on practicality.[4]
Winfrey defended her decision to establish the Leadership Academy in South Africa by offering the following observation:
I think the reason not just Africa but the world is in the state that it is because of a lack of leadership on all levels of
government   and particularly in regard to schools and schooling for poor children.   The best way to effect change long term is to ... give children exposure and opportunity and nurture them to understand their own power and possibility.[5]
Rebecca Traister of Salon.com[6] and Karen Russell of The Huffington Post[7] wrote in defense of the school. Russell then cited the success of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Africa's first female President who restored Liberia s electricity, as an example of what can happen when the best and brightest girls in Africa are given a world-class education. She praised Winfrey for sending the message that Black people and women have value.[7]
Other criticisms that Winfrey received about the Leadership Academy included the racial makeup of students, with the majority of students selected and accepted as candidates for the school being black. Winfrey deflected this criticism by saying that the "school is open to all girls who are disadvantaged. All girls, all races, who are disadvantaged   [including] White, Indian and Native American students of varying faiths," as long as eligibility requirements were met.[8] Many of girls chosen for the Leadership Academy come from families affected by HIV/AIDS.[9]
In spite of the criticism, Winfrey offered that her vision for the Leadership Academy was to provide a vehicle for mentoring academically talented and disadvantaged girls with "that 'It' quality" to provide them with opportunities to "change the face of a nation," make a difference in the world and become future leaders of South Africa.  As for rationale of the lavishness of the school, Winfrey continued by saying that "[i]f you are surrounded by beautiful things and wonderful teachers who inspire you, that beauty brings out the beauty in you."[10] To change how women are viewed, Winfrey added during an interview, one must look for an opportunity "'to change the paradigm, to change the way not only these girls think   but to also change the way a culture feels about what women can do.'[11] 'Girls who are educated are less likely to get HIV/AIDS and in this country which has such a pandemic, we have to begin to change the pandemic.'"[12]
2007 incidents[edit]
In the school's first year, a female member of the school staff was accused of physically and sexually abusing students. Winfrey flew to South Africa to meet with school officials and parents.[13] The dorm matron was arrested after seven students submitted statements alleging assault and various accusations of abuse.[14][15] A specialist on sexual violence with the South African Medical Research Council praised Winfrey's response as  "phenomenal"  because it sent a powerful message in a country afflicted with record high levels of sexual abuse.[16]
On 23 March 2010, the Associated Press reported that Winfrey settled the defamation lawsuit filed by one of the headmistresses at the Academy before the trial began.[17]
In March 2007, some parents complained because they were only allowed to visit their children once a month and the girls were only allowed to use their cell phones on weekends.[18] John Samuels, the executive head of the school responded to the complaints by appealing to security and school spirit. 
Another incident that occurred was of an dead infant found in one of the students backpack . It is said that the 17 year old girl arrived at the hospital internally bleeding and amongst her belongings they found a dead infant. The case was considered baseless as no proof or investigation had ever begun. 
Seven students at Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for girls were suspended for "sexually assaulting and fondling with their classmates".
Praise[edit]
There have also been reports of praise for the school.  According to Masechaba Hine, whose daughter and granddaughter both attend the school, her children "have no problems about the school, they are happy about everything."  Hine has been so pleased with the experience that she even praised Winfrey personally, saying, "Oprah is an angel, she is God-sent She came to my rescue when my husband was not working."[19]
Praise from Nelson Mandela[edit]
One of the academy's most vocal fans was Nelson Mandela, who called Winfrey his hero because she understood that South Africa's gains in democracy would be nullified unless future generations were educated.
The Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls located near Johannesburg and educating girls in Grades 8 through 12 is therefore a wonderfully appropriate gift to the people of South Africa, one that will endure over many lifetimes. When I went to the opening of her school, I looked at the shining faces of these young women and thought every one of them has the potential to be an Oprah Winfrey. The school is important because it will change the trajectory of these girls' lives and it will brighten the future of all women in South Africa. Oprah understands that in Africa, women and girls have often been doubly disadvantaged. They have had the curse of low expectations and unequal opportunities. Nelson Mandela quoted in Time[20]
Praise from Bill Clinton[edit]
The academy was honoured by Bill Clinton when he featured it in his book Giving: How Each of Us Can Change the World as an example of how to give back to the world.  Clinton predicted that the school would change the lives of many young women and interviewed Winfrey to find out why she decided to build the school.  Winfrey explained that caring teachers "made education an open door" for her and that she wanted to help girls who grew up like her, "economically disadvantaged, but not poor in mind or spirit".[2]
See also[edit]
List of boarding schools
Young Women's Leadership Charter School of Chicago
References[edit]
^ Reaching out: South African school for girls born out of Oprah's need to "feel" a connection.[permanent dead link] (2 January 2007). The Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 10 January 2007.
^ a b Bill Clinton. Giving: How Each of Us Can Change the World Page 18
^ "A graduate from Oprah Winfrey's school in South Africa just became the first to get a PhD". Vicky McKeever, CNBC, May 7, 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
^ Samuels, A. (8 January 2007). Oprah goes to School. Newsweek. Retrieved 15 August 2016.
^ Winfrey Says She Wants to Nurture Kids. (3 January 2007). The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
^ Traister, R. (13 January 2007). What Oprah can't forget. Salon.com. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
^ a b Russell, K. (4 January 2007). War on Oprah. The Huffington Post. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
^ CNN transcript (Jeff Koinanage, CNN Africa correspondent reporting). (2 January 2007). CNN. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
^ "Chicago Tribune - Chicago Tribune". chicagotribune.com.[permanent dead link]
^ Oprah's school for girls opens in S. Africa: Plus, TV mogul answers critics who would rather see her help poor students in the U.S. Archived 9 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine (3 January 2007). EURweb. Retrieved 10 January 2007.
^ Oprah wants to change the view of women in Africa: Talk show host opens a school for girls in an effort to change the culture. Archived 16 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine Today.com. Retrieved 10 January 2007.
^ Usborne, D. (3 January 2007). Oprah wants to change the view of women in Africa: Oprah's  20 m school proves she's not all talk. Archived 16 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine The Independent (UK). Retrieved 10 January 2007.
^ "Retrieved 23 October 2007". Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2007.
^ "Business & Financial News, U.S & International Breaking News | Reuters". www.reuters.com.
^ "Oprah Scandal Rocks South Africa   TIME". Archived from the original on 6 November 2007.
^ "Oprah case highlights abuse in South Africa". Christian Science Monitor. 8 November 2007.
^ "Associated Press - YouTube". www.youtube.com.
^ "Oprah's school 'too strict': South Africa: News: News24". Archived from the original on 9 October 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2007.
^ "Despite allegations, Oprah's school supported - CNN.com". www.cnn.com.
^ "Oprah Winfrey   The TIME 100   TIME". Archived from the original on 5 May 2007.
External links[edit]
"Educate a Woman, You Educate a Nation" - South Africa Aims to Improve its Education for Girls WNN   Women News Network. 28 August 2007. Lys Anzia
Press release: Oprah Winfrey, Nelson Mandela and South Africa's Ministry of Education break ground for the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls   South Africa. Archived 12 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine (2002, 6 December). The Oprah Winfrey Foundation. Retrieved 14 January 2007.
Sakoana, T. (21 August 2006) Oprah's African dream realised. Archived 27 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine International Marketing Council of South Africa (IMC). Retrieved 10 January 2007.
vteOprah WinfreyMedia worksBroadcasting and publishing
The Oprah Winfrey Show
Oprah's Book Club
Oprah's Favorite Things
No Phone Zone
Oprah After the Show
Michael Jackson Talks ... to Oprah
O, The Oprah Magazine
Oprah Radio
Oprah Winfrey Network
Canada
Oprah's Lifeclass
Oprah's Master Class
Oprah Prime
Oprah's Book Club 2.0
The Life You Want
Oprah's Book Club
The Oprah Conversation
Oprah with Meghan and Harry
The Me You Can't See
Films produced
Before Women Had Wings (1997)
Beloved (1998)
The Great Debaters (2007)
The Hundred-Foot Journey (2014)
Selma (2014)
The Color Purple (2023)
Other
Endorsement of Barack Obama
Harpo Productions
Awards and nominations
Oprahization
Oprah Winfrey Foundation
Oprah's Angel Network
Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls
Related
Stedman Graham
 Category
vteNotable schools in GautengAlternative schools
African Leadership Academy
Michael Mount Waldorf School
Private schools
Ashton International College
Beaulieu College
Charter College
Crawford College, Lonehill
Crawford College, Pretoria
Crawford College, Sandton
Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls
Pretoria Chinese School
Redhill School
The Ridge School
Sheikh Anta Diop College
Southdowns College
Tyger Valley College
Catholic
Christian Brothers' College, Boksburg
Christian Brothers' College, Mount Edmund
Holy Family College
Loreto Convent School
Marist Brothers Linmeyer
Sacred Heart College
St Benedict's College
St Catherine's School
St David's Marist, Inanda
St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls
Protestant
Cornwall Hill College
CVO Skool Pretoria
Helpmekaar Kollege
Kingsmead College
Ho rskool Raslouw
Roedean School
St Alban's College
St Andrew's School for Girls
St Barnabas College
St Dunstan's College
St John's College
St Martin's School
St Mary's Diocesan School for Girls
St Mary's School, Waverley
St Peter's College
St Stithians College
Jewish
King David Schools
Torah Academy
Yeshiva College
Yeshiva Maharsha Beis Aharon
Muslim
Auckland Park Academy of Excellence
Johannesburg Muslim School
Lenasia Muslim School
Pretoria Muslim School
Hindu
Amity International School
Public schools
Afrikaanse Ho r Meisieskool
Afrikaanse Ho r Seunskool
Ho rskool Alberton
Allen Glen High School
Athlone Boys' High School
Barnato Park High School
Boksburg High School
Bopasenatla Secondary School
Bryanston High School
Clapham High School
Ho rskool Dinamika
Ho rskool Eldoraigne
Ho rskool Florida
Fourways High School
The Glen High School
Germiston High School
Greenside High School
Hillview High School
Hyde Park High School
Jeppe High School for Boys
Jeppe High School for Girls
King Edward VII School
Lyttelton Manor High School
Mamelodi High School
Ho rskool Marais Viljoen
Meadowlands Secondary School
Ho rskool Menlopark
Moletsane High School
Ho rskool Monument
Morris Isaacson High School
Naledi High School
Northcliff High School
Orchards Primary School
Ho rskool Oos-Moot
Ho rskool Overkruin
Parktown Boys' High School
Pretoria Boys High School
Pretoria High School for Girls
Pretoria North High School
Pretoria Secondary School
Pro Arte Alphen Park
Sandown High School
Sandringham High School
Sir John Adamson High School
Soshanguve High School
Springs Boys' High School
Ho rskool Staatspresident C R Swart
Sutherland High School
Thutolore Secondary School
Ho rskool Voortrekker
Ho rskool Waterkloof
Waverley Girls' High School
Westbury Secondary School
Willowridge High School
Ho rskool Wonderboom
International schools
American International School of Johannesburg
Deutsche Internationale Schule Johannesburg
Deutsche Internationale Schule Pretoria
Japanese School of Johannesburg
Lyc e Jules Verne
Authority control 
ISNI
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oprah_Winfrey_Leadership_Academy_for_Girls&oldid=1145906113"