Military leader and emperor of France (1769 1821)
This article is about Napoleon I. For other uses, see Napoleon (disambiguation) and Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation).
NapoleonThe Emperor Napoleon in His Study at the Tuileries, by Jacques-Louis David, 1812Emperor of the French (more...) 1st reign18 May 1804   6 April 1814Coronation2 December 1804Notre-Dame CathedralPredecessorLouis XVII (disputed) or Louis XVI (as King of France)SuccessorLouis XVIII (as King of France)2nd reign20 March 1815   22 June 1815PredecessorLouis XVIIISuccessorNapoleon II (disputed) or Louis XVIIIKing of ItalyReign17 March 1805   11 April 1814Coronation26 May 1805Milan CathedralFirst Consul of France
In office12 December 1799  18 May 1804Co-Consuls
Jean-Jacques-R gis de Cambac r s
Charles-Fran ois Lebrun
Provisional Consul of France
In office10 November 1799  12 December 1799Co-Consuls
Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
Roger Ducos
President of the Italian Republic
In office26 January 1802  17 March 1805Vice PresidentFrancesco Melzi d'Eril
Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine
In office12 July 1806  4 November 1813Prince-Primates
Karl von Dalberg
Eug ne de Beauharnais
BornNapoleone Buonaparte[1](1769-08-15)15 August 1769Ajaccio, Corsica, Kingdom of FranceDied5 May 1821(1821-05-05) (aged 51)Longwood, Saint HelenaBurial15 December 1840Les Invalides, Paris, FranceSpouses
Jos phine de Beauharnais
   (m. 1796; ann. 1810) 
Marie Louise of Austria
   (m. 1810; sep. 1814) 
IssueDetail
Napoleon II
Charles, Count L on
Alexandre, Count Colonna-Walewski
NamesNapol on BonaparteRegnal nameNapoleon IHouseBonaparteFatherCarlo BuonaparteMotherLetizia RamolinoSignature
Battles of Napoleon
[Interactive fullscreen map]
Rescale the fullscreen map to see Saint Helena
Napoleon Bonaparte[a] (born Napoleone Buonaparte; 15 August 1769   5 May 1821), later known by his regnal name Napoleon I,[b] was a Corsican-born French military commander and political leader who rose to prominence during the French Revolution and led successful campaigns during the Revolutionary Wars. He was the de facto leader of the French Republic as First Consul from 1799 to 1804, then Emperor of the French from 1804 until 1814 and again in 1815. Napoleon's political and cultural legacy endures to this day, as a highly celebrated and controversial leader. He initiated many liberal reforms that have persisted in society, and is considered one of the greatest military commanders in history. His campaigns are still studied at military academies worldwide. Between three and six million civilians and soldiers died in what became known as the Napoleonic Wars.[2][3]
Napoleon was born on the island of Corsica, not long after its annexation by France, to a native family descending from minor Italian nobility.[4][5] He supported the French Revolution in 1789 while serving in the French army, and tried to spread its ideals to his native Corsica. He rose rapidly in the Army after he saved the governing French Directory by firing on royalist insurgents. In 1796, he began a military campaign against the Austrians and their Italian allies, scoring decisive victories and becoming a national hero. Two years later, he led a military expedition to Egypt that served as a springboard to political power. He engineered a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic.
Differences with the United Kingdom meant France faced the War of the Third Coalition by 1805. Napoleon shattered this coalition with victories in the Ulm campaign, and at the Battle of Austerlitz, which led to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1806, the Fourth Coalition took up arms against him. Napoleon defeated Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt, marched the Grande Arm e into Eastern Europe, and defeated the Russians in June 1807 at Friedland, forcing the defeated nations of the Fourth Coalition to accept the Treaties of Tilsit. Two years later, the Austrians challenged the French again during the War of the Fifth Coalition, but Napoleon solidified his grip over Europe after triumphing at the Battle of Wagram.
Hoping to extend the Continental System, his embargo against Britain, Napoleon invaded the Iberian Peninsula and declared his brother Joseph the King of Spain in 1808. The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted in the Peninsular War aided by a British army, culminating in defeat for Napoleon's marshals. Napoleon launched an invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812. The resulting campaign witnessed the catastrophic retreat of Napoleon's Grande Arm e. In 1813, Prussia and Austria joined Russian forces in a Sixth Coalition against France, resulting in a large coalition army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig. The coalition invaded France and captured Paris, forcing Napoleon to abdicate in April 1814. He was exiled to the island of Elba, between Corsica and Italy. In France, the Bourbons were restored to power.
Napoleon escaped in February 1815 and took control of France.[6] The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition, which defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. The British exiled him to the remote island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic, where he died in 1821 at the age of 51.
Napoleon had an extensive impact on the modern world, bringing liberal reforms to the lands he conquered, especially the regions of the Low Countries, Switzerland and parts of modern Italy and Germany. He implemented many liberal policies in France and Western Europe.[c]
Early life
 Napoleon's father, Carlo Buonaparte, fought for Corsican independence under Pasquale Paoli, but after their defeat he eventually became the island's representative to the court of Louis XVI.
Napoleon's family was of Italian origin. His paternal ancestors, the Buonapartes, descended from a minor Tuscan noble family who emigrated to Corsica in the 16th century and his maternal ancestors, the Ramolinos, descended from a minor Genoese noble family.[13] The Buonapartes were also the relatives, by marriage and by birth, of the Pietrasentas, Costas, Paraviccinis, and Bonellis, all Corsican families of the interior.[14] His parents Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino maintained an ancestral home called "Casa Buonaparte" in Ajaccio. Napoleon was born there on 15 August 1769. He was the fourth child and third son of the family.[d] He had an elder brother, Joseph, and younger siblings Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline, and J r me. Napoleon was baptised as a Catholic, under the name Napoleone.[15] In his youth, his name was also spelled as Nabulione, Nabulio, Napolionne, and Napulione.[16]
Napoleon was born in the same year that the Republic of Genoa (former Italian state) ceded the region of Corsica to France.[17] The state sold sovereign rights a year before his birth and the island was conquered by France during the year of his birth. It was formally incorporated as a province in 1770, after 500 years under Genoese rule and 14 years of independence.[e] Napoleon's parents joined the Corsican resistance and fought against the French to maintain independence, even when Maria was pregnant with him. His father Carlo was an attorney who had supported and actively collaborated with patriot Pasquale Paoli during the Corsican war of independence against France;[5] after the Corsican defeat at Ponte Novu in 1769 and Paoli's exile in Britain, Carlo began working for the new French government and went on to be named representative of the island to the court of Louis XVI in 1777.[5][21]
The dominant influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child.[21] Later in life, Napoleon stated, "The future destiny of the child is always the work of the mother."[22] Napoleon's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss Fesch family in her second marriage, and Napoleon's uncle, the cardinal Joseph Fesch, would fulfill a role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years. Napoleon's noble, moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time.[23]
 Statue of Napoleon as a schoolboy in Brienne, aged 15, by Louis Rochet [fr] (1853)
When he turned 9 years old,[24][25] he moved to the French mainland and enrolled at a religious school in Autun in January 1779. In May, he transferred with a scholarship to a military academy at Brienne-le-Ch teau.[26] In his youth he was an outspoken Corsican nationalist and supported the state's independence from France.[24][27] Like many Corsicans, Napoleon spoke and read Corsican (as his mother tongue) and Italian (as the official language of Corsica).[28][29][30][27] He began learning French in school at around age 10.[31] Although he became fluent in French, he spoke with a distinctive Corsican accent and never learned how to spell correctly in French.[32] Consequently, Napoleon was treated unfairly by his schoolmates.[27] He was, however, not an isolated case, as it was estimated in 1790 that fewer than 3 million people, out of France's population of 28 million, were able to speak standard French, and those who could write it were even fewer.[33]
Napoleon was routinely bullied by his peers for his accent, birthplace, short stature, mannerisms and inability to speak French quickly.[29] He became reserved and melancholy, applying himself to reading. An examiner observed that Napoleon "has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics. He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography ... This boy would make an excellent sailor".[f][35]
One story told of Napoleon at the school is that he led junior students to victory against senior students in a snowball fight, showing his leadership abilities.[36] In early adulthood, Napoleon briefly intended to become a writer; he authored a history of Corsica and a romantic novella.[24]
On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the  cole Militaire in Paris. He trained to become an artillery officer and, when his father's death reduced his income, was forced to complete the two-year course in one year.[37] He was the first Corsican to graduate from the  cole Militaire.[37] He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace.[38]
Early career
 Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, as lieutenant-colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers. Portrait by Henri F lix Emmanuel Philippoteaux
Upon graduating in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La F re artillery regiment.[g][26] He served in Valence and Auxonne until after the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789. Bonaparte was a fervent Corsican nationalist during this period.[40] He asked for leave to join his mentor Pasquale Paoli, when Paoli was allowed to return to Corsica by the National Assembly. Paoli had no sympathy for Napoleon, however, as he deemed his father a traitor for having deserted his cause for Corsican independence.[41]
He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica, fighting in a complex three-way struggle among royalists, revolutionaries, and Corsican nationalists. Napoleon came to embrace the ideals of the Revolution, becoming a supporter of the Jacobins and joining the pro-French Corsican Republicans who opposed Paoli's policy and his aspirations of secession.[42] He was given command over a battalion of volunteers and was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against French troops.[43]
When Corsica declared formal secession from France and requested the protection of the British government, Napoleon and his commitment to the French Revolution came into conflict with Paoli, who had decided to sabotage the Corsican contribution to the Exp dition de Sardaigne, by preventing a French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena.[44] Bonaparte and his family were compelled to flee to Toulon on the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli.[45]
Although he was born "Napoleone Buonaparte", it was after this that Napoleon began styling himself "Napol on Bonaparte". His family did not drop the name Buonaparte until 1796. The first known record of him signing his name as Bonaparte was at the age of 27 (in 1796).[46][15][47]
Siege of Toulon
Main article: Siege of Toulon
 Bonaparte at the Siege of Toulon, 1793
In July 1793, Bonaparte published a pro-republican pamphlet entitled Le souper de Beaucaire (Supper at Beaucaire) which gained him the support of Augustin Robespierre, the younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre. With the help of his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti, Bonaparte was appointed senior gunner and artillery commander of the republican forces which arrived on 8 September at Toulon.[48][49]
He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city's harbour and force the British to evacuate. The assault on the position led to the capture of the city, and during it Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh on 16 December. Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety, he was put in charge of the artillery of France's Army of Italy.[50] On 22 December he was on his way to his new post in Nice, promoted from the rank of colonel to brigadier general at the age of 24. He devised plans for attacking the Kingdom of Sardinia as part of France's campaign against the First Coalition.
The French army carried out Bonaparte's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794, and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains. From Ormea, they headed west to outflank the Austro-Sardinian positions around Saorge. After this campaign, Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country's intentions towards France.[51]
13 Vend miaire
Main article: 13 Vend miaire
Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the Robespierres following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794. Napoleon's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs. According to Bourrienne, jealousy was responsible, between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy, with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time.[52] Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defence in a letter to the commissar Saliceti, and he was acquitted of any wrongdoing.[53] He was released within two weeks (on 20 August) and due to his technical skills, was asked to draw up plans to attack Italian positions in the context of France's war with Austria. He also took part in an expedition to take back Corsica from the British, but the French were repulsed by the British Royal Navy.[54]
By 1795, Bonaparte had become engaged to D sir e Clary, daughter of Fran ois Clary. D sir e's sister Julie Clary had married Bonaparte's elder brother Joseph.[55] In April 1795, he was assigned to the Army of the West, which was engaged in the War in the Vend e a civil war and royalist counter-revolution in Vend e, a region in west-central France on the Atlantic Ocean. As an infantry command, it was a demotion from artillery general for which the army already had a full quota and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting.[56]
 Journ e du 13 Vend miaire, artillery fire in front of the Church of Saint-Roch, Paris, Rue Saint-Honor 
He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety. He sought unsuccessfully to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan.[57] During this period, he wrote the romantic novella Clisson et Eug nie, about a soldier and his lover, in a clear parallel to Bonaparte's own relationship with D sir e.[58] On 15 September, Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vend e campaign. He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects.[59]
On 3 October, royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention.[60] Paul Barras, a leader of the Thermidorian Reaction, knew of Bonaparte's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the convention in the Tuileries Palace. Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realized that artillery would be the key to its defence.[26]
He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795 13 Vend miaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar. 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.[60] He cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot", according to 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle in The French Revolution: A History.[61][62]
The defeat of the royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new government, the Directory. Murat married one of Napoleon's sisters, becoming his brother-in-law; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals. Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy.[45]
Within weeks, he was romantically involved with Jos phine de Beauharnais, the former mistress of Barras. The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony.[63]
First Italian campaign
Main article: Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars
 Bonaparte at the Pont d'Arcole, by Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, (c. 1801), Mus e du Louvre, Paris
Two days after the marriage, Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy. He immediately went on the offensive, hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene. In a series of rapid victories during the Montenotte Campaign, he knocked Piedmont out of the war in two weeks. The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war, the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua. The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege, but Napoleon defeated every relief effort, scoring victories at the battles of Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli. The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy. At Rivoli, the Austrians lost up to 14,000 men while the French lost about 5,000.[64]
The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands. French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796, but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon's assault. In the first encounter between the two commanders, Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of Tarvis in March 1797. The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben, about 100 km from Vienna, and decided to sue for peace.[65]
The Treaty of Leoben, followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio, gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries, and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria. Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender, ending 1,100 years of Venetian independence. He authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.[66]
On the journey, Bonaparte conversed much about the warriors of antiquity, especially Alexander, Caesar, Scipio and Hannibal. He studied their strategy and combined it with his own. In a question from Bourrienne, asking whether he gave his preference to Alexander or Caesar, Napoleon said that he places Alexander the Great in the first rank, the main reason being his campaign in Asia.[67]
 Bonaparte during the Italian campaign in 1797
His application of conventional military ideas to real-world situations enabled his military triumphs, such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry. He stated later in life:[when?] "I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning. Look at Caesar; he fought the first like the last".[68]
Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the "hinge" of an enemy's weakened front. If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take up the central position and attack two co-operating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.[69] In this Italian campaign, Bonaparte's army captured 150,000 prisoners, 540 cannons, and 170 standards.[70] The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles through superior artillery technology and Bonaparte's tactics.[71]
During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics. He founded two newspapers: one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France.[72] The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator.[73] Napoleon's forces extracted an estimated $45 million in funds from Italy during their campaign there, another $12 million in precious metals and jewels. His forces confiscated more than 300 priceless paintings and sculptures.[74]
Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d' tat and purge the royalists on 4 September the Coup of 18 Fructidor. This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent upon Bonaparte, who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria. These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio. Bonaparte returned to Paris in December 1797 as a hero.[75] He met Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister who served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain.[45]
Egyptian expedition
Main article: French campaign in Egypt and Syria
 Bonaparte Before the Sphinx (c. 1886) by Jean-L on G r me, Hearst Castle
After two months of planning, Bonaparte decided that France's naval strength was not yet sufficient to confront the British Royal Navy. He decided on a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain's access to its trade interests in India.[45] Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East and join forces with Tipu Sultan, the Sultan of Mysore who was an enemy of the British.[76] Napoleon assured the Directory that "as soon as he had conquered Egypt, he will establish relations with the Indian princes and, together with them, attack the English in their possessions".[77] The Directory agreed in order to secure a trade route to the Indian subcontinent.[78]
In May 1798, Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences. His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists, with mathematicians, naturalists, chemists, and geodesists among them. Their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone, and their work was published in the Description de l' gypte in 1809.[79]
 Battle of the Pyramids on 21 July 1798 by Louis-Fran ois, Baron Lejeune, 1808
En route to Egypt, Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798, then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller. Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance, and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men.[80]
Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July.[45] He fought the Battle of Shubra Khit against the Mamluks, Egypt's ruling military caste. This helped the French practise their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids, fought on 21 July, about 24 km (15 mi) from the pyramids. General Bonaparte's forces of 25,000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks' Egyptian cavalry. Twenty-nine French[81] and approximately 2,000 Egyptians were killed. The victory boosted the morale of the French army.[82]
On 1 August 1798, the British fleet under Sir Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two vessels of the French fleet in the Battle of the Nile, defeating Bonaparte's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean.[83] His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt, though it faced repeated uprisings.[84] In early 1799, he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee). Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.[85] The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal. Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war, ostensibly on parole, so he ordered the garrison and some 1,500 2,000 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning.[86] Men, women, and children were robbed and murdered for three days.[87]
Bonaparte began with an army of 13,000 men. 1,500 were reported missing, 1,200 died in combat, and thousands perished from disease mostly bubonic plague. He failed to reduce the fortress of Acre, so he marched his army back to Egypt in May. To speed up the retreat, Bonaparte ordered plague-stricken men to be poisoned with opium. The number who died remains disputed, ranging from a low of 30 to a high of 580. He also brought out 1,000 wounded men.[88] Back in Egypt on 25 July, Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir.[89]
Ruler of France
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and Napoleonic era
 General Bonaparte surrounded by members of the Council of Five Hundred during the Coup of 18 Brumaire, by Fran ois Bouchot
While in Egypt, Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs. He learned that France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition.[90] On 24 August 1799, fearing that the Republic's future was in doubt, he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France, despite the fact that he had received no explicit orders from Paris.[91] The army was left in the charge of Jean-Baptiste Kl ber.[92]
Unknown to Bonaparte, the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil, but poor lines of communication prevented the delivery of these messages.[90] By the time that he reached Paris in October, France's situation had been improved by a series of victories. The Republic, however, was bankrupt and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population.[93] The Directory discussed Bonaparte's "desertion" but was too weak to punish him.[90]
Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome. He drew together an alliance with director Emmanuel Joseph Siey s, his brother Lucien, speaker of the Council of Five Hundred Roger Ducos, director Joseph Fouch , and Talleyrand, and they overthrew the Directory by a coup d' tat on 9 November 1799 ("the 18th Brumaire" according to the revolutionary calendar), closing down the Council of Five Hundred. Napoleon became "first consul" for ten years, with two consuls appointed by him who had consultative voices only. His power was confirmed by the new "Constitution of the Year VIII", originally devised by Siey s to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon, and accepted by direct popular vote (3,000,000 in favour, 1,567 opposed). The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but, in reality, established a dictatorship.[94][95]
French Consulate
Main articles: French Consulate and War of the Second Coalition
 Bonaparte, First Consul, by Ingres. Posing the hand inside the waistcoat was often used in portraits of rulers to indicate calm and stable leadership.
 Silver coin: 5 francs_AN XI, 1802, Bonaparte, First Consul
Napoleon established a political system that historian Martyn Lyons called "dictatorship by plebiscite".[96] Worried by the democratic forces unleashed by the Revolution, but unwilling to ignore them entirely, Napoleon resorted to regular electoral consultations with the French people on his road to imperial power.[96] He drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul, taking up residence at the Tuileries. The constitution was approved in a rigged plebiscite held the following January, with 99.94 percent officially listed as voting "yes".[97]
Napoleon's brother, Lucien, had falsified the returns to show that 3 million people had participated in the plebiscite. The real number was 1.5 million.[96] Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people, so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the consulate.[96] In the first few months of the consulate, with war in Europe still raging and internal instability still plaguing the country, Napoleon's grip on power remained very tenuous.[98]
In the spring of 1800, Napoleon and his troops crossed the Swiss Alps into Italy, aiming to surprise the Austrian armies that had reoccupied the peninsula when Napoleon was still in Egypt.[h] After a difficult crossing over the Alps, the French army entered the plains of Northern Italy virtually unopposed.[100] While one French army approached from the north, the Austrians were busy with another stationed in Genoa, which was besieged by a substantial force. The fierce resistance of this French army, under Andr  Mass na, gave the northern force some time to carry out their operations with little interference.[101]
 The Battle of Marengo was Napoleon's first great victory as head of state.
After spending several days looking for each other, the two armies collided at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June. General Melas had a numerical advantage, fielding about 30,000 Austrian soldiers while Napoleon commanded 24,000 French troops.[102] The battle began favourably for the Austrians as their initial attack surprised the French and gradually drove them back. Melas stated that he had won the battle and retired to his headquarters around 3 pm, leaving his subordinates in charge of pursuing the French.[103] The French lines never broke during their tactical retreat. Napoleon constantly rode out among the troops urging them to stand and fight.[104]
Late in the afternoon, a full division under Desaix arrived on the field and reversed the tide of the battle. A series of artillery barrages and cavalry charges decimated the Austrian army, which fled over the Bormida River back to Alessandria, leaving behind 14,000 casualties.[104] The following day, the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria, which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region.[104]
Although critics have blamed Napoleon for several tactical mistakes preceding the battle, they have also praised his audacity for selecting a risky campaign strategy, choosing to invade the Italian peninsula from the north when the vast majority of French invasions came from the west, near or along the coastline.[105] As David G. Chandler points out, Napoleon spent almost a year getting the Austrians out of Italy in his first campaign. In 1800, it took him only a month to achieve the same goal.[105] German strategist and field marshal Alfred von Schlieffen concluded that "Bonaparte did not annihilate his enemy but eliminated him and rendered him harmless" while attaining "the object of the campaign: the conquest of North Italy".[106]
Napoleon's triumph at Marengo secured his political authority and boosted his popularity back home, but it did not lead to an immediate peace. Bonaparte's brother, Joseph, led the complex negotiations in Lun ville and reported that Austria, emboldened by British support, would not acknowledge the new territory that France had acquired. As negotiations became increasingly fractious, Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more. Moreau and the French swept through Bavaria and scored an overwhelming victory at Hohenlinden in December 1800. As a result, the Austrians capitulated and signed the Treaty of Lun ville in February 1801. The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio.[107]
Temporary peace in Europe
See also: Haitian Revolution
After a decade of constant warfare, France and Britain signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802, bringing the Revolutionary Wars to an end. Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic.[101] With Europe at peace and the economy recovering, Napoleon's popularity soared to its highest levels under the consulate, both domestically and abroad.[108] In a new plebiscite during the spring of 1802, the French public came out in huge numbers to approve a constitution that made the Consulate permanent, essentially elevating Napoleon to dictator for life.[108]
Whereas the plebiscite two years earlier had brought out 1.5 million people to the polls, the new referendum enticed 3.6 million to go and vote (72 percent of all eligible voters).[109] There was no secret ballot in 1802 and few people wanted to openly defy the regime. The constitution gained approval with over 99% of the vote.[109] His broad powers were spelled out in the new constitution: Article 1. The French people name, and the Senate proclaims Napoleon-Bonaparte First Consul for Life.[110] After 1802, he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte.[39]
 The 1803 Louisiana Purchase totalled 2,144,480 square kilometres (827,987 square miles), doubling the size of the United States.
The brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on French colonies abroad. Saint-Domingue had managed to acquire a high level of political autonomy during the Revolutionary Wars, with Toussaint L'Ouverture installing himself as de facto dictator by 1801. Napoleon saw a chance to reestablish control over the colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens. In the 18th century, Saint-Domingue had been France's most profitable colony, producing more sugar than all the British West Indies colonies combined. However, during the Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish slavery in February 1794.[111] Aware of the expenses required to fund his wars in Europe, Napoleon made the decision to reinstate slavery in all French Caribbean colonies. The 1794 decree had only affected the colonies of Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and Guiana, and did not take effect in Mauritius, Reunion and Martinique, the last of which had been captured by the British and as such remained unaffected by French law.[112]
In Guadeloupe slavery had been abolished (and its ban violently enforced) by Victor Hugues against opposition from slaveholders thanks to the 1794 law. However, when slavery was reinstated in 1802, a slave revolt broke out under the leadership of Louis Delgr s.[113] The resulting Law of 20 May had the express purpose of reinstating slavery in Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and French Guiana, and restored slavery throughout most of the French colonial empire (excluding Saint-Domingue) for another half a century, while the French transatlantic slave trade continued for another twenty years.[114][115][116][117][118]
Napoleon sent an expedition under his brother-in-law General Leclerc to reassert control over Saint-Domingue. Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture, the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army, and Jean-Jacques Dessalines won a string of victories, first against Leclerc, and when he died from yellow fever, then against Donatien-Marie-Joseph de Vimeur, vicomte de Rochambeau, whom Napoleon sent to relieve Leclerc with another 20,000 men. In May 1803, Napoleon acknowledged defeat, and the last 8,000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haiti in 1804. In the process, Dessalines became arguably the most successful military commander in the struggle against Napoleonic France.[119][120] Seeing the failure of his efforts in Haiti, Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States, instantly doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre, a total of $15 million.[2][121]
The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and controversial.[122] Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation. Neither of these territories were covered by Amiens, but they inflamed tensions significantly.[123] The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne and declaring that every British male between eighteen and sixty years old in France and its dependencies to be arrested as a prisoner of war.[124]
French Empire
Main article: First French Empire
See also: Coronation of Napoleon I and Napoleonic Wars
 The Coronation of Napoleon by Jacques-Louis David (1804)
During the consulate, Napoleon faced several royalist and Jacobin assassination plots, including the Conspiration des poignards (Dagger plot) in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise (also known as the Infernal Machine) two months later.[125] In January 1804, his police uncovered an assassination plot against him that involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon family, the former rulers of France. On the advice of Talleyrand, Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien, violating the sovereignty of Baden. The Duke was quickly executed after a secret military trial, even though he had not been involved in the plot.[126] Enghien's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe, becoming one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars.
To expand his power, Napoleon used these assassination plots to justify the creation of an imperial system based on the Roman model. He believed that a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if his family's succession was entrenched in the constitution.[127] Launching yet another referendum, Napoleon was elected as Emperor of the French by a tally exceeding 99%.[109] As with the Life Consulate two years earlier, this referendum produced heavy participation, bringing out almost 3.6 million voters to the polls.[109]
A keen observer of Bonaparte's rise to absolute power, Madame de R musat, explains that "men worn out by the turmoil of the Revolution [ ] looked for the domination of an able ruler" and that "people believed quite sincerely that Bonaparte, whether as consul or emperor, would exert his authority and save [them] from the perils of anarchy."[128]"
 Napoleon's throne room at Fontainebleau
Coronation
Napoleon's coronation, at which Pope Pius VII officiated, took place at Notre Dame de Paris, on 2 December 1804. The ceremony, more or less, lasted around three hours, so the guests who arrived earlier became dull or bored and had to go in out and of the cathedral, to at least rejuvenate their spirits and also to buy food and drink.[129] Two separate crowns were brought for the ceremony: a golden laurel wreath recalling the Roman Empire, and a replica of Charlemagne's crown.[130] Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings[130] since the laurel wreath symbolized victory, peace and civic virtue.[129] For the official coronation, he raised the replica Charlemagne crown over his own head in a symbolic gesture, but never placed it on top because he was already wearing the golden wreath.[130] After the crown was placed on his head, everyone in the Notre Dame Cathedral stood up spontaneously, the men waving their feathered hats.[131] Josephine, his wife, knelt in front of Napoleon where he then placed the crown on Josephine's head, the event commemorated in the officially sanctioned painting by Jacques-Louis David.[130] Josephine became only the second queen to be crowned and anointed in French history, other than Marie de' Medici.[132]
Napoleon was then crowned King of Italy, with the Iron Crown of Lombardy, at the Cathedral of Milan on 26 May 1805. He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from among his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army on 18 May 1804, the official start of the Empire.[133]
War of the Third Coalition
Main article: War of the Third Coalition
 Napoleon and the Grande Arm e receive the surrender of Austrian General Mack after the Battle of Ulm in October 1805. The decisive finale of the Ulm Campaign raised the tally of captured Austrian soldiers to 60,000. With the Austrian army destroyed, Vienna would fall to the French in November.
Great Britain had broken the Peace of Amiens by declaring war on France in May 1803.[134] In December 1804, an Anglo-Swedish agreement became the first step towards the creation of the Third Coalition. By April 1805, Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia.[135] Austria had been defeated by France twice in recent memory and wanted revenge, so it joined the coalition a few months later.[136]
Before the formation of the Third Coalition, Napoleon had assembled an invasion force, the Arm e d'Angleterre, around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France. He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England. They never invaded, but Napoleon's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations.[137] The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Arm e. At the start, this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps, which were large field units that contained 36 40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue.[138]
A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support, giving the Grande Arm e countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign. On top of these forces, Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions, four mounted dragoon divisions, one division of dismounted dragoons, and one of light cavalry, all supported by 24 artillery pieces.[139] By 1805, the Grande Arm e had grown to a force of 350,000 men,[139] who were well equipped, well trained, and led by competent officers.[140]
Napoleon knew that the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head-to-head battle, so he planned to lure it away from the English Channel through diversionary tactics.[141] The main strategic idea involved the French Navy escaping from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threatening to attack the British West Indies. In the face of this attack, it was hoped, the British would weaken their defence of the Western Approaches by sending ships to the Caribbean, allowing a combined Franco-Spanish fleet to take control of the English channel long enough for French armies to cross and invade.[141] However, the plan unravelled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805. French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to C diz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel.[142]
 Napol on in his coronation robes by Fran ois G rard, c. 1805
By August 1805, Napoleon had realized that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally. Facing a potential invasion from his continental enemies, he decided to strike first and turned his army's sights from the English Channel to the Rhine. His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive. On 25 September, after great secrecy and feverish marching, 200,000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260 km (160 mi).[143][144]
Austrian commander Karl Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia. Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Arm e performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions. The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack, who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off. After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm, Mack finally surrendered after realizing that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement. For just 2,000 French casualties, Napoleon had managed to capture a total of 60,000 Austrian soldiers through his army's rapid marching.[145] Napoleon wrote after the conflict:
"I have accomplished my object, I have destroyed the Austrian army by simply marching."[146]
The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century.[147] For the French, this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October. After Trafalgar, the Royal Navy was never again seriously challenged by a French fleet in a large-scale engagement for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars.[148]
 Napoleon at the Battle of Austerlitz, by Fran ois G rard 1805. The Battle of Austerlitz, also known as the Battle of the Three Emperors, was one of Napoleon's many victories, where the French Empire defeated the Third Coalition.
Following the Ulm Campaign, French forces managed to capture Vienna in November. The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured 100,000 muskets, 500 cannons, and the intact bridges across the Danube.[149] At this critical juncture, both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle, despite reservations from some of their subordinates. Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness.[150]
Desperate to lure the Allies into battle, Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state, even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights, a sloping hill near the village of Austerlitz. At the Battle of Austerlitz, in Moravia on 2 December, he deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank, enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line. A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time.[150]
Meanwhile, the heavy Allied deployment against the French right flank weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights, which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult. With the Allied center demolished, the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically, capturing thousands of prisoners in the process. The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near-perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan of the same stature as Cannae, the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2,000 years before.[150]
The Allied disaster at Austerlitz significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British-led war effort. France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December. Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lun ville between the two powers. The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria, and lands in Germany to Napoleon's German allies.[151]
It imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil. Napoleon went on to say, "The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought".[152] Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality, and what used to be French foreign policy became a "personal Napoleonic one".[153] Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".[154]
Middle-Eastern alliances
Main articles: Franco-Ottoman alliance and Franco-Persian alliance
 The Iranian envoy Mirza Mohammed Reza-Qazvini meeting with Napoleon I at the Finckenstein Palace in West Prussia, 27 April 1807, to sign the Treaty of Finckenstein
Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia, and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire.[76] In February 1806, Ottoman Emperor Selim III recognised Napoleon as Emperor. He also opted for an alliance with France, calling France "our sincere and natural ally".[155] That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain. A Franco-Persian alliance was formed between Napoleon and the Persian Empire of Fat h-Ali Shah Qajar. It collapsed in 1807 when France and Russia formed an unexpected alliance.[76] In the end, Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East.[156]
War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
Main article: War of the Fourth Coalition
After Austerlitz, Napoleon established the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806. A collection of German states intended to serve as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe, the creation of the Confederation spelled the end of the Holy Roman Empire and significantly alarmed the Prussians. The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region, if not eliminating it outright. War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806. At the insistence of his court, especially his wife Queen Louise, Frederick William III decided to challenge the French domination of Central Europe by going to war.[157]
 Napoleon reviewing the Imperial Guard before the Battle of Jena
The initial military manoeuvres began in September 1806. In a letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign, Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon-carr  ("square battalion").[158] In the bataillon-carr  system, the various corps of the Grande Arm e would march uniformly together in close supporting distance.[158] If any single corps was attacked, the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help.[159]
Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180,000 troops, rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale. As in previous campaigns, his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war. Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army, the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force. At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt, fought on 14 October, the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties. With several major commanders dead or incapacitated, the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army, which began to quickly disintegrate.[159]
In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the "peak of Napoleonic warfare", according to historian Richard Brooks,[159] the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers, over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons, all in a single month. Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces: "Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered".[158] Despite their overwhelming defeat, the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight.
 The Treaties of Tilsit: Napoleon meeting with Alexander I of Russia on a raft in the middle of the Neman River
Following his triumph, Napoleon imposed the first elements of the Continental System through the Berlin Decree issued in November 1806. The Continental System, which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain, was widely violated throughout his reign.[160][161] In the next few months, Napoleon marched against the advancing Russian armies through Poland and was involved in the bloody stalemate at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807.[162] After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides, the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive.[163]
On 14 June Napoleon obtained an overwhelming victory over the Russians at the Battle of Friedland, wiping out the majority of the Russian army in a very bloody struggle. The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French. On 19 June, Tsar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon. The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe. On that basis, the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen. The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well-calibrated: "I hate the English as much as you do".[163] Their meeting lasted two hours. Despite waging wars against each other the two Emperors were very much impressed and fascinated by one another.  Never,  said Alexander afterward,  did I love any man as I loved that man. [164]
Alexander faced pressure from his brother, Duke Constantine, to make peace with Napoleon. Given the victory he had just achieved, the French emperor offered the Russians relatively lenient terms demanding that Russia join the Continental System, withdraw its forces from Wallachia and Moldavia, and hand over the Ionian Islands to France.[165] By contrast, Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia, despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise. Wiping out half of Prussian territories from the map, Napoleon created a new kingdom of 2,800 square kilometres (1,100 sq mi) called Westphalia and appointed his young brother J r me as its monarch.[166]
Prussia's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism that festered as the Napoleonic era progressed. Moreover, Alexander's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart, who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years. Despite these problems, the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France, which he had not seen in over 300 days.[166]
Peninsular War and Erfurt
Main article: Peninsular War
The settlements at Tilsit gave Napoleon time to organize his empire. One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British forces. He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal, which consistently violated his trade prohibitions. After defeat in the War of the Oranges in 1801, Portugal adopted a double-sided policy.
 Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, as King of Spain
Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government, Napoleon negotiated a secret treaty with Charles IV of Spain and sent an army to invade Portugal.[167] On 17 October 1807, 24,000 French troops under General Junot crossed the Pyrenees with Spanish cooperation and headed towards Portugal to enforce Napoleon's orders.[168] This attack was the first step in what would eventually become the Peninsular War, a six-year struggle that significantly sapped French strength. Throughout the winter of 1808, French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs, attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family. On 16 February 1808, secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country.[169]
Marshal Murat led 120,000 troops into Spain. The French arrived in Madrid on 24 March,[170] where wild riots against the occupation erupted just a few weeks later. Napoleon appointed his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808. The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population. Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout Spain. The shocking French defeats at the Battle of Bail n and the Battle of Vimiero gave hope to Napoleon's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person.[171]
Before going to Iberia, Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians. At the Congress of Erfurt in October 1808, Napoleon hoped to keep Russia on his side during the upcoming struggle in Spain and during any potential conflict against Austria. The two sides reached an agreement, the Erfurt Convention, that called upon Britain to cease its war against France, that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden and made it an autonomous Grand Duchy,[172] and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria "to the best of its ability".[173]
Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war. The Grande Arm e, under the Emperor's personal command, rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces. After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra, Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops.[174] He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces. The British were swiftly driven to the coast, and they withdrew from Spain entirely after a last stand at the Battle of Corunna in January 1809 and the death of Moore.[175]
 Napoleon accepting the surrender of Madrid, 4 December 1808
Napoleon would end up leaving Iberia in order to deal with the Austrians in Central Europe, but the Peninsular War continued on long after his absence. He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign. Several months after Corunna, the British sent another army to the peninsula under Arthur Wellesley, the future Duke of Wellington. The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand. The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside. Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict.[176]
The vicious guerrilla fighting in Spain, largely absent from the French campaigns in Central Europe, severely disrupted the French lines of supply and communication. Although France maintained roughly 300,000 troops in Iberia during the Peninsular War, the vast majority were tied down to garrison duty and to intelligence operations.[176] The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively, prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favour of the Allies. After the invasion of Russia in 1812, the number of French troops in Spain vastly declined as Napoleon needed reinforcements to conserve his strategic position in Europe. By 1814 the Allies had pushed the French out of the peninsula.
The impact of the Napoleonic invasion of Spain and ousting of the Spanish Bourbon monarchy in favour of his brother Joseph had an enormous impact on the Spanish empire. In Spanish America many local elites formed juntas and set up mechanisms to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII of Spain, whom they considered the legitimate Spanish monarch. The outbreak of the Spanish American wars of independence in most of the empire was a result of Napoleon's destabilizing actions in Spain and led to the rise of strongmen in the wake of these wars.[177]
War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
Main article: War of the Fifth Coalition
 Napoleon at the Battle of Wagram, painted by Horace Vernet
After four years on the sidelines, Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats. Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain, Sweden, and the Ottoman Empire in 1809. Frederick William of Prussia initially promised to help the Austrians but reneged before conflict began.[178] A report from the Austrian finance minister suggested that the treasury would run out of money by the middle of 1809 if the large army that the Austrians had formed since the Third Coalition remained mobilized.[178] Although Archduke Charles warned that the Austrians were not ready for another showdown with Napoleon, a stance that landed him in the so-called "peace party", he did not want to see the army demobilized either.[178] On 8 February 1809, the advocates for war finally succeeded when the Imperial Government secretly decided on another confrontation against the French.[179]
In the early morning of 10 April, leading elements of the Austrian army crossed the Inn River and invaded Bavaria. The early Austrian attack surprised the French; Napoleon himself was still in Paris when he heard about the invasion. He arrived at Donauw rth on the 17th to find the Grande Arm e in a dangerous position, with its two wings separated by 120 km (75 mi) and joined by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops. Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout.[180]
In response, Napoleon came up with a plan to cut off the Austrians in the celebrated Landshut Maneuver.[181] He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckm hl. The French scored a convincing win in the resulting Battle of Eckm hl, forcing Charles to withdraw his forces over the Danube and into Bohemia. On 13 May, Vienna fell for the second time in four years, although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany.
 The entry of Napoleon in Sch nbrunn, Vienna
On 21 May, the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube, precipitating the Battle of Aspern-Essling. The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling, the focal points of the French bridgehead. A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island. Both sides inflicted about 23,000 casualties on each other.[182] It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle, and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield.[183]
After the setback at Aspern-Essling, Napoleon took more than six weeks in planning and preparing for contingencies before he made another attempt at crossing the Danube.[184] From 30 June to the early days of July, the French recrossed the Danube in strength, with more than 180,000 troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians.[184] Charles received the French with 150,000 of his own men.[185] In the ensuing Battle of Wagram, which also lasted two days, Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then. Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat. Austrian losses were very heavy, reaching well over 40,000 casualties.[186] The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately, but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July.
 The French Empire at its greatest extent in 1812: French Empire French satellite states
In the Kingdom of Holland, the British launched the Walcheren Campaign to open up a second front in the war and to relieve the pressure on the Austrians. The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July, by which point the Austrians had already been defeated. The Walcheren Campaign was characterized by little fighting but heavy casualties thanks to the popularly dubbed "Walcheren Fever". Over 4,000 British troops were lost in a bungled campaign, and the rest withdrew in December 1809.[187] The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians. Emperor Francis waited to see how the British performed in their theatre before entering into negotiations with Napoleon. Once it became apparent the British were going nowhere, the Austrians agreed to peace talks.[citation needed]
The resulting Treaty of Sch nbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory. Metternich and Archduke Charles had the preservation of the Habsburg Empire as their fundamental goal, and to this end, they succeeded by making Napoleon seek more modest goals in return for promises of friendship between the two powers.[188] While most of the hereditary lands remained a part of the Habsburg realm, France received Carinthia, Carniola, and the Adriatic ports, while Galicia was given to the Poles and the Salzburg area of the Tyrol went to the Bavarians.[188] Austria lost over three million subjects, about one-fifth of her total population, as a result of these territorial changes.[189]
Napoleon turned his focus to domestic affairs after the war. Empress Jos phine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon, who became worried about the future of his empire following his death. Desperate for a legitimate heir, Napoleon divorced Jos phine on 10 January 1810 and started looking for a new wife. Hoping to cement the recent alliance with Austria through a family connection, Napoleon married the 18-year-old Archduchess Marie Louise, daughter of Emperor Francis II. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise gave birth to a baby boy, whom Napoleon made heir apparent and bestowed the title of King of Rome. His son never actually ruled the empire, but given his brief titular rule and cousin Louis-Napol on's subsequent naming himself Napol on III, historians often refer to him as Napoleon II.[190]
Invasion of Russia
Main article: French invasion of Russia
In 1808, Napoleon and Tsar Alexander met at the Congress of Erfurt to preserve the Russo-French alliance. The leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807.[191] By 1811, however, tensions had increased, a strain on the relationship became the regular violations of the Continental System by the Russians as their economy was failing, which led Napoleon to threaten Alexander with serious consequences if he formed an alliance with Britain.[192]
 Napoleon watching the fire of Moscow in September 1812, by Adam Albrecht (1841)
 Napoleon's withdrawal from Russia, painting by Adolph Northen
By 1812, advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland. On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his Grande Arm e to more than 450,000 men.[193] He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign; on 24 June 1812 the invasion commenced.[194]
In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots, Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768. Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created. This was rejected by Napoleon, who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen. Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army's rear. The serfs later committed atrocities against French soldiers during France's retreat.[195]
The Russians avoided Napoleon's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia. A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles, and Napoleon resumed his advance. The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose. Owing to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses.[196]
The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September: the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44,000 Russian and 35,000 French dead, wounded or captured, and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point in time.[197] Although the French had won, the Russian army had accepted, and withstood, the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive. Napoleon's own account was: "The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow. The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory, but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible".[198]
The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow. Napoleon entered the city, assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace. Moscow was burned, rather than surrendered, on the order of Moscow's governor Feodor Rostopchin. After five weeks, Napoleon and his army left. In early November Napoleon became concerned about the loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812. His army walked through snow up to their knees, and nearly 10,000 men and horses froze to death on the night of 8/9 November alone. After the Battle of Berezina Napoleon managed to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train. On 5 December, shortly before arriving in Vilnius, Napoleon left the army in a sledge.[199]
The French suffered in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter. The Arm e had begun as over 400,000 frontline troops, with fewer than 40,000 crossing the Berezina River in November 1812.[200] The Russians had lost 150,000 soldiers in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians.[201]
War of the Sixth Coalition
Main article: War of the Sixth Coalition
 Napoleon's farewell to his Imperial Guard, 20 April 1814, by Antoine-Alphonse Montfort
There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812 13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was able to field 350,000 troops.[202] Heartened by France's loss in Russia, Prussia joined with Austria, Sweden, Russia, Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal in a new coalition. Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.[203]
Despite these successes, the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon, and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig. This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90,000 casualties in total.[204]
The Allies offered peace terms in the Frankfurt proposals in November 1813. Napoleon would remain as Emperor of the French, but it would be reduced to its "natural frontiers". That meant that France could retain control of Belgium, Savoy and the Rhineland (the west bank of the Rhine River), while giving up control of all the rest, including all of Spain and the Netherlands, and most of Italy and Germany. Metternich told Napoleon these were the best terms the Allies were likely to offer; after further victories, the terms would be harsher and harsher. Metternich's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars.[205]
Napoleon, expecting to win the war, delayed too long and lost this opportunity; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer. When his back was to the wall in 1814 he tried to reopen peace negotiations on the basis of accepting the Frankfurt proposals. The Allies now had new, harsher terms that included the retreat of France to its 1791 boundaries, which meant the loss of Belgium, but Napoleon would remain Emperor. However, he rejected the term. The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed, and they prevailed, though Napoleon adamantly refused.[205][206]
 Napoleon after his abdication in Fontainebleau, 4 April 1814, by Paul Delaroche
Napoleon withdrew into France, his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers and little cavalry; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops.[207] Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's older brother, abdicated as king of Spain on 13 December 1813 and assumed the title of lieutenant general to save the collapsing empire. The French were surrounded: British armies pressed from the south, and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states. By the middle of January 1814, the Coalition had already entered France's borders and launched a two-pronged attack on Paris, with Prussia entering from the north, and Austria from the East, marching out of the capitulated Swiss confederation. The French Empire, however, would not go down so easily. Napoleon launched a series of victories in the Six Days' Campaign. While they repulsed the coalition forces and delayed the capture of Paris by at least a full month, these were not significant enough to turn the tide. The coalitionaries camped on the outskirts of the capital on 29 March. A day later, they advanced onto the demoralised soldiers protecting the city. Joseph Bonaparte led a final battle at the gates of Paris. They were greatly outnumbered, as 30,000 French soldiers were pitted against a combined coalition force that was 5 times greater than theirs. They were defeated, and Joseph retreated out of the city. The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition on the last day of March 1814.[208] On 1 April, Alexander addressed the S nat conservateur. Long docile to Napoleon, under Talleyrand's prodding it had turned against him. Alexander told the S nat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon, not France, and they were prepared to offer honourable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power. The next day, the S nat passed the Acte de d ch ance de l'Empereur ("Emperor's Demise Act"), which declared Napoleon deposed.
Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris had fallen. When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital, his senior officers and marshals mutinied.[209] On 4 April, led by Ney, the senior officers confronted Napoleon. When Napoleon asserted the army would follow him, Ney replied the army would follow its generals. While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on, the senior commanders were unwilling to continue. Without any senior officers or marshals, any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible. Bowing to the inevitable, on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son, with Marie Louise as regent. However, the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander, who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne.[210][211] Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later.[211]
In his farewell address to the soldiers of Old Guard in 20 April, Napoleon said:"Soldiers of my Old Guard, I have come to bid you farewell. For twenty years you have accompanied me faithfully on the paths of honor and glory. ...With men like you, our cause was [not] lost, but the war would have dragged on interminably, and it would have been a civil war. ... So I am sacrificing our interests to those of our country. ...Do not lament my fate; if I have agreed to live on, it is to serve our glory. I wish to write the history of the great deeds we have done together. Farewell, my children!"[212]
Exile to Elba
 Napoleon leaving Elba on 26 February 1815, by Joseph Beaume (1836)
The Allied Powers having declared that Emperor Napoleon was the sole obstacle to the restoration of peace in Europe, Emperor Napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of France and Italy, and that there is no personal sacrifice, even that of his life, which he is not ready to make in the interests of France.Done in the palace of Fontainebleau, 11 April 1814. Act of abdication of Napoleon[213]
In the Treaty of Fontainebleau, the Allies exiled Napoleon to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean, 10 km (6 mi) off the Tuscan coast. They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain the title of Emperor. Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow. Its potency had weakened with age, however, and he survived to be exiled, while his wife and son took refuge in Austria.[214]
He was conveyed to the island on HMS Undaunted by Captain Thomas Ussher, and he arrived at Portoferraio on 30 May 1814. In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, oversaw the construction of new roads, issued decrees on modern agricultural methods, and overhauled the island's legal and educational system.[215][216]
A few months into his exile, Napoleon learned that his ex-wife Josephine had died in France. He was devastated by the news, locking himself in his room and refusing to leave for two days.[217]
Hundred Days
Main article: Hundred Days
 Napoleon's Return from Elba, by Charles de Steuben, 1818
Separated from his wife and son, who had returned to Austria, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean,[218] Napoleon escaped from Elba in the brig Inconstant on 26 February 1815 with 700 men.[218] Two days later, he landed on the French mainland at Golfe-Juan and started heading north.[218]
The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815. Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted to the soldiers, "Here I am. Kill your Emperor, if you wish."[219] The soldiers quickly responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!" Ney, who had boasted to the restored Bourbon king, Louis XVIII, that he would bring Napoleon to Paris in an iron cage, affectionately kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch. The two then marched together toward Paris with a growing army. The unpopular Louis XVIII fled to Belgium after realizing that he had little political support. On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw. Four days later, Great Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia each pledged to put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule.[220]
Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days. By the start of June, the armed forces available to him had reached 200,000, and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies. The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, in modern-day Belgium.[221]
Napoleon's forces fought two Coalition armies, commanded by the British Duke of Wellington and the Prussian Prince Bl cher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. Wellington's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon's right flank.
Napoleon returned to Paris and found that both the legislature and the people had turned against him. Realizing that his position was untenable, he abdicated on 22 June in favour of his son. He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine's former palace in Malmaison (on the western bank of the Seine about 17 kilometres (11 mi) west of Paris). Even as Napoleon travelled to Paris, the Coalition forces swept through France (arriving in the vicinity of Paris on 29 June), with the stated intent of restoring Louis XVIII to the French throne.
When Napoleon heard that Prussian troops had orders to capture him dead or alive, he fled to Rochefort, considering an escape to the United States. British ships were blocking every port. Napoleon surrendered to Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS Bellerophon on 15 July 1815.[222]
Exile on Saint Helena
 Napoleon on Saint Helena, watercolor by Franz Josef Sandmann, c. 1820
 Longwood House, Saint Helena, site of Napoleon's captivity
Refusing Napoleon's request for political asylum in England, the British kept Napoleon on the island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, 1,870 km (1,162 mi) from the west coast of Africa. Napoleon arrived at Jamestown, Saint Helena in October 1815 on board the HMS Northumberland. The British also took the precaution of sending a small garrison of soldiers to both Saint Helena and the nearby uninhabited Ascension Island, which lay between St. Helena and Europe, to prevent any escape from the island.[223]
Napoleon stayed for two months at Briars pavilion before he was moved to Longwood House, a large wooden bungalow on Saint Helena, in December 1815. By this point, the house had fallen into disrepair. The location and interior of the house was damp, windswept and unhealthy.[224][225] The Times published articles insinuating the British government was trying to hasten his death. Napoleon often complained of the living conditions of Longwood House in letters to the island's governor and his custodian, Hudson Lowe,[226] while his attendants complained of "colds, catarrhs, damp floors and poor provisions."[227] Modern scientists have speculated that his later illness may have arisen from arsenic poisoning caused by copper arsenite in the wallpaper at Longwood House.[228]
With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about the living conditions. Lowe cut Napoleon's expenditure, ruled that no gifts were allowed if they mentioned his imperial status, and made his supporters sign a guarantee they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely.[229] When he held a dinner party, men were expected to wear military dress and "women [appeared] in evening gowns and gems. It was an explicit denial of the circumstances of his captivity".[230]
While in exile, Napoleon wrote a book about Julius Caesar, one of his great heroes.[231] He also studied English under the tutelage of Count Emmanuel de Las Cases with the main aim of being able to read English newspapers and books, as access to French newspapers and books was heavily restricted to him on Saint Helena.[232] Napoleon also devoted himself to compiling a book "M morial de Ste-H l ne", an account which reflected his self-depiction as a liberal, visionary ruler for European unification, deposed by reactionary elements of the Ancien R gime.[233]
Another pastime of Napoleon's while in exile was playing card games.[234][235] The number of patiences named in his honour seems to suggest that he was an avid player of the solitary game. Napoleon at St Helena is described as being a favourite of his,[236] while Napoleon's Favourite (or St. Helena) is clearly a contender. Other games with a Napoleonic theme include Napoleon's Flank, Napoleon's Shoulder, Napoleon's Square and Little Napoleon Patience. However, Arnold argues that, while Napoleon played cards in exile, the notion that he played numerous patience games is "based on a misunderstanding".[234]
There were rumours of plots and even of his escape from Saint Helena, but in reality, no serious attempts were ever made.[237] For English poet Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely, and flawed genius.[238]
Death
See also: Death mask of Napoleon, Retour des cendres, and Napoleon's tomb
 Frederick Marryat's sketch of Napoleon's body on his deathbed
Napoleon's personal physician, Barry O'Meara, warned London that his declining state of health was mainly caused by the harsh treatment. During the last few years of his life, Napoleon confined himself for months on end in his damp, mold-infested and wretched habitation of Longwood. Years of isolation and loneliness took its toll on Napoleon's mental health, having his court continually reduced, including the arrest of Count Emmanuel de Las Cases, conditions which Lord Holland used to bring about a debate regarding the treatment of Napoleon in captivity.[239]
In February 1821, Napoleon's health began to deteriorate rapidly, and he reconciled with the Catholic Church. By March, he had become confined to bed. Napoleon died on 5 May 1821 at Longwood House at age 51, after making his last confession, Extreme Unction and Viaticum in the presence of Father Ange Vignali from his deathbed. His last words were, France, l'arm e, t te d'arm e, Jos phine ("France, the army, head of the army, Jos phine").[240][241][233]
Shortly after his death, an autopsy was conducted and Fran ois Carlo Antommarchi, the doctor conducting the autopsy, cut off Napoleon's penis.[28][page needed][242] Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, although it is not clear which doctor created it.[i][244] Napoleon's heart and intestines were removed and contained separately in two sealed vessels, which were placed inside his coffin at his feet. In his will, he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine, but the British governor said he should be buried on Saint Helena, in the Valley of the Willows.[240]
 Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides in Paris
In 1840, Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British government to return Napoleon's remains to France. His casket was opened to confirm that it still contained the former emperor. Despite being dead for nearly two decades, Napoleon had been very well preserved and not decomposed at all. On 15 December 1840, a state funeral was held. The horse-drawn hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs- lys es, across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St J r me's Chapel, where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed.
 Napoleon's remains passing through Jamestown, Saint Helena, on 13 October 1840
In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a sarcophagus of red quartzite from Russia (often mistaken for porphyry) in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.[245]
Cause of death
 Situation of Napoleon's body when his coffin was reopened on St Helena, by Jules Rigo, 1840
The cause of Napoleon's death has been debated. His physician, Fran ois Carlo Antommarchi, led the autopsy, which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer. Antommarchi did not sign the official report.[246] Napoleon's father had died of stomach cancer, although this was apparently unknown at the time of the autopsy.[247] Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer; this was the most convenient explanation for the British, who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon.[240]
In 1955, the diaries of Napoleon's valet, Louis Marchand, were published. His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in Nature to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning.[248] Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period. Furthermore, in a 1978 book with Ben Weider, Forshufvud noted that Napoleon's body was found to be well preserved when moved in 1840. Arsenic is a strong preservative, and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis. Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring.[248] They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expelling these compounds and that his thirst was a symptom of the poison. Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose, which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind.[248] According to a 2007 article, the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts was mineral, the most toxic, and according to toxicologist Patrick Kintz, this supported the conclusion that he was murdered.[249]
There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding.[249] In a 2008 study, researchers analysed samples of Napoleon's hair from throughout his life, as well as samples from his family and other contemporaries. All samples had high levels of arsenic, approximately 100 times higher than the current average. According to these researchers, Napoleon's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy, and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives.[j] Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismissed evidence of arsenic poisoning, suggesting peptic ulcer and gastric cancer as the cause of death.[251]
Religion
Further information: Napoleon and the Catholic Church
 Reorganisation of the religious geography: France is divided into 59 dioceses and 10 ecclesiastical provinces.
Napoleon was baptised in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771. He was raised as a Catholic but never developed much faith,[252] though he recalled the day of his First Communion in the Catholic Church to be the happiest day of his life.[253][254] As an adult, Napoleon was a deist, believing in an absent and distant God. However, he had a keen appreciation of the power of organized religion in social and political affairs, and he paid a great deal of attention to bending it to his purposes. He noted the influence of Catholicism's rituals and splendors.[252]
Napoleon had a civil marriage with Jos phine de Beauharnais, without religious ceremony. Napoleon was crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804 at Notre-Dame de Paris in a ceremony presided over by Pope Pius VII. On the eve of the coronation ceremony, and at the insistence of Pope Pius VII, a private religious wedding ceremony of Napoleon and Jos phine was celebrated. Cardinal Fesch performed the wedding.[255] This marriage was annulled by tribunals under Napoleon's control in January 1810. On 1 April 1810, Napoleon married the Austrian princess Marie Louise in a Catholic ceremony. Napoleon was excommunicated by the Pope through the bull Quum memoranda in 1809, but later reconciled with the Catholic Church before his death in 1821.[256] While in exile in Saint Helena he is recorded to have said "I know men; and I tell you that Jesus Christ is not a man."[257][258][259]
He also defended Muhammad ("a great man") against Voltaire's Mahomet.[260]
Concordat
Further information: Concordat of 1801
 Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat
Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics, Napoleon and Pope Pius VII signed the Concordat of 1801 on 15 July 1801. It solidified the Roman Catholic Church as the majority church of France and brought back most of its civil status. The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved. The Concordat did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off. As a part of the Concordat, Napoleon presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles.[261][262]
While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy, the balance of church state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon's favour. He selected the bishops and supervised church finances. Napoleon and the Pope both found the Concordat useful. Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon, especially Italy and Germany.[263] Now, Napoleon could win favour with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense. Napoleon said in April 1801, "Skillful conquerors have not got entangled with priests. They can both contain them and use them". French children were issued a catechism that taught them to love and respect Napoleon.[264]
Arrest of Pope Pius VII
In 1809, under Napoleon's orders, Pope Pius VII was placed under arrest in Italy, and in 1812 the prisoner Pontiff was transferred to France, being held in the Palace of Fontainebleau.[265] Because the arrest was made in a clandestine manner, some sources[266][265][267] describe it as a kidnapping.[268] In January 1813, Napoleon personally forced the Pope to sign a humiliating "Concordat of Fontainebleau"[269] which was later repudiated by the Pontiff.[270] The Pope was not released until 1814, when the Coalition invaded France.
Religious emancipation
Further information: Napoleon and the Jews and Napoleon and Protestants
Napoleon emancipated Jews, as well as Protestants in Catholic countries and Catholics in Protestant countries, from laws which restricted them to ghettos, and he expanded their rights to property, worship, and careers. Despite the antisemitic reaction to Napoleon's policies from foreign governments and within France, he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere.[271]
In 1806 an assembly of Jewish notables was gathered by Napoleon to discuss 12 questions broadly dealing with the relations between Jews and Christians, as well as other issues dealing with the Jewish ability to integrate into French society. Later, after the questions were answered in a satisfactory way according to the Emperor, a "great Sanhedrin" was brought together to transform the answers into decisions that would form the basis of the future status of the Jews in France and the rest of the empire Napoleon was building.[272]
He stated, "I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France, because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country. It takes weakness to chase them out of the country, but it takes strength to assimilate them".[273] He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "Antichrist and the Enemy of God".[274]
One year after the final meeting of the Sanhedrin, on 17 March 1808, Napoleon placed the Jews on probation. Several new laws restricting the citizenship the Jews had been offered 17 years previously were instituted at that time. However, despite pressure from leaders of a number of Christian communities to refrain from granting Jews emancipation, within one year of the issue of the new restrictions, they were once again lifted in response to the appeal of Jews from all over France.[272]
Freemasonry
It is not known for certain if Napoleon was initiated into Freemasonry. As Emperor, he appointed his brothers to Masonic offices under his jurisdiction: Louis was given the title of Deputy Grand Master in 1805; Jerome the title of Grand Master of the Grand Orient of Westphalia; Joseph was appointed Grand Master of the Grand Orient de France; and finally Lucien was a member of the Grand Orient of France.[275]
Personality
 Napoleon visiting the Palais Royal for the opening of the 8th session of the Tribunat in 1807, by Merry-Joseph Blondel
Historians emphasize the strength of the ambition that took Napoleon from an obscure village to rule over most of Europe.[276] In-depth academic studies about his early life conclude that up until age 2, he had a "gentle disposition".[29] His older brother, Joseph, frequently received their mother's attention which made Napoleon more assertive and approval-driven. During his early schooling years, he would be harshly bullied by classmates for his Corsican identity and limited command of the French language. To withstand the stress he became domineering, eventually developing an inferiority complex.[29]
George F. E. Rud  stresses his "rare combination of will, intellect and physical vigour".[277] In one-on-one situations he typically had a hypnotic effect on people, seemingly bending the strongest leaders to his will.[278] He understood military technology, but was not an innovator in that regard.[279] He was an innovator in using the financial, bureaucratic, and diplomatic resources of France. He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates, keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point, and like a chess master, "seeing" the best plays moves ahead.[280] This intellectual vigour was accompanied by a mixture of "remarkable charisma and willpower" and "a furious temper" exhibited during failure of his plans; which commanded respect as well as dread from his adjutants.[281]
Napoleon maintained strict, efficient work habits, prioritizing what needed to be done. He cheated at cards, but repaid the losses; he had to win at everything he attempted.[282] He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work. Unlike many generals, Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation. Critics said he won many battles simply because of luck; Napoleon responded, "Give me lucky generals", arguing that "luck" comes to leaders who recognize opportunity, and seize it.[283] Dwyer states that Napoleon's victories at Austerlitz and Jena in 1805 06 heightened his sense of self-grandiosity, leaving him even more certain of his destiny and invincibility.[284] "I am of the race that founds empires" he once boasted, deeming himself an heir to the Ancient Romans.[285]
In terms of influence on events, it was more than Napoleon's personality that took effect. He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for wars.[286] He inspired his men the Duke of Wellington said his presence on the battlefield was worth 40,000 soldiers, for he inspired confidence from privates to field marshals.[287] The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win.[288]
Image
Further information: Cultural depictions of Napoleon
 Napoleon is often represented in his green colonel uniform of the Chasseur   Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that often served as his personal escort, with a large bicorne and a hand-in-waistcoat gesture.
The military historian Martin van Creveld has described him as "the most competent human being who ever lived".[289] Since his death, many towns, streets, ships, and even cartoon characters have been named after him. He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles.[290][291][292] The German legal scholar Carl Theoder Welcker described Napoleon as "the greatest master of Machiavellism".[293]
When his contemporaries met him in person, many were surprised by his apparently unremarkable physical appearance in contrast to his significant deeds and reputation, especially in his youth, when he was consistently described as small and thin. English painter Joseph Farington, who observed Napoleon personally in 1802, commented that "Samuel Rogers stood a little way from me and... seemed to be disappointed in the look of [Napoleon's] countenance ["face"] and said it was that of a little Italian." Farington said Napoleon's eyes were "lighter, and more of a grey, than I should have expected from his complexion", that "his person is below middle size", and that "his general aspect was milder than I had before thought it."[294]
A personal friend of Napoleon's said that when he first met him in Brienne-le-Ch teau as a young man, Napoleon was only notable "for the dark color of his complexion, for his piercing and scrutinising glance, and for the style of his conversation"; he also said that Napoleon was personally a serious and somber man: "his conversation bore the appearance of ill-humor, and he was certainly not very amiable."[295] Johann Ludwig Wurstemberger, who accompanied Napoleon from Camp Fornio in 1797 and on the Swiss campaign of 1798, noted that "Bonaparte was rather slight and emaciated-looking; his face, too, was very thin, with a dark complexion... his black, unpowdered hair hung down evenly over both shoulders", but that, despite his slight and unkempt appearance, "[h]is looks and expression were earnest and powerful."[296]
Denis Davydov met him personally and considered him remarkably average in appearance:
His face was slightly swarthy, with regular features. His nose was not very large, but straight, with a slight, hardly noticeable bend. The hair on his head was dark reddish-blond; his eyebrows and eyelashes were much darker than the colour of his hair, and his blue eyes, set off by the almost black lashes, gave him a most pleasing expression ... The man I saw was of short stature, just over five feet tall, rather heavy although he was only 37 years old.[297]
During the Napoleonic Wars, he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade. Despite or due to his average size, Napoleon was mocked in British newspapers as a short tempered small man and he was nicknamed "Little Boney in a strong fit".[298] A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people; the "bogeyman".[299] The British propaganda about his supposedly small size was so successful that many people today "know" very little besides this untruth about him.[300] At 1.57 metres (5 ft 2 in), he had the height of an average French male but was short for an aristocrat or officer (partly why he was assigned to the artillery, since at the time the infantry and cavalry required more commanding figures).[301]
Some historians believe his size at death was incorrectly recorded due to use of an obsolete old French yardstick (a French foot equals 33 cm, while an English foot equals 30.47 cm).[301][302] But Napoleon was a champion of the metric system and had no use for the old yardsticks that had been out of use since 1793 in France. It is likely that he was 1.57 m (5 ft 2 in), the height measured on St. Helena (a British island), since he would have most likely been measured with an English yardstick rather than a yardstick of the French Old Regime.[301] Napoleon surrounded himself with tall bodyguards and was affectionately nicknamed le petit caporal (the little corporal), reflecting his reported camaraderie with his soldiers rather than his height.
When he became First Consul and later Emperor, Napoleon eschewed his general's uniform and habitually wore the green colonel uniform (non-Hussar) of a colonel of the Chasseur   Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that served as his personal escort many times, with a large bicorne. He also habitually wore (usually on Sundays) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers (blue with white facings and red cuffs). He also wore his L gion d'honneur star, medal and ribbon, and the Order of the Iron Crown decorations, white French-style culottes and white stockings. This was in contrast to the complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him.
In his later years he gained quite a bit of weight and had a complexion considered pale or sallow, something contemporaries took note of. Novelist Paul de Kock, who saw him in 1811 on the balcony of the Tuileries, called Napoleon "yellow, obese, and bloated".[303] A British captain who met him in 1815 stated "I felt very much disappointed, as I believe everyone else did, in his appearance ... He is fat, rather what we call pot-bellied, and although his leg is well shaped, it is rather clumsy ... He is very sallow, with light grey eyes, and rather thin, greasy-looking brown hair, and altogether a very nasty, priestlike-looking fellow."[304]
The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a clich  in popular culture. He is often portrayed wearing a large bicorne hat sideways with a hand-in-waistcoat gesture a reference to the painting produced in 1812 by Jacques-Louis David.[305] In 1908 Alfred Adler, a psychologist, cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex in which short people adopt an over-aggressive behaviour to compensate for lack of height; this inspired the term Napoleon complex.[306]
Reforms
 First remittance of the L gion d'Honneur, 15 July 1804, at Saint-Louis des Invalides, by Jean-Baptiste Debret (1812)
Napoleon instituted various reforms, such as higher education, a tax code, road and sewer systems, and established the Banque de France, the first central bank in French history. He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church, which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime. It was presented alongside the Organic Articles, which regulated public worship in France. He dissolved the Holy Roman Empire prior to German Unification later in the 19th century. The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the United States.[307]
In May 1802, he instituted the Legion of Honour, a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements; the order is still the highest decoration in France.[308]
Napoleonic Code
Main article: Napoleonic Code
 First page of the 1804 original edition of the Code Civil
Napoleon's set of civil laws, the Code Civil now often known as the Napoleonic Code was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques R gis de Cambac r s, the Second Consul. Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts. The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law. Other codes ("Les cinq codes") were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published, which enacted rules of due process.[309]
The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Continental Europe, though only in the lands he conquered, and remained in force after Napoleon's defeat. Napoleon said: "My true glory is not to have won forty battles ... Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories. ... But ... what will live forever, is my Civil Code".[310] The Code influences a quarter of the world's jurisdictions such as those in Continental Europe, the Americas, and Africa.[311]
Dieter Langewiesche described the code as a "revolutionary project" that spurred the development of bourgeois society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism. Napoleon reorganized what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made up of about three hundred Kleinstaaterei, into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this helped promote the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.[312]
The movement toward Italian unification was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule.[313] These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state.[314]
Napoleon directly overthrew remnants of feudalism in much of western Continental Europe. He liberalized property laws, ended seigneurial dues, abolished the guild of merchants and craftsmen to facilitate entrepreneurship, legalized divorce, closed the Jewish ghettos and made Jews equal to everyone else. The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire. The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law was proclaimed for all men.[315]
Warfare
Further information: Napoleonic weaponry and warfare and Military career of Napoleon Bonaparte
 Statue in Cherbourg-Octeville unveiled by Napoleon III in 1858. Napoleon I strengthened the town's defences to prevent British naval incursions.
In the field of military organization, Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, and from the reforms of preceding French governments, and then developed much of what was already in place. He continued the policy, which emerged from the Revolution, of promotion based primarily on merit.[316]
Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units, mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries, the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine. These methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare.[316] Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory, one of the restored monarchy's first acts was to end it.[317]
His opponents learned from Napoleon's innovations. The increased importance of artillery after 1807 stemmed from his creation of a highly mobile artillery force, the growth in artillery numbers, and changes in artillery practices. As a result of these factors, Napoleon, rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy's defences, now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry. McConachy rejects the alternative theory that growing reliance on artillery by the French army beginning in 1807 was an outgrowth of the declining quality of the French infantry and, later, France's inferiority in cavalry numbers.[318] Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th-century operational mobility underwent change.[319]
Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. Antoine-Henri Jomini explained Napoleon's methods in a widely used textbook that influenced all European and American armies.[320] Napoleon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war, and historians rank him as a great military commander.[321] Wellington, when asked who was the greatest general of the day, answered: "In this age, in past ages, in any age, Napoleon".[322][incomplete short citation]
Under Napoleon, a new emphasis towards the destruction, not just outmaneuvering, of enemy armies emerged. Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive. The political effect of war increased; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves. Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.[323]
Metric system
Main articles: History of the metric system, Mesures usuelles, and Units of measurement in France
 Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napol on gold coin
The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society. Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence. Napoleon took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the mesures usuelles (traditional units of measurement) for retail trade,[324] a system of measure that resembled the pre-revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre; for example, the livre metrique (metric pound) was 500 g,[325] in contrast to the value of the livre du roi (the king's pound), 489.5 g.[326] Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner prior to the definitive introduction of the metric system across parts of Europe in the middle of the 19th century.[327]
Education
Napoleon's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe.[328] Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien R gime, The Enlightenment, and the Revolution, with the aim of establishing a stable, well-educated and prosperous society. He made French the only official language. He left some primary education in the hands of religious orders, but he offered public support to secondary education. Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools (lyc es) designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France.[329]
All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages. Unlike the system during the Ancien R gime, religious topics did not dominate the curriculum, although they were present with the teachers from the clergy. Napoleon hoped to use religion to produce social stability.[329] He gave special attention to the advanced centers, such as the  cole Polytechnique, that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science.[330] Napoleon made some of the first efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education.[when?] The system featured scholarships and strict discipline, with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts, many of which borrowed from the French system.[331]
Memory and evaluation
Main article: Legacy and memory of Napoleon
Criticism
 The Third of May 1808 by Francisco Goya, showing Spanish resisters being executed by French troops
 A mass grave of soldiers killed at the Battle of Waterloo
In the political realm, historians debate whether Napoleon was "an enlightened despot who laid the foundations of modern Europe" or "a megalomaniac who wrought greater misery than any man before the coming of Hitler".[332] Many historians have concluded that he had grandiose foreign policy ambitions. The Continental powers as late as 1808 were willing to give him nearly all of his gains and titles, but some scholars maintain he was overly aggressive and pushed for too much, until his empire collapsed.[333][334]
He was considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents at the time and ever since. His critics charge that he was not troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike.[335] His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France's overseas colonies are controversial and affect his reputation.[336] French liberal intellectual Benjamin Constant (1767 1830) was a staunch critic of political homogenisation and personality cult that dominated Napoleonic France and wrote several books condemning Napoleon such as "The Spirit of Conquest and Usurpation" (1814) and "Principles of Politics Applicable to All Representative Governments" (1815). According to Constant, Bonapartism was even more tyrannical than the Bourbon monarchy, since it forced the masses to support its grand universalist narrative through imperialism and jingoism.[337]
Napoleon institutionalized plunder of conquered territories: French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon's forces from across Europe. Artefacts were brought to the Mus e du Louvre for a grand central museum; an example which would later be followed by others.[338] He was compared to Adolf Hitler by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947,[339] and Claude Ribbe in 2005.[340] David G. Chandler, a historian of Napoleonic warfare, wrote in 1973 that, "Nothing could be more degrading to the former [Napoleon] and more flattering to the latter [Hitler]. The comparison is odious. On the whole Napoleon was inspired by a noble dream, wholly dissimilar from Hitler's... Napoleon left great and lasting testimonies to his genius in codes of law and national identities which survive to the present day. Adolf Hitler left nothing but destruction."[341]
Critics argue Napoleon's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule: historian Victor Davis Hanson writes, "After all, the military record is unquestioned 17 years of wars, perhaps six million Europeans dead, France bankrupt, her overseas colonies lost."[342] McLynn states that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars."[335] Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name, when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions that aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution.[343]
British military historian Correlli Barnett calls him "a social misfit" who exploited France for his personal megalomaniac goals. He says Napoleon's reputation is exaggerated.[344] French scholar Jean Tulard provided an influential account of his image as a saviour.[345] Louis Bergeron has praised the numerous changes he made to French society, especially regarding the law as well as education.[346] His greatest failure was the Russian invasion. Many historians have blamed Napoleon's poor planning, but Russian scholars instead emphasize the Russian response, noting the notorious winter weather was just as hard on the defenders.[347]
The large and growing historiography in French, English, Russian, Spanish and other languages has been summarized and evaluated by numerous scholars.[348][349][350]
Propaganda and memory
 1814 caricature of Napoleon being exiled to Elba: the ex-emperor is riding a donkey backwards while holding a broken sword.
Main article: Napoleonic propaganda
Napoleon's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power, legitimated his r gime, and established his image for posterity. Strict censorship, controlling various key constituents of the press, books, theatre, and art were part of his propaganda scheme, aimed at portraying him as bringing desperately wanted peace and stability to France. The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon's reign, focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier, and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader. Specifically targeting his civilian audience, Napoleon fostered a relationship with the contemporary art community, taking an active role in commissioning and controlling different forms of art production to suit his propaganda goals.[351]
 Ceramic pitcher of Bonaparte: Where is he going to. To Elba. (Mus e de la R volution fran aise).
In England, Russia and across Europe though not in France Napoleon was a popular topic of caricature.[352][353][354]
Hazareesingh (2004) explores how Napoleon's image and memory are best understood. They played a key role in collective political defiance of the Bourbon restoration monarchy in 1815 1830. People from different walks of life and areas of France, particularly Napoleonic veterans, drew on the Napoleonic legacy and its connections with the ideals of the 1789 Revolution.[355]
Widespread rumours of Napoleon's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism, individual and collective liberties, and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials, displaying the tricolor and rosettes. There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime.[355]
Datta (2005) shows that, following the collapse of militaristic Boulangism in the late 1880s, the Napoleonic legend was divorced from party politics and revived in popular culture. Concentrating on two plays and two novels from the period Victorien Sardou's Madame Sans-G ne (1893), Maurice Barr s's Les D racin s (1897), Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon (1900), and Andr  de Lorde and Gyp's Napol onette (1913) Datta examines how writers and critics of the Belle  poque exploited the Napoleonic legend for diverse political and cultural ends.[356]
Reduced to a minor character, the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one, fashioned by individuals' needs and consumed as popular entertainment. In their attempts to represent the emperor as a figure of national unity, proponents and detractors of the Third Republic used the legend as a vehicle for exploring anxieties about gender and fears about the processes of democratization that accompanied this new era of mass politics and culture.[356]
International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly, with participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.[357] In January 2012, the mayor of Montereau-Fault-Yonne, near Paris the site of a late victory of Napoleon proposed development of Napoleon's Bivouac, a commemorative theme park at a projected cost of 200 million euros.[358]
Napoleon Crossing the Alps, romantic version by Jacques-Louis David in 1805
Bonaparte Crossing the Alps, realist version by Paul Delaroche in 1848
Moscow (1812). Napoleon leaves the Kremlin. painting by Maurice Orange.
Long-term influence outside France
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution
 Bas-relief of Napoleon in the chamber of the United States House of Representatives
Napoleon was responsible for spreading the values of the French Revolution to other countries, especially in legal reform.[359] After the fall of Napoleon, not only was it retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands, Belgium, parts of Italy and Germany, but it has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic, the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec.[360] The code was also used as a model in many parts of Latin America.[361] The reputation of Napoleon in Poland has been favourable, especially for his support of independence, opposition to Russia, his legal code, the abolition of serfdom, and the introduction of modern middle class administration.[362]
Napoleon had an influence on the establishment of modern Germany. He caused the end of the Holy Roman Empire and helped create middle sized states such as Bavaria and W rttemberg along the great powers Prussia and Austria. Although he also directly or indirectly helped to reduce the number of German states (from about 300 to fewer than 50), the middle sized states tried to prevent the unification of Germany as a federalist state. A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism which eventually turned the German Confederation into the German Empire after a series of conflicts and other political developments.
Napoleon indirectly began the process of Latin American independence when he invaded Spain in 1808. The abdication of King Charles IV and renunciation of his son, Ferdinand VII created a power vacuum that was filled by native born political leaders such as Sim n Bol var and Jos  de San Mart n. Such leaders embraced nationalistic sentiments influenced by French nationalism and led successful independence movements in Latin America.[363]
Napoleon also significantly aided the United States when he agreed to sell the territory of Louisiana for 15 million dollars during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. That territory almost doubled the size of the United States, adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union.[307]
From 1796 to 2020, at least 95 major ships were named for him. In the 21st century, at least 18 Napoleon ships are operated under the flag of France, as well as Indonesia, Germany, Italy, Australia, Argentina, India, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.[364]
Wives, mistresses, and children
 Jos phine, first wife of Napoleon, obtained the civil dissolution of her marriage under the Napoleonic Code. Painting by Henri Fr d ric Schopin, 1843.
 Marriage of Napoleon and Marie-Louise by Georges Rouget, 1843
Napoleon married Jos phine (n e Marie Jos phe Rose Tascher de La Pagerie) in 1796, when he was 26; she was a 32-year-old widow whose first husband, Alexandre de Beauharnais, had been executed during the Reign of Terror. Five days after Alexandre de Beauharnais' death, the Reign of Terror initiator Maximilien de Robespierre was overthrown and executed, and, with the help of high-placed friends, Jos phine was freed.[365] Until she met Bonaparte, she had been known as "Rose", a name which he disliked. He called her "Jos phine" instead, and she went by this name henceforth. Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns.[366] He formally adopted her son Eug ne and second cousin (via marriage) St phanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them. Jos phine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother Louis.[367]
Jos phine had lovers, such as Lieutenant Hippolyte Charles, during Napoleon's Italian campaign.[368] Napoleon learnt of that affair and a letter he wrote about it was intercepted by the British and published widely, to embarrass Napoleon. Napoleon had his own affairs too: during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline Bellisle Four s, the wife of a junior officer, as his mistress. She became known as "Cleopatra".[k][370]
While Napoleon's mistresses had children by him, Jos phine did not produce an heir, possibly because of either the stresses of her imprisonment during the Reign of Terror or an abortion she may have had in her twenties.[371] Napoleon chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir. Despite his divorce from Josephine, Napoleon showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life. When he heard the news of her death while in exile in Elba, he locked himself in his room and would not come out for two full days.[217] Her name would also be his final word on his deathbed in 1821.
On 11 March 1810 by proxy, he married the 19-year-old Marie Louise, Archduchess of Austria, and a great-niece of Marie Antoinette. Thus he had married into a German royal and imperial family.[372] Louise was less than happy with the arrangement, at least at first, stating: "Just to see the man would be the worst form of torture". Her great-aunt had been executed in France, while Napoleon had fought numerous campaigns against Austria all throughout his military career. However, she seemed to warm up to him over time. After her wedding, she wrote to her father: "He loves me very much. I respond to his love sincerely. There is something very fetching and very eager about him that is impossible to resist".[217]
Napoleon and Marie Louise remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again. The couple had one child, Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles (1811 1832), known from birth as the King of Rome. He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks. He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21, with no children.[372]
Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son: Charles L on (1806 1881) by El onore Denuelle de La Plaigne.[373] Alexandre Colonna-Walewski (1810 1868), the son of his mistress Maria Walewska, although acknowledged by Walewska's husband, was also widely known to be his child, and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon's Y-chromosome haplotype.[374] He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well, such as Eugen Megerle von M hlfeld by Emilie Victoria Kraus von Wolfsberg[375] and H l ne Napoleone Bonaparte (1816 1907) by Albine de Montholon.
Notes
^ English: /n po li n  bo n p rt/, French: Napol on Bonaparte [nap le  b napa t]; Italian: Napoleone Bonaparte, [napole o ne  b na parte]; Corsican: Napulione Buonaparte.
^ French: Napol on Ier
^ He established a system of public education,[7] abolished the vestiges of feudalism,[8] emancipated Jews and other religious minorities,[9] abolished the Spanish Inquisition,[10] enacted legal protections for an emerging middle class,[11] and centralized state power at the expense of religious authorities.[12]
^ His brother, also called Napoleon, died at birth and his sister, Maria Anna, died shortly before her first birthday. In total, two siblings died at birth and three died in infancy.
^ Although the 1768 Treaty of Versailles formally ceded Corsica's rights, it remained un-incorporated during 1769[17] until it became a province of France in 1770.[18] Corsica would be legally integrated as a d partement in 1789.[19][20]
^ Aside from his name, there does not appear to be a connection between him and Napoleon's theorem.[34]
^ He was mainly referred to as Bonaparte until he became First Consul for life.[39]
^ This is depicted in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps by Hippolyte Delaroche and in Jacques-Louis David's imperial Napoleon Crossing the Alps. He is less realistically portrayed on a charger in the latter work.[99]
^ It was customary to cast a death mask of a leader. At least four genuine death masks of Napoleon are known to exist: one in The Cabildo in New Orleans, one in a Liverpool museum, another in Havana and one in the library of the University of North Carolina.[243]
^ The body can tolerate large doses of arsenic if ingested regularly, and arsenic was a fashionable cure-all.[250]
^ One night, during an illicit liaison with actress Marguerite Georges, Napoleon had a major fit. This and other more minor attacks have led historians to debate whether he had epilepsy and, if so, to what extent.[369]
Citations
^ "Fac-simil  de l'acte de bapt me de Napol on, r dig  en italien.   Images d'Art" [Facsimile of Napoleon's baptismal certificate, written in Italian.    Art Pictures] (in French).
^ a b Roberts 2014, Introduction
^ Charles Messenger, ed. (2001). Reader's Guide to Military History. Routledge. pp. 391 427. ISBN 978-1-135-95970-8.
^ Roberts, A. (2016). Napoleon the Great. United Kingdom: Penguin Books Limited. (p. 1)
^ a b c Geoffrey Ellis (1997). Napoleon. Pearson Education Limited. ISBN 9781317874690.
^ Forrest, Alan (26 March 2015). Waterloo: Great Battles. Oxford University Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0199663255. Retrieved 14 June 2021.
^ Grab 2003, p. 56.
^ Broers, M. and Hicks, P.The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 230
^ Conner, S. P. The Age of Napoleon. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004, pp. 38 40.
^ Perez, Joseph. The Spanish Inquisition: A History. Yale University Press, 2005, p. 98
^ Fremont-Barnes, G. and Fisher, T. The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey Publishing, 2004, p. 336
^ Grab, A. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003, Conclusion
^ McLynn 1998, p. 2
^ Gueniffey, Patrice (13 April 2015). Bonaparte. Harvard University Press. pp. 21 22. ISBN 978-0-674-42601-6.
^ a b Dwyer 2008a, ch 1
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. xv
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 6
^ McLynn 1998, p. 20
^ "Corsica | History, Geography, & Points of Interest". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
^ Roberts 2014, p. 142.
^ a b Cronin 1994, pp. 20 21
^ Chamberlain, Alexander (1896). The Child and Childhood in Folk Thought: (The Child in Primitive Culture), p. 385. MacMillan. ISBN 9781421987484.
^ Cronin 1994, p. 27
^ a b c International School History (8 February 2012), Napoleon's Rise to Power, archived from the original on 8 May 2015, retrieved 29 January 2018
^ Johnson, Paul (2006). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303745-3. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
^ a b c Roberts 2001, p. xvi
^ a b c Murari Culture , Edoardo (20 August 2019). "Italians Of The Past: Napoleon Bonaparte". Italics Magazine. Retrieved 24 October 2021.
^ a b Roberts 2014.
^ a b c d Parker, Harold T. (1971). "The Formation of Napoleon's Personality: An Exploratory Essay". French Historical Studies. 7 (1): 6 26. doi:10.2307/286104. JSTOR 286104.
^ Adams, Michael (2014). Napoleon and Russia. A&C Black. ISBN 978-0-8264-4212-3. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
^ Roberts 2014, p. 11.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 18
^ Gr goire, Henri (1790). "Report on the necessity and means to annihilate the patois and to universalise the use of the French language". Wikisource (in French). Paris: French National Convention. Retrieved 16 January 2020. [...] the number of people who speak it purely does not exceed three million; and probably the number of those who write it correctly is even fewer.
^ Wells 1992, p. 74
^ McLynn 1998, p. 21
^ Chandler 1973, pp. 12 14.
^ a b Dwyer 2008a, p. 42
^ McLynn 1998, p. 26
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 290
^ Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, Corsica.
^ Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, Revolution.
^ David Nicholls (1999). Napoleon: A Biographical Companion. ABC-CLIO. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-87436-957-1.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 55
^ McLynn 1998, p. 61
^ a b c d e Roberts 2001, p. xviii
^ Roberts, Andrew (2011). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-698-17628-7.
^ "Napoleon I | Biography, Achievements, & Facts". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 132
^ Dwyer, p. 136.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 76
^ Patrice Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769 1802 (Harvard UP, 2015), pp. 137 59.
^ Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 39
^ Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 38
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 157
^ McLynn 1998, pp. 76, 84
^ McLynn 1998, p. 92
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 26
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 164
^ McLynn 1998, p. 93
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 96
^ Johnson 2002, p. 27
^ Carlyle, Thomas (1896). "The works of Thomas Carlyle   The French Revolution, vol. III, book 3.VII". Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
^ Englund (2010) pp. 92 94
^ Bell 2015, p. 29.
^ Dwyer 2008a, pp. 284 85
^ McLynn 1998, p. 132
^ Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte, Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne, pp 158.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 145
^ McLynn 1998, p. 142
^ Harvey 2006, p. 179
^ McLynn 1998, p. 135
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 306
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 305
^ Bell 2015, p. 30.
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 322
^ a b c Watson 2003, pp. 13 14
^ Amini 2000, p. 12
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 342
^ Englund (2010) pp. 127 28
^ McLynn 1998, p. 175
^ McLynn 1998, p. 179
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 372
^ Zamoyski 2018, p. 188.
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 392
^ Dwyer 2008a, pp. 411 24
^ Zamoyski 2018, p. 198.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 189
^ Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769 1802 pp. 500 02.
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 442
^ a b c Connelly 2006, p. 57
^ Zamoyski 2018, pp. 205 206.
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 444
^ Dwyer 2008a, p. 455
^ Fran ois Furet, The French Revolution, 1770 1814 (1996), p. 212
^ Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799 1807 (1969), pp. 60 68
^ a b c d Lyons 1994, p. 111
^ Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799 1807 (1969), pp. 71 92
^ Holt, Lucius Hudson; Chilton, Alexander Wheeler (1919). A Brief History of Europe from 1789 1815. Macmillan. p. 206. August 1802 referendum napoleon.
^ Chandler 2002, p. 51
^ Chandler 1966, pp. 279 281
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 235
^ Chandler 1966, p. 292
^ Chandler 1966, p. 293
^ a b c Chandler 1966, p. 296
^ a b Chandler 1966, pp. 298 304
^ Chandler 1966, p. 301
^ Schom 1997, p. 302
^ a b Lyons 1994, pp. 111 114
^ a b c d Lyons 1994, p. 113
^ Edwards 1999, p. 55
^ James, C. L. R. The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution, [1963] (Penguin Books, 2001), pp. 141 142.
^ "French Emancipation". obo.
^ "May 10th 1802, "The last cry of innocence and despair"". herodote (in French). Retrieved 6 December 2019.
^ Roberts 2014, p. 301.
^ James, C. L. R. (1963) [1938]. The Black Jacobins (2nd ed.). New York: Vintage Books. pp. 45 55. OCLC 362702.
^ "CHRONOLOGY-Who banned slavery when?". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. 22 March 2007. Retrieved 27 October 2019.
^ Oldfield, Dr John (17 February 2011). "British Anti-slavery". BBC History. BBC. Retrieved 27 October 2019.
^ Perry, James Arrogant Armies Great Military Disasters and the Generals Behind Them, (Edison: Castle Books, 2005) pp. 78 79.
^ Christer Petley, White Fury: A Jamaican Slaveholder and the Age of Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), p. 182.
^ Roberts 2014, p. 303.
^ Connelly 2006, p. 70
^ Mowat R B (1924). The Diplomacy Of Nepoleon.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 265
^ Zamoyski 2018, pp. 338 339.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 243
^ McLynn 1998, p. 296
^ McLynn 1998, p. 297
^ De R musat, Claire Elisabeth, Memoirs of Madame De R musat, 1802 1808 Volume 1, HardPress Publishing, 2012, 542 pp., ISBN 978-1-290-51747-8.
^ a b Dwyer 2013, p. 164.
^ a b c d Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 355.
^ Dwyer 2013, p. 165.
^ Dwyer 2013, p. 166.
^ Dwyer, Philip (2015). "'Citizen Emperor': Political Ritual, Popular Sovereignty and the Coronation of Napoleon I". History. 100 (339): 40 57. doi:10.1111/1468-229X.12089. ISSN 1468-229X.
^ Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763 1848 (1996) pp. 231 286
^ Chandler 1966, p. 328. Meanwhile, French territorial rearrangements in Germany occurred without Russian consultation and Napoleon's annexations in the Po valley increasingly strained relations between the two.
^ Chandler 1966, p. 331
^ Chandler 1966, p. 323
^ Chandler 1966, p. 332
^ a b Chandler 1966, p. 333
^ Michael J. Hughes, Forging Napoleon's Grande Arm e: Motivation, Military Culture, and Masculinity in the French Army, 1800 1808 (NYU Press, 2012).
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 321
^ McLynn 1998, p. 332
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 108
^ Andrew Uffindell, Great Generals of the Napoleonic Wars. p. 15
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156.
^ "Napoleon: Napoleon at War". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 26 February 2022.
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156. "It is a historical clich  to compare the Schlieffen Plan with Hannibal's tactical envelopment at Cannae (216 BC); Schlieffen owed more to Napoleon's strategic maneuver on Ulm (1805)".
^ Glover (1967), pp. 233 252.
^ Chandler 1973, p. 407.
^ a b c Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
^ Schom 1997, p. 414
^ Schom 1997, p. 414
^ McLynn 1998, p. 350
^ Cronin 1994, p. 344
^ Karsh 2001, p. 12
^ Sicker 2001, p. 99.
^ Michael V. Leggiere (2015). Napoleon and Berlin: The Franco-Prussian War in North Germany, 1813. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-8061-8017-5. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
^ a b c Chandler 1966, pp. 467 468
^ a b c Brooks 2000, p. 110
^ McLynn 1998, p. 497
^ Jacques Godechot et al. Napoleonic Era in Europe (1971) pp. 126 139
^ McLynn 1998, p. 370
^ a b August Fournier (1911). Napoleon I.: A Biography. H. Holt. p. 459.
^ The History of Napoleon Bonaparte by John Stevens Cabot Abbott, 1882, p. 559
^ Roberts, pp. 458 459
^ a b Roberts, pp. 459 461
^ Horne, Alistair (1997). How Far From Austerlitz? Napoleon 1805 1815. Pan Macmillan. p. 238. ISBN 978-1-74328-540-4. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
^ Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 197.
^ Fisher & Fremont-Barnes pp. 198 199.
^ Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 199.
^ Chandler, pp. 620
^ Engman, Max (2016). "Finland and the Napoleonic Empire".  In Planert, Ute (ed.). Napoleon's Empire. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 227 238. doi:10.1057/9781137455475_16. ISBN 978-1-349-56731-7   via Springer Link.
^ "The Erfurt Convention 1808". Napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2013.
^ Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 205.
^ Hope, John; Baird, D. (28 January 1809). "Battle of Corunna". Vol. 15, no. 4. Cobbett's political register. pp. 91 94.
^ a b Chandler 1966, pp. 659 660
^ John Lynch, Caudillos in Spanish America 1800 1850. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1992, pp. 402 403.
^ a b c Fisher & Fremont-Barnes, p. 106.
^ Gill, pp. 44 45
^ Chandler 1966, p. 690
^ Chandler 1966, p. 690
^ Chandler 1966, p. 706
^ Chandler 1966, p. 707
^ a b Chandler 1973, p. 708.
^ Chandler 1973, p. 720.
^ Chandler 1973, p. 729.
^ "The British Expeditionary Force to Walcheren: 1809". napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2015.
^ a b Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 144.
^ Chandler 1973, p. 732.
^ David Watkin, The Roman Forum. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2012. 183.
ISBN 978-0-674-06367-9
books.google.com/books?id=cRrufMNLOhwC&pg=PA183
^ McLynn 1998, p. 378
^ McLynn 1998, p. 495
^ McLynn 1998, p. 507
^ McLynn 1998, p. 506
^ McLynn 1998, pp. 504 505
^ Harvey 2006, p. 773
^ McLynn 1998, p. 518
^ Markham 1988, p. 194
^ "Napoleon1812". napoleon-1812.nl. Archived from the original on 13 February 2016.
^ Markham 1988, pp. 190, 199
^ McLynn 1998, p. 541
^ McLynn 1998, p. 549
^ McLynn 1998, p. 565
^ Chandler 1995, p. 1020
^ a b Riley, J.P. (2013). Napoleon and the World War of 1813: Lessons in Coalition Warfighting. Routledge. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-136-32135-1. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
^ Leggiere (2007). The Fall of Napoleon: Volume 1, The Allied Invasion of France, 1813 1814. pp. 53 54. ISBN 978-0-521-87542-4. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015.
^ Fremont-Barnes 2004, p. 14
^ McLynn 1998, p. 585
^ Gates 2003, p. 259.
^ Lieven, Dominic (2010). Russia Against Napoleon: The True Story of the Campaigns of War and Peace. Penguin. pp. 484 485. ISBN 978-1-101-42938-9. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
^ a b Prutsch, M. (2012). Making Sense of Constitutional Monarchism in Post-Napoleonic France and Germany. Springer. pp. 10 15. ISBN 9781137291653.
^ A. Bell, David (2015). "5: Downfall, 1812 1815". Napoleon: A Concise Biography. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-19-026271-6.
^ "Napoleon's act of abdication". Bulletin des lois de la Republique Fran aise. July 1814. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2009.
^ McLynn 1998, pp. 593 594
^ McLynn 1998, p. 597
^ Latson, Jennifer (26 February 2015). "Why Napoleon Probably Should Have Just Stayed in Exile the First Time". Archived from the original on 25 June 2016.
^ a b c "PBS   Napoleon: Napoleon and Josephine". PBS. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017.
^ a b c McLynn 1998, p. 604
^ McLynn 1998, p. 605
^ McLynn 1998, p. 607
^ Chesney 2006, p. 35
^ Cordingly 2004, p. 254
^ Cox, Dale (2015). Nicolls' outpost : a War of 1812 fort at Chattahoochee, Florida. Old Kitchen Books. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-692-37936-3.
^ Hibbert, Christopher (2003). Napoleon's Women. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 272. ISBN 978-0-393-32499-0. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ Information, Reed Business (28 October 1982). "Napoleon's moulds". New Scientist: 257. {{cite journal}}: |first1= has generic name (help)
^ Schom 1997, pp. 769 70
^ "Two Days at Saint Helena". The Spirit of the English Magazines. Monroe and Francis: 402. 1832. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
^ Jones, David (14 October 1982). "The Singular Case of Napoleon's Wallpaper". New Scientist: 101.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 642
^ "A JOURNEY TO ST. HELENA, HOME OF NAPOLEON'S LAST DAYS". Retrieved 18 March 2021.
^ I, Napoleon; Marchand, Louis Joseph (29 October 2017). Chronicles of Caesar's Wars: The First-Ever Translation. Translated by Barzani, Arshan (1 ed.). Clio Books. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017.
^ Hicks, Peter. "Napoleon's English Lessons". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
^ a b Price, Munro (2014). "Epilogue: The Hundred Days". Napoleon: The End of Glory. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. p. 262. ISBN 978-0-19-966080-3.
^ a b  Arnold (2011), p. 310.
^ "Napoleon I - Exile on St. Helena | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 20 August 2022.
^ Henshaw (1870), p. 10.
^ Wilkins 1972
^ McLynn 1998, p. 651
^ Zamoyski 2018, p. 638 639.
^ a b c McLynn 1998, p. 655
^ Roberts, Napoleon  (2014) 799 801
^ "Napoleon had a 'very small' penis according to C4 show". The Independent. 4 April 2014. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021.
^ Fulghum 2007
^ Wilson 1975, pp. 293 295
^ Driskel 1993, p. 168
^ McLynn 1998, p. 656
^ Johnson 2002, pp. 180 181
^ a b c Cullen 2008, pp. 146 148
^ a b Cullen 2008, p. 156
^ Cullen 2008, p. 50
^ Cullen 2008, p. 161, and Hindmarsh et al. 2008, p. 2092
^ a b "L'Empire et le Saint-Si ge". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 15 June 2011.
^ Wachtel, Albert (1992). The Cracked Lookingglass: James Joyce and the Nightmare of History. Susquehanna University Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-945636-27-4.
^ Joyce, James (2005). A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Collector's Library. p. 52. ISBN 978-1-904919-54-4.
^ "Napoleon's "divorce"". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
^ "catholictextbookproject.com". Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018.
^ Bledsoe, Albert Taylor; Herrick, Sophia M'Ilvaine Bledsoe (1871). "The Responsibility of Men for their Belief". The Southern review, Volume 9. p. 528. Retrieved 3 February 2021.
^ Confidential Correspondence of the Emperor Napoleon and the Empress Josephine: Including Letters from the Time of Their Marriage Until the Death of Josephine, and Also Several Private Letters from the Emperor to His Brother Joseph, and Other Important Personages. With Numerous Illustrative Notes ... Mason Brothers. 1856. p. 359. Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, and I have founded empires. But on what did we rest the creations of our genius? Upon force. Jesus Christ founded his empire upon love; and at this hour millions of men would die for him
^ Cyclop dia of Moral and Religious Anecdote [abridged from the larger "Cyclop dia" of K. Arvine], with an introductory essay by the Rev. George Cheever. J. J. Griffin & Company. 1851. p. 58.
^ Cases, Emmanuel-Auguste-Dieudonn  comte de Las (1855). Memoirs of the Life, Exile, and Conversations of the Emperor Napoleon. Redfield.
^ William Roberts, "Napoleon, the Concordat of 1801, and Its Consequences". in by Frank J. Coppa, ed., Controversial Concordats: The Vatican's Relations with Napoleon, Mussolini, and Hitler (1999) pp. 34 80.
^ Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780 1804 (Catholic University of America Press, 2000) pp. 279 315
^ Nigel Aston, Christianity and revolutionary Europe, 1750 1830 (Cambridge University Press, 2002) pp. 261 62.
^ Luis Granados (2012). Damned Good Company. Humanist Press. pp. 182 83. ISBN 978-0-931779-24-4. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015.
^ a b "When Napoleon Captured the Pope". The New York Times. 13 December 1981. Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018.
^ "Napoleon and the Pope: From the Concordat to the Excommunication". Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
^ "Why Napoleon Kidnapped One Pope After Another".
^ Caiani, Ambrogio A. (2021). To Kidnap a Pope. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300251333. JSTOR j.ctv1m8d6m9.
^ "Concordat Of Fontainebleau". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
^ "Pius VII | pope". Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2017.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 436
^ a b Green, David B. (9 February 2014). "This Day in Jewish History / The Sanhedrin of Paris Convenes at the Behest of Napoleon". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 November 2017.
^ Schwarzfuchs 1979, p. 50
^ Cronin 1994, p. 315
^ "Napoleon Bonaparte". A few famous freemasons. Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon A.F. & A. M. Retrieved 9 June 2020.
^ Pieter Geyl, Napoleon, For and Against (1982)
^ George F.E. Rud  (1988). The French Revolution. Grove Weidenfeld. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8021-3272-7. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015.
^ Jack Coggins (1966). Soldiers And Warriors: An Illustrated History. Courier Dover Publications. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-486-45257-9.
^ Sally Waller (2002). France in Revolution, 1776 1830. Heinemann. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-435-32732-3.
^ See David Chandler, "General Introduction" to his The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History's Greatest Soldier  (1975).
^ Price, Munro (2014). "1: Napoleon and his Empire, December 1812". Napoleon: The End of Glory. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-966080-3.
^ Roberts, Napoleon: A Life  (2014) pp. 470 73
^ Gregory R. Copley (2007). The Art of Victory: Strategies for Personal Success and Global Survival in a Changing World. Simon and Schuster. p. 97. ISBN 978-1-4165-2478-6.
^ Dwyer 2013, pp. 175 76
^ Ellis, Geoffrey (16 May 2003). The Napoleonic Empire. Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 125. ISBN 978-1-4039-4401-6.
^ J. M. Thompson, Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), p. 285
^ Christopher Hibbert (1999). Wellington: A Personal History. Da Capo Press. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-7382-0148-1.
^ Steven Englund, Napoleon: A Political Life (2004), pp. 379ff
^ van Crevald, Martin (1987). Command in War. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-674-14441-5.
^ "Napoleon Bonaparte (Character)". Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ Bell 2007, p. 13
^ "Most Popular Napoleon Bonaparte Movies and TV Shows". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved 22 August 2020.
^ The German original, der gr te Meister des Machiavellismus, means "the greatest master of Machiavellism" but is mistranslated and misspelled with capitalization as "the greatest Maestro of Machiavellism" in Bourke, Skinner, Richard, Quentin; Kelly, Duncan (2016). "11: Popular sovereignty as state theory in the nineteenth century". Popular Sovereignty in Historical Perspective. University Printing House, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 280 281. ISBN 978-1-107-13040-1.
^ The Fortnightly, Volume 114. Chapman and Hall, 1923. p. 836.
^ Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne. "Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte." Charles Scribner's Sons, 1889. Vol. 1, p. 7.
^ Kircheisen, F. M. Napoleon New York : Harcourt, Brace, 1932
^ Davydov, Denis. In the Service of the Tsar Against Napoleon: The Memoirs of Denis Davydov, 1806 1814. Translation by Gregory Troubetzkoy. Greenhill Books, 1999. p. 64.
^ "Greatest cartooning coup of all time: The Brit who convinced everyone Napoleon was short". National Post. 28 April 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2017.
^ Roberts 2004, p. 93
^ "Was Napoleon Short? | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 20 August 2022.
^ a b c Owen Connelly (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7425-5318-7.
^ "The Myth of Napoleon's Height: How a Single Image Can Change History". Entity. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2018.
^ Seward, Desmond. Napoleon's Family. New York: Viking, 1986.
^ The Bookman, Vol. 29, p. 304. Diary of Capt. Ross, commander of the Northumberland.
^ Bordes 2007, p. 118.
^ Hall 2006, p. 181
^ a b McGraw-Hill's, US History 2012, pp. 112 13 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMcGraw-Hill's,_US_History2012 (help)[clarification needed]
^ Blaufarb 2007, pp. 101 02
^ McLynn 1998, p. 255
^ Bernard Schwartz (1998). The Code Napoleon and the Common-law World. The Lawbook Exchange. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-886363-59-5. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
^ Wood 2007, p. 55
^ Scheck 2008, Chapter: The Road to National Unification
^ Astarita 2005, p. 264
^ Alter 2006, pp. 61 76
^ Robert R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), pp. 428 29
^ a b Archer et al. 2002, p. 397
^ Flynn 2001, p. 16
^ McConachy, Bruce (2001). "The Roots of Artillery Doctrine: Napoleonic Artillery Tactics Reconsidered" (PDF). The Journal of Military History. 65 (3): 617 640. doi:10.2307/2677528. JSTOR 2677528. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2012.
^ Archer et al. 2002, p. 383
^ John Shy, "Jomini" in Peter Paret, ed. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (1986).
^ Archer et al. 2002, p. 380
^ Roberts 2001, p. 272
^ Archer et al. 2002, p. 404
^ Hallock, William; Wade, Herbert T (1906). "Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures and the metric system". London: The Macmillan Company. pp. 66 69.
^ Denis F vrier. "Un historique du m tre" (in French). Minist re de l'Economie, des Finances et de l'Industrie. Archived from the original on 28 February 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
^ Thierry Sabot (1 October 2000). "Les poids et mesures sous l'Ancien R gime" [The weights and measures of the Ancien R gime] (in French). histoire-genealogie. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2011.
^ O'Connor 2003
^ Clive Emsley (2014). Napoleon: Conquest, Reform and Reorganisation. Routledge. p. 52. ISBN 978-1-317-61028-1. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015.
^ a b Williams, L. Pearce (1956). "Science, Education and Napoleon I". Isis. 47 (4): 369 382. doi:10.1086/348507. JSTOR 226629. S2CID 144112149.
^ Margaret Bradley, "Scientific education versus military training: the influence of Napoleon Bonaparte on the  cole Polytechnique". Annals of science (1975) 32#5 pp. 415 49.
^ Roberts 2014, pp. 278 81
^ Hastings, Max (31 October 2014). "Everything is Owed to Glory". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014.
^ Charles Esdaile, Napoleon's Wars: An International History 1803 1815 (2008), p. 39
^ Colin S. Gray (2007). War, Peace and International Relations: An Introduction to Strategic History. Routledge. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-134-16951-1. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 666
^ Repa, Jan (2 December 2005). "Furore over Austerlitz ceremony". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
^ Bourke, Skinner, Richard, Quentin; Garstan, Bryan (2016). "10: From popular sovereignty to civil society in post-revolutionary France". Popular Sovereignty in Historical Perspective. University Printing House, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 254 255, 258 259. ISBN 978-1-107-13040-1.
^ Poulos 2000
^ Geyl 1947
^ Dwyer 2008b
^ Chandler 1973, p. xliii.
^ Hanson 2003
^ Cronin 1994, pp. 342 43
^ Correlli Barnett, Bonaparte (1978)
^ Jean Tulard, Napoleon: The Myth of the Saviour (1984)
^ Bergeron, Louis (1981). France Under Napoleon. Princeton U.P. ISBN 978-0-691-00789-2.
^ Dominic Lieven, "Review article: Russia and the defeat of Napoleon." Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History (2006) 7#2 pp. 283 308.
^ Robert S. Alexander, Napoleon (Oxford University Press, 2001), examines major debates among historians.
^ Western Society for French History (1974). Proceedings of the ... Annual Meeting of the Western Society for French History. Issues for have subtitle:Selected papers of the ... Annual Meeting. Las Cruces, N.M.: New Mexico State University Press.
^ John Dunne, "Recent Napoleonic Historiography: 'Poor Relation' Makes Good?" French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 484 91.
^ Alan Forrest, "Propaganda and the Legitimation of Power in Napoleonic France". French History, 2004 18(4): 426 45
^ Richardson, Hubert N. B. (1920). A dictionary of Napoleon and his times. University of California Libraries. London, New York [etc.] : Cassell and company, ltd.
^ Mark, Bryant, "Broadsides against Boney." History Today 60.1 (2010): 52+
^ Mark Bryant, Napoleonic Wars in Cartoons (Grub Street, 2009).
^ a b Sudhir Hazareesingh, "Memory and Political Imagination: the Legend of Napoleon Revisited". French History, 2004 18(4): 463 83
^ a b Venita Datta, "'L'appel Au Soldat': Visions of the Napoleonic Legend in Popular Culture of the Belle Epoque". French Historical Studies 2005 28(1): 1 30
^ "Call for Papers: International Napoleonic Society, Fourth International Napoleonic Congress". La Fondation Napol on. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2008.
^ Laurent, Ottavi (8 February 2012). "A New Napoleonic Campaign for Montereau". Foundation Napoleon. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013.
^ Grab 2003, country by country analysis
^ "Napoleonic Code". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 December 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
^ Lobingier, Charles Sumner (December 1918). "Napoleon and His Code". Harvard Law Review. 32 (2): 114 134. doi:10.2307/1327640. ISSN 0017-811X. JSTOR 1327640.
^ Andrzej Nieuwazny, "Napoleon and Polish identity". History Today, May 1998 vol. 48 no. 5 pp. 50 55
^ "The Crisis of 1808". www.brown.edu. Brown University. Retrieved 6 May 2021.
^ " ". yandex.ru. Retrieved 20 August 2022.
^ "Biography of Joesephine de Beauharnais". Archived from the original on 28 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 117
^ McLynn 1998, p. 271
^ McLynn 1998, p. 118
^ McLynn 1998, p. 284
^ McLynn 1998, p. 188
^ McLynn 1998, p. 100
^ a b McLynn 1998, p. 663
^ McLynn 1998, p. 630
^ Lucotte, G rard; Mac , Jacques & Hrechdakian, Peter (September 2013). "Reconstruction of the Lineage Y Chromosome Haplotype of Napol on the First" (PDF). International Journal of Sciences. 2 (9): 127 39. ISSN 2305-3925. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2014.
^ McLynn 1998, p. 423
References
Main article: Bibliography of Napoleon
Biographical studies
Abbott, John (2005). Life of Napoleon Bonaparte. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4179-7063-6.
Bell, David A. (2015). Napoleon: A Concise Biography. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-026271-6.  only 140pp; by a scholar
Blaufarb, Rafe (2007). Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents. Bedford. ISBN 978-0-312-43110-5.
Broers, Michael (2015). Napoleon: Soldier of Destiny. Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0571273454.
Chandler, David (2002). Napoleon. Leo Cooper. ISBN 978-0-85052-750-6.
Cronin, Vincent (1994). Napoleon. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-637521-0.
Dwyer, Philip (2008a). Napoleon: The Path to Power. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300137545.
Dwyer, Philip (2013). Citizen Emperor: Napoleon in Power 1799-1815. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-3002-1253-2.
Englund, Steven (2010). Napoleon: A Political Life. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-674-01803-7.
Gueniffey, Patrice. Bonaparte: 1769 1802 (Harvard UP, 2015, French edition 2013); 1008 pp.; vol 1 of most comprehensive recent scholarly biography by leading French specialist; less emphasis on battles and campaigns excerpt; also online review
Johnson, Paul (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-03078-1.; 200 pp.; quite hostile
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit, 1799 1807. Columbia University Press. influential wide-ranging history
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon: from Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807 1815. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0231033138.
Lyons, Martyn (1994). Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution. St. Martin's Press.
Markham, Felix (1963). Napoleon. Mentor.; 303 pp.; short biography by an Oxford scholar online
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6247-5. ASIN 0712662472.
Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-670-02532-9.
Thompson, J.M. (1951). Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall. Oxford U.P., 412 pp.; by an Oxford scholar
Zamoyski, Adam (2018). Napoleon: The Man Behind The Myth. Great Britain: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-811607-1.
Primary sources
Babelon, Jean-Pierre, D'Huart, Suzanne and De Jonge, Alex. Napoleon's Last Will and Testament. Paddington Press Ltd. New York & London. 1977. ISBN 0-448-22190-X.
Broadley, A. M., and J. Holland Rose. Napoleon in caricature 1795 1821 (John Lane, 1911) online, illustrated
Gourgaud, Gaspard (1903) [1899]. Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena. Translated from the French by Elizabeth Wormeley Latimer. Chicago: A.C. McClurg.
Historiography and memory
Broadley, Alexander Meyrick (1911). Napoleon in Caricature 1795-1821. John Lane, 1911 Caricature.
Dwyer, Philip G. (2004). "Napoleon Bonaparte as Hero and Saviour: Image, Rhetoric and Behaviour in the Construction of a Legend". French History. 18 (4): 379 403. doi:10.1093/fh/18.4.379.
Dwyer, Philip (2008b). "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars". French Politics, Culture & Society. 26 (3): 110 22. doi:10.3167/fpcs.2008.260306.
Englund, Steven. "Napoleon and Hitler". Journal of the Historical Society (2006) 6#1 pp. 151 69.
Geyl, Pieter (1982) [1947]. Napoleon For and Against. Penguin Books.
Hanson, Victor Davis (2003). "The Claremont Institute: The Little Tyrant, A review of Napoleon: A Penguin Life". The Claremont Institute.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). The Legend of Napoleon. excerpt and text search
Hazareesingh, Sudhir. "Memory and Political Imagination: The Legend of Napoleon Revisited", French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 463 83.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). "Napoleonic Memory in Nineteenth-Century France: The Making of a Liberal Legend". MLN. 120 (4): 747 73. doi:10.1353/mln.2005.0119. S2CID 154508777.
Porterfield, Todd, and Susan Siegfried. Staging Empire: Napoleon, Ingres, and David (Penn State Press, 2006).   online review.
Specialty studies
Alder, Ken (2002). The Measure of All Things   The Seven-Year Odyssey and Hidden Error That Transformed the World. Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-1675-3.
Alter, Peter (2006).  T. C. W. Blanning and Hagen Schulze (ed.). Unity and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-726382-2.
Amini, Iradj (2000). Napoleon and Persia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-934211-58-1.
Archer, Christon I.; Ferris, John R.; Herwig, Holger H. (2002). World History of Warfare. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-4423-8.
Astarita, Tommaso (2005). Between Salt Water And Holy Water: A History Of Southern Italy. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-05864-2.
Bell, David (2007). The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-34965-4.
Bordes, Philippe (2007). Jacques-Louis David. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12346-3.
Brooks, Richard (2000). Atlas of World Military History. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-7607-2025-7.
Chandler, David (1966). The Campaigns of Napoleon. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-02-523660-8. OCLC 740560411.
Chandler, David (1973) [1966]. Napoleon. ISBN 978-0841502543.
Chesney, Charles (2006). Waterloo Lectures:A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4286-4988-0.
Clausewitz, Carl von (2018). Napoleon's 1796 Italian Campaign. Trans and ed. Nicholas Murray and Christopher Pringle. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-2676-2
Clausewitz, Carl von (2020). Napoleon Absent, Coalition Ascendant: The 1799 Campaign in Italy and Switzerland, Volume 1. Trans and ed. Nicholas Murray and Christopher Pringle. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-3025-7
Clausewitz, Carl von (2021). The Coalition Crumbles, Napoleon Returns: The 1799 Campaign in Italy and Switzerland, Volume 2. Trans and ed. Nicholas Murray and Christopher Pringle. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-3034-9
Connelly, Owen (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5318-7.
Cordingly, David (2004). The Billy Ruffian: The Bellerophon and the Downfall of Napoleon. Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-58234-468-3.
Cullen, William (2008). Is Arsenic an Aphrodisiac?. Royal Society of Chemistry. ISBN 978-0-85404-363-7.
Dobi.A. 1974.  For the Emperor-Bibliophile, Only the Very Best.  Wilson Library Bulletin 49 (November): 229 33.
Driskel, Paul (1993). As Befits a Legend. Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-484-1.
Esdaile, Charles J. (2003). The Peninsular War: A New History. Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6231-7.
Flynn, George Q. (2001). Conscription and democracy: The Draft in France, Great Britain, and the United States. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-31912-9.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Fisher, Todd (2004). The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-84176-831-1.
Fulghum, Neil (2007). "Death Mask of Napoleon". University of North Carolina. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81083-1.
Gates, David (2003). The Napoleonic Wars, 1803 1815. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-0719-3.
Gill, John H. (2014). 1809: Thunder on the Danube   Napoleon's Defeat of the Habsburgs, Vol. 1. London: Frontline Books. ISBN 978-184415-713-6.
Glover, Richard (1967). "The French Fleet, 1807 1814; Britain's Problem; and Madison's Opportunity". The Journal of Modern History. 39 (3): 233 52. doi:10.1086/240080. S2CID 143376566.
Godechot, Jacques;  et al. (1971). The Napoleonic era in Europe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. ISBN 978-0-03-084166-8.
Grab, Alexander (2003). Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-68275-3.
Hall, Stephen (2006). Size Matters. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-618-47040-2.
Harvey, Robert (2006). The War of Wars. Robinson. ISBN 978-1-84529-635-3.
Hindmarsh, J. Thomas; Savory, John (2008). "The Death of Napoleon, Cancer or Arsenic?". Clinical Chemistry. 54 (12): 2092. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2008.117358.
Karsh, Inari (2001). Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery in the Middle East, 1789 1923. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00541-9.
Mowat, R.B. (1924) The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) 350 pp. online
O'Connor, J; Robertson, E F (2003). "The history of measurement". St Andrew's University. Retrieved 18 July 2008.
Poulos, Anthi (2000). "1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict". International Journal of Legal Information (vol 28 ed.). 28: 1 44. doi:10.1017/S0731126500008842. S2CID 159202400.
Richardson, Hubert N.B. A Dictionary of Napoleon and His Times (1921) online free 489pp
Roberts, Chris (2004). Heavy Words Lightly Thrown. Granta. ISBN 978-1-86207-765-2.
Schom, Alan (1997). Napoleon Bonaparte. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-017214-5.
Schroeder, Paul W. (1996). The Transformation of European Politics 1763 1848. Oxford U.P. pp. 177 560. ISBN 978-0-19-820654-5. advanced diplomatic history of Napoleon and his era
Schwarzfuchs, Simon (1979). Napoleon, the Jews and the Sanhedrin. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-19-710023-3.
Watson, William (2003). Tricolor and crescent. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-97470-1. Retrieved 12 June 2009.
Sicker, Martin (2001). The Islamic World in Decline: From the Treaty of Karlowitz to the Disintegration of the Ottoman Empire. Greenwood. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-275-96891-5.
Wells, David (1992). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Geometry. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-011813-1.
External links
Napoleon Bonaparte  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
The Napoleonic Guide
Napoleon Series
International Napoleonic Society
Biography by the US Public Broadcasting Service
Works by Napoleon at Project Gutenberg
Hit the road with Napoleon
Rose, John Holland (1911). "Napoleon I." . Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 19 (11th ed.). pp. 190 211.
Offices and distinctions
Napoleon I of FranceHouse of BonaparteBorn: 15 August 1769 Died: 5 May 1821
Political offices
New titleDirectory dissolved
 Provisional Consul of the French Republic 11 November   12 December 1799        Served alongside: Roger Ducos and Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
Became First Consul 
New titleConsulate established
 First Consul of the French Republic 12 December 1799   18 May 1804        Served alongside: Jean Jacques R gis de Cambac r s (Second Consul)Charles-Fran ois Lebrun (Third Consul)
Became Emperor 
New titleItalian Republic established
 President of the Italian Republic 26 January 1802   17 March 1805
Vacant(Became King)Title next held byEnrico De Nicola 
New titleHelvetic Republic dissolved
 Mediator of the Swiss Confederation 19 February 1803   19 October 1813
New Confederation established 
Regnal titles
VacantFrench RevolutionTitle last held byLouis XVI as King of the French 
 Emperor of the French 18 May 1804   11 April 1814
Succeeded byLouis XVIIIas King of France and Navarre
VacantTitle last held byCharles V, Holy Roman Emperor as last crowned monarch, 1530 
 King of Italy 17 March 1805   11 April 1814
VacantTitle next held byVictor Emmanuel II of Savoy 
VacantTitle last held byLouis XVI 
 Co-Prince of Andorra 1806   11 April 1814
Succeeded byLouis XVIII
New titleState created
 Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine 12 July 1806   19 October 1813
Confederation dissolved successive ruler:Francis I of Austriaas Head of the Pr sidialmacht Austria
New title
 Sovereign of the Island of Elba 11 April 1814   20 March 1815
Relinquished title 
Preceded byLouis XVIIIas King of France and Navarre
 Emperor of the FrenchCo-Prince of Andorra 20 March   22 June 1815
Succeeded byLouis XVIIIas King of France and Navarre(Napoleon II according to his will only)
Titles in pretence
New title
 TITULAR  Emperor of the French 11 April 1814  20 March 1815
VacantTitle next held byNapoleon II 
vteNapoleonFamily
Father: Carlo Maria Buonaparte
Mother: Letizia Ramolino
Brothers: Joseph Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Louis Bonaparte
J r me Bonaparte
Sisters: Caroline Bonaparte
Pauline Bonaparte
Elisa Bonaparte
Wives: Jos phine de Beauharnais
Marie Louise
Children: Charles L on
Alexandre Walewski
Napoleon II
Battles and wars
French Revolutionary Wars
Siege of Toulon
French Revolution
13 Vend miaire
Battle of Lodi
Battle of Bassano
Battle of Rivoli
French campaign in Egypt and Syria
Battle of the Pyramids
Siege of Jaffa
Battle of Marengo
War of the Third Coalition
Battle of Austerlitz
War of the Fourth Coalition
Battle of Eylau
War of the Fifth Coalition
Battle of Eckm hl
French invasion of Russia
Battle of Borodino
War of the Sixth Coalition
Battle of Leipzig
Battle of Vauchamps
Battle of Arcis-sur-Aube
Hundred Days
Battle of Ligny
Battle of Waterloo
Homes and honours
Maison Bonaparte (Casa Buonaparte)
Rue de la Victoire
Arc de Triomphe
Column of the Grande Arm e
Palace of Fontainebleau
Longwood House
Les Invalides
Links to related articles
vteNapoleonic Wars
Third Coalition
Fourth Coalition
Peninsular War
Fifth Coalition
French Invasion of Russia
Sixth Coalition
Seventh Coalition
Belli-gerentsFrance,client statesand allies
France
Polish Legions
Italy
Holland
Etruria
Swiss Confederation
Naples
Confederation of the Rhine
Bavaria
Saxony
Westphalia
W rttemberg
Denmark Norway
Ottoman Empire
Persia
Spain
Coalitionforces
United Kingdom
Austria
Russia
Prussia
Spain
Portugal
Sicily
Papal States
Ottoman Empire
Persia
Sardinia
Sweden
Netherlands
Brunswick
Hanover
Nassau
French Royalists
MajorbattlesPrelude
French Revolution
First Coalition
Second Coalition
18 Brumaire
Planned invasion of the United Kingdom
Duc d'Enghien Execution
Coronation of Napoleon
1805
Diamond Rock
Cape Finisterre
Wertingen
G nzburg
Haslach-Jungingen
Elchingen
Ulm
Verona
Trafalgar
Caldiero
Cape Ortegal
Amstetten
D renstein
Sch ngrabern
Austerlitz
1806
Gaeta
Campo Tenese
Maida
Schleiz
Saalfeld
Jena Auerstedt
Erfurt
Halle
Magdeburg
Prenzlau
Pasewalk
Stettin
Waren-Nossentin
L beck
Greater Poland uprising
Hamelin
Czarnowo
Golymin
Pu tusk
1807
Mohrungen
Eylau
Ostro ka
Kolberg
Danzig
Stralsund I
Mileto
Guttstadt-Deppen
Heilsberg
Friedland
Stralsund II
Copenhagen
Invasion of Portugal
1808
Dos de Mayo
Bruch
Rosily Squadron
Cabez n
1st Zaragoza
Valencia
Medina de Rioseco
Bail n
Roli a
Vimeiro
Zornoza
Valmaseda
Burgos
Espinosa
Tudela
Somosierra
2nd Zaragoza
Sahag n
Benavente
1809
Castell n
Ucl s
Corunna
Valls
Tyrolean Rebellion
Villafranca
Yevenes/Y benes
Ciudad Real
1st Porto
Medell n
Bergisel
Sacile
Teugen-Hausen
Raszyn
Abensberg
Landshut
Eckm hl
Ratisbon
Neumarkt-Sankt Veit
Dalmatian Campaign
Ebelsberg
Girona
Piave River
Grij 
2nd Porto
W rgl
Tarvis
Aspern-Essling
Alca iz
Sankt Michael
Stralsund
Raab
Mar a
Graz
Wagram
Korneuburg
Stockerau
Gefrees
Hollabrunn
Sch ngrabern
Armistice of Znaim
Talavera
Walcheren Campaign
 lper
Almonacid
Tamames
Oca a
Alba de Tormes
1810
C diz
Astorga
Ciudad Rodrigo
Barquilla
C a
Almeida
Bussaco
1811
Gebora
Barrosa
Pombal
Redinha
Casal Novo
Campo Maior
Sabugal
Almeida
Fuentes de O oro
Tarragona
Albuera
Usagre
Saguntum
Arroyo dos Molinos
Valencia
1812
Ciudad Rodrigo
Badajoz
Villagarcia
Almaraz
Maguilla
Mir
Ekau
Salamanca
Garc a Hern ndez
Saltanovka
Ostrovno
Vitebsk
Kobryn
Klyastitsy
Majadahonda
Gorodechno
Smolensk
1st Polotsk
Valutino
Mesoten
Borodino
Moscow
Burgos
Tarutino
2nd Polotsk
Venta del Pozo
Maloyaroslavets
Chashniki
Vyazma
Smoliani
Krasnoi
Berezina
1813
Castalla
L tzen
Bautzen
Tarragona
Luckau
Vitoria
San Sebasti n
Pyrenees
Sorauren
Gro beeren
Katzbach
Dresden
1st Kulm
San Marcial
Dennewitz
2nd Kulm
G hrde
Ro lau
Wartenburg
Bidassoa
Leipzig
Hanau
Nivelle
Bornh ved
Sehested
1814
Brienne
La Rothi re
Mincio River
Champaubert
Montmirail
Ch teau-Thierry
Vauchamps
Garris
Mormant
Montereau
Orthez
Bar-sur-Aube
Laon
Reims
Craonne
Arcis-sur-Aube
F re-Champenoise
Saint-Dizier
Montmartre
Paris
Toulouse
Bayonne
1815
Panaro
Occhiobello
Carpi
Casaglia
Ronco
Cesenatico
Pesaro
Scapezzano
Tolentino
Ancona
Castel di Sangro
San Germano
Gaeta
Quatre Bras
Ligny
Waterloo
Wavre
Rocheserviere
La Suffel
Rocquencourt
Issy
InfoFrench and allymilitary andpolitical leaders
Napoleon
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Joachim Murat
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Jean Lannes
Auguste de Marmont
Andr  Mass na
Michel Ney
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Marshal Victor
Jean-Baptiste Bessi res
Pierre-Charles Villeneuve
Joseph I
Louis Bonaparte
J r me Bonaparte
Prince Poniatowski
Prince Eug ne
Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria
Frederick Augustus I of Saxony
Frederick I of W rttemberg
Frederick VI of Denmark
Coalitionmilitary andpolitical leaders
Duke of Wellington
Rowland Hill
John Moore
Horatio Nelson
Thomas Cochrane
Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
Manuel Lape a
Archduke Charles
Prince von Schwarzenberg
Archduke John of Austria
Alexander I of Russia
Mikhail Kutuzov
Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly
Count Bennigsen
Pyotr Bagration
Peter Wittgenstein
Frederick William III of Prussia
Gebhard von Bl cher
Duke of Brunswick
Prince of Hohenlohe
Ferdinand VII of Spain
Miguel de  lava
Maria I of Portugal
Prince Regent John of Portugal
Count of Feira
William, Prince of Orange
Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies
Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden
Prince Charles John of Sweden
Louis XVIII
Relatedconflicts
Anglo-Russian War
Anglo-Spanish War
Anglo-Swedish War
Anglo-Turkish War
Anglo-Danish War
Gunboat War
Dano-Swedish War
Russo-Swedish War (Finnish War)
Franco-Swedish War (Pomeranian War)
Russo-Persian War
Russo-Turkish War
Spanish American wars of independence
Swedish Norwegian War
War of 1812
Treaties
Campo Formio
Lun ville
Amiens
Artlenburg
Pressburg
Finckenstein
Tilsit
Cintra
Sch nbrunn
Paris (1810)
Paris (February 1812)
Paris (March 1812)
Paris (1814)
Tauroggen
Ried
Chaumont
Kiel
Mantua
Casalanza
Fontainebleau (1814)
Paris (1815)
Miscellaneous
Bibliography
Bourbon Restoration
Casualties
Congress of Erfurt
Continental System
Conference of Dresden
England expects that every man will do his duty
Films
Grande Arm e
Longwood House
 France portal
vteFrench Revolution
Causes
Timeline
Ancien R gime
Revolution
Constitutional monarchy
Republic
Directory
Consulate
Glossary
Journals
Museum
Significant civil and political events by year1788
Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788)
Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)
1789
What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789)
R veillon riots (28 Apr 1789)
Convocation of the Estates General (5 May 1789)
Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789)
National Assembly (17 Jun   9 Jul 1790)
Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789)
National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul   30 Sep 1791)
Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789)
Great Fear (20 Jul   5 Aug 1789)
Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789)
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789)
Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)
Nationalization of the Church properties (2 Nov 1789)
1790
Abolition of the Parlements (Feb Jul 1790)
Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790)
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790)
F te de la F d ration (14 Jul 1790)
1791
Flight to Varennes (20 21 Jun 1791)
Champ de Mars massacre (17 Jul 1791)
Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791)
The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791)
National Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791   Sep 1792)
1792
France declares war (20 Apr 1792)
Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792)
Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792)
10th of August (10 Aug 1792)
September Massacres (Sep 1792)
National Convention (20 Sep 1792   26 Oct 1795)
First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)
1793
Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793)
Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793   31 May 1795)
Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793   27 Jul 1794)
Committee of Public Safety
Committee of General Security
Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793)
Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793)
Lev e en masse (23 Aug 1793)
The Death of Marat (painting)
Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793)
Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793)
Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)
1794
Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794)
Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794)
Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794)
Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794)
White Terror (Fall 1794)
Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)
1795 6
Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III (1 Apr 1795)
Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795)
Directoire (1795 99)
Council of Five Hundred
Council of Ancients
13 Vend miaire 5 Oct 1795
Conspiracy of the Equals (May 1796)
1797
Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797)
Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)
1798
Law of 22 Flor al Year VI (11 May 1798)
1799
Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799)
Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799)
Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799)
Consulate
Revolutionary campaigns1792
Verdun
Thionville
Valmy
Royalist Revolts
Chouannerie
Vend e
Dauphin 
Lille
Siege of Mainz
Jemappes
Namur [fr]
1793
First Coalition
War in the Vend e
Battle of Neerwinden)
Battle of Famars (23 May 1793)
Expedition to Sardinia (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793)
Battle of Kaiserslautern
Siege of Mainz
Battle of Wattignies
Battle of Hondschoote
Siege of Bellegarde
Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees)
Siege of Toulon (18 Sep   18 Dec 1793)
First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793)
Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees)
Second Battle of Wissembourg (26 27 Dec 1793)
1794
Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794)
Second Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr   1 May 1794)
Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794)
Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794)
Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794)
Chouannerie
Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
1795
Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 - 7 Jun 1795)
Peace of Basel
1796
Battle of Lonato (3 4 Aug 1796)
Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796)
Battle of Theiningen
Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796)
Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796)
Battle of W rzburg (3 Sep 1796)
Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796)
First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796)
Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796)
Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796)
Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796)
Battle of Calliano (6 7 Nov 1796)
Battle of Arcole (15 17 Nov 1796)
Ireland expedition (Dec 1796)
1797
Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797)
Battle of Rivoli (14 15 Jan 1797)
Battle of the Bay of C diz (25 Jan 1797)
Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797)
Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797)
Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)
1798
French invasion of Switzerland (28 January   17 May 1798)
French Invasion of Egypt (1798 1801)
Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May   23 Sep 1798)
Quasi-War (1798 1800)
Peasants' War (12 Oct   5 Dec 1798)
1799
Second Coalition (1798 1802)
Siege of Acre (20 Mar   21 May 1799)
Battle of Ostrach (20 21 Mar 1799)
Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799)
Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799)
Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799)
First Battle of Zurich (4 7 Jun 1799)
Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799)
Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799)
Second Battle of Zurich (25 26 Sep 1799)
1800
Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800)
Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800)
Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800)
League of Armed Neutrality (1800 02)
1801
Treaty of Lun ville (9 Feb 1801)
Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801)
Algeciras campaign (8 Jul 1801)
1802
Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)
Treaty of Paris (25 Jun 1802)
Military leaders FranceFrench Army
Eustache Charles d'Aoust
Pierre Augereau
Alexandre de Beauharnais
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Jean-Baptiste Bessi res
Guillaume Brune
Jean Fran ois Carteaux
Jean- tienne Championnet
Chapuis de Tourville
Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Louis Desaix
Jacques Fran ois Dugommier
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas
Charles Fran ois Dumouriez
Pierre Marie Barth lemy Ferino
Louis-Charles de Flers
Paul Grenier
Emmanuel de Grouchy
Jacques Maurice Hatry
Lazare Hoche
Jean-Baptiste Jourdan
Fran ois Christophe de Kellermann
Jean-Baptiste Kl ber
Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
Jean Lannes
Charles Leclerc
Claude Lecourbe
Fran ois Joseph Lefebvre
 tienne Macdonald
Jean-Antoine Marbot
Marcellin Marbot
Fran ois S verin Marceau
Auguste de Marmont
Andr  Mass na
Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey
Jean Victor Marie Moreau
 douard Mortier, Duke of Tr vise
Joachim Murat
Michel Ney
Pierre-Jacques Osten [fr]
Nicolas Oudinot
Catherine-Dominique de P rignon
Jean-Charles Pichegru
J zef Poniatowski
Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr
Barth lemy Louis Joseph Sch rer
Jean-Mathieu-Philibert S rurier
Joseph Souham
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Louis-Gabriel Suchet
Belgrand de Vaubois
Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno
French Navy
Charles-Alexandre Linois
Opposition Austria
J zsef Alvinczi
Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen
Count of Clerfayt (Walloon)
Karl Aloys zu F rstenberg
Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss)
Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth
P l Kray (Hungarian)
Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French)
Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon)
Karl Mack von Leiberich
Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon)
Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich
Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen
Johann M sz ros von Szoboszl  (Hungarian)
Karl Philipp Sebottendorf
Dagobert von Wurmser
 Britain
Sir Ralph Abercromby
James Saumarez, 1st Baron de Saumarez
Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth
Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
 Netherlands
William V, Prince of Orange
 Prussia
Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick
Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
 Russia
Alexander Korsakov
Alexander Suvorov
 Spain
Luis Firmin de Carvajal
Antonio Ricardos
Other significant figures and factionsPatriotic Society of 1789
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette
Fran ois Alexandre Fr d ric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt
Isaac Ren  Guy le Chapelier
Honor  Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau
Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P rigord
Nicolas de Condorcet
Feuillantsand monarchiens
Grace Elliott
Arnaud de La Porte
Jean-Sifrein Maury
Fran ois-Marie, marquis de Barth lemy
Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas
Antoine Barnave
Lafayette
Alexandre-Th odore-Victor, comte de Lameth
Charles Malo Fran ois Lameth
Andr  Ch nier
Jean-Fran ois Rewbell
Camille Jordan
Madame de Sta l
Boissy d'Anglas
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard
Bertrand Bar re de Vieuzac
Girondins
Jacques Pierre Brissot
Jean-Marie Roland de la Plati re
Madame Roland
Father Henri Gr goire
 tienne Clavi re
Marquis de Condorcet
Charlotte Corday
Marie Jean H rault
Jean Baptiste Treilhard
Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
J r me P tion de Villeneuve
Jean Debry
Olympe de Gouges
Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet
Louis Marie de La R velli re-L peaux
The Plain
Abb  Siey s
de Cambac r s
Charles-Fran ois Lebrun
Pierre-Joseph Cambon
Bertrand Bar re
Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot
Philippe  galit 
Louis Philippe I
Mirabeau
Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville
Jean Joseph Mounier
Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours
Fran ois de Neufch teau
Montagnards
Maximilien Robespierre
Georges Danton
Jean-Paul Marat
Camille Desmoulins
Louis Antoine de Saint-Just
Paul Barras
Louis Philippe I
Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau
Jacques-Louis David
Marquis de Sade
Georges Couthon
Roger Ducos
Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois
Jean-Henri Voulland
Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai
Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville
Philippe-Fran ois-Joseph Le Bas
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
Jean-Pierre-Andr  Amar
Prieur de la C te-d'Or
Prieur de la Marne
Gilbert Romme
Jean Bon Saint-Andr 
Jean-Lambert Tallien
Pierre Louis Prieur
Antoine Christophe Saliceti
H bertistsand Enrag s
Jacques H bert
Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne
Pierre Gaspard Chaumette
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Antoine-Fran ois Momoro
Fran ois-Nicolas Vincent
Fran ois Chabot
Jean Baptiste No l Bouchotte
Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel
Fran ois Hanriot
Jacques Roux
Stanislas-Marie Maillard
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Jean-Fran ois Varlet
Theophile Leclerc
Claire Lacombe
Pauline L on
Gracchus Babeuf
Sylvain Mar chal
OthersFigures
Charles X
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
Louis XVIII
Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien
Louis Henri, Prince of Cond 
Louis Joseph, Prince of Cond 
Marie Antoinette
Napol on Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Joseph Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Jos phine de Beauharnais
Joachim Murat
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Jacques-Donatien Le Ray
Guillaume-Chr tien de Malesherbes
Talleyrand
Th r sa Tallien
Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target
Catherine Th ot
Madame de Lamballe
Madame du Barry
Louis de Breteuil
de Chateaubriand
Jean Chouan
Lom nie de Brienne
Charles Alexandre de Calonne
Jacques Necker
Jean-Jacques Duval d'Epr mesnil
List of people associated with the French Revolution
Factions
Jacobins
Cordeliers
Panth on Club
Social Club
Influential thinkers
Les Lumi res
Beaumarchais
Edmund Burke
Anacharsis Cloots
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Pierre Claude Fran ois Daunou
Diderot
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
Antoine Lavoisier
Montesquieu
Thomas Paine
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Abb  Siey s
Voltaire
Mary Wollstonecraft
Cultural impact
La Marseillaise
Cockade of France
Flag of France
Libert ,  galit , fraternit 
Marianne
Bastille Day
Panth on
French Republican calendar
Metric system
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
Cult of the Supreme Being
Cult of Reason
Temple of Reason
Sans-culottes
Phrygian cap
Women in the French Revolution
Incroyables and merveilleuses
Symbolism in the French Revolution
Historiography of the French Revolution
Influence of the French Revolution
Films
vteImperial House of France of the First French EmpireEmperor and immediate family
Napoleon, Emperor of the French
Jos phine, Empress of the French
Marie Louise, Empress of the French
Napoleon, King of Rome
French Princes
Joseph Bonaparte
Louis Bonaparte
Joachim Murat
Eug ne de Beauharnais
Elisa Bonaparte
J r me Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Lucien Bonaparte
Several family members held additional titles in vassal states
vteBonaparte family1st generation
Joseph I of Spain
Napol on I
Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Elisa, Grand Duchess of Tuscany
Louis I of Holland
Pauline, Princess of Guastalla
Caroline, Queen of Naples
J r me I of Westfalia
2nd generation
Z na de, Princess of Canino and Musignano
Princess Charlotte
Napol on II
Charlotte, Princess Mario Gabrielli
Charles Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Prince Louis Lucien
Prince Pierre Napol on
Napol on Charles, Prince Royal of Holland
Louis II of Holland
Napol on III
Prince J r me Napol on
Prince J r me
Mathilde, Princess of San Donato
Napol on, Prince of Monfort
3rd generation
Joseph Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Augusta, Princess Placido Gabrielli
Napol on Charles, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Roland, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Jeanne, Marchioness of Villeneuve-Escaplon
Napol on, Prince Imperial of France
Prince Jerome Napoleon II
Prince Charles
Victor, Prince Napol on
Prince Louis Bonaparte
Princess Marie Letizia, Duchess of Aosta
William Bonaparte-Wyse
Marie Bonaparte-Wyse
Lucien Bonaparte-Wyse
4th generation
Princess Mary, Mrs. Enrico Gotti
Eug nie, Princess of La Moskowa
Marie, Princess George of Greece and Denmark
Marie Clotilde, Countess Serge de Witt
Louis, Prince Napol on
Andrew Bonaparte-Wyse
Eugenia Rasponi
5th generation
Charles, Prince Napol on
6th generation
Jean-Christophe, Prince Napol on
vteGerman Confederations (1806 1871)Confederation of the Rhine 1806 1813Protector
Napoleon I (1806 1813)
Prince primate
Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806 1813)
Eug ne de Beauharnais (1813)
German Confederation 1815 1866Presidents
Francis I of Austria (1815 1835)
Ferdinand I of Austria (1835 1848)
Francis Joseph I of Austria (1850 1866)
Imperial regent
Archduke Johann of Austria (1848 1849)
North German Confederation 1867 1871President
Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867 1871)
Chancellor
Otto von Bismarck (1867 1871)
List of German monarchs
History of Germany
House of Habsburg-Lorraine
House of Hohenzollern
vtePretenders to the French throne since 1792Monarchy in exile (1792 1815)
1792 Louis XVI
1793 Louis XVII
1795 Louis XVIII 1814 1815
Legitimist pretenders (1830 present)
1830 Charles X
1836 Louis XIX
1844 Henri V
1883 Jean III
1887 Charles XI
1909 Jacques I
1931 Charles XII
1936 Alphonse I
1941 Henri VI
1975 Alphonse II
1989 Louis XX present
Orl anist pretenders (1848 1873)
1848  Louis Philippe II 1873
Unionist succession (1830 present)
1830 Charles X
1836 Louis XIX
1844 Henri V
1883 Philippe VII
1894 Philippe VIII
1926 Jean III
1940 Henri VI
1999 Henri VII
2019 Jean IV present
Bonapartist succession (1814 present)
1814 1815 Napol on I
1821 Napol on II
1832 Joseph
1844 Louis
1846 Napol on III (Emperor 1852 1870)
1873 Napol on IV
1879 Napol on V
1926 Napol on VI
1997 Napol on VII Charles / Napol on VII Jean-Christophe
present (disputed)
vteMonarchs of France
Detailed family tree
Simplified family tree
List of Frankish kings
List of French monarchs
Merovingians (509 751)
Clovis I
Childebert I
Chlothar I
Charibert I
Guntram
Chilperic I
Sigebert I
Childebert II
Chlothar II
Dagobert I
Sigebert II
Clovis II
Chlothar III
Childeric II
Theuderic III
Clovis IV
Childebert III
Dagobert III
Chilperic II
Chlothar IV
Theuderic IV
Childeric III
Carolingians,Robertians and Bosonids (751 987)
Pepin the Short
Carloman I
Charlemagne (Charles I)
Louis I
Charles II
Louis II
Louis III
Carloman II
Charles the Fat
OdoR
Charles III
Robert IR
RudolphB
Louis IV
Lothair
Louis V
House of Capet (987 1328)
Hugh Capet
Robert II
Henry I
Philip I
Louis VI
Louis VII
Philip II
Louis VIII
Louis IX
Philip III
Philip IV
Louis X
John I
Philip V
Charles IV
House of Valois (1328 1589)
Philip VI
John II
Charles V
Charles VI
Charles VII
Louis XI
Charles VIII
Louis XII
Francis I
Henry II
Francis II
Charles IX
Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422 1453)
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589 1792)
Henry IV
Louis XIII
Louis XIV
Louis XV
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
House of Bonaparte (1804 1814; 1815)
Napoleon I
Napoleon II
House of Bourbon (1814 1815; 1815 1830)
Louis XVIII
Charles X
Louis XIX
Henry V
House of Orl ans (1830 1848)
Louis Philippe I
Louis Philippe II
House of Bonaparte (1852 1870)
Napoleon III
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics.
vteMonarchs of GermanyEast Francia during the Carolingian dynasty (843 911)
Louis the German
Carloman
Louis the Younger
Charles the Fat
Arnulf
Louis the Child
East Francia (911 919)Kingdom of Germany (919 962)
Conrad I
Henry I
Arnulf
Otto I
Kingdom of Germany within the Holy Roman Empire (962 1806)
Otto I
Otto II
Otto III
Henry II
Conrad II
Henry III
Henry IV
Rudolf
Hermann
Conrad (III)
Henry V
Lothair II/III
Conrad III
Henry (VI)
Frederick I
Henry VI
Philip
Otto IV
Frederick II
Henry (VII)
Conrad IV
Henry (VIII)
William
Richard
Alfonso
Rudolf I
Adolf
Albert I
Henry VII
Louis IV
Frederick (III)
Charles IV
G nther
Wenceslaus
Rupert
Jobst
Sigismund
Albert II
Frederick III
Maximilian I
Charles V
Ferdinand I
Maximilian II
Rudolf II
Matthias
Ferdinand II
Ferdinand III
Ferdinand IV
Leopold I
Joseph I
Charles VI
Charles VII
Francis I
Joseph II
Leopold II
Francis II
Confederation of the Rhine (1806 1813)
Napoleon I
German Confederation (1815 1848)
Francis I
Ferdinand I
German Empire (1848/1849)
Archduke John of Austria (Imperial Regent)
German Confederation (1850 1866)
Franz Joseph I
North German Confederation (1867 1871)
William I
German Empire (1871 1918)
William I
Frederick III
William II
vteFrench Consulate (10 November 1799   18 May 1804)Provisional consuls
Napoleon Bonaparte
Emmanuel Joseph Siey s
Roger Ducos
BonaparteFirst ConsulConsuls
Napoleon Bonaparte
Jean Jacques R gis de Cambac r s
Charles-Fran ois Lebrun, duc de Plaisance
MinistersForeign Affairs
Charles-Fr d ric Reinhard
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P rigord
Justice
Jean Jacques R gis de Cambac r s
Andr  Joseph Abrial
Claude Ambroise R gnier
War
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Lazare Carnot
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
FinanceMartin-Michel-Charles GaudinPoliceJoseph Fouch Interior
Pierre-Simon Laplace
Lucien Bonaparte
Jean-Antoine Chaptal
Navy and Colonies
Marc-Antoine Bourdon de Vatry
Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait
Denis Decr s
Secretary of StateHugues-Bernard Maret, duc de BassanoTreasuryFran ois Barb -MarboisWar AdministrationJean Fran ois Aim  Dejean
Preceded by French Directory
Followed by First Cabinet of Napoleon I
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Romania
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
zbMATH
Artists
KulturNav
RKD Artists
Te Papa (New Zealand)
ULAN
People
Netherlands
2
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Lexicon Istoric Retic
NARA
RISM
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Napoleon&oldid=1149387693"