Process of creating artworks by printing, normally on paper
This article is about techniques of printmaking as a fine art. For the history of printmaking in Europe, see Old master print. For the Japanese printmaking tradition, see Ukiyo-e.
 Katsushika Hokusai The Underwave off Kanagawa, 1829/1833, color woodcut, Rijksmuseum Collection
 Rembrandt,  Self-portrait, etching, c. 1630
 Francisco Goya, There is No One To Help Them, Disasters of War series, aquatint c. 1810
Printmaking is the process of creating artworks by printing, normally on paper, but also on fabric, wood, metal, and other surfaces. "Traditional printmaking" normally covers only the process of creating prints using a hand processed technique, rather than a photographic reproduction of a visual artwork which would be printed using an electronic machine (a printer); however, there is some cross-over between traditional and digital printmaking, including risograph. 
Prints are created by transferring ink from a matrix to a sheet of paper or other material, by a variety of techniques. Common types of matrices include: metal plates for engraving, etching and related intaglio printing techniques; stone, aluminum, or polymer for lithography; blocks of wood for woodcuts and wood engravings; and linoleum for linocuts. Screens made of silk or synthetic fabrics are used for the screen printing process. Other types of matrix substrates and related processes are discussed below.
Except in the case of monotyping, all printmaking processes have the capacity to produce identical multiples of the same artwork, which is called a print. Each print produced is considered an "original" work of art, and is correctly referred to as an "impression", not a "copy" (that means a different print copying the first, common in early printmaking). However, impressions can vary considerably, whether intentionally or not. Master printmakers are technicians who are capable of printing identical "impressions" by hand.  A print that copies another work of art, especially a painting, is known as a "reproductive print".
Multiple impressions printed from the same matrix form an edition. Since the late 19th century, artists have generally signed individual impressions from an edition and often number the impressions to form a limited edition; the matrix is then destroyed so that no more prints can be produced. Prints may also be printed in book form, such as illustrated books or artist's books.
Techniques[edit]
External video Printmaking: Woodcuts and Engravings, Smarthistory
Overview[edit]
Printmaking techniques are generally divided into the following basic categories:
Relief, where ink is applied to the original surface of the matrix, while carved or displaced grooves are absent of ink. Relief techniques include woodcut or woodblock, wood engraving, linocut and metalcut.
Intaglio, where ink is forced into grooves or cavities in the surface of the matrix. Intaglio techniques include collagraphy, engraving, etching, mezzotint, aquatint.
Planographic, where the matrix retains its original surface, but is specially prepared and/or inked to allow for the transfer of the image. Planographic techniques include lithography, monotyping, and digital techniques.
Stencil, where ink or paint is pressed through a prepared screen, including screen printing, risograph, and pochoir.
A type of printmaking outside of this group is viscosity printing. Contemporary printmaking may include digital printing, photographic mediums, or a combination of digital, photographic, and traditional processes.
Many of these techniques can also be combined, especially within the same family. For example, Rembrandt's prints are usually referred to as "etchings" for convenience, but very often include work in engraving and drypoint as well, and sometimes have no etching at all.
Woodcut[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Albrecht D rer,
Hans Burgkmair,
Ugo da Carpi,
Hiroshige,
Hokusai,
Frans Masereel,
Gustave Baumann, 
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner,
Eric Slater
Antonio Frasconi
Main article: Woodcut
 F lix Vallotton, La raison probante (The Cogent Reason), woodcut from the series Intimit s, (1898)
 Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Portrait of Otto M ller, 1915
Woodcut, a type of relief print, is the earliest printmaking technique. It was probably first developed as a means of printing patterns on cloth, and by the 5th century was used in China for printing text and images on paper.[1] Woodcuts of images on paper developed around 1400 in Japan, and slightly later in Europe.[citation needed] These are the two areas where woodcut has been most extensively used purely as a process for making images without text. 
 Woodcuts of Stanislaw Raczynski (1903 1982)
The artist either draws a design directly on a plank of wood, or transfers an drawing done on paper to a plank of wood. Traditionally, the artist then handed the work to a technician, who then uses sharp carving tools to carve away the parts of the block that will not receive ink.[2] In the Western tradition, the surface of the block is then inked with the use of a brayer; however in the Japanese tradition, woodblocks were inked with a brush.[3] Then a sheet of paper, perhaps slightly damp, is placed over the block. The block is then rubbed with a baren or spoon, or is run through a printing press. If the print is in color, separate blocks can be used for each color, or a technique called reduction printing can be used.
Reduction printing is a name used to describe the process of using one block to print several layers of color on one print. Both woodcuts and linocuts can employ reduction printing. This usually involves cutting a small amount of the block away, and then printing the block many times over on different sheets before washing the block, cutting more away and printing the next color on top. This allows the previous color to show through. This process can be repeated many times over. The advantages of this process is that only one block is needed, and that different components of an intricate design will line up perfectly. The disadvantage is that once the artist moves on to the next layer, no more prints can be made.
Another variation of woodcut printmaking is the cukil technique, made famous by the Taring Padi underground community in Java, Indonesia. Taring Padi Posters usually resemble intricately printed cartoon posters embedded with political messages. Images usually resembling a visually complex scenario are carved unto a wooden surface called cukilan, then smothered with printer's ink before pressing it unto media such as paper or canvas.[4]
Main article: Engraving
 Melencolia I, 1514 engraving by Albrecht D rer, one of the most important printmakers.
The process was developed in Germany in the 1430s from the engraving used by goldsmiths to decorate metalwork.  Engravers use a hardened steel tool called a burin to cut the design into the surface of a metal plate, traditionally made of copper. Engraving using a burin is generally a difficult skill to learn.
Gravers come in a variety of shapes and sizes that yield different line types. The burin produces a unique and recognizable quality of line that is characterized by its steady, deliberate appearance and clean edges. Other tools such as mezzotint rockers, roulettes (a tool with a fine-toothed wheel) and burnishers (a tool used for making an object smooth or shiny by rubbing) are used for texturing effects.
To make a print, the engraved plate is inked all over, then the ink is wiped off the surface, leaving only ink in the engraved lines. The plate is then put through a high-pressure printing press together with a sheet of paper (often moistened to soften it). The paper picks up the ink from the engraved lines, making a print. The process can be repeated many times; typically several hundred impressions (copies) could be printed before the printing plate shows much sign of wear, except when drypoint, which gives much shallower lines, is used.
In the 20th century, true engraving was revived as a serious art form by artists including Stanley William Hayter whose Atelier 17 in Paris and New York City became the magnet for such artists as Pablo Picasso, Alberto Giacometti, Mauricio Lasansky and Joan Mir .
Etching[edit]
Main article: Etching
 Albrecht D rer, Saint Jerome in his Study, 1514.
Artists using this technique include
Albrecht D rer,
Rembrandt,
Francisco Goya,
Wenceslaus Hollar,
Whistler,
Otto Dix,
James Ensor,
Edward Hopper,
K the Kollwitz,
Pablo Picasso,
Cy Twombly,
Lucas van Leyden
 Rembrandt, Christ Preaching, (The Hundred Guilder print); etching c. 1648
Etching is part of the intaglio family. In pure etching, a metal plate (usually copper, zinc, or steel) is covered with a waxy or acrylic ground. The artist then draws through the ground with a pointed etching needle, exposing the metal. The plate is then etched by dipping it in a bath of etchant (e.g. nitric acid or ferric chloride). The etchant "bites" into the exposed metal, leaving behind lines in the plate. The remaining ground is then cleaned off the plate, and the printing process is then just the same as for engraving.
Although the first dated etching is by Albrecht D rer in 1515, the process is believed to have been invented by Daniel Hopfer (c. 1470 1536) of Augsburg, Germany, who decorated armor in this way, and applied the method to printmaking.[5] Etching soon came to challenge engraving as the most popular printmaking medium. Its great advantage was that, unlike engraving which requires special skill in metalworking, etching is relatively easy to learn for an artist trained in drawing.
Etching prints are generally linear and often contain fine detail and contours. Lines can vary from smooth to sketchy. An etching is opposite of a woodcut in that the raised portions of an etching remain blank while the crevices hold ink.
A non-toxic form of etching that does not involve an acid is Electroetching.
Mezzotint[edit]
Artists using this technique include
John Martin,
Ludwig von Siegen,
John Smith,
Wallerant Vaillant,
Carol Wax
Main article: Mezzotint
An intaglio variant of engraving in which the image is formed from subtle gradations of light and shade. Mezzotint from the Italian mezzo ("half") and tinta ("tone") is a "dark manner" form of printmaking, which requires artists to work from dark to light. To create a mezzotint, the surface of a copper printing plate is roughened evenly all over with the aid of a tool known as a rocker; the image is then formed by smoothing the surface with a tool known as a burnisher. When inked, the roughened areas of the plate will hold more ink and print more darkly, while smoother areas of the plate hold less or no ink, and will print more lightly or not at all. It is, however, possible to create the image by only roughening the plate selectively, so working from light to dark.
Mezzotint is known for the luxurious quality of its tones: first, because an evenly, finely roughened surface holds a lot of ink, allowing deep solid colors to be printed; secondly because the process of smoothing the texture with burin, burnisher and scraper allows fine gradations in tone to be developed.
The mezzotint printmaking method was invented by Ludwig von Siegen (1609 1680). The process was used widely in England from the mid-eighteenth century, to reproduce oil paintings and in particular portraits.
Aquatint[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Norman Ackroyd,
Jean-Baptiste Le Prince,
William Daniell,
Francisco Goya,
Thomas Rowlandson
Main article: Aquatint
 The sleep of Reason creates monsters, etching and aquatint by Francisco Goya, c. 1797 98
A technique used in Intaglio etchings. Like etching, aquatint technique involves the application of acid to make marks in a metal plate. Where the etching technique uses a needle to make lines that retain ink, traditional aquatint relies on powdered rosin which is acid resistant in the ground to create a tonal effect. The rosin is applied in a light dusting by a fan booth, the rosin is then cooked until set on the plate. At this time the rosin can be burnished or scratched out to affect its tonal qualities. The tonal variation is controlled by the level of acid exposure over large areas, and thus the image is shaped by large sections at a time.
Contemporary printmakers also sometimes using airbrushed asphaltum or spray paint, as well as other non toxic techniques, to achieve aquatint due to rosin boxes posing a fire hazard.[6]
Goya used aquatint for most of his prints.
Drypoint[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Mary Cassatt,
Francis Seymour Haden,
Master of the Housebook,
Richard Spare,
William Lionel Wyllie
Main article: Drypoint
 The Three Crosses, 1653 drypoint by Rembrandt
A variant of engraving, done with a sharp point, rather than a v-shaped burin. While engraved lines are very smooth and hard-edged, drypoint scratching leaves a rough burr at the edges of each line. This burr gives drypoint prints a characteristically soft, and sometimes blurry, line quality. Because the pressure of printing quickly destroys the burr, drypoint is useful only for very small editions; as few as ten or twenty impressions. To counter this, and allow for longer print runs, electro-plating (here called steelfacing) has been used since the nineteenth century to harden the surface of a plate.
The technique appears to have been invented by the Housebook Master, a south German fifteenth-century artist, all of whose prints are in drypoint only. Among the most famous artists of the old master print, Albrecht D rer produced three drypoints before abandoning the technique; Rembrandt used it frequently, but usually in conjunction with etching and engraving.
Lithography[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Honor  Daumier,
Vincent van Gogh,
George Bellows,
Pierre Bonnard,
Edvard Munch,
Emil Nolde,
Pablo Picasso,
Odilon Redon,
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec,
Salvador Dal ,
M. C. Escher,
Willem de Kooning,
Joan Mir ,
Stow Wengenroth,
Elaine de Kooning,
Louise Nevelson
Main article: Lithography
 La Goulue, Lithograph poster by Toulouse-Lautrec (1891)
Lithography is a technique invented in 1798 by Alois Senefelder and based on the chemical repulsion of oil and water.
A porous surface, normally limestone, is used; the image is drawn on the limestone with a greasy medium.
Acid is applied, transferring the grease-protected design to the limestone, leaving the image 'burned' into the surface. Gum arabic, a water-soluble substance, is then applied, sealing the surface of the stone not covered with the drawing medium.
The stone is wetted, with water staying only on the surface not covered in grease-based residue of the drawing; the stone is then 'rolled up', meaning oil ink is applied with a roller covering the entire surface; since water repels the oil in the ink, the ink adheres only to the greasy parts, perfectly inking the image.
A sheet of dry paper is placed on the surface, and the image is transferred to the paper by the pressure of the printing press. Lithography is known for its ability to capture fine gradations in shading and very small detail.
Variations of Lithography[edit]
 Rachel Robinson Elmer, halftone offset lithograph, Woolworth Building June Night, 1916, The National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.
Photo-lithography captures an image by photographic processes on metal plates; printing is more or less carried out in the same way as stone lithography.
Halftone lithography produces an image that illustrates a gradient-like quality.
Mokulito is a form of lithography on wood instead of limestone. It was invented by Seishi Ozaku in the 1970s in Japan and was originally called Mokurito.[7]
Screenprinting[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Josef Albers,
Ralston Crawford,
Gene Davis.
Robert Indiana,
Roy Lichtenstein,
Julian Opie,
Bridget Riley,
Edward Ruscha,
Andy Warhol.
Main article: Screenprinting
Screen printing (occasionally known as "silkscreen", or "serigraphy") creates prints by using a fabric stencil technique; ink is simply pushed through the stencil against the surface of the paper, most often with the aid of a squeegee. Generally, the technique uses a natural or synthetic 'mesh' fabric stretched tightly across a rectangular 'frame,' much like a stretched canvas. The fabric can be silk, nylon monofilament, multifilament polyester, or even stainless steel.[8]  While commercial screen printing often requires high-tech, mechanical apparatuses and calibrated materials, printmakers value it for the "Do It Yourself" approach, and the low technical requirements, high quality results. The essential tools required are a squeegee, a mesh fabric, a frame, and a stencil. Unlike many other printmaking processes, a printing press is not required, as screen printing is essentially stencil printing.
Screen printing may be adapted to printing on a variety of materials, from paper, cloth, and canvas to rubber, glass, and metal. Artists have used the technique to print on bottles, on slabs of granite, directly onto walls, and to reproduce images on textiles which would distort under pressure from printing presses.
Monotype[edit]
Main article: Monotyping
 Paul Gauguin, Arearea no Varua Ino (Words of the Devil), watercolor monotype on Japan paper mounted on cardboard, 1894, The National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.
 Monotype by the technique's inventor, Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione, The Creation of Adam, c 1642
Monotyping is a type of printmaking made by drawing or painting on a smooth, non-absorbent surface. The surface, or matrix, was historically a copper etching plate, but in contemporary work it can vary from zinc or glass to acrylic glass. The image is then transferred onto a sheet of paper by pressing the two together, usually using a printing-press. Monotypes can also be created by inking an entire surface and then, using brushes or rags, removing ink to create a subtractive image, e.g. creating lights from a field of opaque color. The inks used may be oil based or water based. With oil based inks, the paper may be dry, in which case the image has more contrast, or the paper may be damp, in which case the image has a 10 percent greater range of tones.
Unlike monoprinting, monotyping produces a unique print, or monotype, because most of the ink is removed during the initial pressing. Although subsequent reprintings are sometimes possible, they differ greatly from the first print and are generally considered inferior. A second print from the original plate is called a "ghost print" or "cognate". Stencils, watercolor, solvents, brushes, and other tools are often used to embellish a monotype print. Monotypes are often spontaneously executed and with no preliminary sketch.
Monotypes are the most painterly method among the printmaking techniques, a unique print that is essentially a printed painting. The principal characteristic of this medium is found in its spontaneity and its combination of printmaking, painting, and drawing media.[9]
Monoprint[edit]
Main article: Monoprinting
Monoprinting is a form of printmaking that uses a matrix such as a woodblock, litho stone, or copper plate, but produces impressions that are unique. Multiple unique impressions printed from a single matrix are sometimes known as a variable edition. There are many techniques used in monoprinting, including collagraph, collage, hand-painted additions, and a form of tracing by which thick ink is laid down on a table, paper is placed on the ink, and the back of the paper is drawn on, transferring the ink to the paper. Monoprints can also be made by altering the type, color, and viscosity of the ink used to create different prints. Traditional printmaking techniques, such as lithography, woodcut, and intaglio, can be used to make monoprints.
Mixed-media prints[edit]
Mixed-media prints may use multiple traditional printmaking processes such as etching, woodcut, letterpress, silkscreen, or even monoprinting in the creation of the print. They may also incorporate elements of chine colle, collage, or painted areas, and may be unique, i.e. one-off, non-editioned, prints. Mixed-media prints are often experimental prints and may be printed on unusual, non-traditional surfaces.
Digital prints[edit]
Artists using this technique include
Istvan Horkay, Ralph Goings, Enrique Chagoya
Main article: Digital printing
Digital prints refers to images printed using digital printers such as inkjet printers instead of a traditional printing press. Images can be printed to a variety of substrates including paper, cloth, or plastic canvas.
Dye-based inks[edit]
Dye-based inks are organic (not mineral) dissolved and mixed into a liquid. Although most are synthetic, derived from petroleum, they can be made from vegetable or animal sources. Dyes are well suited for textiles where the liquid dye penetrates and chemically bonds to the fiber. Because of the deep penetration, more layers of material must lose their color before the fading is apparent. Dyes, however, are not suitable for the relatively thin layers of ink laid out on the surface of a print.
Pigment-based inks[edit]
Pigment is a finely ground, particulate substance which, when mixed or ground into a liquid to make ink or paint, does not dissolve, but remains dispersed or suspended in the liquid. Pigments are categorized as either inorganic (mineral) or organic (synthetic).[10] Pigment-based inks have a much longer permanence than dye-based inks.[11]
Gicl e[edit]
Gicl e (pron.: / i kle / zhee-KLAY or /d i kle /), is a neologism coined in 1991 by printmaker Jack Duganne [12] for digital prints made on inkjet printers. Originally associated with early dye-based printers it is now more often refers to pigment-based prints.[13] The word is based on the French word gicleur, which means "nozzle". Today fine art prints produced on large format ink-jet machines using the CcMmYK color model are generally called "Gicl e".
Foil imaging[edit]
In art, foil imaging is a printmaking technique made using the Iowa Foil Printer, developed by Virginia A. Myers from the commercial foil stamping process. This uses gold leaf and acrylic foil in the printmaking process.
Direct-to-garment printing  DTG printing)[edit]
Direct-to-garment printing (DTG) is a process of printing on textiles using specialized aqueous ink jet technology. DTG printers typically have a platen designed to hold the garment in a fixed position, and the printer inks are jetted or sprayed onto the textile by the print head. 
Color[edit]
 Hiroshige, Morning Mist
Printmakers apply color to their prints in many different ways. Some coloring techniques include positive surface roll, negative surface roll, and A la poup e. Often color in printmaking that involves etching, screen printing, woodcut, or linocut is applied by either using separate plates, blocks or screens or by using a reductionist approach. In multiple plate color techniques, a number of plates, screens or blocks are produced, each providing a different color. Each separate plate, screen, or block will be inked up in a different color and applied in a particular sequence to produce the entire picture. On average about three to four plates are produced, but there are occasions where a printmaker may use up to seven plates. Every application of another plate of color will interact with the color already applied to the paper, and this must be kept in mind when producing the separation of colors. The lightest colors are often applied first, and then darker colors successively until the darkest.
The reductionist approach to producing color is to start with a lino or wood block that is either blank or with a simple etching. Upon each printing of color the printmaker will then further cut into the lino or woodblock removing more material and then apply another color and reprint. Each successive removal of lino or wood from the block will expose the already printed color to the viewer of the print. Picasso is often cited as the inventor of reduction printmaking, although there is evidence of this method in use 25 years before Picasso's linocuts.[14]
The subtractive color concept is also used in offset or digital print and is present in bitmap or vectorial software in CMYK or other color spaces.
Registration[edit]
In printmaking processes requiring more than one application of ink or other medium, the problem exists as to how to line up properly areas of an image to receive ink in each application. The most obvious example of this would be a multi-color image in which each color is applied in a separate step. The lining up of the results of each step in a multistep printmaking process is called "registration." Proper registration results in the various components of an image being in their proper place. But, for artistic reasons, improper registration is not necessarily the ruination of an image. Andy Warhol was known to intentionally employ improper registration.
This can vary considerably from process to process. It generally involves placing the substrate, generally paper, in correct alignment with the printmaking element that will be supplying it with coloration.[15]
Protective printmaking equipment[edit]
Protective clothing is very important for printmakers who engage in etching and lithography (closed toed shoes and long pants). Whereas in the past printmakers put their plates in and out of acid baths with their bare hands, today printmakers use rubber gloves.  They also wear industrial respirators for protection from caustic vapors. Most acid baths are built with ventilation hoods above them.
Protective respirators and masks should have particle filters, particularly for aquatinting. As a part of the aquatinting process, a printmaker is often exposed to rosin powder.  Rosin is a serious health hazard, especially to printmakers who, in the past, simply used to hold their breath[16]  using an aquatinting booth.
Print preservation[edit]
 Preservation of this 140+ year-old print protected under glass required removal of the old matting, deacidification of the print, and conservation grade new matting.
Modern prints onto paper protected from the sun and moisture will last an incredibly long time. Prints made using newer alkaline and acid-free paper have a life expectancy of over 1,000 years for the best paper and 500 years for average grades. When it comes to older prints, the condition of a print largely depends on the technique used to make the paper. Prints that are several hundred years old may be in better condition than prints that are less than 50 years old .[17]  Many older prints will yellow or brown over time owing to acids in the paper and any matting or backing papers. To preserve/restore older prints, washing, deacidification and treatment with stain reducing agents may be in order.[18] Further, if the print is framed, archival or conservation grade picture mats are essential since acids within older or inexpensive matting will attack a print even if the print was produced using acid-free paper. Color prints can be susceptible to fading depending on the type of inks used. Lighting of sensitive prints should be limited to 50 lux (5 foot-candles) or less and artificial lights can be equipped with UV-filtering sleeves or tubes.[19]
Prints onto animal skins (vellum) should also be maintained at a humidity level between 25% and 40%.[20] Prints onto silk are particularly sensitive to any light including camera flashes.[21]
See also[edit]
Visual arts portal
Artist's proof
Banhua, Chinese printmaking
Carborundum printmaking
Graphic design
Line engraving
List of printmakers
Old master print
Shin hanga
Sosaku hanga
Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America
Ukiyo-e
Visual arts
Printmakers by nationality[edit]
Engravers by nationality
Etchers by nationality
Printmakers by nationality
References[edit]
^ "Woodcut". www.metmuseum.org. Retrieved 2023-01-11.
^ "Woodcut". The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 2023-02-24.
^ Watton, Jill (2019-04-26). "Japanese Woodblock Printmaking Explained". Jackson's Art Blog. Retrieved 2021-07-24.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Woodcut". The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 2023-02-24.
^ Cohen, Brian D. "Freedom and Resistance in the Act of Engraving (or, Why D rer Gave up on Etching)," Archived 2020-03-08 at the Wayback Machine Art in Print Vol. 7 No. 3 (September October 2017), 17.
^ "Exploding Rosin Box". Straight Dope Message Board. 2010-01-28. Retrieved 2021-07-24.
^ "mokulito - Danielle Creenaune". daniellecreenaune.com. Retrieved 2021-07-24.
^ "Screen Fabric". A.W.T. World Trade Inc.
^ Washington printmakers' gallery Archived 2010-12-28 at the Wayback Machine
^ Printmaking FAQ at Magnolia Editions Archived 2009-04-13 at the Wayback Machine
^ Carden, Susan (2015). Digital Textile Printing. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 27. ISBN 9781472535689.
^ Johnson, Harald. Mastering Digital Printing, p.11 at Google Books
^ Luong, Q.-Tuan. An overview of large format color digital printing Archived 2021-01-13 at the Wayback Machine at largeformatphotography.info
^ "Not Picasso's invention - a foray into the history of reductive linoprinting. (2001) by Bunbury, Alisa.   Australian Prints + Printmaking".
^ "Nontoxicprint".
^ Smidgeon (2014-09-09). "Printmaking 101: Applying Rosin for Aquatint (Using a Rosin Box)". SMIDGEON PRESS. Retrieved 2019-07-17.
^ "The Deterioration and Preservation of Paper: Some Essential Facts - Collections Care - Resources (Preservation, Library of Congress)". www.loc.gov. Retrieved 2021-01-03.
^ Marianne (2017-12-16). "Cleaning Stained and Yellowed Works of Art On Paper". Marianne Kelsey Book and Paper Conservator Professional. Retrieved 2021-01-03.
^ "Philadelphia Museum of Art - Research : Conservation". www.philamuseum.org. Retrieved 2021-01-04.
^ Marianne (2020-01-10). "How to Care For Vellum and Parchment Documents". Marianne Kelsey Book and Paper Conservator Professional. Retrieved 2021-01-06.
^ "How do you preserve a 100-year-old piece of silk and woman suffrage history?". National Museum of American History. 2013-08-19. Retrieved 2021-01-06.
Sources[edit]
What is a Print?, from the Museum of Modern Art
Bamber Gascoigne: How to Identify Prints: A Complete Guide to Manual and Mechanical Processes from Woodcut to Inkjet (ISBN 0-500-28480-6)
Further reading[edit]
A. Hyatt Mayor (1971). Prints & people: a social history of printed pictures (full PDF). New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9780870991080.
Beth Grabowski and Bill Fick, "Printmaking: A Complete Guide to Materials & Processes." Prentice Hall, 2009. ISBN 0-205-66453-9
Donna Anderson Experience Printmaking. Worcester, MA: Davis Publications, 2009. ISBN 978-0-87192-982-2
Gill Saunders and Rosie Miles Prints Now: Directions and Definitions Victoria and Albert Museum (May 1, 2006) ISBN 1-85177-480-7
Antony Griffiths, Prints and Printmaking, British Museum Press, 2nd ed, 1996 ISBN 0-7141-2608-X
Linda Hults The Print in the Western World: An Introductory History. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-299-13700-7
Carol Wax, The Mezzotint: History and Technique (Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1990)
James Watrous A Century of American Printmaking. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1984. ISBN 0-299-09680-7
William Ivins, Jr. Prints and Visual Communication. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1953. ISBN 0-262-59002-6
Donald Saff and Deli Sacilotto. Printmaking: History and Process. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1978. ISBN 978-0030856631
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to printmaking.
Look up printmaking in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  "Print".
Library resources about  Printmaking 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
History of printmaking; glossaries
Museum of Modern Art, New York: What Is a Print?
Thompson, Wendy. "The Printed Image in the West: History and Techniques". In Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000   . (October 2003)
Andr  B guin's dictionary;enormous dictionary of terms, relating more to the printing than the creation of the image
Another glossary - for modern prints 
Judging the Authenticity of Prints by The Masters by art historian David Rudd Cycleback
Printing techniques explained
vteVisual arts
Architecture
Art
Ceramics
Computer art
Craft
Drawing
Design
Filmmaking
Light art
Painting
Photography
Printmaking
Public art
Sculpture
Site-specific art
Street art
Synthography
List of artistic media
vteVisual arts and the art worldArtwork
Appropriation
Collage
Conceptual art
Cultural artifact
Drawing
Fine art
Fine-art photograph
Found object
Installation art
Kinetic art
Mixed media
bricolage
Mural
fresco
graffiti
New media art
digital
virtual
Painting
Performance art
Plastic arts
Printmaking
Public art
street art
Sculpture
carving
relief
statue
tallest
Site-specific art
Social sculpture
Soft sculpture
Stained glass
Roles
Artist
Collector
Conservator-restorer
paintings
frescos
Critic
Curator
Dealer
Model
Patron
Visual arts education
Europe
Placesand events
Art auction
Art colony
Art commune
Art exhibition
alternative exhibition space
Art gallery
Contemporary art gallery
Art museum
Single-artist museum
Art school
Europe
Arts centre
Arts festival
Artist collective
Artist cooperative
Artist-in-residence program
Artist-run initiative
Artist-run space
Biennale
Commission
Sculpture garden
Sculpture trail
Virtual museum
History of art
Timeline of art
Art history (academic study)
Art manifesto
Art movements
Criticism
feminist
History of painting
outline
Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America
Related
Art market
The arts
Catalogue raisonn 
Classificatory disputes
Museum collection management
deaccessioning
Conservation-restoration
paintings
Cultural policy
Destination painting
Eclecticism in art
Economics of art
art finance
art valuation
Elements of art
Index of painting-related articles
Outline of the visual arts
painting
sculpture
Provenance
Sociology of art
Style
Visual design elements and principles
Lists
Art magazines
Art media
Art techniques
Art movements
Art museums
largest
most visited
sculpture parks
single artist
Art reference books
Colossal sculptures in situ
Contemporary artists
Contemporary art galleries
Modern artists
National galleries
Painters
by name
by nationality
Photographers
Sculptors
female
Stolen paintings
Most expensive paintings, sculptures, works by living artists
Painting portal
Visual arts portal
Arts portal
Authority control National
Germany
2
Israel
United States
Other
Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Printmaking&oldid=1149407460"