Group of individuals whose primary interest and activities involve motorcycles
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Southern California Norton Owner's Club on California State Route 41, near Creston.
A motorcycle club is a group of individuals whose primary interest and activities involve motorcycles. A motorcycle group can range as clubbed groups of different bikes or bikers who own same model of vehicle like the Harley Owners Group.
There are a great many brand clubs, i.e. clubs dedicated to a particular marque, including those sponsored by various manufacturers, modeled on the original brand club, the Harley Owners Group. There are also large national independent motorcycle clubs, for example, the BMW Motorcycle Owners of America, and the Dominar Owners Club (DOC),[1] an exclusive motorcycle group for Bajaj Dominar bikes only.[2] There are also specific clubs for women, such as the Women's International Motorcycle Association, and clubs for lesbians and gays, such as Dykes on Bikes.
Clubs catering for those interested in vintage machines such as the Vintage Motor Cycle Club are also popular as well as those centered on particular venues. Clubs catering for riders' rights such as the Motorcycle Action Group, and charities like The Royal British Legion Riders Branch are also popular. Many affiliate with an umbrella organization, such as the British Motorcyclists Federation in the UK, or FEMA in Europe. Producing national and local branch club magazines and events are typical activities of such clubs.
Other organizations whose activities primarily involve motorcycles exist for specific purposes or social causes such as the Patriot Guard Riders, who provide funeral escorts for military veterans, and Rolling Thunder, which advocates for troops missing in action and prisoners of war.  While neither of the latter two groups require a motorcycle for membership, they are motorcycling-oriented and much of their activity involves rides.[3][4][5]
There are numerous religiously oriented clubs such as the Christian Motorcyclists Association, a biker ministry, charities such as Freewheelers EVS, which use motorcycles to provide an out-of-hours emergency medical courier service, and clubs which attract membership from specific groups, such as the Blue Knights Law Enforcement Motorcycle Club, for law enforcement personnel.[6]
In the United Kingdom, two charities (the Institute of Advanced Motorists and RoSPA Advanced Drivers and Riders) have significant-sized motorcycle clubs with trained volunteers to promote roadcraft and help riders pass an advanced driving test.
History[edit]
One of the first motorcycle clubs was the New York Motorcycle Club, which in 1903 merged with the Alpha Motorcycle Club of Brooklyn to become the Federation of American Motorcyclists. Later, the Motorcycle and Allied Trades Association (M&ATA) formed a Rider Division which spun off into the American Motorcyclist Association.[7]
American Motorcyclist Association[edit]
The American Motorcyclist Association (AMA) is the largest American motorcyclist organization. It serves as an umbrella organization for local clubs and sporting events. As of 2015, the AMA counts over 200,000 active members and over 1,200 chartered clubs.[8]
MCs and MCCs[edit]
Main article: Outlaw motorcycle club
 A Cannonball MC member in Helsinki, Finland in 2009.
The abbreviations MC and MCC are both used to mean "motorcycle club" but have a special social meaning from the point of view of the outlaw or one percenter motorcycling subculture. MC is generally reserved for those clubs that are mutually recognized by other MC or outlaw motorcycle clubs.[9] This is indicated by a motorcyclist wearing an MC patch, or a three-piece patch called colors, on the back of their jacket or riding vest.  Outlaw or one percenter can mean merely that the club is not chartered under the auspices of the American Motorcyclist Association,[10] implying a radical rejection of authority and embracing of the "biker" lifestyle as defined and popularized since the 1950s and represented by such media as Easyriders magazine, the work of painter David Mann and others.  In many contexts the terms overlap with the usual meaning of "outlaw" because some of these clubs, or some of their members, are recognized by law enforcement agencies as taking part in organized crime.
Outside of the outlaw motorcyclist subculture, the words "motorcycle club" carry no pejorative meaning beyond the everyday English definition of the words   a club involving motorcycles, whose members come from every walk of life. Thus, there are clubs that are culturally and stylistically nothing like outlaw or one percenter clubs, and whose activities and goals not similar to them at all, but still use three-part patches or the initials MC in their name or insignia.[11]
See also[edit]
Shwet Ashwas (India)
References[edit]
^ Dominar Owners Club (DOC) Archived 2021-12-02 at the Wayback Machine
^ Bajaj Dominar
^ Feuer, Alan (May 29, 2006). "Revving Their Engines, Remembering a War's Toll". The New York Times.
^ Grant, Japhy (March 28, 2006). "Biking to block Phelps". The Advocate. p. 22. ISSN 0001-8996.
^ Platoni, Kara (July August 2006). "The hogs of war". Mother Jones. pp. 16 17.
^ "Police Motorcycle Club Invades Tyler". Tyler Morning Telegraph. Tyler, Texas. July 25, 2012. pp. 1A, 6A.
^ "History of Motorcycle Clubs". BikeDomain. 17 February 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015.
^ "AMA Facts & Figures". American Motorcyclist Association. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015.
^ Drew, A. J. (2002), The everything motorcycle book: the one book you must have to buy, ride, and maintain your motorcycle, Adams Media Corp, pp. 273, 277, ISBN 9781580625548, Biker slang or babble (marked BB) [...] mc (BB) Motorcycle Club; this abbreviation usually refers to an outlaw motorcycle club. [...]  outlaw (BB) Generally speaking, any motorcycling club that is not represented by the AMA.  This does not connote criminal intent.
^ Wolf, Daniel R. (1992), The Rebels: a brotherhood of outlaw bikers, University of Toronto Press, ISBN 9780802073631
^ Scher, Steve (4 February 2009), "Easy Riders: Motorcycle Culture in Seattle", Weekday, KUOW Puget Sound Public Radio; University of Washington, archived from the original on 27 September 2016, retrieved 30 May 2013
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Motorcycle clubs.
Motorcycle organizations at Curlie
vteMotorcycles and Motorcycling (outline)General topics
Definition
History
Museums
Motorcycle occupations
Safety
Types
Street
Cruiser
Sport
Touring / Sport touring
Universal Japanese Motorcycle
Custom
Dual-sport
Off-road
Enduro
Motocross
Track racing
Trials
Design
Components
Accessories
Brakes
Chassis
Frame
Suspension
Fork
Engine
Transmission
Saddle
Tires (tyres)
Wheels
Fairing
Testing and measurement
Manufacturers
Aprilia
Bajaj
BMW
Ducati
Harley-Davidson
Hero
Japanese Big Four
Honda
Kawasaki
Suzuki
Yamaha
KTM
Kymco
Moto Guzzi
Peugeot
Royal Enfield
Triumph
TVS
VinFast
Zero
Media
Books
Biker films
Magazines
Touring
Motorcycle rally
List of long-distance motorcycle riders
Equipment
Armor
Boots
Helmet
Jacket
Sport
Motorcycle land-speed record
Production motorcycles (by speed / by acceleration)
Freestyle motocross
Racing
Stunting
Trials
Organizations
Motorcycle club
List of motorcycle clubs
Motorcycle gang
Colors
List of outlaw motorcycle clubs
vteBiker cultureBikers
Biker bar
Chopper
Colors
Motorcycle rally
Outlaw motorcycle club (List of clubs, List of terms)
Squids, stunters and hooligans
Mat Rempit
Scooterboy
Streetfighter
Snatch theft
Street racing
Stunt riding
Youth subculture
Japanese subculture
B s zoku
Hashiriya
Sukeban
Zoku
In the media
Film and television
Biker Boyz
Ghost Rider (Swedish motorcyclist)
Harley and the Davidsons
Outlaw biker film
Sons of Anarchy
Torque
Wild Hogs
Gangland Undercover
Video games
Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned
Days Gone
Ride to Hell: Retribution
Publications
Back Street Heroes
Easyriders
Iron Horse
Writers
Sonny Barger
Buzz Kanter
Donny Petersen
Ted Polhemus
William Queen
Hunter S. Thompson
J gatsu Toi
Outline of motorcycles and motorcycling
vteFandomsBy typeGenre
Fantasy fandom
Furry fandom
Science fiction fandom
Yaoi fandom
Medium-specific
Anime and manga fandom
Bibliophilia
Cinephilia
Disney fandom
Disney adults
Disneyland social club
Donaldism
Gamer
Sports fan
Production-specific
A Song of Ice and Fire
Beatlemania
Deadhead
Doctor Who
EarthBound
Harry Potter
James Bond
Janeite
Juggalo
Moonwalker
MST3K
MLP: FIM
Parrothead
Shrek
Sherlock Holmes
Star Wars
Stargate
Tolkien
Trekkie
Twilight
Demographics
Anorak
Anti-fan
Cult following
Fan
Furry
Geek
Groupie
Nerd
Otaku
Sasaeng
Shipper
Stan
Tifosi
Ultras
Waifu
Organizationsand events
Amateur press association
Car club
Boy racer
Cruising
Import scene
Hot rodding
Kustom Kulture
Lowrider Club
Supercar Season
Cosplay
Fan club
Fan convention
Fandom names
Game club
Historical reenactment
Live action role-playing game
Motorcycle club
Harley Owners Group
Organization for Transformative Works
Railfan
Stan Twitter
Publicationsand activities
Anime music video
Autograph collecting
Doujin
Doujin music
Doujinshi
Fan art
Fan edit
Fan fiction
Fan film
Fan labor
Fan mail
Fan rice
Fan translation
Fanac
Fangame
Doujin soft
Mod
Fansite
Fanspeak
Fanzine
Filk music
Real person fiction
Vidding
Zine
Conventions
Anime
list
Comic book
list
Doujinshi
Furry
Gaming
list
Horror
Multigenre
Professional wrestling
Science fiction
list
by date of establishment
Topics
Autograph
Fan loyalty
Fan service
Odagiri effect
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motorcycle_club&oldid=1145010207"