The present disambiguation page holds the title of a primary topic, and an article needs to be written about it.  It is believed to qualify as a broad-concept article. It may be written directly at this page or drafted elsewhere and then moved over here. Related titles should be described in Lithium battery, while unrelated titles should be moved to Lithium battery (disambiguation).
Look up lithium battery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Lithium battery may refer to:
Lithium metal battery, a non-rechargeable battery with lithium as an anode
Rechargeable lithium metal battery, a rechargeable counterpart to the lithium metal battery
Lithium-ion battery, a rechargeable battery in which lithium ions move from the negative electrode to the positive electrode during discharge and back when charging
Thin-film lithium-ion battery, a solid-state lithium-ion battery constructed as a thin-film
Aqueous lithium-ion battery
Lithium-ion flow battery
Lithium ion manganese oxide battery
Lithium polymer battery
Lithium sulfur battery
Lithium-titanate battery
Lithium air battery
Lithium iron phosphate battery
Nickel lithium battery
Lithium silicon battery
Lithium vanadium phosphate battery
Lithium hybrid organic battery
Solution of lithium tetrachloroaluminate in thionyl chloride is the liquid cathode and electrolyte of some lithium batteries, e.g. the lithium-thionyl chloride cell. Another cathode-electrolyte formulation is lithium tetrachloroaluminate + thionyl chloride + sulfur dioxide + bromine.
Other salts used in lithium battery electrolytes are lithium bromide, lithium perchlorate, lithium tetrafluoroborate, and lithium hexafluorophosphate; less common ones are lithium chloride, lithium iodide, lithium chlorate, lithium nitrate, lithium hexafluoroarsenate,  lithium hexafluorosilicate (i.e. lithium and hexafluorosilicic acid), lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, and lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate.[1]
See also[edit]
List of battery types
Lithium batteries in China
High capacity oceanographic lithium battery pack
Glass battery, which may use a lithium metal electrode
Subtopics of the lithium-ion battery:
Environmental impacts of lithium-ion batteries
History of the lithium-ion battery
Nanoarchitectures for lithium-ion batteries
Research in lithium-ion batteries
References[edit]
^ USA US20080280197 A1, Masaki Machida, "Spirally wound non-aqueous electrolyte secondary battery", published 13 Nov 2008,  assigned to Sony Corporation 
Index of articles associated with the same name
This article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).  If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lithium_battery&oldid=1146526423"