Division of a record label
"A&R" redirects here. For other uses, see A&R (disambiguation).
Artists and repertoire (colloquially abbreviated to A&R) is the division of a record label or music publishing company that is responsible for talent scouting and overseeing the artistic development of recording artists (singers, instrumentalists, bands, and so on) and songwriters.[1] It also acts as a liaison between artists and the record label or publishing company. Every activity involving artists to the point of album release is generally considered under the purview and responsibility of A&R.
Responsibilities[edit]
Finding talent[edit]
The A&R division of a record label is responsible for finding new recording artists and bringing those artists to the record company. A&R staff may go to hear emerging bands play at nightclubs and festivals to scout for talent. Personnel in the A&R division are expected to understand the current tastes of the market and to be able to find artists that will be commercially successful. For this reason, A&R people are often young and many are musicians, music journalists or record producers.[2]
An A&R executive is authorized to offer a record contract, often in the form of a "deal memo": a short, informal document that establishes a business relationship between the recording artist and the record company.[2] The actual contract negotiations will typically be carried out by rival entertainment lawyers hired by the musician's manager and the record company.[3]
A&R executives rely mostly on the word of mouth of trusted associates, critics and business contacts, rather than on unsolicited demo tapes.[4] They also tend to favor the bands that play in the same city as the record label's offices.[4]
Overseeing the recording process[edit]
The A&R division of a record label oversees the music style and recording process. This includes helping the artist to find the right record producer, scheduling time in a recording studio and advising the artist on all aspects of making a high-quality recording. They work with the artist to choose the best songs (i.e., repertoire) to record. For artists who do not write their own music, the A&R person will assist in finding songs, songwriters and arrangers. A&R staff will help find session musicians for the recording. A&R executives maintain contact with their counterparts at music publishing companies to get new songs and material from songwriters and producers.
As the record nears completion, the A&R department works closely with the artist to determine whether the record is acceptable to the record company. This process may include suggesting that new songs need to be written, that existing songs need a new arrangement, or that some album tracks need to be re-recorded. A key issue is whether the album has a single: a particular track which can be used to market the record.
Assisting with marketing and promotion[edit]
Once the record is completed, the A&R department consults with marketing, promotion, the artist and their management to choose one or more singles to help promote the record.
History and influence[edit]
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (February 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The tastes of particular A&R executives have influenced the course of music history. A&R man John Hammond discovered Billie Holiday, Bob Dylan, Aretha Franklin and Bruce Springsteen. Hammond's colleagues were initially skeptical of these artists because none of them appeared to be creating "commercial" music. Hammond's instincts proved to be correct, and these artists went on to sell hundreds of millions of records.[5] Gary Gersh signed the band Nirvana to David Geffen's DGC Records at a time when alternative rock music was not considered commercial.[6] Gersh was able to convince his co-workers to push the record in spite of their misgivings.[7] In cases like these, A&R people have radically changed the direction of popular musical tastes and introduced large numbers of people to new sounds.
This kind of prescience is the exception rather than the rule. Historically, A&R executives have tended to sign new artists that fit into recent trends and who resemble acts that are currently successful. For example, Columbia Records' A&R man in the 1950s, Mitch Miller, favored traditional pop singers like Guy Mitchell and Patti Page, and rejected early rock-'n'-rollers Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly.
This "trend following" mindset has generated several waves of narrowly defined genres, leading to a perception of triteness, including teen pop (1998 2001), alternative rock (1993 1996), glam metal (1986 1991) and disco (1976 1978). Trend following can be counter-productive, since it has often led to over-promotion followed by backlash (as happened to the disco genre for example). Towards the end of the life of each wave or trend, record companies have found themselves faced with enormous losses as consumers' tastes changed. For example, at the end of the disco boom in 1978, millions of records were returned by record retailers, causing a deep recession in the music business that lasted until 1982, when Michael Jackson's Thriller finally brought the public back into record stores in large numbers.[8]
The general move towards more conservative and business-minded signings from the 1980s onwards is seen to be symptomatic of an industry where the most powerful figures are no longer music fans or people with musical backgrounds, but are business executives, a group largely composed of individuals with uniform backgrounds. Traditionally A&R executives were composers, arrangers and producers   Atlantic Records's heads Jerry Wexler and Ahmet Ertegun were producers and composers respectively   but an A&R with musical ability and knowledge has become a rarity, with Ron Fair and Martin Kierszenbaum being notable recent exceptions.[9] The composer and arranger Richard Niles has said,
What you've got now is huge multinational companies where most of their A&R staff are businessmen. They're people who look at music from the standpoint of marketing, not from the standpoint of music and talent. They will say, "Go out and get me anything that's popular now."[9]
Hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan referenced this stereotype of the business-minded A&R executive in their single "Protect Ya Neck", metaphorically likening them to "mountain climbers".[10][11]
Regional variations[edit]
According to Rhythm King Records and Lizard King Records founder Martin Heath, the A&R community in the UK is more integrated than it is in the US, being very London-centric and encompassing a relatively small number of people.[12] "If scouts are chasing a band, you'll see the same thirty people in one room. You get a herd mentality in the UK, but also some very diverse signings as well," he said in an interview with HitQuarters.[12] Heath believes that in the US it is more typical for A&R to wait until a band is established   having attracted other offers or achieved a level of sales   before taking action, a technique which often works out as being more expensive.[12]
2000s changes[edit]
See also: 2000s in the music industry
New forms of digital distribution have changed the relationship between consumers and the music they choose. Gerd Leonhard and others argue that the wide selection of music on digital services has allowed music consumers to bypass the traditional role of A&R.[13] In the wake of declining record sales, many A&R staffers have been terminated.[14]
See also[edit]
Al Coury
Chas Chandler
Clive Davis
Clyde Otis
David Geffen
Impresario
John Kalodner
Kara DioGuardi
Loren Israel
Muff Winwood
Song plugger
Citations[edit]
^ Cook, Richard (2005). Richard Cook's Jazz Encyclopedia. London: Penguin Books. pp. 16. ISBN 0-141-00646-3.
^ a b Albini 1993.
^ Krasilovsky, M. William; Shemel, Sidney; Gross, John M.; Feinstein, Jonathan (2007), This Business of Music (10th ed.), Billboard Books, ISBN 0-8230-7729-2
^ a b Weissman 2003, p. 25.
^ Prial 2006.
^ Shoemer 1992.
^ Goldberg 2009, p. 179-180.
^ Disco boom: Knopper (2009, pp. 15 35). Teen pop boom: Knopper (2009). Knopper discusses the way the industry has overreacted to these waves throughout his book.
^ a b Bouwman, Kimbel (23 April 2007). "Interview with Richard Niles". HitQuarters. Archived from the original on 29 March 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2010.
^ Watson, Richard (26 November 2014). "Wu-Tang Clan: 10 of the best". The Guardian.
^ Weiss, Jeff (19 December 2007). "Wu-Tang Clan Still Sting". LA Weekly.
^ a b c Bouwman, Kimbel (12 December 2005). "Interview With Martin Heath". HitQuarters. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2010.
^ Kusek & Leonhard 2005.
^ Knopper 2009, pp. 220 221.
References[edit]
Albini, Steve (1993), "The Problem with Music", The Baffler, Chicago: Thomas Frank, no. 5, archived from the original on 28 September 2007, retrieved 20 June 2009 (Reprinted in Maximum Rocknroll no. 133 (June 1994) and later various websites.)
Goldberg, Danny (2009), Bumping into Geniuses, ISBN 978-1-59240-483-4
Knopper, Steve (2009), Appetite for self-destruction : the spectacular crash of the record industry in the digital age, New York: Free Press, ISBN 978-1-4165-5215-4
Kusek, David; Leonhard, Gerd (2005), The future of music : manifesto for the digital music revolution, Boston: Berklee Press, ISBN 0-87639-059-9
Prial, Dunstan (2006), The producer : John Hammond and the soul of American music, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, ISBN 0-374-11304-1
Shoemer, Karen (30 October 1992), "Some Alternative Boundaries Fall", The New York Times
Weissman, Dick (2003), The music business : career opportunities and self-defense, New York: Three Rivers Press, ISBN 0-609-81013-8
vteMusic industryMajor companiesand organisationsRepresentatives
ARIA
BVMI
BPI
Music Canada
FIMI
IFPI (worldwide)
PMB
PROMUSICAE
RIAA
SNEP
Musicpublishers
BMG Rights Management
Sony Music Publishing
Universal Music Publishing Group
Warner Chappell Music
Record labels
Major: Sony
Universal
Warner
Independent: Concord
Independent UK record labels
AAMG
Retailers
Amazon
Digital music stores (iTunes Store)
Fnac
HMV
Kaspien
Virgin Megastores
Live music
CTS Eventim
Live Nation
LiveStyle
Ticketmaster
Majorpopular genres
Avant-garde
Blues
Contemporary R&B
Country
Crossover
Dance
Disco
Drum and bass
Easy listening
Electronica
Experimental
Folk
Funk
Gospel
Hip hop
Instrumental
Jazz
J-pop
K-pop
Latin
Metal
Motown
New Age
Operatic pop
Pop
Punk
Reggae
Reggaeton
Rock
Soul
Soundtrack
World
Sectorsand roles
Album cover design
Artists and repertoire (A&R)
Disc jockey
Distribution
Entertainment law
Music education
Music executive
Music journalism
Music publisher
Music store
Music venue
Musical instruments
Professional audio store
Promotion
Radio promotion
Record label
Record shop
Road crew
Talent manager
Tour promoter
Production
Arrangement
Songwriter
Composer
Lyricist
Conductor
Disc jockey
Hip hop producer
Horn section
Record producer
Rhythm section
Orchestrator
Session musician
Backup singer
Ghost singer
Vocal coach
Ghostwriter
Sound engineer
Releaseformats
Single (Extended play (EP), 12" single, Cassette single, CD single, Maxi single)
Album
Double album
Music video
Promotional recording
Phonograph record
Eight-track
Compact cassette
CD
DVD
Airplay
Music download
Music streaming service
Live shows
Concert
Concert tour
Concert residency
Music festival
Music competition
Charts
ARIA Charts
Billboard Hot 100
Billboard Argentina Hot 100
Brasil Hot 100 Airplay
Canadian Hot 100
Circle Chart
G-Music Chart
Irish Singles Chart
Italian Singles Chart
GfK Entertainment Charts
Entertainment Monitoring Africa
Oricon Charts
New Zealand Singles Chart
Rolling Stone Top 100
Sino Chart
SNEP Singles Chart
Sverigetopplistan
UK Singles Chart
Publications
Billboard
HitQuarters
Hot Press
Kerrang!
Mojo
Musica e dischi
NME
Q
Rolling Stone
Smash Hits
Top of the Pops
TelevisionChannels
Channel V
CMT
Fuse
Mnet
MTV
MTV2
Tr3s
MuchMusic
The Music Factory
Viva
VH1
The Country Network
Series
Idol franchise
Popstars
Star Academy
The Four
The Voice
The X Factor
Rising Star
Achievements
Music award
Best-selling music artists
In: Finland
Germany
Japan
United States
Best-selling albums
by country
Best-selling singles
by country
Highest-earning musicians
Highest-grossing live music artists
Highest-grossing concert tours
Highest-attended concerts
Global Recording Artist of the Year
Other
Album era
Album-equivalent unit
A-side and B-side
Backmasking
Bootleg recording
Christian music industry
Environmental impact
Hidden track
Largest recorded music markets
Music certification
Record sales
Surprise album
White label
 Record production portal
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artists_and_repertoire&oldid=1144485457"