Hair care product
This article is about the hair care product. For other uses, see Shampoo (disambiguation).
 Shampoo lather in hair
 Bottles of shampoo and lotions manufactured in the early 20th century by the C.L. Hamilton Co. of Washington, D.C., United States
Shampoo (/ m pu /) is a hair care product, typically in the form of a viscous liquid, that is used for cleaning hair. Less commonly, shampoo is available in solid bar format. Shampoo is used by applying it to wet hair, massaging the product into the scalp, and then rinsing it out. Some users may follow a shampooing with the use of hair conditioner.
Shampoo is typically used to remove the unwanted build-up of sebum in the hair without stripping out so much as to make hair unmanageable. Shampoo is generally made by combining a surfactant, most often sodium lauryl sulfate or sodium laureth sulfate, with a co-surfactant, most often cocamidopropyl betaine in water. The sulfate ingredient acts as a surfactant, trapping oils and other contaminants, similarly to soap.
Specialty shampoos are marketed to people with dandruff, color-treated hair, gluten or wheat allergies,[why?] an interest in using an organic product, infants and young children ("baby shampoo" is less irritating). There are also shampoos intended for animals that may contain insecticides or other medications to treat skin conditions or parasite infestations such as fleas.
Etymology[edit]
The word shampoo entered the English language from the Indian subcontinent during the colonial era.[1] It dated to 1762 and was derived from the Hindi word c p  ( , pronounced [t po ]),[2][3] itself derived from the Sanskrit root capati ( ), which means 'to press, knead, or soothe'.[4][5]
History[edit]
Indian subcontinent[edit]
In the Indian subcontinent, a variety of herbs and their extracts have been used as shampoos since ancient times. The first origin of shampoo came from the Indus Valley Civilization. A very effective early shampoo was made by boiling Sapindus with dried Indian gooseberry (amla) and a selection of other herbs, using the strained extract.[citation needed] Sapindus, also known as soapberries or soapnuts, a tropical tree widespread in India, is called ksuna (Sanskrit:  )[6] in ancient Indian texts and its fruit pulp contains saponins which are a natural surfactant. The extract of soapberries creates a lather which Indian texts called phenaka (Sanskrit:  ).[7] It leaves the hair soft, shiny and manageable. Other products used for hair cleansing were shikakai (Acacia concinna), hibiscus flowers,[8][9] ritha (Sapindus mukorossi) and arappu (Albizzia amara).[10] Guru Nanak, the founder and the first Guru of Sikhism, made references to soapberry tree and soap in the 16th century.[11]
Cleansing the hair and body massage (champu) during one's daily bath was an indulgence of early colonial traders in India. When they returned to Europe, they introduced the newly learned habits, including the hair treatment they called shampoo.[12]
Europe[edit]
 Swedish advertisement for toiletries, 1905/1906
Sake Dean Mahomed, a Bengali traveller, surgeon, and entrepreneur, is credited with introducing the practice of shampoo or "shampooing" to Britain. In 1814, Mahomed, with his Irish wife Jane Daly, opened the first commercial "shampooing" vapour masseur bath in England, in Brighton. He described the treatment in a local paper as "The Indian Medicated Vapour Bath (type of Turkish bath), a cure to many diseases and giving full relief when everything fails; particularly Rheumatic and paralytic, gout, stiff joints, old sprains, lame legs, aches and pains in the joints".[13]
During the early stages of shampoo in Europe, English hair stylists boiled shaved soap in water and added herbs to give the hair shine and fragrance. Commercially made shampoo was available from the turn of the 20th century. A 1914 advertisement for Canthrox Shampoo in American Magazine showed young women at camp washing their hair with Canthrox in a lake; magazine advertisements in 1914 by Rexall featured Harmony Hair Beautifier and Shampoo.[14]
In 1900, German perfumer and hair-stylist Josef Wilhelm Rausch developed the first liquid hair washing soap and named it "Champooing" in Emmishofen, Switzerland. Later, in 1919, J.W. Rausch developed an antiseptic Chamomile Shampooing (pH 8.5)
https://www.rausch.ch/ueber-uns/geschichte.html
In 1927, liquid shampoo was improved for mass production by German inventor Hans Schwarzkopf in Berlin; his name became a shampoo brand sold in Europe.
Originally, soap and shampoo were very similar products; both containing the same naturally derived surfactants, a type of detergent. Modern shampoo as it is known today was first introduced in the 1930s with Drene, the first shampoo using synthetic surfactants instead of soap. Shampoo is also more beneficial for the hair roots.[15]
Indonesia[edit]
Early shampoos used in Indonesia were made from the husk and straw (merang) of rice. The husks and straws were burned into ash, and the ashes (which have alkaline properties) are mixed with water to form lather. The ashes and lather were scrubbed into the hair and rinsed out, leaving the hair clean, but very dry. Afterwards, coconut oil was applied to the hair in order to moisturize it.[16]
Philippines[edit]
Filipinos have been traditionally using gugo before commercial shampoos were sold in stores. The shampoo is obtained by soaking and rubbing the bark of the vine Gugo (Entada phaseoloides),[17][18] producing a lather that cleanses the scalp effectively. Gugo is also used as an ingredient in hair tonics.[19]
Pre-Columbian North America[edit]
Certain Native American tribes used extracts from North American plants as hair shampoo; for example the Costanoans of present-day coastal California used extracts from the coastal woodfern, Dryopteris expansa.[20]
Pre-Columbian South America[edit]
Before quinoa can be eaten the saponin must be washed out from the grain prior to cooking. Pre-Columbian Andean civilizations used this soapy by-product as a shampoo.[21]
Composition[edit]
 Typical liquid shampoo
Shampoo is generally made by combining a surfactant, most often sodium lauryl sulfate or sodium laureth sulfate, with a co-surfactant, most often cocamidopropyl betaine in water to form a thick, viscous liquid. Other essential ingredients include salt (sodium chloride), which is used to adjust the viscosity, a preservative and fragrance.[22][23] Other ingredients are generally included in shampoo formulations to maximize the following qualities:
pleasing foam
ease of rinsing
minimal skin and eye irritation
thick or creamy feeling
pleasant fragrance[24]
low toxicity
good biodegradability
slight acidity (pH less than 7)
no damage to hair
repair of damage already done to hair[how?]
Many shampoos are pearlescent. This effect is achieved by the addition of tiny flakes of suitable materials, e.g. glycol distearate, chemically derived from stearic acid, which may have either animal or vegetable origins. Glycol distearate is a wax. Many shampoos also include silicone to provide conditioning benefits.
Commonly used ingredients[edit]
Ammonium chloride
Ammonium lauryl sulfate
Glycol
Sodium laureth sulfate is derived from coconut oils and is used to soften water and create a lather. There was some concern over this particular ingredient circa 1998 as evidence suggested it might be a carcinogen, and this has yet to be disproved, as many sources still describe it as irritating to the hair and scalp.
Sodium lauroamphoacetate is naturally derived from coconut oils and is used as a cleanser and counter-irritant. This is the ingredient that makes the product tear-free.
Polysorbate 20 (abbreviated as PEG(20)) is a mild glycol-based surfactant that is used to solubilize fragrance oils and essential oils, meaning it causes liquid to spread across and penetrate the surface of a solid (i.e. hair).
Polysorbate 80 (abbreviated as PEG(80)) is a glycol used to emulsify (or disperse) oils in water (so the oils do not float on top like Italian salad dressing).
PEG-150 distearate is a simple thickener.
Citric acid is produced biochemically and is used as an antioxidant to preserve the oils in the product. While it is a severe eye-irritant, the sodium lauroamphoacetate counteracts that property. Citric acid is used to adjust the pH down to approximately 5.5. It is a fairly weak acid which makes the adjustment easier. Shampoos usually are at pH 5.5 because at slightly acidic pH, the scales on a hair follicle lie flat, making the hair feel smooth and look shiny. It also has a small amount of preservative action. Citric acid, as opposed to any other acid, will prevent bacterial growth.[25]
Quaternium-15 is used as a bacterial and fungicidal preservative.
Polyquaternium-10 has nothing to do with the chemical quaternium-15; it acts as the conditioning ingredient, providing moisture and fullness to the hair.
Di-PPG-2 myreth-10 adipate is a water-dispersible emollient that forms clear solutions with surfactant systems.
Chloromethylisothiazolinone, or CMIT, is a powerful biocide and preservative.
Benefit claims regarding ingredients[edit]
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandates that shampoo containers accurately list ingredients on the products container. The government further regulates what shampoo manufacturers can and cannot claim as any associated benefit. Shampoo producers often use these regulations to challenge marketing claims made by competitors, helping to enforce these regulations. While the claims may be substantiated, however, the testing methods and details of such claims are not as straightforward. For example, many products are purported to protect hair from damage due to ultraviolet radiation. While the ingredient responsible for this protection does block UV, it is not often present in a high enough concentration to be effective. The North American Hair Research Society has a program to certify functional claims based on third-party testing. Shampoos made for treating medical conditions such as dandruff[26] or itchy scalp are regulated as OTC drugs[27] in the US marketplace.
In the European Union, there is a requirement for the anti-dandruff claim to be substantiated as with any other advertising claim, but it is not considered to be a medical problem.[citation needed]
Health risks[edit]
A number of contact allergens are used as ingredients in shampoos, and contact allergy caused by shampoos is well known.[28] Patch testing can identify ingredients to which patients are allergic, after which a physician can help the patient find a shampoo that is free of the ingredient to which they are allergic.[28][29] The US bans 11 ingredients from shampoos, Canada bans 587, and the EU bans 1328.[30]
Specialized shampoos[edit]
Dandruff[edit]
Cosmetic companies have developed shampoos specifically for those who have dandruff. These contain fungicides such as ketoconazole, zinc pyrithione and selenium disulfide, which reduce loose dander by killing fungi like Malassezia furfur. Coal tar and salicylate derivatives are often used as well.
Alternatives to medicated shampoos are available for people who wish to avoid synthetic fungicides. Such shampoos often use tea tree oil, essential oils or herbal extracts.[31]
Colored hair[edit]
Many companies have also developed color-protection shampoos suitable for colored hair; some of these shampoos contain gentle cleansers according to their manufacturers.
Baby[edit]
Shampoo for infants and young children is formulated so that it is less irritating and usually less prone to produce a stinging or burning sensation if it were to get into the eyes. For example, Johnson's Baby Shampoo advertises under the premise of "No More Tears". This is accomplished by one or more of the following formulation strategies.
dilution, in case the product comes in contact with eyes after running off the top of the head with minimal further dilution
adjusting pH to that of non-stress tears, approximately 7, which may be a higher pH than that of shampoos which are pH adjusted for skin or hair effects, and lower than that of shampoo made of soap
Use of surfactants which, alone or in combination, are less irritating than those used in other shampoos (e.g. Sodium lauroamphoacetate)
use of nonionic surfactants of the form of polyethoxylated synthetic glycolipids and polyethoxylated synthetic monoglycerides, which counteract the eye sting of other surfactants without producing the anesthetizing effect of alkyl polyethoxylates or alkylphenol polyethoxylates
The distinction in 4 above does not completely surmount the controversy over the use of shampoo ingredients to mitigate eye sting produced by other ingredients, or the use of the products so formulated.
The considerations in 3 and 4 frequently result in a much greater multiplicity of surfactants being used in individual baby shampoos than in other shampoos, and the detergency or foaming of such products may be compromised thereby. The monoanionic sulfonated surfactants and viscosity-increasing or foam stabilizing alkanolamides seen so frequently in other shampoos are much less common in the better baby shampoos.
Sulfate-free shampoos[edit]
Sulfate-free shampoos are composed of natural ingredients and free from both sodium lauryl sulfate and sodium Laureth sulfate.[32] These shampoos use alternative surfactants to cleanse the hair.
Animal[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Shampoo intended for animals may contain insecticides or other medications for treatment of skin conditions or parasite infestations such as fleas or mange. These must never be used on humans. While some human shampoos may be harmful when used on animals, any human haircare products that contain active ingredients or drugs (such as zinc in anti-dandruff shampoos) are potentially toxic when ingested by animals. Special care must be taken not to use those products on pets. Cats are at particular risk due to their instinctive method of grooming their fur with their tongues.
Shampoos that are especially designed to be used on pets, commonly dogs and cats, are normally intended to do more than just clean the pet's coat or skin. Most of these shampoos contain ingredients which act differently and are meant to treat a skin condition or an allergy or to fight against fleas.
The main ingredients contained by pet shampoos can be grouped in insecticidals, antiseborrheic, antibacterials, antifungals, emollients, emulsifiers and humectants. Whereas some of these ingredients may be efficient in treating some conditions, pet owners are recommended to use them according to their veterinarian's indications because many of them cannot be used on cats or can harm the pet if it is misused.
Generally, insecticidal pet shampoos contain pyrethrin, pyrethroids (such as permethrin and which may not be used on cats) and carbaryl. These ingredients are mostly found in shampoos that are meant to fight against parasite infestations.
Antifungal shampoos are used on pets with yeast or ringworm infections. These might contain ingredients such as miconazole, chlorhexidine, providone iodine, ketoconazole or selenium sulfide (which cannot be used on cats).
Bacterial infections in pets are sometimes treated with antibacterial shampoos. They commonly contain benzoyl peroxide, chlorhexidine, povidone iodine, triclosan, ethyl lactate, or sulfur.
Antipruritic shampoos are intended to provide relief of itching due to conditions such as atopy and other allergies.[33] These usually contain colloidal oatmeal, hydrocortisone, Aloe vera, pramoxine hydrochloride, menthol, diphenhydramine, sulfur or salicylic acid. These ingredients are aimed to reduce the inflammation, cure the condition and ease the symptoms at the same time while providing comfort to the pet.
Antiseborrheic shampoos are those especially designed for pets with scales or those with excessive oily coats. These shampoos are made of sulfur, salicylic acid, refined tar (which cannot be used on cats), selenium sulfide (cannot be used on cats) and benzoyl peroxide. All these are meant to treat or prevent seborrhea oleosa, which is a condition characterized by excess oils. Dry scales can be prevented and treated with shampoos that contain sulfur or salicylic acid and which can be used on both cats and dogs.
Emollient shampoos are efficient in adding oils to the skin and relieving the symptoms of a dry and itchy skin. They usually contain oils such as almond, corn, cottonseed, coconut, olive, peanut, Persia, safflower, sesame, lanolin, mineral or paraffin oil. The emollient shampoos are typically used with emulsifiers as they help distributing the emollients. These include ingredients such as cetyl alcohol, laureth-5, lecithin, PEG-4 dilaurate, stearic acid, stearyl alcohol, carboxylic acid, lactic acid, urea, sodium lactate, propylene glycol, glycerin, or polyvinylpyrrolidone.
Although some of the pet shampoos are highly effective, some others may be less effective for some condition than another. Yet, although natural pet shampoos exist, it has been brought to attention that some of these might cause irritation to the skin of the pet. Natural ingredients that might be potential allergens for some pets include eucalyptus, lemon or orange extracts and tea tree oil.[34] On the contrary, oatmeal appears to be one of the most widely skin-tolerated ingredients that is found in pet shampoos. Most ingredients found in a shampoo meant to be used on animals are safe for the pet as there is a high likelihood that the pets will lick their coats, especially in the case of cats.
Pet shampoos which include fragrances, deodorants or colors may harm the skin of the pet by causing inflammations or irritation. Shampoos that do not contain any unnatural additives are known as hypoallergenic shampoos and are increasing in popularity.
Solid shampoo bars[edit]
Solid shampoos or shampoo bars can either be soap-based or use other plant-based surfactants, such as sodium cocoyl isethionate or sodium coco-sulfate combined with oils and waxes. Soap-based shampoo bars are high in pH (alkaline) compared to human hair and scalps, which are slightly acidic. Alkaline pH increases the friction of the hair fibres which may cause damage to the hair cuticle, making it feel rough and drying out the scalp.[35]
Jelly and gel[edit]
Stiff, non-pourable clear gels to be squeezed from a tube were once popular forms of shampoo, and can be produced by increasing a shampoo's viscosity. This type of shampoo cannot be spilled, but unlike a solid, it can still be lost down the drain by sliding off wet skin or hair.
Paste and cream[edit]
Shampoos in the form of pastes or creams were formerly marketed in jars or tubes. The contents were wet but not completely dissolved. They would apply faster than solids and dissolve quickly.
Antibacterial[edit]
Antibacterial shampoos are often used in veterinary medicine for various conditions,[36][37] as well as in humans before some surgical procedures.[38][39]
No Poo Movement[edit]
Main article: No poo
Closely associated with environmentalism, the "no poo" movement consists of people rejecting the societal norm of frequent shampoo use. Some adherents of the no poo movement use baking soda or vinegar to wash their hair, while others use diluted honey. Further methods include the use of raw eggs (potentially mixed with salt water), rye flour, or chickpea flour dissolved in water. Other people use nothing or rinse their hair only with conditioner.[40][41]
Theory[edit]
In the 1970s, ads featuring Farrah Fawcett and Christie Brinkley asserted that it was unhealthy not to shampoo several times a week. This mindset is reinforced by the greasy feeling of the scalp after a day or two of not shampooing. Using shampoo every day removes sebum, the oil produced by the scalp. This causes the sebaceous glands to produce oil at a higher rate, to compensate for what is lost during shampooing. According to Michelle Hanjani, a dermatologist at Columbia University, a gradual reduction in shampoo use will cause the sebum glands to produce at a slower rate, resulting in less grease in the scalp.[42] Although this approach might seem unappealing to some individuals, many people try alternate shampooing techniques like baking soda and vinegar in order to avoid ingredients used in many shampoos that make hair greasy over time.[43]
There is no known mechanism in the body that allows the sebaceous glands to detect oil on the scalp and react accordingly, as such these claims are unsupported by current science.[citation needed][contradictory]
Whereas the use of baking soda for hair cleansing has been associated with hair damage and skin irritation, likely due to its high pH value and exfoliating properties, honey, egg, rye flour, and chickpea flour hair washes seem gentler for long-term use.[44]
See also[edit]
Soap
Dry shampoo
Baby shampoo
Hair conditioner
Exfoliant
No Poo
References[edit]
^ M. J. Campion, Hobson-Jobson: The words English owes to India. BBC News, 11 July 2012.
^ c p  ( ) is the imperative of c pn  ( , pronounced [t pna ]), 'to smear, knead the muscles, massage the head and hair'.
^ American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th Edition, See Shampoo; Also see Shampoo. Hobson-Jobson (1903), University of Chicago.
^ Sanskrit Lexicon, University of Koeln, Germany, see   (2008).
^ Shampoo, Etymology Dictionary (2006).
^ kSuNa, Sanskrit Lexicon, Monier-Williams Dictionary (1872)
^ phenaka, Spoken Sanskrit, University of Koeln, Germany
^ Rahman, History of Indian Science, Technology and Culture at Google Books, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195646528, page 145
^ "Tamil Nadu Medicinal plants board" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2011.
^ "Forestry :: Nursery Technologies". agritech.tnau.ac.in.
^ Khushwant Singh, Hymns of Guru Nanak, Orient Longman, ISBN 978-8125011613
^ Virginia Smith (2007), Clean: A History of Personal Hygiene and Purity, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199297795
^ Teltscher, Kate (2000). "The Shampooing Surgeon and the Persian Prince: Two Indians in Early Nineteenth-century Britain". Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies. 2 (3): 409 23. doi:10.1080/13698010020019226. S2CID 161906676.
^ Victoria Sherrow, Encyclopedia of hair: a cultural history, 2007 s.v. "Advertising" p. 7.
^ "From Pert: Do You Wash and Go?". Company Science Behind the Brands. Procter and Gamble. Archived from the original on 2007-02-16. Retrieved 2007-03-26.
^ "Agar RAMBUT Selalu Sehat". Kompas Cyber Media. 2004-04-11. Archived from the original on 2007-03-12. Retrieved 2007-03-26.
^ Diaz, Eden C. (1990). Home Economics, Practical Arts and Livelihood Education for College: Book Two. Rex Bookstore, Inc. p. 75. ISBN 978-971-23-0795-9. Retrieved 18 June 2021.
^ Salas, Kinny (21 March 2014). "Thick, lush, sexy hair from drugstore products". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2021.
^ Gonzales, Lucas L.; Quimio, Marcos J. Jr.; Calinawan, Rogelio. "Response of gugo to differing potting media" (PDF). Canopy International. Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 27: 3. ISSN 0115-0960. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021.
^ C. Michael Hogan. 2008. Coastal Woodfern (Dryopteris arguta), GlobalTwitcher, ed. N. Stromberg Archived 2011-07-11 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Quinoa   March Grain of the Month". Archived from the original on 2016-03-04.
^ Robbins, Clarence R., Chemical and physical behavior of human hair, 4th ed (Springer Verlag: New York) 2002.
^ ChemViews (2012). "Shampoo Science". ChemViews. doi:10.1002/chemv.201200149.
^ "Latest innovations" (PDF). Pg.com. Retrieved September 4, 2019.
^ "How To Make Clarifying Shampoo   Dermatologist Explains   Clarifying Shampoos". 10 June 2022. Retrieved 2022-06-20.
^ "Dandruff". Headanshoulders.co.in.
^ Research, Center for Drug Evaluation and (May 20, 2019). "OTC (Nonprescription) Drugs". FDA.
^ a b "Shampoos". Medscape.com.
^ "Patch tests | DermNet NZ". Dermnetnz.org.
^ Schlanger, Zoe (27 June 2017). "Will your shampoo make your hair fall out? The US government isn't sure". Quartz. Retrieved 27 June 2017.
^ Aburjai, Talal; Natsheh, Feda M. (November 2003). "Plants used in cosmetics". Phytotherapy Research. 17 (9): 987 1000. doi:10.1002/ptr.1363. PMID 14595575. S2CID 19327387.
^ Suhira, Munshi. "Sulfate-free Shampoo Recipe". Shebegan. Shebegan Mag. Retrieved 29 May 2020.
^ "Dog Shampoos: The Function of Common Ingredients". Peteducation.com. Retrieved 2010-06-11.
^ "Common Canine Skin Irritants". Vetinfo.com. Retrieved 2010-06-11.
^ Gavazzoni Dias, Maria Fernandareis; Pichler, Janine; Adriano, Andrericardo; Cecato, Patricia; De Almeida, Andreiamunck (2014). "The Shampoo pH can Affect the Hair: Myth or Reality?". Int J Trichology. 6 (2014 Jul-Sep, 6(3)): 95 99. doi:10.4103/0974-7753.139078. PMC 4158629. PMID 25210332.
^ Guaguere, E. (1996). "Topical treatment of canine and feline pyoderma". Veterinary Dermatology. 7 (3): 145 151. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3164.1996.tb00239.x. PMID 34644989.
^ Mueller, R. S. (2004). "Treatment protocols for demodicosis: an evidence-based review". Veterinary Dermatology. 15 (2): 75 89. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3164.2004.00344.x. PMID 15030556.
^ Williams Iii, E. F.; Lam, S. M. (2003). "Midfacial Rejuvenation Via an Endoscopic Browlift Approach: A Review of Technique". Facial Plastic Surgery. 19 (2): 147 156. doi:10.1055/s-2003-40001. PMID 12825156.
^ Raney, J. P.; Kirk, E. A. (1988). "The use of an Ommaya reservoir for administration of morphine sulphate to control pain in select cancer patients". Journal of Neuroscience Nursing. 20 (1): 23 29. doi:10.1097/01376517-198802000-00004. PMID 2963870. S2CID 23825496.
^ "How to Wash Your Hair Without Shampoo: 11 steps". Wikihow.com. 2012-03-20. Retrieved 2012-04-25.
^ tubular (2008-03-19). "How to Go No Poo". Instructables.com. Retrieved 2012-04-25.
^ "When It Comes To Shampoo, Less Is More". Npr.org. Retrieved 2012-04-25.
^ "How to Quit Shampoo Without Becoming Disgusting". Thehairpin.com. 2011-04-20.
^ "Clarifying Shampoos   Big, glossy, bouncy hair!". Retrieved 2022-06-20.
External links[edit]
 Quotations related to Shampoo at Wikiquote
 The dictionary definition of shampoo at Wiktionary
vteCosmeticsFace
Anti-aging cream
BB cream
Botulinum toxin (Botox)
CC cream
Concealer
Cotton pad
Cleanser
DD cream
Facial
Facial toning
Foundation
Highlighter
Moist towelette
Moisturizer
Permanent makeup
Primer
Powder
Rouge
Toner
Venetian ceruse
Lips
Lipstick
Balm
Gloss
Liner
Stain
Eyes
Blepharoplasty
Circle contact lens
Eyelash extensions
Eyelid glue
Eye liner
Eye shadow
Kohl
Mascara
Hair
Conditioner
Hair coloring and bleaching
Removal
chemical
electric
laser
IPL
plucking
shaving
threading
waxing
Shampoo
Sindoor
Styling products
gel
mousse
pomade
spray
wax
Nails
Artificial nails
Buffing
Manicure
Nail polish
Pedicure
Body
Body powder
Cold cream
Lotion
Peeling
Plastic surgery
Skin whitening
Sunless tanning
Related
Cosmetic electrotherapy
Cosmetic ingredients
Cosmetics advertising
Cosmetic packaging
Cosmetology
History of cosmetics
Cosmetic industry
Male cosmetics
Major cosmetic brands
Ahava
Almay
Amorepacific
Anastasia Beverly Hills
Anna Sui
Aqua Net
Artistry
Aveda
Avon
Bath & Body Works
Benefit
Biotherm
Bite Beauty
Bobbi Brown
Bonne Bell
Bumble and bumble
Burt's Bees
Carol's Daughter
Clarins
Clinique
Coty
ColourPop Cosmetics
CoverGirl
Creme 21
Cutex
Daigaku Honyaku Center
Dermacol
Douglas
Elizabeth Arden, Inc.
Est e Lauder
elf
Etude House
Faberg 
Farmec
Fenty Beauty
Fresh
Garnier
Guerlain
Hard Candy
Helena Rubinstein
Jeffree Star Cosmetics
Kao Corporation
Kevyn Aucoin
Kiehl's
Kylie Cosmetics
Lanc me
Laneige
Laura Mercier Cosmetics
Lise Watier
L'Or al
L'Occitane
Love Cosmetics
Lush
MAC Cosmetics
Make Up For Ever
Mary Kay
Max Factor
Maybelline
Merle Norman
Missha
Molton Brown
Morphe Cosmetics
NARS
Natura
Natural Wonder
Nature Republic
Neal's Yard Remedies
Neutrogena
Nexxus
Nivea
NYX Cosmetics
O Botic rio
OPI
Oriflame
Origins
Paula Begoun
Pond's
Red Earth
Revlon
Richard Hudnut
Rimmel
Sephora
Shiseido
Shu Uemura
SimplySiti
Sinful Colors
SK-II
Skin Food
Stila
Tarte Cosmetics
The Body Shop
The Face Shop
Ulta Beauty
Ultima II
Uoma Beauty
Urban Decay
Vaseline
Victoria's Secret
Wella
Younique
Yves Rocher
 Categories
Companies
People
History
vteHuman hairClassificationby type
Lanugo
Body
Terminal
Vellus
Afro-textured hair (kinky hair)
by location
Body
Ear
Nose
Eyebrow
unibrow
Eyelash
Underarm
Chest
Abdominal
Pubic
Leg
Head hairstyles(list)
Afro
Afro puffs
Asymmetric cut
Bald
Bangs
Beehive
Big hair
Blowout
Bob cut
Bouffant
Bowl cut
Braid
Brush, butch, burr cut
Bun (odango)
Bunches
Businessman cut
Buzz cut
Caesar cut
Chignon
Chonmage
Comb over
Conk
Cornrows
Crew cut
Crochet braids
Croydon facelift
Curly hair
Curtained hair
Czupryna
Devilock
Dido flip
Digital perm
Dreadlocks
Ducktail
Eton crop
Extensions
Feathered hair
Finger wave
Flattop
Fontange
French braid
French twist
Fringe
Frosted tips
Hair crimping
Hair twists
High and tight
Hime cut
Historical Christian hairstyles
Hi-top fade
Induction cut
Ivy League, Harvard, Princeton cut
Japanese women
Jewfro
Jheri curl
Kiss curl
Layered hair
Liberty spikes
Long hair
Lob cut
Lovelock
Marcelling
Mod cut
Mohawk
Mullet
1950s
1980s
Pageboy
Part
Payot
Pigtail
Pixie cut
Pompadour
Ponytail
Punch perm
Professional cut
Queue
Quiff
Rattail
Razor cut
Regular haircut
Ringlets
Shag
Shape-Up
Shimada
Short back and sides
Short brush cut
Short hair
Spiky hair
Straight hair
Standard haircut
Step cut
Surfer hair
Taper cut
Temple fade
Tonsure
Updo
Undercut
Victory rolls
Waves
Widow's peak
Wings
Facial hair(list)
Beard
Chinstrap
Goatee
Ned Kelly
Shenandoah
Soul patch
Van Dyke
Moustache
Fu Manchu
handlebar
horseshoe
pencil
toothbrush
walrus
Designer stubble
Sideburns
Hair subtractioncosmetic
Removal
waxing
threading
plucking
chemical
electric
laser
IPL
Shaving
head
leg
cream
brush
soap
Razor
electric
safety
straight
disorders
Alopecia
areata
totalis
universalis
Frictional alopecia
Pattern hair loss
Hypertrichosis
Management
Trichophilia
Trichotillomania
Pogonophobia
Haircare products
Brush
Clay
Clipper
Comb
Conditioner
Dryer
Gel
Hairstyling products
Hot comb
Iron
Mousse
Pomade
Relaxer
Rollers
Shampoo
Spray
Wax
Haircare techniques
Backcombing
Hair coloring
Crimping
Curly Girl Method
Hair cutting
Perm
Shampoo and set
Straightening
Health and medical
Hair follicle
Hair growth
Trichology
Related
Beard and haircut laws by country
Bearded lady
Barber (pole)
Eponymous hairstyle
Frizz
Good hair
Hairdresser
list
Hair fetishism
vteRoutes of administration, dosage formsOralDigestive tract (enteral)Solids
Tablet
Capsule
Pastille
Time release technology
Osmotic delivery system
Liquids
Decoction
Elixir
Electuary
Emulsion
Effervescent powder or tablet
Herbal tea
Hydrogel
Molecular encapsulation
Powder
Softgel
Solution
Suspension
Syrup
Tincture
Buccal (sublabial),sublingualSolids
Orally disintegrating tablet
Film
Lollipop
Sublingual drops
Lozenges
Effervescent tablet
Chewing gum
Liquids
Mouthwash
Toothpaste
Ointment
Spray
Respiratory tractSolids
Dry-powder inhaler
Smoking
00Liquids
Anesthetic vaporizer
Heated humidified high-flow therapy
Metered-dose inhaler (MDI)
Nebulizer
Vaporizer
Gas
Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula
Oxygen concentrator
Anaesthetic machine
Relative analgesia machine
Ophthalmic,otologic, nasal
Nasal spray
Ear drops
Eye drops
Ointment
Hydrogel
Insufflation
Mucoadhesive microdiscUrogenital
Ointment
Pessary
Vaginal ring
Douche
Intrauterine device (IUD)
Extra-amniotic infusion
Intravesical infusion
Rectal (enteral)
Ointment
Suppository
Enema
Solution
Hydrogel
Murphy drip
Nutrient enemaDermal
Ointment
Topical cream
Topical gel
Liniment
Paste
Film
DMSO solution
Electrophoretic system
Hydrogel
Liposomes
Transfersome vesicles
Cream
Lotion
Lip balm
Medicated shampoo
Dermal patch
Transdermal patch
Transdermal spray
Jet injectorInjection,infusion(into tissue/blood)Skin
Intradermal
Subcutaneous
Injector pen
Transdermal implant
Organs
Intracavernous
Intravitreal
Intra-articular
Central nervous system
Intracerebral
Intrathecal
Epidural
Circulatory,musculoskeletal
Intravenous
Intracardiac
Intramuscular
Intraosseous
Intraperitoneal
Nanocell injection
Patient-controlled analgesia pump
PIC line
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shampoo&oldid=1148190003"