Education from a profit-making business
For-profit education (also known as the education services industry or proprietary education) refers to educational institutions operated by private, profit-seeking businesses. For-profit education is common in many parts of the world, making up more than 70% of the higher education sector in Malaysia, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and the Philippines.[1]
Australia[edit]
In 2011, Australia had over 170 for-profit higher education institutions, taking in 6% of the total student population and expected to increase to 20% by 2020. Their qualifications are legally equivalent to those issued by the public universities, but there have been concerns raised by external audits about the quality assurance and standards in for-profit colleges.[1]
There are also concerns over the low representation of Indigenous students, students from low socio-economic status backgrounds and students from non-English speaking backgrounds in for-profit colleges, which falls behind that in public universities. However, for-profit colleges do give a second chance to many students who would not otherwise have access to higher education. Partnerships between for-profit "pathway" colleges and public universities have also proven effective in recruiting overseas students. In this model, students spend a year at the pathway college before transferring to the university for two years to complete their degree; 70% of students at the pathway colleges are foreign, going on to make up 45% of foreign students recruited by the partner universities.[1]
China[edit]
In 2021, China banned for-profit tutoring companies. [2]
United Kingdom[edit]
The UK does not permit for-profit schools (independent schools are mostly non-profit making trusts), but there are a number of for-profit institutions in higher education. In 2013, Michael Gove, then secretary of state for education, was said to have drawn up plans to allow free schools and academies to become for-profit businesses, and in 2014, his successor Nicky Morgan refused to rule out for-profit schools. However, the Conservative manifesto for the 2015 General Election committed the party not to introduce for-profit schools, and after the Conservative victory, Morgan ruled out any place for for-profit schools in the UK education system.[3]
In higher education, by contrast, there are a large number of for-profit providers. A study by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills identified 674 privately funded institutions and estimated that the majority were for-profit businesses (based on survey returns from 249 providers, of which 136 identified as for-profit).[4] Most of the 136 for-profit colleges that returned the survey were either non-specialist (56) or specialized in business, management and accountancy (49).[5] There are three for-profit universities in the UK: the University of Law, BPP University and Arden University, which are the only for-profit institutions with degree-awarding powers.
United States[edit]
See also: For-profit higher education in the United States
There are two types of for-profit schools. The first major category of for-profit schools is post-secondary institutions, which operate as businesses, receiving fees from each student they enroll. The second type of for-profit schools, which is less prevalent in the United States, are K 12 private schools which often operate as businesses.
However, in many public schools, private and for-profit forces still exist. One such force is known as an education management organization (EMO); these are management organizations for primary and secondary educational institutions. EMOs work with school districts or charter schools, using public funds to finance their operations. They typically offer schools back-office services, but may also provide teacher training, facility support, and other management related services. In the 2018 19 school year, roughly 10% of charter schools contracted with a for-profit EMO, while about 30% contracted with a non-profit charter management organization.[6]
While supporters of EMOs argue that the profit motive encourages efficiency, this arrangement has also drawn controversy and criticism.[7]
Kevin Carey of the New America Foundation said in a 2010 column in The Chronicle of Higher Education that "For-profits exist in large part to fix educational market failures left by traditional institutions, and they profit by serving students that public and private nonprofit institutions too often ignore." He also said that "There's no doubt that the worst for-profits are ruthlessly exploiting the commodified college degree. But they didn't commodify it in the first place."[8]
See also[edit]
Diploma mill
List of for-profit universities and colleges
List of unaccredited higher education institutions in Switzerland
Proprietary colleges
References[edit]
^ a b c Mahsood Shah; Sid Nair (2013). "Private for-profit higher education in Australia: Widening access, participation and opportunities for public-private collaboration". Higher Education Research and Development. 32 (5): 820 832. doi:10.1080/07294360.2013.777030. S2CID 144381078.
^ Fineman, Josh (Jul 25, 2021). "China confirms official ban on for-profit school tutoring companies". Seeking Alpha. Retrieved 25 July 2021.
^ Jon Stone (18 May 2015). "For-profit schools have no place in Britain, says Tory Education Secretary Nicky Morgan". The Independent.
^ "Privately funded providers of higher education in the UK" (PDF). Department for Business Innovation and Skills. June 2013.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Tristram Hughes; Aaron Porter; Stephen Jones; Jonathan Sheen (June 2013). Privately funded providers of higher education in the UK (Report). Department for Business Innovation and Skills.
^ Jamison White (August 11, 2020). "Are There For-Profit Charter Schools? Dispelling The Myth". The National Alliance for Public Charter Schools.
^ Kozol, Jonathan. The Shame of the Nation. Three Rivers Press, 2005. See chapter 4 "Preparing Minds for Markets" and others.
^ Kevin Carey (July 25, 2010). "Why Do You Think They're Called For-Profit Colleges?". The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Bibliography[edit]
Brown, H.; Henig, J.; Holyoke, T.; Lacireno-Paquet, N. (2004). "Scale of Operations and Locus of Control in Market- Versus Mission-Oriented Charter Schools" Social Science Quarterly; 85 (5) Special Issue Dec 2004. pp. 1035 1077
Halperin, D. (2014). Stealing America's Future: How For-Profit Colleges Scam Taxpayers and Ruin Students' Lives
Hentschke, G. et al. (2010). For-Profit Colleges and Universities: Their Markets, Regulation, Performance, and Place in Higher Education
Mettler, S. (2014). "Degrees of Inequality"
Blumenstyk, G. (2014). American Higher Education in Crisis?: What Everyone Needs to Know
Breneman, D. et al. (2006). Earnings from Learning: The Rise of For-profit Universities
Halperin, D. (2014). Stealing America's Future: How For-Profit Colleges Scam Taxpayers and Ruin Students' Lives
Hentschke, G. et al. (2010). For-Profit Colleges and Universities: Their Markets, Regulation, Performance, and Place in Higher Education
Kinser, K. (2006). From Main Street to Wall Street: The Transformation of For-Profit Higher Education
McGuire, M. (2012). Subprime Education: For-profit Colleges and the Problem with Title IV Student Aid Duke Law Journal, 62 (1): 119-160
Morey, A. (2004). Globalization and the Emergence of For-profit Education
Murphy, J. (2013). Mission Forsaken The University of Phoenix Affair With Wall Street
Natale, S., Libertella, A., & Doran, C. (2015;2013). "For-profit education: The sleep of ethical reason." Journal of Business Ethics, 126(3), 415-421. doi:10.1007/s10551-013-1938-1
Ruch, R. (2003). Higher Ed Inc.: The Rise of the For-Profit University
vteSchool typesBy educational stageEarly childhood
Preschool
Pre-kindergarten
Kindergarten
Primary
First school
Infant school
Junior school
Primary school / Elementary school
Secondary
Adult high school
Cadet college
College-preparatory school
Collegiate institute
Comprehensive high school
Comprehensive school
Continuation high school
Grammar school
Gymnasium
Hauptschule
Lyceum
Maths school
Minor seminary
Secondary school / High school
Sixth form college
Studio school
University technical college
Upper school
Tertiary
Professional school
Technical school
Vocational school
Higher
Academy
College
Community college
Graduate school
Institute of technology
Junior college
Liberal arts college
Research university
Residential college
Seminary
University
Upper division college
Vocational university
Combined
All-through school
Middle school
One-room school
Ranch school
By funding / eligibility
Academy (England)
Charter school
Community day school
Comprehensive school (British)
For-profit education
Free education
Free school (England)
Private school
UK private school
preparatory
public
University
private
public
international
Selective school
Separate school
Sink school
Specialist school (United Kingdom)
State or public school
State-integrated school (New Zealand)
By style / purpose
Alternative school
Democratic education
Anarchistic free school
Sudbury school
International school
Magnet school
Music school
Single-sex education
Specialist school
Vocal school
Progressive
Free school movement
Folk high school
Laboratory school
Montessori school
Waldorf school
Religious
Bible college
Catholic school
Christian school
Female seminary
Gurukula
Parochial school
Madrasa
Yeshiva
By location
Boarding school
Day school
Distance education
Homeschooling
Prison education
Virtual school
By scope
College preparatory
Compensatory education
Compulsory education
Continuing education
Further education
Gifted education
Inclusive education
Remedial education
Special education
Historical
Ancient higher-learning institutions
Platonic Academy
Lyceum
Monastic school
Cathedral school
Medieval university
Schools imposed onindigenous peoples
in Canada
in New Zealand
in South Africa
in the United States
Informal or illegal
in Ireland
in Greece
in South Tyrol
Related topics
K 12
Educational institution
 Schools portal
 Category
 Commons
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=For-profit_education&oldid=1142551970"