President of the United States from 1825 to 1829
For other uses, see John Quincy Adams (disambiguation).
"JQA" redirects here. For other uses, see JQA (disambiguation).
John Quincy AdamsPortrait by Mathew Brady, c. 1843 18486th President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1825  March 4, 1829Vice PresidentJohn C. CalhounPreceded byJames MonroeSucceeded byAndrew Jackson8th United States Secretary of StateIn officeSeptember 22, 1817  March 3, 1825PresidentJames MonroePreceded byJames MonroeSucceeded byHenry Clay14th Dean of the United States House of RepresentativesIn officeApril 22, 1844  February 23, 1848Preceded byDixon Hall LewisSucceeded byJames Iver McKayMember of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom MassachusettsIn officeMarch 4, 1831  February 23, 1848Preceded byJoseph RichardsonSucceeded byHorace MannConstituency
11th district (1831 1833)
12th district (1833 1843)
8th district (1843 1848)
United States Senatorfrom MassachusettsIn officeMarch 4, 1803  June 8, 1808Preceded byJonathan MasonSucceeded byJames LloydMember of the Massachusetts SenateIn officeApril 20, 1802  March 4, 1803
 Diplomatic positions
7th United States Minister to the United KingdomIn officeJune 8, 1815  May 14, 1817Nominated byJames MadisonPreceded byJonathan Russell (1812)Succeeded byRichard Rush1st United States Minister to RussiaIn officeNovember 5, 1809  April 28, 1814Nominated byJames MadisonPreceded byOffice establishedSucceeded byJames A. Bayard1st United States Minister to PrussiaIn officeDecember 5, 1797  May 5, 1801Nominated byJohn AdamsPreceded byOffice establishedSucceeded byHenry Wheaton (1835)3rd United States Minister to the NetherlandsIn officeNovember 6, 1794  June 20, 1797Nominated byGeorge WashingtonPreceded byWilliam ShortSucceeded byWilliam Vans Murray
Personal detailsBorn(1767-07-11)July 11, 1767Braintree, Massachusetts Bay, British America (now Quincy)DiedFebruary 23, 1848(1848-02-23) (aged 80)Washington, D.C., U.S.Resting placeUnited First Parish ChurchPolitical party
Federalist (1792 1808)
Democratic-Republican (1809 1828)
National Republican (1828 1830)
Anti-Masonic (1830 1834)
Whig (1834 1848)[1]
SpouseLouisa Johnson  (m. 1797) Children4, including George, John II and CharlesParents
John Adams
Abigail Smith
Relatives
Adams political family
Quincy political family
Education
Harvard University (AB, AM)
OccupationPoliticianlawyerSignature
This article is part of a series aboutJohn Quincy Adams
Birthplace
Early life
Family
Adams
Quincy
Electoral history
Bibliography
Historical reputation
United States Secretary of State
Treaty of Ghent
Adams On s Treaty
Treaty of 1818
6th President of the United States
Presidency
Inauguration
Judicial Appointments
Foreign policy
Tariff of 1828
First Treaty of Prairie du Chien
Treaty of Fond du Lac
Treaty of Limits
Presidential campaigns
1824
election
Corrupt bargain
1832
election
Post-presidency
Congressional career
Abolitionism
Death
vte
John Quincy Adams (/ kw nzi/ (listen);[a] July 11, 1767   February 23, 1848) was an American politician, diplomat, lawyer, and diarist who served as the sixth president of the United States, from 1825 to 1829. He previously served as the eighth United States Secretary of State from 1817 to 1825. During his long diplomatic and political career, Adams also served as an ambassador, and as a member of the United States Congress representing Massachusetts in both chambers. He was the eldest son of John Adams, who served as the second president of the United States from 1797 to 1801, and First Lady Abigail Adams. Initially a Federalist like his father, he won election to the presidency as a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, and in the mid-1830s became affiliated with the Whig Party.
Born in Braintree, Massachusetts,[3] Adams spent much of his youth in Europe, where his father served as a diplomat. After returning to the United States, Adams established a successful legal practice in Boston. In 1794, President George Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to the Netherlands, and Adams would serve in high-ranking diplomatic posts until 1801, when Thomas Jefferson took office as president. Federalist leaders in Massachusetts arranged for Adams's election to the United States Senate in 1802, but Adams broke with the Federalist Party over foreign policy and was denied re-election. In 1809, President James Madison, a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to Russia. Multilingual, Adams held diplomatic posts for the duration of Madison's presidency, and he served as part of the American delegation that negotiated an end to the War of 1812. In 1817, President James Monroe selected Adams as his Secretary of State. In that role, Adams negotiated the Adams On s Treaty, which provided for the American acquisition of Florida. He also helped formulate the Monroe Doctrine, which became a key tenet of U.S. foreign policy. In 1818, Adams was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.[4]
Adams, Andrew Jackson, William H. Crawford, and Henry Clay all members of the Democratic-Republican Party competed in the 1824 presidential election. Because no candidate won a majority of electoral votes, the House of Representatives held a contingent election, which Adams won with the support of Speaker of the House Clay, whom Adams would go on to controversially appoint as his Secretary of State. As president, Adams called for an ambitious agenda that included federally funded infrastructure projects, the establishment of a national university, and engagement with the countries of Latin America, but Congress refused to pass many of his initiatives. During Adams's presidency, the Democratic-Republican Party split into two major camps: the National Republican Party, which supported President Adams, and Andrew Jackson's Democratic Party. The Democrats proved to be more effective political organizers than Adams and his National Republican supporters, and Jackson soundly defeated Adams in the 1828 presidential election, making Adams the second president to fail to win re-election (his father being the first).
Rather than retiring from public service, Adams won election to the House of Representatives, where he would serve from 1831 until his death in 1848. He remains the only former president to be elected to the chamber. After narrowly losing his bids for Governor of Massachusetts and Senate re-election, Adams joined the Anti-Masonic Party in the early 1830s before joining the Whig Party, which united those opposed to President Jackson. During his time in Congress, Adams became increasingly critical of slavery and of the Southern leaders whom he believed controlled the Democratic Party. He was particularly opposed to the annexation of Texas and the Mexican American War, which he saw as a war to extend slavery and its political grip on Congress. He also led the repeal of the "gag rule", which had prevented the House of Representatives from debating petitions to abolish slavery. Historians concur that Adams was one of the greatest diplomats and secretaries of state in American history; they typically rank him as an average president, as he had an ambitious agenda but could not get it passed by Congress. By contrast, historians also view Adams in a more positive light during his post-presidency because of his vehement stance against slavery, as well as his fight for the rights of women and Native Americans.
Early life, education, and early career
 Adams's birthplace in Quincy, Massachusetts
John Quincy Adams was born on July 11, 1767, to John and Abigail Adams (n e Smith) in a part of Braintree, Massachusetts that is now Quincy.[5] He was named after his mother's maternal grandfather, Colonel John Quincy, after whom Quincy, Massachusetts, is named, who died two days after Adams's birth.[6] Young Adams was educated by private tutors   his cousin James Thaxter and his father's law clerk, Nathan Rice.[7][page needed] He soon exhibited literary skills, and in 1779 he started a diary that he kept until just before he died in 1848.[8] Until the age of ten, Adams grew up on the family farm in Braintree, largely in the care of his mother. Though frequently absent because of his participation in the American Revolution, John Adams maintained a correspondence with his son, encouraging him to read works by authors such as Thucydides and Hugo Grotius.[9] With his father's encouragement, Adams would also translate classical authors such as Virgil, Horace, Plutarch, and Aristotle.[10]
In 1778, Adams and his father departed for Europe, where John Adams would serve as part of American diplomatic missions in France and the Netherlands.[11] During this period, Adams studied law, French, Greek, and Latin, and attended several schools, including Leiden University.[12][13] In 1781, Adams traveled to Saint Petersburg, Russia, where he served as the secretary to the American diplomat, Francis Dana.[14] He returned to the Netherlands in 1783 and accompanied his father to Great Britain in 1784.[15] Though Adams enjoyed Europe, he and his family decided he needed to return to the United States to complete his education and eventually launch a political career.[16]
Adams returned to the United States in 1785 and earned admission as a member of the junior class of Harvard College the following year. He joined Phi Beta Kappa and excelled academically, graduating second in his class in 1787.[17] After graduating from Harvard, he studied law with Theophilus Parsons in Newburyport, Massachusetts, from 1787 to 1789.[18] Adams initially opposed the ratification of the United States Constitution, but he ultimately came to accept the document, and in 1789 his father was elected as the first Vice President of the United States.[19] In 1790, Adams opened his own legal practice in Boston. Despite some early struggles, he was successful as an attorney and established financial independence from his parents.[20]
Early political career (1793 1817)
Main article: Electoral history of John Quincy Adams
Early diplomatic career and marriage
John Quincy Adams, age 29 by John Singleton CopleyLouisa Catherine Johnson Adams by Gilbert Stuart, 1821-26
Adams initially avoided becoming involved in politics, instead focusing on building his legal career. In 1791, he wrote a series of pseudonymously published essays arguing that Britain provided a better governmental model than France. Two years later, he published another series of essays attacking Edmond-Charles Gen t, a French diplomat who sought to undermine President George Washington's policy of neutrality in the French Revolutionary Wars.[21] In 1794, Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to the Netherlands. Adams considered declining the role, but ultimately took the position on the advice of his father.[22] While abroad, Adams continued to urge neutrality, arguing that the United States would benefit economically by staying out of the ongoing French Revolutionary Wars.[23] His chief duty as the ambassador to the Netherlands was to secure and maintain loans essential to U.S. finances. On his way to the Netherlands, he met with John Jay, who was then negotiating the Jay Treaty with Great Britain. Adams supported the Jay Treaty, but it proved unpopular with many in the United States, contributing to a growing partisan split between the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton and the Democratic-Republican Party of Thomas Jefferson.[24] In 1794 he supported John Skey Eustace who wanted to return to the United States via the Netherlands.[25]
Adams spent the winter of 1795 1796 in London, where he met Louisa Catherine Johnson, the second daughter of American merchant Joshua Johnson. In April 1796, Louisa accepted Adams's proposal of marriage. Adams's parents disapproved of his decision to marry a woman who had grown up in England, but he informed his parents that he would not reconsider his decision.[26] Adams initially wanted to delay his wedding to Louisa until he returned to the United States, but they married in All Hallows-by-the-Tower on July 26, 1797.[27][b] Shortly after the wedding, Joshua Johnson fled England to escape his creditors, and Adams did not receive the dowry that Johnson had promised him, much to the embarrassment of Louisa. Adams noted in his own diary that he had no regrets about his decision to marry Louisa.[29]
In 1796, Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to Portugal.[30] Later that year, John Adams defeated Jefferson in the 1796 presidential election. When the elder Adams became president, he appointed his son as the U.S. ambassador to Prussia.[31] Though concerned that his appointment would be criticized as nepotistic, Adams accepted the position and traveled to the Prussian capital of Berlin with his wife and his younger brother, Thomas Boylston Adams. The State Department tasked Adams with developing commercial relations with Prussia and Sweden, but President Adams also asked his son to write to him frequently about affairs in Europe.[32] In 1799, Adams negotiated a new trade agreement between the United States and Prussia, though he could never complete an agreement with Sweden.[33] He frequently wrote to family members in the United States, and in 1801 his letters about the Prussian region of Silesia were published in a book titled Letters on Silesia.[34] During his time in Prussia, Adams befriended the German diplomat and writer Friedrich von Gentz, whose work, The Origins and Principles of the American Revolution, Compared with the Origins and Principles of the French Revolution, Adams would translate into English in 1800. In the 1800 presidential election, Jefferson defeated John Adams, and both Adams and his son left office in early 1801.[35]
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts
On his return to the United States, Adams re-established a legal practice in Boston, and in April 1802 he was elected to the Massachusetts Senate.[36] In November of that year, he ran unsuccessfully for the United States House of Representatives.[37] In February 1803, the Massachusetts legislature elected Adams to the United States Senate. Though somewhat reluctant to affiliate with any political party, Adams joined the Federalist minority in Congress.[38] Like his Federalist colleagues, he opposed the impeachment of Associate Justice Samuel Chase, an outspoken supporter of the Federalist Party.[39]
Adams had strongly opposed Jefferson's 1800 presidential candidacy, but he gradually became alienated from the Federalist Party. His disaffection was driven by the party's declining popularity, disagreements over foreign policy, and Adams's hostility to Timothy Pickering, a Federalist Party leader whom Adams viewed as overly favorable to Britain. Unlike other New England Federalists, Adams supported the Jefferson administration's Louisiana Purchase and expansionist policies.[40] Adams was the lone Federalist in Congress to vote for the Non-importation Act of 1806 that punished Britain for its attacks on American shipping during the ongoing Napoleonic Wars. Adams became increasingly frustrated with the unwillingness of other Federalists to condemn British actions, including impressment, and he moved closer to the Jefferson administration. After Adams supported the Embargo Act of 1807, the Federalist-controlled Massachusetts legislature elected Adams's successor several months before the end of his term, and Adams resigned from the Senate shortly thereafter.[41]
While a member of the Senate, Adams served as a professor of logic at Brown University[42] and as the Boylston Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory at Harvard University. Adams's devotion to classical rhetoric shaped his response to public issues, and he would remain inspired by those rhetorical ideals long after the neo-classicalism and deferential politics of the founding generation were eclipsed by the commercial ethos and mass democracy of the Jacksonian Era. Many of Adams's idiosyncratic positions were rooted in his abiding devotion to the Ciceronian ideal of the citizen-orator "speaking well" to promote the welfare of the polis.[43] He was also influenced by the classical republican ideal of civic eloquence espoused by British philosopher David Hume.[44] Adams adapted these classical republican ideals of public oratory to the American debate, viewing its multilevel political structure as ripe for "the renaissance of Demosthenic eloquence". His Lectures on Rhetoric and Oratory (1810) looks at the fate of ancient oratory, the necessity of liberty for it to flourish, and its importance as a unifying element for a new nation of diverse cultures and beliefs. Just as civic eloquence failed to gain popularity in Britain, in the United States interest faded in the second decade of the 19th century, as the "public spheres of heated oratory" disappeared in favor of the private sphere.[45]
Minister to Russia
 1815 US passport issued by John Quincy Adams at London.
After resigning from the Senate, Adams was ostracized by Massachusetts Federalist leaders, but he declined Democratic-Republican entreaties to seek office.[46] In 1809, he argued before the Supreme Court of the United States in Fletcher v. Peck, and the Supreme Court ultimately agreed with Adams's argument that the Constitution's Contract Clause prevented the state of Georgia from invalidating a land sale to out-of-state companies.[47] Later that year, President James Madison appointed Adams as the first United States Minister to Russia in 1809. Though Adams had only recently broken with the Federalist Party, his support of Jefferson's foreign policy had earned him goodwill with the Madison Administration.[48] Adams was well-qualified for the role after his experiences in Europe generally and Russia specifically.[49]
After a difficult passage through the Baltic Sea, Adams arrived in the Russian capital of St. Petersburg in October 1809. He quickly established a productive working relationship with Russian official Nikolay Rumyantsev and eventually befriended Tsar Alexander I of Russia. Adams continued to favor American neutrality between France and Britain during the Napoleonic War.[50] Louisa was initially distraught at the prospect of living in Russia, but she became a popular figure at the Russian court.[51] From his diplomatic post, Adams observed the French Emperor Napoleon's invasion of Russia, which ended in defeat for the French.[52] In February 1811, President Madison nominated Adams as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court.[53] The nomination was unanimously confirmed by the Senate, but Adams declined the seat, preferring a career in politics and diplomacy, so Joseph Story took the seat instead.[54]
Treaty of Ghent and ambassador to Britain
 Adams portrait   Gilbert Stuart, 1818
Adams had long feared that the United States would enter a war it could not win against Britain, and by early 1812, he saw such a war as inevitable due to the constant British attacks on American shipping and the British practice of impressment. In mid-1812, the United States declared war against Britain, beginning the War of 1812. Tsar Alexander attempted to mediate the conflict between Britain and the United States, and President Madison appointed Adams, Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, and Federalist Senator James A. Bayard to a delegation charged with negotiating an end to the war. Gallatin and Bayard arrived in St. Petersburg in July 1813, but the British declined Tsar Alexander's offer of mediation. Hoping to start negotiations at another venue, Adams left Russia in April 1814.[55] Negotiations finally began in mid-1814 in Ghent, where Adams, Gallatin, and Bayard were joined by two additional American delegates, Jonathan Russell and former Speaker of the House Henry Clay.[56] Adams, the nominal head of the delegation, got along well with Gallatin, Bayard, and Russell, but he occasionally clashed with Clay.[57]
The British delegation initially treated the United States as a defeated power, demanding the creation of an Indian barrier state from American territory near the Great Lakes. The American delegation unanimously rejected this offer, and their negotiating position was bolstered by the American victory in the Battle of Plattsburgh.[58] By November 1814, the government of Lord Liverpool decided to seek an end to hostilities with the U.S. on the basis of status quo ante bellum. Even though a return to the status quo would mean the continuation of the British practice of impressment, Adams and his fellow commissioners had hoped for similar terms. The treaty was signed on December 24, 1814. The United States did not gain any concessions from the treaty but could boast that it had survived a war against the strongest power in the world. Following the signing of the treaty, Adams traveled to Paris, where he witnessed first-hand the Hundred Days of Napoleon's restoration.[59]
 Painting of John Quincy Adams by Thomas Sully, 1824
In May 1815, Adams learned that President Madison had appointed him as the U.S. ambassador to Britain.[60] With the aid of Clay and Gallatin, Adams negotiated a limited trade agreement with Britain. Following the conclusion of the trade agreement, much of Adams's time as ambassador was spent helping stranded American sailors and prisoners of war.[61] In pursuit of national unity, newly elected president James Monroe decided a Northerner would be optimal for the position of Secretary of State, and he chose the respected and experienced Adams for the role.[62] Having spent several years in Europe, Adams returned to the United States in August 1817.[61]
Secretary of State (1817 1825)
See also: Presidency of James Monroe
Adams served as Secretary of State during Monroe's eight-year presidency, from 1817 to 1825. Many of his successes as secretary, such as the convention of 1818 with the United Kingdom, the Transcontinental Treaty with Spain, and the Monroe Doctrine, were not preplanned strategies but responses to unexpected events. Adams wanted to delay American recognition of the newly independent republics of Latin America to avoid the risk of war with Spain and its European allies. However, Andrew Jackson's military campaign in Florida and Henry Clay's threats in Congress forced Spain to cut a deal, which Adams negotiated successfully. Biographer James Lewis says, "He managed to play the cards that he had been dealt   cards that he very clearly had not wanted   in ways that forced the Spanish cabinet to recognize the weakness of its own hand".[63] Apart from the Monroe doctrine, his last four years as Secretary of State were less successful because he was preoccupied with his presidential campaign and refused to make compromises with other countries that might have weakened his candidacy; the result was a small-scale trade war but a successful election to the White House.
Taking office in the aftermath of the War of 1812, Adams thought that the country had been fortunate in avoiding territorial losses, and he prioritized avoiding another war with a European power, particularly Britain.[64] He also sought to avoid exacerbating sectional tensions, which had been a major issue for the country during the War of 1812.[65][c] One of the major challenges confronting Adams was how to respond to the power vacuum in Latin America that arose from Spain's weakness following the Peninsular War.[67] In addition to his foreign policy role, Adams held several domestic duties, including overseeing the 1820 Census and writing an extensive report on weights and measures.[68] The weights and measures report, a particular passion of Adams', provided an extensive historical perspective on the topic and advocated for adoption of the metric system.[69]
Monroe and Adams agreed on most major foreign policy issues: both favored neutrality in Latin American independence wars, peace with the United Kingdom, rejection of a trade agreement with the French, and peaceful expansion into the Spanish Empire's North American territories.[70] The president and his secretary of state developed a strong working relationship, and while Adams often influenced Monroe's policies, he respected that Monroe made the final decisions on major issues.[71] Monroe met regularly with his five-person cabinet, which initially consisted of Adams, Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Crowninshield, and Attorney General William Wirt.[72] Adams developed a strong respect for Calhoun but believed that Crawford was unduly focused on succeeding Monroe in 1824.[73]
 In the Adams On s Treaty, the United States acquired Florida and set the western border of the 1803 Louisiana Purchase.
During his time as ambassador to Britain, Adams had begun negotiations over several contentious issues that had not been solved by the War of 1812 or the Treaty of Ghent. In 1817, the two countries agreed to the Rush Bagot Treaty, which limited naval armaments on the Great Lakes. Negotiations between the two powers continued, resulting in the Treaty of 1818, which defined the Canada United States border west of the Great Lakes. The boundary was set at the 49th parallel to the Rocky Mountains, while the territory to the west of the mountains, known as Oregon Country, would be jointly occupied. The agreement marked a watershed moment in United Kingdom United States relations, as the United States focused on its southern and western borders and British concerns about American expansionism subsided.[74]
Adams On s Treaty
When Adams took office, Spanish possessions bordered the United States to the south and west. To the south, Spain retained control of Florida, which the U.S. had long sought to purchase. Spain struggled to control the Indian tribes active in Florida, and some of those tribes raided United States territory. To the west, New Spain bordered the territory acquired by the United States in the Louisiana Purchase, but no clear boundary had been established between United States and Spanish territory.[64] After taking office, Adams began negotiations with Luis de On s, the Spanish minister to the United States, for the purchase of Florida and the settlement of a border between the United States and New Spain. The negotiations were interrupted by an escalation of the Seminole War, and in December 1818, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to enter Florida and retaliate against Seminoles that had raided Georgia. Exceeding his orders, Jackson captured the Spanish outposts of St. Marks and Pensacola and executed two Englishmen. While Jackson's actions outraged the rest of the cabinet, Adams defended them as necessary to the country's self-defense, and he eventually convinced Monroe and most of the cabinet to support Jackson.[75] Adams informed Spain that its failure to police its own territory had compelled Jackson to act, and he advised Spain to either secure the region or sell it to the United States.[76] The British, meanwhile, declined to risk their recent rapprochement with the United States, and did not make a major diplomatic issue out of Jackson's execution of two British nationals.[77]
Negotiations between Spain and the United States continued, and Spain agreed to cede Florida. The determination of the western boundary of the United States proved more difficult. American expansionists favored setting the border at the Rio Grande, but Spain, intent on protecting its colony of Mexico from American encroachment, insisted on setting the boundary at the Sabine River. At Monroe's direction, Adams agreed to the Sabine River boundary, but he insisted that Spain cede its claims on Oregon Country.[78] Adams was deeply interested in establishing American control over the Oregon Country, partly because he believed that control of that region would spur trade with Asia. The acquisition of Spanish claims to the Pacific Northwest also allowed the Monroe administration to pair the acquisition of Florida, which was chiefly sought by Southerners, with territorial gains favored primarily by those in the North.[79] After extended negotiations, Spain and the United States agreed to the Adams On s Treaty, which was ratified in February 1821.[75] Adams was deeply proud of the treaty, though he privately was concerned by the potential expansion of slavery into the newly acquired territories.[80] In 1824, the Monroe administration would strengthen US claims to Oregon by ratifying the Russo-American Treaty of 1824, which established Russian Alaska's southern border at 54 40  north.[81]
Monroe Doctrine
As the Spanish Empire continued to fracture during Monroe's second term, Adams, Monroe and Clay became increasingly concerned that the "Holy Alliance" of Prussia, Austria, and Russia would seek to bring Spain's erstwhile colonies under their control, to the point of even contemplating a Holy Alliance of their own to defend democracy. In his 1821 Fourth of July address, Adams addressed this issue, noting a shared "chain of sympathy" between the U.S. and Latin America, but arguing for neutrality rather than a Holy Alliance.[82] In 1822, following the conclusion of the Adams On s Treaty, the Monroe administration recognized the independence of several Latin American countries, including Argentina and Mexico. In 1823, British Foreign Secretary George Canning suggested that the United States and Britain should work together to preserve the independence of these fledgling republics. The cabinet debated whether to accept the offer, but Adams opposed it. Instead, Adams urged Monroe to publicly declare the United States' opposition to any European attempt to colonize or re-take control of territory in the Americas, while also committing the United States to neutrality in European affairs. In his December 1823 annual message to Congress, Monroe laid out the Monroe Doctrine, which was largely built upon Adams's ideas.[83] In issuing the Monroe Doctrine, the United States displayed a new level of assertiveness in international relations, as the doctrine represented the country's first claim to a sphere of influence. It also marked the country's shift in psychological orientation away from Europe and towards the Americas. Debates over foreign policy would no longer center on relations with Britain and France, but instead focus on western expansion and relations with Native Americans.[84] The doctrine became one of the foundational principles of U.S. foreign policy.[83]
 1824 presidential election results
1824 presidential election
Main article: 1824 United States presidential election
Immediately upon becoming Secretary of State, Adams emerged as one of Monroe's most likely successors, as the last three presidents had all served in the role before taking office. As the 1824 election approached, Henry Clay, John C. Calhoun (who later dropped out of the race), and William H. Crawford appeared to be Adams's primary competition to succeed Monroe.[85] Crawford favored state sovereignty and a strict constructionist view of the Constitution, while Clay, Calhoun, and Adams embraced federally funded internal improvements, high tariffs, and the Second Bank of the United States, which was also known as the national bank.[86] Because the Federalist Party had all but collapsed after the War of 1812, all the major presidential candidates were members of the Democratic-Republican Party.[87] Adams felt that his own election as president would vindicate his father, while also allowing him to pursue an ambitious domestic policy. Though he lacked the charisma of his competitors, Adams was widely respected and benefited from the lack of other prominent Northern political leaders.[88]
Adams's top choice for the role of vice president was General Andrew Jackson; Adams noted that "the Vice-Presidency was a station in which [Jackson] could hang no one, and in which he would need to quarrel with no one".[89] However, as the 1824 election approached, Jackson jumped into the race for president, and Calhoun ended up receiving the Vice-presidential support of Adams supporters.[87] While the other candidates based their candidacies on their long tenure as congressmen, ambassadors, or members of the cabinet, Jackson's appeal rested on his military service, especially in the Battle of New Orleans.[90] The congressional nominating caucus had decided upon previous Democratic-Republican presidential nominees, but it had become largely discredited by 1824. Candidates were instead nominated by state legislatures or nominating conventions, and Adams received the endorsement of the New England legislatures.[91] The regional strength of each candidate played an important role in the election; Adams was popular in New England, Clay and Jackson were strong in the West, and Jackson and Crawford competed for the South.[92]
1825 contingent presidential election vote distribution
States for Adams
States for Jackson
States for Crawford
Connecticut
Illinois
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Missouri
New Hampshire
New York
Ohio
Rhode Island
Vermont
Alabama
Indiana
Mississippi
New Jersey
Pennsylvania
South Carolina
Tennessee
Delaware
Georgia
North Carolina
Virginia
Total: 13 (54%)
Total: 7 (29%)
Total: 4 (17%)
In the 1824 presidential election, Jackson won a plurality in the Electoral College, taking 99 of the 261 electoral votes, while Adams won 84, Crawford won 41, and Clay took 37. Calhoun, meanwhile, won a majority of the electoral votes for vice president.[92] Adams nearly swept the electoral votes of New England and won a majority of the electoral votes in New York, but he won just six electoral votes from the slave states. Most of Jackson's support came from slave-holding states, but he also won New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and some electoral votes from the Northwest.[93] As no candidate won a majority of the electoral votes, the House was required to hold a contingent election under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment. The House would decide among the top three electoral vote winners, with each state's delegation having one vote; thus, unlike his three rivals, Clay was not eligible to be elected by the House.[92]
Adams knew that his own victory in the contingent election would require the support of Clay, who wielded immense influence in the House of Representatives.[94] Though they were quite different in temperament and had clashed in the past, Adams and Clay shared similar views on national issues. By contrast, Clay viewed Jackson as a dangerous demagogue, and he was unwilling to support Crawford due to the latter's health issues.[95] Adams and Clay met before the contingent election, and Clay agreed to support Adams in the election.[96] Adams also met with Federalists such as Daniel Webster, promising that he would not deny governmental positions to members of their party.[97] On February 9, 1825, Adams won the contingent election on the first ballot, taking 13 of the 24 state delegations. Adams won the House delegations of all the states in which he or Clay had won a majority of the electoral votes, as well as the delegations of Illinois, Louisiana, and Maryland.[96] Adams's victory made him the first child of a president to serve as president himself.[d] After the election, many of Jackson's supporters claimed that Adams and Clay had reached a "Corrupt Bargain" whereby Adams promised Clay the position of Secretary of State in return for Clay's support.[96]
Presidency (1825 1829)
Main article: Presidency of John Quincy Adams
Inauguration
Adams was inaugurated on March 4, 1825, becoming the first son of a former United States president to himself become president, a feat only repeated 176 years later by George W. Bush, son of George H. W. Bush. He took the oath of office on a book of constitutional law, instead of the more traditional Bible.[98] In his inaugural address, he adopted a post-partisan tone, promising that he would avoid party-building and politically motivated appointments. He also proposed an elaborate program of "internal improvements": roads, ports, and canals. Though some were worried about the constitutionality of such federal projects, Adams argued that the General Welfare Clause provided for broad constitutional authority. He promised that he would ask Congress to authorize many such projects.[99]
Administration
The Adams cabinetOfficeNameTermPresidentJohn Quincy Adams1825 1829Vice PresidentJohn C. Calhoun1825 1829Secretary of StateHenry Clay1825 1829Secretary of the TreasuryRichard Rush1825 1829Secretary of WarJames Barbour1825 1828Peter Buell Porter1828 1829Attorney GeneralWilliam Wirt1825 1829Secretary of the NavySamuel L. Southard1825 1829
Adams presided over a harmonious and productive cabinet that he met with on a weekly basis.[100] Like Monroe, Adams sought a geographically balanced cabinet that would represent the various party factions, and he asked the members of the Monroe cabinet to remain in place for his own administration.[101] Samuel L. Southard of New Jersey stayed on as Secretary of the Navy, William Wirt kept his post of Attorney General,[102] and John McLean of Ohio continued to serve as the Postmaster General, an important position that was not part of the cabinet.[103] Adams's first choices for Secretary of War and Secretary of the Treasury were Andrew Jackson and William Crawford, but each declined to serve in the administration. Adams instead selected James Barbour of Virginia, a prominent supporter of Crawford, to lead the War Department. Leadership of the Treasury Department went to Richard Rush of Pennsylvania, who would become a prominent advocate of internal improvements and protective tariffs within the administration.[104] Adams chose Henry Clay as Secretary of State, angering those who believed that Clay had offered his support in the 1824 election for the most prestigious position in the cabinet.[105] Though Clay would later regret accepting the position since it reinforced the "Corrupt Bargain" accusation, Clay's strength in the West and interest in foreign policy made him a natural choice for the top cabinet position.[106]
Domestic affairs
Ambitious agenda
 Medal of John Quincy Adams
In his 1825 annual message to Congress,[107] Adams presented a comprehensive and ambitious agenda. He called for major investments in internal improvements as well as the creation of a national university, a naval academy, and a national astronomical observatory. Noting the healthy status of the treasury and the possibility for more revenue via land sales, Adams argued for the completion of several projects that were in various stages of construction or planning, including a road from Washington, D.C. to New Orleans.[108] He also proposed the establishment of a Department of the Interior as a new cabinet-level department that would preside over these internal improvements.[109] Adams hoped to fund these measures primarily through Western land sales, rather than increased taxes or public debt.[86] The domestic agenda of Adams and Clay, which would come to be known as the American System, was designed to unite disparate regional interests in the promotion of a thriving national economy.[110]
Adams's programs faced opposition from various quarters. Many disagreed with his broad interpretation of the constitution and preferred that power be concentrated in state governments rather than the federal government. Others disliked interference from any level of government and were opposed to central planning.[111] Some in the South feared that Adams was secretly an abolitionist and that he sought to subordinate the states to the federal government.[112] Most of the president's proposals were defeated in Congress. Adams's ideas for a national university, a national observatory, and the establishment of a uniform system of weights and measures never received congressional votes.[113] His proposal for the creation of a naval academy won the approval of the Senate but was defeated in the House; opponents objected to the naval academy's cost and worried that the establishment of such an institution would "produce degeneracy and corruption of the public morality".[114] Adams's proposal to establish a national bankruptcy law was also defeated.[113]
Unlike other aspects of his domestic agenda, Adams won congressional approval for several ambitious infrastructure projects.[115] Between 1824 and 1828, the United States Army Corps of Engineers conducted surveys for a bevy of potential roads, canals, railroads, and improvements in river navigation. Adams presided over major repairs and further construction on the National Road, and shortly after he left office the National Road extended from Cumberland, Maryland, to Zanesville, Ohio.[116] The Adams administration also saw the beginning of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal; the construction of the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal and the Louisville and Portland Canal around the Falls of the Ohio; the connection of the Great Lakes to the Ohio River system in Ohio and Indiana; and the enlargement and rebuilding of the Dismal Swamp Canal in North Carolina.[117] Additionally, the first passenger railroad in the United States, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, was constructed during Adams's presidency. Though many of these projects were undertaken by private actors, the government often provided money or land to aid the completion of such projects.[118]
Formation of political parties
See also: First Party System and Second Party System
 General Andrew Jackson, Adams's opponent in the 1824 and 1828 United States presidential elections
In the immediate aftermath of the 1825 contingent election, Jackson was gracious to Adams.[119] Nevertheless, Adams's appointment of Clay rankled Jackson, who received a flood of letters encouraging him to run. In 1825, Jackson accepted the presidential nomination of the Tennessee legislature for the 1828 election.[120] Though he had been close to Adams during Monroe's presidency, Vice President Calhoun was also politically alienated from the president by the appointment of Clay, since that appointment established Clay as the natural heir to Adams.[121] Adams's ambitious December 1825 annual message to Congress further galvanized the opposition, with important figures such as Francis Preston Blair of Kentucky and Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri breaking with the Adams administration.[122] By the end of the first session of the 19th United States Congress, an anti-Adams congressional coalition consisting of Jacksonians (led by Benton and Hugh Lawson White), Crawfordites (led by Martin Van Buren and Nathaniel Macon), and Calhounites (led by Robert Y. Hayne and George McDuffie) had emerged.[123] Aside from Clay, Adams lacked strong supporters outside of the North, and Edward Everett, John Taylor, and Daniel Webster served as his strongest advocates in Congress.[124] Supporters of Adams began calling themselves National Republicans, while supporters of Jackson began calling themselves Democrats.[125] In the press, they were often described as "Adams Men" and "Jackson Men".[126]
In the 1826 elections, Adams's opponents picked up seats throughout the country, as allies of Adams failed to coordinate among themselves.[127] Andrew Stevenson, a Jackson supporter, replaced John Taylor, an Adams supporter, as Speaker of the House.[128] As Adams himself noted, the United States had never seen a Congress that was firmly under the control of political opponents of the president.[129] After the elections, Van Buren and Calhoun agreed to throw their support behind Jackson in 1828, with Van Buren bringing along many of Crawford's supporters.[130] Though Jackson did not articulate a detailed political platform in the same way that Adams did, his coalition united in opposition to Adams's reliance on government planning.[131] Adams, meanwhile, clung to the hope of a non-partisan nation, and he refused to make full use of the power of patronage to build up his own party structure.[132]
Tariff of 1828
 Painting of Quincy Adams by Charles Osgood, 1828
During the first half of his administration, Adams avoided taking a strong stand on tariffs, partly because he wanted to avoid alienating his allies in the South and New England.[133] After Jacksonians took power in 1827, they devised a tariff bill designed to appeal to Western states while instituting high rates on imported materials important to the economy of New England. It is unclear whether Van Buren, who shepherded the bill through Congress, meant for the bill to pass, or if he had deliberately designed it to force Adams and his allies to oppose it.[134] Regardless, Adams signed the Tariff of 1828, which became known as the "Tariff of Abominations" by opponents. Adams was denounced in the South, and he received little credit for the tariff in the North.[135]
Indian policy
See also: Federal Indian Policy
Adams sought the gradual assimilation of Native Americans via consensual agreements, a priority shared by few whites in the 1820s. Yet Adams was also deeply committed to the westward expansion of the United States. Settlers on the frontier, constantly seeking to move westward, cried for a more expansionist policy that disregarded the concerns of Native Americans. Early in his term, Adams suspended the Treaty of Indian Springs after learning that the Governor of Georgia, George Troup, had forced the treaty on the Muscogee.[136] Adams signed a new treaty with the Muscogee in January 1826 that allowed the Muscogee to stay but ceded most of their land to Georgia. Troup refused to accept its terms and authorized all Georgian citizens to evict the Muscogee.[137] A showdown between Georgia and the federal government was only averted after the Muscogee agreed to a third treaty.[138] Though many saw Troup as unreasonable in his dealings with the federal government and the Native Americans, the administration's handling of the incident alienated those in the Deep South who favored immediate Indian removal.[139]
Foreign affairs
Trade and claims
 Quincy Adams appointed Henry Clay as Secretary of State
One of the major foreign policy goals of the Adams administration was the expansion of American trade.[140] His administration reached reciprocity treaties with a number of nations, including Denmark, Prussia, and the Federal Republic of Central America. The administration also reached commercial agreements with the Kingdom of Hawaii and the Kingdom of Tahiti.[141] Agreements with Denmark and Sweden opened their colonies to American trade, but Adams was especially focused on opening trade with the British West Indies. The United States had reached a commercial agreement with Britain in 1815, but that agreement excluded British possessions in the Western Hemisphere. In response to United States pressure, the British had begun to allow a limited amount of American imports to the West Indies in 1823, but United States leaders continued to seek an end to Britain's protective Imperial Preference system.[142] In 1825, Britain banned United States trade with the British West Indies, dealing a blow to Adams's prestige.[143] The Adams administration negotiated extensively with the British to lift this ban, but the two sides could not reach an agreement.[144] Despite the loss of trade with the British West Indies, the other commercial agreements secured by Adams helped expand the overall volume of United States exports.[145]
Latin America
Aside from an unsuccessful attempt to purchase Texas from Mexico, President Adams did not seek to expand into Latin America or North America.[146] Adams and Clay instead sought engagement with Latin America to prevent it from falling under the British Empire's economic influence.[147] As part of this goal, the administration favored sending a United States delegation to the Congress of Panama, an 1826 conference of New World republics organized by Sim n Bol var.[148] Clay and Adams hoped that the conference would inaugurate a "Good Neighborhood Policy" among the independent states of the Americas.[149] However, the funding for a delegation and the confirmation of delegation nominees became entangled in a political battle over Adams's domestic policies, with opponents such as Van Buren impeding the confirmation of a delegation.[111] While Van Buren saw the Panama Congress as an unwelcome deviation from the more isolationist foreign policy established by President Washington,[149] many Southerners opposed involvement with any conference attended by delegates from Haiti, a republic that had been established through a slave revolt.[150] Though the United States delegation finally won confirmation from the Senate, it never reached the Congress of Panama due to the Senate's delay.[151]
1828 presidential election
Main article: 1828 United States presidential election
 1828 presidential election results
The Jacksonians formed an effective party apparatus that adopted many modern campaign techniques. Rather than focusing on issues, they emphasized Jackson's popularity and the supposed corruption of Adams and the federal government. Jackson himself described the campaign as a "struggle between the virtue of the people and executive patronage".[152] Adams, meanwhile, refused to adapt to the new reality of political campaigns, and he avoided public functions and refused to invest in pro-administration tools such as newspapers.[153] In early 1827, Jackson was publicly accused of having encouraged his wife, Rachel, to desert her first husband.[154] In response, followers of Jackson attacked Adams's personal life, and the campaign turned increasingly nasty.[155] The Jacksonian press portrayed Adams as an out-of-touch elitist,[156] while pro-Adams newspapers attacked Jackson's past involvement in various duels and scuffles, portraying him as too emotional and impetuous for the presidency. Though Adams and Clay had hoped that the campaign would focus on the American System, it was instead dominated by the personalities of Jackson and Adams.[157]
Vice President Calhoun joined Jackson's ticket, while Adams turned to Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush as his running mate.[158] The 1828 election thus marked the first time in United States history that a presidential ticket composed of two Northerners faced off against a presidential ticket composed of two Southerners.[159] In the election, Jackson won 178 of the 261 electoral votes and just under 56% of the popular vote.[160] Jackson won 50.3% of the popular vote in the free states, but 72.6% of the vote in the slave states.[161] No future presidential candidate would match Jackson's proportion of the popular vote until Theodore Roosevelt's 1904 campaign, while Adams's loss made him the second one-term president, after his own father.[160] By 1828, only two states did not hold a popular vote for president, and the number of votes in the 1828 election was triple that in the 1824 election. This increase in votes was due not only to the recent wave of democratization, but also because of increased interest in elections and the growing ability of the parties to mobilize voters.[162] Adams did not attend Jackson's inauguration, making him one of only four presidents who finished their terms but skipped the event.[163]
Later congressional career (1830 1848)
Jackson administration, 1830 1836
 Daguerreotype of Quincy Adams by Philip Haas, 1843
Adams considered permanently retiring from public life after his 1828 defeat, and he was deeply hurt by the suicide of his son, George Washington Adams, in 1829.[164] He was appalled by many of the Jackson administration's actions, including its embrace of the spoils system[165] and the prosecution of his close friend, Treasury Auditor Tobias Watkins, for embezzlement.[166] Though they had once maintained a cordial relationship, Adams and Jackson each came to loathe the other in the decades after the 1828 election.[167] Adams grew bored with his retirement and still felt that his career was unfinished, so he ran for and won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in the 1830 elections.[168] His election went against the generally held opinion, shared by his own wife and youngest son, that former presidents should not run for public office.[169] Nonetheless, he would win election to nine terms, serving from 1831 until his death in 1848.[1] Adams and Andrew Johnson are the only former presidents to serve in Congress.[170] After winning election, Adams became affiliated with the Anti-Masonic Party, partly because the National Republican Party's leadership in Massachusetts included many of the former Federalists that Adams had clashed with earlier in his career. The Anti-Masonic Party originated as a movement against Freemasonry, but it developed into the country's first third party and embraced a general program of anti-elitism.[171]
Adams expected a light workload when he returned to Washington at 64 years old, but Speaker Andrew Stevenson selected Adams chair of the Committee on Commerce and Manufactures.[172] Though he identified as a member of the Anti-Masonic Party, Congress was broadly polarized into allies of Jackson and opponents of Jackson, and Adams generally aligned with the latter camp.[173] Stevenson, an ally of Jackson, expected that the committee chairmanship would keep Adams busy defending the tariff even while the Jacksonian majority on the committee would prevent Adams from accruing any real power.[174] As chair of the committee charged with writing tariff laws, Adams became an important player in the Nullification crisis, which stemmed largely from Southern objections to the high rates imposed by the Tariff of 1828. South Carolina leaders argued that states could nullify federal laws, and they announced that they would bar the federal government from enforcing the tariff in their state.[175] Adams helped pass the Tariff of 1832, which lowered rates, but not enough to mollify the South Carolina nullifiers. The crisis ended when Clay and Calhoun agreed to another tariff bill, the Tariff of 1833, that furthered lower tariff rates. Adams was appalled by the Nullification Crisis's outcome, as he felt that the Southern states had unfairly benefited from challenging federal law.[176] After the crisis, Adams was convinced that Southerners exercised undue influence over the federal government through their control of Jackson's Democratic Party.[177]
In the 1833 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, the Anti-Masonic Party nominated Adams in a four-way race between Adams, the National Republican candidate, the Democratic candidate, and a candidate of the Working Men's Party. The National Republican candidate, John Davis, won 40% of the vote, while Adams finished in second place with 29%. Because no candidate won a majority of the vote, the state legislature decided the election. Rather than seek election by the legislature, Adams withdrew his name from contention, and the legislature selected Davis.[178] Adams was nearly elected to the Senate in 1835 by a coalition of Anti-Masons and National Republicans, but his support for Jackson in a minor foreign policy matter annoyed National Republican leaders enough that they dropped their support for his candidacy.[179] After 1835, Adams never again sought higher office, focusing instead on his service in the House of Representatives.[180]
Van Buren, Harrison and Tyler administrations, 1837 1843
 Portrait of Quincy Adams by William Hudson, 1844
In the mid-1830s, the Anti-Masonic Party, the National Republicans, and other groups opposed to Jackson coalesced into the Whig Party.[181] In the 1836 presidential election Democrats put forward Martin Van Buren, while the Whigs fielded multiple presidential candidates. Because he disdained all the major party contenders for president, Adams did not take part in the campaign; Van Buren won the election.[182] Nonetheless, Adams became aligned with the Whig Party in Congress.[183] Adams generally opposed the initiatives of President Van Buren, long a political adversary, though they maintained a cordial public relationship.[184]
The Republic of Texas won its independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution of 1835 1836. Texas had largely been settled by Americans from the Southern United States, and many of those settlers owned slaves despite an 1829 Mexican law that abolished slavery. Many in the United States and Texas thus favored the admission of Texas into the union as a slave state. Adams considered the issue of Texas to be "a question of far deeper root and more overshadowing branches than any or all others that agitate the country", and he emerged as one of the leading congressional opponents of annexation.  When he served as secretary of state, Adams had sought to acquire Texas, but he argued that, because Mexico had abolished slavery, the acquisition of Texas would transform the region from a free territory into a slave state. He also feared that the annexation of Texas would encourage Southern expansionists to pursue other potential slave states, including Cuba. Adams's firm stance may have played a role in discouraging Van Buren from pushing for the annexation of Texas during his presidency.[185]
Whig nominee William Henry Harrison defeated Van Buren in the 1840 presidential election, and the Whigs gained control of both houses of Congress for the first time. Despite his low regard for Harrison as a person, Adams was enthusiastic about the new Whig administration and the end of the long-standing Democratic dominance of the federal government.[186] However, Harrison died in April 1841 and was succeeded by Vice President John Tyler, a Southerner who, unlike Adams, Henry Clay, and many other prominent Whigs, did not embrace the American System. Adams saw Tyler as an agent of "the slave-driving, Virginia, Jeffersonian school, principled against all improvement". After Tyler vetoed a bill to restore the national bank, Whig congressmen expelled Tyler from the party. Adams was appointed chairman of a special committee that explored impeaching Tyler, and Adams presented a scathing report of Tyler that argued that his actions warranted impeachment. The impeachment process did not move forward, though, because the Whigs did not believe that the Senate would vote to remove Tyler from office.[187]
 John Quincy Adams, c. 1840s, Unknown author
Opposition to the Mexican-American War, 1844 1848
Tyler made the annexation of Texas the main foreign policy priority of the later stages of his administration.[188] He attempted to win ratification of an annexation treaty in 1844, but, to Adams's surprise and relief, the Senate rejected the treaty.[189] The annexation of Texas became the central issue of the 1844 presidential election, and Southerners blocked the nomination of Van Buren at the 1844 Democratic National Convention due to the latter's opposition to annexation; the party instead nominated James K. Polk, an acolyte of Andrew Jackson.[190] Though he once again did not take part in the campaigning, Adams was deeply disappointed that Polk defeated his old ally, Henry Clay, in the 1844 election. He attributed the outcome of the election partly to the Liberty Party, a small, abolitionist third party that may have siphoned votes from Clay in the crucial state of New York.[191] After the election, Tyler, whose term would end in March 1845, once again submitted an annexation treaty to Congress.[e] Adams strongly attacked the treaty, arguing that the annexation of Texas would involve the United States in "a war for slavery". Despite Adams's opposition, both houses of Congress approved the treaty, with most Democrats voting for annexation and most Whigs voting against it. Texas thus joined the United States as a slave state in 1845.[193]
Adams had served with James K. Polk in the House of Representatives, and Adams loathed the new president, seeing him as another expansionist, pro-slavery Southern Democrat.[194] Adams favored the annexation of the entirety of Oregon Country, a disputed region occupied by both the United States and Britain, and was disappointed when President Polk signed the Oregon Treaty, which divided the land between the two claimants at the 49th parallel.[195] Polk's expansionist aims centered instead on the Mexican province of Alta California, and he attempted to buy the province from Mexico. The Mexican government refused to sell California or recognize the independence and subsequent American annexation of Texas. Polk deployed a military detachment led by General Zachary Taylor to back up his assertion that the Rio Grande constituted the Southern border of both Texas and the United States. After Taylor's forces clashed with Mexican soldiers north of the Rio Grande, Polk asked for a declaration of war in early 1846, asserting that Mexico had invaded American territory. Though some Whigs questioned whether Mexico had started an aggressive war, both houses of Congress declared war, with the House voting 174-to-14 to approve the declaration. One of the 14 dissenting votes was Adams, who believed that Polk was seeking to wage an offensive to expand slavery.[196] After the start of the war, he supported the Wilmot Proviso, an unsuccessful legislative proposal that would have banned slavery in any territory ceded by Mexico.[197] After 1846, ill health increasingly affected Adams, but he continued to oppose the Mexican American War until his death in 1848.[198]
Anti-slavery movement
Main article: John Quincy Adams and abolitionism
 BEP engraved portrait of Adams as president
In the 1830s, slavery emerged as an increasingly polarizing issue in the United States.[199] A longtime opponent of slavery, Adams used his new role in Congress to fight it, and he became the most prominent national leader opposing slavery.[200] After one of his reelection victories, he said that he must "bring about a day prophesied when slavery and war shall be banished from the face of the Earth". He wrote in his private journal in 1820:[201]
The discussion of this Missouri question has betrayed the secret of their souls. In the abstract they admit that slavery is an evil, they disclaim it, and cast it all upon the shoulder of Great Britain. But when probed to the quick upon it, they show at the bottom of their souls pride and vainglory in their condition of masterdom. They look down upon the simplicity of a Yankee's manners, because he has no habits of overbearing like theirs and cannot treat negroes like dogs. It is among the evils of slavery that it taints the very sources of moral principle. It establishes false estimates of virtue and vice: for what can be more false and heartless than this doctrine which makes the first and holiest rights of humanity to depend upon the color of the skin?
In 1836, partially in response to Adams's consistent presentation of citizen petitions requesting the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia, the House of Representatives imposed a "gag rule" that immediately tabled any petitions about slavery. Democrats and Southern Whigs favored the rule, but Northern Whigs, like Adams, opposed it.[202] In late 1836, Adams began a campaign to ridicule slave owners and the gag rule. He frequently attempted to present anti-slavery petitions, often in ways that provoked strong reactions from Southern representatives.[203] Though the gag rule remained in place,[204] the discussion ignited by his actions and the attempts of others to quiet him raised questions of the right to petition, the right to legislative debate, and the morality of slavery. Adams fought actively against the gag rule for another seven years, eventually moving the resolution that led to its repeal in 1844.[205]
 Adams's portrait at the U.S. National Portrait Gallery by George Bingham c. 1850 copy of an 1844 original
In 1841, at the request of Lewis Tappan and Ellis Gray Loring, Adams joined the case of United States v. The Amistad. Adams went before the Supreme Court on behalf of African slaves who had revolted and seized the Spanish ship Amistad. Adams appeared on February 24, 1841, and spoke for four hours. His argument succeeded: the Court ruled that the Africans were free and they returned to their homes.[206]
Smithsonian Institution
Adams also became a leading force for the promotion of science. In 1829, British scientist James Smithson died, and he left his fortune for the "increase and diffusion of knowledge". In Smithson's will, he stated that should his nephew, Henry James Hungerford, die without heirs, the Smithson estate would go to the government of the United States to create an "Establishment for the increase and diffusion of Knowledge among men". After the nephew died without heirs in 1835, President Andrew Jackson informed Congress of the bequest, which amounted to about US$500,000 (US$75 million in 2008 dollars after inflation). Adams realized that this might allow the United States to realize his dream of building a national institution of science and learning. Adams thus became Congress's primary supporter of the future Smithsonian Institution.[207]
The money was invested in shaky state bonds, which quickly defaulted. After heated debate in Congress, Adams successfully argued to restore the lost funds with interest.[208] Though Congress wanted to use the money for other purposes, Adams successfully persuaded Congress to preserve the money for an institution of science and learning. Congress also debated whether the federal government had the authority to accept the gift, though with Adams leading the initiative, Congress accepted the legacy bequeathed to the nation and pledged the faith of the United States to the charitable trust on July 1, 1836.[209] Partly due to Adams's efforts, Congress voted to establish the Smithsonian Institution in 1846. A nonpolitical board of regents was established to lead the institution, which included a museum, art gallery, library, and laboratory.[210]
Death
 Adams's cenotaph at the Congressional Cemetery
In mid-November 1846, the 78-year-old former president suffered a stroke that left him partially paralyzed. After a few months of rest, he made a full recovery and resumed his duties in Congress. When Adams entered the House chamber on February 13, 1847, everyone "stood up and applauded".[211]
 John Quincy Adams during his final hours of life after his collapse in the Capitol. Drawing in pencil by Arthur Joseph Stansbury, digitally restored.
On February 21, 1848, the House of Representatives was discussing the matter of honoring United States Army officers who served in the Mexican American War. Adams had been a vehement critic of the war, and as Congressmen rose up to say, "Aye!" in favor of the measure, he instead yelled, "No!"[212] He rose to answer a question put forth by Speaker of the House Robert Charles Winthrop.[213] Immediately thereafter, Adams collapsed, having suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage.[214] Two days later, on February 23, he died at 7:20 p.m. with his wife at his side in the Speaker's Room inside the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C.; his only living child, Charles Francis, did not arrive in time to see his father alive. His last words were "This is the last of Earth. I am content".[213] Among those present for his death was Abraham Lincoln, then a freshman representative from Illinois.[215]
 John Quincy Adams's original tomb at Hancock Cemetery, across the street from United First Parish Church
His original interment was temporary, in the public vault at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C. Later, he was interred in the family burial ground in Quincy, Massachusetts, across from the (Unitarian) United First Parish Church, called Hancock Cemetery. After Louisa's death in 1852, his son had his parents re-interred in the expanded family crypt in the United First Parish Church across the street, next to John and Abigail. Both tombs are viewable by the public. Adams's original tomb at Hancock Cemetery is still there and marked simply "J.Q. Adams".[216]
Personal life
See also: Adams political family
Adams and Louisa had three sons and a daughter. Their daughter, Louisa, was born in 1811 but died in 1812.[217] They named their first son George Washington Adams (1801 1829) after the first president. This decision upset Adams's mother, and, by her account, his father as well.[218] Both George and their second son, John (1803 1834), led troubled lives and died in early adulthood.[219][220] George, who had long suffered from alcoholism, died in 1829 after going overboard on a steamboat; it is not clear whether he fell or purposely jumped from the boat.[221] John, who ran an unprofitable flour and grist mill owned by his father, died of an unknown illness in 1834.[222] Adams's youngest son, Charles Francis Adams Sr., was an important leader of the "Conscience Whigs", a Northern, anti-slavery faction of the Whig Party.[198] Charles served as the Free Soil Party's vice presidential candidate in the 1848 presidential election and later became a prominent member of the Republican Party, serving as United States Minister to England during the American Civil War.[223]
Personality
 Presidential Dollar of John Quincy Adams
Adams's personality and political beliefs were much like his father's.[224] He always preferred solitary reading to social engagements, and he was repeatedly persuaded to stay in public service by others. Historian Paul Nagel states that, like Abraham Lincoln after him, Adams often suffered from depression, for which he sought treatment in early years. Adams thought his depression was due to the high expectations demanded of him by his father and mother. Throughout his life, he felt inadequate and socially awkward because of his depression, and was constantly bothered by his physical appearance.[224] He was closer to his father, with whom he spent much of his early life while abroad, than he was to his mother. In his youth, while the American Revolution raged on, Adams heard from his mother about his father's work and the substantial risks he took to support it. As a result, he developed a deep respect for his father.[224] In contrast, Adams had a rocky relationship with his mother, due to her high expectations of him, and her fear that her children would follow in the footsteps of her brother, who died of alcoholism.[224] His biographer, Nagel, concludes that his mother's disapproval of Louisa Johnson motivated him to marry Johnson in 1797, despite Adams's reservations that Johnson, like his mother, had a forceful personality.[224]
Though Adams wore a powdered wig in his youth, he abandoned this fashion while serving as the U.S. Minister to Russia (1809-1814)[225] and became the first president to adopt a short haircut instead of long hair tied in a queue and to regularly wear long trousers instead of knee breeches according to the fashion of the 19th century.[226][227] It has been suggested that John Quincy Adams had the highest I.Q. of any U.S. president.[228][229] Dean Simonton, a professor of psychology at UC Davis, estimated his I.Q. score at 165.[230] He reportedly spoke eight foreign languages (Dutch, French, German, Greek, Italian, Latin, Russian, and Spanish), more than any other U.S. president. He remains the only U.S. president who could converse in Russian.[231]
Legacy
Historical reputation
 Official portrait of Adams by George Peter Alexander Healy, c. 1858
Adams is widely regarded as one of the most effective diplomats and secretaries of state in American history,[232][233] but scholars generally rank him as an average president.[234][235] Adams is remembered as a man eminently qualified for the presidency, yet hopelessly weakened in his presidential leadership potential because of the 1824 election. Most importantly, Adams is remembered as a poor politician in an era when politics had begun to matter more. He spoke of trying to serve as a man above the "baneful weed of party strife" at the precise moment in history when the Second Party System was emerging with nearly revolutionary force.[170] Biographer and historian William J. Cooper Jr. comments that Adams "does not loom large in the American imagination", but that he has received more public attention since the late 20th century due to his anti-slavery stances. Cooper writes that Adams was the first "major public figure" to publicly question whether the United States could remain united so long as the institution of slavery persisted.[232] Historian Daniel Walker Howe writes that Adams's "intellectual ability and courage were above reproach, and his wisdom in perceiving the national interest has stood the test of time".[236] He has also been praised as a strong prose stylist, with James Parker describing him as one of the "three authentically muddy-eyed and pained-by-subjectivity writers" that the White House has harbored, along with Abraham Lincoln and Barack Obama.[237]
Memorials
 Peacefield - John Quincy Adams's Home
John Quincy Adams Birthplace is now part of Adams National Historical Park and open to the public. Adams House, one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University, is named for John Adams, John Quincy Adams, and other members of the Adams family associated with Harvard.[238] John Quincy Adams tower, located in the Southwest residential area of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, is named for the president.[239] In 1870, Charles Francis built the first presidential library in the United States, to honor his father. The Stone Library includes over 14,000 books written in twelve languages. The library is located at Peacefield (the "Old House") at Adams National Historical Park in Quincy, Massachusetts.
An Adams Memorial has been proposed in Washington, D.C., honoring Adams and his wife, son, father, mother, and other members of their family.
Adams's middle name of Quincy has been used by several locations in the United States, including the town of Quincy, Illinois. Adams County, Illinois and Adams County, Indiana are also named after Adams. Adams County, Iowa, and Adams County, Wisconsin, were each named for either John Adams or John Quincy Adams.
 Tombs of Presidents John Adams (far left) and John Quincy Adams (right) and their wives Abigail and Louisa, in a family crypt beneath the United First Parish Church.
Some sources contend that in 1843 Adams sat for the earliest confirmed photograph of a United States president, although others maintain that William Henry Harrison had posed even earlier for his portrait, in 1841.[240] The original daguerreotype is in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution.[241]
Film and television
Adams occasionally is featured in the mass media. In the PBS miniseries The Adams Chronicles (1976), he was portrayed by David Birney, William Daniels, Marcel Trenchard, Steven Grover and Mark Winkworth. He was also portrayed by Anthony Hopkins in the 1997 film Amistad, and again by Ebon Moss-Bachrach and Steven Hinkle in the 2008 HBO television miniseries John Adams.
See also
Adams's method for apportionment
List of abolitionists
List of United States political appointments across party lines
List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
List of United States Congress members who died in office (1790 1899)
Mendi Bible
Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft
Notes
^ The Quincy family name was pronounced / kw nzi/, as in the name of Quincy, Massachusetts (then called Braintree), where Adams was born. All of the other Quincy place names are locally / kw nsi/. Though not accurate, this pronunciation is also commonly used for Adams's middle name.[2]
^ When Adams took office as president in 1825, Louisa became the first First Lady born outside of the United States. In 2017, Melania Trump became the second First Lady born outside of the United States.[28]
^ Adams had been especially concerned by the Hartford Convention, which had been called by anti-war Federalists to discuss their grievances against the Madison administration.[66]
^ In 2001, George W. Bush would become the second child of a president to serve as president.
^ Tyler had initially sent the treaty to the Senate; the Constitution provides that a two-thirds vote of the Senate is required to ratify any treaty. After the 1844 election, Tyler asked Congress to approve the treaty via joint resolution, which would require a simple majority vote in both houses of Congress.[192]
References
^ a b  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain: "John Quincy Adams; Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress". Bioguide.congress.gov. Retrieved March 15, 2017.
^ Wead, Doug (2005). The Raising of a President. New York: Atria Books. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-7434-9726-8.
^  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain: Quincy, Mailing Address: 135 Adams Street. "John Quincy Adams Birthplace - Adams National Historical Park (U.S. National Park Service)". nps.gov. Retrieved March 4, 2020.
^ "APS Member History". search.amphilsoc.org. Retrieved April 5, 2021.
^ Rettig, Polly M. (April 3, 1978). "John Quincy Adams Birthplace". National Park Service. Retrieved November 1, 2011.
^ Herring, James; Longacre, James Barton (1853). The National Portrait Gallery of Distinguished Americans. D. Rice & A.N. Hart. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-405-02500-6.
^ Remini 2002
^ "The Diaries of John Quincy Adams: A Digital Collection". Massachusetts Historical Society. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2011.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 5 8.
^ Richard, Carl (2009). The Golden Age of the Classics in America: Greece Rome and the Antebellum United States. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-674-03264-4.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 8 9, 16.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 9, 14 16.
^ "American presidents and their special relationship with Leiden". universiteitleiden.nl. January 11, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2020.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 17 18.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 21 22
^ Edel 2014, pp. 36 37
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 24 27
^ Musto, David F. (April 20, 1968). "The Youth of John Quincy Adams". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: American Philosophical Society. 113: 273. PMID 11615552.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 29 30
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 32 33
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 35 36
^ Cooper 2017, p. 38
^ Edel 2014, pp. 83 86
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 34, 40 41
^ "Online Adams Catalogue". Massachusetts Historical Society.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 45 48
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 48 53
^ Black, Allida (2009). "The First Ladies of the United States of America". The White House Historical Assoc.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 54 55
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 48 49
^ Edel 2014, p. 83
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 53 56
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 59 60
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 60 61
^ Edel 2014, p. 89
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 64 66
^ McCullough 2001, pp. 575 76
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 67 68
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 70 71
^ "John Quincy Adams Isn't Who You Think He Is". Bloomberg.com. February 8, 2020. Retrieved March 14, 2020.
^ Thompson 1991, pp. 165 181
^ McCullough 2001, p. 587
^ Rathbun, Lyon (2000). "The Ciceronian Rhetoric of John Quincy Adams". Rhetorica. 18 (2): 175 215. doi:10.1525/rh.2000.18.2.175.
^ Hume, David (1742). Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London: T. Cadell. pp. 99 110.
^ Potkay, Adam S. (1999). "Theorizing Civic Eloquence in the Early Republic: the Road from David Hume to John Quincy Adams". Early American Literature. 34 (2): 147 70.
^ Cooper 2017, p. 85
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 87 88
^ Edel 2014, pp. 96 97
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 88 89
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 91 92
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 90, 94 95
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 92 93
^ McMillion, Barry J.; Rutkus, Denis Steven (July 6, 2018). "Supreme Court Nominations, 1789 to 2017: Actions by the Senate, the Judiciary Committee, and the President" (PDF). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service. Retrieved August 26, 2018.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 106 107
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 109 110
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 112 113
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 112, 114 115, 119
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 116 118
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 289 302
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 127 128
^ a b Kaplan 2014, pp. 307 11, 318 20
^ Edel 2014, pp. 116 17
^ James E. Lewis Jr, John Quincy Adams: Policymaker for the Union (2001) p. 56
^ a b Kaplan 2014, pp. 321 22
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 143 145
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 145 146
^ Edel 2014, pp. 107 09.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 147 148
^ Traub, James (2016). John Quincy Adams: Militant Spirit. New York: Basic Books. pp. 169 170, 253 255. ISBN 978-0-465-02827-6.
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 327 28
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 151 152
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 153 154
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 154 155
^ Remini 2002, pp. 48, 51 53
^ a b Kaplan 2014, pp. 333 37, 348
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 163 164
^ Howe 2007, p. 106
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 164 166
^ Howe 2007, pp. 108 109
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 167 168.
^ Howe 2007, pp. 112 115
^ Traub, 256-258
^ a b Kaplan 2014, pp. 380 385
^ Howe 2007, pp. 115 116
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 364 367
^ a b Howe 2007, pp. 203 204
^ a b Parsons 2009, pp. 70 72
^ Hargreaves 1985, p. 24
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 208 209
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 20 21
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 79 86
^ a b c Kaplan 2014, pp. 386 389
^ Cooper 2017, p. 213
^ "John Quincy Adams: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. October 4, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2017.
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 33 34, 36 38
^ a b c Kaplan 2014, pp. 391 393, 398
^ Cooper 2017, p. 217
^ "John Quincy Adams Takes the Oath of Office   Wearing Pants". New England Historical Society. March 4, 2015. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 394 396
^ Hargreaves 1985, p. 62 64
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 47 48
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 49 50
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 106 107
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 48 49
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 396 397
^ Howe 2007, pp. 247 248
^ First Annual Message; John Quincy Adams; speech transcript; (1825); via Peters, Gerhard and Woolley, John T.; The American Presidency Project online; University of California Santa Barbara; accessed January 2020
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 402 403
^ Remini 2002, pp. 80 81
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 311 314
^ a b Kaplan 2014, pp. 404 405
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 397 398
^ a b Remini 2002, pp. 84 86
^ Hargreaves 1985, p. 167
^ Hargreaves 1985, p. 173
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 173 174
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 176 177
^ Remini 2002, pp. 85 86
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 105 106
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 110 111
^ Howe 2007, pp. 249 250
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 114 115
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 119 120
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 138 139
^ Remini 2002, pp. 84 85
^ Howe 2007, p. 251
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 125 126.
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 146 147
^ Remini 2002, pp. 110 111
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 127 128
^ Howe 2007, pp. 279 280
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 141 142
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 189 191
^ Remini, Robert V. (July 1958). "Martin Van Buren and the Tariff of Abominations". The American Historical Review. 63 (4): 903 917. doi:10.2307/1848947. JSTOR 1848947.
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 157 158
^ Edel 2014, pp. 225 226
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 398 400
^ Howe 2007, p. 256
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 101 101
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 67 68
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 76 85
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 91 95
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 400 401
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 102 107
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 110 112
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 240 241
^ Howe 2007, p. 257
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 401 402
^ a b Remini 2002, pp. 82 83
^ Cooper 2017, p. 229
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 408 410
^ Howe 2007, pp. 275 277
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 152 154
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 142 143
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 143 144
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 166 167
^ Howe 2007, pp. 278 279
^ Hargreaves 1985, pp. 283 284
^ Parsons 2009, pp. 171 172
^ a b Parsons 2009, pp. 181 183
^ Howe 2007, pp. 281 283
^ Howe 2007, pp. 276, 280 281
^ Balcerski, Opinion by Thomas (November 11, 2020). "Opinion: A history lesson on presidents who snub their successors' inaugurations". CNN. Retrieved November 12, 2020.
^ Edel 2014, pp. 254 56
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 445 446
^ Cain, Marvin R. (Spring 1984). "Claims, Contracts, and Customs: Public Accountability and a Department of Law, 1789-1849". Journal of the Early Republic. 4 (1): 27 45. doi:10.2307/3122853. JSTOR 3122853.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 288 289, 345 346
^ Edel 2014, pp. 258 59
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 450 52
^ a b "John Quincy Adams: Impact and Legacy". Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. October 4, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2017.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 280 283
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 454, 458 59
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 286 287
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 458 64
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 298 299
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 300 303
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 309, 401
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 284 285
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 311 312
^ Cooper 2017, p. 315
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 309 310
^ Cooper 2017, p. 316
^ Cooper 2017, p. 330
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 345 346
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 371 375
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 377 379
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 379 381
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 401 403
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 404 405
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 405 406
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 407 408
^ Cooper 2017, p. 410
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 410 413
^ Cooper 2017, p. 414
^ Kaplan 2014, pp. 555 556
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 421 423
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 424 425
^ a b Cooper 2017, pp. 430 431
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 323 324
^ Parsons 1998, p. 224
^ Miller 1996, p. 189
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 331 332
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 337 338
^ Miller 1996, p. 270
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 354 356, 409
^ Rodriguez, Junius, ed. (2007). Encyclopedia of Emancipation and Abolition in the Transatlantic World. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 9 11.
^ Teed, Paul E. (2006). John Quincy Adams : Yankee nationalist. New York: Nova Science Publishers. pp. 159 160. ISBN 978-1-59454-797-3.
^ "Smithsonian Information Brochure", Smithsonian Visitor Information and Associates' Reception Center, May 2009
^ "James Smithson: Biographical Information" (PDF). newsdesk.si.edu. January 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016.
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 350 351
^ "President John Q. Adams : Health and Medical History". doctorzebra.com. Retrieved February 8, 2014.
^ Parker, Theodore (1848). A discourse occasioned by the death of John Quincy Adams. Boston: Published by Bela Marsh, 25 Cornhill. p. 26. OCLC 6354870. Retrieved August 2, 2009.
^ a b Donaldson, Norman and Betty (1980). How Did They Die?. Greenwich House. ISBN 978-0-517-40302-0.
^ Widmer, Edward L. (2008). Ark of the liberties: America and the world. New York: Hill and Wang. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-8090-2735-4. OCLC 191882004. Retrieved August 2, 2009.
^ Traub, pg.  446
^ "Quincy's Historic Hancock Cemetery". Quincy Historical Society. 2002. Retrieved July 11, 2018.
^ "Louisa Adams Biography: National First Ladies' Library". www.firstladies.org. Retrieved January 18, 2018.
^ "From Abigail Smith Adams to Thomas Boylston Adams, 12 July 1801". Adams Papers, Massachusetts Historical Society. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2020.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)[This is an Early Access document from The Adams Papers. It is not an authoritative final version.]. Also available from Internet Archive as archived on December 24, 2019.
^ "Brief Biographies of Jackson Era Characters (A)". Jmisc.net. Retrieved September 16, 2008.
^ Shepherd, Jack, Cannibals of the Heart: A Personal Biography of Louisa Catherine and John Quincy Adams, New York, McGraw-Hill 1980
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 264 265
^ Cooper 2017, pp. 313 314
^ "ADAMS, Charles Francis, (1807-1886)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. United States Congress. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
^ a b c d e Nagel 1999[page needed]
^ Hewson, Martha S.; Cronkite, Walter (January 1, 2009). John Quincy Adams   Google Knihy. ISBN 978-0-7910-7599-9. Retrieved November 4, 2018.
^ Digital History; Steven Mintz. "Digital History". Digitalhistory.uh.edu. Archived from the original on July 23, 2010. Retrieved April 20, 2010.
^ "John Quincy Adams Takes the Oath of Office   Wearing Pants". March 4, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2018.
^ "Poindexter in Chief: Presidential IQs and Success in the Oval Office". U.S. News & World Report.
^ Simonton, Dean Keith (1986). "Presidential Greatness: The Historical Consensus and Its Psychological Significance". Political Psychology. 7 (2): 259 283. doi:10.2307/3791125. JSTOR 3791125.
^ Simonton, Dean Keith (August 2006). "Presidential IQ, Openness, Intellectual Brilliance, and Leadership: Estimates and Correlations for 42 U.S. Chief Executives" (PDF). Political Psychology. 27 (4): 511 526. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9221.2006.00524.x.
^ Summers, Robert S. "Foreign Languages". Presidents of the United States (POTUS). Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ a b Cooper 2017, pp. xiii xiv
^ Herring, George (2008). From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776. Oxford Univ. Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0.
^ "Historians Survey Results: John Quincy Adams". Presidential Historians Survey 2017. National Cable Satellite Corporation. 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017.
^ Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin S. (February 19, 2018). "How Does Trump Stack Up Against the Best and Worst Presidents?". New York Times. Retrieved May 14, 2018.
^ Howe 2007, pp. 244 245
^ Parker, James (February 13, 2020). "Three Authentic Writers Have Occupied the Oval Office". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 5, 2020.
^ "House History: Adams House". Harvard University. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The President and Fellows of Harvard College. 2016.
^ "Residence Halls". University of Massachusetts Amherst.
^ Krainik, Clifford. "Face the Lens, Mr. President: A Gallery of Photographic Portraits of 19th-Century U.S. Presidents" (PDF). The White House Historical Association. Retrieved September 4, 2009.
^ "John Quincy Adams 1843 daguerreotype". National Portrait Gallery. August 21, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2017.
Works cited
Abraham, Henry Julian (2008). Justices, Presidents, and Senators: A History of the U.S. Supreme Court Appointments from Washington to Bush II. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5895-3.
Allgor, Catherine (1997). "'A Republican in a Monarchy': Louisa Catherine Adams in Russia". Diplomatic History. 21 (1): 15 43. doi:10.1111/1467-7709.00049. ISSN 0145-2096. JSTOR 24913402.
Bemis, Samuel Flagg (1981) [1949]. John Quincy Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign Policy. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-22636-6.
Bemis, Samuel Flagg (1956). John Quincy Adams and the Union. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-394-41413-3.
Cooper, William J. (2017). The Lost Founding Father: John Quincy Adams and the Transformation of American Politics. Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-1-63149-389-8.
Edel, Charles N. (2014). Nation Builder: John Quincy Adams and the Grand Strategy of the Republic. Harvard Univ. Press.
Georgini, Sara. Household Gods: The Religious Lives of the Adams Family (Oxford University Press, 2019).
Hargreaves, Mary W.M. (1985). The Presidency of John Quincy Adams. Univ. Press of Kansas. ISBN 9780700602728.
Howe, Daniel Walker (2007). What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815 1848. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-974379-7.
Kaplan, Fred (2014). John Quincy Adams: American Visionary. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-219932-4.
Lewis Jr, James E. John Quincy Adams: Policymaker for the Union (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2001).
Mattie, Sean (2003). "John Quincy Adams and American Conservatism" (PDF). Modern Age. 45 (4): 305 314. ISSN 0026-7457.
McCullough, David (2001). John Adams. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 144. ISBN 978-1-4165-7588-7.
Miller, William Lee (1996). Arguing About Slavery: The Great Battle in the United States Congress. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-394-56922-2.
Nagel, Paul C. (1983). Descent from Glory: Four Generations of the John Adams Family. Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503172-0.
Nagel, Paul (1999). John Quincy Adams: A Public Life, a Private Life. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-674-47940-1.
Parsons, Lynn H. (2009). The Birth of Modern Politics: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and the Election of 1828. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-983754-0. excerpt and text search
Parsons, Lynn H. (1998). John Quincy Adams. Rowman and LittleField. ISBN 978-1-4422-0288-7.
Potkay, Adam S. (1999). "Theorizing Civic Eloquence in the Early Republic: the Road from David Hume to John Quincy Adams". Early American Literature. 34 (2): 147 170. ISSN 0012-8163.
Rathbun, Lyon (2000). "The Ciceronian Rhetoric of John Quincy Adams". Rhetorica. 18 (2): 175 215. doi:10.1525/rh.2000.18.2.175. ISSN 0734-8584.
Remini, Robert V. (2002). John Quincy Adams. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6939-6.
Thompson, Robert R. (1991). "John Quincy Adams, Apostate: From "Outrageous Federalist" to "Republican Exile," 1801- 1809". Journal of the Early Republic. 11 (2): 161 183. doi:10.2307/3123239. JSTOR 3123239.
Traub, James (2016). John Quincy Adams: Militant Spirit. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-09879-8.
Further reading
Main article: Bibliography of John Quincy Adams
Secondary sources
Holt, Michael F. (1999). The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-977203-2.
McMillan, Richard (2001). "Election of 1824: Corrupt Bargain or the Birth of Modern Politics?". New England Journal of History. 58 (2): 24 37.
Morgan, William G.  Henry Clay s Biographers and the  Corrupt Bargain  Charge.  Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 66#3 (1968), pp. 242 58. online
Morgan, William G.  John Quincy Adams Versus Andrew Jackson: Their Biographers And The  Corrupt Bargain  Charge.  Tennessee Historical Quarterly 26#1 (1967), pp. 43 58. online
Nagel, Paul C. (1983). Descent from Glory: Four Generations of the John Adams Family. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503172-0.
Parsons, Lynn Hudson (2003). "In Which the Political Becomes Personal, and Vice Versa: the Last Ten Years of John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson". Journal of the Early Republic. 23 (3): 421 443. doi:10.2307/3595046. ISSN 0275-1275. JSTOR 3595046.
Pessen, Edward. "John Quincy Adams" in Henry Graff, ed. The Presidents: A Reference History (3rd ed. 2002) online
Unger, Harlow Giles (2012). John Quincy Adams. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-82130-1.
Waldstreicher, David (2013). A Companion to John Adams and John Quincy Adams. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-52429-9. excerpt and text search
Wood, Gary V. (2004). Heir to the Fathers: John Quincy Adams and the Spirit of Constitutional Government. Ladham, Maryland: Lexington. ISBN 978-0-7391-0601-3.
Primary sources
Waldstreicher, David, ed. The Diaries of John Quincy Adams, 1779 1821 (Library of America, 20170. xiv, 727 pp.)
Adams, John Quincy (1874 1877).  Adams, Charles Francis (ed.). Memoirs of John Quincy Adams: Comprising Portions of His Diary from 1795 to 1848. 12 v. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott & Co. ISBN 978-0-8369-5021-2. OCLC 559230698.
Adams, John Quincy (1913 1917).  Ford, Worthington C (ed.). Writings of John Quincy Adams. 7 v. New York: The Macmillan Company. OCLC 564019879.
Butterfield, L. H.; Taylor, Robert J.; Ryerson, Richard A., eds. (1961). The Adams Papers. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. OCLC 56354007. Founders Online, searchable edition
External links
Listen to this article (1 hour and 11 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 13 March 2019 (2019-03-13), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
 Media related to John Quincy Adams at Wikimedia Commons
Scholarly coverage of Adams at Miller Center, U of Virginia
United States Congress. "John Quincy Adams (id: A000041)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
The Diaries of John Quincy Adams: A Digital Collection Archived February 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine at the Massachusetts Historical Society
"Life Portrait of John Quincy Adams", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, April 18, 1999
Works by John Quincy Adams at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about John Quincy Adams at Internet Archive
Works by John Quincy Adams at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
vteJohn Quincy Adams
U.S. Representative for MA 8 (1843 1848)
U.S. Representative for MA 12 (1833 1843)
U.S. Representative for MA 11 (1831 1833)
6th President of the United States (1825 1829)
8th United States Secretary of State (1817 1825)
U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1814 1817)
U.S. Minister to Russia (1809 1814)
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1803 1808)
U.S. Minister to Prussia (1797 1801)
U.S. Minister to the Netherlands (1794 1797)
Presidency
Inauguration
American System
Internal improvements
Tariff of 1828
First Treaty of Prairie du Chien
Treaty of Fond du Lac
Treaty of Limits
United States Naval Observatory
State of the Union Address, 1825
1827
1828
Federal judiciary appointments
Otherevents
Monroe Doctrine, author
Treaty of Ghent
Adams On s Treaty
Treaty of 1818
Tariff of 1832
Smithsonian Institution
United States v. The Amistad
Mendi Bible
President, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
President, Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences
Writings
Lifelong diary
Massachusetts Historical Society holdings
Adams Papers Editorial Project
Life andhomes
Early life
Abigail Adams Cairn
John Quincy Adams and abolitionism
Adams National Historical Park
Birthplace and family home
Peacefield
Stone Library
United First Parish Church and gravesite
Electoral history
Senate
1803
1808
Presidential runs
1824
Corrupt Bargain
1828
Legacy
Bibliography
Adams Memorial
Adams House at Harvard University
U.S. Postage stamps
Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar
Mount Quincy Adams
USS President Adams (1941)
USS John Adams (1963)
Popularculture
Profiles in Courage (1957 book)
1965 television series)
The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries)
Mutiny on the Amistad (1987 book)
Amistad (1997 film) 
John Adams (2001 book
2008 miniseries)
Adams familyQuincy family
Louisa Adams (wife)
George W. Adams (son)
Charles Adams Sr. (son)
John Adams II (son)
Henry Adams (grandson)
Brooks Adams (grandson)
John Quincy Adams II (grandson)
John Adams
father
presidency
Abigail Adams
mother
First Lady
Quincy family
Abigail Adams Smith (sister)
Charles Adams (brother)
Thomas Boylston Adams (brother)
John Adams Sr. (paternal grandfather)
Susanna Boylston (paternal grandmother)
Elihu Adams (paternal uncle)
John Quincy (great-grandfather)
Related
National Republican Party
Republicanism
Quincy Patriot
  James Monroe
Andrew Jackson  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Diplomatic posts
Preceded byWilliam Short
 United States Minister to the Netherlands 1794 1797
Succeeded byWilliam Vans Murray
New office
 United States Minister to Prussia 1797 1801
VacantTitle next held byHenry Wheaton 
Preceded byWilliam Short
 United States Minister to Russia 1809 1814
Succeeded byJames A. Bayard
VacantTitle last held byJonathan Russell as Acting United States Minister to the United Kingdom 
 United States Envoy to the United Kingdom 1815 1817
Succeeded byRichard Rush
U.S. Senate
Preceded byJonathan Mason
 United States Senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts 1803 1808        Served alongside: Timothy Pickering
Succeeded byJames Lloyd
Political offices
Preceded byJames Monroe
 United States Secretary of State 1817 1825
Succeeded byHenry Clay
 President of the United States 1825 1829
Succeeded byAndrew Jackson
Party political offices
Preceded byJames Monroe
 Democratic-Republican nominee for President of the United States  1824 Served alongside: Henry Clay, William H. Crawford, Andrew Jackson
Party abolished 
New political party
 National Republican nominee for President of the United States 1828
Succeeded byHenry Clay
Preceded bySamuel Lathrop
 Anti-Masonic nominee for Governor of Massachusetts 1833
Succeeded byJohn Bailey
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJoseph Richardson
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 11th congressional district 1831 1833
Succeeded byJohn Reed Jr.
Preceded byJames L. Hodges
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 12th congressional district 1833 1843
Succeeded byGeorge D. Robinson
Preceded byWilliam B. Calhoun
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 8th congressional district 1843 1848
Succeeded byHorace Mann
Preceded byRollin Mallary
 Chair of the House Manufactures Committee 1831 1847
Succeeded byAndrew Stewart
Preceded byJohn Bell
 Chair of the House Indian Affairs Committee 1841 1843
Succeeded byCave Johnson
Preceded byCaleb Cushing
 Chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee 1842 1843
Succeeded byCharles Jared Ingersoll
Honorary titles
Preceded byDixon Hall Lewis
 Dean of the House 1844 1848        Served alongside: James Iver McKay
Succeeded byJames Iver McKay
Notes and references
1. The Democratic-Republican Party split in the 1824 election, fielding four separate candidates.
Articles related to John Quincy Adams
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteUnsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States
Thomas Jefferson (1796)
John Adams (1800)
Charles C. Pinckney (1804, 1808)
DeWitt Clinton (1812)
Rufus King (1816)
Andrew Jackson (1824)
William H. Crawford (1824)
Henry Clay (1824, 1832, 1844)
John Quincy Adams (1828)
William Henry Harrison (1836)
Hugh Lawson White (1836)
Martin Van Buren (1840)
Lewis Cass (1848)
Winfield Scott (1852)
John C. Fr mont (1856)
Stephen A. Douglas (1860)
George B. McClellan (1864)
Horatio Seymour (1868)
Horace Greeley (1872)
Samuel J. Tilden (1876)
Winfield Scott Hancock (1880)
James G. Blaine (1884)
Grover Cleveland (1888)
Benjamin Harrison (1892)
William J. Bryan (1896, 1900, 1908)
Alton B. Parker (1904)
William Howard Taft (1912)
Charles Evans Hughes (1916)
James M. Cox (1920)
John W. Davis (1924)
Al Smith (1928)
Herbert Hoover (1932)
Alf Landon (1936)
Wendell Willkie (1940)
Thomas E. Dewey (1944, 1948)
Adlai Stevenson (1952, 1956)
Richard Nixon (1960)
Barry Goldwater (1964)
Hubert Humphrey (1968)
George McGovern (1972)
Gerald Ford (1976)
Jimmy Carter (1980)
Walter Mondale (1984)
Michael Dukakis (1988)
George H. W. Bush (1992)
Bob Dole (1996)
Al Gore (2000)
John Kerry (2004)
John McCain (2008)
Mitt Romney (2012)
Hillary Clinton (2016)
Donald Trump (2020)
 All presidential candidates
 Presidents
 Third party candidates
vte(  1804)   1808 United States presidential election   (1812  )Democratic-Republican PartyNominees
President: James Madison
Vice President: George Clinton (incumbent)
Other candidates
President: James Monroe
George Clinton
Vice President: Henry Dearborn
John Quincy Adams
Federalist PartyNominees
President: Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Vice President: Rufus King
Other 1808 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1820)   1824 United States presidential election   (1828  )Democratic-RepublicanPartyAdams-Clay factionNominees
President: John Quincy Adams
Henry Clay (eliminated in contingent election)
Vice President: John C. Calhoun
Nathan Sanford
Jacksonian factionNominees
President: Andrew Jackson
Vice President: John C. Calhoun
Tertium quidsNominees
President: William H. Crawford
Vice President: Nathaniel Macon
Other candidates
John C. Calhoun
Smith Thompson
Other 1824 elections: Contingent election
House
Senate
vte(  1824)   1828 United States presidential election   (1832  )Jacksonian PartyNominees
President: Andrew Jackson
campaign
Vice President: John C. Calhoun (incumbent)
National Republican PartyNominees
President: John Quincy Adams (incumbent)
Vice President: Richard Rush
Other 1828 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1828)   1832 United States presidential election   (1836  )Democratic PartyNominees
President: Andrew Jackson (incumbent)
Vice President: Martin Van Buren
Other candidates
Vice President: Philip P. Barbour
Richard M. Johnson
National Republican PartyNominees
President: Henry Clay
Vice President: John Sergeant
Nullifier PartyNominees
President: John Floyd
Vice President: Henry Lee
Anti-Masonic PartyNominees
President: William Wirt
Vice President: Amos Ellmaker
Other candidates
President: John Quincy Adams
Richard Rush
Vice President: John C. Spencer
Other 1832 elections: House
Senate
vteDemocratic-Republican Party
Anti-Administration Party
First Party System
Jeffersonian democracy
Era of Good Feelings
Presidency of Thomas Jefferson
Presidency of James Madison
Presidency of James Monroe
Tertium quids
Presidentialtickets
1796: Jefferson/Burr
1800: Jefferson/Burr
1804: Jefferson/Clinton
1808: Madison/Clinton
1812: Madison/Gerry
1816: Monroe/Tompkins
1820: Monroe/Tompkins
1824: Adams/Calhoun
Jackson/Calhoun
Crawford/Macon
Clay/Sanford
U.S. Housespeakers
Frederick Muhlenberg (1793 1795)
Nathaniel Macon (1801 1807)
Joseph Bradley Varnum (1807 1811)
Henry Clay (1811 1814)
Langdon Cheves (1814 1815)
Henry Clay (1815 1820)
John W. Taylor (1820 1821)
Philip P. Barbour (1821 1823)
Henry Clay (1823 1825)
U.S. CabinetState
Thomas Jefferson (1790 1794)
Levi Lincoln Sr. (1801)
James Madison (1801 1809)
Robert Smith (1809 1811)
James Monroe (1811 1817)
John Graham (1817)
John Quincy Adams (1817 1825)
Treasury
Albert Gallatin (1801 1814)
George W. Campbell (1814)
Alexander J. Dallas (1814 1816)
William Jones (1816)
William H. Crawford (1816 1825)
War
Henry Dearborn (1801 1809)
William Eustis (1809 1813)
John Armstrong Jr. (1813 1814)
James Monroe (1814 1815)
Alexander J. Dallas (1815)
William H. Crawford (1815 1816)
George Graham (1816 1817)
John C. Calhoun (1817 1825)
Attorney General
Levi Lincoln Sr. (1801 1805)
John Breckinridge (1805 1806)
Caesar Augustus Rodney (1807 1811)
William Pinkney (1811 1814)
William Wirt (1817 1825)
Navy
Robert Smith (1801 1809)
Paul Hamilton (1809 1813)
William Jones (1813 1814)
Benjamin Williams Crowninshield (1815 1818)
Smith Thompson (1819 1823)
Samuel L. Southard (1823 1825)
vteNational Republican and Whig Parties
American System
American Party
1856 American National Convention
Anti-Masonic Party
Constitutional Union/Unionist Party
1860 Constitutional Union Convention
Opposition Party
Second Party System
Presidency of John Quincy Adams
Presidency of William Henry Harrison
Presidency of John Tyler
Presidency of Zachary Taylor
Presidency of Millard Fillmore
Presidentialtickets
1828 (None): Adams/Rush
1831 (Baltimore): Clay/Sergeant
1836 (None): Harrison/Granger
White/Tyler
Webster/Granger
Mangum/Tyler
1839 (Harrisburg): Harrison/Tyler
1844 (Baltimore): Clay/Frelinghuysen
1848 (Philadelphia): Z. Taylor/Fillmore
1852 (Baltimore): Scott/Graham
1856 (Baltimore): Fillmore/Donelson
U.S. HouseSpeakers
J. Taylor (1825 1827)
Hunter (1839 1841)
White (1841 1843)
Winthrop (1847 1849)
Banks (1856 1857)
U.S. CabinetState
Henry Clay (1825 1829)
Daniel Webster (1841 1843)
Abel P. Upshur (1843 1844)
John M. Clayton (1849 1850)
Daniel Webster (1850 1852)
Edward Everett (1852 1853)
Treasury
Richard Rush (1825 1829)
Thomas Ewing (1841)
Walter Forward (1841 1843)
John C. Spencer (1843 1844)
George M. Bibb (1844 1845)
William M. Meredith (1849 1850)
Thomas Corwin (1850 1853)
War
James Barbour (1825 1828)
Peter B. Porter (1828 1829)
John Bell (1841)
John C. Spencer (1841 1843)
James M. Porter (1843 1844)
George W. Crawford (1849 1850)
Charles M. Conrad (1850 1853)
Attorney General
William Wirt (1825 1829)
John J. Crittenden (1841)
John Nelson (1843 1845)
Reverdy Johnson (1849 1850)
John J. Crittenden (1850 1853)
Navy
Samuel L. Southard (1825 1829)
George E. Badger (1841)
Abel P. Upshur (1841 1843)
William B. Preston (1849 1850)
William A. Graham (1850 1852)
John P. Kennedy (1852 1853)
Interior
Thomas Ewing (1849 1850)
Thomas M. T. McKennan (1850)
Alexander H. H. Stuart (1850 1853)
vteUnited States Secretaries of StateSecretary of Foreign Affairs1781 1789
R. Livingston
Jay
Secretary of State1789 present
Jefferson
Randolph
Pickering
J. Marshall
Madison
Smith
Monroe
Adams
Clay
Van Buren
E. Livingston
McLane
Forsyth
Webster
Upshur
Calhoun
Buchanan
Clayton
Webster
Everett
Marcy
Cass
Black
Seward
Washburne
Fish
Evarts
Blaine
Frelinghuysen
Bayard
Blaine
Foster
Gresham
Olney
Sherman
Day
Hay
Root
Bacon
Knox
Bryan
Lansing
Colby
Hughes
Kellogg
Stimson
Hull
Stettinius
Byrnes
G. Marshall
Acheson
Dulles
Herter
Rusk
Rogers
Kissinger
Vance
Muskie
Haig
Shultz
Baker
Eagleburger
Christopher
trips
Albright
trips
Powell
trips
Rice
tenure
trips
Clinton
tenure
trips
Kerry
trips
Tillerson
trips
Pompeo
trips
Blinken
trips
List of international trips made by secretaries of state of the United States
vteUnited States senators from MassachusettsClass 1
Dalton
Cabot
Goodhue
Mason
Adams
Lloyd
Gore
Ashmun
Mellen
Mills
Webster
Choate
Webster
Winthrop
Rantoul
Sumner
Washburn
Dawes
Lodge Sr.
Butler
Walsh
Lodge Jr.
J. Kennedy
Smith
E. Kennedy
Kirk
Brown
Warren
Class 2
Strong
Sedgwick
Dexter
Foster
Pickering
Varnum
Otis
Lloyd
Silsbee
Davis
Bates
Davis
Everett
Rockwell
Wilson
Boutwell
Hoar
Crane
J. Weeks
Walsh
Gillett
Coolidge
Lodge Jr.
S. Weeks
Saltonstall
Brooke
Tsongas
Kerry
Cowan
Markey
vteMembers of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts1st district
F. Ames
Dexter
Goodhue
Holten
Sedgwick
Skinner
Sedgwick
J. Bacon
Eustis
Quincy
Ward Jr.
Mason
Gorham
Webster
Gorham
N. Appleton
Gorham
A. Lawrence
Fletcher
A. Lawrence
Winthrop
N. Appleton
Winthrop
S. Eliot
W. Appleton
Scudder
T. D. Eliot
Hall
T. D. Eliot
Buffington
Crapo
R. Davis
Randall
Wright
G. Lawrence
Treadway
Heselton
Conte
Olver
Neal
2nd district
Goodhue
Foster
W. Lyman
Sedgwick
Ward Sr.
W. Lyman
Shepard
J. Crowninshield
Story
Pickman
W. Reed
Pickering
Silsbee
Barstow
B. Crowninshield
Choate
Phillips
Saltonstall
D. King
Rantoul
Fay
Crocker
Buffington
O. Ames
Harris
Long
E. Morse
Gillett
Churchill
Bowles
Kaynor
Granfield
Clason
Furcolo
Boland
Neal
McGovern
3rd district
Gerry
Bourne
Coffin
S. Lyman
Mattoon
Cutler
Nelson
Livermore
White
Pickering
Nelson
Varnum
Nelson
Osgood
Cushing
A. Abbott
Duncan
Edmands
Damrell
C. Adams
Thomas
A. Rice
Twichell
Whiting I
Pierce
Field
B. Dean
Field
Ranney
L. Morse
J. Andrew
Walker
J. R. Thayer
R. Hoar
C. Washburn
J. A. Thayer
Wilder
Paige
F. Foss
Casey
Philbin
Drinan
Donohue
Early
Blute
McGovern
N. Tsongas
Trahan
4th district
Sedgwick
Dearborn
G. Thatcher
Wadsworth
Foster
L. Lincoln Sr.
Hastings
Varnum
W. Richardson
Dana
Stearns
Fuller
E. Everett
Sa. Hoar
Parmenter
Thompson
Palfrey
Thompson
Sabine
Walley
Comins
A. Rice
Hooper
Frost
J. Abbott
L. Morse
Collins
O'Neil
Apsley
Weymouth
Tirrell
Mitchell
Wilder
Winslow
Stobbs
P. Holmes
Donohue
Drinan
Frank
Kennedy III
Auchincloss
5th district
Partridge
Bourne
Freeman
L. Williams
T. Dwight
Ely
Mills
Lathrop
Sibley
J. Davis
L. Lincoln Jr.
Hudson
C. Allen
W. Appleton
Burlingame
W. Appleton
Hooper
Alley
Butler
Gooch
Banks
Bowman
L. Morse
Hayden
Banks
Sh. Hoar
Stevens
Knox
B. Ames
J. Rogers
E. Rogers
B. Morse
Cronin
P. Tsongas
Shannon
Atkins
Meehan
N. Tsongas
Markey
Clark
6th district
G. Thatcher
Leonard
J. Reed Sr.
J. Smith
Taggart
S. Allen
Locke
Kendall
Grennell
Alvord
Baker
Ashmun
G. Davis
Upham
T. Davis
Alley
Gooch
Banks
Butler
Thompson
Loring
Stone
Lovering
Lodge
Cogswell
Moody
Gardner
Lufkin
A.P. Andrew
G. Bates
W. Bates
Harrington
Mavroules
Torkildsen
Tierney
Moulton
7th district
Leonard
Ward Sr.
Leonard
Bullock
Bishop
Mitchell
Barker
Baylies
Turner
Baylies
Hulbert
Shaw
H. Dwight
S. Allen
Grennell
Briggs
J. Rockwell
Goodrich
Banks
Gooch
Boutwell
Brooks
Esty
E. Hoar
Tarbox
Butler
W. Russell
Stone
Cogswell
W. Everett
Barrett
Roberts
Phelan
Maloney
W. Connery
L. Connery
Lane
Macdonald
Markey
Capuano
Pressley
8th district
Grout
G. Thatcher
F. Ames
Otis
Eustis
L. Williams
Green
Gardner
Green
J. Reed Jr.
Baylies
Sampson
Hobart
Lathrop
Bates
Calhoun
J. Adams
Mann
Wentworth
Knapp
Train
Baldwin
G. Hoar
J. M. S. Williams
Warren
Claflin
Candler
W Russell
C. H. Allen
Greenhalge
Stevens
McCall
Deitrick
Dallinger
H. Thayer
Dallinger
Healey
Goodwin
Macdonald
O'Neill
Kennedy II
Capuano
Lynch
9th district
Varnum
Bishop
J. Dean
Wheaton
J. Reed Jr.
Folger
J. Reed Jr.
H. Dwight
Briggs
Jackson
Hastings
H. Williams
Hale
Fowler
Little
De Witt
E. Thayer
Bailey
A. Walker
W. Washburn
Crocker
G. Hoar
W. Rice
T. Lyman
Ely
Burnett
Candler
G. Williams
O'Neil
Fitzgerald
Conry
Keliher
Murray
Roberts
Fuller
Underhill
Luce
R. Russell
Luce
T. H. Eliot
Gifford
Nicholson
Keith
McCormack
Hicks
Moakley
Lynch
Keating
10th district
Goodhue
Sewall
Read
Hastings
Upham
J. Allen
Brigham
Wheaton
Morton
F Baylies
Bailey
H. A. S. Dearborn
W. Baylies
Borden
H. Williams
Borden
Burnell
Grinnell
Scudder
Dickinson
Chaffee
Delano
Dawes
Crocker
Stevens
Seelye
Norcross
W. Rice
J. E. Russell
J. Walker
McEttrick
Atwood
Barrows
Naphen
McNary
O'Connell
Curley
Murray
Tague
Fitzgerald
Tague
Douglass
Tinkham
Herter
Curtis
Martin
Heckler
Studds
Delahunt
Keating
11th district
Bradbury
Bartlett
Cutler
Stedman
A. Bigelow
Brigham
B. Adams
J. Russell
Hobart
J. Richardson
J. Adams
J. Reed Jr.
Burnell
Goodrich
Trafton
Dawes
Chapin
Robinson
Whiting II
Wallace
Coolidge
Draper
Sprague
Powers
Sullivan
Peters
Tinkham
Douglass
Higgins
Flaherty
Curley
Kennedy
O'Neill
Burke
Donnelly
12th district
H. Dearborn
I. Parker
Lee
S. Thatcher
Skinner
Larned
Bidwell
Bacon
Dewey
Hulbert
Strong
Kendall
L. Bigelow
Baylies
Hodges
J. Adams
Robinson
F. Rockwell
Crosby
E. Morse
Lovering
Powers
Weeks
Curley
Gallivan
McCormack
Keith
Studds
13th district
Wadsworth
Seaver
Ruggles
Dowse
Eustis
J. Reed Jr.
Randall
Simpkins
Greene
Weeks
Mitchell
Carter
Luce
Wigglesworth
Burke
14th district
G. Thatcher
Cutts
C. King
J. Holmes
Lovering
E. Foss
Harris
Gilmore
Olney
Frothingham
Wigglesworth
Martin
15th district
Wadsworth
Ilsley
Whitman
Widgery
Bradbury
Whitman
Greene
Leach
Martin
Gifford
16th district
S. Thatcher
Cook
Tallman
S. Davis
Brown
Orr
Hill
Thacher
Walsh
Gifford
17th district
Bruce
Chandler
Gannett
F. Carr
Wood
J. Carr
Wilson
Kinsley
18th district
Wilson
T. Rice
J. Parker
19th district
J. Parker
Conner
Gage
Cushman
20th district
Hubbard
Parris
E. Lincoln
At-large
Cobb
vteAmbassadors of the United States of America to the Court of St. James'sMinisters Plenipotentiary tothe Court of St. James's(1785 1811)
J. Adams
Pickney
King
Monroe
Pinkney
Russell (charg  d'affaires)
Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary tothe Court of St. James's(1815 1893)
J. Q. Adams
Rush
King
Gallatin
Lawrence (charg  d'affaires)
Barbour
McLane
Van Buren
Vail (charg  d'affaires)
Stevenson
Everett
McLane
Bancroft
Lawrence
Ingersoll
Buchanan
Dallas
C. Adams
R. Johnson
Motley
Schenck
Pierrepont
Welsh
Lowell
Phelps
Lincoln
Ambassadors Extraordinaryand Plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James's(1893 present)
Bayard
Hay
Choate
Reid
Page
Davis
Harvey
Kellogg
Houghton
Dawes
Mellon
Bingham
Kennedy
Winant
Harriman
Douglas
Gifford
Aldrich
Whitney
Bruce
Annenberg
Richardson
Armstrong
Brewster
Louis
Price
Catto
Seitz
Crowe
Lader
Farish
Tuttle
Susman
Barzun
W. Johnson
Hartley
vte United States Ambassadors to Germany Germany United States relationsEmbassy of the United States, BerlinMinister Plenipotentiary
Adams
Envoy Extraordinaryand Minister Plenipotentiary
Wheaton
Donelson
Hannegan
Barnard
Vroom
Wright
Judd
Wright
Bancroft
Davis
Taylor
White
Sargent
Kasson
Pendleton
Phelps
Runyon
Ambassador Extraordinaryand Plenipotentiary
Runyon
Uhl
White
Tower
Hill
Leishman
Gerard
Dresel
Houghton
Schurman
Sackett
Dodd
Wilson
Kirk
Morris
Conant
Bruce
Dowling
McGhee
Lodge
Rush
Hillenbrand
Stoessel
Burns
Burt
Walters
Kimmitt
Holbrooke
Redman
Bindenagel
Kornblum
Coats
Timken
Koenig
Murphy
Emerson
Logsdon
Grenell
Quinville
Gutmann
vte United States Ambassadors to the Netherlands 
J. Adams
Short
J. Q. Adams
Vans Murray
Eustis
Everett
Hughes
Preble
Davezac
Bleecker
Hughes
Davezac
Folsom
Belmont
Murphy
Pike
Rhodes
Ewing
Gorham
Birney
Dayton
Bell
Roosevelt
Thayer
Quinby
Newel
Hill
Beaupre
Bryce
Van Dyke
Garrett
Phillips
Tobin
Diekema
Swenson
Emmet
Gordon
Biddle
Hornbeck
Baruch
Chapin
Matthews
Young
Rice
Tyler
Middendorf
Gould
McCloskey
Joseph
Dyess
Bremer
Shad
Wilkins
Dornbush
Schneider
Sobel
Arnall
Culbertson
Hartog-Levin
Broas
Hoekstra
Duggal
vteUnited States Ambassadors to Russia Russian Empire (1780 1917)
Dana
Adams
Pinkney
Campbell
Middleton
Randolph
Buchanan
Wilkins
J. Clay
Dallas
Cambreleng
Todd
Ingersoll
Bagby
Brown
Seymour
Pickens
Appleton
C. Clay
Cameron
C. Clay
Curtin
Orr
Jewell
Boker
Stoughton
Foster
Hunt
Taft
Lothrop
Tree
C. Smith
White
Breckinridge
Hitchcock
Tower
McCormick
Meyer
Riddle
Rockhill
Guild
Marye
Francis
 Soviet Union (1933 1991)
Bullitt
Davies
Steinhardt
Standley
Harriman
W. Smith
Kirk
Kennan
Bohlen
Thompson
Kohler
Thompson
Beam
Dubs
Stoessel
Toon
Watson
Hartman
Matlock
Strauss
 Russian Federation (1991 present)
Strauss
Pickering
Collins
Vershbow
Burns
Beyrle
McFaul
Tefft
Huntsman
Sullivan
Tracy
vteChairmen of the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs
Russell
Forsyth
Everett
Archer
Wayne
Mason
Howard
Pickens
Cushing
Adams
Ingersoll
T. Smith
McClernand
Bayly
Pennington
Clingman
Hopkins
Corwin
Crittenden
Davis
Banks
Myers
Orth
Swann
Cox
Williams
Curtin
Belmont
McCreary
Hitt
Blount
McCreary
Hitt
Cousins
Perkins
Foster
Sulzer
C. Smith
Flood
Porter
Temple
Linthicum
McReynolds
Bloom
Eaton
Bloom
Kee
Richards
Chiperfield
Richards
Gordon
Morgan
Zablocki
Fascell
Hamilton
Gilman
Hyde
Lantos
Berman
Ros-Lehtinen
Royce
Engel
Meeks
McCaul
vteDeans of the United States House of Representatives
Muhlenberg
Hartley/Thatcher
Grove/Gregg/Macon
Stanford
Davenport
Newton
McCoy
Williams
Everett/Lewis
Adams/McKay
Boyd
Giddings
Phelps
Washburne
Dawes
Kelley
Randall
Cannon/Mills/Blount/Bland
Culberson
Reed
Bingham
Dalzell
Payne
Jones
Cooper/Gillett
Butler
Haugen
Pou
Sabath
Doughton
Rayburn
Vinson
Celler
Patman
Mahon
Whitten
Dingell
Conyers
Young
Rogers
vteCabinet of President James Monroe (1817 1825)Secretary of State
Richard Rush (1817)
John Quincy Adams (1817 1825)
Secretary of the Treasury
William H. Crawford (1817 1825)
Secretary of War
John C. Calhoun (1817 1825)
Attorney General
Richard Rush (1817)
William Wirt (1817 1825)
Secretary of the Navy
Benjamin Williams Crowninshield (1817 1818)
Smith Thompson (1819 1823)
Samuel L. Southard (1823 1825)
vteCabinet of President John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)Secretary of State
Henry Clay (1825 1829)
Secretary of the Treasury
Richard Rush (1825 1829)
Secretary of War
James Barbour (1825 1828)
Peter Buell Porter (1828 1829)
Attorney General
William Wirt (1825 1829)
Secretary of the Navy
Samuel L. Southard (1825 1829)
vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright
vteJohn Adams
2nd President of the United States (1797 1801)
1st Vice President of the United States (1789 1797)
U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1785 1788)
U.S. Minister to the Netherlands (1782 1788)
Delegate to the Second Continental Congress (1775 1778)
Delegate to the First Continental Congress (1774)
Founding of theUnited States
Braintree Instructions (1765)
Boston Massacre defense
Continental Association
Petition to the King
United Colonies
Thoughts on Government (1776)
Lee Resolution (seconded)
Declaration of Independence
May 15 preamble
Committee of Five
Model Treaty
Treaty of Amity and Commerce
Treaty of Alliance
Board of War
Chairman of the Marine Committee, 1775-1779
Continental Navy
Staten Island Peace Conference
Conference House
Constitution of Massachusetts (1780)
Treaty of Paris, 1783
Diplomacy
Elections
United States presidential election 1788 1789
1792
1796
1800
Presidency
Inauguration
Quasi War with France
XYZ Affair
Commerce Protection Act
United States Marine Corps
Convention of 1800
Alien and Sedition Acts
Naturalization Act of 1798
Navy Department Library
Treaty of Tellico
Treaty of Tripoli
Midnight Judges Act
Marbury v. Madison
State of the Union Address (1797
1798
1799
1800)
Cabinet
Federal judiciary appointments
Other writings
Massachusetts Historical Society holdings
Adams Papers Editorial Project
A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America
Founders Online
Gray v. Pitts
Life andhomes
Early life and education
Adams National Historical Park
John Adams Birthplace
Family home and John Quincy Adams birthplace
Peacefield
Stone Library
Massachusetts Hall, Harvard University
Presidents House, Philadelphia
Co-founder and second president, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
United First Parish Church and gravesite
Legacy
Bibliography
List of memorials
Adams Memorial (proposed)
John Adams Building
Jefferson Memorial pediment
U.S. Postage stamps
Treaty of Paris (1783 painting)
USS Adams (1799)
USS John Adams (1799)
USS Adams (1874)
USS President Adams (1941)
USS John Adams (1963)
Adams House at Harvard University
Mount Adams (New Hampshire, Washington)
Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence
Popular culture
Profiles in Courage (1964 series)
American Primitive (1969 play)
1776 (1969 musical
1972 film)
The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
John Adams (2001 book
2008 miniseries)
John and Abigail Adams (2006 documentary film)
Sons of Liberty (2015 miniseries)
Franklin (upcoming miniseries)
Related
"Adams and Liberty" campaign song
Adams' personal library
American Enlightenment
Congress Hall
Federalist Party
Federalist Era
First Party System
republicanism
American Philosophical Society
Gazette of the United States
The American Museum
Letters of Mrs. Adams, the Wife of John Adams
American Revolution
patriots
Founding Fathers
Adams family
Abigail Adams
wife
Quincy family
Abigail Adams Smith (daughter)
John Quincy Adams
son
presidency
Charles Adams (son)
Thomas Boylston Adams (son)
George W. Adams (grandson)
Charles Adams Sr. (grandson)
John Adams II (grandson)
John Q. Adams (great-grandson)
Henry Adams (great-grandson)
Brooks Adams (great-grandson)
John Adams Sr. (father)
Susanna Boylston (mother)
Elihu Adams (brother)
Samuel Adams (second cousin)
Louisa Adams
daughter-in-law
first lady
  George Washington
Thomas Jefferson  
Thomas Jefferson  
 Category
vteMassachusetts's delegation(s) to the 8th 10th, 22nd 30th United States Congress (ordered by seniority)
8th
Senate: 
 T. Pickering (F)
 J. Q. Adams (F)
House: 
 P. Wadsworth (F)
 J. Varnum (DR)
 P. Bishop (DR)
 L. Williams (F)
 T. Skinner (DR)
 M. Cutler (F)
 W. Eustis (DR)
 R. Cutts (DR)
 S. Hastings (F)
 S. Thatcher (F)
 P. Bruce (F)
 J. Crowninshield (F)
 T. Dwight (F)
 N. Mitchell (F)
 E. Seaver (DR)
 W. Stedman (F)
 S. Taggart (F)
 S. Larned (DR)
9th
Senate: 
 T. Pickering (F)
 J. Q. Adams (F)
House: 
 P. Wadsworth (F)
 J. Varnum (DR)
 P. Bishop (DR)
 R. Cutts (DR)
 S. Hastings (F)
 J. Crowninshield (F)
 E. Seaver (DR)
 W. Stedman (F)
 S. Taggart (F)
 J. Barker (DR)
 B. Bidwell (DR)
 J. Chandler (DR)
 O. Cook (DR)
 W. Ely (F)
 I. Green (DR)
 J. Nelson (F)
 J. Quincy III (F)
10th
Senate: 
 T. Pickering (F)
 J. Q. Adams (F)
 J. Lloyd (F)
House: 
 J. Varnum (DR)
 R. Cutts (DR)
 J. Crowninshield (F)
 E. Seaver (DR)
 W. Stedman (F)
 S. Taggart (F)
 J. Barker (DR)
 B. Bidwell (DR)
 J. Chandler (DR)
 O. Cook (DR)
 W. Ely (F)
 I. Green (DR)
 J. Quincy III (F)
 J. Dean (DR)
 D. Ilsley (DR)
 E. Livermore (F)
 J. Upham (F)
 E. Bacon (DR)
 J. Story (DR)
22nd
Senate: 
 N. Silsbee (NR)
 D. Webster (NR)
House: 
 J. Reed Jr. (NR)
 J. Nelson (NR)
 J. Davis (NR)
 E. Everett (NR)
 I. Bates (NR)
 J. Hodges (NR)
 G. Grennell (NR)
 J. Kendall (NR)
 J. Q. Adams (NR)
 N. Appleton (NR)
 G. Briggs (NR)
 R. Choate (NR)
 H. Dearborn (NR)
23rd
Senate: 
 N. Silsbee (NR)
 D. Webster (NR)
House: 
 J. Reed Jr. (NR)
 B. Gorham (NR)
 J. Davis (NR)
 E. Everett (NR)
 I. Bates (NR)
 G. Grennell (NR)
 W. Baylies (NR)
 J. Q. Adams (AM)
 G. Briggs (NR)
 R. Choate (NR)
 W. Jackson (AM)
 G. Osgood (J)
 L. Lincoln Jr. (NR)
 S. Phillips (NR)
24th
Senate: 
 D. Webster (NR)
 J. Davis (NR)
House: 
 J. Reed Jr. (AM)
 G. Grennell Jr. (NR)
 J. Q. Adams (AM)
 G. Briggs (NR)
 W. Jackson (AM)
 L. Lincoln Jr. (NR)
 S. Phillips (NR)
 N. Borden (J)
 W. Calhoun (NR)
 C. Cushing (NR)
 S. Hoar (NR)
 A. Lawrence (NR)
25th
Senate: 
 D. Webster (W)
 J. Davis (W)
House: 
 J. Reed Jr. (W)
 G. Grennell (W)
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 G. Briggs (W)
 L. Lincoln Jr. (W)
 S. Phillips (W)
 N. Borden (D)
 W. Calhoun (W)
 C. Cushing (W)
 R. Fletcher (W)
 W. Hastings (W)
 W. Parmenter (D)
 L. Saltonstall (W)
26th
Senate: 
 D. Webster (W)
 J. Davis (W)
 I. Bates (W)
 R. Choate (W)
House: 
 J. Reed Jr. (W)
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 G. Briggs (W)
 L. Lincoln Jr. (W)
 W. Calhoun (W)
 C. Cushing (W)
 A. Lawrence (W)
 W. Parmenter (D)
 W. Hastings (W)
 L. Saltonstall (W)
 J. Alvord (W)
 H. Williams (D)
 O. Baker (W)
 R. Winthrop (W)
27th
Senate: 
 I. Bates (W)
 R. Choate (W)
House: 
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 G. Briggs (W)
 L. Lincoln Jr. (W)
 N. Borden (W)
 W. Calhoun (W)
 C. Cushing (W)
 W. Parmenter (D)
 W. Hastings (W)
 L. Saltonstall (W)
 O. Baker (W)
 R. Winthrop (W)
 B. Burnell (W)
 C. Hudson (W)
 N. Appleton (W)
28th
Senate: 
 I. Bates (W)
 R. Choate (W)
House: 
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 W. Parmenter (D)
 O. Baker (W)
 R. Winthrop (W)
 H. Williams (D)
 B. Burnell (W)
 C. Hudson (W)
 A. Abbott (W)
 D. King (W)
 J. Rockwell (W)
 J. Grinnell (W)
29th
Senate: 
 I. Bates (W)
 D. Webster (W)
 J. Davis (W)
House: 
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 R. Winthrop (W)
 C. Hudson (W)
 A. Abbott (W)
 D. King (W)
 J. Rockwell (W)
 J. Grinnell (W)
 G. Ashmun (W)
 A. Hale (W)
 B. Thompson (W)
30th
Senate: 
 D. Webster (W)
 J. Davis (W)
House: 
 J. Q. Adams (W)
 R. Winthrop (W)
 C. Hudson (W)
 A. Abbott (W)
 D. King (W)
 J. Rockwell (W)
 J. Grinnell (W)
 G. Ashmun (W)
 A. Hale (W)
 J. Palfrey (W)
 H. Mann (W)
Portals: Biography United States Politics LawJohn Quincy Adams at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Academics
CiNii
Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Quincy_Adams&oldid=1149298336"