This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Season of television series
Bobobo-bo Bo-boboVolume 1 DVD, featuring Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo on the cover.Native nameKanji Revised HepburnBobob bo B bobo
Country of originJapanNo. of episodes76ReleaseOriginal networkTV AsahiOriginal releaseNovember 8, 2003 (2003-11-08) October 29, 2005 (2005-10-29)
The anime television series Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo is based on the manga series of the same name written and illustrated by Yoshio Sawai. The series was directed by Hiroki Shibata[1] and produced by Toei Animation. It ran for 76 episodes from November 8, 2003 to October 29, 2005 on TV Asahi.[2] For episodes 1-32, the first opening theme is "Wild Challenger" by Jindou while the ending themes are "Shiawase" ( , Happiness) by Mani Laba and "Kirai Tune" ( , Hate Tune) by FREENOTE. For episodes 33-76, the second opening theme is "Baka Survivor" ( , Stupid Survivor) by Ulfuls while the third ending theme is "H.P.S.J." by mihimaru GT.[3]
In North America, the anime was licensed by the Joy Tashjian Marketing Group, a licensing representative named by Toei Animation.[4] The series first aired as a sneak peek on Cartoon Network's "Summer 2005 Kick-Off Special" in May 2005,[5] and then premiered on 30 September and aired on Cartoon Network's Toonami programming block Saturdays at 10/9c, starting on 1 October.[6] New episodes premiered on 17 February 2007.[7][8] The series was seen on Cartoon Network's broadband service Toonami Jetstream from 5 November 2007, until its closure in January 2009.[9] In the United Kingdom, the series premiered on Jetix on 16 April 2007.[10]
Episode list[edit]
No.TitleOriginal air dateEnglish air date1"The Bo-nafide Soulful Bo-tector of Hair" / "Written as "Soul of Hair", Wants to be Read as "Sparkling"..."Transcription: "'Ke tamash ' to kaite 'sup kuringu' to yoma setai..." (Japanese:  " " ...)8 November 2003 (2003-11-08)30 September 2005
In the year 300X, the diabolical Czar Baldy-Bald IV proclaims a hair hunt throughout his Chrome Dome Empire, forcing everyone under his rule to be as bald as him. But in the midst of the chaos emerges a rebel with a golden afro and an insane way of doing things. That man is Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo! This episode introduces Bo-bobo, along with the pink-haired Beauty (who joins along on his hair-raising adventures) and the vinegary Pickles (who is never seen again after this episode), along with several mysterious characters we'll probably meet again later.
2"Let's Get Wiggy With It" / "Written as "Tears of Hair", Should be Read as "Sentimental"Transcription: "'Ke namida' to kaite 'senchimentaru' to yonde hosh ..." (Japanese:  " " ...)15 November 2003 (2003-11-15)8 October 2005
Due to circumstances in the last episode, Bo-bobo ends up facing off against the orange star-shaped Wiggin Don Patch in a Christmas-themed Wiggin battle (involving a story about churros), but when Beauty gets abducted by a group of wig-wearing Hair Hunters, the two of them must join together to confuse the heck out of them! Weirdness regarding vegetables and joining in on the villain's date follow suit. Yet with Beauty abandoned to the Hair Hunters, she at least is saved by a mysterious white-haired boy.
3"Wacky Quacker Cooks His Own Goose" / "26-Year-Old Duck Underwear"Transcription: "26-sai no ahiru pantsu saa~!" (Japanese: 26 !)22 November 2003 (2003-11-22)15 October 2005
Leaving behind Don Patch for the moment, Bo-bobo and Beauty first head to a Wig-Out Festival, where we discover the value of giant burger costumes and why dynamite should never play the stock market. Then, the duo encounter a hair hunter with a weird taste in underwear, considering there's a duck sticking out of the front of it!
4"Bababa-ba Ba-baba! The Honorable King Nosehair" / "Bababa-ba Ba-baba! The Great King Nosehair?"Transcription: "Babab ba b baba! Idainaru kingu hanage-sama?" (Japanese:  ! ?)29 November 2003 (2003-11-29)22 October 2005
Don Patch is ready to go out on his own and join with Bo-bobo and Beauty, but first he has to finish "Wiggin' School", where Bo-bobo isn't making his last day any easier. Then, as the trio continue their journey (and drive each other crazy), they face off against a water-logged Hair Hunter that can read minds and are forced to witness the revival (and quick abandonment) of the legendary king of the nosehairs.
5"To Be or Snot to Be" / "Sushi and Bunny Girls? Ultimate Attack! Ochazuke Beam!!"Transcription: "Sushi to ban g ru? Hissatsu! Ochadzuke b mu!!" (Japanese:  ? ! !!)6 December 2003 (2003-12-06)29 October 2005
Bo-bobo and Don Patch decide to throw a play in the middle of the woods where the plot becomes more bizarre with each scene. But without notice, they find themselves under siege from a strange green tentacle alien in search for a familiar boy (familiar to Beauty, anyway) and a power that leads to a very unstoppable craving for rice soup!? But after an underwater battle and an unexpected finale, Bo-bobo finally brings the creature down without knowing that he works for an even more foreboding opponent.
6"Pasta... the Perfect Food!" / "Dreadful Ultimate Secret Somen Shinken! Ko-n-ni-chi-wa!"Transcription: "Osorubeshi ky kyoku  gi s men ma ken! Ko n ni chi ha!!" (Japanese:  ! !!)13 December 2003 (2003-12-13)12 November 2005
Continuing their journey to another city, Bo-bobo tries to master a new technique from a famed pasta maker and witnesses wooden spoons making... wooden spoons. But when Beauty is attacked with a "hair-loss beam" from a Hair Hunter from C-Block, our heroes must begin a new journey to save the heroine, save the day... and figure out why Don Patch's weapons are all green onions.
7"Queen Chicken Level and the Video Store of Dumb" / "The 10th Miss Chicken Queen Niwako and the Mysterious Guard Softon"Transcription: "Dai 10 kai Misu niwatori Ku n niwako to nazo no bannin Sofuton" (Japanese:  10 )20 December 2003 (2003-12-20)19 November 2005
Crash landing inside C-Block Tower, Bo-bobo and Don Patch begin an upwards battle against the local hair hunters, while learning along the way about dental hygiene, poultry pageants, and the importance of having two video stores on top of each other. But that's before they find out their next mysterious opponent... well, has an interesting taste in head gear.
8"We All Scream for Ice Cream!" / "The Release of Soul is... Piro-Piro-Piro-Piro-Pirochi!"Transcription: "Tamashi no Kaih  sore wa, Piro-Piro-Piro-Piro-Pirochi!" (Japanese:  ...  !)10 January 2004 (2004-01-10)26 November 2005
Bo-bobo finally faces off against Softon, the fourth-floor guardian who claims he's strawberry soft serve (but we know better). While he does claim to have Beauty's welfare at heart, Softon also has an unstoppable arsenal of techniques and the abilities of the goddess Blabs-a-Lot! But that's before Bo-bobo unleashed on him the enigma that is Bo-bobo World.
9"Gasser Up! I'm Ready to Drive!" / "The Mysterious Boy's True Form and Fart Shinken! Eat Asparagus!"Transcription: "Nazo no Sh nen no Sh tai to Onara shinken! Asupara Kuttoke!" (Japanese:  ! !)17 January 2004 (2004-01-17)3 December 2005
Finally reaching the top of C-Block Tower, our heroes face off against the windy Geha the Gale (even though Beauty's already been saved). But when Bo-bobo and Don Patch are blown away by the competition, a new challenger finally makes his presence known: Gasser, master of the "Fist of the Backwind" and the boy that has been watching Beauty all this time! (though his appearance doesn't explain why Bo-bobo turns into a leopard)
10"Protect the Environment... Something Stinks in Here!" / "Protect! The Earth's Environment: The Password is Fart Puppu-: There's No Smell~!"Transcription: "Mamore! Chiky  Kanky  Aikotoba wa Onarapupp  Kusakunai!!" (Japanese:  !     !!)24 January 2004 (2004-01-24)10 December 2005
A giant wall monster emerges from out of nowhere in C-Block Tower, with the objective of capturing Gasser and stealing his "Fist of the Backwind". But Bo-bobo sees a bigger problem: how Gasser's ultimate technique is powerful enough to destroy life on Earth as we know it! And that probably explains why he and Don Patch make fun of the battle in progress.
11"A Bird in the Hand Can Play Chicken But Still Smell Fowl!" / "'The Crane's Gratitude' of Betrayal and Greed The Passage is VE~RY!"Transcription: "Uragiri to yokub  no "Tsuru no Ongaeshi" sono setu wa d mo!" (Japanese:  " " !)31 January 2004 (2004-01-31)17 December 2005
With Gasser now a part of his team, Bo-bobo decides to teach him a few things about fighting. The first lesson: how to defeat an opponent without using his own special technique. But when that fails after a battle with a Hair Hunter, his education moves to the "Nosehair Dojo", where beating up fish and fighting old women (and one old man) are on the curriculum.
12"The Weally Wobbly World of Bo-bobo's Foe: General Jelly Jiggler!" / "The Strong Enemy That Jiggles Appears! His Name is Tokoro Tennosuke"Transcription: "Purunpurun shite iru ky teki shutsugen! Sononaha Tokoro Tennosuke" (Japanese:  ! )7 February 2004 (2004-02-07)7 January 2006
Gasser's education continues while Bo-bobo and Don Patch fend chopsticks from a thieving pencil case. But no one could expect what comes next: the mysterious appearance of a new amusement park controlled by the leader of A-Block, Jelly Jiggler. And with a friend of Bo-bobo (whom we've never seen prior) being held captive and forced to eat spaghetti against his will, its up to the heroes to fight and have fun while they're at it.
13"Bo-bobo's Rappin' Roller Coaster Ride" / "Enraged Snapshot! 24-Hour Amusement Park: The Revealed Hippos Black Curtain!"Transcription: "Gekisatsu! Y enchi 24-ji abaka reta kaba no kuromaku!" (Japanese:  !  24   !)7 February 2004 (2004-02-07)14 January 2006
With Jelly Jiggler somewhere in the park, the team searches A-Block and gets into all sorts of mischief: Bo-bobo rides a monkey train almost taken over by rabbits, Don Patch reunites with an old boyfriend that's now by-the-numbers, Gasser beats up more fish and Beauty watches a cat eat with utensils. And that's before a roller coaster rap about... turtles!?
14"Haunted HollowBo-bobo" / "Marriage in the Haunted House: Mama, Papa I Will Be Very Happy..."Transcription: "Obakeyashi de kekkonshiki papa mama atashi shiawase ni narimasu..." (Japanese:      ...)21 February 2004 (2004-02-21)21 January 2006
While searching inside a haunted house, Gasser finds out he's marrying... Bo-bobo!? And if that's not enough, he is also stuck fighting A-Block vice leader Katsu, who can counter abilities with smiley-face absorption! But with the hair-hunter's accessories collection incomplete and Bo-bobo fending off his own nose-hair fist, things take a turn for the strange.
15"General Jelly Jiggler: Supreme Hair Enemy or Dastardly Dessert?" / "Secret of Purupuru Shinken! Tokoroten Gun Explosion! But There's no Tas~te"Transcription: "Purupuru ma ken  gi! Tokoro ten tepp  sakuretsu! Demo aji gana~i" (Japanese:  ! ! )28 February 2004 (2004-02-28)28 January 2006
Gasser's true power (and mental side effect) are finally revealed against Katsu, while the search for Jelly Jiggler comes to a weird climax as Bo-bobo finally faces off against the blue jelly man and his "Fist of the Wobble-Wobble". But when Bo-bobo should be fighting his greatest enemy, all he can do is eat him! (and worse off, without any ponzu sauce)
16"Snot in My Neighborhood!" / "Farewell My Greatest Enemy: Tokoro Tennosuke! Good Evening My New Enemy: Dengakuman!"Transcription: "Saraba saiky  no teki tokoroten'nosuke! Konbanwa aratana teki dengaku man!" (Japanese:    !   !)6 March 2004 (2004-03-06)4 February 2006
Bo-bobo and Don Patch's come together (literally) for a final assault on Jelly Jiggler! But after that... they decide to join the Hair Hunters!? While both are in the competition for the position, Bo-bobo's abilities in front of fans may put him at an advantage over bad seed Don Patch's ability to play a stick of butter. But the two of them don't know is that there are a couple of enemies keeping a close eye on them.
17"The Ducktail Versus Afro Showdown" / "Regent vs Afro: The Eternal Rival's Pure-Hearted School!"Transcription: "R zento VS afuro eien no raibaru junj -ha!" (Japanese:  VS   ( ) !)13 March 2004 (2004-03-13)11 February 2006
Bo-bobo encounters his greatest rival: Captain Battleship, the ducktailed master of a personal "Fist of the Nosehair" style! But there's more to him than meets the eye: how does Gasser know who he is? Why is he fighting against other Hair Hunters if he himself is a Hair Hunter elite? And what exactly does he want now outside running around as an octopus? All that we know is that this is the episode that teaches us that you can never have too many Beautys.
18"Beauty is in the Eye of her Holder" / "Infiltration! Gunkan's Stronghold: The Great Spy Operation!"Transcription: "Sen'ny ! Gunkan no y sai suppai dai sakusen!" (Japanese:  !   !)3 April 2004 (2004-04-03)18 February 2006
Our heroes finally reach Puppu City, Gasser's hometown and the current ruined home of Battleship's Pomade Ring headquarters (and where Beauty's being held hostage). But now they face an entire legion of problems, such as the Pomade Ring's army, a fish-loving second-in-command, floating heads, disgruntled businessmen, masked warriors who can't count, and of course... Serviceman. But take heart: if you have big sparkly eyes, you can fly away free from these problems!
19"The Entangled Nose Hair of Destiny: Who Will Pass the Test?" / "The Entangled Nosehair of Destiny: This Comes in the Next Test!"Transcription: "Karamaru shukumei no hanage! Koko-ji no tesuto ni demasu!" (Japanese:  ! !)3 April 2004 (2004-04-03)25 February 2006
With saving Beauty still on their mind, Bo-bobo and team prepare for one-on-one fights with The Battleship Five Quartet (who still number in six). Gasser fights first, having to go through a masked school filled with friends, enemies and sumo wrestlers until encountering an old ally turned rival. Then, Bo-bobo takes on a calendar who's afraid of losing all its pages but it may not be the real enemy he should be worried about!
20"World of Blabs-a-Lot: The Sappiest Place on Earth" / "New World Travel Guide!! I Saw Bo-bobo's Weakness in the Backwoods of Babylon!"Transcription: "Sekai shin kik ! Babiron no okuchi ni b bobo no jakuten o mita!" (Japanese:  ! !)1 May 2004 (2004-05-01)4 March 2006
Bo-bobo, Don Patch and King Nosehair confuse the heck out of the second member of the Battleship Five Quartet, but after the results of that battle (and following battles by Don Patch and Jelly Jiggler), Softon sends Bo-bobo off to the mysterious World of Blabs-a-Lot to receive special training and get rid of his weakness. But even though he ends up running around with a bunch of chicken-headed tour guides and expelling fruit from yogurt, he ends up facing the mysterious last member of Battleship's masked warriors..and has just the attack to take care of him.
21"Good-bye Bo-bobo! The Final Showdown?" / "Farewell Bo-bobo! The Final Nosehair Battle!! But This Isn't the End~!"Transcription: "Saraba b bobo! ? Saish  hanage kessen! Demo saish kai jana i!" (Japanese:  !? ! !)8 May 2004 (2004-05-08)11 March 2006
Back from his training trip (and after helping out in a carpentry lesson), Bo-bobo finally has his ultimate showdown with Captain Battleship, upon which the ducktailed warrior's sordid past and the truth of his hatred towards Bo-bobo is finally revealed! With bones flying, robots destroying and ultimate attacks from nosehairs to armadas to orange boxes showing up left and right, the two Fist of the Nosehair masters fight until one is finally standing at the end. But just when you think it's over a new character appears at the end.!
22"Hatenko the Hunk Has the Key to Your Heart" / "Enter the Mysterious Cool Guy! He'll LOCK Up Your Heart!!"Transcription: "Nazo no ikemen t j ! Kimi no h to o LOCK suru!!" (Japanese:  ! LOCK !!)15 May 2004 (2004-05-15)18 March 2006
Hatenko, a mysterious former ally of Bo-bobo from the Hair Kingdom, finally catches up with him to criticize his current status and stop anyone in his way. But that's before everyone learns of his obsessive devotion to his great "sun", Don Patch! And to make matters worse, along comes Kitty-Poo, the second of the Baldy-Bald Big Four to finish what Battleship started. (and to make fun of a certain sh nen anime classic) But there's one thing he forgot: never, ever underestimate Don Patch! And that's because Kitty-Poo and co-horts were each defeated by Don Patch by ONE attack!
23"Weddings, Wiggins and Water Torture" / "Welcome to Evil Blood Mansion! The Returned Duck Underwear--!!"Transcription: "Y koso yokoshima chi-kan e! Kaettekita ahiru pantsu saa!!" (Japanese:  ! !!)29 May 2004 (2004-05-29)25 March 2006
Hatenko leads the group towards the Evil House of Blood, as if they were invited to a reception for Czar Baldy Bald's wedding. But instead, they're forced to go through several obstacles such as a returning Hair Hunt villain, allies turned into mind slaves, exploding cell phone assassins, brainwashed Bo-bobo soup, and the importance of wearing a fashionable raincoat. However, with doubts going through Gasser's mind about the key fighter's true purpose, all Don Patch wants is the power to win as well as a much buffer body!
24"The Terrifying Z-Block Is Here!" / "Arrival at the Terrifying Z-Block Base! The Ocean! A Quiz! Forgiveness Mask!!"Transcription: "Ky fu no Z burokku kichi shutsugen! Umida! Kuizu da! Yurushite kamenda!!" (Japanese:  Z ! ! ! !!)5 June 2004 (2004-06-05)8 April 2006
Bo-bobo and team finally arrives at Z-Block Base, from where the cute leader Dengaku Man has been taunting them for a while now. But to get to it, they must first get through a beachfront entrance with a powerful robot team who's just as good with beach volleyball as they are with asking for forgiveness! And once they make it inside the main headquarters, then they must go through a game show where the questions and contests get weirder by the second!
25"The New Bo-bobo with the Old Bo-bobody" / "Birth! NEW Bo-bobo WITH Fishcake: Father is Doing His Best!"Transcription: "Tanj ! Ny  B bobo WITH hanpen ot san wa ganbatte iru zo!" (Japanese:  !NEW  WITH    !)12 June 2004 (2004-06-12)15 April 2006
As their Z-Block trials continue, Bo-bobo and Don Patch decide to go into broadcasting, even if it means going inside a giant TV and facing off against a villain who can shine a light on them! But in the midst of all this, the horrific secret of Z-Block is revealed, Gasser and Beauty get stuck within a crowd of chefs and Bo-bobo dies after revealing himself to be a vampire! But that's before a strange black-haired Bo-bobo arrives with the power of fishcake and the ability to turn into a dragon, not to mention unleash yet another Z-Block warrior! Also, Beauty goes temporarily insane (on the level of Don Patch and Bo-BoBo
26"Dengaku Man, Pixie or Pit Bull--He'll Love You or Hate You!" / "Once More, the Ultimate Enemy! Dengakuman!! How Many Friends Can He Make?"Transcription: "Futatabi saiky  no teki! Dengaku man!! Tomodachi nanijin dekiru ka na?" (Japanese:  ! !! ?)19 June 2004 (2004-06-19)29 April 2006
The little Z-Block leader Dengaku Man finally emerges to take on Bo-bobo and Don Patch, showing off just as much wiggin abilities as our heroes! But amidst the honey butter, flag waving, and aeronautical potstickers, the enemy may just be a lonely little puppy (well, he doesn't look like a dog) who just wants someone to be his friend. Lucky for him, Bo-bobo may just know some... just watch out for squids and raisins!
27"Luck Let a Wiggin See...How Nice a Hanky Can Be!" / "Hair Raising! The Legendary Hajike Base!! I've Already Wiped My Tears with the Handkerchief of "Nu"..."Transcription: "Senritsu! Densetsu no Hajike kichi!! M  namida o o fuki "nu" no hankachi de" (Japanese:  ! !! ...)10 July 2004 (2004-07-10)6 May 2006
With Bo-bobo defeating him at every turn, Czar Baldy-Bald authorizes the re-opening of Wiggin Block, where some of the most powerful (and insane) warriors reside. Now in order to take it down, Bo-bobo and the team must go through a base onslaught of ice-cream loving assassins, dolphin shows, strange space travelers, tea ceremonies and transforming birds...not to mention the return of a certain jiggly ally and a brand "nu" lucky hanky!
28"Mortal Match! Fist of Nose Hair vs. Fist of Rice!" / "Death Match! Hanage Shinken vs. Kome Shinken!! Be Friends and Don't Fight "Transcription: "Shit ! Hanage ma ken VS Amerika ma ken!! Nakayoku kenka-shina  " (Japanese:  ! VS !! )17 July 2004 (2004-07-17)13 May 2006
Continuing through Wiggin Block, Bo-bobo and our ragtag group are forced into a cat-and-mouse chase against an honorable mouse samurai who has issues with toilet seats. Then, they encounter Rice, a so-called King of Wiggin Specialists with a grudge against Don Patch and a bowl of full-grain attacks! Now with Beauty captured and facing a bizarre fate, Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly Jiggler (and maybe Gasser) are forced to face down the "Fist of Rice" master, whether its by throwing fruit at him or using friends as protective shields!
29"Instant Rice - Ready in Half an Hour?" / "Bo-bobo and Rice's 30-Minute Cooking! Madam, What Do You Want from Tonight's Menu?"Transcription: "B -bobo & raisu no 30-bu kukkingu! Okusama, kon'ya no meny  ni ikaga?" (Japanese:  & 30 ! ?)24 July 2004 (2004-07-24)20 May 2006
You are cordially invited to a thirty-minute dinnertime Wiggin spectacular, as we witness Rice unleashing his full power as the King of Wiggin Specialists, complete with back rubs, ballerina tutus, poison apples, a king outfit and carbo-loaded fury! Co-starring Bo-bobo (who wants the title from Rice), Don Patch (who turned down the title and with transformation of his own), Jelly Jiggler (with his new line of party supplies), and Beauty as...a panda!?
30"Revenge is a Dish Best Served Cold with Shiitake Mushroom Sauce" / "Elemental Ninja Castle! Lips to Ruby to a Pig's Butt...What Anime is This?!"Transcription: "F un ninja-j ! Kuchibiru ni rub  ni buta no oshiri tte don'na anime ja!!" (Japanese:  ! ... !!)7 August 2004 (2004-08-07)27 May 2006
Just when the fight for King of Wiggin Specialist was finished, a big-mouth ninja assassin arrives to challenge Bo-bobo to take on his master, the horrific OVER of the Baldy-Bald Big Four! After Bo-bobo and the others can get past his bone-headed ninja tricks, he sends them to the entrance with a flying duck-loving warrior to face. (and Serviceman hanging by a limb) And beyond that is a force of The Ultimate Five Assassins to get past along the way, the first of which is...a playful little girl!?
31"The Ultimate Five Assassins vs. Bo-bobo All-Stars!" / "The Killer 5 Ninshu vs. Bo-bobo All Stars! Baby He-kun Runs Wild Too! Babu "Transcription: "Hissatsu go shinobu shuu VS B bobo  rusut zu! Akachan hekkun mo dai b s !" (Japanese:  VS ! ! )4 September 2004 (2004-09-04)3 June 2006
Continuing through OVER's Castle, our heroes next face the only soccer-themed villain who has no connection to soccer whatsoever! That doesn't stop Gasser from causing a complete stink over his fight. (even with the eventual lawsuits they cause) Then, they face off against an incompetent trap master who almost succeeds in victory! (prior to the return of a cute little Wiggin) But all this leads up to a showdown against the last three assassins...on top of a giant toilet where those trapped inside get a very swell fate!
32"Enter BoboPatchiggler! Is That How It's Spelled?" / "Go! Bobopatchnosuke! In a Bicycle!!!...Seriously!?"Transcription: "Ike! Bobo Patchi no suke! Mamachari de!!!... Majide!?" (Japanese:  ! ! !!!... !?)4 September 2004 (2004-09-04)10 June 2006
Facing off against a team of ancient cultures that knows how to work together, Bo-bobo shows how little he, Don Patch and Jelly Jiggler really work together outside beating each other (and Dengaku Man) up! But with time running out and facing the elite teamwork (not to mention a not too bad curling technique) of the ninja assassins, the trio (literally) come together to form the triple fusion Bobopatchiggler, which unleashes the power that is Majide Time...ARE YOU SERIOUS!?
Special"Thanks for Waiting! Remodelled Grand Opening!! It's Finally Come, the Patchmi Era  "Transcription: "Omatase! Shins  kaiten!! Tsuini kita no ne, pachi bi no jidai ga  " (Japanese:  ! !! )23 October 2004 (2004-10-23)Unaired
In a special recap episode, the cast members of the series (as well as a female fan that looks just like our main protagonist) come together to figure out who the new main character of the series is going to be. But Don Patch keeps seeing strange visions on his crystal ball of an enemy they're about to take on once this discussion is....OVER! Luckily, after everything is straightened out, BoboPatchiggler reverts everything back to the cliffhanger of the previous episode.
33"It Ain't OVER 'Til the Fat Lady Sings" / ""OVER! I'll Defeat You!" Said Tokoro Tennosuke-!!!"Transcription: "OVER! Tem  wa ore ga buttaosu! Tte ten no suke ga ittemashita!!!" (Japanese: OVER! ! !!!)30 October 2004 (2004-10-30)17 June 2006
Finally at the top of the castle, our heroes finally face the tyrannical OVER, who challenges Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly Jiggler to an all out cannon-flying showdown where the losers get chowed by metallic bear traps. But while being thrown through the sky, knawed by metal teeth and being trashed by giant scissors isn't bad enough, the trio just can't stop making the bad guy angry at their shenanigans! (particularly Jelly Jiggler) However, when he's finally angry enough times, it may seem like it's GAME OVER, but...
34"Torpedo Girl: Man or Myth? Or Mythes?" / "Sorry for the Extremely Long Wait Everyone! Finally Introduced! Gyourai Girl!!"Transcription: "Minasama taihen nagaraku o mata se itashimashita! Tsuini t j ! Gyorai g ru!!" (Japanese:  ! ! !!)6 November 2004 (2004-11-06)24 June 2006
Unexpectedly, OVER true form is revealed to be Torpedo Girl, a legendary Joke Killer who smashes into anyone who cracks an extremely lame excuse for humor! And with Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly Jiggler being bashed around every other line (and Dengaku Man getting none of it), the trio come together for an all out attack to put a stop to this ultimate enemy! Not even the Fist of the Nose Hair can stop this threat...BECAUSE SHE'S A TORPEDO!!!
35"King Nose Hair Presents: "The Follicle Follies of the Future"" / "Gyourai Girl!! In the Name of the Earth, I'll Judge You "Transcription: "Gyorai g ru yo!! Chiky  ni kawatte o sabaki yo  " (Japanese:  !! )13 November 2004 (2004-11-13)1 July 2006
Torpedo Girl takes a quick trip to Bo-bobo World, but not even the insanity there is able to stop her stubborn joke-hating ways. But then, Bo-bobo unleashes his most powerful attack: the judgement of the nine planets of the Solar System (done in his own unique manners) unleashing the greatest powers of the universe! But while this may be enough to stop a torpedo, it takes a little more nosehair thrust to finally put a stop to OVER! But while all seems happy, Captain Battleship's assistant Suzu is about to lead them on a new path...
36"Next Stop...Holy Guacamole Land!" / "Advance Departure to Hallelujah Land! Hell Up Ahead!?"Transcription: "Hareruya Rando e shuppatsu shink ! Konosaki wa jigoku!?" (Japanese:  ! !?)20 November 2004 (2004-11-20)8 July 2006
Bo-bobo and company take a train to Holy Guacamole Land, the theme park base of the greedy Halekulani. Though with six tickets and seven potential passengers, Jelly discovers traveling al fresco. However, an official assassin attacks him and Bo-bobo on the boxcars, leading to an all night spear-swinging, jelly slicing, Don Patch angering battle! But once their journey is done, several tunnels have been smashed through and a UFO has been blown up...and all they get for their journey is a stupid sash!
37"Holy Guacamole Land Isn't Just For Breakfast Anymore" / "Great Rage at Hallelujah Land! Everyone's Become Children "Transcription: "Hareruya Rando de dai abare! Min'na kodomo ni natchi ~yaimachita  " (Japanese:  ! )27 November 2004 (2004-11-27)22 July 2006
While Bo-bobo and the others have safely arrived in Holy Guacamole Land, they soon realize the danger of a park where attractions can blow up on you! At least everyone can find refuge in the "Kids Area", where everyone can relive their childhood...and Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly can create their own rock band. No one told them about the adult villain in the park that can make them relive their worst nightmares, but the kid fighters can still have fun, kick butt, and even fuse into...a badly drawn warrior!
38"Money Castle! Cash Only Please. Credit Cards Not Accepted" / "Start the Attack on Money Castle! But Let's Drop in on the Way!"Transcription: "Man ky assuru e totsugeki kaishi! Demo toch  de yorimichi sa sete!" (Japanese:  ! !)4 December 2004 (2004-12-04)29 July 2006
Though Bo-bobo and the others should be making their way to Money Castle and Halekulani, they end up splitting up in the middle of the park. But A Few Dangerous Thugs lurk about around the attractions...while Bo-bobo and Jelly face off against a long-nailed freak (while Suzu does her worst Don Patch impersanation), Don Patch fights in a show where he's the hero and a villainous cyborg can't predict any of his insane moves! But while the first two fail, the last one (or should I say three) now stand in their way.
39"The Terrible Triplets Versus the Wiggin' Trio!" / "Decisive Battle! The Three Prison-Murderer Brothers vs. Hajike Trio! Which Has Better Teamwork!?"Transcription: "Kessen! Goku ya 3 ky dai VS hajiketorio! Ch muw ku wa dotchiga-j !?" (Japanese:  ! 3 VS ! ?)11 December 2004 (2004-12-11)5 August 2006
Bo-bobo's team takes on the Terrible Triplets (who despite their claims, look nothing alike) for the sake of Beauty and Suzu, who are stuck under the stench of fatal gum! From unleashing goddesses at them to slapping them around with seaweed to unleashing powerful whirlwinds (slightly inspired by another series), the Bo-bobo team appears to show just as much (or just as lacking) teamwork as their laser firing, gum-chewing, cuteness revealing competition!
40"The Fall of Halekulani! And the Winter of Discontent!" / "Overthrow Halekulani! And Afterwards Lets Take His Money "Transcription: "Dat  harekurani! Son'na koto yori okane o hiroou  " (Japanese:  ! )8 January 2005 (2005-01-08)12 August 2006
Now that the brother Haou has become more powerful, Bo-bobo unleashes a special attack to bring him and his brothers down: a madcap roulette where any of them (or his allies) can be smashes, struck by ninjas, or...turned into sh jo characters! And when they're finally out of the way, there's still the matter of Halekulani, who shows off an impenetrable money field that can transform anyone struck into currency! (Bo-bobo and the others may rather spend it than fight it...)
41"The Magical Battle Against Halekulani!" / "Gorgeous Showdown with Halekulani! See, Our Super Illusion!!"Transcription: "Harekurani to g jasu taiketsu! Miyo, s p  iry jon!!" (Japanese:  ! !!)15 January 2005 (2005-01-15)19 August 2006
Halekulani finally faces off against Bo-bobo's team, where he reveals the power of his rich "Fist of Gorgeousness", where bills can become phoenixes, knights can come out of coins, and teammates can become coins! But as Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly break through his attacks (and embrace the finer things in life), the powerful villain takes them to a board game where his asset growth leads to a jewel-encrusted torture! But as Bo-bobo keeps rolling the rhino of fate, it may take a bit more to win this game...like the power of barbecue!
42"Bo-bobo Braves the Board Game that's Berry, Berry Bothersome" / "Fun Sugoroku in March! We'll Do A Service Altogether "Transcription: "Omoshiro sugoroku hatsud ! Min'na sorotte s bisu shi chau  " (Japanese:  ! )22 January 2005 (2005-01-22)26 August 2006
Although still Halekulani's board game, Bo-bobo decides to take it over, creating an extremely crazy game where aliens exist in haunted houses, fish are used for massaging and he controls all movement! But while the enemy seems down for the count (and set to jump rope), Halekulani reveals the true power of money, unleashing his ultimate power and an arsenal of trillions! But as Bo-bobo continues his onslaught, he may know the key of something more powerful than money...(if he didn't want it so badly)
43"Ha-le Oo-pu Ah-ah!" / "Final Battle with Halekulani: The Final Conclusion...We Thought Until a New Enemy!?"Transcription: "Harekurani saish  kessen tsuini ketchaku! ...to omottara aratana teki!?" (Japanese:    !... !?)29 January 2005 (2005-01-29)2 September 2006
Bo-bobo reveals the secret behind what's more important than money: boring everyday life, as revealed through a bizarre seven-day schedule where he eats crab, conquers Japan, blows up planets and runs around with ghosts...oh and stopping Halekulani once and for all! But with one enemy down, no one foresaw Gasser getting abducted by the forces of Cyber City, where the powerful Giga awaits his new prize. So it's off to rescue their ally... there are dangerous waters (and a torpedo) dead ahead!
44"The Seriously Circular Skirmish in Cyber City" / "Appear the Six Electric Brain Warriors! The Male Ballerina are Enchanting Too "Transcription: "Den'n  6 toukishi sanj ! Otoko barer na mo mise chaimasu [h to]" (Japanese:  6 ! )6 February 2005 (2005-02-06)9 September 2006
With a little assistance from Torpedo Girl, Bo-bobo's team makes their way to Cyber City, where they immediately find themselves on the broadcast of an insane, wheel-headed assassin who slices, dices, and makes them very, very dizzy! But with Gasser missing and Jelly turned into a sausage, Bo-bobo will go through anything to take him down, particularly if it involves pirouettes, driving...or horrible piano lessons! With one down, there's still five of The Six Cyber Knights left to go!
45"Begin the Bungie Battle! Last One Down is a Rotten Egg!" / "Invitation to the Depths of Hell!? Decisive Sky Battle! Start the Bungee Battle!!"Transcription: "Naraku no soko e go sh tai!? K ch  kessen! Banj  batoru kaishi!!" (Japanese:  !? ! !!)13 February 2005 (2005-02-13)16 September 2006
Preparing to encounter the remainder of the Cyber Knights, Bo-bobo's team is seized by a warrior who fights in a rebounding bungee fight with the two most pathetic sidekicks ever: a karate-using rabbit with bad spelling and a bagface depressed man who loves cookies! But when our heroes realize all their efforts just lead to a bottomless pit, Bo-bobo covers it with a "Mystery Box" where no one knows what they'll fall into, whether it's a trap, their dreams come true...or an exorcising Jelly!
46"Libraries and Driving Tests!" / "Messenger of Justice from the Darkness!? Female-Torpedo Teacher Gyor b  Appears!!"Transcription: "Yami kara no seigi no shisha!? Gyorai joky shi gyo rabe kenzan!!" (Japanese:  !? !!)20 February 2005 (2005-02-20)23 September 2006
Bo-bobo watches in anger as Gasser is turned into Giga's latest masterpiece, but ends up thrown for a loop when Torpedo Girl splits the team up towards two separate Cyber Knights. But when she, Don Patch and Jelly take on a writer who controls language, it take a bit of protective torpedo power to make him eat his words! Meanwhile, Bo-bobo and Softon take a crash course in driver's ed with a car-headed teacher..and Dengaku Man behind the wheel!
47"A Battle of Skills and Wills with One Green Onion. Or Is It Garlic?" / "Violent Sink-or-Swim Battle!! Onion-san comes Too "Transcription: "Ichi ka bachi ka no gekiretsu batoru!! Tamanegi-san mo deru yo  " (Japanese:  !! )27 February 2005 (2005-02-27)30 September 2006
An attempt by one enemy to wipe everyone's memories falls flat when he realizes Don Patch has no mind...and makes him feel the same empty-headed power, while Bo-bobo finishes up his fight while showing off further rage at Giga. But the team (minus Dengaku Man) is reunited by J, a mysterious onion/garlic headed warrior who controls Cyber City with the mysterious power of the Black Sun! But while Softon may have found an honorable opponent, he soon finds himself quickly defeated by the mustached fighter's amazing technique!
48"Silly Singing Saves the Show from a Sinister Scoundrel" / "Enter Magical Girl Denbo-chan! The Love Spell is Gabapavich!?"Transcription: "Majikaru   g ru denbo-chan t j ! Koi no jumon wa Gabapabitchi!?" (Japanese:  ! !?)6 March 2005 (2005-03-06)7 October 2006
While J continues to throw out action poses, Softon tips Bo-bobo on how to defeat him (even after supposedly being dead and buried). But a fusion attempt to put an end to him is thrown for a loop, as Bo-bobo and Dengaku Man become the beautiful (female) singing idol Denbo! And after a quick nunchaku tenderization of the onion, she unleashes an unstoppable sing-along show where the lyrics come to life, the villain gets drowned in jelly and beta-carotene, and bossed around by a senate candidate...oh, and the fusion female too!
49"The Battle of Brains Begins!" / "Extremely Difficult? IQ Battle Begins! Giga, Come and Get It~!!"Transcription: "Ch  nankai? IQ batoru kaishi! Giga yo, kakatte koi ya!!" (Japanese:  ?IQ ! !!)13 March 2005 (2005-03-13)4 November 2006
With the fall of all of his minions, Giga finally invites Bo-bobo's team to take him on in a battle where art appreciation involves getting smashed around by his works. But after wheeling around his defenses (and seeing them consistently hitting on his female minions), he ups the ante in a brain battle, proving his genius and predicting all of the Wiggin warriors moves! But where thinking ends, a bit of Dengaku Man finally lets Bo-bobo throw him off...but even with all that happened, Giga's fist technique has yet to be used!
50"Giga Goes Gaga! Alarming Attacks with Impressive Art" / "Enraged Seal: Super Giga Appears! We've Been Double-Crossed "Transcription: "Abaka reta f in-ch  (s p ) giga shutsugen! Boku-tachi sotchi ni negaerimasu  " (Japanese:    ! )20 March 2005 (2005-03-20)25 November 2006
After experiencing more of the art of Giga firsthand (like turning into his works courtesy of his servants), the Cyber City leader unleashes the full brunt of his Obuj  de Art, throwing Bo-bobo against a wall of sound (until Torpedo Girl helps them break it), then forcing them up a flight of deadly steps with masterpieces being thrown after them at every turn! But after a perplexing combination of teamwork (and a horizontal elevator) lets Bo-bobo's team get closer to victory...Giga unleashes his full power by breaking all of his hard work!
51"The Art of Art and the Fist of All Fists!" / "Art Power vs. Nosehair Soul! Eat This! Hajike Trio Burning Fist!!"Transcription: "Geijutsu paw  VS (b sasu) hanage tamash ! Kurae! Hajike Torio no atsuki tekken!!" (Japanese:  VS ! ! !!)27 March 2005 (2005-03-27)17 February 2007
In his super form, Giga resists all of Bo-bobo's attacks by literally becoming the art that he has fused with. But Bo-bobo's squad finds their way around it by showing him the power of the art of the everyday! (and the power of a bull market) Yet with Giga preparing for his greatest accomplishment of destroying Gasser, Bo-bobo is forced to release the seal of his Nosehair Soul, gathering the power of dragons and using Don Patch and Jelly to help in revealing the manliness and burning desire to finally bring down Giga!
52"Gasser's Back! A Whole New Season, Same Old Stench! / Don Patch! The Man, the Myth, the Mouth!" / "Welcome Back, He-kun  A New Journey's Starting, Starting~! / The New Enemy Has Come! Bridge-Top Death Match!!"Transcription: "O kaeri hekkun   aratana tabi no hajimari hajimari! / Kichatta atarash  teki! Hashi no ue de no desu matchi!!" (Japanese:  ! /  ! !!)9 April 2005 (2005-04-09)24 February 2007
As Gasser and Softon return to the team and Torpedo Girl goes her own way, Bo-bobo's team returns on their journey. But when the team ends up crashing into a platoon of Hair Hunters from one-hundred years ago, they end up in a massive bridge-top melee filled with crazy teamwork attacks, changing weather conditions and a battleground that can easily be opened! Yet the villains still have one purpose in particular: to take out the remains from the Hair Kingdom...and guess who that is?
53"Dancin' and Trainin' for Quickly Obtainin' the Enemy's Painin' / A Rose by Any Other Name Would Be Called Something Else!" / "Everyone Power Up! The New Costume is 582 Yen? / The Enemy is Our Horrible Ancestor? Even The Power-Up Is Use less!!"Transcription: "Min'na de paw  appu! Shin kosuch mu wa 582-en? / Teki wa sai ky  no go senzo-sama? Paw  appu mo yakunitachimase!!" (Japanese:  ! 582 ? /  ? !!)16 April 2005 (2005-04-16)10 March 2007
After throwing aside the remaining Hair Hunters (and giving them a nice jelly gift pack), Bo-bobo's team heads to a legendary training ground (a shopping mall) to prepare for the threat of more old Hair Hunters. But they soon meet their match in a flower-throwing general who's both as ruthless as he is at taking out the powered-up warriors! Now with Bo-bobo in a corner, he prepares to take him on...with a jacket that cost $27.50 at a supermarket!
54"The War of the Roses...or Lilacs...or Daffodils / Someone Get Me Out of This Hot Whirlpool!" / "Let's Go Super Bo-bobo! He'll Demonstra~te The Love Power  / Euphoric Battle in the Flower Garden! The Smell of Flowers is the Smell of Death?"Transcription: "Ike s p  B bobo! Ai no chikara hakki shicha imasu   / Ohanabatake de runrun batoru! Ohana no kaori wa shi no kaori?" (Japanese:  !  /  ! ?)23 April 2005 (2005-04-23)24 March 2007
Bo-bobo desperately attempts to fight against the floral Wild Wister, but none of his tricks appear to work on the plant master. But when he remembers his recent training, the true Super power of his new jacket is released, bringing out the heavy artillery, defending against the flower menace and planting the seeds of annoyance (and Don Patch's former girlfriends) before planting Wister where he can never return...yet the true threat of the former empire prepares for its awakening!
55"The Gang's All Here! And Boy, Are They Weird! / Rivalist Factions and a Cool Robot Action with a Cherry on Top!" / "Awaited Hatenko  Factions Made and Allies Split!? / Gadget-kun Advances Wildly! Thrusting Away Both Enemies and Allies!!"Transcription: "Omatase hatenk    habatsu tsukutte nakamaware!? / Susume b s  ga jetto-kun! Teki mo mikata mo tsukitobase!!" (Japanese:  !? /  ! !!)30 April 2005 (2005-04-30)14 April 2007
With Hatenko returning to lead the way, Bo-bobo's team pummels through an army of Hair Hunters to find the base of the Former block leaders: an amusement park planted right on the ruins of Jelly Jiggler's old base! Furthermore, their first challenge at this park is a living bowl of ice cream who forces them to fight his team while running away from a runaway robot on an ever-changing path. But with Bo-bobo, Hatenko and Jelly (nearly) in unison, they are able to stand fast...while getting run over.
56"The Ultimate SF Battle! Supreme Fisticuffs or Certain Free-for-All! / All Aboard! The Nightmare Tour is About to Begin!" / "Dress Change and Decisive Sci-Fi Battle! See! Our New Trio!! / Impossibly Predicted World Tour! Now Depart~ing in The Love-Love Wagon!!"Transcription: "Doresuchenji de SF kessen! Miyo! Warera shin torio!! / Yosoku fun  no sekai tsu ! Raburabu wagon de iza de hatsu!!" (Japanese:  SF ! ! !! /  ! !!)7 May 2005 (2005-05-07)21 April 2007
Changing to a more team-intensive strategy, Not Nice Cream's group fight with the power of SF by their side, but a renewed effort on teamwork (not to mention a raid of a villainous space station and a stiff jelly key) let Bo-bobo's team regain control. One act of selfishness by the former Block Leader inspired Bo-bobo and Jelly to unleash their enemies on a chaotic world tour where nothing is fair, not even their defeat!
57"The Water Slide That's Bona Fide to Leave You Terrified! / Our Torpedo Hero Fights a Commando Like a Tornado!" / "Hell Water Slider! The Enemy! Swishing Sunfish and Swimsuit Gals!? / Assault Love-Love Torpedo-sensei! I Won't Forgive Joking Guy~s!!"Transcription: "Jigoku no u t  suraid ! Teki wa! Pichi pichi manbou ni mizugi gyaru!? / Totsugeki rabu rabu gyorai sensei! Fuzaketa yatsu wa yurusanai!!" (Japanese:  ! ! !? /    !  !!)14 May 2005 (2005-05-14)5 May 2007
At the next park attraction, Bo-bobo suddenly finds himself trying to save Beauty and Don Patch from a tough (but incompetent) soldier in a water slide where he keeps throwing out traps...while being comforted by his female assistants. But the leader's attempt at summoning the ultimate weapon to finish off his opponent...ends up forcing him to face a very angry Torpedo Girl whom Bo-bobo uses to his advantage to turn against her summoner...even if she's a torpedo who can't swim.
58"Face the Cold Hard Facts! It's Freezing in Here! / Chill Out, Brussel Sprout! We're Gonna Put This Fight on Ice!" / "Ice-Top Machine Battle! The Great Fierce Battle With No Rules! / The Penalty Game is on Ice: But It's Cold Baby-!!"Transcription: "Hikami no mashin batoru! R ru muy  de dai gekisen! / Batsu g mu wa k ri-dzuke sorya tsumetai ze beib !!" (Japanese:  ! ! /    !!)21 May 2005 (2005-05-21)12 May 2007
Chilling along to the ice skating rink, the Wiggin Trio face off in a massive mech showdown where their choice in battle gear is extremely unconventional, robotic nosehairs rule, and where Jelly is nearly killed by his own vehicle. But when the wind-sickle carrying Master Jeda ups the ante by blowing away the allies and forcing the wobbly warrior into refrigeration, Bo-bobo and Don Patch are forced to fuse once again...but after Don Patch is through with Bo-bobo's insides, the result isn't what they expected!
59"Enemy Crusin' for a Brusin?  Then Just Try Fusion" / "Wiggin' Fusion PatchBobo! The Serious Battle Without Foolishness!? / Fierce Fight! Love Triangle!! Euphoric Merry-Go-Round Battle!?"Transcription: "Hajike gattai Patchi Bobo! O fuzake-nashi no gachinko batoru!? / Gekit ! Koi no sankaku kankei!! Mer  g rando de run run batoru!?" (Japanese:  ! !? /  ! !! !?)28 May 2005 (2005-05-28)19 May 2007
In their new fusion form, Patchbobo shows off a few bizarre combinations of his own, beating down Jeda and his minions with a stinky yo-yo, a sugarcane sword and even the frozen Jelly Jiggler himself before lashing a special cameo to defeat the enemies. Meanwhile, Torpedo Girl's troubles at the merry go round draw her, Softon and Hatenko to the attention of a tough former leader (and his two incompetent underlings), but her fickle nature, combined with key and Blabs-a-lot powers, make quick work of them.
60"Blowing Your Savings on Bubbles, Is It Worth It?" / "The Destined Three Alternatives! A Good Present, a Bad Heaven, a Normal Hell!? / Rice, the Noble Youth of Rice, Visits! Great Free-For-All of Enemies and Allies!!"Transcription: "Unmei no mitaku! Yoi gense, warui tengoku, futs  no jigoku!? / Amerika no kik shi raisu sanj ! Teki mo mikata mo dai konsen!!" (Japanese:  !  !? /  !  !!)4 June 2005 (2005-06-04)26 May 2007
Bo-bobo's squad are dragged into a giant coin machine arena by the bubble-blowing Bubbleuba, who forces them into a six-on-six battle. But with Beauty sent away, Jelly being tormented by a weird beast and Dengaku Man defeated by bubble minions, Bo-bobo is forced to summon two more allies to assist him inside the new battleground before even more enemies emerge. Luckily for them, Rice answers the call and assists in an all out triple Wiggin takedown of the bubble blower...yet their troubles have only begun.
61"United We Stand, Divided We Also Stand, Just Further Apart!" / "Full-Throttle Ultra Service!! See? Make the Most of The Beautiful Figure!? / Mythical Beasts vs. Don Patch!! Even Dataless, Brace Yourself Goemon!!"Transcription: "Urutora s bisu zenkai!! Mite? Muda ni utsukush  Kono sugata!? / Genj  vs shury  Patchi!! D ta nashi demo funbare Goemon!!" (Japanese:  !! ? !? /  vs !! !!)11 June 2005 (2005-06-11)9 June 2007
Still within the coin machine, Bo-bobo is forced to listen to Beauty facing the complaints of the narcoleptic Rem while Serviceman's attempts to show himself off are ignored by her closed eyes. Desperate, he throws down Don Patch to save her...only to have him (and some guy who isn't Jelly Jiggler) face a samurai whose monsters are cuter and more ignorant of his orders than he realized! Yet while he finally finds a way to get back towards Beauty, Bo-bobo inadvertently leaves Rice at the mercy of Lambada and his polygons!
62"Good Night! Sleep Tight! And Don't Let the Bedbugs Bug Ya!" / "Here's the Country of Death, the Country of Dreams! Sleep~, Sleep~, Re-m Rem  / Deciding Battle! Rem Sleep World!! Everyone Get Together and Don't Oversleep!!"Transcription: "Koko wa shi no kuni yume no kuni! Nemure, nemure, R mu Remu   / Kessen! Remu sur  puw rudo!! Min'na sorotte nen'ne shi natsu!!" (Japanese:  !  /  ! !! !!)18 June 2005 (2005-06-18)16 June 2007
Using the power of her Fist style, Rem puts all of her captives (including Jelly, just arriving with a sore behind) to sleep, where they are forced into a dream world where she's the most powerful and where anyone gets penalized for slumbering. Yet with the combination of Bo-bobo and Jelly's Wiggin attacks, the duo last long enough for the power of Bo-bobo's anger (and a well-placed alarm clock) to wake them out of their doze! Now awake and with Don Patch back (after confusing Roman Samurai to defeat), a lively turnaround begins.
63"Our Dream Team Turns Bad Dreams to Bad Guys' Screams!" / "Now, Rem's Past is Exposed! A Story of Tearful Emotion(^^;) / Strong Enemy Lambada vs. Power of the Black Sun! A Slight Counterattack Sent Back Four Times(^0^)"Transcription: "Ima, abaka eru Remu no kako! Namida no kand  sut r  (^^;) / Ky teki Ranbada vs kuro taiy  no chikara! 4-Bai-gaeshi de chotto hangeki (^ 0 ^)" (Japanese:  ! (^^;) /  vs !4 (^0^))25 June 2005 (2005-06-25)23 June 2007
Hoping to open up Rem's heart, Bo-bobo releases his own nightmarish Bo-bobo World, filled with so many dramatic and touching scenes that it finally frees the darkness within for him to smash up. But before things became over-emotional, Lambada crashes the party and releases the power of his polygon aura to change the shape of his opponents! Luckily Softon (by way of inheriting J's Black Sun abilities) helps against the warrior of shapes, as he finds himself temporarily stopped by the judgement of Blabs-a-lot!
64"Geometry 101: Painful, Perplexing and Pungent Polygons" / "Go on with the Polygons!! Both Dancing and Beautifully Formed High Spi~rits!? / Counterattack Retro Game(^0^)V Great Difference in Seeing and Doing!?"Transcription: "Porigon de ikeike!! Buy  mo biy  mo nori nori!? / Hangeki retoro g mu (^ 0 ^) V miru to yaru to wa dai chigai!?" (Japanese:  !!    !? /  (^0^)V  !?)2 July 2005 (2005-07-02)30 June 2007
Still at the mercy of Lambada's polygons, the Wiggin Trio find themselves changed time and again by the power of their enemy's aura...even if some changes looked less menacing than others. After temporarily taking him down with a paper-mache machine, Bo-bobo releases his ultimate defense against Lambada: an old style video game world where polygons become pixelated, forcing him at the mercy of retro-style action, puzzles, racing and dating sims until finally slashed down by a pixelated Bobopatchiggler!
65"The Unreal Meal That's a Major Ordeal For Real" / "Fierce Oden Deathmatch! Bo-bobo vs. Hanpen!! / Shock! Power of Hanpen Fist!! The Dawn of Hanpen is Near?!"Transcription: "Nett  oden desu matchi! B bobo tai hanpen!! / Sh geki! Hanpen uketamawa no chikara!! Hanpen no yoake wa chikai?!" (Japanese:  !  !! /  ! !!  ?!)9 July 2005 (2005-07-09)14 July 2007
Bo-bobo's team finally confront their final obstacle before the Third's reawakening: General Lee Fishcake, the powerful former A-Block leader who throws our heroes into their soupiest battleground yet! Forced to fight on top of fishcakes and bouillabaisse, Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Hatenko must fight against the fishcake, a priest and a sneezing churro while spashing around, feeding their opponent eggs, being smashed by giant squares, listening to the whining of Jelly Jiggler's food fight challenge...and uncovering the mystery of "fishamel".
66"The Fishcake Frenzy: Freeze Dried, French Fried, Freaked Out Fracas" / "The Side Dish is Bright(^0^): Thanks for the Cheap Bento  / My Name is TenBobo! I Hate Fighting(^o^)"Transcription: "Okazu wa batchiri (^ 0 ^) otegaru bent  maido ari ~  / Boku no na wa ten bobo! Arasoi wa kiraidesu (^ o ^)" (Japanese:  (^0^)   /  !  (^o^))16 July 2005 (2005-07-16)21 July 2007
As the bouillabaisse showdown continues, Bo-bobo's team continue to try to knock some damage onto General Lee Fishcake (outside the scars he created himself), attempting to break through his fishcake shields, lock him with self-made keys and turn him into a (literal) shooting star. But as the fishcake-head finally powers up to his limit, Jelly finally turns it into a personal battle...which falls apart instantly. But his sacrifice and Bo-bobo's concern brings them together to a new fusion: the violently-peaceful Mr. Bojiggler.
67"The Pacifist That Packs a Punch Like a Pugilist" / "Incredibly Stro~ng! Meet the Callously Heartless Hero !! / Devil's Door Opens...! The Dark Emperor Finally Activates!!"Transcription: "Keta hazure ni tsuyo~i! Hij  muj  no h r    kenzan!! / Aka reshi akuma no tobira! Yami no k tei tsuini shid !!" (Japanese:  !  !! /  ...!  !!)30 July 2005 (2005-07-30)28 July 2007
With the power of peace by his side (as well as the power of guns, angry birds, swords and a well place nosehair or two), Mr. Bojiggler despairs through his great power to finally stop General Lee Fishcake! But as one battle ends, the horrible realization of the revival of former leader Czar Baldy-Bald the Third finally comes into fruition. Yet even with all attempts to stop him in his box, a magical box escape reveals the resurrected emperor and his terrible power, while all Bo-bobo can do is...offer watermelon.
68"The Battle of Baldy Bald: Buckle Up and Brace Yourself" / "Announcement! Popularity Contest!! Who's in First? Me? / OVER vs. the 3rd vs. Bo-bobo! Three-Way Decisive Playoff of the Evil Secrets!!"Transcription: "Happy ! Ninki t hy ! ! 1-I wa dare? Ore? / OVERvs 3-sei vs B bobo! Saiky   gi no mitsudomoe kessen!!" (Japanese:  ! !! 1 ? ? / OVER vs. 3  vs.  !  !!)6 August 2005 (2005-08-06)4 August 2007
Using the power of a magical-fueled Fist, Baldy-Bald the Third takes his awakened power out on everyone, particularly the survivor of the Hair Kingdom in possession of the powerful, yet elusive Hair Ball. But after surviving a rank-driven dart attack and watching allies disappear, things get even worse for everyone when Torpedo Girl suddenly turns back to OVER! Now with two warring enemies going after each other and Bo-bobo (not to mention Jelly Jiggler), the nosehair fighter truces with the silver-hair for a common foe!
69"Yummy, Yummy, Yummy! Bo-bobo's in My Tummy!" / "Menace! Red and Blue Shinken!! Vs. Afro Golden Troop!! / The Great Transformation from Drinking Bo-bobo! He Looks Like a Showboy But Is Super Stro~ng!!"Transcription: "Ky i! Shinku to ao ai ma ken!! Tai afuro  gonky !! / B bobo nonde dai henshin! Mitame wa shoboi ga ch  tsuyo~i!!" (Japanese:  ! !!  !! /  !  !!)20 August 2005 (2005-08-20)11 August 2007
With the power of a massive handkerchief, Baldy-Bald the Third teleports Bo-bobo's team to a special universe where he starts removing the brains of the allies with his alternate "Fist of Blue Magic", but even a brainless Bo-bobo is able to release an army from his own afro and get everyone out of there. But the desperate Baldy-Bald decides to go after the Hair Ball the easy way: by eating Bo-bobo (and taking Don Patch with him). But while more powerful, the former leader has to now put up with a bizarre appearance and the worst case of indigestion of his life from the Wiggin Duo!
70"Baldy Bald Bottoms Out! Best of Luck, Be Well and Bye-Bye!" / "Finally Concluded! Tsuru Tsurulina the 3rd!! Defeated / Curtain Raising! New Emperor Playoffs!! Bo-bobo Troop's Raid!!"Transcription: "Tsuini ketchaku!! Tsuru tsurur na san-sei gekiha!! / Kaimaku! Shin k tei kettei-sen!! B bobo ikk  naguri komi!!" (Japanese:  !!  !! /  ! !!  !!)27 August 2005 (2005-08-27)25 August. 2007
Attempting to pacify Baldy-Bald the Third's hatred of humans, Bo-bobo forces him to live through an abridged human life cycle, from kung-fu babies to space school and blowing up the office, all leading up to stopping the former emperor with the power of humanity (and non-humans). But as their team flies off elsewhere, an attack by a strange parachute-manipulating Hair Hunter leads to them learning of the Chrome Dome Playoff, where many old rivals (as well as mysterious new ones) prepare to gather to fight to become the new emperor!
71"Funneled into a Tunnel and Bamboozled By Noodles" / "Beauty's Close Call! Though I'm Alone, I Will Fight!! / Delicious? Then Lose! In Search of the World's Greatest Ramen!!"Transcription: "Byuti kiki ippatsu!! Watashi hitori demo tatakaimasu!! / Umai   ga make yo! Mezase sekai saik  r men!!" (Japanese:  !!  !! /  ? !  !!)17 September 2005 (2005-09-17)1 September 2007
Arriving at the entrance to the Bald Bowl, Bo-bobo and his allies get separated into different entrance trials. For Beauty, this means trying to stand on her own two feet against a chain-wielding guard while Don Patch and Not Nice Cream ignore her or try to prove themselves as the main heroine! On the other hand, Bo-bobo and Gasser team with the Three Civilizations against a ramen-creating temptress forcing them to create the most delicious meal. Yet escaping from these trials guarantee even more Hair Hunters in the next round!
72"Si Se or, It's No Bore! It's Hair Hunters Galore!" / "Start! Badge Contest!! The Gold Batch is Proof of the Strong Ones! / Swiftly Run! Bo-bobo TV Channel! It's Here~The Meanacing Ratings!!"Transcription: "Kaishi! Batchi s datsu-sen!! Kin no batchi ga tsuwamono no akashi! / Tsuppashire! Bobobo TV-kyoku! Deta~ky i no shich -ritsu!!" (Japanese:  ! !!  ! /  ! TV !  !!)24 September 2005 (2005-09-24)15 September 2007
With Bo-bobo's team reunited and facing Baldy-Bald the Fourth (and an army of Hair Hunters), Bo-bobo chooses to enter the New Czar Playoff the easy way: by defeating the duct-tape-using leader of the Chrome Dome assassin corp and taking his medal! But although he and the other Wiggins nearly get stopped and almost get stuck as metamorphing goo, Bo-bobo finally finds the means to stop the stopper and join the tourney: a non-stop TV channel with his own bizarre programming... and horrible ratings!
73"Take a Stance Against the Dance, Mr. Smarty Pants!" / "Badge Contest Battle Royal!! Desired Character Dream Match!? / Samba DE Bo-bobo! Demon to Yamamba to Sambaman!?"Transcription: "Batchi s datsu batoru roiyaru!! Natsukashi kyara to no dor mu matchi!? / Sanba DE B bobo!! Yasha ni ya manba ni Sanbaman!?" (Japanese:  !!  !? /  DE !!  !?)1 October 2005 (2005-10-01)22 September 2007
Now officially in the tournament, Bo-bobo's team head inside the first battleground on a mountain of arenas: a bottle stage where their opponent is an extremely powerful warrior who uses the abilities of skulls to fight and transform into "a powerful old lady". But with Bo-bobo, Don Patch and Jelly smashing his skull abilities with the power of Mother Nature, he is forced to turn into his true form: a samba-loving goofball who attempts to force the Wiggins to follow the power of the beat... until they beat the beat out of him!
74"The Bigger the Gasser --- The Smellier the Gas!" / "The Battle Stage is an Immense He-Kun! Invoke Baby Mode!! / Transform! Angry DoDoDoDoDoDon Patch!!"Transcription: "Batoru sut ji wa kyodai-ka hekkun! Akachan m do hatsud !! / Henshin! Ikari no DoDoDoDoDoDon Patchi!!" (Japanese:  ! !! /  !  !!)8 October 2005 (2005-10-08)29 September 2007
Without warning, a sword-manipulating member of the Shadow Big Four destroys Bo-bobo's next battle arena and decides to make his own by turning Gasser into a giant! Yet even with the strange manipulation of Gasser's body and turning him into his unpredictable baby mode, a sacrifice by unexpected ally General Lee Fishcake forces Don Patch to take this battle "seriously"... by transforming into Professional Patch, a seriously powerful upgrade that makes easy work out of his enemy! (at least until he turns into a Baby Patch follower)
75"Finally! The Final Fight of Finality! Except the Final One!" / "Rushing to the Final Decisive Battle! Enter the Life-Sacrificing Clock Board!! / Angry Super Bo-bobo! In the Counterattack Huge Nosehair Bears Enter!?"Transcription: "Saish  kessen ni totsuny ! Ky fu no ikenie tokei-ban t j !! / Ikari no S p  B bobo! Hangeki no kyodai hanage ni kumasan t j !?" (Japanese:  ! !! /  !  !?)22 October 2005 (2005-10-22)6 October 2007
Suddenly with enough medals to enter Chrome Dome Castle, team Bo-bobo rush ahead to finish the empire. But unexpectedly, three more of the Shadow Big Four pop up, with Bo-bobo forced to take on three super-powerful bags who can destroy the world, Don Patch letting the other two go in to destroy the rest of the competition, and Lee Fishcake... dressing up as Rem. But just when Bo-bobo seems too weak to take on the force of the Shadow Chrome Dome, his "super" power (and some gun-toting bears in a nosehair) force them to prepare for their final stand!
76"Finally! The Final Fight of Finality! This Time We Mean It!" / "Calling Super Denbo!! Countdown to Love and Peace?! / The Final Showdown at Last!! Fist of Nosehair FOREVER!!"Transcription: "S p  denbo sanj !! Ai to heiwa no kauntodaun?! / Tsuini saish  kessen!! Hanage ma ken FOREVER!!" (Japanese:  !!  ?! /  !!  FOREVER!!)29 October 2005 (2005-10-29)13 October 2007
As Triple Bag upgrades his Shadow power, Bo-bobo and Dengaku Man fuse into an upgraded Denbo, who forces the enemy through a picture activity book before punishing him. But even with his defeat, the summon clock is still completed allowing for Hydrate and his floating castle to emerge and allowing him to take over the empire! Now with the Shadow Chrome Dome forces in control, Bo-bobo and his allies ally with friend and enemy alike as they race upwards towards their enemy and their ultimate destiny only to realize that this is the last episode!
Home media release[edit]
English[edit]
The series was originally licensed for home video release in North America by Illumitoon Entertainment in 2006,[11] who released only 2 volumes on bilingual DVD in 2007,[12][13] before their distribution deal with Westlake Entertainment fell through, and all further volumes were canceled.[14] S'more Entertainment later announced on 16 January 2012, that they would release the series with English subtitles and dubbing on DVD on 10 April of the same year.[15][16] This release, however, lacked an English subtitle track, despite a fully translated script being present on a PDF file on disc 4 and indication on the box and pre-release information that there would be a subtitle track on the release.[17] S'more Entertainment released a statement claiming the packaging was wrong, and there never was an intention to subtitle the release, due to costs.[18] In August 2018, Discotek Media announced the licensee of the series and was released on 28 January 2020, as a SD Blu-ray Disc set with all the 76 episodes.[19][20]
References[edit]
^   Staff (in Japanese). TV Asahi. Archived from the original on 26 January 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^   -   -   (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^  BD-BOX   76 3 . Abema Times (in Japanese). 8 November 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ "Joy Tashian To Represent Toei's Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo". Anime News Network. 20 June 2005. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Macdonald, Christopher (30 May 2005). "Cartoon Network Summer 2005 Kick-Off". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Bertschy, Zac (6 September 2005). "Bobobo, IGPX premiere dates announced". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Hanson, Brian (17 February 2007). "February 17th - February 23rd - The Click". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ "Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo Picked up by Cartoon Network for Second Season". Anime News Network. 9 January 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ "Cartoon Network and VIZ Media Celebrate First Anniversary of Toonami Jetstream  with Expanded Show Lineup". Anime News Network. 8 August 2007. Retrieved 14 September 2018.
^ Phillips, George (4 April 2007). "Bobobo-bo Bobo-bo to Air on Jetix UK". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ "Illumitoon & Westlake Acquire Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo [2006-11-02]". Anime News Network. 2 November 2006. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo: Bo-nafide Protector (DVD). ASIN B000KWZ2YW.
^ Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo: Scream for Ice Cream (DVD). ASIN B000NJMJZ2.
^ Loo, Egan (26 October 2007). "Illumitoon's B'tX, Beet, BoBoBo-Bo DVDs Discontinued (Updated)". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Loo, Egan (16 January 2012). "S'more Entertainment Adds Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo on U.S. DVD". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ "Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo DVD Complete Series Part 1 (D/Raw)". Rightstuf.com. 10 April 2012. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 14 October 2012.
^ Martin, Theron (6 June 2012). "Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo DVD - Review". Anime News Network. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
^ Ransom, Ko (11 April 2012). "S'More Ent. Acknowledges Bobobo-Bo Bo-Bobo Packaging Error". Anime News Network. Retrieved 17 October 2021.
^ "Discotek Licenses Giant Robo, Kimagure Orange Road, Galaxy Express 999, More". Anime News Network. Retrieved 12 August 2018.
^ Mateo, Alex (12 November 2019). "Discotek to Release Bludgeoning Angel Dokuro-chan, Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo, God Mazinger Anime on January 28". Anime News Network. Retrieved 13 November 2019.
External links[edit]
Bobobo-bo Bo-bobo at IMDb
vteBobobo-bo Bo-bobo by Yoshio SawaiMediaSeries
Characters
Chapters
Episodes
Video games
Jump Super Stars
Jump Ultimate Stars
J-Stars Victory VS
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Bobobo-bo_Bo-bobo_episodes&oldid=1137239006"