Connection formed between neurons that allows neurotransmission
For circuits of neurons, see neural circuit.
Not to be confused with Neurotransmitter pathways.
 A neural pathway connects one part of the nervous system to another using bundles of axons called tracts. The optic tract that extends from the optic nerve is an example of a neural pathway because it connects the eye to the brain; additional pathways within the brain connect to the visual cortex.
In neuroanatomy, a neural pathway is the connection formed by axons that project from neurons to make synapses onto neurons in another location, to enable neurotransmission (the sending of a signal from one region of the nervous system to another). Neurons are connected by a single axon, or by a bundle of axons known as a nerve tract, or fasciculus.[1] Shorter neural pathways are found within grey matter in the brain, whereas longer projections, made up of myelinated axons, constitute white matter.
In the hippocampus there are neural pathways involved in its circuitry including the perforant pathway,  that provides a connectional route from the entorhinal cortex[2] to all fields of the hippocampal formation, including the dentate gyrus, all CA fields (including CA1),[3] and the subiculum.
Descending motor pathways of the pyramidal tracts travel from the cerebral cortex to the brainstem or lower spinal cord.[4][5] Ascending sensory tracts in the dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway (DCML) carry information from the periphery to the cortex of the brain.
Naming[edit]
 Neural pathways of cerebellar cortex
 Pathways in the ciliary ganglion. Green=Parasympathetic; Red=Sympathetic; Blue=Sensory
The first named pathways are evident to the naked eye even in a poorly preserved brain, and were named by the great anatomists of the Renaissance using cadaver material.[citation needed] Examples of these include the great commissures of the brain such as the corpus callosum (Latin, "hard body"; not to be confused with the Latin word "colossus"   the "huge" statue), anterior commissure, and posterior commissure.[citation needed] Further examples include the pyramidal tract, crus cerebri (Latin, "leg of the brain"), and cerebellar peduncles (Latin, "little foot of the cerebellum").[citation needed] Note that these names describe the appearance of a structure but give no information on its function, location, etc.[citation needed]
Later, as neuroanatomical knowledge became more sophisticated, the trend was toward naming pathways by their origin and termination.[citation needed] For example, the nigrostriatal pathway runs from the substantia nigra (Latin, "black substance") to the corpus striatum (Latin, "striped body").[citation needed] This naming can extend to include any number of structures in a pathway, such that the cerebellorubrothalamocortical pathway originates in the cerebellum, synapses in the red nucleus ("ruber" in Latin), on to the thalamus, and finally terminating in the cerebral cortex.[citation needed]
Sometimes, these two naming conventions coexist. For example, the name "pyramidal tract" has been mainly supplanted by lateral corticospinal tract in most texts.[citation needed] Note that the "old" name was primarily descriptive, evoking the pyramids of antiquity, from the appearance of this neural pathway in the medulla oblongata.[citation needed] The "new" name is based primarily on its origin (in the primary motor cortex, Brodmann area 4) and termination (onto the alpha motor neurons of the spinal cord).[citation needed]
In the cerebellum one of the two major pathways is that of the mossy fibers. Mossy fibers project directly to the deep nuclei, but also give rise to the following pathway: mossy fibers   granule cells   parallel fibers   Purkinje cells   deep nuclei. The other main pathway is from the climbing fibers and these project to Purkinje cells and also send collaterals directly to the deep nuclei.[6]
Functional aspects[edit]
 Diagram showing cortical pathways
In general, neurons receive information either at their dendrites or cell bodies. The axon of a nerve cell is, in general, responsible for transmitting information over a relatively long distance. Therefore, most neural pathways are made up of axons.[citation needed] If the axons have myelin sheaths, then the pathway appears bright white because myelin is primarily lipid.[citation needed] If most or all of the axons lack myelin sheaths (i.e., are unmyelinated), then the pathway will appear a darker beige color, which is generally called grey.[citation needed]
Some neurons are responsible for conveying information over long distances. For example, motor neurons, which travel from the spinal cord to the muscle, can have axons up to a meter in length in humans. The longest axon in the human body belongs to the Sciatic Nerve and runs from the great toe to the base of the spinal cord. These are archetypal examples of neural pathways.[citation needed]
Basal ganglia pathways and dopamine[edit]
Neural pathways in the basal ganglia in the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop, are seen as controlling different aspects of behaviour. This regulation is enabled by the dopamine pathways. It has been proposed that the dopamine system of pathways is the overall organiser of the neural pathways that are seen to be parallels of the dopamine pathways.[7] Dopamine is provided both tonically and phasically in response to the needs of the neural pathways.[7]
Major neural pathways[edit]
Arcuate fasciculus
Cerebral peduncle
Corpus callosum
Pyramidal tracts   corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts
Medial forebrain bundle
Dorsal column medial lemniscus pathway
Retinohypothalamic tract is a photic neural input pathway involved in the circadian rhythms
See also[edit]
Direct pathway of movement
Indirect pathway of movement
Reflex arc
Systems neuroscience
Nerve tract
Neural circuit
Nerve plexus
References[edit]
^ Moore, Keith; Dalley, Arthur (2005). Clinically Oriented Anatomy (5th ed.). LWW. p. 47. ISBN 0-7817-3639-0. A bundle of nerve fibers (axons) connecting neighboring or distant nuclei of the CNS is a tract.
^ Witter, Menno P.; Naber, Pieterke A.; Van Haeften, Theo; Machielsen, Willem C.M.; Rombouts, Serge A.R.B.; Barkhof, Frederik; Scheltens, Philip; Lopes Da Silva, Fernando H. (2000). "Cortico-hippocampal communication by way of parallel parahippocampal-subicular pathways". Hippocampus. 10 (4): 398 410. doi:10.1002/1098-1063(2000)10:4<398::AID-HIPO6>3.0.CO;2-K. PMID 10985279. S2CID 25432455.
^ Vago, David R.; Kesner, Raymond P. (2008). "Disruption of the direct perforant path input to the CA1 subregion of the dorsal hippocampus interferes with spatial working memory and novelty detection". Behavioural Brain Research. 189 (2): 273 83. doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2008.01.002. PMC 2421012. PMID 18313770.
^ Purves, Dale (2011). Neuroscience (5. ed.). Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer. pp. 375 378. ISBN 9780878936953.
^ Purves, Dale; Augustine, George J.; Fitzpatrick, David; Katz, Lawrence C.; LaMantia, Anthony-Samuel; McNamara, James O.; Williams, S. Mark (1 January 2001). "Damage to Descending Motor Pathways: The Upper Motor Neuron Syndrome". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Llinas RR, Walton KD, Lang EJ (2004). "Ch. 7 Cerebellum".  In Shepherd GM (ed.). The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515955-1.
^ a b Hong, Simon (2013). "Dopamine system: manager of neural pathways". Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 7: 854. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00854. PMC 3856400. PMID 24367324.
vteBrain and spinal cord: neural tracts and fasciculiSensoryDCML1 :
Pacinian corpuscle/Meissner's corpuscle   Posterior column (Gracile fasciculus/Cuneate fasciculus)   Gracile nucleus/Cuneate nucleus
2 :
  sensory decussation/arcuate fibers (Posterior external arcuate fibers, Internal arcuate fibers)   Medial lemniscus/Trigeminal lemniscus   Thalamus (VPL, VPM)
3 :
  Posterior limb of internal capsule   Postcentral gyrus
Anterolateral/painFast/lateral
1  (Free nerve ending   A delta fiber)   2  (Anterior white commissure   Lateral and Anterior Spinothalamic tract   Spinal lemniscus   VPL of Thalamus)   3  (Postcentral gyrus)   4  (Posterior parietal cortex)
2  (Spinomesencephalic tract   Superior colliculus of Midbrain tectum)
Slow/medial
1  (Group C nerve fiber   Spinoreticular tract   Reticular formation)   2  (MD of Thalamus)   3  (Cingulate cortex)
MotorPyramidal
flexion: Primary motor cortex   Posterior limb of internal capsule   Decussation of pyramids   Corticospinal tract (Lateral, Anterior)   Neuromuscular junction
Extrapyramidalflexion:
Primary motor cortex   Genu of internal capsule   Corticobulbar tract    Facial motor nucleus   Facial muscles
flexion:
Red nucleus   Rubrospinal tract
extension:
 Vestibulocerebellum    Vestibular nuclei   Vestibulospinal tract
extension:
 Vestibulocerebellum   Reticular formation   Reticulospinal tract
Midbrain tectum   Tectospinal tract    muscles of neck
Basal gangliadirect:1  (Motor cortex   Striatum)   2  (GPi)   3  (Lenticular fasciculus/Ansa lenticularis   Thalamic fasciculus   VL of Thalamus)   4  (Thalamocortical radiations   Supplementary motor area)     5  (Motor cortex)indirect:1  (Motor cortex   Striatum)   2  (GPe)   3  (Subthalamic fasciculus   Subthalamic nucleus)   4  (Subthalamic fasciculus   GPi)   5  (Lenticular fasciculus/Ansa lenticularis   Thalamic fasciculus   VL of Thalamus)   6  (Thalamocortical radiations   Supplementary motor area)    7  (Motor cortex)nigrostriatal pathway:
Pars compacta   Striatum
CerebellarAfferent
Vestibular nuclei   Vestibulocerebellar tract   ICP   Cerebellum   Granule cell
Pontine nuclei   Pontocerebellar fibers   MCP   Deep cerebellar nuclei   Granule cell
Inferior olivary nucleus    Olivocerebellar tract   ICP   Hemisphere   Purkinje cell   Deep cerebellar nuclei
Efferent
Dentate nucleus in Lateral hemisphere/pontocerebellum   SCP   Dentatothalamic tract   Thalamus (VL)   Motor cortex
Interposed nucleus in Intermediate hemisphere/spinocerebellum   SCP   Reticular formation, or   Cerebellothalamic tract   Red nucleus   Thalamus (VL)   Motor cortex
Fastigial nucleus in Flocculonodular lobe/vestibulocerebellum   Vestibulocerebellar tract   Vestibular nuclei
Bidirectional:SpinocerebellarUnconscious proprioception
lower limb   1  (muscle spindles   DRG)   2  (Posterior thoracic nucleus   Dorsal/posterior spinocerebellar tract   ICP   Cerebellar vermis)
upper limb   1  (muscle spindles   DRG)   2  (Accessory cuneate nucleus   Cuneocerebellar tract   ICP   Anterior lobe of cerebellum)
Reflex arc
lower limb   1  (Golgi tendon organ)   2  (Ventral/anterior spinocerebellar tract  SCP   Cerebellar vermis)
upper limb   1  (Golgi tendon organ)   2  (Rostral spinocerebellar tract   ICP   Cerebellum)
vteOptical illusions (list)Illusions
Afterimage
Ambigram
Ambiguous image
Ames room
Barberpole
Bezold
Caf  wall
Checker shadow
Chubb
Cornsweet
Delboeuf
Ebbinghaus
Ehrenstein
Flash lag
Fraser spiral
Gravity hill
Grid
Hering
Impossible trident
Jastrow
Lilac chaser
Mach bands
McCollough
M ller-Lyer
Necker cube
Oppel-Kundt
Orbison
Penrose stairs
Penrose triangle
Peripheral drift
Poggendorff
Ponzo
Rubin vase
Sander
Schroeder stairs
Shepard tables
Spinning dancer
Ternus
Vertical horizontal
White's
Wundt
Z llner
Popular culture
Op art
Trompe-l' il
Spectropia (1864 book)
Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing)
Waterfall (1961 drawing)
The dress (2015 photograph)
Related
Accidental viewpoint
Auditory illusions
Tactile illusions
Temporal illusion
vtePhysiology of balance and hearingHearingGeneral
Auditory system
Bone conduction
Otoacoustic emission
Tullio phenomenon
Pathway
inner ear: Hair cells   Spiral ganglion   Cochlear nerve VIII  
pons: Cochlear nucleus (Anterior, Dorsal)   Trapezoid body   Superior olivary nuclei  
midbrain: Lateral lemniscus   Inferior colliculi  
thalamus: Medial geniculate nuclei  
cerebrum: Acoustic radiation   Primary auditory cortex
BalanceGeneral
Vestibular system
Pathway
inner ear: Vestibular nerve VIII  
pons: Vestibular nuclei (Medial vestibular nucleus, Lateral vestibular nucleus)
cerebellum: Flocculonodular lobe
spinal cord: Vestibulospinal tract (Medial vestibulospinal tract, Lateral vestibulospinal tract)
thalamus: Ventral posterolateral nucleus
cerebrum: Vestibular cortex
Vestibulo-oculomotor fibers
vtePapez circuit pathwayDiencephalon
Mammillary body   Mammillothalamic tract   Anterior nuclei of thalamus  
Telencephalon
Anterior limb of internal capsule   Cingulate gyrus   Cingulum   Parahippocampal gyrus   Entorhinal cortex   Perforant path   Hippocampus/Hippocampal formation (CA3   CA1   Subiculum)   Fornix  
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neural_pathway&oldid=1143916930"