Military battle during World War II on 19 August 1944Not to be confused with the Paris newspaper Lib ration.
Liberation of ParisPart of Operation Overlord of World War IIParisians line the Champs  lys es for a parade conducted by the French 2nd Armored Division on 26 August 1944.Date19 25 August 1944(6 days)LocationParis and outskirts, France48 52 25 N 2 17 47 E  /  48.8735 N 2.29642 E  / 48.8735; 2.29642Result
Allied victoryBelligerents
 France   French Resistance United States United Kingdom
 Germany   Vichy FranceCommanders and leaders
 Charles de Gaulle Philippe Leclerc Jacques Chaban-Delmas
Bernard Montgomery Raymond O. Barton
 Dietrich von Choltitz Units involved
 FFI  2nd Armored Division   Spanish Exiles   4th Infantry Division
 325th Security Division MiliceCasualties and losses
French Resistance:1,600 dead[1]Free French Forces:130 dead319 wounded[2]United Kingdom: UnknownUnited States: Unknown[3]
3,200 dead
12,800 prisoners[1]
vteFree French campaigns
Africa & Middle East
Dakar
Gabon
Keren
Exporter
Kufra
Bir Hakeim
Run for Tunis
Torch
Tunisia
Europe
Eastern Front
Husky
Corsica
Monte Cassino
Gli res
Ist
Mont Mouchet
Overlord
Paris
Elba
Saint-Marcel
Vercors
Dragoon
Toulon
Marseilles
Lorraine
Dompaire
Strasbourg
Nordwind
Colmar Pocket
Alps
Indian Ocean & Asia
R union
Crimson
Indochina
North America
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
vteOperation Overlord(Battle of Normandy)Prelude
Atlantic Wall
Bodyguard
Fortitude
Zeppelin
Titanic
Taxable, Glimmer & Big Drum
Combined Bomber Offensive
Pointblank
Transport Plan
Postage Able
Tarbrush
Tiger
Fabius
Airborne assaultBritish Sector
Tonga
Caen canal and Orne river bridges
Merville Battery
Mallard
American Sector
Albany
Boston
Chicago
Detroit
Elmira
Normandy landingsAmerican Sector
Omaha
Utah
Pointe du Hoc
Anglo-Canadian Sector
Gambit
Sword
Juno
Gold
Port-en-Bessin
Logistics
American
Operation Chastity
British
Mulberry
Pluto
Ground campaignAmerican Sector
Br court Manor
Graignes
Saint-L 
Carentan
Hill 30
Cherbourg
Naval
Anglo-Canadian Sector
Caen
Br ville
Perch
Villers-Bocage
Le Mesnil-Patry
Normandy massacres
Ardenne Abbey
Douvres
Martlet
Epsom
Windsor
Charnwood
Jupiter
2nd Odon
Atlantic
Goodwood
Verri res Ridge
Breakout
Cobra
Spring
Bluecoat
Totalize
L ttich
Tractable
Hill 262
Chambois
Falaise
Saint-Malo
Brest
Mantes-Gassicourt
Paris
La Rochelle
Air and Sea operations
Ushant
La Caine
Cherbourg
Pierres Noires
Audierne Bay
Supporting operations
Dingson
Samwest
Titanic
Cooney
Bulbasket
Houndsworth
Loyton
Jedburgh
Dragoon
Wallace & Hardy
Aftermath
Cemeteries
The Liberation of Paris (French: Lib ration de Paris) was a military battle that took place during World War II from 19 August 1944 until the German garrison surrendered the French capital on 25 August 1944. Paris had been occupied by Nazi Germany since the signing of the Second Compi gne Armistice on 22 June 1940, after which the Wehrmacht occupied northern and western France.
The liberation began when the French Forces of the Interior the military structure of the French Resistance staged an uprising against the German garrison upon the approach of the US Third Army, led by General George Patton. On the night of 24 August, elements of General Philippe Leclerc's 2nd French Armored Division made their way into Paris and arrived at the H tel de Ville shortly before midnight. The next morning, 25 August, the bulk of the 2nd Armored Division and US 4th Infantry Division and other allied units entered the city. Dietrich von Choltitz, commander of the German garrison and the military governor of Paris, surrendered to the French at the H tel Le Meurice, the newly established French headquarters. General Charles de Gaulle of the French Army arrived to assume control of the city as head of the Provisional Government of the French Republic.
Background[edit]
Further information: Operation Overlord
The Allied strategy emphasized destroying the German forces retreating towards the Rhine, the French Forces of the Interior (the armed force of the French Resistance), led by Henri Rol-Tanguy, staged an uprising in Paris.
The Falaise Pocket battle (12 21 August), the final phase of Operation Overlord, was still going on, and General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Commander of the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, did not consider the liberation of Paris a primary objective. The goal of the U.S. and British Armed Forces was to destroy the German forces, and therefore end World War II in Europe, which would allow the Allies to concentrate all their efforts on the Pacific front.[4]
The French Resistance began to rise against the Germans in Paris on 15 August, but the Allies were still pushing the Germans toward the Rhine and did not want to get embroiled in a battle for the liberation of Paris. The Allies thought that it was too early to take Paris.[5] They were aware that Adolf Hitler had ordered the German military to completely destroy the city in the event of an Allied attack; Paris was considered to have too great a value, culturally and historically, to risk its destruction. They were also keen to avoid a drawn-out battle of attrition like the Battle of Stalingrad or the Siege of Leningrad.[citation needed] It was also estimated that, in the event of a siege, 4,000 short tons (3,600 t) of food per day, as well as significant amounts of building materials, manpower, and engineering skill, would be required to feed the population after the liberation of Paris.[citation needed] Basic utilities would have to be restored, and transportation systems rebuilt. All these supplies were needed in other areas of the war effort.
De Gaulle was concerned that military rule by Allied forces would be implemented in France with the implementation of the Allied Military Government for Occupied Territories. This administration which had been planned by the American Chiefs of Staff had been approved by US President Franklin Roosevelt but had been opposed by Eisenhower.[6] Nevertheless, De Gaulle, upon learning the French Resistance had risen up against the German occupiers, and unwilling to allow his countrymen to be slaughtered as was happening to the Polish Resistance in the Warsaw Uprising, petitioned for an immediate frontal assault. He threatened to detach the French 2nd Armored Division (2e DB) and order it to single-handedly attack the German forces in Paris, bypassing the SHAEF chain of command, if Eisenhower delayed approval unduly.[5]
General strike (15 19 August 1944)[edit]
 A truck painted with the marks of the FFI and the V for Victory
On 15 August, in the northeastern suburb of Pantin, 1,654 men (among them 168 captured Allied airmen), and 546 women, all political prisoners, were sent to the concentration camps of Buchenwald (men) and Ravensbr ck (women), on what was to be the last convoy to Germany. Pantin had been the area of Paris from which the Germans had entered the capital in June 1940.[7][8]
That same day, employees of the Paris M tro, the Gendarmerie, and Police went on strike; postal workers followed the next day. They were soon joined by workers across the city, causing a general strike to break out on 18 August.
On 16 August, 35 young FFI members were betrayed by Capitaine Serge, a double agent of the Gestapo. They had gone to a secret meeting near the Grande Cascade in the Bois de Boulogne and were gunned down there.[9]
On 17 August, concerned that the Germans were placing explosives at strategic points around the city, Pierre Taittinger, the chairman of the municipal council, met Dietrich von Choltitz, the military governor of Paris.[10] When Choltitz told them that he intended to slow the Allied advance as much as possible, Taittinger and Swedish consul Raoul Nordling attempted to persuade Choltitz not to destroy Paris.[11]
Battle and Liberation[edit]
FFI uprising (19 23 August)[edit]
Further information: French Forces of the Interior
 FFI uprising on 19 August. One skirmisher is wearing an Adrian helmet.
All over France, from the BBC and Radiodiffusion nationale (the Free French broadcaster) the population knew of the Allies' advance toward Paris after the end of the battle of Normandy. RN had been in the hands of the Vichy propaganda minister, Philippe Henriot, since November 1942 when de Gaulle took it over in an ordonnance he signed in Algiers on 4 April 1944.[12]
On 19 August, continuing their retreat eastwards, columns of German vehicles moved down the Avenue des Champs  lys es. Posters calling citizens to arm had previously been pasted on walls by FFI members. These posters called for a general mobilization of the Parisians, arguing that "the war continues"; they called on the Parisian police, the Republican Guard, the gendarmerie, the Garde Mobile, the Groupe mobile de r serve (the police units replacing the army), and patriotic Frenchmen ("all men from 18 to 50 able to carry a weapon") to join "the struggle against the invader". Other posters assured that "victory is near" and promised "chastisement for the traitors", i.e. Vichy loyalists and collaborators. The posters were signed by the "Parisian Committee of the Liberation", in agreement with the Provisional Government of the French Republic, and under the orders of "Regional Chief Colonel Rol" (Henri Rol-Tanguy), the commander of the French Forces of the Interior in  le de France.
Then the first skirmishes between the French and the German occupiers began. Small mobile units of the Red Cross moved into the city to assist French and German wounded. That same day, the Germans detonated a barge filled with mines in the northeastern suburb of Pantin, which set mills on fire that supplied Paris with its flour.[8]
 A captured tank fires against a sniper's position
On 20 August, as barricades began to appear, Resistance fighters organized themselves to sustain a siege. Trucks were positioned, trees cut down, and trenches were dug in the pavement to free paving stones for consolidating the barricades. These materials were transported by men, women, and children using wooden carts. Fuel trucks were attacked and captured. Civilian vehicles were commandeered, painted with camouflage, and marked with the FFI emblem. The Resistance used them to transport ammunition and orders from one barricade to another.[citation needed]
Skirmishes reached their peak on 22 August, when some German units tried to leave their fortifications. At 09:00 on 23 August, under Choltitz's orders, the Germans opened fire on the Grand Palais, an FFI stronghold, and German tanks fired at the barricades in the streets. Adolf Hitler gave the order to inflict maximum damage on the city.[13]
An estimated 800 to 1,000 Resistance fighters were killed during the Battle for Paris, and another 1,500 were wounded.[14]
Allies enter Paris (24 25 August)[edit]
Further information: 2nd Armored Division (France)
 Film "La Lib ration de Paris" shot by the French Resistance
On 24 August, delayed by combat and poor roads, Free French General Leclerc, commander of the 2nd French Armored Division which were equipped with American M4 Sherman tanks, halftracks and trucks disobeyed his direct superior, American corps commander Major General Leonard T. Gerow, and sent a vanguard (the colonne Dronne) to Paris, with the message that the entire division would be there the following day. The 9th Company of the R giment de marche du Tchad which was nicknamed La Nueve (Spanish for "the nine") consisted of 160 men under French command, 146 of which were Spanish republicans.[15] They were commanded by French Captain Raymond Dronne, who became the second uniformed Allied officer to enter Paris after Amado Granell.[16]
At 9:22 p.m. on the night of 24 August, the 9th Company broke into the center of Paris by the Porte d'Italie. Upon entering the town hall square, the half-track "Ebro" fired the first rounds at a large group of German fusiliers and machine guns. Civilians went out to the street and sang "La Marseillaise". The leader of the 9th Company, Raymond Dronne, went to the command center of the German general Dietrich von Choltitz to request the surrender.
The 4th US Infantry Division commanded by Raymond Barton also entered through the Porte d'Italie in the early hours of the next day. The leading American regiments covered the right flank of the French 2nd Armoured and turned Eastward at the Place de la Bastille and made their way along Avenue Daumesnil heading towards the Bois de Vincennes.[17] In the afternoon the British 30 Assault Unit had entered the Porte d'Orl ans and then searched buildings for vital intelligence, later capturing the former Headquarters of Admiral Karl D nitz, the Ch teau de la Muette.[18]
While awaiting the final capitulation, the 9th Company assaulted the Chamber of Deputies, the H tel Majestic and the Place de la Concorde. At 3:30 p.m. on 25 August, the German garrison of Paris surrendered and the Allies received Von Choltitz as a prisoner, while other French units also entered the capital.
Near the end of the battle, Resistance groups brought Allied airmen and other troops hidden in suburban towns, such as Montlh ry, into central Paris. Here, they witnessed the ragged end of the capital's occupation, de Gaulle's triumphal arrival, and the claim of "One France" liberated by the Free French and the Resistance.
The 2nd Armored Division suffered 71 killed and 225 wounded. Material losses included 35 tanks, six self-propelled guns, and 111 vehicles, "a rather high ratio of losses for an armored division", according to historian Jacques Mordal.[19]
German surrender (25 August)[edit]
 25 August - Armoured vehicles of the 2nd Armored (Leclerc) Division fighting before the Palais Garnier. One German tank is going up in flames.
Despite repeated orders from Adolf Hitler that the French capital "must not fall into the enemy's hand except lying in complete debris", which was to be accomplished by bombing it and blowing up its bridges,[20] Choltitz, as commander of the German garrison and military governor of Paris, surrendered on 25 August at the H tel Meurice. He was then driven to the Paris Police Prefecture where he signed the official surrender, then to the Gare Montparnasse, Montparnasse train station, where General Leclerc had established his command post, to sign the surrender of the German troops in Paris. Choltitz was kept prisoner until April 1947. In his memoir Brennt Paris? ("Is Paris Burning?"), first published in 1950,[21] Choltitz describes himself as the saviour of Paris, though some historians opine that it was more the case that he had lost control of the city and had no means to carry out Hitler's orders.[citation needed]
De Gaulle's speech (25 August)[edit]
 German soldiers at the H tel Majestic, headquarters for the Milit rbefehlshaber in Frankreich, the German High Military Command in France. They requested that they be made prisoner only by the military and surrendered to Battalion Chief Jacques Massu of the 2e DB.
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "De Gaulle's speech at Liberation" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (October 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
On 25 August, the same day that the Germans surrendered, Charles de Gaulle, President of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, moved back into the War Ministry on the Rue Saint-Dominique. He made a rousing speech to the crowd from the H tel de Ville.
Why do you wish us to hide the emotion which seizes us all, men and women, who are here, at home, in Paris that stood up to liberate itself and that succeeded in doing this with its own hands?
No! We will not hide this deep and sacred emotion. These are minutes which go beyond each of our poor lives.
Paris! Paris outraged! Paris broken! Paris martyred! But Paris liberated! Liberated by itself, liberated by its people with the help of the French armies, with the support and the help of all France, of the France that fights, of the only France, of the real France, of the eternal France!
Since the enemy which held Paris has capitulated into our hands, France returns to Paris, to her home. She returns bloody, but quite resolute. She returns there enlightened by the immense lesson, but more certain than ever of her duties and of her rights.
I speak of her duties first, and I will sum them all up by saying that for now, it is a matter of the duties of war. The enemy is staggering, but he is not beaten yet. He remains on our soil.
It will not even be enough that we have, with the help of our dear and admirable Allies, chased him from our home for us to consider ourselves satisfied after what has happened. We want to enter his territory as is fitting, as victors.
This is why the French vanguard has entered Paris with guns blazing. This is why the great French army from Italy has landed in the south and is advancing rapidly up the Rh ne valley. This is why our brave and dear Forces of the interior will arm themselves with modern weapons. It is for this revenge, this vengeance and justice, that we will keep fighting until the final day, until the day of total and complete victory.
This duty of war, all the men who are here and all those who hear us in France know that it demands national unity. We, who have lived the greatest hours of our History, we have nothing else to wish than to show ourselves, up to the end, worthy of France. Long live France!
Victory parades (26 and 29 August)[edit]
The day after de Gaulle's speech, Leclerc's French 2nd Armored Division paraded down the Champs- lys es. A few German snipers were still active, and ones from rooftops in the H tel de Crillon area shot at the crowd while de Gaulle marched down the Champs  lys es and entered the Place de la Concorde.[22]
General de Gaulle and his entourage proudly stroll down the Champs  lys es to Notre Dame Cathedral for a Te Deum ceremony following the city's liberation on 25 August 1944.
A British AFPU photographer kisses a child before cheering crowds in Paris, 26 August 1944.
As allied troops enter Paris on 26 August, celebrating crowds on place De La Concorde scatter for cover from small bands of remaining German snipers.
The U.S. 28th Infantry Division on the Champs  lys es in the "Victory Day" parade on 29 August 1944.
American soldiers look at the French tricolour flying from the Eiffel Tower.
On 29 August, the U.S. Army's 28th Infantry Division, which had assembled in the Bois de Boulogne the previous night, paraded 24-abreast up the Avenue Hoche to the Arc de Triomphe, then down the Champs  lys es. Joyous crowds greeted the Americans as the entire division, men and vehicles, marched through Paris "on its way to assigned attack positions northeast of the French capital."[23]
Food crisis[edit]
Whilst the liberation was ongoing, it became apparent that food in Paris was getting scarcer by the day. The French rail network had largely been destroyed by Allied bombing, so getting food in had become a problem, especially since the Germans stripped Paris of its resources for themselves. The Allies realised the necessity to get Paris back on its feet and pushed a plan for food convoys to get through to the capital as soon as possible. In addition, surrounding towns and villages were requested to supply as much to Paris as possible. The Civil Affairs of SHAEF authorised the import of up to 2,400 tons of food per day at the expense of the military effort. A British food convoy labelled 'Vivres Pour Paris' entered on 29 August and US supplies were flown in via Orl ans Airport before being sent in. 500 tons were delivered a day by the British and another 500 tons by the Americans. Along with French civilians outside Paris bringing in indigenous resources, within ten days the food crisis was overcome.[24]
Aftermath[edit]
 General Omar Bradley, Dwight D. Eisenhower, General Marie-Pierre K nig and Air Marshal Arthur Tedder
The uprising in Paris gave the newly established Free French government and its president, Charles de Gaulle, enough prestige and authority to establish a provisional French Republic. This replaced the fallen Vichy State (1940 1944),[25] and united the politically divided French Resistance, drawing Gaullists, nationalists, communists and anarchists into a new "national unanimity" government.[citation needed]
De Gaulle emphasized the role that the French had in the liberation.[25] De Gaulle drove the necessity for the French people to do their "duty of war" by advancing into the Benelux countries and Germany.[citation needed] He wanted France to be among "the victors", a belief that they escaped the fate of having a new constitution imposed by the AMGOT threat like those that would be established in Germany and Japan in 1945.
Although Paris was liberated, there was still heavy fighting elsewhere in France. Large portions of the country were still occupied after the successful Operation Dragoon in southern France, which extended into the south-western region of the Vosges Mountains from 15 August to 14 September. Fighting went on in Alsace and Lorraine in eastern France during the last months of 1944 until the early months of 1945.
Legal purge[edit]
Further information:  puration l gale
Several alleged Vichy loyalists involved in the Milice, a paramilitary militia established by Sturmbannf hrer Joseph Darnand that hunted the Resistance along with the Gestapo, were made prisoners in a post-liberation purge known as the  puration l gale (Legal purge). Some were executed without trial. Women accused of "horizontal collaboration" because of alleged sexual relationships with Germans were arrested and had their heads shaved, were publicly exhibited and some were allowed to be mauled by mobs.
On 17 August, the Germans took Pierre Laval to Belfort. On 20 August, under German military escort, Marshal Philippe P tain was forcibly moved to Belfort, and to the Sigmaringen enclave in Germany on 7 September; there, 1,000 of his followers (including Louis-Ferdinand C line) joined him. They established the government of Sigmaringen, challenging the legitimacy of de Gaulle's Provisional Government of the French Republic. As a sign of protest over his forced move, P tain refused to take office, and was eventually replaced by Fernand de Brinon. The Vichy government in exile ended in April 1945.
Legacy[edit]
60th, 70th and 75th anniversaries of the liberation[edit]
On 25 August 2004, two military parades reminiscent of the parades of 26 and 29 August 1944, one in commemoration of the 2nd Armored Division, the other of the US 4th Infantry Division, and featuring armoured vehicles from the era, were held on the 60th anniversary of the Liberation of Paris. Under the auspices of the Senate, a jazz concert and popular dancing took place in the Jardin du Luxembourg.[26] In the same event, homage was paid to the Spanish contribution   the first time in 60 years. Paris Mayor Bertrand Delano  laid a plaque on a wall along the River Seine at the Quai Henri IV in the presence of surviving Spanish veterans, Javier Rojo the President of the Senate of Spain and a delegation of Spanish politicians.
On 25 August 2014, plaques were placed on the Boulevard Saint-Michel and neighboring streets, in the vicinity of the Luxembourg Palace, seat of the French Senate, where combatants had been killed in August 1944.[27] There was dancing in the street in every neighborhood of the French capital and Place de la Bastille, as well as a son et lumi re spectacle and dancing on the Place de l'H tel de Ville in the evening.[28]
On 25 August 2019 many acts in commemoration of the liberation of Paris focused on the role of the Spanish soldiers of "La Nueve" (Spanish for 'Nine'). The mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, herself descendant of Spanish Republican veterans, emphasized during the inauguration of a fresco that it has taken too long to recognize this chapter of the French history.[29]
Homage to the liberation martyrs[edit]
 The wall of the 35 martyrs, Bois de Boulogne
On 16 May 2007, following his election as President of the Fifth French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy organized an homage to the 35 French Resistance martyrs executed by the Germans on 16 August 1944. French historian Max Gallo narrated the events that took place in the woods of Bois de Boulogne, and a Parisian schoolgirl read 17-year-old French resistant Guy M quet's final letter. During his speech, Sarkozy announced that this letter would be read in all French schools to remember the resistance spirit.[30][31] After the speech, the chorale of the French Republican Guard closed the homage ceremony by singing the French Resistance's anthem "Le Chant des Partisans" ("The Partisans' song"). Following this occasion, the new president traveled to Berlin to meet German chancellor Angela Merkel, as a symbol of the Franco-German reconciliation.
In popular culture[edit]
La Lib ration de Paris[edit]
La Lib ration de Paris ("The Liberation of Paris"), whose original title was L'Insurrection Nationale ins parable de la Lib ration Nationale ("The National Insurrection inseparable from the National Liberation"), was a short 30-minute documentary film secretly shot between 16 and 27 August by the French Resistance. It was released in French theatres on 1 September.
Postal material[edit]
 Three-cent stamp picturing the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, with marching U.S. Army soldiers and an overflight by U.S. Army Air Force
On 8 September 1945, the U.S. Post Office issued a three-cent stamp commemorating the liberation of Paris from the Germans. First day covers were illustrated with images of the Ludendorff Bridge illustrating its capture. Other countries have issued stamps commemorating the bridge's capture, including Nicaragua, Guyana, Micronesia, and Republic of the Marshall Islands.[32]
Filmography[edit]
La Lib ration de Paris black-and-white film (1944)
The Liberation of Paris color film (1944) by George Stevens showing the final city shootouts, de Gaulle's triumphal arrival, arrested Germans in the streets of the city and victory parade[33]
Is Paris Burning? (1966)
Diplomacy (2014)
See also[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Liberation of Paris.
France portalWorld War II portal
Anthony Faramus
Camp Gurs
Camp de Rivesaltes
Concentration camps in France
Drancy internment camp
Fort de Romainville
Liberation of France
M morial du mar chal Leclerc de Hauteclocque et de la Lib ration de Paris
Military history of France during World War II
Paris in World War II
Prague uprising
Warsaw Uprising
References[edit]
^ a b "Lib ration de Paris [Liberation of Paris]" Archived 19 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine (in French). (PDF format).
^ "The Lost Evidence  Liberation of Paris". History.
^ "Lib ration de Paris forces am ricaines" Archived 20 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in French).
^ "Les Cahiers Multim dias: Il y a 60 ans : la Lib ration de Paris" Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine (in French). G rard Conreur/M morial du Mar chal Leclerc et de la Lib ration de Paris. Radio France. 6 July 2004.
^ a b "1944: August 25: Paris is liberated after four years of Nazi occupation". History.com.
^ Robertson, Charles L. (19 May 2011). When Roosevelt Planned to Govern France. University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 9781558498815.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 7 July 2007.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) (PDF format). Pantin official website.
^ a b [1] (PDF format). Pantin official website.
^ "Allocution du Pr sident de la R publique lors de la c r monie d hommage aux martyrs du Bois de Boulogne"  (in French), President Nicolas Sarkozy, French Presidency official website, 16 May 2007.
^ Taittinger, Pierre (1946).  ... et Paris ne fut pas d truit (... And Paris Was Not Destroyed) Archived 6 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine (in French). L' lan.
^ Wird Paris vernichtet? (Will Paris Be Destroyed?) Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine (in German), a documentary by Michael Busse and Maria-Rosa Bobbi, Arte/WDR/France 3/TSR. August 2004.
^ Journal Officiel des  tablissements fran ais de l'Oc anie, Titre V, Dispositions g n rales, p. 43, [2][permanent dead link] p. 3.
^ Lib ration de Paris: Balises 1944, L'Humanit , 23 August 2004.
^ Thorton, Willis (1962). The Liberation of Paris   Google Books. Retrieved 30 August 2011.
^ Gaspar, Celaya, Diego (15 December 2011). "Portrait d'oubli s. L'engagement des Espagnols dans les Forces fran aises libres, 1940-1945". Revue historique des arm es (in French) (265): 46 55. ISSN 0035-3299.
^ Rosbottom, Ronald C. (24 August 2014). "Who Liberated Paris in August 1944?". The Daily Beast.
^ Argyle, Ray (2014). The Paris Game: Charles de Gaulle, the Liberation of Paris, and the Gamble that Won France. Dundurn. p. 223. ISBN 9781459722880.
^ Rankin, Nicholas (2011). Ian Fleming's Commandos: The Story of the Legendary 30 Assault Unit. Oxford University Press. pp. 259 263. ISBN 9780199782901.
^ Mordal, Jacques (1964). La Bataille de France 1944 1945 Archived 13 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Arthaud.
^ ... Brennt Paris?. Amazon.de. Retrieved 25 August 2008.
^ Choltitz, von, Dietrich (1950). Brennt Paris? Adolf Hitler ... Tatsachenbericht d. letzten deutschen Befehlshabers in Paris [Factual report of the last German commander in Paris] (in German). Mannheim: UNA Weltb cherei. OCLC 1183798630.
^ "75th Anniversary of the Liberation of Paris". AP Photos. Retrieved 25 February 2023.
^ Stanton, Shelby L. (Captain U.S. Army, Retired), World War II Order of Battle, The encyclopedic reference to all U.S. Army ground force units from battalion through division, 1939 1945, Galahad Books, New York, 1991, p. 105. ISBN 0-88365-775-9.
^ Coles, Harry Lewis; Weinberg, Albert Katz (1964). Civil Affairs: Soldiers Become Governors (PDF). United States Army in World War II: Special Studies. Office of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army. pp. 774 75. Retrieved 22 May 2019.
^ a b "1944 1946: La Lib ration" (in French). Charles de Gaulle foundation official website. 15 June 2007. Archived from the original on 15 June 2007.
^ "60 me Anniversaire de la Lib ration   La Lib ration de Paris   S nat".
^ "La prise du S nat   La Lib ration de Paris".
^ "Bal de c l bration des 70 ans de la lib ration de Paris sur le Parvis de l'H tel de Ville".
^ "Lib ration de Paris: la ville c l bre les combattants espagnols". Le Point. 25 August 2019.
^ President Nicolas Sarkozy's speech (English).[dead link] French Presidency official website, 16 May 2007.
^ Max Gallo's ceremony (video),[dead link] French Presidency official website, 16 May 2007.
^ "Ponts et batailles de la seconde guerre mondiale" (in French). Retrieved 5 April 2015.
^ "George Stevens' World War II Footage". IMDb.
Further reading[edit]
Argyle, Ray. The Paris Game: Charles de Gaulle, the Liberation of Paris, and the Gamble that Won France (Dundurn, 2014); online review.
Bishop, C cile. "Photography, Race and Invisibility: The Liberation of Paris, in Black and White." Photographies 11.2-3 (2018): 193 213; most of De Gaulle's troops were Africans. online
Blumenson, Martin. "Politics and the Military in the Liberation of Paris." Parameters 28.2 (1998): 4+ online.
Blumenson, Martin. Breakout and Pursuit, in the series "United States Army in World War II: The European Theater of Operations" (Washington: US Army, Office of the Chief of Military History, 1963) online
Cobb, Matthew. Eleven days in August : the liberation of Paris in 1944 (2014) online
Clark, Catherine E. "Capturing the moment, picturing history: photographs of the liberation of Paris." American Historical Review 121.3 (2016): 824 860.
Keegan, John. Six Armies In Normandy: From D-Day to the Liberation of Paris June 6th-August 25th, 1944 (Random House, 2011). online
Keith, Susan. "Collective memory and the end of occupation: Remembering (and forgetting) the liberation of Paris in images." Visual Communication Quarterly 17.3 (2010): 134 146.
Smith, Jean Edward. The Liberation of Paris: How Eisenhower, De Gaulle, and Von Choltitz Saved the City of Light (Simon & Schuster, 2020) excerpt, by a leading scholar.
Thornton, Willis. "The Liberation of Paris." History Today (Dec 1959) 9#12 pp 800 811.
Thornton, Willis. The Liberation of Paris (Harcourt, Brace and World, 1962), scholarly book.
Tucker-Jones, Anthony. Operation Dragoon: The Liberation of Southern France, 1944 (Casemate Publishers, 2010).
Zaloga, Steven J. Liberation of Paris 1944: Patton s race for the Seine (Bloomsbury, 2011).
External links[edit]
online films--primary sources
Liberation of Paris   Official French website (in English)
Battle for Paris: August 16 26, Documentary shot by the French Resistance, 1 September 1944
De Gaulle's speech from the H tel de Ville  Charles de Gaulle foundation
De Gaulle's speech in retrospect  BBC News
Paris Liberated: Rare, Unpublished Archived 1 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine  slideshow by Life
Primout, Gilles. "19 25 ao t 1944... La Lib ration de Paris " (in French)   provides archival documents and a detailed timeline
vteFrench Resistance
Belgium
Denmark
Germany
Greece
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Creationand control
Charles de Gaulle
Appeal of 18 June
Comit  d partemental de lib ration
Empire Defense Council
French National Committee
French Committee of National Liberation
National Council of the Resistance
Provisional Consultative Assembly
BCRA
DGER
Free France
Free France
Free French Forces
Air Force
Army of Africa
Navy
French Liberation Army
Battles
Koufra
Bir Hakeim
Gazala
1st Free French Division
Companions of Liberation (List)
Radio Londres
Free French Africa
Domesticoperations
Movements:
Combat
Franc-Tireur
Francs-Tireurs et Partisans
FTP Foreign Labour Force
French Forces of the Interior
Lib ration-nord
Lib ration-sud
Mouvements unis
Mus e de l'Homme
National Front
Ceux de la Lib ration
Ceux de la R sistance
Networks:
Alliance
Organisation de r sistance de l'arm e
Brutus
Comet Line
CdL Cin ma
CLD
Fer
Mithridate [fr]
Morhange
Confr rie Notre-Dame
Others:
Arm e secr te
Organisation civile et militaire
Jade-Amicol
Jade-Fitzroy
Maquis
Vercors
Clandestinepress
Bir-Hakeim [fr]
Bulletin [fr]
Combat
D fense de la France
Les  ditions de Minuit
L'Espoir [fr]
Franc-Tireur
Front National
L'Humanit 
Les Lettres Fran aises
Lib ration (nord) [fr]
Lib ration (sud)
R sistance [fr]
T moignage chr tien
La V rit  fran aise [fr]
La Voix du Nord
FreeFrenchAfrica
Brazzaville Conference
Brazzaville manifesto
French Chad
Empire Defense Council
Free French Africa
French Cameroon
French Congo
French Gabon
Marching Battalions [fr]
Second [fr]
Third [fr]
Operation Marie
Ubangi-Shari
Liberationof France
Kieffer commandos
French Liberation Army
1st Army
2nd DB
General de Lattre
General Leclerc
Liberation of France
Liberation of Paris
Liberation of Strasbourg
Provisional Government
Leaders
Charles de Gaulle 
Jean Moulin 
Emmanuel d'Astier 
Pierre Brossolette 
Charles Delestraint 
Henri Frenay 
Marie-Madeleine Fourcade 
Jean-Pierre L vy [fr] 
Pierre Villon
Museums andMemorials
Order of Liberation
Companions
Resistance Medal
Medal of the Righteous
M morial de la France combattante
Museum of National Resistance [fr]
Museums and memorials
Mus e de l'Ordre de la Lib ration
Free France Foundation [fr]
PortalCategories: (French ResistanceFilmsMembersNetworks and movementsRighteous Among the Nations)
vte   Liberation of France
Belgium
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Forces
Army of Africa
Commando Kieffer
First Army
Cavalry Corps
3rd Army Corps
4th
5th
1st Armored
32nd Infantry
Francs-Tireurs et Partisans
Free French Forces
French Forces of the Interior
French Liberation Army
French Expeditionary Corps Divisions:
1st Free French
2nd Moroccan Infantry
3rd Algerian Infantry
4th Moroccan Mountain
Second Army
Leaders
Charles de Gaulle
Jean Moulin
Winston Churchill
Bernard Montgomery
Henri Giraud
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Raymond O. Barton
George Patton
Philippe Leclerc
Jean de Lattre de Tassigny
Philippe Kieffer
Administration
Empire Defense Council
French Civil and Military High Command
French National Committee
French Committee of National Liberation
Provisional Consultative Assembly
Provisional Government
FrenchcampaignNov 1940
Battle of Gabon
Jun 1941
Syria Lebanon campaign
Nov 1942
Operation Torch
Tunisian campaign
Battle of R union
Sept 1943
Liberation of Corsica
Jan 1944
Battle of Vercors
Battle of Gli res
March 1944
Liberation of Limousin
May 1944
Battle of Mont Mouchet
Jun 1944
Battle of Normandy
Battle of Carentan
Battle of Cherbourg
Battle of Caen
Liberation of Limousin
Tulle massacre
Liberation of Gu ret [fr]
Oradour-sur-Glane massacre
Maquis de Saint-Marcel
Maquis de Saffr 
Battle of Ushant
July 1944
Liberation of Saint-L 
Battle of Mont Gargan [fr]
Operation Cobra
Aug 1944
Battle for Brittany
Rennes
Saint-Malo
Liberation of Brest
Atlantic pockets:
Lorient
Saint-Nazaire
Lioran [fr]
 gletons [fr]
Battle of Port Cros
Battle of La Ciotat
Provence landings
Liberation of Toulon
Liberation of Marseille
Liberation of Paris
Maill  massacre
Liberation of Gu ret [fr]
Battle of Mont limar [fr]
Liberation of Nice [fr]
Sept 1944
Liberation of Nancy
Operation Astonia
Operation Undergo
Atlantic pockets:
La Rochelle
Pointe de Grave
Royan
Dunkirk
Battle of Arracourt
Battle of Meximieux [fr]
Nov 1944 -March 1945
Battle of Alsace
Liberation of Strasbourg
Colmar Pocket
Bitche [fr]
Apr 1945
Atlantic pockets:
Royan
Pointe de Grave
May 1945
Atlantic pockets:
Dunkirk
La Rochelle
Lorient
Saint-Nazaire
Aftermath
End of Vichy
1945 municipal elections
Advance to the Rhine
Invasion of Germany
End of World War II in Europe
Victory in Europe Day
Victory Day
Provisional Government
 puration l gale
 puration sauvage
Tripartisme
1946 legislative election
Fourth Republic
Trente Glorieuses
Trial of Philippe P tain
Klaus Barbie trial
WW II theatres:
Atlantic
Western Front
Eastern Front
Mediterranean and Middle East
Pacific
Sino Japanese
vteWorld War II
Outline
Military engagements
Battles
Operations
Leaders
Allied
Axis
Commanders
Casualties
Conferences
GeneralTopics
Air warfare of World War II
In Europe
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Declarations of war
Diplomacy
Governments in exile
Home front
Australian
United Kingdom
United States
Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
British contribution
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Naval history
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology
Allied cooperation
Mulberry harbour
Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II
Theaters
Asia and Pacific
China
South-East Asia
Pacific
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific
Indian Ocean
Europe
Western Front
Eastern Front
Mediterranean and Middle East
North Africa
East Africa
Italy
West Africa
Atlantic
timeline
Americas
Aftermath
Chinese Civil War
Cold War
Decolonization
Division of Korea
First Indochina War
Expulsion of Germans
Greek Civil War
Indonesian National Revolution
Keelhaul
Marshall Plan
Occupation of Germany
Occupation of Japan
Osoaviakhim
Paperclip
Soviet occupations
Baltic
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Territorial changes of Germany
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
United Nations
War crimes
Allied war crimes
Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes
German war crimes
forced labour
Wehrmacht war crimes
The Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Nuremberg trials
Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes
Nanjing Massacre
Unit 731
Prosecution
Croatian war crimes
Genocide of Serbs
Persecution of Jews
Romanian war crimes
Sexual violence
German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Ianjo
Rape of Manila
Marocchinate
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland
ParticipantsAllies
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria (from September 1944)
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
Finland (from September 1944)
France
Free France
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
Newfoundland
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania (from August 1944)
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
Tuva
United Kingdom
British Empire
United States
Puerto Rico
Yugoslavia
Axis
Albania protectorate
Bulgaria (until September 1944)
Wang Jingwei regime
Croatia
Finland (until September 1944)
Germany
Hungary
Free India
French Indochina
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines
Romania (until August 1944)
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France
Neutral powers
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Vatican City
Resistance
Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Dutch East Indies
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jews
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Qu c d n  ng
 ng minh H i
Vi t Minh
Yugoslavia
POWs
Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
German prisoners
Soviet Union
Azerbaijan
United States
United Kingdom
Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners
Soviet Union
Soviet prisoners
Finland
atrocities by Germans
Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
TimelinePrelude
Africa
Asia
Europe
1939
Poland
Phoney War
Battle of South Guangxi
Winter War
Atlantic
First Battle of Changsha
1939 1940 Winter Offensive
1940
German invasion of Denmark (1940)
Norwegian campaign
German invasion of Luxembourg
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Battle of Zaoyang Yichang
Battle of Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
Hundred Regiments Offensive
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass
1941
Battle of South Henan
Battle of South Shanxi
East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union
Summer War
Finland (Silver Fox)
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor
Hong Kong
Philippines
Second Battle of Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941 1942)
Greek famine of 1941 1944
1942
Burma
Third Battle of Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
 Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
St Nazaire
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch
Chinese famine of 1942 1943
1943
Tunisia
Battle of West Hubei
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
 Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy
Armistice of Cassibile
Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde
Bengal famine of 1943
1944
Monte Cassino / Anzio
Narva
Korsun Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Philippines (1944 1945)
Leyte
Syrmian Front
Hungary
Budapest
Burma (1944 1945)
Ardennes
Bodenplatte
Dutch famine of 1944 1945
1945
Vistula Oder
Manila
Iwo Jima
Project Hula
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Guangxi
West Hunan
Italy (Spring 1945)
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Surrender of Germany
document
Borneo
Taipei
Naval bombardment of Japan
Manchuria
Atomic bombings
Debate
South Sakhalin
Kuril Islands
Shumshu
Vietnamese famine of 1945
Surrender of Japan
Potsdam Declaration
document
End of World War II in Asia
 World War II portal
 World portal
Bibliography
Category
Portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberation_of_Paris&oldid=1145598232"