Drake & Josh is an American teen sitcom created by Dan Schneider for Nickelodeon. It aired from January 11, 2004, to September 16, 2007. Two TV films, Drake & Josh Go Hollywood and Merry Christmas, Drake & Josh, were made apart from the regular series that aired on January 6, 2006, and December 5, 2008, respectively. A total of 56 episodes were aired, spanning four seasons. Drake Bell, Josh Peck, and Miranda Cosgrove appeared in all of the episodes.
Series overview[edit]
SeasonEpisodesOriginally airedFirst airedLast aired16January 11, 2004 (2004-01-11)February 22, 2004 (2004-02-22)214March 14, 2004 (2004-03-14)November 28, 2004 (2004-11-28)317April 2, 2005 (2005-04-02)April 8, 2006 (2006-04-08)419September 24, 2006 (2006-09-24)September 16, 2007 (2007-09-16)FilmsJanuary 6, 2006 (2006-01-06)December 5, 2008 (2008-12-05)
Episodes[edit]
Season 1 (2004)[edit]
No.overallNo. inseasonTitleDirected byWritten byOriginal air dateProd.code11"Pilot"Virgil L. FabianDan SchneiderJanuary 11, 2004 (2004-01-11)101
Drake Parker (Drake Bell) is a cool and popular teenager while Josh Nichols (Josh Peck) is a geeky teenager whom Drake describes as unusual. Drake's mom Audrey Parker (Nancy Sullivan) and Josh's dad Walter Nichols (Jonathan Goldstein) have been dating and announce to Drake, Josh, and Drake's devious little sister, Megan (Miranda Cosgrove), that they are getting married. Josh is thrilled about having a new stepbrother, but Drake is not. Drake is even less excited when he finds out that Josh is Miss Nancy, the anonymous advice columnist for the school newspaper, and that Josh believes he must dress like a woman to adequately write his advice. Drake then uses this to get a date with Tiffany Margolis (Julie Gonzalo), who wrote to Miss Nancy. But Josh gets in trouble when her angered boyfriend Buck (Joey Mendicino) thinks she is on a date with Josh instead and challenges him to a fight. Josh trains all day under a karate instructor but still ends up getting knocked out with one punch. Drake eventually apologizes and helps Josh realize that he can give good advice without wearing his Miss Nancy dress. Both make up and accept each other as brothers.
22"Dune Buggy"Virgil L. FabianDan SchneiderJanuary 18, 2004 (2004-01-18)106
Drake and Josh are excited to receive a dune buggy from his friend Trevor (Taran Killam), only to find it is broken down. Later, Drake convinces Josh to try out lying after Josh accidentally breaks the TV, but Josh is grounded for doing so. Drake and Josh then fully repair the dune buggy, to the surprise of their parents, who forbid them from driving it. Drake secretly drives it with Trevor anyway and crashes. Drake attempts to conceal his bruises and the damages to the dune buggy, but Josh eventually finds out when he gets a call from the emergency room and confronts Drake about it, angry that all Drake cares about is keeping the accident and his injuries a secret from their parents. Racked with guilt, Drake confesses to Walter and Audrey, and they ground Drake for two weeks, much to Josh's delight. However, due to Drake's injury, his "grounding" is simply staying home from school, resting, and making Josh be his servant.
33"Believe Me, Brother"Virgil L. FabianDan SchneiderJanuary 25, 2004 (2004-01-25)102
Josh has suspicions that Susan (Ashley Drane), Drake's new girlfriend, is flirting with him behind Drake's back. Drake laughs it off at first, but then becomes angry when he catches Susan kissing Josh and believes Josh is trying to steal Susan from him. Josh tries to explain his innocence to Drake, but Drake ignores him and the two become increasingly distant. Drake eventually learns the truth when Megan inserts a video of Susan flirting with Josh (along with many other embarrassing shots of Drake and Josh) into their music video project. Enraged and betrayed, Drake dumps a horrified Susan, and the two boys then thank a stunned Megan for her prank, and get even with Susan by putting purple paint in her locker.
44"Two Idiots and a Baby"Virgil L. FabianSteven MolaroFebruary 8, 2004 (2004-02-08)103
When Audrey and Walter go out to dinner with Mr. and Mrs. Galloway, Josh offers to babysit Mr. and Mrs. Galloway's son Max, much to Drake's dismay. After Drake and Josh struggle to get Max changed and then put to sleep, Drake leaves to play at a concert. Josh panics when Max disappears and ends up getting stuck on the roof looking for him. However, underlying loyalty compels Drake to return and help Josh find Max just before Audrey, Walter, Mr. and Mrs. Galloway return.
55"First Crush"Virgil L. FabianSteve HollandFebruary 15, 2004 (2004-02-15)104
Josh gets his first crush on Kathy (Erin Chambers) but cannot stop saying ridiculous things such as "Spoons" to her. While trying to impress her, he accidentally says that he can play the guitar, which he cannot. Kathy wants Josh to play her a song at her birthday party, which is at the coffee shop not only run by Josh's former karate teacher, but the same one Drake just got banned from because of a prank involving Megan's pet snake.
66"Grammy"Virgil L. FabianAndrew Hill NewmanFebruary 22, 2004 (2004-02-22)105
When Megan, Audrey and Walter leave the house for the weekend, Drake and Josh's dreams of a parent-free weekend are dashed when Josh's grandmother and Walter's mom Grammy (Randee Heller) comes to babysit. Josh is glad to have Grammy around, but Drake does not like her. Drake wants to attend a concert with his friends, but Grammy forbids him from going and his friends also cannot go, because the tickets are sold out. However, they make a deal in which Drake can spend time with his friends if he beats Grammy in a basketball game, as long as he does not attend the concert. Drake wins the game, but is forced to break his promise out of peer-pressure when his friends are able to get tickets for the concert. Once there, they find out the tickets they have are actually counterfeit, and are detained at the venue until Grammy pays a $200 fine to release them. Grammy then reveals that she let Drake win so he could go with his friends. Drake does not believe her and decides to play again, under the condition that if he wins, no one tells his parents about the concert. Grammy agrees on the condition that if he loses, he will tell his parents about the concert. Drake loses the game, but when his parents come home, Grammy stops him from telling his parents, seeing as he paid back the $200 and was willing to tell them, and that was a good enough punishment for her (Grammy instead tells Drake's parents that she beat Drake at basketball). Drake finally accepts Grammy and they hug each other goodbye, with Grammy secretly sticking an envelope onto Drake's back paying him back the $200 he gave her.
Season 2 (2004)[edit]
No.overallNo. inseasonTitleDirected byWritten byOriginal air dateProd.code71"The Bet"Steve HoeferGeorge Doty IVMarch 14, 2004 (2004-03-14)202
Drake has an addiction to junk food and Josh is addicted to video games. This lands them into trouble when they forget to bring Megan home on a rainy day, for which they are both grounded by Audrey. They both make a bet to see who can live without their addictions, with the loser dying their hair pink, signing a contract with Megan. After a few days, temptation takes over when Drake gets a disfiguring facial rash from his sudden change in diet and must cure it by eating junk food, while Josh receives a brand new GameSphere from Grammy. At this point, their parents then make a bet over who will win, with the loser dying their hair pink. Walter bets on Josh and Audrey bets on Drake. Both Drake and Josh are ready to cave when Megan convinces both to try and make the other crack first. Josh turns their bedroom into a candy palace, while Drake plays Josh's GameSphere right in front of him. Both cave at the same moment, and they fight in the chocolate milk pool who caved first until Megan reveals that it does not matter who caved first, and that they both lose. Because of this, both Audrey and Walter lose their bet as well, forcing everyone but Megan to dye their hair pink, much to her amusement. However, when everyone leaves the house, Drake stays behind to get breakfast and it is revealed that he was only wearing a pink wig.
82"Guitar"Virgil FabianDan SchneiderMarch 21, 2004 (2004-03-21)201
Drake uses his classmates to win tickets to his favorite band's concert, Zero Gravity, and a Fender Stratocaster guitar signed by the lead guitarist, Devin Malone (Mark Matkevich), from a radio contest; he manages to succeed only after Megan picks up the phone and blackmails him into doing her homework for a week in exchange for the guitar and the tickets. But the guitar explodes when Josh plugs it into Drake's faulty amplifier while showing it to Megan, so Josh tries to buy a new one and get it autographed at the concert before Drake finds out. Megan eventually tells Drake, but he is amazed that Josh would go to such great lengths for him. However, moments before the concert, Josh accidentally slams the guitar case closed on Devin's right hand. The concert is about to be cancelled, but Josh nominates Drake to perform in place of Devin, and the manager agrees. Drake then repays Josh for buying him the guitar by giving him the paycheck he earned from performing. Meanwhile, Audrey encourages Walter to bond more with Drake, but Drake is uninterested in doing so.
93"Movie Job"Virgil FabianDan SchneiderMarch 28, 2004 (2004-03-28)203
Josh gets a job at the Premiere movie theater after making "Crazy" Steve (Jerry Trainor) quit after complaining about his wobbly drink holder. Josh enjoys his new job and buys lots of new things with his paychecks, which inspires Drake to get a job at the Premiere as well. The manager, Helen (Yvette Nicole Brown), starts giving Drake more credit for his work despite his laziness and Josh being more competent, even promoting him to assistant manager. Josh tries to get Helen to notice him more by coming up with a promotion to sell more popcorn, but it causes a massive brawl among the customers. Josh is prepared to tell Helen the incident was his fault, but Drake takes the blame, feeling that the job meant more to Josh than to him, and Helen reluctantly fires him.
Audrey only appears in the tag and no lines.
104"Football"Virgil FabianStory by : Barry O'BrienTeleplay by : Dan SchneiderApril 4, 2004 (2004-04-04)205
Drake calls Josh uncool after Josh humiliates him in front of a girl (Leah Pipes) with an unsuccessful magic trick, and encourages him to try out for the school football team to become cool. Josh makes the team as the equipment manager, but Drake still thinks he is uncool. However, Josh finds himself having to play in a crucial game after the brownies he makes for the team makes the center ill (due to Megan putting dirt from a flower pot in them). Josh does not want to play against the toughest team in the state, so Drake sneaks the school janitor (Tony Longo), a former pro player who lost his memory as a result of an accident, into the game in place of Josh. But the janitor gets injured, regaining his memory again, forcing Josh to go and play, where he scores the game-winning touchdown, and Drake finally admits Josh is cool.
115"Pool Shark"Steve HoeferAnthony Del BroccoloApril 18, 2004 (2004-04-18)204
Drake discovers Josh is talented at pool (due to Josh using his geometry and physics skills and knowledge to his advantage), so he takes advantage of this and uses him to hustle several people behind Josh's back after being inspired when Megan hustles him while playing darts. Josh eventually finds out about this after several people complain to him about Drake's gambling at their expense, and furiously vows to never play pool again, especially after Drake reveals he still intends to hustle more people if they play again. Meanwhile, Walter sends Drake and Josh out to get a new birthday present for Audrey after she buys the exact same bracelet he planned to give her. On their way, they find a pool hall, and Josh reluctantly agrees to play pool again and let Drake hustle their opponents, on his conditions. They get into a match with two thugs betting $200 (the money Walter gave the boys for Audrey's present). When Josh wins, the thugs accuse them of hustling them and pin them against a wall. A very frightened Drake apologizes and vows to never hustle anyone ever again, but Josh reveals that it was all just a setup by him and his former camp counselors  (disguised as thugs) to teach Drake a lesson about hustling.
126"Smart Girl"Roger ChristiansenDan SchneiderApril 25, 2004 (2004-04-25)207
Drake unintentionally joins the academic team at school to impress Michelle (Kate Lang Johnson), a girl he likes who has intellectual interests. He competes in the academic bowl and initially gives his team the upper hand while Josh reluctantly feeds him info through a radio, but then a fast food restaurant interferes with Josh's radio frequency, causing Drake's team to lose points. Drake, however, leads the team to victory because of some chemistry knowledge that Josh had given him during the all-night study session and later confesses to Michelle that he is not smart, but Michelle admits that she likes him for who he is. Meanwhile, tired of Megan's countless pranks on him, Josh tries to get back at her, only to fail each time. At the end of the episode, Drake and Josh end up being glued to their chairs by Megan.
137"Little Diva"Virgil FabianEric FriedmanMay 2, 2004 (2004-05-02)208
The Premiere is hosting a world premiere starring Ashley Blake (Skyler Samuels), a child actress. Helen (Frances Callier) assigns Josh to be Ashley Blake's personal assistant, much to Josh's dismay due to the frequent and ridiculous requests Ashley makes. Drake also becomes Ashley's assistant so that Josh may let him into the premiere's after-party, but he, too, is exhausted by Ashley's requests. But when Ashley gets knocked out, due to an accident involving a bucket and a door, they must bring her to the Premiere without making it look like she is unconscious, holding her up, talking for her, and moving her arms for her.
Note: Frances Callier replaced Yvette Nicole Brown as Helen in this episode.
148"Blues Brothers"Fred SavageCraig DiGregorioSeptember 12, 2004 (2004-09-12)206
Josh appears on the local news as the assistant weatherman to his father Walter, only to discover that he has stage fright after Megan tells him she found out about it from Walter, which causes him to twitch heavily on live TV. Soon, everyone in San Diego is mocking him, and Josh becomes too depressed to even leave the house. Meanwhile, at a talent show Drake's band is performing in, a rival boy band steals the song Drake was originally going to perform with his band, forcing them to improvise. So they create a tribute to the Blues Brothers, performing a rendition of "Soul Man" along with Josh, winning the talent show and restoring Josh's confidence.
159"Driver's License"Virgil FabianDan SchneiderSeptember 12, 2004 (2004-09-12)209
Drake fails to get his driver's license while Josh obtains it, and Josh is excited until he gets a ticket for running a stop sign. Fearing that Walter will take his license away for good after Walter instructed the boys with a practice-test, Drake offers to pay for the ticket and keep it a secret. But in return, Drake starts asking Josh to drive him around everywhere, threatening to reveal his ticket to Walter. But Josh decides he has had enough when Drake makes him drive his date around while dressing and acting as a chauffeur, which leads to a fight when Josh gets another ticket for leaving his taillight on.
1610"Number One Fan"Virgil FabianDan SchneiderSeptember 19, 2004 (2004-09-19)211
A girl from Megan's campfire troop, Wendy (Alyson Stoner), has a massive crush on Drake. Her dream is for Drake to play her a song. Impressed with all her knowledge of him, Drake gives her an autograph and a guitar pick. Soon after, Wendy becomes obsessed with Drake and will not leave him alone, much to Drake's annoyance. Despite Drake's attempts to gently tell Wendy she should just leave him in his space, Wendy takes her obsession for Drake too far by posting flyers everywhere around his school promoting an upcoming radio appearance Drake will make with his band. Furious, Drake confronts Wendy about how she meant nothing to him, breaking her heart. At the station, he is in need of a guitar pick and when he checks his pockets, he finds a note from Wendy apologizing for what she did and returning the pick he gave her. Realizing his mistake, he reschedules his radio performance and returns home to Wendy and plays a song just for her. Meanwhile, Josh becomes the leader of the campfire troop after Walter quits due to the kids' troublemaking, but the kids like Josh even less than Walter and trap Josh in a tent at the end of the episode.
1711"Mean Teacher"Steve HoeferGeorge Doty IVSeptember 26, 2004 (2004-09-26)210
Drake wants to break up with his girlfriend Kelly (Chelsea Brummet) due to her laughing obnoxiously in inappropriate situations. However, once he finds out that Mrs. Hayfer (Julia Duffy), his English teacher who hates him, is Kelly's mother, she threatens to send Drake to summer school, should he break up with her. Josh suggests that Drake should make Kelly break up with him, so Drake attempts to do so by acting disgusting at a dinner date, but to no avail. Meanwhile, Josh starts wearing an ugly shirt, and good things begin to happen to him, such as getting a perfect score on an assignment, getting handed a watch and ring by a feuding couple, receiving a classmate's entire video game collection, avoiding Megan's pranks, and having Kelly set him up on a double date with a teen model who loves magic and video games. Drake, fed up with Kelly's laughing, demands to wear Josh's lucky shirt to their double date, but Josh refuses, which leads to a fight that rips the sleeves off the shirt. Drake wears the sleeves and Josh the torso, but neither date goes well, so they agree to let Drake wear the whole shirt until Kelly breaks up with him, and then give it back to Josh for the rest of the night. Kelly breaks up with Drake, much to his delight, and Josh's date takes a liking to him, even kissing him. But the next day, they find the shirt is gone, having been donated by Megan and Audrey. Initially angry, the boys get over it by convincing themselves that the shirt wasn't really lucky. During the credits, a hobo ends up winning the lottery while wearing the shirt, proving that the shirt was lucky after all.
1812"The Gary Grill"Virgil FabianAnthony Del BroccoloOctober 17, 2004 (2004-10-17)212
Drake and Josh get an offer to sell Gary Coleman grills from two men they meet at the Premiere. They prove to be successful salesmen and make a lot of money until they are arrested by the FBI for selling the grills, which were stolen by the two men. They are thrown in jail until Megan tricks the criminals into admitting they stole the grills, and Drake and Josh are set free after the FBI discovered the truth.This episode was dedicated to Richard Biggs, who portrayed an FBI agent. He died on May 22, 2004.
Special Guest Star: Gary Coleman as himself
1913"Drew & Jerry"Steve HoeferDan SchneiderOctober 24, 2004 (2004-10-24)213
After Drake tells Josh he needs more time off himself, Josh begins hanging out with Drew (James Immekus), a teenager who looks and acts like Drake. Drake gets jealous of Drew, so he finds a new friend named Jerry (Stephen Markarian), a teenager who looks and acts like Josh, to make Josh jealous. Soon, both opt to start spending more time with their new friends rather than with each other. Josh abandons his plans to see a movie with Drake to see it with Drew instead, and Drake spends the day deep-sea fishing with Jerry, something Josh has always wanted to do. Drake and Josh get fed up with each other, so they have Drew and Jerry show off their talents at the Premiere (Jerry shows a magic trick, after that, Drew plays his saxophone and Jerry shows his dance to it), which draws the attention of a television producer, who offers them parts in a show about two brothers (which ends up eerily similar to Drake and Josh). Drake and Josh eventually reconcile and become friends again.
2014"Honor Council"Virgil FabianEric FriedmanNovember 28, 2004 (2004-11-28)214
Drake is wrongfully accused of pulling a prank on Mrs. Hayfer when her car is parked inside her classroom. Nonetheless, she suspends him for it. Josh decides to defend Drake in a trial in front of the school honor council to prove his brother's innocence, but Mrs. Hayfer is represented by his archenemy Mindy Crenshaw (Allison Scagliotti-Smith). Mindy interrogates Drake until he looks guilty through all of her evidence, but Drake and Josh receive one more piece of evidence from Megan. They obtain Mindy's transcript, where they realize the only B she had was in a class taught by Mrs. Hayfer and taunt her until she admits to pulling the prank in retaliation for the B in Mrs. Hayfer's class and framing Drake. When she finally does admit it, Mindy is suspended and Drake is cleared of all charges. Mrs. Hayfer reluctantly apologizes to Drake but still says that she despises him.
Season 3 (2005 06)[edit]
No.overallNo. inseasonTitleDirected byWritten byOriginal air dateProd.code211"The Drake & Josh Inn"Adam WeissmanJake FarrowApril 2, 2005 (2005-04-02)305
Audrey and Walter leave the house to go to Los Angeles for Spring Break, leaving Drake and Josh in charge of the house. But Drake spends $200, that they were given for food and emergencies only, on toys and other unnecessary items such as a Mexican robot. Desperate for money, Drake gets the idea to turn their house into a bed and breakfast after he notices a couple who has no place to stay. Josh initially disagrees as he is furious at Drake for his greedy spending, but later reluctantly agrees because they need money. Megan also agrees as long as she is treated like a guest. Things quickly get out of hand, however, when Drake invites a crowd of partying college students to stay, and things get even worse when MTV starts broadcasting from their house. Audrey and Walter get suspicious when they see their house on TV, and start heading home. But with the help of Megan, Drake and Josh succeed in getting everyone out and cleaning up the house before Walter and Audrey come home. Audrey and Walter are then mistakenly arrested for hosting a televised party without a city-authorized permit.
222"Peruvian Puff Pepper"Steve HoeferSteve HollandApril 9, 2005 (2005-04-09)301
Josh enters a salsa making contest and asks Drake to help him in order to win the prize, a plasma screen TV. Megan wants to help the boys win the TV, but they decline, wanting to keep the prize for themselves. Megan sabotages their salsa in retaliation, causing it to explode all over the kitchen, with the boys taking the blame. Drake and Josh, sick of getting blamed for all of Megan's pranks, try to dig up some proof of her deviousness, and discover a surveillance panel in her room, only for them to get in more trouble when the panel is hidden when they attempt to show their parents. Megan then enters the salsa contest on her own, and obtains a "Peruvian Puff Pepper", a rare pepper that could guarantee her victory, so the boys steal the pepper and use it in their salsa instead, infuriating Megan. Drake and Josh go on to win the contest, but they are disqualified when they reveal their secret, as Peruvian Puff Peppers are illegal in the United States, due to them causing kidney failure and/or chapped lips, leaving Megan as the winner. Although she realizes that the boys think that she set them up, she convinces them she is not that smart to do that. At the end, Megan watches the boys repaint the kitchen after the earlier incident through her new TV.
233"We're Married"Steve HoeferGeorge Doty IVApril 16, 2005 (2005-04-16)302
Josh's foreign pen pal, Yooka (Anastasia Baranova), comes to visit from her fictional country of Yudonia, and Drake takes a strong liking to her, spending more time with her than Josh can. Drake promises to back off, but he and Josh soon learn that Yooka is homesick, so they hold a Yudonian friendship ceremony, which turns out to be a marriage ceremony between Yooka and Drake. Drake tries to carry on with life as normal, but Yooka is serious about being married (revealing that they mistranslated her saying "sick of home"), and matters only get worse when Yooka's parents come to visit. So Drake and Josh come up with a plan to annul the marriage, serving her family goat (which is a sacred animal in Yudonia). But Drake quickly regrets it after he learns that Yooka's father is a billionaire. The plan works, with Yooka's father ending the marriage and their whole family returning to Yudonia, much to Drake's sadness. During the end credits, it is revealed that Josh and Yooka are still e-pals and Yooka's father bought the Boston Red Sox for Yooka's new boyfriend and fianc  Achboo, causing Drake to sob over losing Yooka.
244"Mindy's Back"Adam WeissmanEric FriedmanApril 30, 2005 (2005-04-30)303
Mindy returns to school from a mental institution (following the events of her first appearance in "Honor Council"), and once again beats Josh in the science fair. With advice from Megan, Josh attempts to ignore her until Mindy picks him as a project partner. Josh is initially annoyed by this, but they eventually realize they have feelings for one another and begin to date. However, Josh is too worried to tell Drake about his newfound relationship, due to Drake and Mindy's hatred for one another. But because of this, Mindy breaks up with Josh as punishment for his dishonesty. When Drake finally finds out, he is actually happy for Josh, and tries to get the two back together by taking Josh to Mindy's house during the night, where Josh and Mindy finally kiss through Mindy's bedroom window.
255"The Affair"Adam WeissmanAnthony Del BroccoloMay 21, 2005 (2005-05-21)304
Drake and Josh notice Walter has been acting strangely lately, and start to believe that he has been cheating on Audrey with another woman, and further eavesdropping only confirms their suspicions. They try to make Walter fall in love with Audrey again by preparing a meal for him that Audrey "made," but this backfires when Drake accidentally puts cumin on his food, which Walter is allergic to. With the help of Megan, she told Drake and Josh that Walter is at a restaurant with a woman named Peggy (Allison Dunbar). Drake and Josh try to get Peggy to leave their father alone, but she refuses, so the boys dump food on her, causing her to leave Walter for good. But Walter furiously reveals that she was actually a producer for "Good Morning Today," who was talking with him about being their new national weatherman. As retribution for messing up the lunch and costing him the job, he makes his sons dump food on themselves.
266"Playing the Field"Roger ChristiansenDan SchneiderJune 4, 2005 (2005-06-04)306
Drake fears breaking up with Tori (Torrey DeVitto), his most recent girlfriend. When he wants to win her love back again, Drake finds out Tori is already seeing other boys, so he goes on a date with another girl, Liza Tupper, to try and make Tori jealous. Meanwhile, Josh grows a mustache, but nobody approves of it, including Mindy, though he refuses to shave it off.
277"Helen's Surgery"Adam WeissmanGeorge Doty IVJune 11, 2005 (2005-06-11)307
Drake and Josh must assist Helen after eye surgery leaves her temporarily blind. But after finding her apartment loaded with luxurious accessories such as a hot tub and a huge flat-screen TV due to Helen receiving royalties from a TV series she starred in as a child, Drake subsequently takes advantage of Helen's blindness and throws a party at her apartment, much to Josh's disapproval. However, Helen gets a call from her doctor to take the patches off her eyes and does so to find the party in progress. Helen then thinks the party is for her and allows it to continue. Meanwhile, Megan pitches to Helen an idea of a bucket-shaped container that stores most movie theater snacks, which Josh instantly disapproves of, and earns $700 to Josh's dismay.
288"Paging Dr. Drake"Steve HoeferAnthony Del BroccoloOctober 1, 2005 (2005-10-01)309
While working out, Josh drops a barbell on his left foot and breaks it after Drake carelessly shoots him with a potato using a launching gun, but he is scared to go to the hospital. When the family finds out, he is forced to go and is told that he will need surgery on his left foot. At the hospital, Drake tries to get the attention of college nurses by impersonating a doctor, only, though, he is the lookalike of a young doctor due to arrive that day. Drake now has to avoid being caught by Josh's doctor, Doctor Carlson (John O'Hurley), and ends up having to perform a foot surgery. Eventually, he is caught when the real doctor shows up, and he jumps out the window, breaking his right arm in the process. Meanwhile, Megan plots revenge on the boys for not letting her turn up the heat upstairs, since the thermostat was in their room. She decreases the temperature of their room gradually so low that it begins snowing, which Drake does not seem to care.
299"Foam Finger"Roger ChristiansenDan SchneiderOctober 8, 2005 (2005-10-08)308
Drake and Josh realize that they previously met 8 years ago during a San Diego Padres game, when they were both 8 years old and fought over buying the last foam finger at the stadium. Drake and Josh both believe that the other started the fight, and flashback scenes depict different circumstances based on their own memory of the event. Josh believes that Drake hit the back of his head with the foam finger after purchasing it, although Drake denies hitting him. The two drift apart after a fight that results in Josh ripping the foam finger apart and Drake moves out of their bedroom and into Megan's bedroom. They continue to be bitter at each other until Megan locates Lenny (Fred Stoller), the stadium clerk who sold the foam finger. Lenny remembers the incident between Drake and Josh because it was a rare instance in which he had to call the police to break up a fight. Lenny explains that it was young Megan who threw a cookie from her stroller, hitting Josh in the back of the head and setting off the fight between the boys. Drake and Josh reconcile upon learning the truth. The episode ends with Drake and Josh imagining themselves as old men and Megan as an old lady.
3010"Girl Power"Steve HoeferJake FarrowOctober 15, 2005 (2005-10-15)311
Drake wants to break up with his girlfriend Lucy (Gabrielle Christian), after finding out that she is possibly stronger than he is, but Drake challenges her to a fight to prove that he is tougher than she is. Meanwhile, Josh tries to impress Mindy's parents so he can continue to date her. He later organizes a dinner for them at his house on the same night as Drake and Lucy's fight. Josh is concerned that the fight will ruin his chances of impressing Mindy's parents, so he makes Drake and Lucy wrestle upstairs in the bedroom, where Megan is waiting to watch the fight with a group of friends. However, during the dinner, Drake and Lucy later wrestle their way into the living room and Josh furiously yells at Drake for ruining his plans. Mindy's parents understand how much Josh cares for their daughter and allow her and Josh to resume their relationship. However, once they find out what Drake and Lucy were fighting over, Mindy's parents argue with each other over whether women are stronger than men, and fight it out in front of everyone.
3111"Sheep Thrills"Steve HoeferEric FriedmanOctober 22, 2005 (2005-10-22)310
Megan talks Drake and Josh into temporarily babysitting her newly-adopted sheep whom she bought online while she thinks of a way to explain this to their parents. In exchange, she promises not to pull any pranks on them for 3 months. But when the sheep gives birth to a baby lamb on Drake's bed and later wanders out of the room, Drake and Josh must then hide the sheep from their parents while Megan is at oboe practice. However, they are exposed when their parents notice their strange behavior and see the sheep in their room, with Megan pretending to not know about the sheep, causing the boys to get grounded for a month. A month later, the night before they are lifted from their punishment, the boys discover that Megan bought a zebra, to which they choose not to have anything to do with it.
3212"Megan's New Teacher"Adam WeissmanGeorge Doty IVJanuary 28, 2006 (2006-01-28)313
After being accepted into the TTT (Tomorrow's Teachers Today), a student-teaching group, Josh becomes Megan's class teacher. However, he takes his new job very seriously and overuses his teaching skills, as he challenges the students with college-level chemistry, something that the students are not old enough to learn about, and even fails them on pop quizzes based on homework that they were unable to do. Because of this, Megan becomes disliked by her classmates and gets uninvited to her friend Katie's birthday party which involves a Josh pi ata. Drake finds an 11-year-old boy named Neil Kramer in Megan's class with a talent to play drums and wants him to play for the band on Friday after his original drummer quit, but he is not allowed to play after failing Josh's pop quiz, so Drake is now annoyed at Josh. Drake and Megan hatch a sneaky little plan to fire Josh from the student-teaching group. They sneak into the school at night and replace his liquid (to use in chemistry) with one that will explode when combined with anything, replace a tape about chemistry with a video of clowns hurting each other with rubber chickens, and unscrew the sink to burst water when turned. At the end, Josh is fired and the young boy gets to play with Drake at a concert in the Premiere. However, Megan and her classmates then give a trophy to Josh, calling him their favorite teacher, because him screwing up his teaching job got the class's other teacher (whom they hated) to quit. They then admit that Josh is cool, not as a teacher, but as a guy, something which Josh delightfully accepts.
3313"Little Sibling"Steve HoeferDan SchneiderFebruary 4, 2006 (2006-02-04)312
Drake once again gets in trouble at school by his mean English teacher, Mrs. Hayfer, so to keep from being sent to Remedial English (a class with a lack of discipline with its poorly behaved students), Drake agrees to look after a boy named Sammy. Sammy likes Josh more than Drake and often excludes him. Josh and Sammy then have lots of fun together such as filming a pretend cooking show where (still recording) Josh tells Sammy how most people who know Drake and Josh prefer Drake over him and it's "kind of nice having things the other way around.". Not wanting to go to Remedial English as a result to being unsuccessful with Sammy, Drake desperately tries to interest him. Although he succeeds, he realizes that Sammy truly prefers Josh after seeing the cooking show tape and what Sammy meant to Josh. He then pretends to be sick so Sammy and Josh can go to a magic show. Later, Drake gets sent to Remedial English, however, Josh comes in and frees Drake, as a thank you for giving Sammy back to him.
3414"Theater Thug"Roger ChristiansenDan SchneiderFebruary 18, 2006 (2006-02-18)314
Josh lands the role of a criminal called the Theater Thug on a TV show called FBI's Most Wanted at the Premiere, but ends up being mistaken for the real Theater Thug and gets arrested several times. Drake gets more attention from people despite having a three-second cameo appearance with one line which he got at the last minute. Eventually, around closing time at the Premiere, the real theater thug comes in and attempts to attack Drake and Josh. They both pin him down, but when the cops show up, they think Josh is the real bandit and arrest him instead of the real thug, letting him get away.
3515"The Demonator"Steve HoeferAnthony Del Broccolo & Eric FriedmanFebruary 25, 2006 (2006-02-25)315
Drake and Josh plan on riding a roller coaster called the Demonator on its opening day, but Megan reveals it was open that very night. Drake and Josh are not allowed to go, because Audrey and Walter want them to stay home and watch over their great-grandfather, Papa Nichols, who is 81 years old and has had surgery that afternoon while Walter and Audrey are at the awards show. Drake calls Craig and Eric to come over and they come to watch him while he, Josh, and Megan go off to ride the Demonator. Papa Nichols wakes up disoriented, he thinks he is back in World War II and that Craig and Eric are considered to be Germans (claiming he has been captured by two German nerds), in which he proceeds to attack them and break Eric's cell phone when he thinks it's a weapon. While at Mystic Mountain, Drake, Josh, and Megan are bumped to the back of the line after Josh got back in the middle of the line upsetting the other people when he had to use the restroom. Later, Drake and Josh get bumped back again for messing with Milfred Mouse the mascot and Megan takes the opportunity to remain in line by pretending not to know them. After Megan rides the Demonator first, Drake and Josh finally get to ride the Demonator and get home just in the nick of time before Audrey and Walter come home to see how Drake and Josh did watching Papa Nichols, who wakes up and punches Walter, knocking him out and calling him a German.
3616"Alien Invasion"Will BardelliSteve HollandMarch 18, 2006 (2006-03-18)316
Megan has just gotten a brand new telescope and is using Josh's laptop and Drake's leather jacket without their permission and gets them sent to their room after convincing Walter that both of them pushed her down, upsetting the boys. They hatch a plan to turn tables and prank Megan. First, they insert fake images of aliens onto the laptop screen. Megan falls for the prank and believes that aliens are invading. Drake and Josh then get Eric to adjust the electric switches in the kitchen to control the technology inside, then they frighten Megan and make her still believe aliens are real. Drake and Josh continue to try to prove to her that aliens are invading, and when Megan is left home alone one night, Drake and Josh dress as aliens and get their comeuppance on Megan. Just as Drake and Josh celebrate, a real alien shows up that turns out to be Megan's friend, and he scares Drake and Josh away, but not Megan when she realizes who he is. Leaving the boys to their own fear as payback, Megan and her alien friend then hang out together in the house as the parents come home, with the alien scaring Walter away when he discovers him.
3717"Dr. Phyllis Show"Steve HoeferAnthony Del Broccolo & Eric FriedmanApril 8, 2006 (2006-04-08)317
Drake and Josh have been fighting a lot lately, including late at night. Megan is upset to be continually awoken by their fighting three nights in a row, so she gives them tickets to the Dr. Phyllis Show (a parody of Dr. Phil), hoping that Dr. Phyllis Tupper (Gabrielle Carteris) can end their bickering. On the show, Dr. Phyllis has the boys reminisce about fights they have had in the past. When Josh mentions that Drake once dated a girl named Liza Tupper to make Tori jealous (from the episode "Playing the Field") as an example of Drake taking advantage of everyone, Drake confirms that the story is true and insults Liza Tupper by calling her dumb and a bad kisser. Liza Tupper, however, happens to be Dr. Phyllis' daughter. She ends up getting so mad at Drake that she physically attacks him on air, then attacks Josh when he tries to stop her. Once back at the house, the boys are upset that Dr. Phyllis only made them think of the bad times they have had together, even though they have had good times as well. They reconcile after remembering the good times they had, but soon end up in another argument. Megan is still upset when she hears them arguing again, so she sets off a smoke bomb to render Drake and Josh unconscious and finally have some peace and quiet.
Season 4 (2006 07)[edit]
No.overallNo. inseasonTitleDirected byWritten byOriginal air dateProd.code381"Josh Runs Into Oprah"Roger ChristiansenEthan BanvilleSeptember 24, 2006 (2006-09-24)405
It is Josh's 17th birthday, but Drake forgets and instead sets up a surprise party for his latest girlfriend, Tabitha (Summer Bishil). Realizing his mistake, Drake gets tickets for Josh to see Oprah Winfrey, Josh's idol, and backstage passes to the show since she was going to be in San Diego the next day. However, when Josh exaggerates about parking a distance away and parking elsewhere near the entrance to prevent sweating, Drake accidentally causes Josh to run over Oprah. When they get to the hospital to apologize, Josh is beaten up by a group of women when they overhear that he was the one that injured Oprah. They cannot get past security so Drake tricks them and the whole hospital into believing Josh has a virus, which, in return, leads to him being chemically bathed. In the end, Drake makes it up to an enraged Josh by throwing him a surprise party, with a signed restraining order from Oprah and a new motor scooter as his presents. Meanwhile, Megan tries to take care of Toby, a virtual pet that belongs to her friend Janie, though his need for attention prevents her from being able to get any time for herself.
392"Vicious Tiberius"Roger ChristiansenGeorge Doty IVOctober 1, 2006 (2006-10-01)402
Mrs. Hayfer is going on vacation for the weekend and Josh volunteers to watch over her dog and her house while she is away, and Drake tags along. Walter buys an elliptical machine, and starts working out in hopes of finally beating his arch nemesis, Bruce Winchill, in his TV station's yearly 5k run. Drake and Josh arrive at Mrs. Hayfer's house and they meet her dog, Tiberius, who is a vicious Rottweiler, and traps them in Mrs. Hayfer's bathroom. When Megan shows up from oboe practice, Drake and Josh see that Tiberius happens to be calm when Megan is seen sitting on the couch petting him with her oboe in its case. An animal control officer (Buddy Lewis) arrives and is about to capture Tiberius until the dog traps him in the bathroom as well. Drake and Josh then devise a successful plan to escape out of Mrs. Hayfer's house without getting mauled by Tiberius. When Drake and Josh arrive home, Walter goes to Mrs. Hayfer's house to look for Drake and Josh but finds Tiberius. He becomes scared and runs out Mrs. Hayfer's house, with Tiberius still after him while Drake and Josh relax at home.
403"The Wedding"Steve HoeferMatt FleckensteinOctober 15, 2006 (2006-10-15)412
Drake and Josh are asked to deliver a wedding cake to their Great Aunt Catherine's wedding on time, in hopes that the family can get her beach house when she dies. But Drake gives Craig and Eric Josh's laptop case which not only contains Josh's laptop, but also Josh's cell phone and the keys to their mother's SUV, leaving them with no ride to the wedding. Drake starts to call Craig and Eric, but Josh denies this because neither of them have cell phones and talks about the time Papa Nichols broke Eric's cell phone (from the episode "The Demonator"), and according to Craig's mother, cell phones cause Craig to get ear sores. They use Trevor's old car, a 1970s Chevrolet El Camino to try to get to the wedding on time. Trevor's old car breaks down and leaves them stranded with no means of calling for help. When they leave to urinate, two police officers (Kevin Farley and Jesse Burch) give them a parking ticket. Drake and Josh then try to get help off of two male strangers who end up mugging them. Afterwards, a tow truck driver named Leslie (E. E. Bell) offers to help, but Drake insults him for his name, so he abandons them. At the end, Drake and Josh eventually fix Trevor's old car, but it catches on fire along with the wedding cake, at which point they give up and walk away.
414"Mindy Loves Josh"Adam WeissmanArthur GradsteinOctober 22, 2006 (2006-10-22)403
Josh and Mindy are working together, and when Mindy leaves, she tells Josh that she loves him. After telling Mindy that he is not sure of his feelings towards her, he finds out from Drake that Mindy may have only said that to distract him from beating her in the Regional Science Fair. Meanwhile, Megan seeks revenge on Drake after he eats her cookie: she discovers a fictional disease that turns the hands and feet a sickly greenish color, and she dyes Drake's hands and feet green to make him believe he has the disease, making him suffer a disgusting cure, only though, while he is in the middle of it, she spills the beans.
425"Who's Got Game?"Adam WeissmanEthan BanvilleNovember 5, 2006 (2006-11-05)409
After a debate, Drake and Josh make a bet to see who can score more dates. The bet seems to go smoothly until Drake meets and falls in love with Carly (Brittany Curran), an employee at a music store. Drake tries to call off the bet but Josh is on a roll with the help of Audrey with scoring dates, but after Carly overhears Drake arguing with Josh about the bet, she becomes angry and breaks up with him. Drake then tries to be honest to win her back but fails several times. Eventually after a failed attempt with Craig and Eric, he gathers everyone who he was dishonest with in the past and, in front of Carly, admits all the dishonest things he did to them. This works and Carly gets back with him, while Josh officially wins the bet. As part of the bet, if Josh won, he would switch beds with Drake, but during the night, they decide to switch back after Josh accidentally falls off of Drake's high risen platform.
436"The Great Doheny"Adam WeissmanMatt FleckensteinNovember 12, 2006 (2006-11-12)404
Josh's favorite magician, Henry Doheny (Steve Tom), appears at the Premiere Theater and becomes acquainted with Drake and Josh. Mr. Doheny moves in with Drake and Josh, but he is very irritating. When Henry tells Josh nobody wants him around anymore, Drake and Josh decide to get him recognized again by making him do a show at the Premiere. He has swords shoved into him in a box by the duo, and when they check on him after he doesn't appear out of the box in one piece on cue, he is seemingly dead. At the funeral, he suddenly appears alive and well, explaining that faking his death was the trick. Doheny gets a five year deal in Las Vegas and leaves San Diego to perform there. As a parting gift, Drake and Josh get yo-yos, while Megan gets a check for fifty thousand dollars for suggesting the trick in the first place. During the end credits, Walter asks Doheny to give him his hair back, but Doheny leaves straight for Las Vegas and tells Walter to buy a wig.
447"I Love Sushi"Steve HoeferDan SchneiderNovember 26, 2006 (2006-11-26)407
As an anniversary gift for Audrey and Walter, Drake and Josh agree to have their living room redecorated by the company of a show called "Pump My Room", which they have never heard of. The company turned out to be fake and when they said they were going to redecorate the living room, they really stole the furniture. The police also refuse to help because one of them suffered due to Walter's bad weather predictions. Drake and Josh decide to work at a sushi factory to pay for all the stuff that was stolen. The head-chef in the sushi place is very bossy and mean and makes the two work very hard to package the sushi with disastrous results. When they come home, they realize all the furniture is back where it belongs because the police discovered the robbers' moving van had broken down about a half mile up the street. Meanwhile, Megan gets too busy to prank Drake and Josh, so she hires a young boy named Tyler.
Note: This episode is a parody of an episode of the sitcom I Love Lucy.
458"The Storm"Steve HoeferGeorge Doty IVJanuary 7, 2007 (2007-01-07)411
Due to Walter's bad weather predictions, Drake's long-awaited hopes of opening up for The Sparks are crushed when a storm approaches, stranding him and his friends and family in his house. To make matters worse for him, he desperately attempts to keep his current girlfriend, Carly, from meeting his ex-girlfriends, Lucy and Christine, but when they meet, he suddenly becomes paranoid about it and wants to know what they are talking about. Meanwhile, Craig has to crank a TV for Crazy Steve so he can watch Dora the Explorer and Walter is forced to do a live outdoor weather broadcast during the bad storm.
Note: Josh only appears in the opening narration and scene.
469"My Dinner with Bobo"Virgil FabianArthur GradsteinJanuary 14, 2007 (2007-01-14)406
When Drake and Josh earn money to buy a car, they are unable to agree on one they both like. Drake steals the money and uses it to buy an orangutan named Bobo from Stan the Car Man (Steve Kramer). Drake explains to an enraged Josh that they can make enough money to buy plenty of cars. They eventually sell Bobo to a doctor they meet at the Premiere. Megan is suspicious and looks up the guy who they sold Bobo to, and discovers that he eats orangutans and related species. Drake and Josh then go to the doctor's apartment to return the money and get Bobo back. Unfortunately, things do not go to plan and the doctor locks Drake and Josh in the closet and steals Josh s cell phone. However, he is later arrested and Megan frees Drake and Josh as long as they give Bobo back to the car dealer and buy the car she wants: a yellow Beetle with hot pink flowers on it. Though reluctant, they buy the car, which results in them getting teased by their friends, much to Megan's amusement.
4710"Tree House"Roger ChristiansenDan SchneiderJanuary 21, 2007 (2007-01-21)408
After a model rocket explodes in Robbie's tree house, Drake, Josh, and Megan are forced to rebuild his tree house before Drake and Josh can go on a double date with two twin girls. But Drake forgets to cut the doorway out before Josh reattaches the last wall, trapping the boys inside. Megan refuses to let them out as she is angry that they made her miss her friend Janie's birthday party and decides to make them miss their date, and even unplugs the drill so they couldn't use it to escape, to see how they like it. She later gives it to Craig and Eric.
4811"Josh Is Done"Adam WeissmanEthan BanvilleFebruary 11, 2007 (2007-02-11)415
When Drake's antics cause Josh to miss an important test, Josh becomes furious and decides that he is done with Drake and considers Drake nothing more than a roommate. Josh's life begins to improve, such as passing his make-up exam, does not get a grade dropped due to his excellent effort, gets along better with Helen at work, and has a good time with his friends away from Drake. Drake's life, on the other hand, begins falling apart as Josh is not there to help him. It is not until Drake breaks down in chemistry class following a chemical incident involving a new lab partner that the brothers realize how important their relationship with each other really is. The episode ends with the two brothers reconciling over a game of Ping-Pong.
4912"Eric Punches Drake"Roger ChristiansenArthur GradsteinFebruary 18, 2007 (2007-02-18)417
At school, Eric accidentally punches Drake in the eye while demonstrating a kung fu move to Craig. He soon becomes popular as witnesses thought he punched Drake on purpose in a fight but he did it by accident. After feeling comfortable with the popularity, Eric starts spreading rumors about the punch and every story is different, reducing Drake to a laughingstock. Dismayed by the popularity due to this, Drake, with the help of Craig who has split up from Eric, attempts to reveal Eric's non-intention for punching him. The plan is successful and Eric tries to show the actual punch but he accidentally hits a girl, causing him to get embarrassed and Drake takes the girl out. In the end, Drake, Craig and Eric sing behind a dumpster, thus reconciling their friendship. Meanwhile, Josh worries that Mindy has another boyfriend who ends up being her cousin, Chad.
5013"Megan's Revenge"Steve HoeferDan SchneiderMarch 4, 2007 (2007-03-04)401
When Drake and Josh borrow Megan's digital camera to photograph a supermodel, Josh photographs her hamster, Hervey. The flash knocks him unconscious, but the boys think they killed him. Despite Megan assuring them that she is not mad at them, knowing it was an accident, the boys fear retaliation from her, a fear that turns to extreme paranoia as the days go by. However, Megan soon tells them that she knew how scared they were, and that her "revenge" was watching her brothers let their fear own them. Shortly after the truth is revealed, she presses a button on a device, which blows up the spot on Drake and Josh's bedroom floor where they were standing, causing them to fall down into the garage below, and then she tells Drake and Josh that Hervey is not dead, but just stunned by the camera flash.
5114"Steered Straight"Steve HoeferDan SchneiderMarch 11, 2007 (2007-03-11)414
Drake gets himself and Josh fake IDs so that they can enter a nightclub in San Diego to listen to Josh's favorite band, the Hailstones. They are caught by the police, but are not placed under arrest. Instead of grounding their sons, their parents choose to sign them up for the "Steered Straight" program in which children are shown what it is like to be arrested. However, the plan eventually backfires when the officer who is driving them to the police station is interrupted by a criminal named Blaze, who hijacks his car. Drake and Josh use their fake ID names and pretend to be criminals so they can befriend Blaze. Drake and Josh convince Blaze to take them to their house, which the boys claim is somebody else's house that they plan to rob. At the house, while the other family members are away, the boys attempt to contact the police. When Blaze notices Drake and Josh using a cordless phone, they tell him that they were contacting their crew so they could carry out their plan to kidnap the governor. Blaze decides to call in his own crew for the kidnapping plot instead. When Walter comes home early, the boys lock him in a closet to maintain their ruse. The duo then fake a physical argument with each other, with the use of Josh's magic kit. Terrified and disgusted, the criminals flee the house. At the end, Drake, Josh, Audrey, and Megan go out for dinner and the boys realize they forgot to free Walter.
5215"Megan's First Kiss"Will BardelliGeorge Doty IVApril 7, 2007 (2007-04-07)418
Megan's secretive behavior leads Drake and Josh to believe she is up to something. After spying on her (in disguise as Jewish Irishmen in the Premiere), it turns out that Megan has a boyfriend named Corey, whom she has been dating for 7 weeks, but they embarrass Corey, causing him to break up with Megan. After a lecture from Walter, Drake and Josh, feeling bad, apologize to Corey so he can go out with Megan again. However, when Josh goes to the Premiere to pick up his latest paycheck, he sees Corey with another girl named Monica (who he has been dating for a month at that point). He then tells Drake and they decide to tell Megan. At her next date, Drake and Josh arrive and expose Corey by bringing Monica. Megan and Monica both break up with Corey after they realized he was cheating on them. Drake and Josh then attempt to brutally punish Corey, only to be severely beaten by him in retaliation. In the end, Megan apologizes to her brothers for not believing them at first, and then tells them she loves them.
5316"Battle of Panthatar"Josh PeckMatt FleckensteinApril 15, 2007 (2007-04-15)416
Drake and Josh are invited to their friend Thornton's sweet 16 party at Club Diego which will air on MTV live. However, their invitations are revoked after Thornton catches Drake kissing a girl named Maria, who unbeknownst to him was Thornton's girlfriend. To get into the party, Josh pushes a reluctant Drake into giving Thornton his autographed Abbey Road album which is what he had just received from an Englishman. Even though Thornton accepts the present, he still refuses to invite them into the party. As a result, Drake and Josh decide to get revenge by crashing and ruining the party being dressed up as the Red Sky Nauts from Galaxy Wars to steal the album back. When they are discovered, they are able to escape with Drake secretly getting the album back.
5417"Really Big Shrimp"Drake Bell (Part 1)Steve Hoefer (Part 2)Dan Schneider & George Doty IVAugust 3, 2007 (2007-08-03)419 420
It's the end of an era as Drake finally gets a record deal with Josh as his manager. Due to being distracted by big shrimp, Josh signs some wrong documents which affects Drake's song and causes friction between the two boys. Meanwhile, Mindy and Josh consider getting back together. Helen makes a deal with Craig and Eric to video tape her wedding with Buzz. With Helen's wedding approaching, the Parker-Nichols family must cope with the fact that Helen's grandmother is staying at their house.
Note: This episode was written as the series finale, but was aired before "Helicopter" and "Dance Contest" because Nickelodeon aired the episodes out of production order.
5518"Helicopter"Virgil FabianDan SchneiderAugust 5, 2007 (2007-08-05)410
After Drake wins a chance to skydive out of a helicopter, Audrey and Walter, thinking it is too dangerous, go completely against it and forbid Drake from going skydiving. Drake disobeys Audrey and Walter and goes skydiving anyway. Josh tries to stop him, but both of them end up going. Soon, they lose their pilot, Vince, after Josh accidentally blasts Vince with the helicopter's fire extinguisher and the radio when Drake accidentally stretches the cord too far. The helicopter eventually runs out of fuel, forcing them to jump out of it with one parachute to escape. Then, the boys return home just as their parents come home. Vince arrives at Drake and Josh's house and tells Walter that he needs to pay four hundred thousand dollars for the damaged helicopter. Knowing the consequences, Drake and Josh then ground themselves for two weeks.
5619"Dance Contest"Steve HoeferGeorge Doty IVSeptember 16, 2007 (2007-09-16)413
With the end of the school year approaching and their senior year being only 3 months away, Josh and Drake enter a dance contest so Josh could be the top student of the Junior class while Drake is threatened to either do the compete in the Competition or repeat his Junior year, but the competition goes horribly when the brothers put against each other in a bet.
Films[edit]
TitleDirected byWritten byOriginal air dateU.S. viewers(millions)Drake & Josh Go HollywoodSteve HoeferStory by : Dan Schneider & Steven MolaroTeleplay by : Dan SchneiderJanuary 6, 2006 (2006-01-06)5.8[1][2]
Josh decides that he needs a great adventure in his life and Drake promotes him as his band's new manager after he fired his old one for canceling three gigs in a month and having Drake perform at an old folk's home. Audrey and Walter leave to go on a 10-day cruise vacation, and Megan has made plans to go to Denver, Colorado to visit her friend Jessica. Drake and Josh mistakenly send Megan on Flight 647 to Los Angeles when she was supposed to board Flight 746 and follow her on another plane to bring her home. On the plane, Josh's G-O gets switched with someone else's. The G-O that Josh has turns out to be an electrical key for a US Treasury currency production machine, which was stolen 3 days earlier. Josh gets the attention of a producer from LA who gets Drake to perform on TV at Sunset Studios. The owners of the G-O kidnap Drake and Josh and Megan finds the kidnapper's wallet. She then goes to the place where Drake and Josh have been taken hostage and calls the police on the kidnappers. The police come and explained that the leader, Milo McRarie, is on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted List. Megan then leaves to catch her flight to Denver. Drake and Josh then drive to Sunset Studios so Drake can perform his song Hollywood Girl. The producer pull some strings to get Drake an audition for Spin City Records. Two girls then go to Drake to compliment him and ask if they can hang out with him and Josh which they approved.
Merry Christmas, Drake & JoshMichael GrossmanDan Schneider & Steven MolaroDecember 5, 2008 (2008-12-05)8.1[3]
Drake throws a Christmas party on the roof of the Premiere, but when a group of teens trash the place, Josh is mistaken for one of the teens and gets arrested. At night, Drake breaks into prison attempting to free Josh, after he promises to provide a little girl named Mary Alice and her foster family the 'Best Christmas Ever'. But Drake's plan failed and both were arrested and were intended to spend life in prison for multiple crimes. However, things are changed when Drake hires Josh's boss, Helen, to represent them in their case stating that she has never lost an argument, in which the judge agrees to give Drake and Josh a chance to save themselves from prison if they can stick to their promise to give the foster-family their 'Best Christmas Ever'. Meanwhile, Drake and Josh's parole officer, Perry Gilbert, does what he can to prevent Drake and Josh from keeping their promise, including tricking "Crazy" Steve into telling the foster-family about everything, causing them to feel betrayed, and so they turn to Gilbert's mother, who provides them with enough information to stop his evil ways. In the end, they all have a happy Christmas holiday after "Crazy" Steve makes snow by shredding cheese in a woodchipper and Drake and Josh do a nice thing for Gilbert that changes his Christmas spirit. The TV film was made apart from the regular series, closing all the story lines for the series.
References[edit]
^ "Drake & Josh: Really Big Shrimp Reels in Really Big Ratings for Nickelodeon". Nickelodeon. August 6, 2007. Retrieved March 11, 2016   via PR Newswire.
^ "Nickelodeon TV Movie Event 'Drake & Josh Go Hollywood' Kicks Off the New Year with Huge Ratings, Premiering to 5.4 Million Total Viewers". The Free Library. January 10, 2006. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2012.
^ "Nickelodeon's Merry Christmas Drake & Josh Ranks as Week's Top Cable Entertainment Program with 8.1 Million Total Viewers, Number-One TV Telecast with Kids and Tweens" (Press release). New York, NY. WebWire. December 10, 2008. Retrieved June 12, 2012.
vteDrake & JoshTelevision
Characters
Episodes
"Really Big Shrimp"
Soundtrack
"I Found a Way"
Films
Drake & Josh Go Hollywood (2006)
Merry Christmas, Drake & Josh (2008)
Video games
Drake & Josh (video game)
Talent Showdown
Related
iCarly
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Drake_%26_Josh_episodes&oldid=1149032204"