Professional wrestling tag team
Professional wrestling stable
Too CoolGrandmaster Sexay (left) and Scotty 2 Hotty in London, EnglandStableMembersScott Taylor / Scotty 2 Hotty[1][2]Brian Christopher / Grandmaster Sexay[1][2]Rikishi[1]Name(s)Too Cool[1][2]Too Much[2]DebutMarch 1998Years active1998 20012003-2004200720122014 2016
Too Cool, originally known as Too Much, was an American professional wrestling tag team and group active in the World Wrestling Federation (later World Wrestling Entertainment) between 1998 and 2001 and for a short time in 2004 and 2014. The group contained members Grandmaster Sexay, Scotty 2 Hotty, and Rikishi.[1]
History[edit]
World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment (1998 2001, 2003-2004, 2014)[edit]
1998 1999[edit]
The duo of "Too Sexy" Brian Christopher and "Too Hot" Scott Taylor were originally a tag team known as Too Much.[1] They made their appearance at WrestleMania XIV in a tag battle royal won by L.O.D. 2000. The team feuded with fellow light heavyweight wrestlers such as Taka Michinoku and aided Jerry "The King" Lawler (Christopher's father) in his feud with Al Snow. They also feuded with The Headbangers, The Oddities, 8-Ball and Skull and The Hardy Boyz.
In October 1999, Christopher became Grandmaster Sexay, Taylor became Scotty Too Hotty (later spelled as Scotty 2 Hotty) and Too Much was rebranded as Too Cool, debuting on television during the June 13, 1999 episode of Sunday Night Heat. They originally remained villainous characters, but in late 1999, around the time Rikishi Fatu joined the team, they turned into fan favorites. Too Cool's new characteristic was that of hip hop fans, which saw the trio of Scotty 2 Hotty, Grandmaster Sexay and Rikishi Phatu dancing around the ring while lights flashed and dance music played, an act that quickly became very popular with fans. In addition to the wildly popular post-match dancing routine, several of Too Cool's signature moves became extremely popular with the fans, including Scotty 2 Hotty's "The Worm" and Rikishi Phatu's Stink Face.
2000 2001[edit]
A famous moment came when the trio were all participants in the 2000 Royal Rumble.[3] Rikishi had eliminated all three entrants in the match thus far, leaving only him and Grandmaster Sexay in the ring. Rikishi looked as if he was about to throw Grandmaster Sexay out of the ring to eliminate him from the Rumble, but Scotty 2 Hotty entered the match next and convinced Rikishi to instead dance to their music while the Rumble match was still ongoing. At the conclusion of their dance segment in the middle of the Rumble, Rikishi surprised his teammates by delivering a double clothesline and throwing them both to the outside to eliminate them.[3] Rikishi shrugged his shoulders and his partners accepted the elimination with a good humor; no dissension would arise between them. Soon after this, Christopher suffered an injury and while he was recuperating, Scotty won the Light Heavyweight Championship.[4]
Too Cool received arguably their biggest push when they became embroiled in a feud against the McMahon-Helmsley Regime, mainly wrestling against D-Generation X members Triple H, "The Road Dogg" Jesse James and X-Pac, along with a feud against the Radicalz. Too Cool participated in several main events on television during this push, including a 10-man tag team match on WWE Raw where Too Cool teamed with The Rock and Mick Foley (as Cactus Jack) against Triple H, X-Pac and The Radicalz. 
Too Cool's success would peak in the middle of 2000 when Scotty 2 Hotty and Grandmaster Sexay defeated Edge and Christian for the Tag Team Championship on an episode of Raw is War on May 29, 2000,[5] while Rikishi would defeat Chris Benoit for the Intercontinental Championship on the June 20 edition of SmackDown![6]
 Scotty 2 Hotty in the year 2000
Despite enjoying immense popularity among the fans, Too Cool began to fragment in late 2000 when Rikishi left the group after becoming a villain. In March 2001, Too Cool fully disbanded when Scotty was, in storyline, sidelined with a broken ankle caused by Kurt Angle. In reality, he needed time off for neck surgery. During that time, Sexay teamed up with Steve Blackman. In May 2001, Sexay was released from the WWF after he was detained while attempting to cross the Canada United States border with illegal drugs in his possession. After returning in June 2001, Scotty formed a new tag team with Albert called The Zoo Crew that lasted from November 2001 until March 2002.[7] Scotty would injure his neck in April 2002 and was inactive for over a year.
2003 2004[edit]
Rikishi would eventually become a face again and reunited with Scotty 2 Hotty, who returned after an 18 month absence from a neck injury to compete on the SmackDown! brand in October 2003. Rikishi and Scotty 2 Hotty won the WWE Tag Team Championship on February 5, 2004 after defeating the Basham Brothers.[8] Also around this time, the WWE briefly re-hired Grand Master Sexay, although he was on the Raw brand and had no interaction with Scotty 2 Hotty or Rikishi. They held the title for a little over two months, including a successful title defense at WrestleMania XX, before losing the titles to Charlie Haas and Rico on April 22.[8] Rikishi would be released from the company shortly after the title loss, while Scotty remained with the company until being released on May 15, 2007.[9]
 Rikishi at Tribute to the Troops in 2003
2014[edit]
On the January 6, 2014 episode of Old School Raw, Too Cool reunited with Rikishi, defeating 3MB (Heath Slater, Drew McIntyre and Jinder Mahal) in a six-man tag match. This was the first time in over 13 years that the trio were in a 6-man tag team match. Too Cool also appeared at NXT Arrival, challenging The Ascension for the NXT Tag Team Championship. The Ascension would prevail however, retaining the titles.
Independent circuit (2003, 2007-2016)[edit]
 Grandmaster Sexay and Rikishi against Orlando Jordan and Umaga in Australia, 2009
Sexay and Hotty would reunite after 2 and half years for one night on September 28, 2003 for Memphis Wrestling. They defeated Doug Gilbert and Shock.
After Scotty 2 Hotty was released from WWE in May 2007, he briefly reunited with Grandmaster Sexay to compete for the UWF Live's Rock 'n' Express Tag Team Tournament. In the second round of the tournament on July 19, 2007, Too Cool defeated the Extreme Horsemen (C. W. Anderson and Steve Corino).[10] The next day, Too Cool lost to the Steiner Brothers (Rick and Scott) in the semi-final match of the Winner's Bracket.[10] Too Cool made their final appearance for the UWF on July 21 as they lost to The Naturals in the third round match to of the Loser's Bracket.[10]
In 2009, Sexay and Rikishi reunited to compete for the Hulk Hogan's Hulkamania: Let The Battle Begin Tour in Australia. Due to copyright issues with World Wrestling Entertainment, Sexay and Rikishi competed as Brian Christopher and Solofa Fatu, Jr., respectively, and were unable to use the Too Cool name. On November 21, the first night of the tour, they defeated Orlando Jordan and Umaga.[11] Three days later, they defeated Rock of Love (Billy Blade and Kadin Anthony).[12] On November 26, Christopher and Fatu teamed with The Nasty Boys (Brian Knobbs and Jerry Sags) to defeat Black Pearl, Vampire Warrior and Rock of Love.[13] On November 28, the final night of the tour, Fatu and Christopher defeated Pearl and Warrior.[14] Later, the three would go on to reunite in Gangrel's Territory League promotion as part of the Las Vegas Highrollers team.
In March 2014, Grandmaster Sexay and Scotty 2 Hotty reunited at Memphis Power Wrestling's Revenge at Resorts II Cool Event to compete against Chase Stevens and Crimson. Too Cool won the match, but were attacked post-match by Cerebus, Doug Gilbert, and Bill Dundee. On September 5, 2014, Too Cool faced the Maryland Championship Wrestling (MCW) Tag Team Champions The Black Wall Street (Naplam Bomb and Solo) in a losing effort.[15]
On February 22, 2015, Scotty and Sexay made an appearance at Lincoln Fight Factory Wrestling Turn It Up, defeating S C Supreme and Stixx. Their last match as a team was in 2016. They continued to make appearances at conventions and some independent wrestling shows until Brian Christopher Lawler's death in July 2018.[citation needed]
Incarnations[edit]
Championships and accomplishments[edit]
World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment
WWF Intercontinental Championship (1 time) - Rikishi[6]
WWF Light Heavyweight Championship (1 time) - Scotty[4]
WWF Tag Team Championship (1 time) - Scotty and Sexay[5]
WWE Tag Team Championship (1 time) - Scotty and Rikishi[8]
References[edit]
^ a b c d e f "OWOW profile". Online World Of Wrestling. Retrieved 2008-10-08.
^ a b c d "Cagematch profile".
^ a b Powell, John (2000-01-17). "Rocky wins the Rumble; A bloody Triple H defeats Cactus Jack". SLAM! Sports. Retrieved 2008-10-05.
^ a b "Light Heavyweight Championship history". WWE. April 17, 2000. Retrieved 2008-02-02.
^ a b "World Tag Team Championship history". WWE. May 29, 2000. Retrieved 2008-01-30.
^ a b "Intercontinental Championship history". WWE. June 20, 2000. Retrieved 2008-01-30.
^ "Scotty 2 Hotty's OWOW profile".
^ a b c "WWE Tag Team Championship history". WWE. February 5, 2004. Retrieved 2008-02-02.
^ "Scotty 2 Hotty released".
^ a b c "Cagematch match listings, page 1".
^ "Hulkamania: Let The Battle Begin Tour, night 1".
^ "Hulkamania: Let The Battle Begin Tour, night 2".
^ "Hulkamania: Let The Battle Begin Tour, night 3".
^ "Hulkamania: Let The Battle Begin Tour, night 4".
^ "MCW Rally In The Ally  Events Database  CAGEMATCH - The Internet Wrestling Database". www.cagematch.net.
External links[edit]
Too Cool Profile at Online World Of Wrestling
Grandmaster Sexay Profile at Online World Of Wrestling
Scotty 2 Hotty Profile at Online World Of Wrestling
Rikishi Profile at Online World Of Wrestling
vteWWE World Tag Team Champions1970s
Luke Graham and Tarzan Tyler
Karl Gotch and Rene Goulet
Mikel Scicluna and King Curtis Iaukea
Chief Jay Strongbow and Sonny King
Mr. Fuji and Professor Tanaka
Haystacks Calhoun and Tony Garea
Dean Ho and Tony Garea
Valiant Brothers (Jimmy Valiant and Johnny Valiant)
Dominic DeNucci and Pat Barrett/Victor Rivera
The Blackjacks (Blackjack Lanza and Blackjack Mulligan)
Louis Cerdan and Tony Parisi
Executioners (Executioner #1 and Executioner #2)
Billy White Wolf and Chief Jay Strongbow
Dino Bravo and Dominic DeNucci
Yukon Lumberjacks (Lumberjack Eric and Lumberjack Pierre)
Larry Zbyszko and Tony Garea
Valiant Brothers (Jerry Valiant and Johnny Valiant)
Ivan Putski and Tito Santana
1980s
Wild Samoans (Afa and Sika)
Bob Backlund and Pedro Morales
Rick Martel and Tony Garea
The Moondogs (Moondog Rex and Moondog King/Moondog Spot)
Mr. Fuji and Mr. Saito
Chief Jay Strongbow and Jules Strongbow
Soul Patrol (Rocky Johnson and Tony Atlas)
North-South Connection (Adrian Adonis and Dick Murdoch)
U.S. Express (Barry Windham and Mike Rotundo)
The Iron Sheik and Nikolai Volkoff
The Dream Team (Brutus Beefcake and Greg Valentine)
The British Bulldogs (Davey Boy Smith and Dynamite Kid)
The Hart Foundation (Bret Hart and Jim Neidhart)
Strike Force (Rick Martel and Tito Santana)
Demolition (Ax, Crush and Smash)
The Brain Busters (Arn Anderson and Tully Blanchard)
Colossal Connection (Andr  the Giant and Haku)
1990s
The Nasty Boys (Brian Knobbs and Jerry Sags)
The Legion of Doom (Animal and Hawk)
Money Inc. (Irwin R. Schyster and Ted DiBiase)
The Natural Disasters (Earthquake and Typhoon)
Steiner Brothers (Rick Steiner and Scott Steiner)
The Quebecers (Quebecer Jacques and Quebecer Pierre)
The 1-2-3 Kid and Marty Jannetty
Men on a Mission (Mabel and Mo)
The Headshrinkers (Fatu and Samu)
Two Dudes with Attitudes (Diesel and Shawn Michaels)
The 1-2-3 Kid and Bob Holly
The Smoking Gunns (Bart Gunn and Billy Gunn)
Owen Hart and Yokozuna
Bodydonnas (Skip and Zip)
The Godwinns (Henry O. Godwinn and Phineas I. Godwinn)
Owen Hart and the British Bulldog
Shawn Michaels and Stone Cold Steve Austin
Dude Love and Stone Cold Steve Austin
The Headbangers (Mosh and Thrasher)
New Age Outlaws (Billy Gunn and Road Dogg)
Cactus Jack and Chainsaw Charlie
Kane and Mankind
Stone Cold Steve Austin and The Undertaker
Big Boss Man and Ken Shamrock
Jeff Jarrett and Owen Hart
Kane and X-Pac
The Acolytes/The A.P.A. (Bradshaw and Faarooq)
Hardy Boyz (Jeff Hardy and Matt Hardy)
The Unholy Alliance (Big Show and The Undertaker)
Rock 'n' Sock Connection (Mankind and The Rock)
Holly Cousins (Crash Holly and Hardcore Holly)
Al Snow and Mankind
2000s
Dudley Boyz (Bubba Ray Dudley and D-Von Dudley)
Edge and Christian
Too Cool (Grandmaster Sexay and Scotty 2 Hotty)
Right to Censor (Bull Buchanan and The Goodfather)
The Rock and The Undertaker
Brothers of Destruction (The Undertaker and Kane)
Two-Man Power Trip (Stone Cold Steve Austin and Triple H)
Chris Benoit and Chris Jericho
Diamond Dallas Page and Chris Kanyon
Chris Jericho and The Rock
Booker T and Test
Spike Dudley and Tazz
Billy and Chuck
Rico and Rikishi
Edge and Hollywood Hulk Hogan
The Un-Americans (Christian and Lance Storm)
The Hurricane and Kane
Chris Jericho and Christian
Booker T and Goldust
Lance Storm and William Regal
Chief Morley and Lance Storm
Kane and Rob Van Dam
La R sistance (Ren  Dupr e and Sylvain Grenier)
Evolution (Batista and Ric Flair)
Booker T and Rob Van Dam
Chris Benoit and Edge
La R sistance (Rob rt Conway and Sylvain Grenier)
Eugene and William Regal
Tajiri and William Regal
The Hurricane and Rosey
Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch
Big Show and Kane
Spirit Squad (Johnny, Kenny, Mikey, Mitch and Nicky)
Roddy Piper and Ric Flair
Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton)
John Cena and Shawn Michaels
Paul London and Brian Kendrick
Cody Rhodes and Hardcore Holly
The Legacy (Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase Jr.)
Batista and John Cena
CM Punk and Kofi Kingston
John Morrison and The Miz
The Col ns (Carlito and Primo)
Chris Jericho and Edge
Jeri-Show (Big Show and Chris Jericho)
D-Generation X (Shawn Michaels and Triple H)
2010s
ShoMiz (Big Show and The Miz)
The Hart Dynasty (David Hart Smith and Tyson Kidd)
vteWWE Raw Tag Team Champions2000s
Chris Benoit and Kurt Angle
Edge and Rey Mysterio
Los Guerreros (Chavo Guerrero and Eddie Guerrero)
Team Angle/World's Greatest Tag Team (Charlie Haas and Shelton Benjamin)
Eddie Guerrero and Tajiri
Basham Brothers (Danny Basham and Doug Basham)
Rikishi and Scotty 2 Hotty
Charlie Haas and Rico
Dudley Boyz (Bubba Ray Dudley and D-Von Dudley)
Billy Kidman and Paul London
Kenzo Suzuki and Ren  Dupr e
Rey Mysterio and Rob Van Dam
Eddie Guerrero and Rey Mysterio
MNM (Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro)
The Legion of Doom (Animal and Heidenreich)
Batista and Rey Mysterio
Paul London and Brian Kendrick
Deuce 'n Domino
Matt Hardy and Montel Vontavious Porter
John Morrison and the Miz
Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder
The Col ns (Carlito and Primo)
Edge and Chris Jericho
Jeri-Show (Big Show and Chris Jericho)
D-Generation X (Shawn Michaels and Triple H)
2010s
ShoMiz (Big Show and The Miz)
The Hart Dynasty (David Hart Smith and Tyson Kidd)
Cody Rhodes and Drew McIntyre
The Nexus (David Otunga and John Cena)
The Nexus/The Corre (Heath Slater and Justin Gabriel)
Santino Marella and Vladimir Kozlov
John Cena and The Miz
Big Show and Kane
The New Nexus (David Otunga and Michael McGillicutty)
Air Boom (Evan Bourne and Kofi Kingston)
Primo and Epico
Kofi Kingston and R-Truth
Team Hell No (Daniel Bryan and Kane)
The Shield (Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins)
Cody Rhodes and Goldust/Gold and Stardust
New Age Outlaws (Billy Gunn and Road Dogg)
The Usos (Jey Uso and Jimmy Uso)
Damien Mizdow and The Miz
Tyson Kidd and Cesaro
The New Day (Big E, Kofi Kingston and Xavier Woods)
The Prime Time Players (Darren Young and Titus O'Neil)
Cesaro and Sheamus
Luke Gallows and Karl Anderson
Hardy Boyz (Jeff Hardy and Matt Hardy)
Dean Ambrose and Seth Rollins
Jason Jordan and Seth Rollins
Braun Strowman and Nicholas
Bray Wyatt and Matt Hardy
The B-Team (Bo Dallas and Curtis Axel)
Dolph Ziggler and Drew McIntyre
AOP (Akam and Rezar)
Bobby Roode and Chad Gable
The Revival (Scott Dawson and Dash Wilder)
Braun Strowman and Seth Rollins
Dolph Ziggler and Robert Roode
The Viking Raiders (Erik and Ivar)
2020s
Buddy Murphy and Seth Rollins
Street Profits (Angelo Dawkins and Montez Ford)
The New Day (Kofi Kingston and Xavier Woods)
The Hurt Business (Cedric Alexander and Shelton Benjamin)
AJ Styles and Omos
RK-Bro (Randy Orton and Riddle)
Alpha Academy (Chad Gable and Otis)
Kevin Owens and Sami Zayn (current)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Too_Cool&oldid=1144930771"