Christian rite
Part of a series on theEucharist
Lord's Supper
Communion
Elements
Bread
Wine
Ritual and liturgy
Divine Liturgy
Holy Qurobo
Holy Qurbana
Divine Service
Mass
Requiem
Solemn
Consecration/Anaphora
Epiclesis
Words of Institution
Anamnesis
Practices and customs
Closed and open table
Communion under both kinds
Adoration
Discipline
Thanksgiving
Reserved sacrament
Feast of Corpus Christi
First Communion
Infant communion
Viaticum
Vessels
Paten
Chalice
Spoon
Intinction
History
Origin of the Eucharist
Catholic historical roots
Theology
Real presence
Consubstantiation
Impanation
Metousiosis
Receptionism
Sacramental union
Transignification
Transubstantiation
Memorialism
Sacramentarians
Sacrament
Ordinance
Denominational teachings
Anglican
Catholic
Latter-day Saint
Lutheran
Reformed
Related articles
Agape feast
Christian views on alcohol
Eucharistic miracle
Host desecration
Blessed Sacrament
vte
Eucharistic adoration is a Eucharistic devotional practice primarily in Western Catholicism, but also to a lesser extent in certain Lutheran and Anglican traditions, in which the Blessed Sacrament is adored by the faithful. This practice may occur either when the Eucharist is exposed, or when it is not publicly viewable because it is reserved in a place such as a church tabernacle.
Adoration is a sign of devotion to and worship of Jesus Christ, who is believed, according to Christian tradition, to be present in body, blood, soul, and divinity, under the appearance of the consecrated host, that is, sacramental bread. From a theological perspective, the adoration is a form of latria, based on the tenet of the real presence of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament.[1]
Christian meditation performed in the presence of the Eucharist outside Mass is called Eucharistic meditation. It has been practiced by such as Peter Julian Eymard, Jean Vianney and Th r se of Lisieux. Authors such as the Blessed Concepcion Cabrera de Armida and Blessed Maria Candida of the Eucharist have produced large volumes of text based on their Eucharistic meditations.
When the exposition and adoration of the Eucharist is constant (twenty-four hours a day), it is called perpetual adoration. In a monastery or convent, it is done by the resident monks or nuns and, in a parish, by volunteer parishioners since the 20th century. In a prayer opening the Perpetual chapel in St. Peter s Basilica, Pope John Paul II prayed for a perpetual adoration chapel in every parish in the world.[2] Pope Benedict XVI instituted perpetual adoration for the laity in each of the five sectors of the diocese of Rome.[3]
Practice and context[edit]
 Ciborium St.Franziskus Kirche
Eucharistic adoration may be done both when the Eucharist is exposed for viewing and when it is not.[4] It may take place in the context of the liturgical rite of Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament or an informal "visit" to pray before the tabernacle. Writer Valerie Schmalz notes that "During the first part of the twentieth century, it was common for Catholics, young and old, on their way home from work or school, en route to the grocery store or a sports practice, to "stop in for a visit" to the Blessed Sacrament in their local church. Most times the Eucharist was not exposed, but a red candle   then, as now   showed the Presence in the tabernacle."[5]
Since the Second Vatican Council, the Catholic church has made Eucharistic exposition and benediction a liturgical service in its own right and exercised more direction over its practice;[6] it draws its primary meaning from the Eucharistic celebration itself.[7] "By worshiping the Eucharistic Jesus, we become what God wants us to be! Like a magnet, The Lord draws us to Himself and gently transforms us."[6]
At the beginning of the exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, a priest or deacon removes the sacred host from the tabernacle and places it in the monstrance on the altar for adoration by the faithful. A monstrance is the vessel used to display the consecrated Eucharistic Host, during Eucharistic adoration or benediction.
The adoration may also take place when the Eucharist is not exposed but left in a ciborium, which is likewise placed on an altar or in an enclosed tabernacle so that the faithful may pray in its presence without the need for volunteers to be in constant attendance (as is required when the Blessed Sacrament is exposed).[8]
The "Instruction on Eucharistic Worship", issued by the Sacred Congregation of Rites on the Feast of Corpus Christi, 25 May 1967, reads in pertinent part, "The exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, for which either a monstrance or a ciborium may be used, stimulates the faithful to an awareness of the marvelous presence of Christ and is an invitation to spiritual communion with Him. It is therefore an excellent encouragement to offer Him that worship in spirit and truth which is His due."[9]
Speaking to a gathering in Phoenix Park, during a three-day visit to Ireland, from 29 September   1 October 1979, Pope John Paul II said,The visit to the Blessed Sacrament is a great treasure of the Catholic faith. It nourishes social love and gives us opportunities for adoration and thanksgiving, for reparation and supplication. Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, Exposition and Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, Holy Hours, and Eucharistic processions are likewise precious element of your heritage--in full accord with the teaching of the Second Vatican Council."[10]
As to the manner in which Eucharistic adoration is conducted, the "Instructions" state: "Even brief exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, ...should be so arranged that before the blessing with the Blessed Sacrament reasonable time is provided for readings of the Word of God, hymns, prayers, and silent prayer, as circumstances permit."[11] While psalms, readings and music are part of the liturgical service, in common practice silent contemplation and reflection tend to predominate.[4]
 Eucharistic adoration in Saint Therese Little Flower Catholic Church in Reno, Nevada, USA
Where Eucharistic adoration is done by an individual for an uninterrupted hour, this is known as a Holy Hour. The inspiration for the Holy Hour is Matthew 26:40 when in the Garden of Gethsemane the night before his crucifixion, Jesus asks Peter: "So, could you not keep watch with me for one hour?".[12]
Some Christian denominations that do not subscribe to transubstantiation consider Eucharistic adoration unfounded and even bordering on idolatry.[13] But according to the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, exposition "serves to deepen our hunger for Communion with Christ and the rest of the Church."[14]
Part of a series onEucharistic adorationof the Catholic ChurchSolar monstrance of the Eucharist
Papal documents
Mirae caritatis
Dominicae cenae
Mysterium fidei
Mediator Dei
Ecclesia de Eucharistia
Sacramentum caritatis
Organisations and events
Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament
Servants of the Blessed Sacrament
Perpetual Adorers
Tabernacle Societies
Eucharistic congress
Notable individuals
Francis of Assisi
Peter Julian Eymard
John Vianney
Marie Tamisier
Leo Dupont
Fulton J. Sheen
Mary Therese Vicente
Eucharistic meditators
Maria Candida
Conchita de Armida
Maria Valtorta
 Catholicism portalvte
History[edit]
See also: History of Catholic eucharistic theology
Early history[edit]
While the keeping of the Blessed Sacrament outside Mass seems to have been part of the Christian practice from the beginning to administer to the sick and dying (both Justin Martyr and Tertullian refer to it), the practice of adoration began somewhat later.[15]
One of the first possible references to reserving the Blessed Sacrament for adoration is found in a life of St. Basil (died AD 379). Basil is said to have divided the Eucharistic bread into three parts when he celebrated the Divine Liturgy in the monastery. One part he consumed, the second part he gave to the monks, and the third he placed in a golden dove-shaped container suspended over the altar.[16] This separate portion was probably to reserve the sacrament for distribution to the sick who were unable to attend the liturgy.[17]
In Eastern Christianity, the adoration which developed in the West has never been part of the Eastern liturgy which St. Basil celebrated, but a liturgy for adoration does exist among the Eastern Catholic Churches involving psalms and placing a covered diskos with the sacred species on the altar. This is befitting the Eastern custom of veiling from human eyes those things deemed sacred.[18]
Middle Ages[edit]
Part of a series on theEucharist
Lord's Supper
Communion
Elements
Bread
Wine
Ritual and liturgy
Divine Liturgy
Holy Qurobo
Holy Qurbana
Divine Service
Mass
Requiem
Solemn
Consecration/Anaphora
Epiclesis
Words of Institution
Anamnesis
Practices and customs
Closed and open table
Communion under both kinds
Adoration
Discipline
Thanksgiving
Reserved sacrament
Feast of Corpus Christi
First Communion
Infant communion
Viaticum
Vessels
Paten
Chalice
Spoon
Intinction
History
Origin of the Eucharist
Catholic historical roots
Theology
Real presence
Consubstantiation
Impanation
Metousiosis
Receptionism
Sacramental union
Transignification
Transubstantiation
Memorialism
Sacramentarians
Sacrament
Ordinance
Denominational teachings
Anglican
Catholic
Latter-day Saint
Lutheran
Reformed
Related articles
Agape feast
Christian views on alcohol
Eucharistic miracle
Host desecration
Blessed Sacrament
vte
The theological basis for the adoration was prepared in the 11th century by Pope Gregory VII, who was instrumental in affirming the tenet that Christ is present in the Blessed Host. In 1079, Gregory required of Berengar of Tours a confession of belief:I believe in my heart and openly profess that the bread and wine that are placed on the altar are, through the mystery of the sacred prayer and the words of the Redeemer, substantially changed into the true and proper and lifegiving flesh and blood of Jesus Christ our Lord, and that after the consecration they are the true body of Christ[19]
This profession of faith began a "Eucharistic Renaissance" in the churches of Europe.[20] The Franciscan archives credit Saint Francis of Assisi (who died in 1226) for starting Eucharistic Adoration in Italy. It then spread from Umbria to other parts of Italy.[21]
In 1264 Pope Urban IV instituted the feast of Corpus Christi ("the Body of Christ") with the publication of the papal bull Transiturus. He asked the Dominican theologian Thomas Aquinas to write the texts for the Mass and Office of the feast.[22] This included such famous hymns as Panis angelicus and Verbum Supernum Prodiens, the last two strophes of which form the Benediction hymn O Salutaris Hostia. The last two verses of Pange Lingua are sung as the hymn Tantum Ergo, also used at Benediction.
As of the fourteenth century in the Western Church, devotions began to focus on the Eucharistic gifts as the objective presence of the risen Christ and the Host began to be elevated during the liturgy for the purpose of adoration, as well as to be seen by the congregation since the priest stood facing the same direction in front of the altar.[23][page needed]
16th 18th centuries[edit]
In the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation was challenging various issues with respect to the Eucharist and in response the Council of Trent greatly emphasized the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, the theological basis for Eucharistic adoration. The Trent declaration was the most significant theological component of Eucharistic doctrine since the apostolic age.[24] The statement included the following: The other sacraments do not have the power of sanctifying until someone makes use of them, but in the Eucharist the very Author of sanctity is present before the Sacrament is used. For before the apostles received the Eucharist from the hands of our Lord, He told them that it was His Body that He was giving them.[24]
The Council then declared Eucharistic adoration as a form of latria:
The only-begotten Son of God is to be adored in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist with the worship of "latria", including external worship. The Sacrament, therefore, is to be honored with extraordinary festive celebrations (and) solemnly carried from place to place in processions according to the praiseworthy universal rite and custom of the holy Church. The Sacrament is to be publicly exposed for the people's adoration.[25]
Following the Council of Trent, figures such as Saints Charles Borromeo and Alain de Solminihac promoted Eucharistic devotion and adoration.[26] As part of the simplification of Church interiors, and to emphasize the importance of the Blessed Sacrament, Charles Borromeo initiated the practice of placing the tabernacle at a higher, central location behind the main altar. As Eucharistic adoration and Benediction became more widespread during the 17th century, the altar came to be seen as the "home of the Blessed Sacrament" where it would be adored.[27]
A common early practice of adoration known as Quarantore (literary forty hours) started in the 16th century. It is an exercise of devotion in which continuous prayer is made for forty hours before the exposed Blessed Sacrament. This practice started in Milan in the 1530s and 1540s by Capuchins such as Giuseppe da Fermo who promoted long periods of adoration. From Northern Italy it was carried to elsewhere in Europe by the Capuchins and Jesuits.[28][29]
The practice of the perpetual adoration of the Blessed Sacrament started in Naples in 1590 within the Order of the Clerics Regular Minor, founded by St. Francis Caracciolo, Fr. Augustine Adorno and Fr. Fabrizio Caracciolo. This practice was modified to continuous adoration during the day due to the few number of religious in the Order's Constitutions of 1597 with approval by Pope Clement VIII[30] At a later date, the Order would revert to its earlier rule of perpetual adoration, but only within houses of no less than twenty religious. The houses with less religious were offered perpetual adoration as an option if it would not interfere with the execution of the house's ministries.[citation needed]
In the 18th century, large numbers of people were drawn to quiet adoration of the Eucharist and priests such as Alphonsus Liguori encouraged the practice. He wrote a book on Visits to the Blessed Sacrament and he explained that a visit to the Blessed Sacrament is the "practice of loving Jesus Christ", since friends who love each other visit regularly. Benedict Joseph Labre, a homeless beggar and Franciscan tertiary, was a familiar figure in the city of Rome and known as the "saint of the Forty Hours" (or Quarant' Ore) for his dedication to Eucharistic adoration.[citation needed]
19th and 20th centuries[edit]
 The Venerable Leo Dupont
 St. Peter Julian Eymard
The French Revolution hindered the practice of Eucharistic adoration, however, the beginning of the 19th century witnessed a strong emphasis on Eucharistic piety, devotions and adorations. By 1829, the efforts of the Confraternity of Penitents-Gris brought Eucharistic adoration back in France.[31] Twenty years later, the Venerable Leo Dupont initiated the nightly adoration of the Blessed Sacrament in Tours in 1849, from where it spread within France.[32] Saint Anthony Mary Claret, the confessor to Isabella II of Spain and the founder of the Claretians, was also a fervent promoter of Eucharistic devotion and adoration and introduced the practice to Cuba, where he was sent as Archbishop.[33]
The adoration of the Eucharist within France grew in this period, and there were interactions between Catholic figures who were enthusiastic about spreading the practice, e.g., Leo Dupont, Saint Jean Vianney and Saint Peter Julian Eymard who in 1858 formed the Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament.[34]
Also in 1858, Eymard, known as the Apostle of the Eucharist, and sister Marguerite Guillot formed the Servants of the Blessed Sacrament which now maintains houses on several continents where continuous Eucharistic adoration takes place.[35]
 Saint Peter Julian Eymard
By Decree of the Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship, dated 9 December 1995, Saint Peter Julian Eymard, Priest, was added to the General Roman Calendar with the rank of optional memoria: Font and fullness of all evangelization and striking expression of the infinite love of our divine Redeemer for mankind, the Holy Eucharist clearly marked the life and pastoral activity of Peter Julian Eymard. He truly deserves to be called an outstanding apostle of the Eucharist. In fact, his mission in the Church consisted in promoting the centrality of the Eucharistic Mystery in the whole life of the Christian community.
The first informally organized Eucharistic Congress took place in 1874, through the efforts of Marie-Marthe Tamisier of Tours, France. In 1881, Pope Leo XIII approved the first formal Eucharistic Congress, which was organized by Louis-Gaston de S gur in Lille, France, and was attended by few adherents.[36] The 1905 congress took place in Rome, and Pope Pius X presided over it.[37]
The practice of prolonged Eucharistic adoration also spread to the United States in the 19th century and Saint John Neumann the Archbishop of Philadelphia started Forty Hours adoration there, where it continues to date.[38]
Christian traditions[edit]
Anglicans[edit]
See also: Anglican Eucharistic theology
Early Anglicanism officially rejected Eucharistic adoration. Article XXVIII   Of the Lord's Supper in Anglicanism's 39 Articles rejects transubstantiation, declaring that "Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstitions."[39] The Article also states that "The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshiped."[39] Furthermore, the Black Rubric (in both its 1552 and 1662 versions) explains that "the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored; for that were Idolatry, to be abhorred of all faithful Christians".[citation needed]
However, since the mid-19th century, the Oxford Movement has broadened Anglican opinions on the matter. An early 20th century bishop, the Right Reverend Edgar Gibson, Bishop of Gloucester, wrote of Article 28 that "The statement in the Article is worded with the utmost care, and with studied moderation. It cannot be said that any one of the practices is condemned or prohibited by it. It only amounts to this: that none of them can claim to be part of the original Divine institution."[40]
Today, opinions on the nature of the Eucharist and thus on the propriety of adoration and exposition of the Blessed Sacrament vary in the Anglican tradition (see Anglican Eucharistic theology), but many Anglo-Catholics practice Eucharistic adoration.[citation needed] Others celebrate Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, which is not unlike Eucharistic adoration.[41]
Lutherans[edit]
See also: Eucharist in the Lutheran Church
 Adoration at a High Lutheran church in Kansas City, Missouri
Lutheran Eucharistic adoration is most commonly limited in duration to the Eucharistic service because Lutheran tradition typically does not include public reservation of the Sacrament. If the holy elements are not consumed at the altar or after the service, then they can be set aside and placed in an aumbry, which is normally located in the sacristy. Primarily, the extra hosts are reserved for another Eucharist or for taking to the sick and those too feeble to attend a church service. However, certain Lutheran parishes reserve the Eucharist in a tabernacle near the altar. The former Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church strongly encouraged Eucharistic adoration, and some parishes in the Evangelical Catholic tradition of Lutheranism continue to strongly encourage Eucharistic adoration.[citation needed]
Historically in Lutheranism there have been two parties regarding Eucharistic adoration: Gnesio-Lutherans, who followed Martin Luther's view in favor of adoration, and Philippists who followed Philipp Melanchthon's view against it. Although Luther did not entirely approve of the Feast of Corpus Christi,[42] he wrote a treatise The Adoration of the Sacrament (1523) where he defended adoration but desired that the issue not be forced. In his reform of the Roman Mass Luther placed the Sanctus after the Institution Narrative to serve as a solemn act of worship of the Real Presence just brought about by the latter. This order is still maintained in some lutheran liturgies, such as that of the noticeably high church Church of Sweden.[43] After the death of Martin Luther, further controversies developed including Crypto-Calvinism and the second Sacramentarian controversy, started by Gnesio-Lutheran Joachim Westphal. The Philippist understanding of the Real Presence without overt adoration through time became dominant in Lutheranism, although it is not in accordance with Luther's teaching. The German theologian Andreas Musculus can be regarded as one of the warmest defenders of Eucharistic adoration in early Lutheranism.[44]
Catholics[edit]
See also: Eucharist in the Catholic Church
 St. Catherine of Siena Church, Trumbull CT, St. Catherine of Siena Church, Trumbull CT
 Eucharistic adoration in the Chapel of the Apparitions of the Sanctuary of Our Lady of F tima in Portugal.
 Eucharistic adoration in the Royal Basilica of Mafra, Portugal, on Maundy Thursday   Royal and Venerable Confraternity of the Most Blessed Sacrament of Mafra.
Catholic doctrine holds that at the moment of consecration the elements of bread and wine are changed (substantially) into the Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity of Christ while the appearances (the "species") of the bread and wine remain. In the doctrine of Real Presence, at the point of consecration, the act that takes place is a double miracle: 1) that Jesus Christ is present in the Eucharist in a true, real and substantial way, with his Body and his Blood, with his Soul and his Divinity; and 2) that the bread and wine have truly, substantially become Jesus' Body and Blood. Because Catholics believe that Christ is truly present (Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity) in the Eucharist, the reserved sacrament serves as a focal point of adoration.[45] The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that: "The Eucharistic presence of Christ begins at the moment of the consecration and endures as long as the Eucharistic species subsist."[46][47]
The practice of adoration itself developed in a climate of Protestantism, and specifically the rejection of the doctrine of the Real Presence among certain groups. As such, some Catholic leaders began to institute the practice of adoration in order to inspire confidence among the faithful in Catholic Eucharistic doctrine. It became a staple of the Western Church thereafter.[38][39]
St. Faustina Kowalska stated that she was called to religious life while attending the Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament at age seven.[48] Notable examples of conversion are Saints Elizabeth Ann Seton and John Henry Newman, both having converted from Anglicanism, and the Venerable Hermann Cohen (Carmelite), O.C.D., from Judaism, following Eucharistic adoration. Cohen went on to help establish the widespread practice of nocturnal adoration.
The practice of a "daily Holy Hour" of adoration has been encouraged in the Western Catholic tradition. Mother Teresa of Calcutta had a Holy Hour each day and all members of her Missionaries of Charity followed her example.[49]
Since the Middle Ages the practice of Eucharistic adoration outside Mass has been encouraged by the popes.[50]
In the midst of the Second Vatican Council, on 3 September 1965, a few days before opening the fourth session, Pope Paul VI issued the Encyclical Mysterium fidei whereby he urged daily Mass and communion and said,
"And they should not forget about paying a visit during the day to the Most Blessed Sacrament in the very special place of honor where it is reserved in churches in keeping with the liturgical laws, since this is a proof of gratitude and a pledge of love and a display of the adoration that is owed to Christ the Lord who is present there."[51] St. Pius X used to say: "The daily adoration or visit to the Blessed Sacrament is the practice which is the fountainhead of all devotional works."[citation needed]
In Dominicae Cenae Pope John Paul II stated: "The Church and the world have a great need of Eucharistic worship. Jesus waits for us in this sacrament of love. Let us be generous with our time in going to meet Him in adoration and in contemplation that is full of faith."[52] And he added in Ecclesia de Eucharistia: "The worship of the Eucharist outside of the Mass is of inestimable value for the life of the Church.... It is the responsibility of Pastors to encourage, also by their personal witness, the practice of Eucharistic adoration, and exposition of the Blessed Sacrament."[53]
From his early years, the Eucharist had a central place in the theology of Joseph Ratzinger and in his role as Pope Benedict XVI. In his book God Is Near Us: The Eucharist, the Heart of Life he strongly encouraged Eucharistic adoration.[54][55]
Eastern Catholics[edit]
Generally speaking, Eastern Catholics do not practice adoration, as the circumstances which brought about the practice in the Western Church were not acutely present in the East.[56]
Even so, Latinization, biritualism, and other factors have caused some Eastern Catholic parishes and communities to embrace the practice nevertheless.[57]
Prayers to the Blessed Sacrament[edit]
Catholic prayers to the Blessed Sacrament[edit]
One of the better known prayers of reparation to the Blessed Sacrament is attributed to the Angel of Portugal, said to have appeared at Fatima:
O most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, I adore You profoundly. I offer You the Most Precious Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity of Jesus Christ, present in all the tabernacles of the world, in reparation for the outrages, sacrileges and indifferences by which He is offended. By the infinite merits of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I beg the conversion of sinners.[58]
Short Visit to the Blessed Sacrament
By Saint John Henry Newman:
I place myself in the presence of Him, in whose Incarnate Presence I am before I place myself there.
I adore You, O my Savior, present here as God and Man, in Soul and Body, in true Flesh and Blood.
I acknowledge and confess that I kneel before the Sacred Humanity, which was conceived in Mary's womb, and lay in Mary's bosom; which grew up to man's estate, and by the Sea of Galilee called the Twelve, wrought miracles, and spoke words of wisdom and peace; which in due season hung on the cross, lay in the tomb, rose from the dead, and now reigns in heaven.
I praise and bless, and give myself wholly to Him, Who is the true Bread of my soul, and my everlasting joy.[59]
Eucharistic celebrations of any nature are sometimes initiated with the first four or at least the first stanza of the hymn Pange lingua, and often concluded with the Tantum ergo (being the other two stanzas of the same hymn), or at the least the versicle and oration attached to the Tantum ergo (see the article). These hymns and orations are from the Daily Office for Corpus Christi, composed by St. Thomas Aquinas.
Eucharistic meditation[edit]
See also: Christian meditation
Apart from promoting the Eucharist, Saint Peter Julian Eymard also made meditations before the Blessed host and his writings were later published as a book: The Real Presence.[60] His contemporary Saint Jean Vianney also performed Eucharistic meditations which were later published.[61][62]
Saint Th r se of Lisieux was devoted to Eucharistic meditation and on 26 February 1895 shortly before she died wrote from memory her poem "To Live by Love" which she had composed during Eucharistic meditation. During her life, the poem was sent to various religious communities and was included in a notebook of her poems.[63][64]
Significant portions of the writings of the Venerable Concepcion Cabrera de Armida were reported as having been based on her meditations during adoration of the Blessed Sacrament.[65]
In her book Eucharist: true jewel of eucharistic spirituality Maria Candida of the Eucharist (who was beatified by Pope John Paul II) wrote about her own personal experiences and reflections on Eucharistic meditation.[66][67]
Perpetual adoration[edit]
 Perpetual adoration at the National Expiatory Temple of San Felipe de Jesus, Mexico City
Perpetual adoration is the practice of the continuous exposition and adoration of the Eucharist, twenty-four hours a day. Similar to the "Perpetual Rosary" in which the Rosary is recited uninterrupted by a changing group of people, this practice gained popularity among Western (or "Roman") Catholics in 19th-century France and has since spread to lay Catholics in parishes across the world.[68] A textbook was produced by a lay Catholic, Susan Taylor, with help from monks and clergy as a "how to set up Perpetual Adoration".[69]
During perpetual adoration, a specific person performs adoration for a period of one hour or more, so there is always at least one person who performs adoration during each day and night. However, during Mass the Blessed Sacrament is reposed and is then exposed again after Mass.[70]
Early traditions[edit]
Perpetual adoration of God by psalm and prayer has been a tradition among Christians since ancient times, e.g., in Eastern Christianity since the year 400 when the Acoemetae monks kept up a divine service day and night; and in Western Christianity the monks at the monastery of Agaunum performed perpetual prayers since its formation in 522 by King Sigismund.[71]
 Perpetual adoration at the Cathedral of Chihuahua, Mexico
The first recorded instance of perpetual adoration formally began in Avignon, France, on 11 September 1226. To celebrate and give thanks for the victory over the Albigensians in the Siege of Avignon, King Louis VIII asked that the sacrament be placed on display at the Chapel of the Holy Cross.[72] The overwhelming number of adorers brought the local bishop, Pierre de Corbie, to suggest that the exposition be continued indefinitely. With the permission of Pope Honorius III, the idea was ratified and the adoration continued there practically uninterrupted until the chaos of the French Revolution halted it from 1792.[citation needed]
On 25 March 1654 Mother Mechtilde of the Blessed Sacrament formed a Benedictine society formed for that purpose.[71] Mother Mechtilde pioneered perpetual adoration of the Eucharist on request of P re Picotte.[73][72] P re Picotte was the confessor of Anne of Austria who asked him for a vow for the deliverance of France from war and the order was formed in response to that vow. A small house was bought on Rue Feron in Paris and a Benedictine convent, founded for this purpose, began perpetual adoration there on 25 March 1654, one or more nuns kneeling in front of the altar in adoration each hour of the day and night. The simple Benedictine rules with which the nuns started were amended and formal approval for perpetual adoration was provided by the Camera Apostolica in Rome in 1705.[71]
Various Catholic societies and orders were formed for the specific purpose of perpetual adoration prior to the 19th century, e.g., the Perpetual Adorers of the Blessed Sacrament (1659 in Marseille), Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary and of the Perpetual Adoration (formed in 1768 in Paris), and the Religious of the Perpetual Adoration (1789, Switzerland).[citation needed]
By the beginning of the 19th century, in France as well as elsewhere in Europe, strong currents in favor of Eucharistic piety, devotions and adoration began to appear. Preachers such as Prosper Gu ranger, Peter Julian Eymard and Jean Vianney were very effective in renewing such devotions.[74]
The 19th century thus witnessed a rapid growth in perpetual adoration societies, and some existing orders (e.g., the Dominicans and the Poor Clares)[70] e.g.: Sisters of the Perpetual Adoration (1845 in Brittany), Poor Clares of Perpetual Adoration (also in 1854), Religious of Perpetual Adoration (Brussels, 1857), Servants of the Most Blessed Sacrament (1858, Paris), Sisters of St. Francis of Perpetual Adoration (1863, Olpe, Germany), Holy Spirit Adoration Sisters (the Netherlands, 1896). A number of perpetual adoration orders were also formed in the United States, e.g., Franciscan Sisters of Perpetual Adoration (1849 Wisconsin) and Benedictine Sisters of Perpetual Adoration (1874, Clyde, Missouri).[citation needed]
The Poor Clares of the Monastery of Saint Mary of the Angels of Perpetual Adoration, in Drumshanbo, Ireland, first established perpetual adoration on 25 March 1870, and have continued the practice uninterrupted to this day.[75] The Franciscan Sisters of Perpetual Adoration have been praying nonstop longer than anyone in the United States; the practice began on 1 August 1878, at 11 a.m. and officially ended on Ash Wednesday, February 26, 2020. At this point the perpetual prayer had been maintained without interruption for 141 years.[76]
Part of a series onDevotions to Jesusin the Catholic ChurchChrist in Majesty
Devotions
Holy Wounds
Sacred Heart
Holy Face
Divine Mercy
Eucharistic adoration
Holy Name
Holy Hour
Acts of Reparation
Stations of the Cross
Precious Blood
Infant of Prague
Prayers
Anima Christi
Shoulder Wound
Morning offering
Sacred Heart prayer
Sacred Heart Consecration
You are Christ
Vianney's prayer
Perboyre's prayer
Montfort's prayer
Crucifix prayer
 Catholicism portalvte
20th and 21st centuries[edit]
In the 20th century, the practice of perpetual adoration spread from monasteries and convents to Catholic parishes at large, and is now also performed by lay Catholics. The perpetual adoration chapel in Saint Peter's Basilica was inaugurated by Pope John Paul II in 1981 and a number of the major basilicas in Rome have also started perpetual adoration in the 20th century.[70]
Early in the 20th century, questions arose as to the suitability of perpetual adoration by lay Catholics. However, after various discussions, on 2 June 1991 (feast of Corpus Christi), the Pontifical Council for the Laity issued specific guidelines that permit perpetual adoration in parishes. In order to establish a "perpetual adoration chapel" in a parish, the local priest must obtain permission from his bishop by submitting a request along with the required information for the local "perpetual adoration association", its officers, etc.[citation needed]
At the beginning of the 21st century, there were over 2,500 perpetual adoration chapels in Catholic parishes around the world. The United States (with about 70 million Catholics) had about 1,100 chapels, the Philippines (with about 80 million Catholics) 500, the Republic of Ireland (with about 4 million Catholics) about 150, South Korea (with about 4 million Catholics) had about 70.[77]
As of 2005[update], the Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis was estimated to have the most chapels of perpetual adoration of any archdiocese in the United States.[78] As of 2008[update], the world's largest monstrance is in Chicago, in a perpetual adoration chapel dedicated to the Divine Mercy, and is adjacent to Church of St. Stanislaus Kostka, one of the city's Polish churches.[79]
See also[edit]
Fermentum
First Thursdays Devotion
"I Am": Eucharistic Meditations on the Gospel
Showbread
Seven Churches Visitation
References[edit]
^ Schad , Johannes P., "Eucharistic adoration", Encyclopedia of World Religions, 2006, ISBN 978-1-60136-000-7
^ "Eucharisticum Mysterium - Instruction on Eucharistic Worship, 53". Adoremus Bulletin. 25 May 1967. Retrieved 26 April 2017.
^ "Meeting with the Clergy of the Rome Diocese (March 2, 2006) | Benedict XVI". w2.vatican.va. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ a b Dimock 2006, pp. 88 90.
^ Schmalz, Valerie. "Eucharistic Adoration: Reviving An Ancient Tradition", Ignatius Insight, 3 October 2005
^ a b "What is Eucharistic Adoration?". www.catholic-church.org. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Gr n, Anselm and Cumming, John. The seven sacraments, 2003, ISBN 978-0-8264-6704-1 pp. 82 83
^ Arinze, Francis. The Holy Eucharist, 2001, ISBN 978-0-87973-978-2 p. 110
^ Instruction on Eucharistic Worship,  60.
^ "Pope John Paul II Recalls and Encourages National Eucharistic Devotion"
^ Instruction on Eucharistic Worship,  66.
^ Stravinskas 1998, p. 498.
^ Heads of Agreement on the Lord's Supper by John Calvin' Archived 28 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine;
^ "Eucharistic Devotion". www.usccb.org. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Driscoll, Jeremy. Theology at the eucharistic table, 2003, ISBN 978-0-85244-469-6 pp. 237 244
^ Hardon 1997, p. 3.
^ "Eucharistic Adoration". Our Sunday Visitor Catholic Publishing Company. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ 'Byzantine Daily Worship'; Archbishop Joseph Raya, Baron Jose de Vinck
^ "Mysterium Fidei",  52.
^ Hardon 1997, p. 5.
^ Robson, Michael. St Francis of Assisi: The Legend and the Life, 2002, ISBN 978-0-8264-6508-5 pp. 83 84
^ Torrell, Jean-Pierre. Saint Thomas, Catholic University of America Press, 1996, pp. 129-136
^ Hardon 1997.
^ a b Hardon 1997, p. 8.
^ Hardon 1997, p. 9.
^ Bunson, Matthew. John Paul II's book of saints, 1999, ISBN 978-0-87973-934-8 p. 88
^ Schloeder, Steven J., Architecture in communion, 1998, ISBN 978-0-89870-631-4 p. 98
^ Johnson, Timothy J., Franciscans at prayer, 2007, ISBN 978-90-04-15699-9 pp. 444 445
^ Black, Christopher F., Italian Confraternities in the Sixteenth Century, 2003, ISBN 978-0-521-53113-9 p. 99
^ Capetola, C.R.M., Nicholas. "St. Francis Caracciolo: Founder of the Clerics Regular Minor (Adorno Fathers)" pp. 68-69
^ Hardon 1997, p. 11.
^ Scalan, Dorothy. The Holy Man of Tours. (1990) ISBN 978-0-89555-390-4
^ Dimock 2006, p. 125.
^ Cruz, Joan Carroll, Saintly Men of Modern Times. (2003) ISBN 978-1-931709-77-4
^ Letellier, Arthur. "Congregation of the Servants of the Most Blessed Sacrament." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1912. 24 November 2017
^ Meehan, Thomas. "Eucharistic Congresses." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 24 November 2017
^ Bunson, Matthew. OSV's encyclopedia of Catholic history, 2004, ISBN 978-1-59276-026-8 p. 334
^ a b Trigilio, John and Brighenti, Kenneth. The Catholicism Answer Book: The 300 Most Frequently Asked Questions, 2007, ISBN 978-1-4022-0806-5 p. 153
^ a b c The Thirty-Nine Articles Archived 23 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ Gibson, Edgar Charles Sumner (1908). The Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England. Methuen & Company. p. 62.
^ "Services". Church of the Ascension, Chicago. 2006. Archived from the original on 9 February 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2015.
^ Corpus Christi Archived 3 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine article in Christian Cyclopedia
^ Kyrkohandbok f r Svenska kyrkan, 2017, pp:132
^ "The Sacrament of the Altar. A Book on the Lutheran Doctrine of the Lord's Supper by Tom G A Hardt". Archived from the original on 10 June 2001. Retrieved 24 September 2011.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Burke, Jennifer (1 June 2022). "Catholics affirm, reinforce faith through eucharistic adoration". Catholic Courier. Retrieved 12 August 2022.
^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The sacrament of the Eucharist". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Arinze, Francis. Celebrating the Holy Eucharist, 2006, ISBN 978-1-58617-158-2 p. 103
^ Guiley, Rosemary. The encyclopedia of saints, 2001, ISBN 978-0-8160-4134-3 p. 106
^ McHugh, Joan Carter. My Daily Eucharist II, 1997, ISBN 978-0-9640417-5-2 p. 14
^ Ball, Ann. 2003, Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices ISBN 978-0-87973-910-2 p. 11
^ "Mysterium Fidei",  66.
^ Vatican website: Dominicae Cenae
^ "Encyclical Letter Ecclesia de Eucharistia". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Murphy, Joseph. Christ, Our Joy: The Theological Vision of Pope Benedict XVI, 2008, ISBN 978-1-58617-182-7 p. 180
^ Ratzinger, Joseph. God Is Near Us: The Eucharist, the Heart of Life, 2003, ISBN 978-0-89870-962-9 pp. 88 91
^ Olson, Carl E. (7 March 2019). "The Light Of The Eastern Churches | Simply Catholic". Retrieved 23 March 2021.
^ "Adoration in Eastern Catholic rites". Eucharistic Adoration Canada. 25 June 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2021.
^ "Fatima 100th Anniversary - Third Apparition of the Angel of Portugal". www.ewtn.com. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Newman, John Henry (2011). Heart to Heart: A Cardinal Newman Prayerbook. Ave Maria Press. p. 137. ISBN 9780870612619. Retrieved 18 August 2019.
^ Eymard, Peter Julian. The Real Presence: eucharistic meditations, Sentinel Press, 1938 ASIN B00087ST7Q
^ Vianney, Jean Baptiste Marie. The eucharistic meditations of the Cur  d'Ars, Carmelite Publications (1961) ASIN B0007IVDMY
^ Vianney, Jean Baptiste Marie, Convert, H. and Benvenuta, Mary. Eucharistic Meditations: Extracts from the Writings and Instructions of Saint John Vianney, 1998, ISBN 978-0-940147-03-4
^ Descouvemont, Pierre and Loose, Helmuth Nils. Therese and Lisieux, 1996, ISBN 978-0-8028-3836-0 p. 245
^ Collected poems of St Th r se of Lisieux by Th r se (de Lisieux), Alan Bancroft 2001 ISBN 978-0-85244-547-1 p. 75
^ Armida, Concepci n Cabrera de. I Am: Eucharistic Meditations on the Gospel ISBN 978-0-8189-0890-3
^ Bunson, Matthew. Our Sunday Visitor's Catholic Almanac, 2008, ISBN 978-1-59276-441-9 page 255
^ "Maria Candida of the Eucharist (1884-1949), biography". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Stravinskas 1998, p. 776.
^ "Perpetual Adoration". perpetualadoration.info. Retrieved 3 October 2018.
^ a b c Stravinskas 1998, p. 409.
^ a b c Addis, William E. and Arnold, Thomas. A Catholic Dictionary, 2004, ISBN 978-0-7661-9380-2 p. 656
^ a b McMahon, Joseph. "Perpetual Adoration." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 25 November 2017
^ Goyau, Georges. "Saint-Di ." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1912. 25 November 2017
^ Alban Butler; Paul Burns (1998). Butler's Lives of the Saints: August. Burns & Oats. p. 16. ISBN 0860122573.
^ "History". Poor Clare Colettine Federation of St. Mary of the Angels in Ireland & Scotland.
^ "Perpetual Adoration". Franciscan Sisters of Perpetual Adoration (FSPA). 24 June 2014. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ "Bollettino". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 24 December 2018.
^ Burcum, Jill (30 January 2005). "Ancient Catholic adoration ritual draws many modern adherents". Star Tribune. Maple Lake, Minnesota. Archived from the original on 4 February 2005. Retrieved 8 February 2020.
^ "Duriga, Joyce. "Nine-foot monstrance unveiled as part of new Divine Mercy shrine", Catholic News Agency, 10 June 2008". Archived from the original on 11 June 2008. Retrieved 11 February 2011.
Works cited[edit]
Dimock, Giles (2006). 101 questions and answers on the Eucharist. ISBN 978-0-8091-4365-8.
Hardon, John A. (1997). The History of Eucharistic Adoration. CMJ Marian Publishers. ISBN 0-9648448-9-3.
Pope Paul VI (3 September 1965). "Mysterium Fidei". Libreria Editrice Vaticana.
Sacred Congregation of Rites. "Instruction on Eucharistic Worship". Archived from the original on 14 September 2011. Retrieved 12 February 2011.
Stravinskas, Peter (1998). Our Sunday Visitor's Catholic Encyclopedia. OSV Press. ISBN 978-0-87973-669-9.
vtePrayers of the Catholic ChurchPrayers of the Mass
Agnus Dei
Confiteor
Creeds
Apostles' Creed
Athanasian Creed
Nicene Creed
Gloria in excelsis Deo
Gloria Patri
Kyrie eleison
Pater noster
Sanctus
Signum crucis
Marian prayers
Alma Redemptoris Mater
Angelus
Ave Maria
Ave maris stella
Ave Regina caelorum
F tima prayers
Litany
Loreto
Magnificat
Maria mater gratiae
Memorare
Regina caeli
Rosary
Salve Regina
Sub tuum praesidium
Three Hail Marys
Other prayers
Act of Contrition
Adoro te devote
Angele Dei
Anima Christi
Ave verum corpus
Benedictus
Chaplets
Come, Holy Spirit
Jesus Prayer
Mental prayer
Laudes divinae
Litanies
Litany of the Saints
Morning offering
Novena
Nunc dimittis
O salutaris hostia
Penitential Psalms
51: Miserere mei
130: De profundis
Prayer before a crucifix
Prayer of Saint Francis
Prayer to Saint Joseph
Prayer to Saint Michael
Requiem  ternam
Spiritual Communion
Tantum ergo
Te Deum
Thanksgiving after Communion
Veni Creator Spiritus
Veni Sancte Spiritus
Visit to the Blessed Sacrament
Way of the Cross
 Catholicism portal
 Category
vtePrivate revelation in the Catholic ChurchRevelations
Apparitional experience
Christian mysticism
Locution
interior
Marian apparition
Religious ecstasy
Vision (spirituality)
Visions of Jesus and Mary
Miracles
Bilocation
Charism
Gift of miracles
Gifts of healing
Glossolalia
Interpretation of tongues
Prophecy
Word of Knowledge
Word of wisdom
Eucharistic miracle
Miracle of Lanciano
Levitation
Lourdes water
Miracle of the Sun
Odour of sanctity
Stigmata
Tabor Light
Thaumaturgy
Weeping statue
Discernment
Documents
Code of canon law
Haurietis aquas
Normae Congregationis
Tribus circiter
Magisterium
Rule of Faith
Sensus fidei
Theology
Bridal theology
Christology
Mariology
Mystical theology
Popular piety
Acts of reparation
First Thursdays Devotion
Immaculate Heart of Mary
Consecration
First Saturdays Devotion
Miraculous Medal
Seven Dolors
Pilgrimage
Rosary
Rosary of the Holy Wounds
Sacred Heart
First Fridays Devotion
Divine Mercy
Chaplet of the Divine Mercy
Divine Mercy novena
Eucharistic adoration
Holy Hour
Saint Michael  in the Catholic Church
Chaplet of Saint Michael
Prayer to Saint Michael
Scapular
ShrinesMarian shrines
Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe
Cathedral-Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar
Chapel of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal
Knock Shrine
Sanctuary of Our Lady of F tima
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes
Shrine of Our Lady of Good Help
Sanctuary of Our Lady of Graces of Onuva
Shrine of Our Lady of the Hens
Shrine of the Virgin of the Rosary of Pompei
Sanctuary of Our Lady of the Rosary of San Nicol s
Others
Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy
Sanctuary of Christ the King
Shrine of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo
 Catholicism portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eucharistic_adoration&oldid=1142783822"