Pole that firefighters slide down to reach ground level
 The firepole in a fire station in Toronto, Ontario
A fireman's pole (also called a firefighter's pole, sliding pole or fire pole) is a pole that firefighters slide down to quickly reach the ground floor of a fire station. This allows them to respond to an emergency call faster, as they arrive at the fire engine faster than by using a standard staircase.
In the 1870s, answering an alarm, Chicago fireman George Reid decided to use the long-pole the company employed to lift horse's hay from the upper-loft to slide to the ground floor, arriving well ahead of the rest of the company.  Company Captain David Kenyon of Engine Company 21 then successfully petitioned the department be allowed to install a pole through the floor of the loft sleeping space to create what became the standard set-up.[1]
Overview[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The firefighter's pole is found in multi-level fire stations, if the firefighters' living quarters are located upstairs. When they are dispatched to an emergency, the firefighters descend to the ground floor, put on their firefighting gear, and board the fire engine as quickly as possible. The pole may run through a hole in the floor, or it may be accessed from a balcony. To use a pole, a firefighter grasps it with their hands, then clamps their legs around it, and then replaces their tight hand grip with a looser hand or arm grip to allow themselves to descend, using their legs to control the speed. This is somewhat similar to the technique used for fast-roping.
History[edit]
 Vancouver firemen using firepoles to leave their dormitory, 1910
Until 1878, spiral staircases or sliding chutes were common, but not particularly fast. Fire houses were also equipped with spiral staircases so horses would not try to climb the stairs into the living quarters.[2]
Captain David B. Kenyon of Chicago's all-black Engine Company No. 21 worked in a three-story fire station. The ground floor contained the firefighting equipment, the floor above was for recreation and sleeping, and the top floor was the hayloft to store the winter supply of hay for the fire engines' horses. During transport, the hay was secured to a wagon using a wooden binding pole, which was stored in the hayloft when not in use. Firefighter George Reid slid down the pole to respond to a call for help once, which inspired Kenyon to create a permanent pole.[3] Captain David B. KenyonIn 1878 Kenyon convinced his chief to make the necessary hole in the building and install the pole, after agreeing to pay for any necessary maintenance. The company crafted a pole out of a Georgia pine beam by shaving and sanding it into a 3-inch (7.6 cm) diameter pole which they gave several coats of varnish and a coat of paraffin.[citation needed]
Despite being the butt of many jokes, others soon realized Company 21 was usually the first company to arrive when called, especially at night[citation needed], and the chief of the department ordered the poles to be installed in all Chicago fire stations. In 1880 the first brass pole was installed in the Worcester Fire Department.[4]
Safety issues[edit]
 A firepole in Cologne with a door at the entry
Losing one's grip on the pole can result in falling from a great height; the firefighter may hit an object such as a door extending from a truck; poor speed control can result in injured or even broken legs upon impact with the floor; and burns can occur due to friction if the skin rubs against the pole. If the pole runs through an unprotected hole in the floor, there is a risk of a person falling through it, as well as exhaust fumes rising into the living quarters.[5][6]
For these reasons, fire stations built since the 1970s are often built with the living quarters downstairs, and some older fire stations have had their poles removed.[6] In the United States, the National Fire Protection Association has called for the removal of all poles from US fire stations due to safety hazards.[7] The fire service in New Zealand has already removed most of them.[8] In the United Kingdom, more modern fire stations are built with one storey negating the need for a pole and they are sometimes removed from old stations that no longer require the upper floors for operational purposes.[9]
However, due to the strong tradition, time advantages and new safety features, poles are common worldwide even in newly built stations.[6] Slide poles can be made safer. Cushions can be placed around the base of the pole to soften landings. Exhaust control systems can stop fumes from rising upstairs. To prevent accidental falls, the pole can be guarded by railings, baskets, a door or a weight-activated trapdoor that opens only when weight is applied to the pole.[5][6]
References[edit]
^ Grossman, Ron (February 24, 2022). "In response to White Chicagoans mocking the first Black fire crew in 1872, they wanted to prove themselves as good, if not better". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 24, 2022.
^ "Fire Houses and Fire Fighting".[unreliable source?]
^ Black Heroes of Fire. ASIN B07M6ZG2XF.
^ Worcester, MA. "History of the WFD". Retrieved September 18, 2020.
^ a b Castro, Hector (April 24, 2008). "What's a fire station without a fire pole? $150,000 cheaper". Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
^ a b c d Hamill, Sean. "Fire poles survive thanks to land values, tradition, efficiency". The Associated Press. Retrieved June 3, 2011.
^ Newcomb, Tim (December 23, 2010). "Sorry, Kids. Fire Stations Are Ditching Fire Poles". Time. Archived from the original on December 25, 2010.
^ "The legacy of the fire station pole: relics being phased outnationwide due to health and safety". The New Zealand Herald. May 4, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2018.
^ Fish, Elizabeth (April 20, 2011). "Fire Station says goodbye to pole". The Lincolnite. Retrieved December 19, 2022.
vteFirefightingPersonnel and organization
Battalion chief
Chief firefighter
Fire captain
Fire chief
Station officer
Retained firefighter
Fire marshal
Fire police
Firefighter assist and search team
Handcrew
Special operations firefighter
Volunteer fire department
Women in firefighting
Fire department ranks by country
Facilities
Drill tower
Fire department
list
Fire lookout tower
Fire station
Hose tower
Apparatus
Airport crash tender
Fire motorcycle
Fire car
Fire engine
Fireboat
Firefighting apparatus
Hazardous materials apparatus
Light and air unit
Quint
Rescue vehicle
Water tender
Equipment
Bunker gear
Escape chair
Fire blanket
Fire bucket
Fire extinguisher
Fire hose
Fire hydrant
Fire proximity suit
Fire retardant
Fire shelter
Fireman's pole
Fireman's switch
Flame retardant
Fog nozzle
Halligan bar
Hard suction hose
Hazmat suit
Heat detector
Hose bridge
Hydraulic rescue tools ("Jaws of life")
Kelly tool
Nomex
New York roof hook
PASS device
The pig
Portable water tank
Rotary saw
Self-contained breathing apparatus
Siren
Smoke detector
Thermal imaging camera
Terminology
Backdraft
Barn fire
Chimney fire
Dead man zone
Deluge gun
Door breaching
Draft
False alarm
Fire class
Fire control
Fire safety
Fire triangle
Fireman's carry
Firewall
Flash fire
Flashover
Gaseous fire suppression
Multiple-alarm fire
Stop, drop and roll
Structure fire
Two-in, two-out
Ventilation
Miscellaneous
Candidate Physical Ability Test
Fire camp
Fire engine red
Fire photography
Fire protection engineering
Geography of firefighting
History of firefighting
International Association of Fire Fighters
International Firefighters' Day
List of firefighting films
Muster
Saint Florian
World Firefighters Games
World Police and Fire Games
WildfiresGeneral
Wildfire emergency management
Wildfire suppression
Equipment and tactics
Aerial firefighting
Controlled burn
Driptorch
Fire flapper
Fire hose
Fire lookout tower
Fire rake
Fire retardant
Fire retardant gel
Fire trail
Firebreak
Firefighting apparatus
Firefighting foam
Helicopter bucket
Hose pack
McLeod
Modular Airborne FireFighting System
Pulaski
Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel
Wildland fire engine
Wildland water tender
Personnel
Fire lookout
Handcrew
Helitack
Hotshot crew
Smokejumper
Wildland fire module
By location
Ancient Rome
Australia
United States
History
California
Washington
Lists
Glossary of wildfire terms
List of wildfires
See also
Template:Fire
Template:Fire protection
 Category
 Commons
 Glossary
 Index
 Outline
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fireman%27s_pole&oldid=1132480515"