US violent slavery-related confrontations
Bleeding KansasPart of the prelude to the American Civil War1856 map showing slave states (gray), free states (pink), and territories (green) in the United States, with the Kansas Territory in center (white)Date1854 1861LocationKansas TerritoryResult
Antislavery settler victory
Kansas admitted to the Union as a free state
Fighting continues into the American Civil WarBelligerents
Antislavery settlers(Free-Staters)
Pro-slavery settlers (Border Ruffians)Commanders and leaders
John BrownCasualties and losses
Disputed   100+[1]
80 or fewer; 20 30 killed[1]vteBleeding Kansas
Wakarusa War
Sacking of Lawrence
Pottawatomie massacre
Battle of Black Jack
First and Second Battles of Franklin
Battle of Fort Titus
Battle of Osawatomie
Marais des Cygnes massacre
Events leading to  the American Civil War
Economic
End of Atlantic slave trade
Panic of 1857
Political
Northwest Ordinance
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Gag rule
Tariff of 1828
End of slavery in British colonies
Texas Revolution
Texas annexation
Mexican American War
Wilmot Proviso
Nashville Convention
Compromise of 1850
Fugitive Slave Act of 1850
Kansas Nebraska Act
Ostend Manifesto
Caning of Charles Sumner
Lincoln Douglas debates
1860 presidential election
Crittenden Compromise
Secession of Southern states
Peace Conference of 1861
Corwin Amendment
Social
Nat Turner's slave rebellion
Martyrdom of Elijah Lovejoy
Burning of Pennsylvania Hall
American Slavery As It Is
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Bleeding Kansas
The Impending Crisis of the South
Oberlin Wellington Rescue
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Judicial
Trial of Reuben Crandall
Commonwealth v. Aves
The Amistad affair
Prigg v. Pennsylvania
Recapture of Anthony Burns
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Virginia v. John Brown
Military
Star of the West
Battle of Fort Sumter
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
vte
Bleeding Kansas, Bloody Kansas, or the Border War was a series of violent civil confrontations in Kansas Territory, and to a lesser extent in western Missouri, between 1854 and 1859. It emerged from a political and ideological debate over the legality of slavery in the proposed state of Kansas.
The conflict was characterized by years of electoral fraud, raids, assaults, and murders carried out in the Kansas Territory and neighboring Missouri by proslavery "border ruffians" and antislavery "free-staters". According to Kansapedia of the Kansas Historical Society, 56 political killings were documented during the period,[2] and the total may be as high as 200.[3] It has been called a Tragic Prelude, or an overture, to the American Civil War, which immediately followed it.
The conflict centered on the question of whether Kansas, upon gaining statehood, would join the Union as a slave state or a free state. The question was of national importance because Kansas's two new senators would affect the balance of power in the U.S. Senate, which was bitterly divided over the issue of slavery. The Kansas Nebraska Act of 1854 called for popular sovereignty: the decision about slavery would be made by popular vote of the territory's settlers rather than by legislators in Washington. Existing sectional tensions surrounding slavery quickly found focus in Kansas.[4][5]
Missouri, a slave state since 1821, was populated by many settlers with Southern sympathies and proslavery views, some of whom tried to influence the Kansas decision by entering Kansas and claiming to be residents. The conflict was fought politically, as well as between civilians, where it eventually degenerated into brutal gang violence and paramilitary guerrilla warfare. The term "Bleeding Kansas" was popularized by Horace Greeley's New-York Tribune.[6][a]
Kansas had a state-level civil war that would soon be replicated on a national basis. It had two different capitals (proslavery Lecompton and antislavery Lawrence and Topeka), two different constitutions (the proslavery Lecompton Constitution and the antislavery Topeka Constitution), and two different legislatures (the so-called "bogus legislature" in Lecompton and the antislavery body in Lawrence). Both sides sought and received help from outside, the proslavery side from the federal government; Presidents Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan openly helped the proslavery partisans. Both claimed to reflect the will of the people of Kansas. The proslavers used violence and threats of violence, and the free-soilers responded in kind. After much commotion, including a congressional investigation, it became clear that a majority of Kansans wanted Kansas to be a free state, but this required congressional approval, which Southerners in Congress blocked.
Kansas was admitted to the Union as a free state the same day that enough Southern senators had departed, during the secession crisis that led to the Civil War, to allow it to pass (effective January 29, 1861). Partisan violence continued along the Kansas Missouri border for most of the war, though Union control of Kansas was never seriously threatened. Bleeding Kansas demonstrated that armed conflict over slavery was unavoidable. Its severity made national headlines, which suggested to the American people that the sectional disputes were unlikely to be resolved without bloodshed, and it, therefore, acted as a preface to the American Civil War.[8] The episode is commemorated with numerous memorials and historic sites.
Origins[edit]
As abolitionism became increasingly popular in the United States and tensions between its supporters and detractors grew, the U.S. Congress maintained a tenuous balance of political power between Northern and Southern representatives. At the same time, the increasing emigration of Americans to the country's western frontier and the desire to build a transcontinental railroad that would connect the eastern states with California urged incorporation of the western territories into the Union. The inevitable question was how these territories would treat the issue of slavery when eventually promoted to statehood. This question had already plagued Congress during political debates following the Mexican American War. The Compromise of 1850 had at least temporarily solved the problem by permitting residents of the Utah and New Mexico Territories to decide their own laws with respect to slavery by popular vote, an act which set a new precedent in the ongoing debate over slavery.[8]
In May 1854, the Kansas Nebraska Act created from Indian lands the new territories of Kansas and Nebraska for settlement by U.S. citizens. The act was proposed by Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois as a way to appease Southern representatives in Congress, who had resisted earlier proposals to admit states from the Nebraska Territory because of the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which had explicitly forbidden the practice of slavery in all U.S. territory north of 36 30' latitude and west of the Mississippi River, except in the state of Missouri. Southerners feared the incorporation of Nebraska would upset the balance between slave and free states and thereby give abolitionist Northerners an advantage in Congress.
Douglas's proposal attempted to allay these fears with the organization of two territories instead of one, as well as the inclusion of a "popular sovereignty" clause that would, like the condition previously prescribed for Utah and New Mexico, permit settlers of Kansas and Nebraska to vote on the legality of slavery in their own territories a notion which directly contradicted and effectively repealed the Missouri Compromise, as both Kansas and Nebraska were located entirely north of parallel 36 30' north and west of the Mississippi. Like many others in Congress, Douglas assumed that settlers of Nebraska would ultimately vote to prohibit slavery and that settlers of Kansas, further south and closer to the slave state of Missouri, would vote to allow it, and thereby the balance of slave and free states would not change. Regarding Nebraska, this assumption was correct; the idea of slavery had little appeal for Nebraska's residents and its fate as a free state was already solidly in place. In Kansas, however, the assumption of legal slavery underestimated abolitionist resistance to the repeal of the long-standing Missouri Compromise. Southerners saw the passage of the Kansas Nebraska Act as an emboldening victory; Northerners considered it an outrageous defeat. Each side of the slavery question saw a chance to assert itself in Kansas, and it quickly became the nation's prevailing ideological battleground,[9] as well as the most violent place in the country.
Early elections[edit]
Immediately, immigrants supporting both sides of the slavery question arrived in the Kansas Territory to establish residency and gain the right to vote. Among the first settlers of Kansas were citizens of slave states, especially Missouri, many of whom strongly supported Southern ideologies and emigrated to Kansas specifically to assist the expansion of slavery. Proslavery immigrants settled towns, including Leavenworth and Atchison. The administration of President Franklin Pierce appointed territorial officials in Kansas aligned with its own proslavery views, and heeding rumors that the frontier was being overwhelmed by Northerners, thousands of nonresident slavery proponents soon entered Kansas with the goal of influencing local politics. Proslavery factions thereby captured many early territorial elections, often by fraud and intimidation. In November 1854, thousands of armed proslavery men known as "Border Ruffians" or "Southern Yankees", mostly from Missouri, poured into the Kansas Territory and swayed the vote in the election for a nonvoting delegate to Congress in favor of proslavery Democratic candidate John Wilkins Whitfield.[10] The following year, a congressional committee investigating the election reported that 1,729 fraudulent votes were cast compared to 1,114 legal votes. In one location, only 20 of the 604 voters were residents of the Kansas Territory; in another, 35 were residents and 226 nonresidents.[11]
At the same time, Northern abolitionists encouraged their own supporters to move to Kansas in the effort to make the territory a free state, hoping to flood Kansas with so-called "Free-Soilers" or "Free-Staters". By far the most famous of these, and their leader, was John Brown of Leavenworth, who moved from Ohio.[12] Many citizens of Northern states arrived with assistance from benevolent societies such as the Boston-based New England Emigrant Aid Company, founded shortly before passage of the Kansas Nebraska Act with the specific goal of assisting anti-slavery immigrants to reach Kansas Territory. In a colorful story that may be legend, the abolitionist minister Henry Ward Beecher, Harriet Beecher Stowe's brother, shipped them Sharps rifles in crates labelled "Bibles"; they became known as "Beecher's Bibles".[13] Despite boasts that 20,000 New England Yankees would be sent to the Kansas Territory, only about 1,200 settlers had emigrated there by the end of 1855.[14][9] Nevertheless, aid movements like these, heavily publicized by the Eastern press, played a significant role in creating the nationwide hysteria over the fate of Kansas, and were directly responsible for the establishment of towns which later became strongholds of Republican and abolitionist sentiment, including Lawrence, Topeka, and Manhattan, Kansas.[9][15]
First Territorial Legislature[edit]
 1855 Free-State poster
On March 30, 1855, the Kansas Territory held the election for its first territorial legislature.[10] Crucially, this legislature would decide whether the territory would allow slavery.[15] Just as had happened in the election of November 1854, "Border Ruffians" from Missouri again streamed into the territory to vote, and proslavery delegates were elected to 37 of the 39 seats Martin F. Conway and Samuel D. Houston from Riley County were the only Free-Staters elected.[15] Free-Staters loudly denounced the elections as fraudulent. Territorial Governor Andrew Reeder pleased neither side when he invalidated, as tainted by fraud, the results in only 11 of the 40 legislative races. A special election was held on May 22 to elect replacements,[15] and the results were dramatically different; eight of the 11 delegates elected in the special election were Free-Staters. This still left the proslavery camp with an overwhelming 29 10 advantage.[15]
The proslavery legislature convened in the newly created territorial capital of Pawnee on July 2, 1855. The legislature immediately invalidated the results from the special election in May and seated the proslavery delegates elected in March. After only one week in Pawnee, the legislature moved the territorial capital to the Shawnee Mission, on the Missouri border, where it reconvened, adopted a slave code for Kansas modeled largely on that of Missouri, and began passing laws favorable to slaveholders.
Free-Staters quickly elected delegates to a separate legislature based in Topeka, which proclaimed itself the legitimate government and called the proslavery government operating in Lecompton "bogus".  This body created the first territorial constitution, the Topeka Constitution. Charles L. Robinson, a Massachusetts native and agent of the New England Emigrant Aid Company, was elected territorial governor.
Reeder had not been elected, but appointed by President Pierce, at whose pleasure he served. Pierce fired him on August 16, 1855, replacing him with the very pro-Southern Wilson Shannon. Reeder left the territory and found it prudent to do so in disguise.
Pierce refused to recognize the Free-State legislature. In a message to Congress on January 24, 1856, Pierce declared the Topeka government "insurrectionist".[16] The presence of dual governments was symptomatic of the strife brewing in the territory and further provoked supporters of both sides of the conflict.[17][18]
In response to the disputed votes and rising tension, Congress sent a three-man special committee to the Kansas Territory in 1856.[15] The committee reported, in July 1856, that if the election of March 30, 1855, had been limited to "actual settlers", it would have elected a Free-State legislature.[15][19] The report also stated that the legislature actually seated in Lecompton "was an illegally constituted body, and had no power to pass valid laws".[15][19] In other words, the Free-Staters' allegations of fraud were well founded, and the Lecompton legislature was indeed bogus.
Constitutional fight[edit]
See also: Constitutions of Kansas
Much of the early confrontation of the Bleeding Kansas era centered formally on the creation of a constitution for the future state of Kansas. The first of four such documents was the Topeka Constitution, written by anti-slavery forces unified under the Free-Soil Party in December 1855. This constitution was the basis for the Free-State territorial government that resisted the federally authorized government, elected by Missourians who, congressional investigation soon revealed, committed fraud by voting in Kansas as residents and then returning to Missouri.[20] On June 30, 1856, after Pierce's declaration that the Topeka government was extralegal, Congress rejected ratification of the Topeka Constitution.
Pierce was succeeded in 1857 by James Buchanan. Like his predecessor, Buchanan was a Northerner sympathetic to the South and proslavery interests. That year, a second constitutional convention met in Lecompton, and by early November had drafted the Lecompton Constitution, a proslavery document endorsed by President Buchanan. The constitution was submitted to Kansans for a vote on a special slavery article, but Free-Staters refused to participate, since they knew that the constitution would allow Kansas slaveholders to keep existing slaves even if the article in question was voted against. The Lecompton Constitution, including the slavery article, was approved by a vote of 6,226 to 569 on December 21. Congress instead ordered another election because of voting irregularities uncovered. On August 2, 1858, Kansas voters rejected the document by 11,812 to 1,926.[21]
While the Lecompton Constitution was pending before Congress, a third document, the Leavenworth Constitution, was written and passed by Free State delegates. It was more radical than other Free-State proposals in that it would have extended suffrage to "every male citizen," regardless of race. Participation in this ballot on May 18, 1858, was a fraction of the previous and there was even some opposition by Free-State Democrats. The proposed constitution was forwarded to the U.S. Senate on January 6, 1859, where it was met with a tepid reception and left to die in committee.[22]
The fourth and final Free State proposal was the Wyandotte Constitution, drafted in 1859, which represented the anti-slavery view of the future of Kansas. It was approved in a referendum by a vote of 10,421 to 5,530 on October 4, 1859.[23] With Southern states still in control of the Senate, confirmation of the Wyandotte Constitution was indefinitely postponed. When senators from the seceding states left in January 1861, Kansas was immediately admitted the same day as a free state.
Open violence[edit]
On November 21, 1855, the so-called Wakarusa War began in Douglas County when a proslavery settler, Franklin Coleman, shot and killed a Free-Stater, Charles W. Dow, with whom Coleman had long been engaged in a feud that was unrelated to local or national politics. Dow was the first American settler to be murdered in the Kansas Territory. The decision by Douglas County Sheriff Samuel J. Jones to arrest another Free-Stater rather than Coleman and the prisoner's subsequent rescue by a Free-State posse erupted into a conflict that pitted, for the first time, armed pro-slavery settlers against antislavery settlers. Governor Wilson Shannon called for the Kansas militia, but the assembled army was composed almost entirely of proslavery Missourians, who camped outside the town of Lawrence with stolen weapons and a cannon.
In response, Lawrence raised its own militia, led by Charles L. Robinson, the man elected governor by the Topeka legislature, and James H. Lane. The parties besieging Lawrence reluctantly dispersed only after Shannon negotiated a peace agreement between Robinson and Lane and David Rice Atchison. The conflict had one other fatality, when Free-Stater Thomas Barber was shot and killed near Lawrence on December 6.
Summer of 1856[edit]
Main articles: Sacking of Lawrence, Caning of Charles Sumner, Pottawatomie massacre, and Battle of Osawatomie
On May 21, 1856, proslavery Democrats and Missourians invaded Lawrence, Kansas, and burned the Free State Hotel, destroyed two antislavery newspaper offices, and ransacked homes and stores in what became known as the Sack of Lawrence.[24] A cannon used during the Mexican American War, called the Old Kickapoo or Kickapoo Cannon, was stolen and used on that day by a proslavery group including the Kickapoo Rangers of the Kansas Territorial Militia.[25] It was later recovered by an anti-slavery faction and returned to the city of Leavenworth.[25][26][27]
 Preston Brooks attacking Charles Sumner in the U.S. Senate in 1856
In May 1856, Republican Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts took to the floor to denounce the threat of slavery in Kansas and humiliate its supporters. Sumner accused Democrats in support of slavery of lying in bed with "the harlot of slavery" on the House floor during his "Crimes Against Kansas" speech.[28] He had devoted his enormous energies to the destruction of what Republicans called the slave power, that is the efforts of slave owners to control the federal government and ensure both the survival and the expansion of slavery. In the speech (called "The Crime against Kansas") Sumner criticized South Carolina Senator Andrew Butler, portraying Butler's pro-slavery agenda towards Kansas with the raping of a virgin, and characterizing his affection for it in sexual terms.[29] Two days later, Butler's cousin, the South Carolina Congressman Preston Brooks, nearly killed Sumner on the Senate floor with a heavy cane. The action electrified the nation, brought violence to the floor of the Senate, and deepened the North South split.[30] After nearly killing Sumner, Brooks was praised by Southern Democrats for the attack. Many pro-slavery newspapers concluded that abolitionists in Kansas and beyond "must be lashed into submission," and hundreds of Southern Democrat lawmakers after the attack sent Brooks new canes as an endorsement of the attack, with one of the canes being inscribed with the phrase "hit him again." Towns and counties renamed themselves to honor Brooks (Brooksville, Florida, Brooks County, Georgia, and others). Two weeks after the attack, American philosopher and Harvard graduate Ralph Waldo Emerson condemned Brooks and the pro-slavery lawmakers, stating: "I do not see how a barbarous community and a civilized community can constitute one state. I think we must get rid of slavery, or we must get rid of freedom." In the coming weeks, many proslavery Democrats wore necklaces made from broken pieces of the cane as a symbol of solidarity with Preston Brooks.[31]
The violence continued to increase. John Brown led his sons and other followers to plan the murder of settlers who spoke in favor of slavery. At a proslavery settlement at Pottawatomie Creek on the night of May 24, the group seized five proslavery men from their homes and hacked them to death with broadswords. Brown and his men escaped and began plotting a full-scale slave insurrection to take place at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, with financial support from Boston abolitionists.[32]
The proslavery territorial government, serving under President Pierce, had been relocated to Lecompton. In April 1856, a congressional committee arrived there to investigate voting fraud. The committee found that non-Kansas residents had illegally voted in the election, resulting in the proslavery government. President Pierce refused recognition of its findings and continued to authorize the proslavery legislature, which the Free State people called the "Bogus Legislature".
 Tragic Prelude, in the Kansas State Capitol
On July 4, 1856, proclamations of President Pierce led to nearly 500 U.S. Army troops arriving in Topeka from Fort Leavenworth and Fort Riley. With their cannons pointed at Constitution Hall and the long fuses lit, Colonel E.V. Sumner, cousin to the senator of the same name beaten on the Senate floor, ordered the dispersal of the Free State Legislature.[33]
In August 1856, thousands of proslavery men formed into armies and marched into Kansas. That month, Brown and several of his followers engaged 400 proslavery soldiers in the Battle of Osawatomie. The hostilities raged for another two months until Brown departed the Kansas Territory, and a new territorial governor, John W. Geary, took office and managed to prevail upon both sides for peace.
1857 1861[edit]
This was followed by a fragile peace broken by intermittent violent outbreaks for two more years. The last major outbreak of violence was touched off by the Marais des Cygnes massacre in 1858, in which Border Ruffians killed five Free State men. In the so-called Battle of the Spurs, in January, 1859, John Brown led escaped slaves through a proslavery ambush en route to freedom via Nebraska and Iowa; not a shot was fired. About 56 people, though, died in Bleeding Kansas by the time the violence ended in 1859.[1]
There were still ongoing acts of violence even after Kansas adopted a free state constitution in 1859. In 1860, the Indian agent Col. Cowan and sixty United States dragoons burned down many free state supporting settlers' homes, while sparing settlers who came from the South or supported slavery.[34]
Kansas admitted as a free state[edit]
See also: Kansas in the American Civil War
The congressional legislative deadlock was broken in early 1861, when following the election of Abraham Lincoln as President, seven Southern states seceded from the Union. Kansas's entry as a free state had already been approved by the House of Representatives, but had been blocked by Southern senators. When, early in 1861, the senators of the seceding states withdrew from Congress or were expelled, Kansas was immediately, within days, admitted to the Union as a free state, under the Wyandotte Constitution. While pro-Confederates in Missouri attempted to effect that state's secession from the Union, and succeeded in having a pro-Confederate government recognized by and admitted to the Confederacy, by the end of 1861, even that state was firmly in control of its Unionist government. Without control of Missouri, regular Confederate forces were never in a position to seriously threaten the newly recognized free state government in Kansas.
Nevertheless, following the commencement of the American Civil War in 1861, additional guerrilla violence erupted on the border between Kansas and Missouri and sporadically continued until the end of the war.
Legacy[edit]
Heritage area[edit]
In 2006, federal legislation defined a new Freedom's Frontier National Heritage Area (FFNHA) and was approved by Congress. A task of the heritage area is to interpret Bleeding Kansas stories, which are also called stories of the Kansas Missouri border war. A theme of the heritage area is the enduring struggle for freedom. FFNHA includes 41 counties, 29 of which are in eastern Kansas and 12 in western Missouri.[35]
In popular culture[edit]
The "Bleeding Kansas" period has been dramatically rendered in countless works of American popular culture, including literature, theater, film, and television.
Santa Fe Trail (1940) is an American Western film set before the Civil War, which depicts John Brown's campaign during Bleeding Kansas, starring Ronald Reagan, Errol Flynn, and Raymond Massey.
In Seven Angry Men (1955), Raymond Massey again plays John Brown.
Wildwood Boys (William Morrow, New York; 2000) id a biographical novel of "Bloody Bill" Anderson by James Carlos Blake.
Bleeding Kansas (2008) by Sara Paretsky is a novel depicting social and political conflicts in present-day Kansas with many references to the 19th-century events.
The Good Lord Bird (2013) by James McBride is a limited-episode series based on the books released starring Ethan Hawke.[36]
The Outlaw Josey Wales (1976), an American western film set during and after the Civil War which depicts violence in the aftermath of Bleeding Kansas.  The character of Granny, who is from Kansas, had a son whom she said "was killed by Missouri ruffians in the Border War".
Bad Blood, the Border War that Triggered the Civil War (2007), a documentary film[37]
The November 8, 2014, episode of Hell on Wheels, titled "Bleeding Kansas", depicts a white family being slain for having slaves, who were then freed, in the name of religion[38]
When Kings Reigned (2017), a docudrama directed by Ian Ballinger and Alison Dover is about fishermen living along the Kansas River during and after the Bleeding Kansas era and the persecution they faced from local governments.
The Kents, a 12-issue miniseries of comics written by John Ostrander, explores the history of Superman's adoptive family set against the conflicts of the Bleeding Kansas era.
See also[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bleeding Kansas.
Constitutions of Kansas
Origins of the American Civil War
Notes[edit]
^ The Tribune's first reference to "Kansas, bleeding", came on June 16, 1856, in a report on the North American National Convention. There, a Colonel Perry of Kansas reported that "Kansas, bleeding at every pore, would cast more votes indirectly for [the presidential candidate the convention settled upon] ... than any other State in the Union."[7][6]The Tribune's first mention of "bleeding Kansas" was in a poem by Charles S. Weyman, published in the newspaper on September 13, 1856:
Far in the West rolls the thunder  
The tumult of battle is raging
Where bleeding Kansas is waging
War against Slavery!
 "Fremont and Victory: The Prize Song By Charles S. Weyman". New York Daily Tribune. September 13, 1856.[6]
References[edit]
^ a b c "Watts, Dale. "How Bloody Was Bleeding Kansas? Political Killings in Kansas territory, 1854 1861", Kansas History (1995) 18#2 pp. 116 29" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2009.
^ "Bleeding Kansas". Kansapedia. Kansas Historical Society. 2016. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021.
^ Finkelman, Paul (Spring 2011). "A Look Back at John Brown". Prologue Magazine. Vol. 43, no. 1. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2021.
^ "Bleeding Kansas". American Battlefield Trust. February 14, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2022.
^ "Bleeding Kansas (article)". Khan Academy. Retrieved December 5, 2022.
^ a b c Denial, Catherine. "Bleeding Kansas". teachinghistory.org. National History Education Clearinghouse. Archived from the original on November 9, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
^ "Public Meetings. North American National Convention. Third Day". New York Daily Tribune. June 16, 1856.
^ a b Etcheson, Nicole. "Bleeding Kansas: From the Kansas Nebraska Act to Harpers Ferry". Civil War on the Western Border: The Missouri Kansas Conflict, 1854 1865. The Kansas City Public Library. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2018.
^ a b c Rawley, James A. (1969). Race & Politics: "Bleeding Kansas" and the Coming of the Civil War. J. B. Lippincott Company.
^ a b "Territorial Politics and Government". Territorial Kansas Online. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
^ Cutler, William G. History of the State of Kansas, A.T. Andreas, (1883), "Territorial History, Part 8".
^  https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/public/gdcmassbookdig/kansasaffairsspe00wald/kansasaffairsspe00wald_djvu.txt. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Beecher Bibles - Kansapedia - Kansas Historical Society". Archived from the original on February 10, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2019.
^ William Frank Zornow, "Kansas: a history of the Jayhawk State" (1957), p. 72
^ a b c d e f g h Olson, Kevin (2012). Frontier Manhattan. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1832-3.
^ Richardson, James D. "A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents". Project Gutenberg. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved March 18, 2008.
^ Thomas Goodrich, War to the Knife: Bleeding Kansas, 1854 1861. (2004). Ch. 1 iii.
^ Elizabeth R. Varon, Disunion! The Coming of the American Civil War, 1789 1859. (2007). Ch. 8.
^ a b Report of the special committee appointed to investigate the troubles in Kansas, Cornelius Wendell, 1856, archived from the original on August 11, 2011, retrieved June 18, 2014
^ Cutler, William G. History of the State of Kansas, A.T. Andreas, (1883), "Territorial History".
^ Cutler, William G. "Territorial History, Part 55".
^ Cutler, William G. "Territorial History, Part 53".
^ "Wyandotte Constitution Approved". Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2014.
^ "First Sack of Lawrence | Civil War on the Western Border: The Missouri-Kansas Conflict, 1854-1865". Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019.
^ a b Kansas Historical Society (February 2017). "Old Kickapoo Cannon". Kansapedia   Kansas Historical Society. Archived from the original on May 15, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018.
^ Lull, Robert W. (2013). Civil War General and Indian Fighter James M. Williams: Leader of the 1st Kansas Colored Volunteer Infantry and the 8th U.S. Cavalry. University of North Texas Press. ISBN 978-1574415025. Archived from the original on January 2, 2020. Retrieved June 2, 2018   via Google Books.
^ "Kickapoo Cannon". Blackmar's Cyclopedia of Kansas History. 1912. p. 69. Archived from the original on May 15, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018   via Kansas State History.
^ "The Caning of Senator Charles Sumner (May 22, 1856)". United States Senate. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2019.
^ Pfau, Michael William (2003). "Time, Tropes, and Textuality: Reading Republicanism in Charles Sumner's 'Crime Against Kansas'". Rhetoric & Public Affairs. 6 (3): 393. doi:10.1353/rap.2003.0070. S2CID 144786197. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019.
^ Williamjames Hull Hoffer, The Caning of Charles Sumner: Honor, Idealism, and the Origins of the Civil War (2010)
^ "3 Jun 1856, Page 2 - the Charlotte Democrat at Newspapers.com". Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2019.
^ Schraff, Anne E. (2010). John Brown: "We Came to Free the Slaves". Enslow. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-7660-3355-9. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016.
^ Thomas K. Tate (2013). General Edwin Vose Sumner, USA: A Civil War Biography. McFarland. p. 53. ISBN 978-0786472581. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved December 11, 2015.
^ A New Page in the History of the Territory The Trouble on the Cherokee Neutral Lands The Settlers Driven of by U.S. Dragoons Seventy-four Houses Burnt Discrimination in Favor of Pro-Slavery Men Archived 2023-02-03 at nytimes.com (Error: unknown archive URL), nytimes.com/
^ Freedom's Frontier National Heritage Area Management Plan Appendices Archived 2014-11-29 at the Wayback Machine, Freedomsfrontier.org/
^ Garth Franklin (August 3, 2019). "Diggs, Russell Join Hawke's "Good Lord Bird"". darkhorizons.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2019.
^ Bad Blood, the Border War that Triggered the Civil War. Kansas City Public Television and Wide Awake Films. 2007. ISBN 978-0-9777261-4-1. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2022.
^ "Hell on Wheels Season 4 Episode 11 Review: Bleeding Kansas". November 8, 2014. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2014.
Further reading[edit]
Web site[edit]
Territorial Kansas Online 1854 1861. A virtual repository for Territorial Kansas History, University of Kansas and Kansas State Historical Society, 2018
Primary sources[edit]
Brown, Salmon (June 1935). "John Brown and Sons in Kansas Territory". Indiana Magazine of History. Vol. 31, no. 2. pp. 142 150. JSTOR 27786731.
Sanborn, F. B. (February 1908). "The Early History of Kansas, 1854 1861". Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society. 3rd. 1 [Vol. 41 of continuous numbering]: 331 359. JSTOR 25079946.
Sanborn, F. B. (August 15, 1905). "The Story of John Brown's Sacrifice". Alexander's Magazine. pp. 29 36.
Winkley, J. W., M.D. (1905). John Brown the Hero. Personal Reminiscences. Boston: James H. West Company   via Project Gutenburg.
At least 24 pamphlets were published in 1858 dealing with Kansas issues. A listing is in the papers of John Brown biographer Oswald Garrison Villard, here.
U. S. House of Representatives, 34th Congress, 1st Session (1856), Report of the Special Committee appointed to investigate the troubles in Kansas ; with the views of the minority of said Committee, Washington, D.C., archived from the original on August 11, 2011, retrieved June 18, 2014{{citation}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Sumner, Charles (1856). The crime against Kansas. The apologies for the crime. The true remedy. Speech of Hon. Charles Sumner, in the Senate of the United States, 19th and 20th May, 1856. Boston: John J. Jewitt.
Napton, Wm. B.; Price, Sterling; Oliver, M.; Woodson, S. H. (1855). "Address to the people of the United States [on slavery in Kansas]". Address to the people of the United States, together with the proceedings and resolutions of the Pro-slavery Convention of Missouri, held at Lexington, July, 1855. St. Louis, Missouri. pp. 3 15.
Scholarship[edit]
Childers, Christopher. "Interpreting Popular Sovereignty: A Historiographical Essay", Civil War History Volume 57, Number 1, March 2011 pp. 48 70 in Project MUSE
Earle, Jonathan and Burke, Diane Mutti. Bleeding Kansas, Bleeding Missouri: The Long Civil War on the Border. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2013.
Epps, Kristen. Slavery on the Periphery: The Kansas-Missouri Border in the Antebellum and Civil War Eras. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2016.
Etcheson, Nicole. "The Great Principle of Self-Government: Popular Sovereignty and Bleeding Kansas", Kansas History 27 (Spring-Summer 2004):14 29, links it to Jacksonian Democracy
Etcheson, Nicole. Bleeding Kansas: Contested Liberty in the Civil War Era (2006)
Goodrich, Thomas. War to the Knife: Bleeding Kansas, 1854 1861 (2004)
Johannsen, Robert W. "Popular Sovereignty and the Territories", Historian 22#4 pp. 378 395, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.1960.tb01665.x
Malin, James C. John Brown and the Legend of Fifty-six. (1942)
Miner, Craig (2002). Kansas: The History of the Sunflower State, 1854 2000.
Nevins, Allan. Ordeal of the Union: vol. 2 A House Dividing, 1852 1857 (1947), Kansas in national context
Nichols, Roy F. "The Kansas Nebraska Act: A Century of Historiography", Mississippi Valley Historical Review (1956) 43#2 pp. 187 212 in JSTOR
Potter, David M. The Impending Crisis, 1848 1861 (1976), Pulitzer Prize; ch. 9, 12
Reynolds, David S. John Brown, Abolitionist: The Man Who Killed Slavery, Sparked the Civil War, and Seeded Civil Rights (2005)
SenGupta, Gunja (March 1993). "'A Model New England State': Northeastern Antislavery in Territorial Kansas, 1854 1860". Civil War History. 39 (1): 31 46. doi:10.1353/cwh.1993.0057.
External links[edit]
Documentary On Bleeding Kansas
Kansas State Historical Society: A Look Back at Kansas Territory, 1854 1861
Access documents, photographs, and other primary sources on Kansas Memory, the Kansas State Historical Society's digital portal
NEEAC. History of the New-England Emigrant Aid Company. Boston: John Wilson & Son, 1862.
PBS article on Bleeding Kansas.
Territorial Kansas Online: A Virtual Repository for Kansas Territorial History.
U-S-History.com.
Online Exhibit   Willing to Die for Freedom, Kansas Historical Society
Map of North America during Bleeding Kansas at omniatlas.com
vteArmed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forceslisted chronologicallyDomestic
Shays' Rebellion
Whiskey Rebellion
Fries's Rebellion
Turner's Rebellion
Mormon War
Dorr Rebellion
Bleeding Kansas
Utah War
Harpers Ferry raid
American Civil War
American Indian Wars
Brooks Baxter War
Range War
Hamburg riot
Lincoln County War
Johnson County War
Coal Creek War
Homestead strike
Pullman Strike
Colorado Coalfield War
Red Summer
Battle of Blair Mountain
Tulsa riot
Bonus Army
Puerto Rican revolts
1960s ghetto rebellions
Kent State shootings
1992 Los Angeles riots
2020 racial unrest
2021 U.S. Capitol attack
Foreign
American Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
First Sumatran expedition
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast expedition
Mexican American War
First Fiji expedition
Second Opium War
Second Fiji expedition
Formosa Expedition
Korean Expedition
Spanish American War
Philippine American War
Boxer Rebellion
Banana Wars
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Bay of Pigs Invasion
Vietnam War
Invasion of the Dominican Republic
Invasion of Grenada
Lebanese Civil War
Tanker War
1986 bombing of Libya
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
1993 missile strikes on Iraq
Somali Civil War
Invasion of Haiti
1996 missile strikes on Iraq
1998 bombing of Iraq
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
First Libyan Civil War
War against the Islamic State
Iraq
Syria
Cameroon
Libya
Yemeni civil war
Related
List of conflicts in the U.S.
List of wars involving the U.S.
Timeline of U.S. military operations
Length of U.S. participation in major wars
Overseas expansion
Military history
History of the Central Intelligence Agency
Casualties of war
Peace movement
List of anti-war organizations
Conscientious objector
Cold War
War on terror
vteJohn Brown's raid on Harpers FerryJohn Brown's raiders
Osborne Perry Anderson
John Brown
body
Oliver Brown
Owen Brown (son)
Watson Brown
John Anthony Copeland Jr.
Barclay Coppock
Edwin Coppock
Shields Green
John Henry Kagi
Lewis Sheridan Leary
Francis Jackson Meriam
Dangerfield Newby
Aaron Dwight Stevens
Secret Six
Thomas Wentworth Higginson
Samuel Gridley Howe
Theodore Parker
Franklin Benjamin Sanborn
Gerrit Smith
George Luther Stearns
Other individuals
John Wilkes Booth
Mary Ann Day Brown (wife)
Owen Brown (father)
John Brown, Jr.
James Buchanan
Samuel Chilton
John E.P. Daingerfield
Israel Greene
George Henry Hoyt
Andrew Hunter
Stonewall Jackson
Robert E. Lee
James M. Mason
Richard Parker
Wendell Phillips
Richard Realf
James Redpath
Heyward Shepherd
Lysander Spooner
George H. Steuart
J. E. B. Stuart
Lewis Washington
Walt Whitman
Henry A. Wise
Locations
Allstadt House and Ordinary
B & O Railroad Potomac River Crossing
Beall-Air
Charles Town, West Virginia
Gibson-Todd House
Harpers Ferry Armory
Harpers Ferry, West Virginia
Historic District
John Brown's Fort
Kennedy Farm
Sandy Hook, Maryland
Winchester, Virginia
Afterwards
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Burning of Winchester Medical College
Harpers Ferry National Historical Park
Heyward Shepherd monument
John Brown (biography)
John Brown Farm State Historic Site
John Brown Farm, Tannery & Museum
John Brown House (Akron, Ohio)
John Brown Museum (Osawatomie, Kansas)
John Brown's body
John Brown's Body (poem)
John Brown's Body (song)
John Brown's last speech
John Brown's Provisional Constitution
The Last Days of John Brown
The Last Moments of John Brown
A Plea for Captain John Brown
Remarks After the Hanging of John Brown
Tragic Prelude
Virginia v. John Brown
Related
Abolitionism in the United States
La Amistad
Battle of Black Jack
Battle of the Spurs
James Madison Bell
Bleeding Kansas
Cloudsplitter
John Stuart Curry
George DeBaptiste
Frederick Douglass
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Fire on the Mountain
Wm. Lloyd Garrison
The Good Lord Bird (book, miniseries)
Haitian Revolution
Victor Hugo
Elijah P. Lovejoy
Marching Song (play)
James Montgomery
Origins of the American Civil War
Battle of Osawatomie
Quindaro Townsite
Allan Pinkerton
Pottawatomie massacre
Santa Fe Trail (film)
Seven Angry Men
Storer College
Henry David Thoreau
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Denmark Vesey
Wakarusa War
Walt Whitman
Winchester and Potomac Railroad
vteKansas in the American Civil WarPre-War
Kansas Nebraska Act
Bleeding Kansas
Capitals of Kansas
Constitutions of Kansas
Wakarusa War
Sacking of Lawrence
Pottawatomie massacre
Battle of Black Jack
Battle of the Spurs
First and Second Battles of Franklin
Battle of Fort Titus
Battle of Osawatomie
Marais des Cygnes massacre
Combatants
Union
No Confederacy units
September 1861
Sacking of Osceola
August 1863
Lawrence Massacre
Skirmish near Brooklyn
General Order No. 11
October 1863
Baxter Springs massacre
October 1864
Battle of Marais des Cygnes
Battle of Mine Creek
 Category
vteMissouri in the American Civil WarOrigins
Liberty Arsenal
Capture of Camp Jackson
Harney Price Convention
Combatants
Confederacy
Union
Campaigns
Shelby's Raid
Price's Missouri Expedition
Battles1861
Boonville
Cole Camp
Carthage
Battle of Dug Springs
Athens
Wilson's Creek
Dry Wood Creek
1st Lexington
Blue Mills Landing
Fredericktown
1st Springfield
Belmont
Blackwater Creek
Mount Zion Church
1862
Roan's Tan Yard
New Madrid
Moore's Mill
Kirksville
1st Independence
Lone Jack
1st Newtonia
Island Mound
Clark's Mill
1863
2nd Springfield
Hartville
Cape Girardeau
Chalk Bluff
1864
Fort Davidson
Sedalia
Glasgow
2nd Lexington
Little Blue
2nd Independence
Big Blue
Westport
Marmiton River
2nd Newtonia
Involvement(by city or town)
Centralia
Osceola
St. Louis
LeadersConfederate
John S. Marmaduke
Sterling Price
Joseph O. Shelby
Union
Samuel R. Curtis
Thomas Ewing Jr.
Nathaniel Lyon
AftermathMonuments andmemorials
Athens
Carthage
Fort Davidson
Island Mound
Lexington
Newtonia
First Newtonia
Second Newtonia
Wilson's Creek
Cemeteries
Confederate Home
Related topics
General Order 11
Bleeding Kansas
 Category
 Commons
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
vteFranklin Pierce
14th President of the United States (1853 1857)
Senator from New Hampshire (1837 1842)
U.S. Representative for NH at-large (1833 1837)
Life
Doughface
9th Infantry Regiment
Battle of Contreras
Battle of Churubusco
1852 United States presidential election 
1852 Democratic National Convention
Old North Cemetery
Presidency
Inauguration of Franklin Pierce
List of federal judges appointed by Franklin Pierce
Young America movement
Gadsden Purchase
Ostend Manifesto
Kansas Nebraska Act
Bleeding Kansas
Topeka Constitution
1856 Democratic National Convention
Public image
Franklin Pierce Homestead
Franklin Pierce House
Pierce Manse
Franklin Pierce University
Mount Pierce
Pierceton, Indiana
Pierce County, Washington
Pierce County, Georgia
Family
Jane Pierce (wife)
Benjamin Pierce (father)
Benjamin Kendrick Pierce (brother)
  Millard Fillmore
James Buchanan  
 Category
vteJames Buchanan
15th President of the United States (1857 1861)
17th United States Secretary of State (1845 1849)
Senator from Pennsylvania (1834 1845)
U.S. Representative for PA 4 (1823 1831)
U.S. Representative for PA 3 (1821 1823)
Life
Electoral history of James Buchanan
1844 Democratic National Convention
Oregon Treaty
1848 Democratic National Convention
Wheatland
Doughface
1852 Democratic National Convention
Ostend Manifesto
1856 United States presidential election
1856 Democratic National Convention
Woodward Hill Cemetery
Presidency
Inauguration of James Buchanan
Dred Scott v. Sandford
List of federal judges appointed by James Buchanan
Panic of 1857
Utah War
Bleeding Kansas
Lecompton Constitution
1858 United States elections
Paraguay expedition
United States House Select Committee to Investigate Alleged Corruptions in Government
Corwin Amendment
Public image
James Buchanan Memorial
Buchanan's Birthplace State Park
Buchanan, Michigan
Buchanan, Indiana
Buchanan, Georgia
Buchanan, Missouri
James Buchanan High School
Raising Buchanan
Family
Harriet Lane (niece)
James Buchanan Henry (nephew)
  Franklin Pierce
Abraham Lincoln  
 Category
vteHistory of the United StatesTimeline
Geological history
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
Reagan Era
1991 2008
2008 present
Topics
Abortion
Agriculture
American Century
African Americans
Capital punishment
Cities
Corruption
The Constitution
Demography
Economy
Banking
Education
Higher education
Flag
Foreign policy
Diplomacy
Immigration
Labor
Law enforcement
LGBT
Lumber
Medicine
Merchant Marine
Military
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
Music
Native Americans
Postal service
Railway
Religion
Slavery
Sexual slavery
Sports
Taxation
Technology and industry
Territorial evolution
Historic regions
American frontier
Manifest destiny
Indian removal
Voting rights
Women
By region
New England
The South
The West
The West Coast
 Category
 Portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bleeding_Kansas&oldid=1149493554"