Pneumatic vehicle tire
 Cutaway model of MOWAG Piranha tire
A run-flat tire is a pneumatic vehicle tire designed to resist the effects of deflation when punctured, allowing the vehicle to continue to be driven at reduced speeds for limited distances. First developed by tire manufacturer Michelin in the 1930s, run-flat tires were introduced to the public market in the 1980s. They have increased in popularity over time.
Technologies[edit]
There are three basic technologies currently available, described below.
Self-supporting[edit]
The origins of the commercial self-supporting run-flat tire started in 1935 with a tire that had a fabric inner tire. The tire was advertised as a protection against blowouts, a common and dangerous occurrence in the 1930s.[1]
In 1934, Michelin introduced a tire that was based on technology developed for local commuter trains and trolleys. It had a safety rim inside the tire which if punctured would run on a special foam lining. The tire was sold for military use and for specialized vehicles like bank armoured cars.  It was advertised as "semi-bulletproof". While the tire performed as advertised it was far too expensive to be a feasible option for most private automobile users.[2]
In 1958, Chrysler teamed with Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company to offer Captive Air run-flat tires using an interlining to carry the weight.
In 1972 Dunlop launched the Total Mobility Tyre (later Denovo) "fail-safe" wheel and tire system that became optional equipment on the Rover P6 3500 in 1973,[3] and by 1983 evolved into the TD/Denloc which became standard equipment across the whole Austin Metro range.
Most recently, Bridgestone and Pirelli run-flat tires are supplied on some new model BMW cars. The automaker promoted these as a safety feature and as an alternative to carrying a spare tire.
 Cut-Out View of PZT Tire
Pressure Zero Tire (PZT)[4] was pioneered by American Engineering Group (AEG) for US Special Forces. AEG prototype dissipates heat and has the tire flexibility and strength to support the heavy military pick-up weight while providing a relatively smooth ride. The durability characteristics of this design were studied further on four different tire sizes for ATV Polaris, Toyota Hilux, and Toyota Land Cruiser & GMV 1.1. special operations vehicles.
Self-supporting run-flat tires are now common on light trucks and passenger cars and typically allows the vehicle to be driven for 50 miles (80 km) at around 50 miles per hour (80 km/h).  However, if the tires are subject to this kind of misuse, wheels may become damaged in the process, and repair may be impossible or unsafe, especially if the tire is punctured in the sidewall or at the edge of the tread. These tires carry a 20% to 40% weight penalty over similar standard tires and the thicker sidewall also means higher rolling resistance, which reduces the vehicle's fuel economy.[5] However, the weight penalty of the individual tire is usually more than compensated by the fact that the vehicle need no longer carry a spare, as well as the equipment needed to swap in the spare.  The thicker sidewall however results in more road imperfections filtering through the tire to the rim and hence to the car, which results in a harsher ride.[6]
Self-sealing[edit]
See also: Self-sealing fuel tank
These tires contain an extra lining within the tire that self-seals in the event of a small hole due to a nail or screw. In this way, the loss of air is prevented from the outset such that the tire is either permanently self-repairing or at least loses air very slowly.
There are also a number of retrofitted tire sealants which act in a similar way to self-sealing tires. These compounds are normally injected through the tire valve. The rotating force then distributes the compound onto the inner surface of the tire to act as a self-sealing lining within the tire.
Auxiliary-supported[edit]
 Run-flat tire with support ring
In this system, there is an additional support ring or insert attached to the wheel that can support the weight of the vehicle in the event of a loss of pressure.  The run-flat insert has an unsurpassed ability to carry heavy vehicle loads for long distances at high speeds. It is therefore the normal run-flat selection for military vehicles, high-level executive protection vehicles, and armored vehicles[7] used by government, aid groups, or private contractors in conflict zones.
Standards of performance[edit]
The basic benefit of using run-flat tires is continued mobility in case of a loss of air pressure, due either to a 'normal' puncture or to a hostile deliberate act including a bullet strike while the vehicle is traveling at high speed. Performance criteria are therefore in terms of distance and speed at which the vehicle can escape without becoming immobile and the steering control over the vehicle during this process.
The usual standard of performance, especially for military or security vehicles, are the Finabel standards.[7]
Market share[edit]
Run-flat tires accounted for less than 1% of replacement tire sales in the U.S. in 2005. In 2006, it was expected that such tires would gain popularity with armored vehicle manufacturers, but growth figures were slow with one major model, the Michelin PAX System, no longer being developed by the manufacturer (though replacements will be produced for the foreseeable future).[8] A Michelin study released in 2008 found that 3% of drivers worldwide want run-flat tires. U.S. market share is well below 1%. American Honda Motor Co. announced that the 2009 Honda Odyssey Touring and Acura RL were its last models available with run-flat tires and with Honda no longer using run-flats.  This leaves only a handful of volume manufacturers offering them as standard fittings and only on some models. An exception is BMW, who are the largest fitter of run-flats as original equipment.[5]
Former US President Barack Obama's presidential limo, "the Beast", had Goodyear Kevlar lined run-flat tires.[9]
Factors contributing to small market share[edit]
The cost can be more than double other tires of comparable size. Also, run-flat tires cannot be run flat if the flat is due to sidewall damage, a common cause of flats. Generally, under ideal circumstances, the speed and range of run-flat tires is limited. Run-flat tires cannot be driven over 50 miles per hour most of the time, and usually offer only up to 50 miles of extended mobility. These limitations lower the value of the extra expense for many buyers. In certain applications, depending on the vehicle, specific tire design, and driving surface, a run-flat tire can provide from 25 miles to 200 miles driving while flat with limited speed.
For Goodyear Tire, one effect on market share is the policy to prohibit the repair of tires punctured by nails or other road hazards; while Goodyear tires can be repaired, the manufacturer's warranty and liability is voided.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Airless tire
Direct TPMS
Tire manufacturing
Tire mousse
Tire-pressure monitoring system
Tweel - Michelin's air-free tire
References[edit]
^ "Fabric Inner Tube Lessens Blowout Hazards". Popular Mechanics. 63 (4): 488. April 1935. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
^ "Bullet Proof Tire Has Sponge Rubber Tube". Popular Mechanics. 62 (6): 872. December 1934. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
^ "Evening Times - Google News Archive Search". news.google.com. Archived from the original on 2021-04-18. Retrieved 2020-12-16.
^ Pressure Zero Tire: American Engineering Group wins award for its zero pressure tire http://www.tractionnews.com/american-engineering-group-wins-award-zero-pressure-tire-technology/ Archived 2019-04-30 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Kranz, Rick (27 July 2009). "The air runs out of run-flat tires". The Center for Auto Safety. Archived from the original on 15 September 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
^ McIntosh, Jil (24 October 2017). "Run-Flats vs Self-Sealing Tires". Autotrader Canada. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2019.
^ a b Test Operations Procedure (TOP) 02-2-698 Runflat Testing Archived 2021-04-18 at the Wayback Machine.-U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command. - 2015.
^ Jensen, Christopher (20 April 2008). "Michelin Giving Up on PAX Run-Flat Tire". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2010.
^ "The Beast: President Barack Obama's High-Tech Super-Limo". thecarconnection.com. Archived from the original on 2016-04-05. Retrieved 2016-04-18.
vteTiresTypes
Tubeless tire
Radial tire
Low rolling resistance tire
Run-flat tire
Michelin PAX System
Airless tire
Tweel
Rain tyre
Snow tire
All-terrain tire
Bar grip
Knobby tire
Large tire
Mud-terrain tire
Paddle tire
Orange oil tires
Whitewall tire
Aircraft tire
Tundra tire
Bicycle tire
Tubular tire
Lego tire
Motorcycle tyre
Tractor tire
Racing slick
Formula One tyres
Spare tire
Continental tire
Components
Bead
Beadlock
Tread
Siping (rubber)
Valve stem
Dunlop valve
Presta valve
Schrader valve
Attributes
Camber thrust
Circle of forces
Cold inflation pressure
Contact patch
Cornering force
Ground pressure
Pacejka's Magic Formula
Pneumatic trail
Relaxation length
Rolling resistance
Self aligning torque
Slip angle
Steering ratio
Tire balance
Tire load sensitivity
Tire uniformity
Lateral Force Variation
Radial Force Variation
Traction (engineering)
Treadwear rating
Behaviors
Aquaplaning
Groove wander
Slip (vehicle dynamics)
Tramlining
Maintenance
Tire maintenance
Tire rotation
Bicycle pump
Central Tire Inflation System
Tire mousse
Tire-pressure monitoring system
Tire-pressure gauge
Direct TPMS
Bead breaker
Tire changer
Tire iron
Life cycle
Tire manufacturing
List of tire companies
Retread
Waste tires
Tire recycling
Tire fire
Blowout
Flat tire
Ozone cracking
Organizations
European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
Tire Society
Tire Science and Technology
Identification
Tire code
Plus sizing
Tire label
Uniform Tire Quality Grading (UTQG)
 Outline of tires
 Category
vtePowertrainPart of the Automobile seriesAutomotive engine
Diesel engine
Electric
Fuel cell
Hybrid (Plug-in hybrid)
Internal combustion engine
Petrol engine
Steam engine
Transmission
Automatic transmission
Chain drive
Direct-drive
Clutch
Constant-velocity joint
Continuously variable transmission
Coupling
Differential
Direct-shift gearbox
Drive shaft
Dual-clutch transmission
Drive wheel
Automated manual transmission
Electrorheological clutch
Epicyclic gearing
Fluid coupling
Friction drive
Gearshift
Giubo
Hotchkiss drive
Limited-slip differential
Locking differential
Manual transmission
Manumatic
Parking pawl
Park-by-wire
Preselector gearbox
Semi-automatic transmission
Shift-by-wire
Torque converter
Transaxle
Transmission control unit
Universal joint
Wheels and tires
Wheel hub assembly
Wheel
Rim
Alloy wheel
Hubcap
Tire
Off-road
Racing slick
Radial
Rain
Run-flat
Snow
Spare
Tubeless
Hybrid
Electric motor
Hybrid vehicle drivetrain
Electric generator
Alternator
 Portal
 Category
vteAutomotive designPart of a series of articles on carsBodyFramework
Backbone chassis
Beltline
Body-on-frame
Bumper
Dagmar
Cabrio coach
Chassis
Continental tire
Crumple zone
Fender
ponton
skirts
Grille
Hood
scoop
shaker
Monocoque
Overhang
Pillar
Platform
Quarter panel
Roof
rack
Spoiler
Stressed member engine
Subframe
Tonneau
Trunk lid
Compartments
Hood/bonnet
Trunk/boot/dickie
Doors
Butterfly
Canopy
Gull-wing
Scissor
Sliding
Suicide
Swan
Glass
Glass run channel
Greenhouse
Opera window
Power window
Quarter glass
Sunroof
Windshield/windscreen
washer fluid
wiper
Other elements
List of auto parts
Bumper sticker
Curb feeler
Front-end bra
Hood ornament
Instruments
Japan black
Nerf bar
Omniview technology
Run-flat tire
Tire/tyre
spare
Geometry
Approach and departure angles
Breakover angle
Overhang
Ride height
Roll center
Turning radius
Weight distribution
ExteriorequipmentLighting
Daytime running lamp
Headlamp
hidden
high-intensity discharge
sealed beam
trafficators
Automotive light bulb types
Other elements
Horn
Tow hitch
Window deflector
Wing mirror
power side-view mirror
Legal
Registration plate
vanity plate
Theft
Vehicle identification number (VIN)
 Category
 Commons
 Portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Run-flat_tire&oldid=1148090516"