Fictional character (consulting detective) created by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
For other uses, see Sherlock Holmes (disambiguation).
Fictional character
Sherlock HolmesSherlock Holmes characterSherlock Holmes in a 1904 illustration by Sidney PagetFirst appearanceA Study in Scarlet (1887)Last appearance"The Adventure of Shoscombe Old Place" (1927, canon)Created bySir Arthur Conan DoyleIn-universe informationOccupationConsulting private detectiveFamilyMycroft Holmes (brother)NationalityBritishBorn1854
Sherlock Holmes (/ rl k  ho mz/) is a fictional detective created by British author Arthur Conan Doyle. Referring to himself as a "consulting detective" in the stories, Holmes is known for his proficiency with observation, deduction, forensic science and logical reasoning that borders on the fantastic, which he employs when investigating cases for a wide variety of clients, including Scotland Yard.
First appearing in print in 1887's A Study in Scarlet, the character's popularity became widespread with the first series of short stories in The Strand Magazine, beginning with "A Scandal in Bohemia" in 1891; additional tales appeared from then until 1927, eventually totalling four novels and 56 short stories. All but one[a] are set in the Victorian or Edwardian eras, between about 1880 and 1914. Most are narrated by the character of Holmes's friend and biographer Dr. John H. Watson, who usually accompanies Holmes during his investigations and often shares quarters with him at the address of 221B Baker Street, London, where many of the stories begin.
Though not the first fictional detective, Sherlock Holmes is arguably the best known.[1] By the 1990s, there were already over 25,000 stage adaptations, films, television productions and publications featuring the detective,[2] and Guinness World Records lists him as the most portrayed human literary character in film and television history.[3] Holmes's popularity and fame are such that many have believed him to be not a fictional character but a real individual;[4][5][6] numerous literary and fan societies have been founded on this pretence. Avid readers of the Holmes stories helped create the modern practice of fandom.[7] The character and stories have had a profound and lasting effect on mystery writing and popular culture as a whole, with the original tales as well as thousands written by authors other than Conan Doyle being adapted into stage and radio plays, television, films, video games, and other media for over one hundred years.
Inspiration for the character
 Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (1859 1930), Sherlock Holmes's creator, in 1914
Edgar Allan Poe's C. Auguste Dupin is generally acknowledged as the first detective in fiction and served as the prototype for many later characters, including Holmes.[8] Conan Doyle once wrote, "Each [of Poe's detective stories] is a root from which a whole literature has developed ... Where was the detective story until Poe breathed the breath of life into it?"[9] Similarly, the stories of  mile Gaboriau's Monsieur Lecoq were extremely popular at the time Conan Doyle began writing Holmes, and Holmes's speech and behaviour sometimes follow those of Lecoq.[10][11] Doyle has his main characters discuss these literary antecedents near the beginning of A Study in Scarlet, which is set soon after Watson is first introduced to Holmes. Watson attempts to compliment Holmes by comparing him to Dupin, to which Holmes replies that he found Dupin to be "a very inferior fellow" and Lecoq to be "a miserable bungler".[12]
Conan Doyle repeatedly said that Holmes was inspired by the real-life figure of Joseph Bell, a surgeon at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, whom Conan Doyle met in 1877 and had worked for as a clerk. Like Holmes, Bell was noted for drawing broad conclusions from minute observations.[13] However, he later wrote to Conan Doyle: "You are yourself Sherlock Holmes and well you know it".[14] Sir Henry Littlejohn, Chair of Medical Jurisprudence at the University of Edinburgh Medical School, is also cited as an inspiration for Holmes. Littlejohn, who was also Police Surgeon and Medical Officer of Health in Edinburgh, provided Conan Doyle with a link between medical investigation and the detection of crime.[15]
Other possible inspirations have been proposed, though never acknowledged by Doyle, such as Maximilien Heller, by French author Henry Cauvain. In this 1871 novel (sixteen years before the first appearance of Sherlock Holmes), Henry Cauvain imagined a depressed, anti-social, opium-smoking polymath detective, operating in Paris.[16][17][18] It is not known if Conan Doyle read the novel, but he was fluent in French.[19] Similarly, Michael Harrison suggested that a German self-styled "consulting detective" named Walter Scherer may have been the model for Holmes.[20]
Fictional character biography
Family and early life
 The cover page of the 1887 edition of Beeton's Christmas Annual, which contains Holmes's first appearance (A Study in Scarlet)
Details of Sherlock Holmes's life in Conan Doyle's stories are scarce and often vague. Nevertheless, mentions of his early life and extended family paint a loose biographical picture of the detective.
A statement of Holmes's age in "His Last Bow" places his year of birth at 1854; the story, set in August 1914, describes him as sixty years of age.[21] His parents are not mentioned, although Holmes mentions that his "ancestors" were "country squires". In "The Adventure of the Greek Interpreter", he claims that his grandmother was sister to the French artist Vernet, without clarifying whether this was Claude Joseph, Carle, or Horace Vernet. Holmes's brother Mycroft, seven years his senior, is a government official. Mycroft has a unique civil service position as a kind of human database for all aspects of government policy. Sherlock describes his brother as the more intelligent of the two, but notes that Mycroft lacks any interest in physical investigation, preferring to spend his time at the Diogenes Club.[22][23]
Holmes says that he first developed his methods of deduction as an undergraduate; his earliest cases, which he pursued as an amateur, came from fellow university students.[24] A meeting with a classmate's father led him to adopt detection as a profession.[25]
Life with Watson
 Holmes (right) and Watson in a Sidney Paget illustration for "The Adventure of Silver Blaze"
In the first Holmes tale, A Study in Scarlet, financial difficulties lead Holmes and Dr. Watson to share rooms together at 221B Baker Street, London.[26] Their residence is maintained by their landlady, Mrs. Hudson.[27] Holmes works as a detective for twenty-three years, with Watson assisting him for seventeen of those years.[28] Most of the stories are frame narratives written from Watson's point of view, as summaries of the detective's most interesting cases. Holmes frequently calls Watson's records of Holmes's cases sensational and populist, suggesting that they fail to accurately and objectively report the "science" of his craft:
Detection is, or ought to be, an exact science and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional manner. You have attempted to tinge it [A Study in Scarlet] with romanticism, which produces much the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an elopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid. ... Some facts should be suppressed, or, at least, a just sense of proportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in the case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning from effects to causes, by which I succeeded in unravelling it.[29]
Nevertheless, when Holmes recorded a case himself, he was forced to concede that he could more easily understand the need to write it in a manner that would appeal to the public rather than his intention to focus on his own technical skill.[30]
Holmes's friendship with Watson is his most significant relationship. When Watson is injured by a bullet, although the wound turns out to be "quite superficial", Watson is moved by Holmes's reaction:
It was worth a wound; it was worth many wounds; to know the depth of loyalty and love which lay behind that cold mask. The clear, hard eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the firm lips were shaking. For the one and only time I caught a glimpse of a great heart as well as of a great brain. All my years of humble but single-minded service culminated in that moment of revelation.[31]
After confirming Watson's assessment of the wound, Holmes makes it clear to their opponent that the man would not have left the room alive if he genuinely had killed Watson.[31]
Practice
Holmes's clients vary from the most powerful monarchs and governments of Europe, to wealthy aristocrats and industrialists, to impoverished pawnbrokers and governesses. He is known only in select professional circles at the beginning of the first story, but is already collaborating with Scotland Yard. However, his continued work and the publication of Watson's stories raise Holmes's profile, and he rapidly becomes well known as a detective; so many clients ask for his help instead of (or in addition to) that of the police[32] that, Watson writes, by 1887 "Europe was ringing with his name"[33] and by 1895 Holmes has "an immense practice".[34] Police outside London ask Holmes for assistance if he is nearby.[35] A Prime Minister[36] and the King of Bohemia[37] visit 221B Baker Street in person to request Holmes's assistance; the President of France awards him the Legion of Honour for capturing an assassin;[38] the King of Scandinavia is a client;[39] and he aids the Vatican at least twice.[40] The detective acts on behalf of the British government in matters of national security several times,[41] and declines a knighthood "for services which may perhaps some day be described".[42] However, he does not actively seek fame and is usually content to let the police take public credit for his work.[43]
The Great Hiatus
 Holmes and archenemy Moriarty struggle at the Reichenbach Falls; drawing by Sidney Paget
The first set of Holmes stories was published between 1887 and 1893. Conan Doyle killed off Holmes in a final battle with the criminal mastermind Professor James Moriarty[44] in "The Final Problem" (published 1893, but set in 1891), as Conan Doyle felt that "my literary energies should not be directed too much into one channel."[45] However, the reaction of the public surprised Doyle very much. Distressed readers wrote anguished letters to The Strand Magazine, which suffered a terrible blow when 20,000 people cancelled their subscriptions to the magazine in protest.[46] Conan Doyle himself received many protest letters, and one lady even began her letter with "You brute".[46] Legend has it that Londoners were so distraught upon hearing the news of Holmes's death that they wore black armbands in mourning, though there is no known contemporary source for this; the earliest known reference to such events comes from 1949.[47] However, the recorded public reaction to Holmes's death was unlike anything previously seen for fictional events.[7]
After resisting public pressure for eight years, Conan Doyle wrote The Hound of the Baskervilles (serialised in 1901 02, with an implicit setting before Holmes's death). In 1903, Conan Doyle wrote "The Adventure of the Empty House"; set in 1894, Holmes reappears, explaining to a stunned Watson that he had faked his death to fool his enemies.[48] Following "The Adventure of the Empty House", Conan Doyle would sporadically write new Holmes stories until 1927.
Holmes aficionados refer to the period from 1891 to 1894 between his disappearance and presumed death in "The Final Problem" and his reappearance in "The Adventure of the Empty House" as the Great Hiatus.[49] The earliest known use of this expression dates to 1946.[50]
Retirement
In His Last Bow, the reader is told that Holmes has retired to a small farm on the Sussex Downs and taken up beekeeping as his primary occupation.[51] The move is not dated precisely, but can be presumed to be no later than 1904 (since it is referred to retrospectively in "The Adventure of the Second Stain", first published that year).[52] The story features Holmes and Watson coming out of retirement to aid the British war effort. Only one other adventure, "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane", takes place during the detective's retirement.[53]
Personality and habits
 Holmes examining a bicycle with Watson standing behind in "The Adventure of the Priory School" from 1904. Sidney Paget s illustrations in The Strand Magazine iconicised both characters.
Watson describes Holmes as "bohemian" in his habits and lifestyle.[54] Said to have a "cat-like" love of personal cleanliness,[55] at the same time Holmes is an eccentric with no regard for contemporary standards of tidiness or good order. Watson describes him as
in his personal habits one of the most untidy men that ever drove a fellow-lodger to distraction. [He] keeps his cigars in the coal-scuttle, his tobacco in the toe end of a Persian slipper, and his unanswered correspondence transfixed by a jack-knife into the very centre of his wooden mantelpiece. ... He had a horror of destroying documents.... Thus month after month his papers accumulated, until every corner of the room was stacked with bundles of manuscript which were on no account to be burned, and which could not be put away save by their owner.[56]
While Holmes can be dispassionate and cold, during an investigation he is animated and excitable. He has a flair for showmanship, often keeping his methods and evidence hidden until the last possible moment so as to impress observers.[57] His companion condones the detective's willingness to bend the truth (or break the law) on behalf of a client lying to the police, concealing evidence or breaking into houses when he feels it morally justifiable.[58]
Except for that of Watson, Holmes avoids casual company. In "The Gloria Scott", he tells the doctor that during two years at college he made only one friend: "I was never a very sociable fellow, Watson ... I never mixed much with the men of my year".[59] The detective goes without food at times of intense intellectual activity, believing that "the faculties become refined when you starve them."[60][61] At times Holmes relaxes with music, either playing the violin,[62] or enjoying the works of composers such as Wagner[63] and Pablo de Sarasate.[64]
Drug use
 1891 Paget portrait of Holmes smoking his pipe for "The Man with the Twisted Lip"
Holmes occasionally uses addictive drugs, especially in the absence of stimulating cases.[65] He sometimes used morphine and sometimes cocaine, the latter of which he injects in a seven-percent solution; both drugs were legal in 19th-century England.[66][67][68] As a physician, Watson strongly disapproves of his friend's cocaine habit, describing it as the detective's only vice, and concerned about its effect on Holmes's mental health and intellect.[69][70] In "The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter", Watson says that although he has "weaned" Holmes from drugs, the detective remains an addict whose habit is "not dead, but merely sleeping".[71]
Watson and Holmes both use tobacco, smoking cigarettes, cigars, and pipes. Although his chronicler does not consider Holmes's smoking a vice per se, Watson a physician does criticise the detective for creating a "poisonous atmosphere" in their confined quarters.[72][73]
Finances
Holmes is known to charge clients for his expenses and claim any reward offered for a problem's solution, such as in "The Adventure of the Speckled Band", "The Red-Headed League", and "The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet". The detective states at one point that "My professional charges are upon a fixed scale. I do not vary them, save when I remit them altogether". In this context, a client is offering to double his fee, and it is implied that wealthy clients habitually pay Holmes more than his standard rate.[74] In "The Adventure of the Priory School", Holmes earns a  6,000 fee[75] (at a time where annual expenses for a rising young professional were in the area of  500).[76] However, Watson notes that Holmes would refuse to help even the wealthy and powerful if their cases did not interest him.[77]
Attitudes towards women
As Conan Doyle wrote to Joseph Bell, "Holmes is as inhuman as a Babbage's Calculating Machine and just about as likely to fall in love".[78] Holmes says of himself that he is "not a whole-souled admirer of womankind",[79] and that he finds "the motives of women ... inscrutable. ... How can you build on such quicksand? Their most trivial actions may mean volumes..."[80] In The Sign of Four, he says, "Women are never to be entirely trusted not the best of them", a feeling Watson notes as an "atrocious sentiment".[81] In "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane", Holmes writes, "Women have seldom been an attraction to me, for my brain has always governed my heart".[82] At the end of The Sign of Four, Holmes states that "love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is opposed to that true, cold reason which I place above all things. I should never marry myself, lest I bias my judgement."[83] Ultimately, Holmes claims outright that "I have never loved".[84]
But while Watson says that the detective has an "aversion to women",[85] he also notes Holmes as having "a peculiarly ingratiating way with [them]".[86] Watson notes that their housekeeper Mrs. Hudson is fond of Holmes because of his "remarkable gentleness and courtesy in his dealings with women. He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he was always a chivalrous opponent".[87] However, in "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton", the detective becomes engaged under false pretenses in order to obtain information about a case, abandoning the woman once he has the information he requires.[88]
Irene Adler
Irene Adler is a retired American opera singer and actress who appears in "A Scandal in Bohemia". Although this is her only appearance, she is one of only a handful of people who best Holmes in a battle of wits, and the only woman. For this reason, Adler is the frequent subject of pastiche writing.[89] The beginning of the story describes the high regard in which Holmes holds her:
To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. ... And yet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable memory.[90]
Five years before the story's events, Adler had a brief liaison with Crown Prince of Bohemia Wilhelm von Ormstein. As the story opens, the Prince is engaged to another. Fearful that the marriage would be called off if his fianc e's family learns of this past impropriety, Ormstein hires Holmes to regain a photograph of Adler and himself. Adler slips away before Holmes can succeed. Her memory is kept alive by the photograph of Adler that Holmes received for his part in the case.[91]
Knowledge and skills
Shortly after meeting Holmes in the first story, A Study in Scarlet (generally assumed to be 1881, though the exact date is not given), Watson assesses the detective's abilities:
Knowledge of Literature  nil.
Knowledge of Philosophy  nil.
Knowledge of Astronomy  nil.
Knowledge of Politics  Feeble.
Knowledge of Botany  Variable. Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisons generally. Knows nothing of practical gardening.
Knowledge of Geology  Practical, but limited. Tells at a glance different soils from each other. After walks, has shown me splashes upon his trousers, and told me by their colour and consistence in what part of London he had received them.
Knowledge of Chemistry  Profound.
Knowledge of Anatomy  Accurate, but unsystematic.
Knowledge of Sensational Literature  Immense. He appears to know every detail of every horror perpetrated in the century.
Plays the violin well.
Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
Has a good practical knowledge of British law.[92]
In A Study in Scarlet, Holmes claims to be unaware that the earth revolves around the sun since such information is irrelevant to his work; after hearing that fact from Watson, he says he will immediately try to forget it. The detective believes that the mind has a finite capacity for information storage, and learning useless things reduces one's ability to learn useful things.[93] The later stories move away from this notion: in The Valley of Fear, he says, "All knowledge comes useful to the detective",[94] and in "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane", the detective calls himself "an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for trifles".[95] Looking back on the development of the character in 1912, Conan Doyle wrote that "In the first one, the Study in Scarlet, [Holmes] was a mere calculating machine, but I had to make him more of an educated human being as I went on with him."[96]
Despite Holmes's supposed ignorance of politics, in "A Scandal in Bohemia" he immediately recognises the true identity of the disguised "Count von Kramm".[37] At the end of A Study in Scarlet, Holmes demonstrates a knowledge of Latin.[97] The detective cites Hafez,[98] Goethe,[99] as well as a letter from Gustave Flaubert to George Sand in the original French.[100] In The Hound of the Baskervilles, the detective recognises works by Godfrey Kneller and Joshua Reynolds: "Watson won't allow that I know anything of art, but that is mere jealousy since our views upon the subject differ".[101] In "The Adventure of the Bruce-Partington Plans", Watson says that "Holmes lost himself in a monograph which he had undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus", considered "the last word" on the subject which must have been the result of an intensive and very specialized musicological study which could have had no possible application to the solution of criminal mysteries.[102][103]
Holmes is a cryptanalyst, telling Watson that "I am fairly familiar with all forms of secret writing, and am myself the author of a trifling monograph upon the subject, in which I analyse one hundred and sixty separate ciphers".[104] Holmes also demonstrates a knowledge of psychology in "A Scandal in Bohemia", luring Irene Adler into betraying where she hid a photograph based on the premise that a woman will rush to save her most valued possession from a fire.[105] Another example is in "The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle", where Holmes obtains information from a salesman with a wager: "When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un' protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet .... I daresay that if I had put 100 pounds down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager".[106]
Maria Konnikova points out in an interview with D. J. Grothe that Holmes practises what is now called mindfulness, concentrating on one thing at a time, and almost never "multitasks". She adds that in this he predates the science showing how helpful this is to the brain.[107]
Holmesian deduction
 Sidney Paget illustration of Holmes examining a corpse for "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange"
Holmes observes the dress and attitude of his clients and suspects, noting skin marks (such as tattoos), contamination (such as ink stains or clay on boots), emotional state, and physical condition in order to deduce their origins and recent history. The style and state of wear of a person's clothes and personal items are also commonly relied on; in the stories Holmes is seen applying his method to items such as walking sticks,[108] pipes,[109] and hats.[110] For example, in "A Scandal in Bohemia", Holmes infers that Watson had got wet lately and had "a most clumsy and careless servant girl". When Watson asks how Holmes knows this, the detective answers:
It is simplicity itself ... my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey.[111]
In the first Holmes story, A Study in Scarlet, Dr. Watson compares Holmes to C. Auguste Dupin, Edgar Allan Poe's fictional detective, who employed a similar methodology. Alluding to an episode in "The Murders in the Rue Morgue", where Dupin determines what his friend is thinking despite their having walked together in silence for a quarter of an hour, Holmes remarks: "That trick of his breaking in on his friend's thoughts with an apropos remark... is really very showy and superficial".[112] Nevertheless, Holmes later performs the same 'trick' on Watson in "The Cardboard Box"[113] and "The Adventure of the Dancing Men".[114]
Though the stories always refer to Holmes's intellectual detection method as "deduction", he primarily relies on abduction: inferring an explanation for observed details.[115][116][117] "From a drop of water", he writes, "a logician could infer the possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard of one or the other".[118] However, Holmes does employ deductive reasoning as well. The detective's guiding principle, as he says in The Sign of Four, is: "When you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth."[119]
Despite Holmes's remarkable reasoning abilities, Conan Doyle still paints him as fallible in this regard (this being a central theme of "The Yellow Face").[120]
Forensic science
 19th-century Seibert microscope
Though Holmes is famed for his reasoning capabilities, his investigative technique relies heavily on the acquisition of hard evidence. Many of the techniques he employs in the stories were at the time in their infancy.[121][122]
The detective is particularly skilled in the analysis of trace evidence and other physical evidence, including latent prints (such as footprints, hoof prints, and shoe and tire impressions) to identify actions at a crime scene;[123] using tobacco ashes and cigarette butts to identify criminals;[124] handwriting analysis and graphology;[125] comparing typewritten letters to expose a fraud;[126] using gunpowder residue to expose two murderers;[127] and analyzing small pieces of human remains to expose two murders.[128]
Because of the small scale of much of his evidence, the detective often uses a magnifying glass at the scene and an optical microscope at his Baker Street lodgings. He uses analytical chemistry for blood residue analysis and toxicology to detect poisons; Holmes's home chemistry laboratory is mentioned in "The Naval Treaty".[129] Ballistics feature in "The Adventure of the Empty House" when spent bullets are recovered to be matched with a suspected murder weapon, a practice which became regular police procedure only some fifteen years after the story was published.[130]
Laura J. Snyder has examined Holmes's methods in the context of mid- to late-19th-century criminology, demonstrating that, while sometimes in advance of what official investigative departments were formally using at the time, they were based upon existing methods and techniques. For example, fingerprints were proposed to be distinct in Conan Doyle's day, and while Holmes used a thumbprint to solve a crime in "The Adventure of the Norwood Builder" (generally held to be set in 1895), the story was published in 1903, two years after Scotland Yard's fingerprint bureau opened.[122][131] Though the effect of the Holmes stories on the development of forensic science has thus often been overstated, Holmes inspired future generations of forensic scientists to think scientifically and analytically.[132]
Disguises
Holmes displays a strong aptitude for acting and disguise. In several stories ("The Sign of Four", "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton", "The Man with the Twisted Lip", "The Adventure of the Empty House" and "A Scandal in Bohemia"), to gather evidence undercover he uses disguises so convincing that Watson fails to recognise him. In others ("The Adventure of the Dying Detective" and "A Scandal in Bohemia"), Holmes feigns injury or illness to incriminate the guilty. In the latter story, Watson says, "The stage lost a fine actor ... when [Holmes] became a specialist in crime".[133]
Guy Mankowski has said of Holmes that his ability to change his appearance to blend into any situation "helped him personify the idea of the English eccentric chameleon, in a way that prefigured the likes of David Bowie."[134]
Agents
Until Watson's arrival at Baker Street, Holmes largely worked alone, only occasionally employing agents from the city's underclass. These agents included a variety of informants, such as Langdale Pike, a "human book of reference upon all matters of social scandal",[135] and Shinwell Johnson, who acted as Holmes's "agent in the huge criminal underworld of London".[136] The best known of Holmes's agents are a group of street children he called "the Baker Street Irregulars".[137][138]
Combat
 British Army (Adams) Mark III, the type probably carried by Watson
Pistols
Holmes and Watson often carry pistols with them to confront criminals in Watson's case, his old service weapon (probably a Mark III Adams revolver, issued to British troops during the 1870s).[139] Holmes and Watson shoot the eponymous hound in The Hound of the Baskervilles,[140] and in "The Adventure of the Empty House" Watson pistol-whips Colonel Sebastian Moran.[141] In "The Problem of Thor Bridge", Holmes uses Watson's revolver to solve the case through an experiment.
Other weapons
As a gentleman, Holmes often carries a stick or cane. He is described by Watson as an expert at singlestick,[92] and uses his cane twice as a weapon.[142] In A Study in Scarlet, Watson describes Holmes as an expert swordsman,[92] and in "The Gloria Scott" the detective says he practised fencing while at university.[59] In several stories ("A Case of Identity", "The Red-Headed League", "The Adventure of the Six Napoleons") Holmes wields a riding crop, described in the latter story as his "favourite weapon".[143]
Personal combat
 Holmes outfighting Mr Woodley in "The Solitary Cyclist"
The detective is described (or demonstrated) as possessing above-average physical strength. In "The Yellow Face", Holmes's chronicler says, "Few men were capable of greater muscular effort."[144] In "The Adventure of the Speckled Band", Dr. Roylott demonstrates his strength by bending a fire poker in half. Watson describes Holmes as laughing, "'if he had remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his own.' As he spoke he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again."[145]
Holmes is an adept bare-knuckle fighter; "The Gloria Scott" mentions that Holmes boxed while at university.[59] In The Sign of Four, he introduces himself to McMurdo, a prize fighter, as "the amateur who fought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of your benefit four years back." McMurdo remembers: "Ah, you're one that has wasted your gifts, you have! You might have aimed high if you had joined the fancy."[146] In "The Yellow Face", Watson says: "He was undoubtedly one of the finest boxers of his weight that I have ever seen".[147] In "The Solitary Cyclist" Holmes visits a country pub to make enquiries regarding a certain Mr Woodley which resulted in violence. Mr Woodley, Holmes tells Watson,[148]
Had been drinking his beer in the tap-room, and had heard the whole conversation. Who was I? What did I want? What did I mean by asking questions? He had a fine flow of language, and his adjectives were very vigorous. He ended a string of abuse by a vicious backhander, which I failed to entirely avoid. The next few minutes were delicious. It was a straight left against a slogging ruffian. I emerged as you see me. Mr. Woodley went home in a cart.[148]
Another character subsequently refers to Mr Woodley as looking "much disfigured" as a result of his encounter with Holmes.[149]
In "The Adventure of the Empty House", Holmes tells Watson that he used a Japanese martial art known as baritsu to fling Moriarty to his death in the Reichenbach Falls.[150] "Baritsu" is Conan Doyle's version of bartitsu, which combines jujitsu with boxing and cane fencing.[151]
Reception
Popularity
 The popularity of Sherlock Holmes became widespread after his first appearance in The Strand Magazine in 1891. This September 1917 edition of the magazine, with the cover story,  Sherlock Holmes outwits a German spy , could be posted to troops free of charge.
The first two Sherlock Holmes stories, the novels A Study in Scarlet (1887) and The Sign of the Four (1890), were moderately well received, but Holmes first became very popular early in 1891 when the first six short stories featuring the character were published in The Strand Magazine. Holmes became widely known in Britain and America.[1] The character was so well known that in 1893 when Arthur Conan Doyle killed Holmes in the short story "The Final Problem", the strongly negative response from readers was unlike any previous public reaction to a fictional event. The Strand reportedly lost more than 20,000 subscribers as a result of Holmes's death. Public pressure eventually contributed to Conan Doyle writing another Holmes story in 1901 and resurrecting the character in a story published in 1903.[7] In Japan, Sherlock Holmes (and Alice from Alice's Adventures in Wonderland) became immensely popular in the country in the 1890s as it was opening up to the West, and they are cited as two British fictional Victorians who left an enormous creative and cultural legacy there.[152]
Many fans of Sherlock Holmes have written letters to Holmes's address, 221B Baker Street. Though the address 221B Baker Street did not exist when the stories were first published, letters began arriving to the large Abbey National building which first encompassed that address almost as soon as it was built in 1932. Fans continue to send letters to Sherlock Holmes;[153] these letters are now delivered to the Sherlock Holmes Museum.[154] Some of the people who have sent letters to 221B Baker Street believe Holmes is real.[4] Members of the general public have also believed Holmes actually existed. In a 2008 survey of British teenagers, 58 percent of respondents believed that Sherlock Holmes was a real individual.[5]
The Sherlock Holmes stories continue to be widely read.[1] Holmes's continuing popularity has led to many reimaginings of the character in adaptations.[7] Guinness World Records, which awarded Sherlock Holmes the title for "most portrayed literary human character in film & TV" in 2012, released a statement saying that the title "reflects his enduring appeal and demonstrates that his detective talents are as compelling today as they were 125 years ago."[3]
Honours
 Statue of Sherlock Holmes near 221B Baker Street, London
 Blue plaque at The Sherlock Holmes Museum 221b Baker Street, London
The London Metropolitan Railway named one of its twenty electric locomotives deployed in the 1920s for Sherlock Holmes. He was the only fictional character so honoured, along with eminent Britons such as Lord Byron, Benjamin Disraeli, and Florence Nightingale.[155]
A number of London streets are associated with Holmes. York Mews South, off Crawford Street, was renamed Sherlock Mews, and Watson's Mews is near Crawford Place.[156] The Sherlock Holmes is a public house in Northumberland Street in London which contains a large collection of memorabilia related to Holmes, the original collection having been put together for display in Baker Street during the Festival of Britain in 1951.[157][158]
In 2002, the Royal Society of Chemistry bestowed an honorary fellowship on Holmes for his use of forensic science and analytical chemistry in popular literature, making him (as of 2019) the only fictional character thus honoured.[159] Holmes has been commemorated numerous times on a UK postage stamp issued by the Royal Mail, most recently in their August 2020 series to celebrate the Sherlock television series.[160]
There are multiple statues of Sherlock Holmes around the world. The first, sculpted by John Doubleday, was unveiled in Meiringen, Switzerland, in September 1988. The second was unveiled in October 1988 in Karuizawa, Japan, and was sculpted by Yoshinori Satoh. The third was installed in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1989, and was sculpted by Gerald Laing.[161] In 1999, a statue of Sherlock Holmes in London, also by John Doubleday, was unveiled near the fictional detective's address, 221B Baker Street.[162] In 2001, a sculpture of Holmes and Arthur Conan Doyle by Irena Sedleck  was unveiled in a statue collection in Warwickshire, England.[163] A sculpture depicting both Holmes and Watson was unveiled in 2007 in Moscow, Russia, based partially on Sidney Paget's illustrations and partially on the actors in The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson.[164] In 2015, a sculpture of Holmes by Jane DeDecker was installed in the police headquarters of Edmond, Oklahoma, United States.[165] In 2019, a statue of Holmes was unveiled in Chester, Illinois, United States, as part of a series of statues honouring cartoonist E. C. Segar and his characters. The statue is titled "Sherlock & Segar", and the face of the statue was modelled on Segar.[166]
Societies
Main article: Sherlock Holmes fandom  Societies
In 1934, the Sherlock Holmes Society (in London) and the Baker Street Irregulars (in New York) were founded. The latter is still active. The Sherlock Holmes Society was dissolved later in the 1930s, but was succeeded by a society with a slightly different name, the Sherlock Holmes Society of London, which was founded in 1951 and remains active.[167][168] These societies were followed by many more, first in the U.S. (where they are known as "scion societies" offshoots of the Baker Street Irregulars) and then in England and Denmark. There are at least 250 societies worldwide, including Australia, Canada (such as The Bootmakers of Toronto), India, and Japan.[169] Fans tend to be called "Holmesians" in the U.K. and "Sherlockians" in the U.S.,[170][171][172] though recently "Sherlockian" has also come to refer to fans of the Benedict Cumberbatch-led BBC series regardless of location.[173]
Legacy
The detective story
 Statue of Holmes in an Inverness cape and a deerstalker cap on Picardy Place in Edinburgh (Conan Doyle's birthplace)
Although Holmes is not the original fictional detective, his name has become synonymous with the role. Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories introduced multiple literary devices that have become major conventions in detective fiction, such as the companion character who is not as clever as the detective and has solutions explained to him (thus informing the reader as well), as with Dr. Watson in the Holmes stories. Other conventions introduced by Doyle include the arch-criminal who is too clever for the official police to defeat, like Holmes's adversary Professor Moriarty, and the use of forensic science to solve cases.[1]
The Sherlock Holmes stories established crime fiction as a respectable genre popular with readers of all backgrounds, and Doyle's success inspired many contemporary detective stories.[174] Holmes influenced the creation of other "eccentric gentleman detective" characters, like Agatha Christie's fictional detective Hercule Poirot, introduced in 1920.[175] Holmes also inspired a number of anti-hero characters "almost as an antidote to the masterful detective", such as the gentleman thief characters A. J. Raffles (created by E. W. Hornung in 1898) and Ars ne Lupin (created by Maurice Leblanc in 1905).[174]
"Elementary, my dear Watson"
The phrase "Elementary, my dear Watson" has become one of the most quoted and iconic aspects of the character. However, although Holmes often observes that his conclusions are "elementary", and occasionally calls Watson "my dear Watson", the phrase "Elementary, my dear Watson" is never uttered in any of the sixty stories by Conan Doyle.[176] One of the nearest approximations of the phrase appears in "The Adventure of the Crooked Man" (1893) when Holmes explains a deduction: "'Excellent!' I cried. 'Elementary,' said he."[177][178]
William Gillette is widely considered to have originated the phrase with the formulation, "Oh, this is elementary, my dear fellow", allegedly in his 1899 play Sherlock Holmes. However, the script was revised numerous times over the course of some three decades of revivals and publications, and the phrase is present in some versions of the script, but not others.[176] The appearance of the line "Elementary, my dear Potson" in a Sherlock Holmes parody from 1901 has led some authors to speculate that, rather than this being an incidental formulation, the parodist drew upon an already well-established occurrences of "Elementary, my dear Watson."[179][180]
The exact phrase, as well as close variants, can be seen in newspaper and journal articles as early as 1909.[176][181] It was also used by P. G. Wodehouse in his novel Psmith, Journalist, which was first serialised in The Captain magazine between October 1909 and February 1910; the phrase occurred in the January 1910 instalment. The phrase became familiar with the American public in part due to its use in the Rathbone-Bruce series of films from 1939 to 1946.[182]
The Great Game
Main article: Sherlockian game
 Russ Stutler's view of 221B Baker StreetSherlock Holmes Museum, LondonStudyDrawing roomConan Doyle's 56 short stories and four novels are known as the "canon" by Holmes aficionados. The Great Game (also known as the Holmesian Game, the Sherlockian Game, or simply the Game, also the Higher Criticism) applies the methods of literary and especially Biblical criticism to the canon, operating on the pretense that Holmes and Watson were real people and that Conan Doyle was not the author of the stories but Watson's literary agent. From this basis, it attempts to resolve or explain away contradictions in the canon such as the location of Watson's war wound, described as being in his shoulder in A Study in Scarlet and in his leg in The Sign of Four and clarify details about Holmes, Watson and their world, such as the exact dates of events in the stories, combining historical research with references from the stories to construct scholarly analyses.[183][184][185]
For example, one detail analyzed in the Game is Holmes's birth date. The chronology of the stories is notoriously difficult, with many stories lacking dates and many others containing contradictory ones. Christopher Morley and William Baring-Gould contend that the detective was born on 6 January 1854, the year being derived from the statement in "His Last Bow" that he was 60 years of age in 1914, while the precise day is derived from broader, non-canonical speculation.[186] This is the date the Baker Street Irregulars work from, with their annual dinner being held each January.[187][188] Laurie R. King instead argues that details in "The Gloria Scott" (a story with no precise internal date) indicate that Holmes finished his second (and final) year of university in 1880 or 1885. If he began university at age 17, his birth year could be as late as 1868.[189]
Museums and special collections
For the 1951 Festival of Britain, Holmes's living room was reconstructed as part of a Sherlock Holmes exhibition, with a collection of original material. After the festival, items were transferred to The Sherlock Holmes (a London pub) and the Conan Doyle collection housed in Lucens, Switzerland by the author's son, Adrian. Both exhibitions, each with a Baker Street sitting-room reconstruction, are open to the public.[190]
In 1969, the Toronto Reference Library began a collection of materials related to Conan Doyle. Stored today in Room 221B, this vast collection is accessible to the public.[191][192] Similarly, in 1974 the University of Minnesota founded a collection that is now "the world s largest gathering of material related to Sherlock Holmes and his creator". Access is closed to the general public, but is occasionally open to tours.[193][194]
In 1990, the Sherlock Holmes Museum opened on Baker Street in London, followed the next year by a museum in Meiringen (near the Reichenbach Falls) dedicated to the detective.[190] A private Conan Doyle collection is a permanent exhibit at the Portsmouth City Museum, where the author lived and worked as a physician.[195]
Postcolonial criticism
The Sherlock Holmes stories have been scrutinized by a few academics for themes of empire and colonialism.
Susan Cannon Harris claims that themes of contagion and containment are common in the Holmes series, including the metaphors of Eastern foreigners as the root cause of "infection" within and around Europe.[196] Lauren Raheja, writing in the Marxist journal Nature, Society, and Thought, claims that Doyle used these characteristics to paint eastern colonies in a negative light, through their continually being the source of threats. For example, in one story Doyle makes mention of the Sumatran cannibals (also known as Batak) who throw poisonous darts, in "The Adventure of the Devil's Foot" a character employs a deadly West African poison, and in "The Speckled Band" a "long residence in the tropics" was a negative influence on one antagonist's bad temper.[197] Yumna Siddiqi argues that Doyle depicted returned colonials as "marginal, physically ravaged characters that threaten the peace," while putting non-colonials in a much more positive light.[198]
Adaptations and derived works
The popularity of Sherlock Holmes has meant that many writers other than Arthur Conan Doyle have created tales of the detective in a wide variety of different media, with varying degrees of fidelity to the original characters, stories, and setting. The first known period pastiche dates from 1891. Titled "The Late Sherlock Holmes", it was written by Conan Doyle's close friend, J. M. Barrie.[199]
Adaptations have seen the character taken in radically different directions or placed in different times or even universes. For example, Holmes falls in love and marries in Laurie R. King's Mary Russell series, is re-animated after his death to fight future crime in the animated series Sherlock Holmes in the 22nd Century, and is meshed with the setting of H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos in Neil Gaiman's "A Study in Emerald" (which won the 2004 Hugo Award for Best Short Story). An especially influential pastiche was Nicholas Meyer's The Seven-Per-Cent Solution, a 1974 New York Times bestselling novel (made into the 1976 film of the same name) in which Holmes's cocaine addiction has progressed to the point of endangering his career. It served to popularize the trend of incorporating clearly identified and contemporaneous historical figures (such as Oscar Wilde, Aleister Crowley, Sigmund Freud, or Jack the Ripper) into Holmesian pastiches, something Conan Doyle himself never did.[200][201][202] Another common pastiche approach is to create a new story fully detailing an otherwise-passing canonical reference (such as an aside by Conan Doyle mentioning the "giant rat of Sumatra, a story for which the world is not yet prepared" in "The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire").[203]
Related and derivative writings
Main article: Sherlock Holmes pastichesFurther information: List of authors of new Sherlock Holmes stories
 1904 Sidney Paget illustration of "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton"
In addition to the Holmes canon, Conan Doyle's 1898 "The Lost Special" features an unnamed "amateur reasoner" intended to be identified as Holmes by his readers. The author's explanation of a baffling disappearance argued in Holmesian style poked fun at his own creation. Similar Conan Doyle short stories are "The Field Bazaar", "The Man with the Watches", and 1924's "How Watson Learned the Trick", a parody of the Watson Holmes breakfast-table scenes. The author wrote other material featuring Holmes, especially plays: 1899's Sherlock Holmes (with William Gillette), 1910's The Speckled Band, and 1921's The Crown Diamond (the basis for "The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone").[204] These non-canonical works have been collected in several works released since Conan Doyle's death.[205]
In terms of writers other than Conan Doyle, authors as diverse as Anthony Burgess, Neil Gaiman, Dorothy B. Hughes, Stephen King, Tanith Lee, A. A. Milne, and P. G. Wodehouse have all written Sherlock Holmes pastiches. Contemporary with Conan Doyle, Maurice Leblanc directly featured Holmes in his popular series about the gentleman thief, Ars ne Lupin, though legal objections from Conan Doyle forced Leblanc to modify the name to "Herlock Sholmes" in reprints and later stories.[206] Famed American mystery writer John Dickson Carr collaborated with Arthur Conan Doyle's son, Adrian Conan Doyle, on The Exploits of Sherlock Holmes, a pastiche collection from 1954.[207] In 2011, Anthony Horowitz published a Sherlock Holmes novel, The House of Silk, presented as a continuation of Conan Doyle's work and with the approval of the Conan Doyle estate;[208] a follow-up, Moriarty, appeared in 2014.[209] The "MX Book of New Sherlock Holmes Stories" series of pastiches, edited by David Marcum and published by MX Publishing, has reached over thirty volumes and features hundreds of stories echoing the original canon which were compiled for the restoration of Undershaw and the support of Stepping Stones School, now housed in it.[210][211]
Some authors have written tales centred on characters from the canon other than Holmes. Anthologies edited by Michael Kurland and George Mann are entirely devoted to stories told from the perspective of characters other than Holmes and Watson. John Gardner, Michael Kurland, and Kim Newman, amongst many others, have all written tales in which Holmes's nemesis Professor Moriarty is the main character. Mycroft Holmes has been the subject of several efforts: Enter the Lion by Michael P. Hodel and Sean M. Wright (1979),[212] a four-book series by Quinn Fawcett,[213] and 2015's Mycroft Holmes, by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Anna Waterhouse.[214] M. J. Trow has written a series of seventeen books using Inspector Lestrade as the central character, beginning with The Adventures of Inspector Lestrade in 1985.[215] Carole Nelson Douglas' Irene Adler series is based on "the woman" from "A Scandal in Bohemia", with the first book (1990's Good Night, Mr. Holmes) retelling that story from Adler's point of view.[216] Martin Davies has written three novels where Baker Street housekeeper Mrs. Hudson is the protagonist.[217]
In 1980's The Name of the Rose, Italian author Umberto Eco creates a Sherlock Holmes of the 1320s in the form of a Franciscan friar and main protagonist named Brother William of Baskerville, his name a clear reference to Holmes per The Hound of the Baskervilles.[218] Brother William investigates a series of murders in the abbey alongside his novice Adso of Melk, who acts as his Dr. Watson. Furthermore, Umberto Eco's description of Brother William bears marked similarities in both physique and personality to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's description of Sherlock Holmes in A Study in Scarlet.[219]
Laurie R. King recreated Holmes in her Mary Russell series (beginning with 1994's The Beekeeper's Apprentice), set during the First World War and the 1920s. Her Holmes, semi-retired in Sussex, meets a teenaged American girl. Recognising a kindred spirit, he trains her as his apprentice and subsequently marries her. As of 2021, the series includes seventeen base novels and additional writings.[220]
Short stories featuring sage-detective Zavant Konniger and his halfling manservant Vido, written by fantasy authors Gordon Rennie and Josh Reynolds for the Warhammer Fantasy universe, were published by Black Library from 2002 to 2018, including "How Vido Learned the Trick" ("How Watson Learned the Trick") and "The Problem of Three-Toll Bridge" ("The Problem of Thor Bridge").[221][222]
The Final Solution, a 2004 novella by Michael Chabon, concerns an unnamed but long-retired detective interested in beekeeping who tackles the case of a missing parrot belonging to a Jewish refugee boy.[223] Mitch Cullin's novel A Slight Trick of the Mind (2005) takes place two years after the end of the Second World War, and explores an old and frail Sherlock Holmes (now 93) as he comes to terms with a life spent in emotionless logic;[224] this was also adapted into a film, 2015's Mr. Holmes.[225]
There have been many scholarly works dealing with Sherlock Holmes, some working within the bounds of the Great Game, and some written from the perspective that Holmes is a fictional character. In particular, there have been three major annotated editions of the complete series. The first was William Baring-Gould's 1967 The Annotated Sherlock Holmes. This two-volume set was ordered to fit Baring-Gould's preferred chronology, and was written from a Great Game perspective. The second was 1993's The Oxford Sherlock Holmes (general editor: Owen Dudley Edwards), a nine-volume set written in a straight scholarly manner. The most recent is Leslie Klinger's The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes (2004 05), a three-volume set that returns to a Great Game perspective.[226][227]
Adaptations in other media
Main article: Adaptations of Sherlock Holmes
Further information: List of actors who have played Sherlock Holmes
 Poster for the 1899 play Sherlock Holmes by Conan Doyle and actor William Gillette
In 2012, Guinness World Records listed Holmes as the most portrayed literary human character in film and television history, with more than 75 actors playing the part in over 250 productions.[3]
The 1899 play Sherlock Holmes, by Conan Doyle and William Gillette, was a synthesis of several Conan Doyle stories. In addition to its popularity, the play is significant because it, rather than the original stories, introduced one of the key visual qualities commonly associated with Holmes today: his calabash pipe;[228] the play also formed the basis for Gillette's 1916 film, Sherlock Holmes. Gillette performed as Holmes some 1,300 times. In the early 1900s, H. A. Saintsbury took over the role from Gillette for a tour of the play. Between this play and Conan Doyle's own stage adaptation of "The Adventure of the Speckled Band", Saintsbury portrayed Holmes over 1,000 times.[229]
 Basil Rathbone as HolmesHolmes's first screen appearance was in the 1900 Mutoscope film, Sherlock Holmes Baffled.[230] From 1921 to 1923, Eille Norwood played Holmes in forty-seven silent films (45 shorts and two features), in a series of performances that Conan Doyle spoke highly of.[2][231] 1929's The Return of Sherlock Holmes was the first sound title to feature Holmes.[232] From 1939 to 1946, Basil Rathbone played Holmes and Nigel Bruce played Watson in fourteen U.S. films (two for 20th Century Fox and a dozen for Universal Pictures) and in The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes radio show. While the Fox films were period pieces, the Universal films abandoned Victorian Britain and moved to a then-contemporary setting in which Holmes occasionally battled Nazis.[233]
Holmes in two television adaptations: L R: Jeremy Brett in Sherlock Holmes (1984) and Benedict Cumberbatch in Sherlock (2010)The character has also enjoyed numerous radio adaptations, beginning with Edith Meiser's The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes,[234] which ran from 1930 to 1936. Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce continued with their roles for most of the run of The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, airing from 1939 to 1950. Bert Coules, having dramatised the entire Holmes canon for BBC Radio Four from 1989 to 1998,[235][236] penned The Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes between 2002 and 2010. This pastiche series also aired on Radio Four, and starred Clive Merrison as Holmes and Michael Williams and then Andrew Sachs as Watson.[235][237]
 Waxwork of Robert Downey Jr. as Holmes on display at Madame Tussauds London
The 1984 85 Italian/Japanese anime series Sherlock Hound adapted the Holmes stories for children, with its characters being anthropomorphic dogs. The series was co-directed by Hayao Miyazaki.[238] Between 1979 and 1986, the Soviet studio Lenfilm produced a series of five television films, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson. The series were split into eleven episodes and starred Vasily Livanov as Holmes and Vitaly Solomin as Watson. For his performance, in 2006 Livanov was appointed an Honorary Member of the Order of the British Empire.[239][240]
Jeremy Brett played the detective in Sherlock Holmes for Granada Television from 1984 to 1994. Watson was played by David Burke (in the first two series) and Edward Hardwicke (in the remainder). Brett and Hardwicke also appeared on stage in 1988 89 in The Secret of Sherlock Holmes, directed by Patrick Garland.[241]
The 2009 film Sherlock Holmes earned Robert Downey Jr. a Golden Globe Award for his portrayal of Holmes and co-starred Jude Law as Watson.[242] Downey and Law returned for a 2011 sequel, Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows.
Benedict Cumberbatch plays a modern version of the detective and Martin Freeman as a modern version of John Watson in the BBC One TV series Sherlock, which premiered in 2010. In the series, created by Mark Gatiss and Steven Moffat, the stories' original Victorian setting is replaced by present-day London, with Watson a veteran of the modern War in Afghanistan.[243] Similarly, Elementary premiered on CBS in 2012, and ran for seven seasons, until 2019. Set in contemporary New York, the series featured Jonny Lee Miller as Sherlock Holmes and Lucy Liu as a female Dr. Joan Watson.[244] With 24 episodes per season, by the end of season two, Miller became the actor who had portrayed Sherlock Holmes the most in television and/or film.[245]
The 2015 film Mr. Holmes starred Ian McKellen as a retired Sherlock Holmes living in Sussex, in 1947, who grapples with an unsolved case involving a beautiful woman. The film is based on Mitch Cullin's 2005 novel A Slight Trick of the Mind.[246][247]
The 2018 television adaptation, Miss Sherlock, was a Japanese-language production, and the first adaptation with a woman (portrayed by Y ko Takeuchi) in the signature role. The episodes were based in modern-day Tokyo, with many references to Conan Doyle's stories.[248][249]
Holmes has also appeared in video games, including the Sherlock Holmes series of eight main titles. According to the publisher, Frogwares, by 2017 the series sold over seven million copies.[250]
Copyright issues
The copyright for Conan Doyle's works expired in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia at the end of 1980, fifty years after Conan Doyle's death.[251][252] In the United Kingdom it was revived in 1996 due to new provisions harmonising UK law with that of the European Union, and expired again at the end of 2000 (seventy years after Conan Doyle's death).[253] The author's works are now in the public domain in those countries.[254][255]
In the United States, all works published before 1923 entered public domain by 1998, but, as ten Holmes stories were published after that date, the Conan Doyle estate maintained that the Holmes and Watson characters as a whole were still under copyright.[252][256] On 14 February 2013, Leslie S. Klinger (lawyer and editor of The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes) filed a declaratory judgement suit against the Conan Doyle estate asking the court to acknowledge that the characters of Holmes and Watson were public domain in the U.S. The court ruled in Klinger's favour on 23 December, and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed its decision on 16 June 2014. The case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which declined to hear the case, letting the appeals court's ruling stand. This resulted in the characters from the Holmes stories being in the public domain in the U.S. The stories still under copyright due to the ruling, as of that time, were those collected in The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes other than "The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone" and "The Problem of Thor Bridge": a total of ten stories.[255][257][258]
In 2020, although the United States court ruling and the passage of time meant that most of the Holmes stories and characters were in the public domain in that country, the Doyle estate legally challenged the use of Sherlock Holmes in the film Enola Holmes in a complaint filed in the United States.[259] The Doyle estate alleged that the film depicts Holmes with personality traits that were only exhibited by the character in the stories still under copyright.[260][261] On 18 December 2020, the lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice by stipulation of all parties.[262][263]
The remaining ten Holmes stories moved out of copyright between 1 January 2019 and 1 January 2023, leaving the stories and characters completely in the public domain in the United States as of the latter date.[264][265][266]
Works
Main article: Canon of Sherlock Holmes
Novels
A Study in Scarlet (published November 1887 in Beeton's Christmas Annual)
The Sign of the Four (published February 1890 in Lippincott's Monthly Magazine)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (serialised 1901 1902 in The Strand)
The Valley of Fear (serialised 1914 1915 in The Strand)
Short story collections
The short stories, originally published in magazines, were later collected in five anthologies:
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (stories published 1891 1892 in The Strand)
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (stories published 1892 1893 in The Strand)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (stories published 1903 1904 in The Strand)
His Last Bow: Some Later Reminiscences of Sherlock Holmes (stories published 1908 1917)
The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes (stories published 1921 1927)
See also
List of Holmesian studies
Popular culture references to Sherlock Holmes
Sherlock Holmes fandom
Notes
^ His Last Bow: The War Service of Sherlock Holmes
Sherlock Holmes story references
Klinger, Leslie (ed.). The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes, Volume I (New York: W. W. Norton, 2005). ISBN 0-393-05916-2 ("Klinger I")
Klinger, Leslie (ed.). The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes, Volume II (New York: W. W. Norton, 2005). ISBN 0-393-05916-2 ("Klinger II")
Klinger, Leslie (ed.). The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes, Volume III (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006). ISBN 978-0393058000 ("Klinger III")
Citations
^ a b c d Sutherland, John. "Sherlock Holmes, the world's most famous literary detective". British Library. Retrieved 3 July 2018.
^ a b Haigh, Brian (20 May 2008). "A star comes to Huddersfield!". BBC. Retrieved 25 December 2019.
^ a b c "Sherlock Holmes awarded title for most portrayed literary human character in film & TV". Guinness World Records. 14 May 2012. Retrieved 5 January 2020.
^ a b Rule, Sheila (5 November 1989). "Sherlock Holmes's Mail: Not Too Mysterious". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 March 2016.
^ a b Simpson, Aislinn (4 February 2008). "Winston Churchill didn't really exist, say teens". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2019.
^ Scott, C.T. (6 October 2021). "The curious incident of Sherlock Holmes's real-life secretary". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 10 October 2021.
^ a b c d Armstrong, Jennifer Keishin (6 January 2016). "How Sherlock Holmes changed the world". BBC. Retrieved 20 December 2019.
^ 
Sova, Dawn B. (2001). Edgar Allan Poe: A to Z (Paperback ed.). New York: Checkmark Books. pp. 162 163. ISBN 0-8160-4161-X.
^ Knowles, Christopher (2007). Our Gods Wear Spandex: The Secret History of Comic Book Heroes. San Francisco: Weiser Books. p. 67. ISBN 978-1-57863-406-4.
^ Conan Doyle, Arthur (1993).  Lancelyn Green, Richard (ed.). The Oxford Sherlock Holmes: The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. xv.
^ Sims, Michael (25 January 2017). "How Sherlock Holmes Got His Name". Literary Hub. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Klinger III, pp. 42-44 A Study in Scarlet
^ Lycett, Andrew (2007). The Man Who Created Sherlock Holmes: The Life and Times of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Free Press. pp. 53 54, 190. ISBN 978-0-7432-7523-1.
^ Barring-Gould, William S. (1974). The Annotated Sherlock Holmes. Clarkson N. Potter, Inc. p. 8. ISBN 0-517-50291-7.
^ Doyle, A. Conan (1961). The Boys' Sherlock Holmes, New & Enlarged Edition. Harper & Row. p. 88.
^ Cauvain, Henry (2006). Peter D. O'Neill, foreword to Maximilien Heller. ISBN 9781901414301. Retrieved 10 November 2015.
^ " Fue Sherlock Holmes un plagio?". ABC. 22 February 2015. Retrieved 10 November 2015.
^ "Maximilien Holmes. How Intertextuality Influences Translation, by Sandro Maria Perna, Universit  degli Studi di Padova 2013/14" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 November 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2015.
^ "France". The Arthur Conan Doyle Encyclopedia. Retrieved 22 June 2018.
^ Brown, David W. (14 May 2015). "15 Curious Facts About Sherlock Holmes and the Sherlockian Subculture". Mental Floss. Retrieved 15 January 2019.
^ Klinger II, p. 1432 "His Last Bow"
^ Klinger I, pp. 637-639 "The Greek Interpreter"
^ Quigley, Michael J. "Mycroft Holmes". The Official Conan Doyle Estate Ltd. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Klinger I, pp. 529-531 "The Musgrave Ritual"
^ Klinger I, pp. 501-502 "The Gloria Scott"
^ Klinger III, pp. 17-18, 28 A Study in Scarlet
^ Birkby, Michelle. "Mrs Hudson". The Official Conan Doyle Estate Ltd. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Klinger II, pp. 1692, 1705-1706 "The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger"
^ Klinger III, p. 217 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger II, pp. 1482-1483 "The Blanched Soldier"
^ a b Klinger II, p. 1598 "The Adventure of the Three Garridebs"
^ "The Reigate Squires" and "The Adventure of the Illustrious Client" are two examples.
^ "The Reigate Squires"
^ Klinger II, p. 976 "The Adventure of Black Peter"
^ Klinger I, pp. 561-562 "The Reigate Squires"
^ Klinger II, pp. 1190-1191, 1222-1225 "The Adventure of the Second Stain"
^ a b Klinger I, pp. 15-16 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ Klinger II, p. 1092 "The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez"
^ Klinger I, p. 299 "The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor" there was no such position in existence at the time of the story.
^ The Hound of the Baskervilles (Klinger III p. 409) and "The Adventure of Black Peter" (Klinger II p. 977)
^ "The Adventure of the Bruce-Partington Plans", "The Naval Treaty", and after retirement, "His Last Bow".
^ Klinger II, p. 1581 "The Adventure of the Three Garridebs"
^ In "The Naval Treaty" (Klinger I p. 691), Holmes remarks that, of his last fifty-three cases, the police have had all the credit in forty-nine.
^ Walsh, Michael. "Professor James Moriarty". The Official Conan Doyle Estate Ltd. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Klinger II, p. 1448 The Case-book of Sherlock Holmes
^ a b "The hounding of Arthur Conan Doyle". The Irish News. Retrieved 8 October 2020.
^ Calamai, Peter (22 May 2013). "A Reader Challenge & Prize". The Baker Street Journal. Retrieved 25 June 2018.
^ Klinger I, pp. 791-794 "The Adventure of the Empty House"
^ Klinger II, pp. 815-822
^ Riggs, Ransom (2009). The Sherlock Holmes Handbook. The methods and mysteries of the world's greatest detective. Philadelphia: Quirk Books. pp. 115 118. ISBN 978-1-59474-429-7.
^ Klinger II, pp. 1229, 1437, 1440 His Last Bow
^ Klinger II, p. 1189 "The Adventure of the Second Stain"
^ Klinger II, p. 1667 "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane"
^ Klinger I, p. 265 "The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb"
^ Klinger III, p. 550 The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ Klinger I, pp. 528-529 "The Musgrave Ritual"
^ Klinger III, p. 481 The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ "A Scandal in Bohemia", "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton", and "The Adventure of the Illustrious Client"
^ a b c Klinger I, p. 502 "The Gloria Scott"
^ Klinger II, p. 848 "The Adventure of the Norwood Builder"
^ Klinger II, p. 1513 "The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone"
^ Klinger III, pp. 34-36 A Study in Scarlet
^ Klinger II, pp. 1296-1297 "The Adventure of the Red Circle"
^ Klinger I, p. 58 "The Red-Headed League"
^ Klinger III, pp. 213-214 The Sign of Four
^ Diniejko, Andrzej (13 December 2013). "Sherlock Holmes's Addictions". The Victorian Web. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Diniejko, Andrzej (7 September 2002). "Victorian Drug Use". The Victorian Web. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Dalby, J. T. (1991). "Sherlock Holmes's Cocaine Habit". Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine. 8: 73 74. doi:10.1017/S0790966700016475. S2CID 142678530.
^ Klinger III, pp. 215-216 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger II, p. 450 "The Yellow Face"
^ Klinger II, p. 1124 "The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter"
^ Klinger III, p. 423 The Hound of the Baskervilles. See also Klinger II, pp. 950, 1108-1109.
^ Klinger II, p. 1402 "The Adventure of the Devil's Foot"
^ Klinger II, p. 1609 "The Problem of Thor Bridge"
^ Klinger II, p. 971 "The Adventure of the Priory School"
^ "Wages and Cost of Living in the Victorian Era". The Victorian Web. Retrieved 13 March 2016.
^ Klinger II, p. 976 "The Adventure of Black Peter"
^ Liebow, Ely (1982). Dr. Joe Bell: Model for Sherlock Holmes. Popular Press. p. 173. ISBN 9780879721985. Retrieved 17 October 2014.
^ Klinger III, p. 704 The Valley of Fear
^ Klinger II, pp. 1203-1204 "The Adventure of the Second Stain"
^ Klinger III, p. 311 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger II, p. 1676 "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane"
^ Klinger III, p. 378 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger II, p. 1422 "The Adventure of the Devil's Foot"
^ Klinger I, p. 635 "The Greek Interpreter"
^ Klinger II, p. 1111 "The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez"
^ Klinger II, pp. 1341-1342 "The Adventure of the Dying Detective"
^ Klinger II, pp. 1015-1106 "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton"
^ Karlson, Katherine. "Irene Adler". The Official Conan Doyle Estate Ltd. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Klinger I, pp. 5-6 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ Klinger I, pp. 5-40 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ a b c Klinger III, pp. 34-35 A Study in Scarlet
^ Klinger III, pp. 32-33 A Study in Scarlet
^ Klinger III, p. 650 The Valley of Fear
^ Klinger II, p. 1689 "The Adventure of the Lion's Mane"
^ Richard Lancelyn Green, "Introduction", The Return of Sherlock Holmes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993) XXX.
^ Klinger III, p. 202 A Study in Scarlet
^ Klinger I, p. 100 "A Case of Identity"
^ Klinger IIII, p. 282 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger I, p. 73 "The Red-Headed League"
^ Klinger III, p. 570 The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ Klinger III, pp. 1333-1334, 1338-1340 "The Adventure of the Bruce-Partington Plans"
^ Klinger, Leslie (1999). "Lost in Lassus: The Missing Monograph". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Klinger II, p. 888 "The Adventure of the Dancing Men"
^ Klinger I, p. 33 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ Klinger I, p. 216 "The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle"
^ Konnikova, Maria. "How to Think Like Sherlock Holmes". Point of Inquiry. Center for Inquiry. Archived from the original on 19 December 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2017.
^ Klinger III, pp. 387-392 The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ Klinger I, pp. 450-453 "The Yellow Face"
^ Klinger I, pp. 201-203 "The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle"
^ Klinger I, p. 9 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ Klinger III, p. 42 A Study in Scarlet
^ Klinger I, pp. 423-426 "The Cardboard Box"
^ Klinger II, pp. 864-865 "The Adventure of the Dancing Men"
^ Bird, Alexander (27 June 2006). "Abductive Knowledge and Holmesian Inference".  In Tamar Szabo Gendler; Hawthorne, John (eds.). Oxford studies in epistemology. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-19-928590-7.
^ Sebeok & Umiker-Sebeok 1984, pp. 19 28, esp. p. 22
^ Smith, Jonathan (1994). Fact and feeling: Baconian science and the nineteenth-century literary imagination. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-299-14354-1.
^ Klinger III, p. 40 A Study in Scarlet
^ Bennett, Bo. "Pseudo-Logical Fallacies". Logicallyfallacious.com. Logically Fallacious. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020.
^ Klinger I, pp. 449-471 "The Yellow Face"
^ "Sherlock Holmes: Pioneer in Forensic Science". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 20 December 2019.
^ a b Snyder, Laura J. (2004). "Sherlock Holmes: scientific detective". Endeavour. 28 (3): 104 108. doi:10.1016/j.endeavour.2004.07.007. PMID 15350761.
^ A Study in Scarlet, "The Adventure of Silver Blaze", "The Adventure of the Priory School", The Hound of the Baskervilles, "The Boscombe Valley Mystery"
^ "The Adventure of the Resident Patient", The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ "The Reigate Squires", "The Man with the Twisted Lip"
^ Klinger I, pp. 99-100 "A Case of Identity"
^ Klinger I, p. 578 "The Reigate Squires"
^ Klinger I, pp. 438-439 "The Cardboard Box"
^ Klinger I, p. 670 "The Naval Treaty"
^ Klinger II, p. 814 "The Adventure of the Empty House"
^ Klinger II, pp. 860-863
^ Schwartz, Roy (20 May 2022). "Opinion: The fictional character who changed the science of solving crime". CNN. Retrieved 21 May 2022.
^ Klinger I, p. 30 "A Scandal in Bohemia"
^ Schurr, Maria (15 March 2021). "Hauntings, Dystopia and the English Outsider in Albion's Secret History". Pop Matters. Retrieved 30 July 2021.
^ Klinger II, p. 1545 "The Adventure of the Three Gables"
^ Klinger II, p. 1456 "The Adventure of the Illustrious Client"
^ Klinger III, p. 305 The Sign of Four. These "street Arabs" also appear briefly in A Study in Scarlet and "The Adventure of the Crooked Man".
^ Merritt, Russell. "The Baker Street Irregulars and Billy The Page". The Official Conan Doyle Estate Ltd. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ "The Guns of Sherlock Holmes". Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 27 April 2012.
^ Klinger III, p. 589 The Hound of the Baskervilles
^ Klinger II, pp. 805-806 "The Adventure of the Empty House"
^ See "The Red-Headed League" and "The Adventure of the Illustrious Client".
^ Klinger II, p. 1050 "The Adventure of the Six Napoleons"
^ Klinger I, p. 449 "The Yellow Face"
^ Klinger I, p. 243 "The Adventure of the Speckled Band"
^ Klinger III, pp. 262-263 The Sign of Four
^ Klinger I, pp. 449-450 "The Yellow Face"
^ a b Klinger II, p. 915 "The Solitary Cyclist"
^ Klinger II, p. 916 "The Solitary Cyclist"
^ Klinger II, p. 791 "The Adventure of the Empty House"
^ "The Mystery of Baritsu". The Bartitsu Society. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Nathan, Richard (18 December 2020). "Ultra-Influencers: The Two British Fictional Victorians that Changed Japan". Red Circle Authors. Retrieved 21 January 2021.
^ "Santander: who was Abbey's most famous customer?". The Telegraph. 27 May 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2020.
^ Stamp, Jimmy (18 July 2012). "The Mystery of 221B Baker Street". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 18 February 2020.
^ Reed, Brian (1934). Railway Engines of the World. Oxford University Press. p. 133.
^ Mews News Archived 27 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Lurot Brand. Published Summer 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2013.
^ "Northumberland Street". Sherlockology. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2014.
^ Thomson, Henry Douglas (1958). The Sherlock Holmes Catalogue of the Collection in the Bars and the Grill Room and in the Reconstruction of Part of the Living Room at 221 B Baker Street. Whitbread.
^ "NI chemist honours Sherlock Holmes". BBC News. 16 October 2002. Retrieved 19 June 2011.
^ "Royal Mail launches Sherlock Holmes stamps that reveal secret storylines under UV light". The Independent. 18 August 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2022.
^ Redmond, Christopher (2009). Sherlock Holmes Handbook: Second Edition. Dundurn. p. 301. ISBN 9781770705920.
^ Reid, T. R. (22 September 1999). "Sherlock Holmes honored with statue near fictional London home". The Washington Post. Retrieved 6 January 2013.
^ Cannon-Brookes, Peter (11 April 2017). "Irena Sedlecka". The Atelier Sale of Franta Belsky and Irena Sedlecka. Oxford: Mallams. p. 33. Retrieved 6 August 2020.
^ "Monument to Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson". Dialogue of Cultures - United World. Retrieved 26 July 2020.
^ Gangelhoff, Bonnie (15 September 2017). "A small Oklahoma town finds community through public art". Southwest Art. Retrieved 6 August 2020.
^ McClure, Michael (7 December 2019). "December 7, 2019: First Permanent Granite Tribute to Sherlock Holmes erected in the Americas". Baskerville Productions. Retrieved 7 December 2019.
^ "About the Society". The Sherlock Holmes Society of London. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ "Origins of the BSI". The Baker Street Irregulars. 8 June 2018. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ "Societies and Locations". Sherlockian.net. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Redmond, Christopher (2009). Sherlock Holmes Handbook: Second Edition. Dundurn Press. p. 257. ISBN 978-1-55488-446-9.
^ "Anonymous asked: Question: What's the difference between a Sherlockian and a Holmesian?". Baker Street Babes. 1 December 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2018.
^ Brown, David W. (6 January 2020). "15 Curious Facts About Sherlock Holmes". Mental Floss. Retrieved 6 January 2020.
^ "Sherlockian or Holmesian - What do these terms mean now?". Doyleockian. 19 June 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2018.
^ a b Smith, Daniel (2014) [2009]. The Sherlock Holmes Companion: An Elementary Guide (Updated ed.). London: Aurum Press. pp. 107 108. ISBN 978-1-78131-404-3.
^ Jann, Rosemary (1995). The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes: Detecting Social Order. Twayne Publishers. p. 16. ISBN 978-0805783841.
^ a b c Bostr m, Mattias (2018). From Holmes to Sherlock. Mysterious Press. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-8021-2789-1.
^ Mikkelson, David (2 July 2006). "Sherlock Holmes and 'Elementary, My Dear Watson'". Snopes.com. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Shapiro, Fred (30 October 2006). The Yale Book of Quotations. Yale University Press. p. 215. ISBN 978-0300107982.
^ Tovey, Beth (19 July 2013). "A Study in Sherlock: Holmesian homages for Benedict's birthday". Oxford Dictionaries. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2019.
^ Shapiro, Fred R. (2021). The New Yale Book of Quotations. Yale University Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-300-20597-8.
^ "Elementary, My Dear Watson". Quote Investigator. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
^ Bunson, Matthew (1997). Encyclopedia Sherlockiana. Macmillan Publishers. pp. 72 73. ISBN 0-02-861679-0.
^ Todd, David (16 November 1987). "The enduring cult of Sherlock Holmes". Maclean's. Retrieved 2 January 2023.
^ Montague, Sarah (13 January 2011). "A Study in Sherlock". WNYC: New York, New York Public Radio. Retrieved 14 June 2018.
^ "The Grand Game Vol. One: 1902 1959". The Baker Street Irregulars. 15 January 2011. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Lee, Jennifer (6 January 2009). "The Curious Case of a Birthday for Sherlock". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 June 2018.
^ "About Sherlock Holmes". Sherlockian.Net. Retrieved 15 June 2018.
^ "Baker Street Irregulars Weekend Activities". Baker Street Irregulars Weekend Activities. 5 November 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
^ King, Laurie R. "LRK on: Sherlock Holmes". Laurie R. King. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011. Retrieved 10 January 2011.
^ a b "Two Sherlock Holmes museums in Switzerland? Elementary!". Swissinfo. Retrieved 26 October 2014.
^ "Arthur Conan Doyle Collection". Toronto Public Library. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Teicholz, Tom (17 April 2016). "Finding Sherlock Holmes in Toronto". Forbes. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ "Sherlock Holmes   University of Minnesota Libraries". www.lib.umn.edu. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Mumford, Tracy (27 June 2015). "Exploring the largest Sherlock Holmes archive in the world". MPR News. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ "Conan Doyle Collection". www.visitportsmouth.co.uk. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Harris, Susan Cannon (2003). "Pathological Possibilities: Contagion and Empire in Doyle's Sherlock Holmes Stories". Victorian Literature and Culture. 31 (2): 447 466. doi:10.1017/S1060150303000238. ISSN 1060-1503. JSTOR 25058636. S2CID 162476755.
^ Raheja, Lauren. "Anxieties of Empire in Doyle's Tales of Sherlock Holmes." Nature, Society, and Thought, vol. 19, no. 4, 2006, p. 417, ProQuest Central.
^ Siddiqi, Yumna (2006). "The Cesspool of Empire: Sherlock Holmes and the Return of the Repressed". Victorian Literature and Culture. 34 (1): 233 247. doi:10.1017/S1060150306051138. ISSN 1060-1503. JSTOR 25058745. S2CID 162557404.
^ "My Evening With Sherlock". www.mysteryscenemag.com. Retrieved 13 February 2022.
^ Hale, Mike (25 January 2013). "The Holmes Behind the Modern Sherlock". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 27 December 2019.
^ Ridgway Watt, Peter; Green, Joseph (2003). The Alternative Sherlock Holmes. Routledge. pp. 2, 92. ISBN 978-0-7546-0882-0.
^ Picker, Lenny (18 January 2010). "The Return of Sherlock Holmes". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ Ridgway Watt, Peter; Green, Joseph (2003). The Alternative Sherlock Holmes. Routledge. pp. 3 4. ISBN 0-7546-0882-4.
^ Hayes, Paul Stuart (2012). The Theatrical Sherlock Holmes. Hidden Tiger. pp. 6 12. ISBN 978-1-291-26421-0.
^ O'Leary, James C. (4 June 2014). "Classics of Sherlockiana: the Apocrypha of Sherlock Holmes". I Hear of Sherlock Everywhere. Retrieved 2 January 2020.
^ "Maurice Leblanc". The Arthur Conan Doyle Encyclopedia. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ "The Exploits of Sherlock Holmes". The Arthur Conan Doyle Encyclopedia. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ Sansom, Ian (27 October 2011). "The House of Silk by Anthony Horowitz   review". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Flood, Alison (10 April 2014). "Sherlock Holmes returns in new Anthony Horowitz book, Moriarty". Guardian. Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ "Largest ever collection of new Sherlock Holmes stories will raise money to restore Conan Doyle's house". Radio Times. 15 July 2015. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ "Stepping Stones School". Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ "Enter the Lion: A Posthumous Memoir of Mycroft Holmes". Kirkus Reviews. 1 July 1979. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ "Quinn Fawcett". Macmillan Publishers. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ Dirda, Michael (3 October 2018). "Review | Kareem Abdul-Jabbar returns to his other passion: Sherlock Holmes". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ Trow, M.J. "The Lestrade Series". M. J. Trow, Author and Lecturer. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ "The Irene Adler Series". Carole Nelson Douglas. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ "The Holmes & Hudson Series". Martin Davies. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ Haft, Adele J.; White, Jane G.; White, Robert J. (1999). The Key to "The Name of the Rose". The University of Michigan Press. p. 194. ISBN 9780472086214.
^ Capozzi, Rocco, ed. (22 February 1997). Reading Eco: An Anthology. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253112828.
^ "Russell & Holmes". Laurie R. King. Retrieved 24 December 2019.
^ Rennie, Gordon (2002). Zavant. Black Library. ISBN 1841542032.
^ Reynolds, Josh (2018). Inferno! Volume 1. Black Library. ISBN 9781784967338.
^ Thompson, Sam (26 February 2005). "Review: The Final Solution by Michael Chabon". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ "A Slight Trick of the Mind". Kirkus Reviews. 1 February 2005. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ Scott, A. O. (16 July 2015). "Review: For Ian McKellen's 'Mr. Holmes,' Retirement Is Afoot". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 January 2020.
^ Hickling, Alfred (4 December 2004). "Review: The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes edited by Leslie S Klinger". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ Weingarten, Marc (30 December 2004). "Case of the Lawyer With a Sherlock Holmes Bent". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ de Castella, Tom (26 January 2015). "William Gillette: Five ways he transformed how Sherlock Holmes looks and talks". BBC. Retrieved 10 July 2018.
^ Eyles, Allen (1986). Sherlock Holmes: A Centenary Celebration. Harper & Row. p. 57. ISBN 0-06-015620-1.
^ Tuska, Jon (1978). The Detective in Hollywood. New York: Doubleday. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-385-12093-7.
^ Starrett, Vincent (1933). The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes. Otto Penzler Books (published 1993). p. 156. ISBN 1-883402-05-0.
^ Bunson, Matthew (1997). Encyclopedia Sherlockiana. Simon & Schuster. p. 213. ISBN 0-02-861679-0.
^ Eyles, Allen (1986). Sherlock Holmes: A Centenary Celebration. New York: Harper & Row. pp. 89 98. ISBN 0060156201.
^ "Edith Meiser, 95, Dies; Actress and a Writer". The New York Times. 27 September 1993. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 25 October 2022.
^ a b "Cult Presents: Sherlock Holmes   Bert Coules Interview". BBC.
^ Prepolec, Charles. "Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes: Reviewed". BBC Radio.
^ "Bert Coules: writer, director, speaker". Retrieved 9 March 2016.
^ Clements, Jonathan; McCarthy, Helen (2006). The Anime Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese Animation Since 1917 (2nd edition (Revised & Expanded Edition) ed.). Stone Bridge Press. pp. 580 581. ISBN 978-1-933330-10-5.
^ "Moscow honours legendary Holmes". BBC. 30 April 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ Kinchin-Smith, Sam; Gryspeerdt, Nancy (10 July 2014). "Curious incidents: the adventures of Sherlock Holmes in Russia". The Calvert Journal. Retrieved 31 December 2019.
^ "The Secret of Sherlock Holmes". The Arthur Conan Doyle Encyclopedia. Retrieved 15 June 2018.
^ "HFPA   Nominations and Winners". Goldenglobes.org. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 10 January 2011.
^ Thorpe, Vanessa (18 July 2010). "Sherlock Holmes is back... sending texts and using nicotine patches". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 January 2020.
^ "About ELEMENTARY   TV Show Information". www.cbs.com. Retrieved 4 April 2019.
^ Bostr m, Mattias (2017). From Holmes to Sherlock. Mysterious Press. p. 483. ISBN 978-0-8021-2789-1.
^ Bradshaw, Peter (18 June 2015). "Mr Holmes review   Ian McKellen gets more fascinating with age". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 April 2019.
^ Atkinson, Nathalie (17 July 2015). "Mr. Holmes: Every generation gets a Sherlock it deserves". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 30 December 2019.
^ Livingstone, Josephine (31 August 2018). "The Irreverent Joys of a Japanese Sherlock Holmes". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
^ Smith, Alyssa I. (26 April 2018). "Yuko Takeuchi steps into an iconic role on 'Miss Sherlock' with elementary ease". The Japan Times. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
^ Dring, Christopher (5 April 2017). "The secret success of the Sherlock Holmes video games". gamesindustry.biz. Retrieved 3 September 2018.
^ Litwak, Mark (12 March 2013). "Sherlock Holmes and the Case of the Public Domain". Independent Filmmaker Project (IFP). Retrieved 15 September 2016.
^ a b Itzkoff, Dave (19 January 2010). "For the Heirs to Holmes, a Tangled Web". The New York Times.
^ "Locating U.K. Copyright Holders: The WATCH File". Harry Ransom Center. Retrieved 1 January 2023.
^ "Ownership of the Sherlock Holmes Stories". Sherlockian.net. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
^ a b Malekos Smith, Jessica L. (27 June 2016). "Sherlock Holmes & the Case of the Contested Copyright". Chicago-Kent Journal of Intellectual Property. 15:2: 537 554.
^ Masnick, Mike (26 May 2015). "Sherlock Holmes And The Case Of The Never Ending Copyright Dispute". Techdirt. Retrieved 26 December 2019.
^ "Holmes belongs to the world". Free Sherlock!. 14 February 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013.
^ Stempel, Jonathan (16 June 2014). "Sherlock Holmes belongs to the public, U.S. court rules". Reuters. Retrieved 16 June 2014.
^ Britt, Ryan (26 June 2020). "Conan Doyle Estate Sues Netflix Enola Holmes". Den of Geek. Den of Geek. Retrieved 6 November 2020.
^ Mahdawi, Arwa (7 October 2020). "The curious case of Sherlock Holmes' evolving emotions". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 November 2020.
^ Gardner, Eriq (24 June 2020). "Conan Doyle Estate Sues Netflix Over Coming Movie About Sherlock Holmes' Sister". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
^ Flood, Alison (22 December 2020). "Lawsuit over 'warmer' Sherlock depicted in Enola Holmes dismissed". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2020.
^ Moss, Aaron (20 December 2020). ""Enola Holmes" Copyright Lawsuit Dismissed: Unsolved, Yet Resolved". Copyright Lately. Archived from the original on 20 December 2020. Retrieved 23 December 2020. That means the case was probably settled, although we don't know for sure.
^ Klinger v. Conan Doyle Estate, Ltd., 755 F.3d 496, 497 (7th Cir. 2014) ("will not expire until 95 years after the date of original publication between 2018 to 2022, depending on the original publication date of each story").
^ "2023 public domain debuts include last Sherlock Holmes work". AP News. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 1 January 2023.
^ Jenkins, Jennifer. "January 1, 2023 is Public Domain Day: Works from 1927 are open to all!". Duke University School of Law. Retrieved 1 January 2023.
Further reading
Accardo, Pasquale J. (1987). Diagnosis and Detection: Medical Iconography of Sherlock Holmes. Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 0-517-50291-7.
Baring-Gould, William (1967). The Annotated Sherlock Holmes. New York: Clarkson N. Potter. ISBN 0-517-50291-7.
Baring-Gould, William (1962). Sherlock Holmes of Baker Street: The Life of the World's First Consulting Detective. New York: Clarkson N. Potter. OCLC 63103488.
Blakeney, T. S. (1994). Sherlock Holmes: Fact or Fiction?. London: Prentice Hall & IBD. ISBN 1-883402-10-7.
Bradley, Alan (2004). Ms Holmes of Baker Street: The Truth About Sherlock. Alberta: University of Alberta Press. ISBN 0-88864-415-9.
Campbell, Mark (2007). Sherlock Holmes. London: Pocket Essentials. ISBN 978-0-470-12823-7.
Dakin, David (1972). A Sherlock Holmes Commentary. Newton Abbot: David & Charles. ISBN 0-7153-5493-0.
Duncan, Alistair (2008). Eliminate the Impossible: An Examination of the World of Sherlock Holmes on Page and Screen. London: MX Publishing. ISBN 978-1-904312-31-4.
Duncan, Alistair (2009). Close to Holmes: A Look at the Connections Between Historical London, Sherlock Holmes and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. London: MX Publishing. ISBN 978-1-904312-50-5.
Duncan, Alistair (2010). The Norwood Author: Arthur Conan Doyle and the Norwood Years (1891 1894). London: MX Publishing. ISBN 978-1-904312-69-7.
Fenoli Marc, Qui a tu  Sherlock Holmes ? [Who shot Sherlock Holmes ?], Review L'Alpe 45, Gl nat-Mus e Dauphinois, Grenoble-France, 2009. ISBN 978-2-7234-6902-9
Green, Richard Lancelyn (1987). The Sherlock Holmes Letters. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. ISBN 0-87745-161-3.
Hall, Trevor (1969). Sherlock Holmes: Ten Literary Studies. London: Duckworth. ISBN 0-7156-0469-4.
Hall, Trevor (1977). Sherlock Holmes and his Creator. New York: St Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-71719-9.
Hammer, David (1995). The Before-Breakfast Pipe of Mr. Sherlock Holmes. London: Wessex Pr. ISBN 0-938501-21-6.
Harrison, Michael (1973). The World of Sherlock Holmes. London: Frederick Muller Ltd.
Jones, Kelvin (1987). Sherlock Holmes and the Kent Railways. Sittingborne, Kent: Meresborough Books. ISBN 0-948193-25-5.
Keating, H. R. F. (2006). Sherlock Holmes: The Man and His World. Edison, NJ: Castle. ISBN 0-7858-2112-0.
Kestner, Joseph (1997). Sherlock's Men: Masculinity, Conan Doyle and Cultural History. Farnham: Ashgate. ISBN 1-85928-394-2.
King, Joseph A. (1996). Sherlock Holmes: From Victorian Sleuth to Modern Hero. Lanham, US: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 0-8108-3180-5.
Klinger, Leslie (1998). The Sherlock Holmes Reference Library. Indianapolis: Gasogene Books. ISBN 0-938501-26-7.
Knowles, Christopher (2007). Our Gods Wear Spandex: The Secret History of Comic Book Heroes. San Francisco: Weiser Books. ISBN 978-1-57863-406-4.
Lester, Paul (1992). Sherlock Holmes in the Midlands. Studley, Warwickshire: Brewin Books. ISBN 0-947731-85-7.
Lieboe, Eli. Doctor Joe Bell: Model for Sherlock Holmes. Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1982; Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-87972-198-5
McClure, Michael (2020). Sherlock Holmes and the Cryptic Clues. Chester, IL: Baskerville Productions. ISBN 978-0-9981084-7-6.
Mitchelson, Austin (1994). The Baker Street Irregular: Unauthorised Biography of Sherlock Holmes. Romford: Ian Henry Publications Ltd. ISBN 0-8021-4325-3.
Payne, David S. (1992). Myth and Modern Man in Sherlock Holmes: Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and the Uses of Nostalgia. Bloomington, Ind: Gaslight's Publications. ISBN 0-934468-29-X.
Redmond, Christopher (1987). In Bed with Sherlock Holmes: Sexual Elements in Conan Doyle's Stories. London: Players Press. ISBN 0-8021-4325-3.
Redmond, Donald (1983). Sherlock Holmes: A Study in Sources. Quebec: McGill-Queen's University Press. ISBN 0-7735-0391-9.
Rennison, Nick (2007). Sherlock Holmes. The Unauthorized Biography. London: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-4325-9.
Richards, Anthony John (1998). Holmes, Chemistry and the Royal Institution: A Survey of the Scientific Works of Sherlock Holmes and His Relationship with the Royal Institution of Great Britain. London: Irregulars Special Press. ISBN 0-7607-7156-1.
Riley, Dick (2005). The Bedside Companion to Sherlock Holmes. New York: Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 0-7607-7156-1.
Riley, Peter (2005). The Highways and Byways of Sherlock Holmes. London: P.&D. Riley. ISBN 978-1-874712-78-7.
Roy, Pinaki (2008). The Manichean Investigators: A Postcolonial and Cultural Rereading of the Sherlock Holmes and Byomkesh Bakshi Stories. New Delhi: Sarup and Sons. ISBN 978-81-7625-849-4.
Sebeok, Thomas; Umiker-Sebeok, Jean (1984). "'You Know My Method': A Juxtaposition of Charles S. Peirce and Sherlock Holmes".  In Eco, Umberto; Sebeok, Thomas (eds.). The Sign of Three: Dupin, Holmes, Peirce. Bloomington, IN: History Workshop, Indiana University Press. pp. 11 54. ISBN 978-0-253-35235-4. OCLC 9412985. Previously published as chapter 2, pp. 17 52 of Sebeok, Thomas (1981). The Play of Musement. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-39994-6. LCCN 80008846. OCLC 7275523.
Shaw, John B. (1995). Encyclopedia of Sherlock Holmes: A Complete Guide to the World of the Great Detective. London: Pavilion Books. ISBN 1-85793-502-0.
Sova, Dawn B. (2001). Edgar Allan Poe: A to Z (Paperback ed.). New York: Checkmark Books. ISBN 0-8160-4161-X.
Starrett, Vincent (1993). The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes. London: Prentice Hall & IBD. ISBN 978-1-883402-05-1.
Tracy, Jack (1988). The Sherlock Holmes Encyclopedia: Universal Dictionary of Sherlock Holmes. London: Crescent Books. ISBN 0-517-65444-X.
Tracy, Jack (1996). Subcutaneously, My Dear Watson: Sherlock Holmes and the Cocaine Habit. Bloomington, Ind.: Gaslight Publications. ISBN 0-934468-25-7.
Wagner, E. J. (2007). La Scienza di Sherlock Holmes. Torino: Bollati Boringheri. ISBN 978-0-470-12823-7.
Weller, Philip (1993). The Life and Times of Sherlock Holmes. Simsbury: Bracken Books. ISBN 1-85891-106-0.
Wexler, Bruce (2008). The Mysterious World of Sherlock Holmes. London: Running Press. ISBN 978-0-7624-3252-3.
External links
Sherlock Holmes  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Library resources about  Sherlock Holmes 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
A collection of Sherlock Holmes eBooks at Standard Ebooks
The Sherlock Holmes Museum 221b Baker Street London NW1 6XE England.
"Sherlock Holmes". 8 July 1930. at Internet Archive
Sherlock Holmes plaques on openplaques.org
Discovering Sherlock Holmes at Stanford University
Chess and Sherlock Holmes essay by Edward Winter
"The Burden of Holmes"   23.12.09 article in The Wall Street Journal
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle audio books by Lit2Go from the University of South Florida
Portals: Novels History Anarchism London South East England Scotland Film Schools University of Oxford Speculative fiction
vteArthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes
Canon
Adaptations
Pastiches
Popular culture
Novels
A Study in Scarlet (1887)
The Sign of the Four (1890)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1902)
The Valley of Fear (1915)
Story collections
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892)
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (1894)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1905)
His Last Bow (1917)
The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes (1927)
Characters
Sherlock Holmes
Dr. Watson
Professor Moriarty
Inspector Lestrade
Mycroft Holmes
Mrs. Hudson
Irene Adler
Colonel Moran
Baker Street Irregulars
Minor characters
Uncollected stories
"The Field Bazaar" (1896)
"The Story of the Lost Special" (1898)
"How Watson Learned the Trick" (1924)
Universe
221B Baker Street
Baritsu
Diogenes Club
The Dynamics of an Asteroid
A Treatise on the Binomial Theorem
Studies
Sherlockian game
Holmesian studies
The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes
The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes
From Holmes to Sherlock
The Great Detective
Naked Is the Best Disguise
Related
Sherlock Holmes fandom
Sherlockiana
Sherlock Holmes Museum
The Sherlock Holmes
The Baker Street Irregulars
The Baker Street Journal
The Bootmakers of Toronto
The Strand Magazine
Undershaw
 Category
vteScreen adaptations of Sherlock HolmesTheatrical filmsSilent
Sherlock Holmes Baffled (1900)
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes; or, Held for Ransom (1905)
Sherlock Holmes in the Great Murder Mystery (1908)
Ars ne Lupin contra Sherlock Holmes (1910)
 clair film series (1912 1913)
Der Hund von Baskerville (1914)
Detektiv Braun (1914)
A Study in Scarlet (1914 British film)
A Study in Scarlet (1914 US film)
The Valley of Fear (1916)
Sherlock Holmes (1916)
Sherlock Holmes (1922)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1929)
Stoll series
The Dying Detective (1921)
The Devil's Foot (1921)
The Man with the Twisted Lip (1921)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1921)
The Sign of Four (1923)
Wontner series
The Sleeping Cardinal (1931)
The Missing Rembrandt (1932)
The Sign of Four (1932)
The Triumph of Sherlock Holmes (1935)
Silver Blaze (1937)
Rathbone Bruce  series
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1939)
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1939)
Voice of Terror (1942)
Secret Weapon (1942)
Sherlock Holmes in Washington (1943)
Sherlock Holmes Faces Death (1943)
The Spider Woman (1943)
The Scarlet Claw (1944)
The Pearl of Death (1944)
The House of Fear (1945)
The Woman in Green (1945)
Pursuit to Algiers (1945)
Terror by Night (1946)
Dressed to Kill (1946)
Downey series
Sherlock Holmes (2009)
A Game of Shadows (2011)
Other films
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1929)
The Limejuice Mystery (1930)
The Speckled Band (1931)
Lel ek ve slu b ch Sherlocka Holmese (1932)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1932)
Sherlock Holmes (1932)
A Study in Scarlet (1933)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1937)
The Grey Lady (1937)
The Man Who Was Sherlock Holmes (1937)
Deduce, You Say! (1956)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1959)
The Deadly Necklace (1962)
A Study in Terror (1965)
The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes (1970)
They Might Be Giants (1971)
The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes' Smarter Brother (1975)
The Seven-Per-Cent Solution (1976)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1978)
Murder by Decree (1979)
The Case of Marcel Duchamp (1984)
Young Sherlock Holmes (1985)
The Great Mouse Detective (1986)
Without a Clue (1988)
Zero Effect (1998)
A Samba for Sherlock (2001)
Case Closed: The Phantom of Baker Street (2002)
Holmes & Watson. Madrid Days (2012)
Mr. Holmes (2015)
The Empire of Corpses (2015)
Sherlock Gnomes (2018)
Holmes & Watson (2018)
Television/ Streaming/Direct-to-videoFilmsIan Richardson
The Sign of Four (1983)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1983)
Peter O'Toole (animated)
Sherlock Holmes and a Study in Scarlet (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Baskerville Curse (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Sign of Four (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Valley of Fear (1983)
Vasily Livanov   series
Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson (1979)
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson (1980)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1981)
The Treasures of Agra (1983)
The Twentieth Century Approaches (1986)
Christopher Lee
The Leading Lady (1991)
Incident at Victoria Falls (1992)
Matt Frewer
The Hound of the Baskervilles (2000)
The Sign of Four (2001)
The Royal Scandal (2001)
The Case of the Whitechapel Vampire (2002)
Ian Hart (as Watson)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (2002)
The Case of the Silk Stocking (2004)
Henry Cavill
Enola Holmes (2020)
Enola Holmes 2 (2022)
Other films
The Three Garridebs (1937)
The Man Who Disappeared (1951)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1972)
The Longing of Sherlock Holmes (1972)
Doctor Watson and the Darkwater Hall Mystery (1974)
The Return of the World's Greatest Detective (1976)
Sherlock Holmes in New York (1976)
Silver Blaze (1977)
The Strange Case of the End of Civilization as We Know It (1977)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1982)
The Masks of Death (1984)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1987)
Hands of a Murderer (1990)
The Crucifer of Blood (1991)
1994 Baker Street: Sherlock Holmes Returns (1993)
The Hound of London (1993)
Sherlock: Case of Evil (2002)
Sherlock Holmes and the Baker Street Irregulars (2007)
Sherlock Holmes (2010)
Tom and Jerry Meet Sherlock Holmes (2010)
Television series
Sherlock Holmes (1951)
Sherlock Holmes (1954)
Sherlock Holmes (1965 1968)
Sherlock Holmes (1967 1968)
Sherlock Holmes (1968)
Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson (1979 1980)
Young Sherlock: The Mystery of the Manor House (1982)
The Baker Street Boys (1983)
Sherlock Hound (1984 1985)
Sherlock Holmes (1984 1994)
episodes
The Adventures of Shirley Holmes (1997 2000)
Sherlock Holmes in the 22nd Century (1999 2001)
Sherlock (2010 2017)
Tantei Opera Milky Holmes (2010 2016)
Aria the Scarlet Ammo (2011)
Elementary (2012 2019)
Sherlock Holmes (2013)
Sherlock Holmes (2014 2015)
Code:Realize   Guardian of Rebirth (2017)
Miss Sherlock (2018)
Sherlock: Untold Stories (2019)
Case File n 221: Kabukicho (2019 2020)
Moriarty the Patriot (2020 2021)
Sherlock in Russia (2020)
The Irregulars (2021)
Lupin the 3rd Part 6 (2021 2022)
The Tale of the Outcasts (2023)
Actors by role
Sherlock Holmes
Dr. Watson
Inspector Lestrade
Mycroft Holmes
Mrs. Hudson
Professor Moriarty
vteSherlock Holmes franchise mediaAuthorsStage
Sherlock Holmes (1899 play)
The Burglar and the Lady (1905 play)
The Speckled Band (1910 play)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1923 play)
Baker Street (1965 musical)
Sherlock Holmes: The Musical (1988 musical)
Baskerville: A Sherlock Holmes Mystery (2015 play)
Radio
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1930 1936)
The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1939 1950)
Sherlock Holmes (1952 1969)
Sherlock Holmes (1989 1998)
Imagination Theatre (1998 present)
The Newly Discovered Casebook of Sherlock Holmes (1999)
The Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (2002 2010)
Music
"The Tiger of San Pedro"
The Tale of the Giant Rat of Sumatra (1974 parody album)
Sherlock Holmes (2009 soundtrack)
Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows (2011 soundtrack)
Art
Statue in London
Comics
Baker Street
Victorian Undead
Games
221B Baker Street (board game)
Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective (gamebook)
vtePastiches of Sherlock HolmesThe Exploits of Sherlock Holmesby Adrian Conan Doyleand John Dickson Carr
"The Adventure of the Seven Clocks" (1952)
"The Adventure of the Gold Hunter" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Wax Gamblers" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Highgate Miracle" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Black Baronet" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Sealed Room" (1953)
"The Adventure of Foulkes Rath" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Abbas Ruby" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Dark Angels" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Two Women" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Deptford Horror" (1953)
"The Adventure of the Red Widow" (1953)
by Nicholas Meyer
The Seven-Per-Cent Solution (1974)
The West End Horror (1976)
The Canary Trainer (1993)
The Adventure of the Peculiar Protocols (2019)
The Return of the Pharaoh (2021)
by Loren D. Estleman
Sherlock Holmes vs. Dracula (1978)
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Holmes (1979)
The Perils of Sherlock Holmes (2012)
by Michael Hardwick
The Prisoner of the Devil (1979)
The Revenge of the Hound (1987)
by David Stuart Davies
Sherlock Holmes and the Hentzau Affair (1991)
The Tangled Skein (1995)
The Scroll of the Dead (1998)
Shadow of the Rat (1999)
The Veiled Detective (2004)
The Devil's Promise (2014)
The Ripper Legacy (2016)
by Barrie Roberts
Sherlock Holmes and the Railway Maniac (1994)
Sherlock Holmes and the Man from Hell (1997)
Mary Russell seriesby Laurie R. King
The Beekeeper's Apprentice (1994)
A Monstrous Regiment of Women (1995)
A Letter of Mary (1997)
The Moor (1998)
O Jerusalem (1999)
Justice Hall (2002)
The Game (2004)
Locked Rooms (2005)
The Language of Bees (2009)
The God of the Hive (2010)
Pirate King (2011)
Garment of Shadows (2012)
Dreaming Spies (2015)
The Murder of Mary Russell (2016)
Island of the Mad (2018)
by Donald Serrell Thomas
The Secret Cases of Sherlock Holmes (1997)
Sherlock Holmes and the Running Noose (2001)
The Execution of Sherlock Holmes (2007)
Sherlock Holmes and the King's Evil (2009)
Sherlock Holmes and the Ghosts of Bly (2010)
The Lost Casebooks of Sherlock Holmes (2012)
Death on a Pale Horse: Sherlock Holmes on Her Majesty's Secret Service (2013)
by Lyndsay Faye
Dust and Shadow: An Account of the Ripper Killings by Dr. John H. Watson (2009)
The Whole Art of Detection: Lost Mysteries of Sherlock Holmes (2017)
Young Sherlock Holmesby Andy Lane
Death Cloud (2010)
Red Leech (2010)
Black Ice (2011)
Fire Storm (2011)
Snake Bite (2012)
Knife Edge (2013)
Stone Cold (2014)
Night Break (2015)
by Guy Adams
The Breath of God (2011)
The Army of Dr. Moreau (2012)
by Anthony Horowitz
The House of Silk (2011)
Moriarty (2014)
by Kim Newman
Moriarty: The Hound of the D'Urbervilles (2011)
The Man From The Diogenes Club (2017)
by Kareem Abdul-Jabbarand Anna Waterhouse
Mycroft Holmes (2015)
Mycroft and Sherlock (2018)
Mycroft and Sherlock: The Empty Birdcage (2019)
by James Lovegrove
The Stuff of Nightmares (2013)
Gods of War (2014)
The Thinking Engine (2015)
The Labyrinth of Death (2017)
The Devil's Dust (2018)
Sherlock Holmes and the Shadwell Shadows (2016)
Sherlock Holmes and the Miskatonic Monstrosities (2017)
Sherlock Holmes and the Sussex Sea-Devils (2018)
Sherlock Holmes and the Christmas Demon (2019)
Sherlock Holmes and the Beast of the Stapletons (2020)
Sherlock Holmes & The Three Winter Terrors (2021)
by Cavan Scott
Sherlock Holmes: The Patchwork Devil (2016)
Sherlock Holmes: Cry of the Innocents (2017)
The Lady Sherlock Seriesby Sherry Thomas
A Study in Scarlet Women (2016)
A Conspiracy in Belgravia (2017)
The Hollow of Fear (2018)
Sherlock Holmes in Minnesota by Larry Millett
Sherlock Holmes and the Red Demon (1996)
Sherlock Holmes and the Ice Palace Murders (1998)
Sherlock Holmes and the Rune Stone Mystery (1999)
Sherlock Holmes and the Secret Alliance (2001)
The Disappearance of Sherlock Holmes (2012)
Sherlock Holmes and the Eisendorf Enigma (2017)
Other worksNovels
The Pursuit of the House-Boat (1897)
A Double Barrelled Detective Story (1902)
Sherlock Holmes of Baker Street (1962)
The Ultimate Crime (1976)
The Last Sherlock Holmes Story (1978)
The Whitechapel Horrors (1992)
All-Consuming Fire (1994)
The Strange Case of Mrs. Hudson's Cat (1997)
The Mandala of Sherlock Holmes (1999)
Shadows Over Baker Street (2003)
Sherlock Holmes: The Way of All Flesh (2004)
The Final Solution (2004)
A Slight Trick of the Mind (2005)
The Italian Secretary (2005)
Erasing Sherlock (2006)
Sherlock Holmes: The Unauthorized Biography (2006)
Sherlock Holmes Was Wrong (2007)
The Shadow of Reichenbach Falls (2008)
Dead Man's Land (2013)
The Albino's Treasure (2015)
Sherlock Holmes and the Servants of Hell (2016)
The Counterfeit Detective (2017)
Short stories
"The Doctor's Case" (1987)
"A Study in Emerald" (2003)
Novel series
The Enola Holmes Mysteries (2006 10)
The Boy Sherlock Holmes (2007 12)
Gaslight series (2008 18)
Parody
The Fossil Island (1951)
The Adventure of the Peerless Peer (1974)
Everybody's Favorite Duck (1988)
Lizzie Newton: Victorian Mysteries (2011 2013)
Sherlock Bones (2011 2012)
Solar Pons
Stoker and Holmes (2013 2017)
Related
221B Baker Street (board game)
Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective
vteVideo game adaptations of Sherlock HolmesIndividual games
Sherlock
Robin of Sherlock
Sherlock Holmes: Hakushaku Reij  Y kai Jiken
Young Sherlock: The Legacy of Doyle
221B Baker Street
Sherlock: The Riddle of the Crown Jewels
Meitantei Holmes: M-Kara no Chousenjou
London Detective Mysteria
Code: Realize
Consulting Detective
Consulting Detective
Consulting Detective Vol. II
Consulting Detective Vol. III
The Lost Filesof Sherlock Holmes
The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes
The Case of the Rose Tattoo
Frogwares'Sherlock Holmes
The Mystery of the Mummy
The Case of the Silver Earring
The Awakened
Sherlock Holmes Versus Ars ne Lupin
Sherlock Holmes Versus Jack the Ripper
The Mystery of Osborne House
The Testament of Sherlock Holmes
The Hound of the Baskervilles
Crimes & Punishments
The Devil's Daughter
Chapter One
The Great Ace Attorney
The Great Ace Attorney: Adventures
The Great Ace Attorney 2: Resolve
vteArthur Conan DoyleBibliographySherlock Holmes(canon)
A Study in Scarlet (1887)
The Sign of the Four (1890)
The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892)
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes (1894)
The Hound of the Baskervilles (1902)
The Return of Sherlock Holmes (1904)
The Valley of Fear (1914)
His Last Bow (1917)
The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes (1927)
Professor Challenger
The Lost World (1912)
The Poison Belt (1913)
The Land of Mist (1926)
"When the World Screamed" (1928)
"The Disintegration Machine" (1929)
Other novels
The Narrative of John Smith (1883) [2011]
The Mystery of Cloomber (1889)
Micah Clarke (1889)
The Firm of Girdlestone (1890)
The White Company (1891)
The Doings of Raffles Haw (1892)
Beyond the City (1892)
The Great Shadow (1892)
The Refugees (1893)
The Parasite (1894)
The Stark Munro Letters (1895)
The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard (1896)
Rodney Stone (1896)
The Tragedy of the Korosko (1898)
A Duet, with an Occasional Chorus (1899)
Adventures of Gerard (1903)
Sir Nigel (1906)
The Maracot Deep (1929)
Short stories
"J. Habakuk Jephson's Statement" (1884)
"Lot No. 249" (1892)
"The Case of Lady Sannox" (1893)
"The Club-Footed Grocer" (1898)
"The Brown Hand" (1899)
"The Terror of Blue John Gap" (1910)
"The Horror of the Heights" (1913)
Danger! and Other Stories (1918)
Other
"The Inner Room" (1898)
"The Crime of the Congo" (1909)
The Vital Message (1919)
Depictions
FairyTale: A True Story (1997 film)
Photographing Fairies (1997 film)
Arthur & George (2015 miniseries)
Houdini & Doyle (2016 miniseries)
Related
Adrian Conan Doyle (son)
Jean Conan Doyle (daughter)
Charles Altamont Doyle (father)
John Doyle (grandfather)
The Great Wyrley Outrages
Undershaw (home)
vteThe animated works of Burbank Films AustraliaCharles Dickens Animated Classics
Oliver Twist (1982)
A Christmas Carol (1982)
Great Expectations (1983)
David Copperfield (1983)
The Old Curiosity Shop (1984)
A Tale of Two Cities (1984)
Nicholas Nickleby (1985)
The Pickwick Papers (1985)
Sherlock Holmes Animated Classics
Sherlock Holmes and a Study in Scarlet (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Baskerville Curse (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Sign of Four (1983)
Sherlock Holmes and the Valley of Fear (1983)
Literary Animated Classics
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1985)
The Adventures of Robin Hood (1985)
The Man in the Iron Mask (1985)
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1986)
Ivanhoe (1986)
Kidnapped (1986)
King Solomon's Mines (1986)
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1986)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1986)
The Three Musketeers (1986)
Black Beauty (1987)
Don Quixote of La Mancha (1987)
Rob Roy (1987)
The Last of the Mohicans (1987)
The Odyssey (1987)
Treasure Island (1987)
Alice in Wonderland (1988)
Around the World in 80 Days (1988)
Black Arrow (1988)
Black Tulip (1988)
Hiawatha (1988)
Peter Pan (1988)
Prisoner of Zenda (1988)
Westward Ho! (1988)
Wind in the Willows (1988)
The Corsican Brothers (1989)
Co-productionsAlice Through the Looking Glass (1987)
vteMaurice Leblanc's Ars ne LupinNovels andcollections
Ars ne Lupin, Gentleman Burglar
Ars ne Lupin versus Herlock Sholmes
The Hollow Needle
The Crystal Stopper
The Island of Thirty Coffins
The Mysterious Mansion
The Billions of Ars ne Lupin
The Last Love of Ars ne Lupin
Characters
Ars ne Lupin
Josephine Balsamo
Films
Ars ne Lupin contra Sherlock Holmes (1910)
Ars ne Lupin (1916)
The Teeth of the Tiger (1919)
813 (1920)
Ars ne Lupin (1932)
Arsene Lupin, Detective (1937)
Ars ne Lupin Returns (1938)
Enter Ars ne Lupin (1944)
The Adventures of Ars ne Lupin (1957)
Sign  Ars ne Lupin  (1959)
Ars ne Lupin (2004)
Television
Ars ne Lupin (1971-1974)
The Island of Thirty Coffins (1979)
Night Hood (1996-1997)
Lupin (2007)
Code:Realize   Guardian of Rebirth (2017)
Lupinranger VS Patranger (2018-2019)
Lupin (2021-)
Comics
Lupin III
Games
Sherlock Holmes Versus Ars ne Lupin (2007)
London Detective Mysteria (2013)
Code: Realize (2014)
Related
Lupin the Third
A. J. Raffles
Sherlock Holmes
Herlock Sholmes
Persona 5 (2016)
vteAnthony HorowitzAlex Rider
Stormbreaker (2000)
Point Blanc (2001)
Skeleton Key (2002)
Eagle Strike (2003)
Scorpia (2004)
Ark Angel (2005)
Snakehead (2007)
Crocodile Tears (2009)
Scorpia Rising (2011)
Russian Roulette (2013)
Never Say Die (2017)
Secret Weapon (2019)
Nightshade (2020)
The Diamond Brothers
The Falcon's Malteser (1986)
Public Enemy Number Two (1987)
South by South East (1991)
The French Confection (2002)
I Know What You Did Last Wednesday (2002)
The Blurred Man (2002)
The Greek Who Stole Christmas (2007)
Where Seagulls Dare (2022)
The Power of Five
Raven's Gate (2005)
Evil Star (2006)
Nightrise (2007)
Necropolis (2008)
Oblivion (2012)
James Bond
Trigger Mortis (2015)
Forever and a Day (2018)
With a Mind to Kill (2022)
Sherlock Holmes
The House of Silk (2011)
Moriarty (2014)
Susan Ryeland
Magpie Murders (2016)
Moonflower Murders (2020)
Hawthorne and Horowitz
The Word Is Murder (2017)
The Sentence Is Death (2019)
A Line to Kill (2021)
The Twist of a Knife (2022)
Other novels
The Devil and His Boy (1998)
The Killing Joke (2004)
Short story collections
Horowitz Horror (1999)
Films/plays
Just Ask for Diamond (1988)
Mindgame (1999)
The Gathering (2003)
Stormbreaker (2006)
Television series created
The Diamond Brothers (1991)
Crime Traveller (1997)
Murder in Mind (2001 03)
Foyle's War (2002 15)
Collision (2009)
Injustice (2011)
New Blood (2016)
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
2
3
National
Norway
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Sweden
Czech Republic
Australia
Korea
Croatia
Poland
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sherlock_Holmes&oldid=1146397685"