This article needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (December 2018)
PhoenixIvy TechAshfordAPUSUCFSNHULibertyPSUHCCSASUKaplanUCCSUclass=notpageimage| The ten largest colleges and universities by enrollment in the United States.   Private   Public
This is a list of the largest United States colleges and universities by enrollment for colleges and universities in the United States.
What this list includes:
Colleges and universities within the United States
University systems if the system is run under a single administration
Enrollment is the sum of the headcount of undergraduate and graduate students
Enrollment is counted by the Integrated Post-secondary Education System within the United States Department of Education.
Enrollment is the 12-month unduplicated headcount, indicating the number of unique students who attended the university during the year.
What this list does not include:
Any indication of how many of the enrolled students are full or part-time (e.g., some universities may have a high enrollment, but have most students enrolled in only a single class)
Any indication of how many students are online-only.
For other lists that measure university enrollment, see the see also section below.
Rankings[edit]
The United States Department of Education's Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System contains information on all 6,125 officially recognized institutions of higher education in the United States. The following is a list of the ten largest institutions of higher education by Fall 2020 enrollment, meaning it is the number of unique individuals who were enrolled in at least one class on the 21st day of the Fall 2020 semester. Whether a system of individual campuses is counted as one or multiple institutions depends on how that institution is accredited and chartered. All data can be verified on the IPEDS system website.[1]
U.S. Department of Education Fall 2020 Enrollment[2]
Rank
College
Classification
Location
Enrollment
1
Western Governors University
Private
Online
147,866
2
Southern New Hampshire University
Private, Non-profit
New Hampshire
134,345
3
Grand Canyon University
Private, For-profit
Arizona
103,427
4
Liberty University
Private
Virginia
93,349
5
The Pennsylvania State University
Public
Pennsylvania
89,816
6
University of Phoenix-Arizona
Private, For-profit
Arizona
89,763
7
Arizona State University Campus Immersion
Public research university
Arizona
74,795
8
Dallas College
TBC
Texas
74,781
9
University of Central Florida
Public
Florida
71,881
10
Texas A & M University-College Station
Public
Texas
70,418
See also[edit]
World's largest universities
List of largest universities by enrollment
List of largest United States university campuses by enrollment
List of largest United States universities by undergraduate enrollment
References[edit]
^ IPEDS Datacenter United States Department of Education.
^ IPEDS Datacenter
External links[edit]
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, U.S. Department of Education. Dataset cutting tool: All colleges and universities by enrollment count.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_the_largest_United_States_colleges_and_universities_by_enrollment&oldid=1112398295"