Deep-fried chicken dish
General Tso's chickenGeneral Tso's chickenAlternative namesGeneral Tso Chicken[1]CourseMainPlace of originTaiwanServing temperatureHotMain ingredientsChicken, ginger, garlic, soy sauce, rice vinegar,  Shaoxing wine or sherry, sugar, sesame oil, scallions, hot chili peppers, batterVariationsOrange chicken (Westernized version)  Media: General Tso's chicken
General Tso's chickenTraditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinZu  Z ngt ng j Wade GilesTso3 Tsung1-t'ang2 chi1IPA[tswo ts t a t i ]Yue: CantoneseYale RomanizationJ  j ng t hng ga IPA[ts  ts  t  k i]Southern MinHokkien POJCh -chong-tn g-keAlternative Chinese nameTraditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinZu  g ng j Wade GilesTso3 kung1 chi1IPA[tswo k t i ]Yue: CantoneseYale RomanizationZo2 gung1 gai1JyutpingJ  g ng ga IPA[ts ko k i]Southern MinHokkien POJCh -kong-ke
General Tso's chicken ([tswo ]; Chinese:  ; pinyin: Zu  Z ngt ng j ) is a sweet and spicy deep-fried chicken dish that is served in North American Chinese restaurants. The dish is named after Zuo Zongtang, formerly romanized "Tso Tsung-t'ang", a Qing dynasty statesman and military leader, although the dish has no recorded connection to Zuo nor is the dish known in Zuo's home province, Hunan.[2]
Name and origins[edit]
Although the dish was named after Zuo Zongtang  (Tso Tsung-t'ang) (1812 1885), a Qing dynasty statesman and military leader from Hunan Province, he could not have eaten the dish or known of it.[3] The dish is found neither in Changsha, the capital of Hunan Province, nor in Xiangyin County, where Zuo was born.  Zuo's descendants  living in Xiangyin County said that they had never heard of such a dish.[4]
There are several stories concerning the origin of the dish. Eileen Yin-Fei Lo states in her book The Chinese Kitchen that the dish originates from a simple Hunan chicken dish and that the reference to "Zongtang" was not a reference to Zuo Zongtang, but rather a reference to the homophone zongtang ( ), meaning "ancestral meeting hall".[5] Consistent with this interpretation, the dish name is sometimes (but considerably less commonly) found in Chinese as   (Chung tong gai is transliterated from Jyutping[citation needed]; Zu  Z ngt ng j  is transliterated from Hanyu Pinyin).
The dish or its variants are known by a number of variant names, including: Governor Tso's chicken, 
General Tao s chicken, General Gao's / Gau's chicken, General Mao's chicken, General Tsao's chicken, General Tong's chicken, General Tang's chicken, General T's Chicken, General Cho's chicken, General Chow's chicken, General Chai's chicken, General Joe's Chicken, T.S.O. Chicken, General Ching's chicken, General Jong's Chicken, General Sauce Chicken, House Chicken, or simply General's Chicken.
Peng Chang-kuei claim[edit]
Fuchsia Dunlop[2] argues that the recipe was invented by Taiwan-based Hunan cuisine chef Peng Chang-kuei,[6] [7] who had been an apprentice of Cao Jingchen ( ), a leading early 20th-century Chinese chef. Peng was the Nationalist government's banquet chef and fled with Kuomintang forces to Taiwan during the Chinese Civil War.[6] There he continued his career as official chef until 1973, when he moved to New York to open a restaurant. One new dish, General Tso's chicken, was originally prepared without sugar and subsequently altered to suit the tastes of "non-Hunanese people". The popularity of the dish has led to it being adopted by local Hunanese chefs and food writers.[2][4][page needed] When Peng opened a restaurant in Hunan in the 1990s introducing General Tso's chicken, the restaurant closed without success, as the locals found the dish too sweet.[4][page needed]
Peng's Restaurant[8] on East 44th Street in New York City claims that it was the first restaurant in the city to serve General Tso's chicken. Since the dish (and cuisine) was new, Peng made it the house specialty in spite of the dish's commonplace ingredients.[2] A review of Peng's in 1977 mentions that their "General Tso's chicken was a stir-fried masterpiece, sizzling hot both in flavor and temperature".[9]
Peng died from pneumonia in November 2016 at 98 years old.[10][11]
Wang claim[edit]
New York's Shun Lee Palaces, located at East (155 E. 55th St.) and West (43 W. 65th St.), also claims that it was the first restaurant to serve General Tso's chicken and that it was invented by a Chinese immigrant chef named T. T. Wang in 1972. Michael Tong, owner of New York's Shun Lee Palaces, says "We opened the first Hunanese restaurant in the whole country, and the four dishes we offered you will see on the menu of practically every Hunanese restaurant in America today. They all copied from us."[3]
It has also been argued that the two stories can be somewhat reconciled in that the current General Tso's chicken recipe   where the meat is crispy fried   was introduced by Chef Wang but as "General Ching's chicken", a name which still has trace appearances on menus on the Internet (the identity of its namesake "General Ching" is, however, unclear); whereas the name "General Tso's chicken" can be traced to Chef Peng, who cooked it in a different way.[4]
These competing claims are discussed in the 2014 documentary film The Search for General Tso, which also traces how the history of Chinese immigration into the US parallels the development of a unique Chinese-American or American Chinese cuisine.
Recipes[edit]
 General Tso's chicken
 Close-up view of General Tso's chicken
Traditional basic ingredients include:
Sauce: soy sauce, rice wine, rice-wine vinegar, sugar,[12] cornstarch, dried red chili peppers (whole), garlic.
Batter / breading: egg, cornstarch.
Dish: broccoli, chicken dark meat (cubed).
Regional differences[edit]
The Taiwanese restaurant Peng Chang-kuei also serves the dish and is credited by some sources as the inventor of the dish.[6] Differences between this Taiwanese dish and that commonly encountered in North America are that it is not sweet in flavor, the chicken is cooked with its skin and that soy sauce plays a much more prominent role.[4]
See also[edit]
Canada portalUnited States portalFood portal
American Chinese cuisine
Canadian Chinese cuisine
List of Taiwanese inventions and discoveries
Crispy fried chicken
Lemon chicken
List of chicken dishes
Orange chicken
Sesame chicken
References[edit]
^ "Le Grand Poutinefest comes to the West Island May 31 to June 2"..
^ a b c d Dunlop, Fuchsia (February 4, 2007). "Hunan Resources". The New York Times Magazine. Section 6, Page 75. Retrieved 2009-01-09.
^ a b Browning, Michael (April 17, 2002). "Who Was General Tso And Why Are We Eating His Chicken?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved 2007-02-24. Text available at WiredNewYork.com
^ a b c d e Lee, Jennifer (2008). The Fortune Cookie Chronicles: Adventures in the World of Chinese Food. Twelve Books. ISBN 978-0-446-58007-6. - Read online, registration required.
^ Lo, Eileen Yin-Fei (1999). "Transplanting Chinese Foods in the West". The Chinese Kitchen. calligraphy by San Yan Wong (1st ed.). New York: William Morrow and Company. p. 416. ISBN 0-688-15826-9.
^ a b c "The Curious History of General Tso's Chicken" Archived 2010-01-09 at the Wayback Machine, Salon
^ Dunlop (2006).
^ " ".
^ Sheraton, Mimi (March 18, 1977). "A Touch of Hunan, A Taste of Italy". The New York Times. New Jersey Weekly section, Page 68. Retrieved 2007-04-26.
^ Everington, Keoni (2 December 2016). "Inventor of General Tso's Chicken dies in Taipei at age 98 | Taiwan News". Taiwan News. Retrieved 2 December 2016.
^ Grimes, William (2 December 2016). "Peng Chang-kuei, Chef Behind General Tso's Chicken, Dies at 98". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 February 2021.
^ "The Search for General .Tso" (Movie). Ian Cheney. 2014.
Further reading[edit]
Dunlop, Fuchsia (2006), "The Strange Tale of General Tso's Chicken",  in Richard Hosking (ed.), Authenticity in the Kitchen: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery 2005, Oxford Symposium, pp. 165 177, ISBN 978-1-903018-47-7
External links[edit]
7 Chefs on the Enduring Appeal of General Tso's Chicken, Grub Street Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine (January 8, 2015).
Wikimedia Commons has media related to General Tso's Chicken.
vteChicken dishesStews, braisesand casseroles
Adobo
Afritada
Andong jjimdak
Ayam kecap
Ayam masak merah
Ayam pansuh
Ayam rica-rica
Bean sprouts chicken
Betutu
Bon bon chicken
Bourbon chicken
Brown stew chicken
Butter chicken
Cafreal
Cashew chicken
Chargha
Chicken   la King
Chicken and dumplings
Chicken and waffles
Chicken balls
Chicken bog
Chicken Chettinad
Chicken curry
Chicken Divan
Chicken karahi
Chicken Lahori
Chicken Marengo
Chicken marsala
Chicken mull
Chicken paprikash
Chicken Picasso
Chicken Sukka
Chicken riggies
Chicken tikka masala
Chicken Vesuvio
Chimaek
Chikuzenni
Chilli chicken
Circassian chicken
Coq au vin
Country Captain
Dak-bokkeum-tang
Dapanji
Dong'an chicken
Dragon tiger phoenix
Escabeche oriental
Flying Jacob
Fujian red wine chicken
Galinha   portuguesa
Galinhada
Gallo en chicha
Gulai ayam
Helzel
Inubaran
Kedjenou
King Ranch chicken
Kori rotti
Kwetiau ayam
Mie ayam
Moambe chicken
Murgh musallam
Opor ayam
Ostropel
Piaparan
Pininyahang manok
Piyanggang manok
Plecing ayam
Poulet au fromage
Rollatini
Sanbeiji
Scaloppine
Sorol
Soy sauce chicken
Swiss wing
Talunan
Waterzooi
White cut chicken
Yassa
Fried chicken
Ayam goreng
Ayam goreng kalasan
Ayam pop
Barberton chicken
Buffalo wings
Chicken 65
Cordon bleu
Coxinha
Crispy
Dak-galbi
Finger
Fries
Chicken Fran aise
General Tso's chicken
Gribenes
Karaage
Katsu
Chicken Kiev
Kentucky
Korean
Kung Pao
Laziji
Lemon
Lollipop
Chicken Maryland
Moo goo gai pan
Nashville hot chicken
Nugget
Orange
Padak
Parmigiana
Piccata
Pozharsky cutlet
Saltimbocca
Sesame
Southern
Spice bag
Sweet and sour
Tabaka
Taiwanese
Chicken tatsuta
Tongdak
Yangnyeom
Roast and barbecue
Ayam bakar
Ayam bumbu rujak
Ayam kodok
Ayam taliwang
Beggar's Chicken
Beer can chicken
Buldak
Engagement chicken
Galinha   africana
Huli-huli
Inasal
Jerusalem mixed grill
Jerk
Jujeh kabab
Kai yang
Lechon manok
Pinchitos
Pollo a la brasa
Rotisserie
Sajji
Satay
Shawarma
Shish taouk 
Tandoori
Tikka
Tsukune
Yakitori
Rice dishes
Arroz caldo
Arroz con pollo
Bringhe
Bubur ayam
Claypot chicken rice
C m g  rau th m
Dakjuk
Hainanese chicken rice
Hawaiian haystack
Lontong cap go meh
Nasi liwet
Nasi tim
Poule au riz
Thalassery biryani
Pies and bread dishes
Chicken and mushroom pie
Kurnik
Moravian chicken pie
Musakhan
Pastilla
Sandwich
Salads
Chicken macaroni salad
Chicken salad
Chinese
Coronation chicken
Jubilee chicken
Olivier salad
Tavuk g s 
Chicken soup
Binakol
Caldo tlalpe o
Caldo X chitl
Chicken and duck blood soup
Cock-a-leekie soup
Ginataang manok
Linagpang na Manok
Samgye-tang
Sinampalukan
Sopas
Soto ayam
Tinola
Cuts and techniques
Airline chicken
Ballotine
Chicken feet
Drunken chicken
Pinikpikan
Turducken
List of chicken dishes
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=General_Tso%27s_chicken&oldid=1149412925"