Worldwide economic depression (1929 1939)
This article is about the severe worldwide economic downturn in the 1930s. For other uses, see The Great Depression (disambiguation).
 Dorothea Lange's Migrant Mother depicts destitute pea pickers in California, centering on Florence Owens Thompson, age 32, a mother of seven children, in Nipomo, California, March 1936.
 The unemployment rate in the U.S. during 1910 60, with the years of the Great Depression (1929 39) highlighted
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average, 1928 1930
The Great Depression (1929 1939) was an economic shock that impacted most countries across the world. It was a period of economic depression that became evident after a major fall in stock prices in the United States.[1] The economic contagion began around September and led to the Wall Street stock market crash of October 24 (Black Thursday). It was the longest, deepest, and most widespread depression of the 20th century.[2]
Between 1929 and 1932, worldwide gross domestic product (GDP) fell by an estimated 15%. By comparison, worldwide GDP fell by less than 1% from 2008 to 2009 during the Great Recession.[3] Some economies started to recover by the mid-1930s. However, in many countries, the negative effects of the Great Depression lasted until the beginning of World War II.[4] Devastating effects were seen in both rich and poor countries with falling personal income, prices, tax revenues, and profits. International trade fell by more than 50%, unemployment in the U.S. rose to 23% and in some countries rose as high as 33%.[5]
Cities around the world were hit hard, especially those dependent on heavy industry. Construction was virtually halted in many countries. Farming communities and rural areas suffered as crop prices fell by about 60%.[6][7][8] Faced with plummeting demand and few job alternatives, areas dependent on primary sector industries suffered the most.[9]
Economic historians usually consider the catalyst of the Great Depression to be the sudden devastating collapse of U.S. stock market prices, starting on October 24, 1929. However, some dispute this conclusion, seeing the stock crash less as a cause of the Depression and more as a symptom of the rising nervousness of investors partly due to gradual price declines caused by falling sales of consumer goods (as a result of overproduction because of new production techniques, falling exports and income inequality, among other factors) that had already been underway as part of a gradual Depression.[5][10]
Overview
After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, where the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped from 381 to 198 over the course of two months, optimism persisted for some time. The stock market rose in early 1930, with the Dow returning to 294 (pre-depression levels) in April 1930, before steadily declining for years, to a low of 41 in 1932.[11]
At the beginning, governments and businesses spent more in the first half of 1930 than in the corresponding period of the previous year. On the other hand, consumers, many of whom suffered severe losses in the stock market the previous year, cut  expenditures by 10%. In addition, beginning in the mid-1930s, a severe drought ravaged the agricultural heartland of the U.S.[12]
Interest rates dropped to low levels by mid-1930, but expected deflation and the continuing reluctance of people to borrow meant that consumer spending and investment remained low.[13] By May 1930, automobile sales declined to below the levels of 1928. Prices, in general, began to decline, although wages held steady in 1930. Then a deflationary spiral started in 1931. Farmers faced a worse outlook; declining crop prices and a Great Plains drought crippled their economic outlook. At its peak, the Great Depression saw nearly 10% of all Great Plains farms change hands despite federal assistance.[14]
The decline in the U.S. economy was the factor that pulled down most other countries at first; then, internal weaknesses or strengths in each country made conditions worse or better.[citation needed] Frantic attempts by individual countries to shore up their economies through protectionist policies   such as the 1930 U.S. Smoot Hawley Tariff Act and retaliatory tariffs in other countries   exacerbated the collapse in global trade, contributing to the depression.[15] By 1933, the economic decline pushed world trade to one third of its level compared to four years earlier.[16]
Economic indicators
Change in economic indicators 1929 1932[17]
United States
United Kingdom
France
Germany
Industrial production
 46%
 23%
 24%
 41%
Wholesale prices
 32%
 33%
 34%
 29%
Foreign trade
 70%
 60%
 54%
 61%
Unemployment
+607%
+129%
+214%
+232%
Course
 Crowd gathering at the intersection of Wall Street and Broad Street after the 1929 crash
Origins
Because the Great Depression began in the United States and then spread around the world, the origins of the Great Depression are examined in the context of the United States economy. In the aftermath of World War I, the Roaring Twenties had brought considerable wealth to the United States and Western Europe.[18] The year 1929 dawned with considerable economic progress in the American economy. A small stock crash occurred on March 25, 1929, but the crash was stabilized. Despite signs of economic trouble, the market continued to improve through September. Stock prices began to slump in September, and were volatile at the end of September.[19] A large sell-off of stocks began in mid-October. Finally, on October 24, Black Thursday, the American stock market crashed 11% at the opening bell. Actions to stabilize the market failed, and on October 28, Black Monday, the market crashed another 12%. The panic peaked the next day on Black Tuesday, when the market saw another 11% drop.[20][21] Thousands of investors were ruined, and billions of dollars had been lost; many stocks could not be sold at any price.[21] The market recovered 12% on Wednesday, but the damage had been done. Though the market recovered from November 14, until April 17, 1930, the market entered a prolonged slump. From April 17, 1930, until July 8, 1932, the market lost 89% of its value.[22] Crowds outside the Bank of United States in New York after its failure in 1931Despite the crash, the worst of the crisis did not reverberate around the world until after 1929. The crisis hit panic levels again in December 1930, with a bank run on the Bank of United States (privately run, no relation to the government). Unable to pay out to all of its creditors, the bank failed.[23][24] Among the 608 American banks that closed in November and December 1930, the Bank of United States accounted for a third of the total $550 million deposits lost and, with its closure, bank failures reached a critical mass.[25]
The Smoot-Hawley act and the breakdown of international trade
Main article: Smoot Hawley Tariff Act
 Willis C. Hawley (left) and Reed Smoot in April 1929, shortly before the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act passed the House of Representatives.
The Smoot Hawley Tariff Act was passed in the United States on June 17, 1930, having been proposed the year prior. Ostensibly aimed at protecting the American economy as the Depression began to take root, it backfired enormously and may have even caused the Depression. The consensus view among economists and economic historians (including Keynesians, Monetarists and Austrian economists) is that the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff exacerbated the Great Depression,[26] although there is disagreement as to how much. In the popular view, the Smoot-Hawley Tariff was a leading cause of the depression.[27][28] In a 1995 survey of American economic historians, two-thirds agreed that the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act at least worsened the Great Depression.[29] According to the U.S. Senate website the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act is among the most catastrophic acts in congressional history.[30]
Many economists have argued that the sharp decline in international trade after 1930 helped to worsen the depression, especially for countries significantly dependent on foreign trade.  Most historians and economists blame the Act for worsening the depression by seriously reducing international trade and causing retaliatory tariffs in other countries. While foreign trade was a small part of overall economic activity in the U.S. and was concentrated in a few businesses like farming, it was a much larger factor in many other countries.[31] The average ad valorem (value based) rate of duties on dutiable imports for 1921 1925 was 25.9% but under the new tariff it jumped to 50% during 1931 1935. In dollar terms, American exports declined over the next four years from about $5.2 billion in 1929 to $1.7 billion in 1933; so, not only did the physical volume of exports fall, but also the prices fell by about 1 3 as written. Hardest hit were farm commodities such as wheat, cotton, tobacco, and lumber.[citation needed]
Governments around the world took various steps into spending less money on foreign goods such as: "imposing tariffs, import quotas, and exchange controls". These restrictions triggered much tension among countries that had large amounts of bilateral trade, causing major export-import reductions during the depression. Not all governments enforced the same measures of protectionism. Some countries raised tariffs drastically and enforced severe restrictions on foreign exchange transactions, while other countries reduced "trade and exchange restrictions only marginally":[32]
"Countries that remained on the gold standard, keeping currencies fixed, were more likely to restrict foreign trade." These countries "resorted to protectionist policies to strengthen the balance of payments and limit gold losses." They hoped that these restrictions and depletions would hold the economic decline.[32]
Countries that abandoned the gold standard allowed their currencies to depreciate which caused their balance of payments to strengthen. It also freed up monetary policy so that central banks could lower interest rates and act as lenders of last resort. They possessed the best policy instruments to fight the Depression and did not need protectionism.[32]
"The length and depth of a country's economic downturn and the timing and vigor of its recovery are related to how long it remained on the gold standard. Countries abandoning the gold standard relatively early experienced relatively mild recessions and early recoveries. In contrast, countries remaining on the gold standard experienced prolonged slumps."[32]
The gold standard and the spreading of global depression
The gold standard was the primary transmission mechanism of the Great Depression. Even countries that did not face bank failures and a monetary contraction first hand were forced to join the deflationary policy since higher interest rates in countries that performed a deflationary policy led to a gold outflow in countries with lower interest rates. Under the gold standard's price specie flow mechanism, countries that lost gold but nevertheless wanted to maintain the gold standard had to permit their money supply to decrease and the domestic price level to decline (deflation).[33][34]
There is also consensus that protectionist policies, and primarily the passage of the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act, helped to exacerbate, or even cause the Great Depression.[29]
Gold standard
 The Depression in international perspective[35]
Some economic studies have indicated that just as the downturn was spread worldwide by the rigidities of the gold standard, it was suspending gold convertibility (or devaluing the currency in gold terms) that did the most to make recovery possible.[36]
Every major currency left the gold standard during the Great Depression. The UK was the first to do so. Facing speculative attacks on the pound and depleting gold reserves, in September 1931 the Bank of England ceased exchanging pound notes for gold and the pound was floated on foreign exchange markets.
Japan and the Scandinavian countries joined the United Kingdom in leaving the gold standard in 1931. Other countries, such as Italy and the United States, remained on the gold standard into 1932 or 1933, while a few countries in the so-called "gold bloc", led by France and including Poland, Belgium and Switzerland, stayed on the standard until 1935 36.
According to later analysis, the earliness with which a country left the gold standard reliably predicted its economic recovery. For example, The UK and Scandinavia, which left the gold standard in 1931, recovered much earlier than France and Belgium, which remained on gold much longer. Countries such as China, which had a silver standard, almost avoided the depression entirely. The connection between leaving the gold standard as a strong predictor of that country's severity of its depression and the length of time of its recovery has been shown to be consistent for dozens of countries, including developing countries. This partly explains why the experience and length of the depression differed between regions and states around the world.[37]
German banking crisis of 1931 and British crisis
The financial crisis escalated out of control in mid-1931, starting with the collapse of the Credit Anstalt in Vienna in May.[38][39] This put heavy pressure on Germany, which was already in political turmoil. With the rise in violence of Nazi and communist movements, as well as investor nervousness at harsh government financial policies,[40] investors withdrew their short-term money from Germany as confidence spiraled downward. The Reichsbank lost 150 million marks in the first week of June, 540 million in the second, and 150 million in two days, June 19 20. Collapse was at hand. U.S. President Herbert Hoover called for a moratorium on Payment of war reparations. This angered Paris, which depended on a steady flow of German payments, but it slowed the crisis down, and the moratorium was agreed to in July 1931. An International conference in London later in July produced no agreements but on August 19 a standstill agreement froze Germany's foreign liabilities for six months. Germany received emergency funding from private banks in New York as well as the Bank of International Settlements and the Bank of England. The funding only slowed the process. Industrial failures began in Germany, a major bank closed in July and a two-day holiday for all German banks was declared. Business failures were more frequent in July, and spread to Romania and Hungary. The crisis continued to get worse in Germany, bringing political upheaval that finally led to the coming to power of Hitler's Nazi regime in January 1933.[41]
The world financial crisis now began to overwhelm Britain; investors around the world started withdrawing their gold from London at the rate of  2.5 million per day.[42] Credits of  25 million each from the Bank of France and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and an issue of  15 million fiduciary note slowed, but did not reverse the British crisis. The financial crisis now caused a major political crisis in Britain in August 1931. With deficits mounting, the bankers demanded a balanced budget; the divided cabinet of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government agreed; it proposed to raise taxes, cut spending, and most controversially, to cut unemployment benefits 20%. The attack on welfare was unacceptable to the Labour movement. MacDonald wanted to resign, but King George V insisted he remain and form an all-party coalition "National Government". The Conservative and Liberals parties signed on, along with a small cadre of Labour, but the vast majority of Labour leaders denounced MacDonald as a traitor for leading the new government. Britain went off the gold standard, and suffered relatively less than other major countries in the Great Depression. In the 1931 British election, the Labour Party was virtually destroyed, leaving MacDonald as Prime Minister for a largely Conservative coalition.[43][44]
Turning point and recovery
 The overall course of the Depression in the United States, as reflected in per-capita GDP (average income per person) shown in constant year 2000 dollars, plus some of the key events of the period. Dotted red line = long-term trend 1920 1970.[45]
In most countries of the world, recovery from the Great Depression began in 1933.[10] In the U.S., recovery began in early 1933,[10] but the U.S. did not return to 1929 GNP for over a decade and still had an unemployment rate of about 15% in 1940, albeit down from the high of 25% in 1933.
There is no consensus among economists regarding the motive force for the U.S. economic expansion that continued through most of the Roosevelt years (and the 1937 recession that interrupted it). The common view among most economists is that Roosevelt's New Deal policies either caused or accelerated the recovery, although his policies were never aggressive enough to bring the economy completely out of recession. Some economists have also called attention to the positive effects from expectations of reflation and rising nominal interest rates that Roosevelt's words and actions portended.[46][47] It was the rollback of those same reflationary policies that led to the interruption of a recession beginning in late 1937.[48][49] One contributing policy that reversed reflation was the Banking Act of 1935, which effectively raised reserve requirements, causing a monetary contraction that helped to thwart the recovery.[50] GDP returned to its upward trend in 1938.[45] A revisionist view among some economists holds that the New Deal prolonged the Great Depression, as they argue that National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933 and National Labor Relations Act of 1935 restricted competition and established price fixing.[51] John Maynard Keynes did not think that the New Deal under Roosevelt single-handedly ended the Great Depression: "It is, it seems, politically impossible for a capitalistic democracy to organize expenditure on the scale necessary to make the grand experiments which would prove my case except in war conditions."[52]
According to Christina Romer, the money supply growth caused by huge international gold inflows was a crucial source of the recovery of the United States economy, and that the economy showed little sign of self-correction. The gold inflows were partly due to devaluation of the U.S. dollar and partly due to deterioration of the political situation in Europe.[53] In their book, A Monetary History of the United States, Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz also attributed the recovery to monetary factors, and contended that it was much slowed by poor management of money by the Federal Reserve System. Former (2006 2014) Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke agreed that monetary factors played important roles both in the worldwide economic decline and eventual recovery.[54] Bernanke also saw a strong role for institutional factors, particularly the rebuilding and restructuring of the financial system,[55] and pointed out that the Depression should be examined in an international perspective.[56]
Role of women and household economics
Women's primary role was as housewives; without a steady flow of family income, their work became much harder in dealing with food and clothing and medical care. Birthrates fell everywhere, as children were postponed until families could financially support them. The average birthrate for 14 major countries fell 12% from 19.3 births per thousand population in 1930, to 17.0 in 1935.[57] In Canada, half of Roman Catholic women defied Church teachings and used contraception to postpone births.[58]
Among the few women in the labor force, layoffs were less common in the white-collar jobs and they were typically found in light manufacturing work. However, there was a widespread demand to limit families to one paid job, so that wives might lose employment if their husband was employed.[59][60][61] Across Britain, there was a tendency for married women to join the labor force, competing for part-time jobs especially.[62][63]
In France, very slow population growth, especially in comparison to Germany continued to be a serious issue in the 1930s. Support for increasing welfare programs during the depression included a focus on women in the family. The Conseil Sup rieur de la Natalit  campaigned for provisions enacted in the Code de la Famille (1939) that increased state assistance to families with children and required employers to protect the jobs of fathers, even if they were immigrants.[64]
In rural and small-town areas, women expanded their operation of vegetable gardens to include as much food production as possible. In the United States, agricultural organizations sponsored programs to teach housewives how to optimize their gardens and to raise poultry for meat and eggs.[65] Rural women made feed sack dresses and other items for themselves and their families and homes from feed sacks.[66] In American cities, African American women quiltmakers enlarged their activities, promoted collaboration, and trained neophytes. Quilts were created for practical use from various inexpensive materials and increased social interaction for women and promoted camaraderie and personal fulfillment.[67]
Oral history provides evidence for how housewives in a modern industrial city handled shortages of money and resources. Often they updated strategies their mothers used when they were growing up in poor families. Cheap foods were used, such as soups, beans and noodles. They purchased the cheapest cuts of meat sometimes even horse meat and recycled the Sunday roast into sandwiches and soups. They sewed and patched clothing, traded with their neighbors for outgrown items, and made do with colder homes. New furniture and appliances were postponed until better days. Many women also worked outside the home, or took boarders, did laundry for trade or cash, and did sewing for neighbors in exchange for something they could offer. Extended families used mutual aid extra food, spare rooms, repair-work, cash loans to help cousins and in-laws.[68]
In Japan, official government policy was deflationary and the opposite of Keynesian spending. Consequently, the government launched a campaign across the country to induce households to reduce their consumption, focusing attention on spending by housewives.[69]
In Germany, the government tried to reshape private household consumption under the Four-Year Plan of 1936 to achieve German economic self-sufficiency. The Nazi women's organizations, other propaganda agencies and the authorities all attempted to shape such consumption as economic self-sufficiency was needed to prepare for and to sustain the coming war. The organizations, propaganda agencies and authorities employed slogans that called up traditional values of thrift and healthy living. However, these efforts were only partly successful in changing the behavior of housewives.[70]
World War II and recovery
 A female factory worker in 1942, Fort Worth, Texas. Women entered the workforce as men were drafted into the armed forces.
The common view among economic historians is that the Great Depression ended with the advent of World War II. Many economists believe that government spending on the war caused or at least accelerated recovery from the Great Depression, though some consider that it did not play a very large role in the recovery, though it did help in reducing unemployment.[10][71][72][73]
The rearmament policies leading up to World War II helped stimulate the economies of Europe in 1937 1939. By 1937, unemployment in Britain had fallen to 1.5 million. The mobilization of manpower following the outbreak of war in 1939 ended unemployment.[74]
When the United States entered the war in 1941, it finally eliminated the last effects from the Great Depression and brought the U.S. unemployment rate down below 10%.[75] In the U.S., massive war spending doubled economic growth rates, either masking the effects of the Depression or essentially ending the Depression. Businessmen ignored the mounting national debt and heavy new taxes, redoubling their efforts for greater output to take advantage of generous government contracts.[76]
Causes
Main article: Causes of the Great Depression
 Money supply decreased considerably between Black Tuesday and the Bank Holiday in March 1933 when there were massive bank runs across the United States.
  Inflation  Deflation  M2 money supply increases Year/Year
 U.S. industrial production, 1928 1939
The two classic competing economic theories of the Great Depression are the Keynesian (demand-driven) and the Monetarist explanation.[77] There are also various heterodox theories that downplay or reject the explanations of the Keynesians and monetarists. The consensus among demand-driven theories is that a large-scale loss of confidence led to a sudden reduction in consumption and investment spending. Once panic and deflation set in, many people believed they could avoid further losses by keeping clear of the markets. Holding money became profitable as prices dropped lower and a given amount of money bought ever more goods, exacerbating the drop in demand.[78] Monetarists believe that the Great Depression started as an ordinary recession, but the shrinking of the money supply greatly exacerbated the economic situation, causing a recession to descend into the Great Depression.[79]
Economists and economic historians are almost evenly split as to whether the traditional monetary explanation that monetary forces were the primary cause of the Great Depression is right, or the traditional Keynesian explanation that a fall in autonomous spending, particularly investment, is the primary explanation for the onset of the Great Depression.[80] Today there is also significant academic support for the debt deflation theory and the expectations hypothesis that   building on the monetary explanation of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz   add non-monetary explanations.[81][82]
There is a consensus that the Federal Reserve System should have cut short the process of monetary deflation and banking collapse, by expanding the money supply and acting as lender of last resort. If they had done this, the economic downturn would have been far less severe and much shorter.[83]
Mainstream explanations
Modern mainstream economists see the reasons in
A money supply reduction (Monetarists) and therefore a banking crisis, reduction of credit, and bankruptcies.
Insufficient demand from the private sector and insufficient fiscal spending (Keynesians).
Passage of the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act exacerbated what otherwise might have been a more "standard" recession (Both Monetarists and Keynesians).[29]
Insufficient spending, the money supply reduction, and debt on margin led to falling prices and further bankruptcies (Irving Fisher's debt deflation).
Monetarist view
 The Great Depression in the U.S. from a monetary view. Real gross domestic product in 1996-Dollar (blue), price index (red), money supply M2 (green) and number of banks (grey). All data adjusted to 1929 = 100%.
 Crowd at New York's American Union Bank during a bank run early in the Great Depression
The monetarist explanation was given by American economists Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz.[84] They argued that the Great Depression was caused by the banking crisis that caused one-third of all banks to vanish, a reduction of bank shareholder wealth and more importantly monetary contraction of 35%, which they called "The Great Contraction". This caused a price drop of 33% (deflation).[85] By not lowering interest rates, by not increasing the monetary base and by not injecting liquidity into the banking system to prevent it from crumbling, the Federal Reserve passively watched the transformation of a normal recession into the Great Depression. Friedman and Schwartz argued that the downward turn in the economy, starting with the stock market crash, would merely have been an ordinary recession if the Federal Reserve had taken aggressive action.[86][87] This view was endorsed in 2002 by Federal Reserve Governor Ben Bernanke in a speech honoring Friedman and Schwartz with this statement:
Let me end my talk by abusing slightly my status as an official representative of the Federal Reserve. I would like to say to Milton and Anna: Regarding the Great Depression, you're right. We did it. We're very sorry. But thanks to you, we won't do it again. Ben S. Bernanke[88][89]
The Federal Reserve allowed some large public bank failures   particularly that of the New York Bank of United States   which produced panic and widespread runs on local banks, and the Federal Reserve sat idly by while banks collapsed. Friedman and Schwartz argued that, if the Fed had provided emergency lending to these key banks, or simply bought government bonds on the open market to provide liquidity and increase the quantity of money after the key banks fell, all the rest of the banks would not have fallen after the large ones did, and the money supply would not have fallen as far and as fast as it did.[90]
With significantly less money to go around, businesses could not get new loans and could not even get their old loans renewed, forcing many to stop investing. This interpretation blames the Federal Reserve for inaction, especially the New York branch.[91]
One reason why the Federal Reserve did not act to limit the decline of the money supply was the gold standard. At that time, the amount of credit the Federal Reserve could issue was limited by the Federal Reserve Act, which required 40% gold backing of Federal Reserve Notes issued. By the late 1920s, the Federal Reserve had almost hit the limit of allowable credit that could be backed by the gold in its possession. This credit was in the form of Federal Reserve demand notes.[92] A "promise of gold" is not as good as "gold in the hand", particularly when they only had enough gold to cover 40% of the Federal Reserve Notes outstanding. During the bank panics, a portion of those demand notes was redeemed for Federal Reserve gold. Since the Federal Reserve had hit its limit on allowable credit, any reduction in gold in its vaults had to be accompanied by a greater reduction in credit. On April 5, 1933, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 6102 making the private ownership of gold certificates, coins and bullion illegal, reducing the pressure on Federal Reserve gold.[92]
Keynesian view
British economist John Maynard Keynes argued in The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money that lower aggregate expenditures in the economy contributed to a massive decline in income and to employment that was well below the average. In such a situation, the economy reached equilibrium at low levels of economic activity and high unemployment.
Keynes's basic idea was simple: to keep people fully employed, governments have to run deficits when the economy is slowing, as the private sector would not invest enough to keep production at the normal level and bring the economy out of recession. Keynesian economists called on governments during times of economic crisis to pick up the slack by increasing government spending or cutting taxes.
As the Depression wore on, Franklin D. Roosevelt tried public works, farm subsidies, and other devices to restart the U.S. economy, but never completely gave up trying to balance the budget. According to the Keynesians, this improved the economy, but Roosevelt never spent enough to bring the economy out of recession until the start of World War II.[93]
Debt deflation
 
Irving Fisher argued that the predominant factor leading to the Great Depression was a vicious circle of deflation and growing over-indebtedness.[94] He outlined nine factors interacting with one another under conditions of debt and deflation to create the mechanics of boom to bust. The chain of events proceeded as follows:
Debt liquidation and distress selling
Contraction of the money supply as bank loans are paid off
A fall in the level of asset prices
A still greater fall in the net worth of businesses, precipitating bankruptcies
A fall in profits
A reduction in output, in trade and in employment
Pessimism and loss of confidence
Hoarding of money
A fall in nominal interest rates and a rise in deflation adjusted interest rates[94]
During the Crash of 1929 preceding the Great Depression, margin requirements were only 10%.[95] Brokerage firms, in other words, would lend $9 for every $1 an investor had deposited. When the market fell, brokers called in these loans, which could not be paid back.[96] Banks began to fail as debtors defaulted on debt and depositors attempted to withdraw their deposits en masse, triggering multiple bank runs. Government guarantees and Federal Reserve banking regulations to prevent such panics were ineffective or not used. Bank failures led to the loss of billions of dollars in assets.[96]
Outstanding debts became heavier, because prices and incomes fell by 20 50% but the debts remained at the same dollar amount. After the panic of 1929 and during the first 10 months of 1930, 744 U.S. banks failed. (In all, 9,000 banks failed during the 1930s.) By April 1933, around $7 billion in deposits had been frozen in failed banks or those left unlicensed after the March Bank Holiday.[97] Bank failures snowballed as desperate bankers called in loans that borrowers did not have time or money to repay. With future profits looking poor, capital investment and construction slowed or completely ceased. In the face of bad loans and worsening future prospects, the surviving banks became even more conservative in their lending.[96] Banks built up their capital reserves and made fewer loans, which intensified deflationary pressures. A vicious cycle developed and the downward spiral accelerated.
The liquidation of debt could not keep up with the fall of prices that it caused. The mass effect of the stampede to liquidate increased the value of each dollar owed, relative to the value of declining asset holdings. The very effort of individuals to lessen their burden of debt effectively increased it. Paradoxically, the more the debtors paid, the more they owed.[94] This self-aggravating process turned a 1930 recession into a 1933 great depression.
Fisher's debt-deflation theory initially lacked mainstream influence because of the counter-argument that debt-deflation represented no more than a redistribution from one group (debtors) to another (creditors). Pure re-distributions should have no significant macroeconomic effects.
Building on both the monetary hypothesis of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz and the debt deflation hypothesis of Irving Fisher, Ben Bernanke developed an alternative way in which the financial crisis affected output. He builds on Fisher's argument that dramatic declines in the price level and nominal incomes lead to increasing real debt burdens, which in turn leads to debtor insolvency and consequently lowers aggregate demand; a further price level decline would then result in a debt deflationary spiral. According to Bernanke, a small decline in the price level simply reallocates wealth from debtors to creditors without doing damage to the economy. But when the deflation is severe, falling asset prices along with debtor bankruptcies lead to a decline in the nominal value of assets on bank balance sheets. Banks will react by tightening their credit conditions, which in turn leads to a credit crunch that seriously harms the economy. A credit crunch lowers investment and consumption, which results in declining aggregate demand and additionally contributes to the deflationary spiral.[98][99][100]
Expectations hypothesis
Since economic mainstream turned to the new neoclassical synthesis, expectations are a central element of macroeconomic models. According to Peter Temin, Barry Wigmore, Gauti B. Eggertsson and Christina Romer, the key to recovery and to ending the Great Depression was brought about by a successful management of public expectations. The thesis is based on the observation that after years of deflation and a very severe recession important economic indicators turned positive in March 1933 when Franklin D. Roosevelt took office. Consumer prices turned from deflation to a mild inflation, industrial production bottomed out in March 1933, and investment doubled in 1933 with a turnaround in March 1933. There were no monetary forces to explain that turnaround. Money supply was still falling and short-term interest rates remained close to zero. Before March 1933, people expected further deflation and a recession so that even interest rates at zero did not stimulate investment. But when Roosevelt announced major regime changes, people began to expect inflation and an economic expansion. With these positive expectations, interest rates at zero began to stimulate investment just as they were expected to do. Roosevelt's fiscal and monetary policy regime change helped make his policy objectives credible. The expectation of higher future income and higher future inflation stimulated demand and investment. The analysis suggests that the elimination of the policy dogmas of the gold standard, a balanced budget in times of crisis and small government led endogenously to a large shift in expectation that accounts for about 70 80% of the recovery of output and prices from 1933 to 1937. If the regime change had not happened and the Hoover policy had continued, the economy would have continued its free fall in 1933, and output would have been 30% lower in 1937 than in 1933.[101][102][103]
The recession of 1937 1938, which slowed down economic recovery from the Great Depression, is explained by fears of the population that the moderate tightening of the monetary and fiscal policy in 1937 were first steps to a restoration of the pre-1933 policy regime.[104]
Common position
There is common consensus among economists today that the government and the central bank should work to keep the interconnected macroeconomic aggregates of gross domestic product and money supply on a stable growth path. When threatened by expectations of a depression, central banks should expand liquidity in the banking system and the government should cut taxes and accelerate spending in order to prevent a collapse in money supply and aggregate demand.[105]
At the beginning of the Great Depression, most economists believed in Say's law and the equilibrating powers of the market, and failed to understand the severity of the Depression. Outright leave-it-alone liquidationism was a common position, and was universally held by Austrian School economists.[106] The liquidationist position held that a depression worked to liquidate failed businesses and investments that had been made obsolete by technological development   releasing factors of production (capital and labor) to be redeployed in other more productive sectors of the dynamic economy. They argued that even if self-adjustment of the economy caused mass bankruptcies, it was still the best course.[106]
Economists like Barry Eichengreen and J. Bradford DeLong note that President Herbert Hoover tried to keep the federal budget balanced until 1932, when he lost confidence in his Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon and replaced him.[106][107][108] An increasingly common view among economic historians is that the adherence of many Federal Reserve policymakers to the liquidationist position led to disastrous consequences.[107] Unlike what liquidationists expected, a large proportion of the capital stock was not redeployed but vanished during the first years of the Great Depression. According to a study by Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers, the recession caused a drop of net capital accumulation to pre-1924 levels by 1933.[109] Milton Friedman called leave-it-alone liquidationism "dangerous nonsense".[105] He wrote:
I think the Austrian business-cycle theory has done the world a great deal of harm. If you go back to the 1930s, which is a key point, here you had the Austrians sitting in London, Hayek and Lionel Robbins, and saying you just have to let the bottom drop out of the world. You've just got to let it cure itself. You can't do anything about it. You will only make it worse. ... I think by encouraging that kind of do-nothing policy both in Britain and in the United States, they did harm.[107]
Heterodox theories
Austrian School
Two prominent theorists in the Austrian School on the Great Depression include Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek and American economist Murray Rothbard, who wrote America's Great Depression (1963). In their view, much like the monetarists, the Federal Reserve (created in 1913) shoulders much of the blame; however, unlike the Monetarists, they argue that the key cause of the Depression was the expansion of the money supply in the 1920s which led to an unsustainable credit-driven boom.[110]
In the Austrian view, it was this inflation of the money supply that led to an unsustainable boom in both asset prices (stocks and bonds) and capital goods. Therefore, by the time the Federal Reserve tightened in 1928 it was far too late to prevent an economic contraction.[110] In February 1929 Hayek published a paper predicting the Federal Reserve's actions would lead to a crisis starting in the stock and credit markets.[111]
According to Rothbard, the government support for failed enterprises and efforts to keep wages above their market values actually prolonged the Depression.[112] Unlike Rothbard, after 1970 Hayek believed that the Federal Reserve had further contributed to the problems of the Depression by permitting the money supply to shrink during the earliest years of the Depression.[113] However, during the Depression (in 1932[114] and in 1934)[114] Hayek had criticized both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England for not taking a more contractionary stance.[114]
Hans Sennholz argued that most boom and busts that plagued the American economy, such as those in 1819 20, 1839 1843, 1857 1860, 1873 1878, 1893 1897, and 1920 21, were generated by government creating a boom through easy money and credit, which was soon followed by the inevitable bust.[115]
Ludwig von Mises wrote in the 1930s: "Credit expansion cannot increase the supply of real goods. It merely brings about a rearrangement. It diverts capital investment away from the course prescribed by the state of economic wealth and market conditions. It causes production to pursue paths which it would not follow unless the economy were to acquire an increase in material goods. As a result, the upswing lacks a solid base. It is not real prosperity. It is illusory prosperity. It did not develop from an increase in economic wealth, i.e. the accumulation of savings made available for productive investment. Rather, it arose because the credit expansion created the illusion of such an increase. Sooner or later, it must become apparent that this economic situation is built on sand."[116][117]
Marxist
Marxists generally argue that the Great Depression was the result of the inherent instability of the capitalist mode of production.[118] According to Forbes, "The idea that capitalism caused the Great Depression was widely held among intellectuals and the general public for many decades."[119]
Inequality
 Power farming displaces tenants from the land in the western dry cotton area. Childress County, Texas, 1938
Two economists of the 1920s, Waddill Catchings and William Trufant Foster, popularized a theory that influenced many policy makers, including Herbert Hoover, Henry A. Wallace, Paul Douglas, and Marriner Eccles. It held the economy produced more than it consumed, because the consumers did not have enough income. Thus the unequal distribution of wealth throughout the 1920s caused the Great Depression.[120][121]
According to this view, the root cause of the Great Depression was a global over-investment in heavy industry capacity compared to wages and earnings from independent businesses, such as farms. The proposed solution was for the government to pump money into the consumers' pockets. That is, it must redistribute purchasing power, maintaining the industrial base, and re-inflating prices and wages to force as much of the inflationary increase in purchasing power into consumer spending. The economy was overbuilt, and new factories were not needed. Foster and Catchings recommended[122] federal and state governments to start large construction projects, a program followed by Hoover and Roosevelt.
Productivity shock
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the [productivity, output, and employment] trends we are describing are long-time trends and were thoroughly evident before 1929. These trends are in nowise the result of the present depression, nor are they the result of the World War. On the contrary, the present depression is a collapse resulting from these long-term trends. M. King Hubbert[123]
The first three decades of the 20th century saw economic output surge with electrification, mass production, and motorized farm machinery, and because of the rapid growth in productivity there was a lot of excess production capacity and the work week was being reduced. The dramatic rise in productivity of major industries in the U.S. and the effects of productivity on output, wages and the workweek are discussed by Spurgeon Bell in his book Productivity, Wages, and National Income (1940).[124]
Socio-economic effects
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 An impoverished American family living in a shanty, 1936
The majority of countries set up relief programs and most underwent some sort of political upheaval, pushing them to the right. Many of the countries in Europe and Latin America that were democracies saw them overthrown by some form of dictatorship or authoritarian rule, most famously in Germany in 1933. The Dominion of Newfoundland gave up democracy voluntarily.
Australia
Main article: Great Depression in Australia
Australia's dependence on agricultural and industrial exports meant it was one of the hardest-hit developed countries.[125] Falling export demand and commodity prices placed massive downward pressures on wages. Unemployment reached a record high of 29% in 1932,[126] with incidents of civil unrest becoming common.[127] After 1932, an increase in wool and meat prices led to a gradual recovery.[128]
Canada
Main article: Great Depression in Canada
 Unemployed men march in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Harshly affected by both the global economic downturn and the Dust Bowl, Canadian industrial production had by 1932 fallen to only 58% of its 1929 figure, the second-lowest level in the world after the United States, and well behind countries such as Britain, which fell to only 83% of the 1929 level. Total national income fell to 56% of the 1929 level, again worse than any country apart from the United States. Unemployment reached 27% at the depth of the Depression in 1933.[129]
Chile
Main article: Great Depression in Chile
The League of Nations labeled Chile the country hardest hit by the Great Depression because 80% of government revenue came from exports of copper and nitrates, which were in low demand. Chile initially felt the impact of the Great Depression in 1930, when GDP dropped 14%, mining income declined 27%, and export earnings fell 28%. By 1932, GDP had shrunk to less than half of what it had been in 1929, exacting a terrible toll in unemployment and business failures.
Influenced profoundly by the Great Depression, many government leaders promoted the development of local industry in an effort to insulate the economy from future external shocks. After six years of government austerity measures, which succeeded in reestablishing Chile's creditworthiness, Chileans elected to office during the 1938 58 period a succession of center and left-of-center governments interested in promoting economic growth through government intervention.
Prompted in part by the devastating 1939 Chill n earthquake, the Popular Front government of Pedro Aguirre Cerda created the Production Development Corporation (Corporaci n de Fomento de la Producci n, CORFO) to encourage with subsidies and direct investments an ambitious program of import substitution industrialization. Consequently, as in other Latin American countries, protectionism became an entrenched aspect of the Chilean economy.
China
Main article: Nanjing Decade
China was largely unaffected by the Depression, mainly by having stuck to the Silver standard. However, the U.S. silver purchase act of 1934 created an intolerable demand on China's silver coins, and so, in the end, the silver standard was officially abandoned in 1935 in favor of the four Chinese national banks'[which?] "legal note" issues. China and the British colony of Hong Kong, which followed suit in this regard in September 1935, would be the last to abandon the silver standard. In addition, the Nationalist Government also acted energetically to modernize the legal and penal systems, stabilize prices, amortize debts, reform the banking and currency systems, build railroads and highways, improve public health facilities, legislate against traffic in narcotics and augment industrial and agricultural production. On November 3, 1935, the government instituted the fiat currency (fapi) reform, immediately stabilizing prices and also raising revenues for the government.
European African colonies
The sharp fall in commodity prices, and the steep decline in exports, hurt the economies of the European colonies in Africa and Asia.[130][131] The agricultural sector was especially hard hit. For example, sisal had recently become a major export crop in Kenya and Tanganyika. During the depression, it suffered severely from low prices and marketing problems that affected all colonial commodities in Africa. Sisal producers established centralized controls for the export of their fibre.[132] There was widespread unemployment and hardship among peasants, labourers, colonial auxiliaries, and artisans.[133]  The budgets of colonial governments were cut, which forced the reduction in ongoing infrastructure projects, such as the building and upgrading of roads, ports and communications.[134] The budget cuts delayed the schedule for creating systems of higher education.[135]
The depression severely hurt the export-based Belgian Congo economy because of the drop in international demand for raw materials and for agricultural products. For example, the price of peanuts fell from 125 to 25 centimes. In some areas, as in the Katanga mining region, employment declined by 70%. In the country as a whole, the wage labour force decreased by 72.000 and many men returned to their villages. In Leopoldville, the population decreased by 33%, because of this labour migration.[136]
Political protests were not common. However, there was a growing demand that the paternalistic claims be honored by colonial governments to respond vigorously. The theme was that economic reforms were more urgently needed than political reforms.[137] French West Africa launched an extensive program of educational reform in which "rural schools" designed to modernize agriculture would stem the flow of under-employed farm workers to cites where unemployment was high. Students were trained in traditional arts, crafts, and farming techniques and were then expected to return to their own villages and towns.[138]
France
Main article: Great Depression in France
The crisis affected France a bit later than other countries, hitting hard around 1931.[139] While the 1920s grew at the very strong rate of 4.43% per year, the 1930s rate fell to only 0.63%.[140]
The depression was relatively mild: unemployment peaked under 5%, the fall in production was at most 20% below the 1929 output; there was no banking crisis.[141]
However, the depression had drastic effects on the local economy, and partly explains the February 6, 1934 riots and even more the formation of the Popular Front, led by SFIO socialist leader L on Blum, which won the elections in 1936. Ultra-nationalist groups also saw increased popularity, although democracy prevailed into World War II.
France's relatively high degree of self-sufficiency meant the damage was considerably less than in neighbouring states like Germany.
Germany
Main article: Weimar Republic
The Great Depression hit Germany hard. The impact of the Wall Street Crash forced American banks to end the new loans that had been funding the repayments under the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan. The financial crisis escalated out of control in mid-1931, starting with the collapse of the Credit Anstalt in Vienna in May.[39] This put heavy pressure on Germany, which was already in political turmoil with the rise in violence of national socialist and communist movements, as well as with investor nervousness at harsh government financial policies,[40] investors withdrew their short-term money from Germany as confidence spiraled downward. The Reichsbank lost 150 million marks in the first week of June, 540 million in the second, and 150 million in two days, June 19 20. Collapse was at hand. U.S. President Herbert Hoover called for a moratorium on payment of war reparations. This angered Paris, which depended on a steady flow of German payments, but it slowed the crisis down, and the moratorium was agreed to in July 1931. An international conference in London later in July produced no agreements but on August 19 a standstill agreement froze Germany's foreign liabilities for six months. Germany received emergency funding from private banks in New York as well as the Bank of International Settlements and the Bank of England. The funding only slowed the process. Industrial failures began in Germany, a major bank closed in July and a two-day holiday for all German banks was declared. Business failures became more frequent in July, and spread to Romania and Hungary.[41]
In 1932, 90% of German reparation payments were cancelled (in the 1950s, Germany repaid all its missed reparations debts). Widespread unemployment reached 25% as every sector was hurt. The government did not increase government spending to deal with Germany's growing crisis, as they were afraid that a high-spending policy could lead to a return of the hyperinflation that had affected Germany in 1923. Germany's Weimar Republic was hit hard by the depression, as American loans to help rebuild the German economy now stopped.[142] The unemployment rate reached nearly 30% in 1932.[143]
 The devil operating a screw press against a workman, Nazi propaganda medal, obverse
 The reverse of this medal supporting the German election Nazi campaigns of 1932
The German political landscape was dramatically altered, leading to Adolf Hitler's rise to power. The Nazi Party rose from being peripheral to winning 18.3% of the vote in the September 1930 election and the Communist Party also made gains, while moderate forces like the Social Democratic Party, the Democratic Party and the People's Party lost seats. The next two years were marked by increased street violence between Nazis and Communists, while governments under President Paul von Hindenburg increasingly relied on rule by decree, bypassing the Reichstag.[144] Hitler ran for the Presidency in 1932, and while he lost to the incumbent Hindenburg in the election, it marked a point during which both Nazi Party and the Communist parties rose in the years following the crash to altogether possess a Reichstag majority following the general election in July 1932.[143][145] Although the Nazis lost seats in November 1932 election, they remained the largest party, and Hitler was appointed as Chancellor the following January. The government formation deal was designed to give Hitler's conservative coalition partners many checks on his power, but over the next few months, the Nazis manoeuvred to consolidate a single-party dictatorship.[146]
 Adolf Hitler speaking in 1935
Hitler followed an autarky economic policy, creating a network of client states and economic allies in central Europe and Latin America. By cutting wages and taking control of labor unions, plus public works spending, unemployment fell significantly by 1935. Large-scale military spending played a major role in the recovery.[147] The policies had the effect of driving up the cost of food imports and depleting foreign currency reserves, leading to economic impasse by 1936. Nazi Germany faced a choice of either reversing course or pressing ahead with rearmament and autarky. Hitler chose the latter route, which according to Ian Kershaw "could only be partially accomplished without territorial expansion" and therefore war.[148][149]
Greece
Main article: Economic history of Greece and the Greek world
The reverberations of the Great Depression hit Greece in 1932. The Bank of Greece tried to adopt deflationary policies to stave off the crises that were going on in other countries, but these largely failed. For a brief period, the drachma was pegged to the U.S. dollar, but this was unsustainable given the country's large trade deficit and the only long-term effects of this were Greece's foreign exchange reserves being almost totally wiped out in 1932. Remittances from abroad declined sharply and the value of the drachma began to plummet from 77 drachmas to the dollar in March 1931 to 111 drachmas to the dollar in April 1931. This was especially harmful to Greece as the country relied on imports from the UK, France, and the Middle East for many necessities. Greece went off the gold standard in April 1932 and declared a moratorium on all interest payments. The country also adopted protectionist policies such as import quotas, which several European countries did during the period.
Protectionist policies coupled with a weak drachma, stifling imports, allowed the Greek industry to expand during the Great Depression. In 1939, the Greek industrial output was 179% that of 1928. These industries were for the most part "built on sand" as one report of the Bank of Greece put it, as without massive protection they would not have been able to survive. Despite the global depression, Greece managed to suffer comparatively little, averaging an average growth rate of 3.5% from 1932 to 1939. The dictatorial regime of Ioannis Metaxas took over the Greek government in 1936, and economic growth was strong in the years leading up to the Second World War.
Iceland
Main article: Economic history of Iceland
Icelandic post-World War I prosperity came to an end with the outbreak of the Great Depression. The Depression hit Iceland hard as the value of exports plummeted. The total value of Icelandic exports fell from 74 million kronur in 1929 to 48 million in 1932, and was not to rise again to the pre-1930 level until after 1939.[150] Government interference in the economy increased: "Imports were regulated, trade with foreign currency was monopolized by state-owned banks, and loan capital was largely distributed by state-regulated funds".[150] Due to the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, which cut Iceland's exports of saltfish by half, the Depression lasted in Iceland until the outbreak of World War II (when prices for fish exports soared).[150]
India
Main article: Great Depression in India
How much India was affected has been hotly debated. Historians have argued that the Great Depression slowed long-term industrial development.[151] Apart from two sectors jute and coal the economy was little affected. However, there were major negative impacts on the jute industry, as world demand fell and prices plunged.[152] Otherwise, conditions were fairly stable. Local markets in agriculture and small-scale industry showed modest gains.[153]
Ireland
Main article: Economic history of the Republic of Ireland
Frank Barry and Mary E. Daly have argued that:
Ireland was a largely agrarian economy, trading almost exclusively with the UK, at the time of the Great Depression. Beef and dairy products comprised the bulk of exports, and Ireland fared well relative to many other commodity producers, particularly in the early years of the depression.[154][155][156][157]
Italy
Main article: Economic history of Italy
 Benito Mussolini giving a speech at the Fiat Lingotto factory in Turin, 1932
The Great Depression hit Italy very hard.[158] As industries came close to failure they were bought out by the banks in a largely illusionary bail-out the assets used to fund the purchases were largely worthless. This led to a financial crisis peaking in 1932 and major government intervention. The Industrial Reconstruction Institute (IRI) was formed in January 1933 and took control of the bank-owned companies, suddenly giving Italy the largest state-owned industrial sector in Europe (excluding the USSR). IRI did rather well with its new responsibilities restructuring, modernising and rationalising as much as it could. It was a significant factor in post-1945 development. But it took the Italian economy until 1935 to recover the manufacturing levels of 1930 a position that was only 60% better than that of 1913.[159][160]
Japan
The Great Depression did not strongly affect Japan. The Japanese economy shrank by 8% during 1929 31. Japan's Finance Minister Takahashi Korekiyo was the first to implement what have come to be identified as Keynesian economic policies: first, by large fiscal stimulus involving deficit spending; and second, by devaluing the currency. Takahashi used the Bank of Japan to sterilize the deficit spending and minimize resulting inflationary pressures. Econometric studies have identified the fiscal stimulus as especially effective.[161]
The devaluation of the currency had an immediate effect. Japanese textiles began to displace British textiles in export markets. The deficit spending proved to be most profound and went into the purchase of munitions for the armed forces. By 1933, Japan was already out of the depression. By 1934, Takahashi realized that the economy was in danger of overheating, and to avoid inflation, moved to reduce the deficit spending that went towards armaments and munitions.
This resulted in a strong and swift negative reaction from nationalists, especially those in the army, culminating in his assassination in the course of the February 26 Incident. This had a chilling effect on all civilian bureaucrats in the Japanese government. From 1934, the military's dominance of the government continued to grow. Instead of reducing deficit spending, the government introduced price controls and rationing schemes that reduced, but did not eliminate inflation, which remained a problem until the end of World War II.
The deficit spending had a transformative effect on Japan. Japan's industrial production doubled during the 1930s. Further, in 1929 the list of the largest firms in Japan was dominated by light industries, especially textile companies (many of Japan's automakers, such as Toyota, have their roots in the textile industry). By 1940 light industry had been displaced by heavy industry as the largest firms inside the Japanese economy.[162]
Latin America
Main article: Great Depression in Latin America
Because of high levels of U.S. investment in Latin American economies, they were severely damaged by the Depression. Within the region, Chile, Bolivia and Peru were particularly badly affected.[163]
Before the 1929 crisis, links between the world economy and Latin American economies had been established through American and British investment in Latin American exports to the world. As a result, Latin Americans export industries felt the depression quickly. World prices for commodities such as wheat, coffee and copper plunged. Exports from all of Latin America to the U.S. fell in value from $1.2 billion in 1929 to $335 million in 1933, rising to $660 million in 1940.
But on the other hand, the depression led the area governments to develop new local industries and expand consumption and production. Following the example of the New Deal, governments in the area approved regulations and created or improved welfare institutions that helped millions of new industrial workers to achieve a better standard of living.
Middle East and North Africa
The Great Depression had severe impacts across the Middle East and North Africa, including economic decline which led to social unrest.[164]
Netherlands
Main article: Great Depression in the Netherlands
From roughly 1931 to 1937, the Netherlands suffered a deep and exceptionally long depression. This depression was partly caused by the after-effects of the American stock-market crash of 1929, and partly by internal factors in the Netherlands. Government policy, especially the very late dropping of the Gold Standard, played a role in prolonging the depression. The Great Depression in the Netherlands led to some political instability and riots, and can be linked to the rise of the Dutch fascist political party NSB. The depression in the Netherlands eased off somewhat at the end of 1936, when the government finally dropped the Gold Standard, but real economic stability did not return until after World War II.[165]
New Zealand
Main article: History of New Zealand  Great Depression
New Zealand was especially vulnerable to worldwide depression, as it relied almost entirely on agricultural exports to the United Kingdom for its economy. The drop in exports led to a lack of disposable income from the farmers, who were the mainstay of the local economy. Jobs disappeared and wages plummeted, leaving people desperate and charities unable to cope. Work relief schemes were the only government support available to the unemployed, the rate of which by the early 1930s was officially around 15%, but unofficially nearly twice that level (official figures excluded M ori and women). In 1932, riots occurred among the unemployed in three of the country's main cities (Auckland, Dunedin, and Wellington). Many were arrested or injured through the tough official handling of these riots by police and volunteer "special constables".[166]
Poland
Main article: Second Polish Republic  Economy
Poland was affected by the Great Depression longer and stronger than other countries due to inadequate economic response of the government and the pre-existing economic circumstances of the country. At that time, Poland was under the authoritarian rule of Sanacja, whose leader, J zef Pi sudski, was opposed to leaving the gold standard until his death in 1935. As a result, Poland was unable to perform a more active monetary and budget policy. Additionally, Poland was a relatively young country that emerged merely 10 years earlier after being partitioned between German, Russian and the Austro-Hungarian Empires for over a century. Prior to independence, the Russian part exported 91% of its exports to Russia proper, while the German part exported 68% to Germany proper. After independence, these markets were largely lost, as Russia transformed into USSR that was mostly a closed economy, and Germany was in a tariff war with Poland throughout the 1920s.[167]
Industrial production fell significantly: in 1932 hard coal production was down 27% compared to 1928, steel production was down 61%, and iron ore production noted a 89% decrease.[168] On the other hand, electrotechnical, leather, and paper industries noted marginal increases in production output. Overall, industrial production decreased by 41%.[169] A distinct feature of the Great Depression in Poland was the de-concentration of industry, as larger conglomerates were less flexible and paid their workers more than smaller ones.
Unemployment rate rose significantly (up to 43%) while nominal wages fell by 51% in 1933 and 56% in 1934, relative to 1928. However, real wages fell less due to the government's policy of decreasing cost of living, particularly food expenditures (food prices were down by 65% in 1935 compared to 1928 price levels). Material conditions deprivation led to strikes, some of them violent or violently pacified - like in Sanok (March of the Hungry in Sanok [pl] March 6, 1930), Lesko county (Lesko uprising June 21   July 9, 1932) and Zawiercie (Bloody Friday (1930) [pl] April 18, 1930).
To adopt to the crisis, Polish government employed deflation methods such as high interest rates, credit limits and budget austerity to keep a fixed exchange rate with currencies tied to the gold standard. Only in late 1932 the government created a plan to fight the economic crisis.[170] Part of the plan was mass public works scheme, employing up to 100,000 people in 1935.[168] After Pi sudski's death, in 1936 the gold standard regime was relaxed, and launching the development of the Central Industrial Region kicked off the economy, to over 10% annual growth rate in the 1936-1938 period.
Portugal
Main article: Economic history of Portugal
Already under the rule of a dictatorial junta, the Ditadura Nacional, Portugal suffered no turbulent political effects of the Depression, although Ant nio de Oliveira Salazar, already appointed Minister of Finance in 1928 greatly expanded his powers and in 1932 rose to Prime Minister of Portugal to found the Estado Novo, an authoritarian corporatist dictatorship. With the budget balanced in 1929, the effects of the depression were relaxed through harsh measures towards budget balance and autarky, causing social discontent but stability and, eventually, an impressive economic growth.[171]
Puerto Rico
In the years immediately preceding the depression, negative developments in the island and world economies perpetuated an unsustainable cycle of subsistence for many Puerto Rican workers. The 1920s brought a dramatic drop in Puerto Rico's two primary exports, raw sugar and coffee, due to a devastating hurricane in 1928 and the plummeting demand from global markets in the latter half of the decade. 1930 unemployment on the island was roughly 36% and by 1933 Puerto Rico's per capita income dropped 30% (by comparison, unemployment in the United States in 1930 was approximately 8% reaching a height of 25% in 1933).[172][173] To provide relief and economic reform, the United States government and Puerto Rican politicians such as Carlos Chardon and Luis Mu oz Mar n created and administered first the Puerto Rico Emergency Relief Administration (PRERA) 1933 and then in 1935, the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration (PRRA).[174]
Romania
Main article: Great Depression in Romania
Romania was also affected by the Great Depression.[175][176]
South Africa
Main article: Great Depression in South Africa
As world trade slumped, demand for South African agricultural and mineral exports fell drastically. The Carnegie Commission on Poor Whites had concluded in 1931 that nearly one-third of Afrikaners lived as paupers. The social discomfort caused by the depression was a contributing factor in the 1933 split between the "gesuiwerde" (purified) and "smelter" (fusionist) factions within the National Party and the National Party's subsequent fusion with the South African Party.[177][178] Unemployment programs were begun that focused primarily on the white population.[179]
Soviet Union
The Soviet Union was the world's only socialist state with very little international trade. Its economy was not tied to the rest of the world and was mostly unaffected by the Great Depression.[180]
At the time of the Depression, the Soviet economy was growing steadily, fuelled by intensive investment in heavy industry. The apparent economic success of the Soviet Union at a time when the capitalist world was in crisis led many Western intellectuals to view the Soviet system favorably. Jennifer Burns wrote:
As the Great Depression ground on and unemployment soared, intellectuals began unfavorably comparing their faltering capitalist economy to Russian Communism [...] More than ten years after the Revolution, Communism was finally reaching full flower, according to New York Times reporter Walter Duranty, a Stalin fan who vigorously debunked accounts of the Ukraine famine, a man-made disaster that would leave millions dead.[181]
Due to having very little international trade and its policy of isolation, they did not receive the benefits of international trade once the depression ran its course, and were still effectively poorer than most developed countries at their worst sufferings in the crisis.[citation needed]
The Great Depression caused mass immigration to the Soviet Union, mostly from Finland and Germany. Soviet Russia was at first happy to help these immigrants settle, because they believed they were victims of capitalism who had come to help the Soviet cause. However, when the Soviet Union entered the war in 1941, most of these Germans and Finns were arrested and sent to Siberia, while their Russian-born children were placed in orphanages. Their fate remains unknown.[182]
Spain
Main article: Economic history of Spain
Spain had a relatively isolated economy, with high protective tariffs and was not one of the main countries affected by the Depression. The banking system held up well, as did agriculture.[183]
By far the most serious negative impact came after 1936 from the heavy destruction of infrastructure and manpower by the civil war, 1936 39. Many talented workers were forced into permanent exile. By staying neutral in the Second World War, and selling to both sides[clarification needed], the economy avoided further disasters.[184]
Sweden
Main article: Economy of Sweden
By the 1930s, Sweden had what America's Life magazine called in 1938 the "world's highest standard of living". Sweden was also the first country worldwide to recover completely from the Great Depression. Taking place amid a short-lived government and a less-than-a-decade old Swedish democracy, events such as those surrounding Ivar Kreuger (who eventually committed suicide) remain infamous in Swedish history. The Social Democrats under Per Albin Hansson formed their first long-lived government in 1932 based on strong interventionist and welfare state policies, monopolizing the office of Prime Minister until 1976 with the sole and short-lived exception of Axel Pehrsson-Bramstorp's "summer cabinet" in 1936. During forty years of hegemony, it was the most successful political party in the history of Western liberal democracy.[185]
Thailand
In Thailand, then known as the Kingdom of Siam, the Great Depression contributed to the end of the absolute monarchy of King Rama VII in the Siamese revolution of 1932.[citation needed]
United Kingdom
Main articles: Great Depression in the United Kingdom and Interwar Britain
 Unemployed people in front of a workhouse in London, 1930
The World Depression broke at a time when the United Kingdom had still not fully recovered from the effects of the First World War more than a decade earlier. The country was driven off the gold standard in 1931.
The world financial crisis began to overwhelm Britain in 1931; investors around the world started withdrawing their gold from London at the rate of  2.5 million per day.[42] Credits of  25 million each from the Bank of France and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and an issue of  15 million fiduciary note slowed, but did not reverse the British crisis. The financial crisis now caused a major political crisis in Britain in August 1931. With deficits mounting, the bankers demanded a balanced budget; the divided cabinet of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government agreed; it proposed to raise taxes, cut spending and most controversially, to cut unemployment benefits by 20%. The attack on welfare was totally unacceptable to the Labour movement. MacDonald wanted to resign, but King George V insisted he remain and form an all-party coalition "National Government". The Conservative and Liberals parties signed on, along with a small cadre of Labour, but the vast majority of Labour leaders denounced MacDonald as a traitor for leading the new government. Britain went off the gold standard, and suffered relatively less than other major countries in the Great Depression. In the 1931 British election, the Labour Party was virtually destroyed, leaving MacDonald as Prime Minister for a largely Conservative coalition.[186][44]
The effects on the northern industrial areas of Britain were immediate and devastating, as demand for traditional industrial products collapsed. By the end of 1930 unemployment had more than doubled from 1 million to 2.5 million (20% of the insured workforce), and exports had fallen in value by 50%. In 1933, 30% of Glaswegians were unemployed due to the severe decline in heavy industry. In some towns and cities in the north east, unemployment reached as high as 70% as shipbuilding fell by 90%.[187] The National Hunger March of September October 1932 was the largest[188] of a series of hunger marches in Britain in the 1920s and 1930s. About 200,000 unemployed men were sent to the work camps, which continued in operation until 1939.[189]
In the less industrial Midlands and Southern England, the effects were short-lived and the later 1930s were a prosperous time. Growth in modern manufacture of electrical goods and a boom in the motor car industry was helped by a growing southern population and an expanding middle class. Agriculture also saw a boom during this period.[190]
United States
Main articles: Great Depression in the United States and The New Deal
 Unemployed men standing in line outside a depression soup kitchen in Chicago 1931.
Hoover's first measures to combat the depression were based on encouraging businesses not to reduce their workforce or cut wages but businesses had little choice: wages were reduced, workers were laid off, and investments postponed.[191][192]
In June 1930, Congress approved the Smoot Hawley Tariff Act which raised tariffs on thousands of imported items. The intent of the Act was to encourage the purchase of American-made products by increasing the cost of imported goods, while raising revenue for the federal government and protecting farmers. Most countries that traded with the U.S. increased tariffs on American-made goods in retaliation, reducing international trade, and worsening the Depression.[193]
In 1931, Hoover urged bankers to set up the National Credit Corporation[194] so that big banks could help failing banks survive. But bankers were reluctant to invest in failing banks, and the National Credit Corporation did almost nothing to address the problem.[195]
 Burning shacks on the Anacostia flats, Washington, D.C. put up by the Bonus Army (World War I veterans) after the marchers with their wives and children were driven out by the regular Army by order of President Hoover, 1932[196]
By 1932, unemployment had reached 23.6%, peaking in early 1933 at 25%.[197] Those releasing from prison during this period had an especially difficult time finding employment given the stigma of their criminal records, which often led to recidivism out of economic desperation.[198] Drought persisted in the agricultural heartland, businesses and families defaulted on record numbers of loans, and more than 5,000 banks had failed.[199] Hundreds of thousands of Americans found themselves homeless, and began congregating in shanty towns   dubbed "Hoovervilles"   that began to appear across the country.[200] In response, President Hoover and Congress approved the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, to spur new home construction, and reduce foreclosures. The final attempt of the Hoover Administration to stimulate the economy was the passage of the Emergency Relief and Construction Act (ERA) which included funds for public works programs such as dams and the creation of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) in 1932. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation was a Federal agency with the authority to lend up to $2 billion to rescue banks and restore confidence in financial institutions. But $2 billion was not enough to save all the banks, and bank runs and bank failures continued.[191] Quarter by quarter the economy went downhill, as prices, profits and employment fell, leading to the political realignment in 1932 that brought to power Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 
 Buried machinery in a barn lot; South Dakota, May 1936. The Dust Bowl on the Great Plains coincided with the Great Depression.[201]
Shortly after President Franklin Delano Roosevelt was inaugurated in 1933, drought and erosion combined to cause the Dust Bowl, shifting hundreds of thousands of displaced persons off their farms in the Midwest. From his inauguration onward, Roosevelt argued that restructuring of the economy would be needed to prevent another depression or avoid prolonging the current one. New Deal programs sought to stimulate demand and provide work and relief for the impoverished through increased government spending and the institution of financial reforms.
During a "bank holiday" that lasted five days, the Emergency Banking Act was signed into law. It provided for a system of reopening sound banks under Treasury supervision, with federal loans available if needed. The Securities Act of 1933 comprehensively regulated the securities industry. This was followed by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 which created the Securities and Exchange Commission. Although amended, key provisions of both Acts are still in force. Federal insurance of bank deposits was provided by the FDIC, and the Glass Steagall Act.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act provided incentives to cut farm production in order to raise farming prices. The National Recovery Administration (NRA) made a number of sweeping changes to the American economy. It forced businesses to work with government to set price codes through the NRA to fight deflationary "cut-throat competition" by the setting of minimum prices and wages, labor standards, and competitive conditions in all industries. It encouraged unions that would raise wages, to increase the purchasing power of the working class. The NRA was deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1935.
 CCC workers constructing drainage culvert, 1933. Over 3 million unemployed young men were taken out of the cities and placed into 2,600+ work camps managed by the CCC.[202]
These reforms, together with several other relief and recovery measures, are called the First New Deal. Economic stimulus was attempted through a new alphabet soup of agencies set up in 1933 and 1934 and previously extant agencies such as the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. By 1935, the "Second New Deal" added Social Security (which was later considerably extended through the Fair Deal), a jobs program for the unemployed (the Works Progress Administration, WPA) and, through the National Labor Relations Board, a strong stimulus to the growth of labor unions. In 1929, federal expenditures constituted only 3% of the GDP. The national debt as a proportion of GNP rose under Hoover from 20% to 40%. Roosevelt kept it at 40% until the war began, when it soared to 128%.
By 1936, the main economic indicators had regained the levels of the late 1920s, except for unemployment, which remained high at 11%, although this was considerably lower than the 25% unemployment rate seen in 1933. In the spring of 1937, American industrial production exceeded that of 1929 and remained level until June 1937. In June 1937, the Roosevelt administration cut spending and increased taxation in an attempt to balance the federal budget.[203]
The American economy then took a sharp downturn, lasting for 13 months through most of 1938. Industrial production fell almost 30 per cent within a few months and production of durable goods fell even faster. Unemployment jumped from 14.3% in 1937 to 19.0% in 1938, rising from 5 million to more than 12 million in early 1938.[204] Manufacturing output fell by 37% from the 1937 peak and was back to 1934 levels.[205]
 The WPA employed 2 3 million at unskilled labor.
Producers reduced their expenditures on durable goods, and inventories declined, but personal income was only 15% lower than it had been at the peak in 1937. As unemployment rose, consumers' expenditures declined, leading to further cutbacks in production. By May 1938 retail sales began to increase, employment improved, and industrial production turned up after June 1938.[206] After the recovery from the Recession of 1937 38, conservatives were able to form a bipartisan conservative coalition to stop further expansion of the New Deal and, when unemployment dropped to 2% in the early 1940s, they abolished WPA, CCC and the PWA relief programs. Social Security remained in place.
Between 1933 and 1939, federal expenditure tripled, and Roosevelt's critics charged that he was turning America into a socialist state.[207] The Great Depression was a main factor in the implementation of social democracy and planned economies in European countries after World War II (see Marshall Plan). Keynesianism generally remained the most influential economic school in the United States and in parts of Europe until the periods between the 1970s and the 1980s, when Milton Friedman and other neoliberal economists formulated and propagated the newly created theories of neoliberalism and incorporated them into the Chicago School of Economics as an alternative approach to the study of economics. Neoliberalism went on to challenge the dominance of the Keynesian school of Economics in the mainstream academia and policy-making in the United States, having reached its peak in popularity in the election of the presidency of Ronald Reagan in the United States, and Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom.[208]
Literature
And the great owners, who must lose their land in an upheaval, the great owners with access to history, with eyes to read history and to know the great fact: when property accumulates in too few hands it is taken away. And that companion fact: when a majority of the people are hungry and cold they will take by force what they need. And the little screaming fact that sounds through all history: repression works only to strengthen and knit the repressed.
 John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath[209]
The Great Depression has been the subject of much writing, as authors have sought to evaluate an era that caused both financial and emotional trauma. Perhaps the most noteworthy and famous novel written on the subject is The Grapes of Wrath, published in 1939 and written by John Steinbeck, who was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for the work, and in 1962 was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. The novel focuses on a poor family of sharecroppers who are forced from their home as drought, economic hardship, and changes in the agricultural industry occur during the Great Depression. Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men is another important novella about a journey during the Great Depression. Additionally, Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird is set during the Great Depression. Margaret Atwood's Booker prize-winning The Blind Assassin is likewise set in the Great Depression, centering on a privileged socialite's love affair with a Marxist revolutionary. The era spurred the resurgence of social realism, practiced by many who started their writing careers on relief programs, especially the Federal Writers' Project in the U.S.[210][211][212][213] Nonfiction works from this time also capture important themes. The 1933 memoir Prison Days and Nights by Victor Folke Nelson provides insight into criminal justice ramifications of the Great Depression, especially in regard to patterns of recidivism due to lack of economic opportunity.[198]
A number of works for younger audiences are also set during the Great Depression, among them the Kit Kittredge series of American Girl books written by Valerie Tripp and illustrated by Walter Rane, released to tie in with the dolls and playsets sold by the company. The stories, which take place during the early to mid 1930s in Cincinnati, focuses on the changes brought by the Depression to the titular character's family and how the Kittredges dealt with it.[214] A theatrical adaptation of the series entitled Kit Kittredge: An American Girl was later released in 2008 to positive reviews.[215][216] Similarly, Christmas After All, part of the Dear America series of books for older girls, take place in 1930s Indianapolis; while Kit Kittredge is told in a third-person viewpoint, Christmas After All is in the form of a fictional journal as told by the protagonist Minnie Swift as she recounts her experiences during the era, especially when her family takes in an orphan cousin from Texas.[217]
Naming
Further information: Economic depression
The term "The Great Depression" is most frequently attributed to British economist Lionel Robbins, whose 1934 book The Great Depression is credited with formalizing the phrase,[218] though Hoover is widely credited with popularizing the term,[218][219] informally referring to the downturn as a depression, with such uses as "Economic depression cannot be cured by legislative action or executive pronouncement" (December 1930, Message to Congress), and "I need not recount to you that the world is passing through a great depression" (1931).
 Black Friday, May 9, 1873, Vienna Stock Exchange. The Panic of 1873 and Long Depression followed.
The term "depression" to refer to an economic downturn dates to the 19th century, when it was used by varied Americans and British politicians and economists. Indeed, the first major American economic crisis, the Panic of 1819, was described by then-president James Monroe as "a depression",[218] and the most recent economic crisis, the Depression of 1920 21, had been referred to as a "depression" by then-president Calvin Coolidge.
Financial crises were traditionally referred to as "panics", most recently the major Panic of 1907, and the minor Panic of 1910 11, though the 1929 crisis was called "The Crash", and the term "panic" has since fallen out of use. At the time of the Great Depression, the term "The Great Depression" was already used to refer to the period 1873 96 (in the United Kingdom), or more narrowly 1873 79 (in the United States), which has retroactively been renamed the Long Depression.[220]
Comparison with the Great Recession
Main article: Comparisons between the Great Recession and the Great Depression
The worldwide economic decline after 2008 has been compared to the 1930s.[221][222][223][224][225]
The causes of the Great Recession seem similar to the Great Depression, but significant differences exist. The then-chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, had extensively studied the Great Depression as part of his doctoral work at MIT, and implemented policies to manipulate the money supply and interest rates in ways that were not done in the 1930s. Bernanke's policies will undoubtedly be analyzed and scrutinized in the years to come, as economists debate the wisdom of his choices. In 2011, one journalist contrasted the Great Depression of the 1930s as opposed to the late-2000s recession.[226]
If we contrast the 1930s with the Crash of 2008 where gold went through the roof, it is clear that the U.S. dollar on the gold standard was a completely different animal in comparison to the fiat free-floating U.S. dollar currency we have today. Both currencies in 1929 and 2008 were the U.S. dollar, but analogously it is as if one was a Saber-toothed tiger and the other is a Bengal tiger; they are two completely different animals. Where we have experienced inflation since the Crash of 2008, the situation was much different in the 1930s when deflation set in. Unlike the deflation of the early 1930s, the U.S. economy currently appears to be in a "liquidity trap," or a situation where monetary policy is unable to stimulate an economy back to health.
In terms of the stock market, nearly three years after the 1929 crash, the DJIA dropped 8.4% on August 12, 1932. Where we have experienced great volatility with large intraday swings in the past two months, in 2011, we have not experienced any record-shattering daily percentage drops to the tune of the 1930s. Where many of us may have that '30s feeling, in light of the DJIA, the CPI, and the national unemployment rate, we are simply not living in the '30s. Some individuals may feel as if we are living in a depression, but for many others the current global financial crisis simply does not feel like a depression akin to the 1930s.
1928 and 1929 were the times in the 20th century that the wealth gap reached such skewed extremes;[227] half the unemployed had been out of work for over six months, something that was not repeated until the late-2000s recession. 2007 and 2008 eventually saw the world reach new levels of wealth gap inequality that rivalled the years of 1928 and 1929.
See also
Causes of the Great Depression
Cities in the Great Depression
Entertainment during the Great Depression
List of Depression-era outlaws
Timeline of the Great Depression
General
Causes of World War II
Causes of World War I
Economic collapse
International relations (1919 1939)
Interwar France
Involuntary unemployment
List of economic crises
References
^ John A. Garraty, The Great Depression (1986)
^ Duhigg, Charles (March 23, 2008). "Depression, You Say? Check Those Safety Nets". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved December 25, 2021.
^ Roger Lowenstein, "History Repeating," Wall Street Journal Jan 14, 2015 Archived May 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
^ Garraty, Great Depression (1986) ch1
^ a b Frank, Robert H.; Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). Principles of Macroeconomics (3rd ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-07-319397-7.
^ "Commodity Data". U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2008.
^ Cochrane, Willard W. (1958). "Farm Prices, Myth and Reality": 15. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ "World Economic Survey 1932 33". League of Nations: 43.
^ Mitchell, Depression Decade
^ a b c d "Great Depression" Archived May 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Encyclop dia Britannica
^ "1998/99 Prognosis Based Upon 1929 Market Autopsy". Gold Eagle. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008.
^ "Drought: A Paleo Perspective  20th Century Drought". National Climatic Data Center. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved April 5, 2009.
^ Hamilton, James (1987). "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression". Journal of Monetary Economics. 19 (2): 145 69. doi:10.1016/0304-3932(87)90045-6.
^ "The Great Depression". drought.unl.edu. Archived from the original on March 29, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018.
^ Richard, Clay Hanes, ed. (July 2002). Historic Events for Students: The Great Depression (Volume I ed.). Gale. ISBN 978-0-7876-5701-7.
^ Tignor, Tignor, Robert L. (October 28, 2013). Worlds together, worlds apart: a history of the world from the beginnings of humankind to the present (Fourth ed.). New York. ISBN 978-0-393-92207-3. OCLC 854609153.
^ Jerome Blum, Rondo Cameron, Thomas G. Barnes, The European world: a history (2nd ed 1970) 885 pp.
^ George H. Soule, Prosperity Decade: From War to Depression: 1917 1929 (1947)
^ "Timeline: A selected Wall Street chronology". PBS. Archived from the original on September 23, 2008. Retrieved September 30, 2008.
^ Post, Special to Financial (October 24, 2011). "The Great Crash of 1929, some key dates". Financial Post. Retrieved July 22, 2020.
^ a b "Market crash of 1929: Some facts of the economic downturn". Economic Times. Times Inernet. October 22, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2019.
^ According to the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Data website, based on a monthly timeseries 1929 September   1932 June, the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 87.1% while the Cowles Commission and S&P's all stock index lost 85.0%: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=qj2m , https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=qj2l.
^ Gordon, John Steele (November December 2018). "The Bank of United States". ABA Banking Journal. 110 (6): 58. ProQuest 2160290916.
^ Calomiris, Charles W. (November 2007). "Bank Failures in Theory and History: The Great Depression and Other "Contagious" Events". National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w13597. S2CID 154123748.
^ Ferguson, Niall (October 2009), The Ascent of Money, Penguin, p. 163, ISBN 978-986-173-584-9
^ Whaples, Robert (March 1995). "Where Is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions". The Journal of Economic History. Cambridge University Press. 55 (1): 144. doi:10.1017/S0022050700040602. JSTOR 2123771. S2CID 145691938.
^ "Protectionism and the Great Depression" Archived February 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Paul Krugman, New York Times, November 30, 2009
^ Barry Eichengreen, Douglas Irwin (March 17, 2009). "The protectionist temptation: Lessons from the Great Depression for today" Archived May 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. VOX.
^ a b c Whaples, Robert (1995). "Where is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions". The Journal of Economic History. 55 (1): 139 154. doi:10.1017/S0022050700040602. JSTOR 2123771. S2CID 145691938.
^ "The Senate Passes the Smoot-Hawley Tariff". United States Senate. United States Senate. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2020.
^ "The World in Depression". Mount Holyoke College. Archived from the original on March 10, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008.
^ a b c d Eichengreen, B.; Irwin, D. A. (2010). "The Slide to Protectionism in the Great Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?" (PDF). Journal of Economic History. 70 (4): 871 897. doi:10.1017/s0022050710000756. S2CID 18906612. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Peter Temin, Gianni Toniolo, The World Economy between the Wars, Oxford University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-804201-3, p. 106
^ Randall E. Parker, Reflections on the Great Depression, Elgar publishing, 2003, ISBN 978-1-84376-335-2, p. 22.
^ International data from Maddison, Angus. "Historical Statistics for the World Economy: 1 2003 AD".[permanent dead link]. Gold dates culled from historical sources, principally Eichengreen, Barry (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919 1939. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-506431-3.
^ Eichengreen, Barry (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919 1939. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-506431-3.
^ Bernanke, Ben (March 2, 2004). "Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke: Money, Gold and the Great Depression". At the H. Parker Willis Lecture in Economic Policy, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Charles Loch Mowat, Britain between the wars, 1918 1940 (1955) pp. 379 385.
^ a b William Ashworth, A short history of the international economy since 1850 (2nd ed. 1962) pp. 237 244.
^ a b Isabel Schnabel, "The German twin crisis of 1931". Journal of Economic History 64#3 (2004): 822 871.
^ a b H. V. Hodson (1938), Slump and Recovery, 1929 1937 (London), pp. 64 76.
^ a b Williams, David (1963). "London and the 1931 financial crisis". Economic History Review. 15 (3): 513 528. doi:10.2307/2592922. JSTOR 2592922.
^ Mowat (1955), Britain between the wars, 1918 1940, pp. 386 412.
^ a b Sean Glynn and John Oxborrow (1976), Interwar Britain : a social and economic history, pp. 67 73.
^ a b Per-capita GDP data from MeasuringWorth: What Was the U.S. GDP Then? Archived September 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
^ Gauti B. Eggertsson, "Great Expectations and the End of the Depression", American Economic Review 98, No. 4 (September 2008): 1476 1516
^ "Was the New Deal Contractionary?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 264, October 2006, Gauti B. Eggertsson Archived February 12, 2022, at the Wayback Machine
^ "The Mistake of 1937: A General Equilibrium Analysis", Monetary and Economic Studies 24, No. S-1 (December 2006), Boj.or.jp Archived August 11, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
^ Eggertsson, Gauti B. "A Reply to Steven Horwitz's Commentary on 'Great Expectations and the End of the Great Depression'". Econ Journal Watch. 7 (3): 197 204. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Steven Horwitz, "Unfortunately Unfamiliar with Robert Higgs and Others: A Rejoinder to Gauti Eggertsson on the 1930s", Econ Journal Watch 8(1), 2, January 2011. [1] Archived February 15, 2022, at the Wayback Machine
^ Hannsgen, Greg; Papadimitriou, Dimitri (2010). "Did the New Deal Prolong or Worsen the Great Depression?". Challenge. 53 (1): 63 86. doi:10.2753/0577-5132530103. ISSN 0577-5132. JSTOR 40722622. S2CID 153490746.
^ Quoted by P. Renshaw. Journal of Contemporary History. 1999 vol. 34 (3). pp. 377 364
^ Romer, Christina D. (December 1992). "What Ended the Great Depression" (PDF). Journal of Economic History. 52 (4): 757 84. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.207.844. doi:10.1017/S002205070001189X. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 17, 2013. monetary development were crucial to the recovery implies that self-correction played little role in the growth of real output
^ Ben Bernanke. Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01698-6. p. 7
^ Ben S. Bernanke, "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propaga-tion of the Great Depression", The American Economic Review 73, No. 3 (June 1983): 257 276, available from the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank collection at Stlouisfed.org Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
^ Bernanke, Ben S. (February 1995). "The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative Approach" (PDF). Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. Fraser.stlouisfed.org. 27 (1): 1 28. doi:10.2307/2077848. JSTOR 2077848. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
^ W. S. Woytinsky and E. S. Woytinsky, World population and production: trends and outlook (1953) p. 148
^ Denyse Baillargeon, Making Do: Women, Family and Home in Montreal during the Great Depression (Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1999), p. 159.
^ Stephenson, Jill (2014). Women in Nazi Germany. Taylor & Francis. pp. 3 5. ISBN 978-1-317-87607-6. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ Susan K. Foley (2004). Women in France Since 1789: The Meanings of Difference. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 186 90. ISBN 978-0-230-80214-8.
^ Srigley, Katrina (2010). Breadwinning Daughters: Young Working Women in a Depression-era City, 1929 1939. University of Toronto Press. p. 135. ISBN 978-1-4426-1003-3.
^ Jessica S. Bean, "'To help keep the home going': female labour supply in interwar London". Economic History Review (2015) 68#2 pp. 441 470.
^ Deirdre Beddoe, Back to Home and Duty: Women Between the Wars, 1918 1939 (1989).
^ Camiscioli, Elisa (2001). "Producing Citizens, Reproducing the 'French Race': Immigration, Demography, and Pronatalism in Early Twentieth Century France". Gender & History. 13 (3): 593 621. doi:10.1111/1468-0424.00245. PMID 18198513. S2CID 20333294.
^ Ann E. McCleary, "'I Was Really Proud of Them': Canned Raspberries and Home Production During the Farm Depression". Augusta Historical Bulletin (2010), Issue 46, pp. 14 44.
^ Vogelsang, Willem. "3. Feedsacks and the Great Depression". trc-leiden.nl. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2020.
^ Klassen, Tari (2008). "How Depression-Era Quiltmakers Constructed Domestic Space: An Interracial Processual Study". Midwestern Folklore. 34 (2): 17 47.
^ Baillargeon, Making Do: Women, Family and Home in Montreal during the Great Depression (1999), pp. 70, 108, 136 138, 159.
^ Metzler, Mark (2004). "Woman's Place in Japan's Great Depression: Reflections on the Moral Economy of Deflation". Journal of Japanese Studies. 30 (2): 315 352. doi:10.1353/jjs.2004.0045. S2CID 146273711.
^ Reagin, N. R. (2001). "Marktordnung and Autarkic Housekeeping: Housewives and Private Consumption under the Four-Year Plan, 1936 1939". German History. 19 (2): 162 184. doi:10.1191/026635501678771619. PMID 19610237.
^ Referring to the effect of World War II spending on the economy, economist John Kenneth Galbraith said, "One could not have had a better demonstration of the Keynesian ideas." Daniel Yergin, William Cran (writers / producer) (2002). Commanding Heights, see chapter 6 video or transcript (TV documentary). U.S.: PBS.
^ Romer, Christina D. (1992). "What Ended the Great Depression?". Journal of Economic History. 52 (4): 757 784. doi:10.1017/S002205070001189X. fiscal policy was of little consequence even as late as 1942, suggests an interesting twist on the usual view that World War II caused, or at least accelerated, the recovery from the Great Depression.
^ Higgs, Robert (March 1, 1992). "Wartime Prosperity? A Reassessment of the U.S. Economy in the 1940s". The Journal of Economic History. 52 (1): 41 60. doi:10.1017/S0022050700010251. ISSN 1471-6372. S2CID 154484756.
^ "Great Depression and World War II" Archived January 24, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. Library of Congress.
^ "Depression & WWII" Archived June 25, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Americaslibrary.gov.
^ Richard J. Jensen, "The causes and cures of unemployment in the Great Depression" Archived November 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Journal of Interdisciplinary History 19.4 (1989): 553 583.
^ Lioudis, Nick. "What is the difference between Keynesian and monetarist economics?". Investopedia. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021.
^ "Great Depression - Causes of the decline". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2021.
^ Hayes, Adam. "What is a Monetarist?". Investopedia. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021.
^ Whaples, Robert (1995). "Where is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions" (PDF). The Journal of Economic History. 55 (1). p. 150. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.482.4975. doi:10.1017/S0022050700040602. JSTOR 2123771. S2CID 145691938. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Mendoza, Enrique G.; Smith, Katherine A. (September 1, 2006). "Quantitative implications of a debt-deflation theory of Sudden Stops and asset prices". Journal of International Economics. 70 (1): 82 114. doi:10.1016/j.jinteco.2005.06.016. ISSN 0022-1996. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Buraschi, Andrea; Jiltsov, Alexei (February 1, 2005). "Inflation risk premia and the expectations hypothesis". Journal of Financial Economics. 75 (2): 429 490. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2004.07.003. ISSN 0304-405X. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Whaples, Robert (1995). "Where is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions" (PDF). The Journal of Economic History. 55 (1). p. 143. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.482.4975. doi:10.1017/S0022050700040602. JSTOR 2123771. S2CID 145691938. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ A Monetary History of the United States, 1857 1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1963.
^ Randall E. Parker (2003), Reflections on the Great Depression Archived August 18, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Edward Elgar Publishing, ISBN 978-1-84376-550-9, pp. 11 12
^ Friedman, Milton; Anna Jacobson Schwartz (2008). The Great Contraction, 1929 1933 (New ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691137940. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Bernanke, Ben (2000). Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton University Press. p. 7. ISBN 0-691-01698-4. Archived from the original on December 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021.
^ Ben S. Bernanke (8 November 2002), "FederalReserve.gov: Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke" Archived March 24, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Conference to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago
^ Friedman, Milton; Schwartz, Anna (2008). The Great Contraction, 1929 1933 (New ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 247. ISBN 978-0691137940. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Krugman, Paul (February 15, 2007). "Who Was Milton Friedman?". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on April 10, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008.
^ G. Edward Griffin (1998). The Creature from Jekyll Island: A Second Look at the Federal Reserve (3d ed.). p. 503. ISBN 978-0-912986-39-5.
^ a b Frank Freidel (1973), Franklin D. Roosevelt: Launching the New Deal, ch. 19, Little, Brown & Co.
^ Klein, Lawrence R. (1947). "The Keynesian Revolution". New York: Macmillan: 56 58, 169, 177 179. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help); Rosenof, Theodore (1997). Economics in the Long Run: New Deal Theorists and Their Legacies, 1933 1993. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-2315-5.
^ a b c Fisher, Irving (October 1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions". Econometrica. The Econometric Society. 1 (4): 337 57. doi:10.2307/1907327. JSTOR 1907327. S2CID 35564016.
^ Fortune, Peter (September October 2000). "Margin Requirements, Margin Loans, and Margin Rates: Practice and Principles   analysis of history of margin credit regulations   Statistical Data Included". New England Economic Review. Archived from the original on August 11, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ a b c "Bank Failures". Living History Farm. Archived from the original on February 19, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2008.
^ "Friedman and Schwartz, Monetary History of the United States", 352
^ Randall E. Parker, Reflections on the Great Depression, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2003, ISBN 978-1-84376-550-9, pp. 14 15
^ Bernanke, Ben S (June 1983). "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression" (PDF). The American Economic Review. The American Economic Association. 73 (3): 257 276. JSTOR 1808111. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 18, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Mishkin, Fredric (December 1978). "The Household Balance and the Great Depression". Journal of Economic History. 38 (4): 918 937. doi:10.1017/S0022050700087167. S2CID 155049545.
^ Gauti B. Eggertsson, Great Expectations and the End of the Depression Archived January 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, American Economic Review 2008, 98:4, 1476 1516
^ Christina Romer, "The Fiscal Stimulus, Flawed but Valuable" Archived November 29, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, October 20, 2012.
^ Peter Temin, Lessons from the Great Depression, MIT Press, 1992, ISBN 978-0-262-26119-7, pp. 87 101.
^ Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2008). "Great Expectations and the End of the Depression". The American Economic Review. 98 (4). p. 1480. doi:10.1257/aer.98.4.1476. hdl:10419/60661. JSTOR 29730131.
^ a b De Long, J. Bradford (December 1990). "'Liquidation' Cycles: Old Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory and the Great Depression". NBER Working Paper No. 3546: 1. doi:10.3386/w3546.
^ a b c Randall E. Parker, Reflections on the Great Depression, Elgar Publishing, 2003, ISBN 978-1-84376-335-2, p. 9
^ a b c White, Lawrence (2008). "Did Hayek and Robbins Deepen the Great Depression?". Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 40 (4): 751 768. doi:10.1111/j.1538-4616.2008.00134.x. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2019.
^ De Long, J. Bradford (December 1990). "'Liquidation' Cycles: Old Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory and the Great Depression". NBER Working Paper No. 3546: 5. doi:10.3386/w3546.
^ De Long, J. Bradford (December 1990). "'Liquidation' Cycles: Old Fashioned Real Business Cycle Theory and the Great Depression". NBER Working Paper No. 3546: 33. doi:10.3386/w3546.
^ a b Murray Rothbard, America's Great Depression (Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2000), pp. 159 163.
^ Steele, G. R. (2001). Keynes and Hayek. Routledge. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-415-25138-9.
^ Rothbard, America's Great Depression, pp. 19 21.
^ 
For Hayek's view, see:
Diego Pizano, Conversations with Great Economists: Friedrich A. Hayek, John Hicks, Nicholas Kaldor, Leonid V. Kantorovich, Joan Robinson, Paul A.Samuelson, Jan Tinbergen (Jorge Pinto Books, 2009).
For Rothbard's view, see:
Murray Rothbard, A History of Money and Banking in the United States (Ludwig von Mises Institute), pp. 293 294.
^ a b c John Cunningham Wood, Robert D. Wood, Friedrich A. Hayek, Taylor & Francis, 2004, ISBN 978-0-415-31057-4, p. 115
^ Sennholz, Hans (October 1, 1969). "The Great Depression". Foundation for Economic Education. Archived from the original on December 24, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2016.
^ Mises, Ludwig (August 18, 2014). "The Causes of the Economic Crisis, and Other Essays Before and After the Great Depression". Ludwig von Mises Institute. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2016.
^ Bonner, Bill (February 25, 2011). "Buying Bad Debt to Return Bank Solvency". Business Insider. Archived from the original on October 24, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2016.
^ Corey, Lewis (1934). The Decline of American Capitalism. Covici Friede Publishers. ISBN 978-0-405-04116-7.
^ Fleisher, Larry (October 30, 2009). "The Great Depression And The Great Recession". Forbes.
^ Joseph., Dorfman (1959). The economic mind in American civilization. The Viking Press. OCLC 71400420. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Allgoewer, Elisabeth (May 2002). "Underconsumption theories and Keynesian economics. Interpretations of the Great Depression" (PDF). Discussion Paper No. 2002 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Foster, William Trufant; Catchings, Waddill (1928). The Road to Plenty. Houghton Mifflin. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2021.
^ Hubbert, M. King (1940). "Man Hours and Distribution, Derived from Man Hours: A Declining Quantity, Technocracy, Series A, No. 8, August 1936". Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2017. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Bell, Spurgeon (1940). "Productivity, Wages and National Income, The Institute of Economics of the Brookings Institution". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Geoffrey Lawrence, Capitalism and the Countryside: The rural crisis in Australia (Pluto Press, 1987)
^ A Century of Change in the Australian Labour Market Archived December 31, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Australian Bureau of Statistics
^ John Birmingham (2000). Leviathan: The unauthorised biography of Sydney. Random House. ISBN 978-0-09-184203-1
^ Judy Mackinolty, ed. The Wasted Years?: Australia's Great Depression (Allen & Unwin, 1981).
^ 1929 1939   The Great Depression Archived January 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, Source: Bank of Canada
^ Anthony Latham and John Heaton, The Depression and the Developing World, 1914 1939 (1981).
^ Coquery-Vidrovitch, C. (1977). "Mutation de l'Imp rialisme Colonial Fran ais dans les Ann es 30". African Economic History (in French) (4): 103 152. doi:10.2307/3601244. JSTOR 3601244.
^ Westcott, Nicholas (1984). "The East African sisal industry, 1929 1949: the marketing of a colonial commodity during depression and war". Journal of African History. 25 (4): 445 461. doi:10.1017/s0021853700028486. S2CID 161203218.
^ R. Olufeni Ekundare, An Economic History of Nigeria 1860 1960 (1973) online Archived December 31, 2021, at the Wayback Machine pp. 104 226.
^ Olubomehin, O.O. (2002). "Road Transportation and the Economy of South-Western Nigeria, 1920-1939". Lagos Historical Review. 2: 106 121.
^ Lungu, Gatian F. (1993). "Educational Policy-Making in Colonial Zambia: The Case of Higher Education for Africans from 1924 to 1964". The Journal of Negro History. 78 (4): 207 232. doi:10.2307/2717416. JSTOR 2717416. S2CID 149538992.
^ R. Anstey, King Leopold's Legacy: The Congo under Belgian Rule 1908 1960 (1966), p. 109.
^ Ochonu, Moses (2009). "Critical convergence: the Great Depression and the meshing of Nigerian and British anti-colonial polemic". Canadian Journal of African Studies. 43 (2): 245 281. doi:10.1080/00083968.2010.9707572. S2CID 142695035.
^ Gamble, Harry (2009). "Les paysans de l'empire:  coles rurales et imaginaire colonial en Afrique occidentale fran aise dans les ann es 1930". Cahiers d' tudes Africaines. 49 (3): 775 803. doi:10.4000/etudesafricaines.15630.
^ Laufenburger, Henry (1936). "France and the Depression". International Affairs. 15 (2): 202 224. doi:10.2307/2601740. JSTOR 2601740.
^ Jean-Pierre Dormois, The French Economy in the Twentieth Century (2004) p. 31
^ Beaudry, Paul; Portier, Franck (2002). "The French Depression in the 1930s". Review of Economic Dynamics. 5: 73 99. doi:10.1006/redy.2001.0143.
^ About the Great Depression Archived December 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, University of Illinois
^ a b Germany   Economic Archived December 31, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Public Broadcasting Service (PBS).
^ Bullock, Alan (1991) [1962]. Hitler: A Study in Tyranny. New York; London: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-1-56852-036-0.
^ "The History Place   Rise of Hitler: Hitler Runs for President". www.historyplace.com. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2016.
^ Ian Kershaw (1998). Hitler, 1889 1936: Hubris. W.W. Norton. p. 411. ISBN 978-0-393-32035-0.
^ Adam Tooze, The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy (2007)
^ R. J. Overy, "Misjudging Hitler" pp. 93 115 from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel, Routledge: London, 1999 pp. 98 99.
^ Kershaw, Ian To Hell and Back: Europe 1914-1949, Ch. 5
^ a b c Karlsson, Gunnar (2000). History of Iceland. pp. 308 12.
^ Manikumar, K. A. (2003). A Colonial Economy in the Great Depression, Madras (1929 1937).
^ Samita Sen, "Labour, Organization and Gender: The Jute Industry in India in the 1930s," in Helmut Konrad and Wolfgang Maderthaner, eds. Routes Into the Abyss: Coping with Crises in the 1930s (2013) pp. 152 66.
^ Simmons, Colin (1987). "The Great Depression and Indian Industry: Changing Interpretations and Changing Perceptions". Modern Asian Studies. 21 (3): 585 623. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00009215. JSTOR 312643. S2CID 145538790.
^ Frank Barry and Mary F. Daly, "Concurrent Irish Perspectives on the Great Depression" (2010) [ online ]
^ Frank Barry and Mary E. Daly, "Irish Perceptions of the Great Depression" in Michael Psalidopoulos, The Great Depression in Europe: Economic Thought and Policy in a National Context (Athens: Alpha Bank, 2012) pp. 395 424.
^ See also B. Girvin, Between Two Worlds: Politics and Economy in Independent Ireland (Dublin: Gill and Macmillan, 1989).
^ Barry, Frank, and Mary E. Daly. "Irish Perceptions of the Great Depression" (No. iiisdp349. IIIS, 2011.) Online Archived August 11, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
^ Vera Zamagni, The economic history of Italy 1860 1990 (Oxford University Press, 1993)
^ Fabrizio Mattesini, and Beniamino Quintieri. "Italy and the Great Depression: An analysis of the Italian economy, 1929 1936." Explorations in Economic History (1997) 34#3 pp: 265 294.
^ Fabrizio Mattesini and Beniamino Quintieri. "Does a reduction in the length of the working week reduce unemployment? Some evidence from the Italian economy during the Great Depression." Explorations in Economic History (2006), 43#3, pp. 413 37.
^ Myung Soo Cha, "Did Takahashi Korekiyo Rescue Japan from the Great Depression?", The Journal of Economic History 63, No. 1 (March 2003): 127 144.
^ (For more on the Japanese economy in the 1930s see "MITI and the Japanese Miracle" by Chalmers Johnson.)
^ Rosemary Thorp, Latin America in the 1930s: the role of the periphery in world crisis (Palgrave Macmillan, 2000).
^ Anderson, Betty S. (2016). A history of the modern Middle East : rulers, rebels, and rogues. Stanford, California. ISBN 978-0-8047-9875-4. OCLC 945376555. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022.
^ E. H. Kossmann, The Low Countries: 1780 1940 (1978).
^ "Social Welfare and The State: Great Depression Archived March 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine", Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa.
^ "II RP by a gospodarcz  pora k . Mity na jej temat s  bardzo szkodliwe [TOP 2018]". forsal.pl (in Polish). November 3, 2018. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ a b "Wielki kryzys gospodarczy w Polsce". histmag.org. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ "Wielki kryzys w Polsce. Zbankrutowa o niemal 25% firm, a produkt krajowy spad  o ponad po ow ". WielkaHistoria (in Polish). November 9, 2020. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ "140 lat temu urodzi  si  Boles aw Wieniawa-D ugoszowski". dzieje.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021.
^ Jos  Cardozo, "The great depression and Portugal" in Michael Psalidopoulos, ed. (2012). The Great Depression in Europe: Economic Thought and Policy in a National Context Athens: Alpha Bank, ISBN 978-960-99793-6-8. pp. 361 94 Online Archived March 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
^ Rodriguez, Manuel (2011). A New Deal for the Tropics. Princeton: Markus Wiener. p. 23.
^ "Graph of U.S. Unemployment Rate: 1930 1945". American Social History Project. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2017.
^ Dietz, James (1986). Economic History of Puerto Rico. Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 154 55. ISBN 0-691-02248-8. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
^ Blejan, Elisabeta; Costache, Br ndu a; Aloman, Adriana (2009). "The National Bank of Romania during the Great Depression   1929-1933" (PDF). Fourth Conference of Southeast Europe Monetary History Network (SEEMHN). National Bank of Serbia (8): 1 34. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021.
^ Chiappini, Rapha l; Torre, Dominique; Tosi, Elise (2009). "Romania's unsustainable stabilization: 1929-1933" (PDF). GREDEG Working Papers. Groupe de Recherche en Droit, Economie, Gestion (2019 43): 1 32. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 8, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ Dan O'Meara, Volkskapitalisme: class, capital, and ideology in the development of Afrikaner nationalism, 1934 1948 (Cambridge University Press, 1983).
^ The Great Depression and the 1930S Archived January 2, 2022, at the Wayback Machine, Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress.
^ Minnaar, Anthony (1994). "Unemployment and relief measures during the Great Depression (1929 1934)". Kleio. 26 (1): 45 85. doi:10.1080/00232084.1994.10823193.
^ Robert William Davies, Mark Harrison, and Stephen G. Wheatcroft, eds. The economic transformation of the Soviet Union, 1913 1945 (Cambridge University Press, 1994)
^ Jennifer Burns (2009).Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American Right Archived April 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, p. 34. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-532487-0
^ "Illegal Emigration to the U.S.S.R. During the Great Depression". www.genealogia.fi. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2016.
^ Gabriel Tortella and Jordi Palafox, "Banking and Industry in Spain 1918 1936," Journal of European Economic History (1984), 13#2 Special Issue, pp. 81 110.
^ R.J. Harrison, Economic History of Modern Spain (1978), pp. 129 49.
^ G ran Therborn, "A Unique Chapter in the History of Democracy: The Swedish Social Democrats", in K. Misgeld et al. (eds), Creating Social Democracy, University Park, Penn State University Press, 1996.
^ Charles Loch Mowat, Britain between the wars, 1918 1940 (1955) pp. 386 412.
^ Unemployment During The Great Depression Archived January 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, thegreatdepression.co.uk
^ Cook, Chris and Bewes, Diccon; What Happened Where: A Guide To Places And Events In Twentieth-Century History p. 115; Routledge, 1997 ISBN 1-85728-533-6
^ "Work camps that tackled Depression" Archived January 6, 2022, at the Wayback Machine, BBC News.
^ Constantine, Stephen (1983), Social Conditions in Britain 1918 1939, ISBN 0-416-36010-6
^ a b Peter Clemens, Prosperity, Depression and the New Deal: The USA 1890 1954, Hodder Education, 4. Auflage, 2008, ISBN 978-0-340-96588-7, p. 114.
^ Charles R. Morris, A Rabble of Dead Money: The Great Crash and the Global Depression: 1929 1939 (PublicAffairs, 2017), 389 pp.  online review Archived April 24, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Smoot-Hawley Tariff" Archived March 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Department of State.
^ "Reconstruction Finance Corporation". EH.net Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013.
^ Clemens, Prosperity, Depression and the New Deal, 2008, p. 113.
^ The Great Depression (1929 1939), The Eleanor Roosevelt Papers. Archived December 23, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ Swanson, Joseph; Williamson, Samuel (1972). "Estimates of national product and income for the United States economy, 1919 1941". Explorations in Economic History. 10: 53 73. doi:10.1016/0014-4983(72)90003-4.
^ a b  Prison Days and Nights, by Victor F. Nelson (New York: Garden City Publishing Co., Inc., 1936)
^ "Great Depression in the United States" Archived October 28, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, Microsoft Encarta. Archived October 31, 2009.
^ Joyce Bryant, "The Great Depression and New Deal" Archived July 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
^ The Dust Bowl, Geoff Cunfer, Southwest Minnesota State University. Archived December 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
^ "National Park History: "The Spirit of the Civilian Conservation Corps"". Nationalparkstraveler.com. Archived from the original on September 5, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2010.
^ Robert Goldston, The Great Depression, Fawcett Publications, 1968, p. 228.
^ Economic Fluctuations, Maurice W. Lee, Chairman of Economics Dept., Washington State College, published by R.D. Irwin Inc, Homewood, Illinois, 1955, p. 236.
^ Business Cycles, James Arthur Estey, Purdue University, Prentice-Hall, 1950, pp. 22 23 chart.
^ Maurice W. Lee, 1955.
^ Schlesinger, Jr., Arthur M. The Coming of the New Deal: 1933 1935. Paperback ed. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2003 [1958]. ISBN 0-618-34086-6; Schlesinger, Jr., Arthur M. The Politics of Upheaval: 1935 1936. Paperback ed. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2003 [1960]. ISBN 0-618-34087-4
^ Lanny Ebenstein, Milton Friedman: A Biography (2007).
^ The Grapes of Wrath, by John Steinbeck, Penguin, 2006, 0143039431, p. 238
^ David Taylor, Soul of a People: The WPA Writers' Project Uncovers Depression America (2009).
^ Jerre Mangione, The Dream and the Deal: The Federal Writers' Project, 1935 1943 (1996)
^ Jerrold Hirsch, Portrait of America: A Cultural History of the Federal Writers' Project (2006)
^ Stacy I. Morgan, Rethinking Social Realism: African American art and literature, 1930 1953  (2004), p. 244.
^ Harry, Lou (October 1, 2010). Cincinnati Magazine. Emmis Communications. pp. 59 63. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2017.
^ Morency, Philip. On the Aisle, Volume 2: Film Reviews by Philip Morency. Dorrance Publishing. pp. 133 . ISBN 978-1-4349-7709-0. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
^ Pimpare, Stephen (2017). Ghettos, Tramps, and Welfare Queens: Down and Out on the Silver Screen. Oxford University Press. pp. 216 . ISBN 978-0-19-066072-7. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2017.
^ Smith, Robert W. (January 26, 2006). Spotlight on America: The Great Depression. Teacher Created Resources. ISBN 978-1-4206-3218-7. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2017.
^ a b c "When Did the Great Depression Receive Its Name? (And Who Named It?) - History News Network". hnn.us. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ William Manchester, The Glory and the Dream: A Narrative History of America, 1932 1972.
^ Fletcher, T.W. (1961). "The Great Depression of English Agriculture 1873 1896". The Economic History Review. Blackwell Publishing. 13 (3): 417 32. doi:10.2307/2599512. JSTOR 2599512.
^ Adam Tooze, Crashed: How iters a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World (2018) p. 41.
^ Rampell, Catherine (March 11, 2009). "'Great Recession': A Brief Etymology". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
^ Gibbs, Nancy (April 15, 2009). "The Great Recession: America Becomes Thrift Nation". Time. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009.
^ Krugman, Paul (March 20, 2009). "The Great Recession versus the Great Depression". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2017.
^ Lahart, Justin (July 28, 2009). "The Great Recession: A Downturn Sized Up". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2017.
^ Rabinowitz, Marco (October 6, 2011). "The Great Depression vs. the Great Recession Archived October 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine: A look at the value of the U.S. dollar in 1929 and 2008; what has changed and where that leaves us today". MSN Money. Benzinga.
^ Evans-Pritchard, Ambrose (September 14, 2010). "IMF Fears 'Social Explosion' From World Jobs Crisis". The Daily Telegraph (London). "America and Europe face the worst jobs crisis since the 1930s and risk 'an explosion of social unrest' unless they tread carefully, the International Monetary Fund has warned."
Further reading
Global
Brendon, Piers. The Dark Valley: A Panorama of the 1930s (2000) comprehensive global economic and political history; 816pp
Davis, Joseph S. The World Between the Wars, 1919 39: An Economist's View (1974)
Garraty, John A. The Great Depression: An Inquiry into the causes, course, and Consequences of the Worldwide Depression of the Nineteen-Thirties, as Seen by Contemporaries and in Light of History (1986) online
Garside, William R. Capitalism in Crisis: international responses to the Great Depression (1993)
Grossman, Mark. Encyclopedia of the Interwar Years: From 1919 to 1939 (2000). 400 pp. worldwide coverage
Hall Thomas E. and J. David Ferguson. The Great Depression: An International Disaster of Perverse Economic Policies (1998)
Hodson, H.V. Slump and Recovery, 1929 37: A Survey of World Economic Affairs (Oxford UP, 1938). online
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Edward C. Prescott. Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century (2007)
League Of Nations. World Economic Survey 1935-1936 (1936) online
Rees, Goronwy. The great slump: capitalism in crisis, 1929-33 (1970) online, Marxist.
Rothermund, Dietmar. The Global Impact of the Great Depression (1996)
Europe
Aldcroft, Derek H.  Economic Growth in Britain in the Inter-War Years: A Reassessment.  Economic History Review, 20#2, 1967, pp. 311 26. online
Ambrosius, G. and W. Hibbard, A Social and Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe (1989)
Broadberry, S. N. The British Economy between the Wars (Basil Blackwell 1986)
Feinstein. Charles H. The European Economy between the Wars (1997)
James, Harold. The German slump : politics and economics, 1924-1936 (1986) online
Kaiser, David E. Economic diplomacy and the origins of the Second World War: Germany, Britain, France and Eastern Europe, 1930 1939 (1980)
Konrad, Helmut and Wolfgang Maderthaner, eds. Routes Into the Abyss: Coping With Crises in the 1930s Archived January 24, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (Berghahn Books, 2013), 224 pp. Compares political crises in Germany, Italy, Austria, and Spain with those in Sweden, Japan, China, India, Turkey, Brazil, and the United States.
Psalidopoulos, Michael, ed. The Great Depression in Europe: Economic Thought and Policy in a National Context (Athens: Alpha Bank, 2012). ISBN 978-960-99793-6-8. Chapters by economic historians cover Finland, Sweden, Belgium, Austria, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Romania, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland. table of contents Archived March 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
Tipton, F. and R. Aldrich, An Economic and Social History of Europe, 1890 1939 (1987)
United States and Canada
Dickstein, Morris. Dancing in the dark : a cultural history of the Great Depression (2009) online
Helping the Homeless Man: Activities and Facilities of the Central Registry for Homeless Single Men. ca. 1933-1934. 18 photographic prints (1 box). At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections.
Galbraith, John Kenneth, The Great Crash, 1929 (1954), popular online
Goldston, Robert, The Great Depression: The United States in the Thirties (1968)
McNeese, Tim, and Richard Jensen. The Great Depression 1929-1938 (Discovering U.S. History) (2010) online, for middle schools.
Mitchell, Broadus. Depression Decade: From New Era through New Deal, 1929 1941 (1947), 462 pp., thorough coverage of the U.S. economy online
Reis, Ronald A. The Great Depression and the New Deal : America's economy in crisis (2011) for secondary schools. online
Safarian, A. E. The Canadian economy in the Great Depression (2009) online
Washington Women s Heritage Project Records: Ethel P. Storey Oral History Interview (13/20). 1985. 4 sound cassettes; papers. Storey discusses the Great Depression and hardships of early life, abortion, childbearing and motherhood. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections.
Young, William H. The Great Depression in America : a cultural encyclopedia (2007) online
Other areas
Brown, Ian. The Economies of Africa and Asia in the Inter-war Depression (1989)
Drinot, Paulo, and Alan Knight, eds. The Great Depression in Latin America (2014) excerpt
Latham, Anthony, and John Heaton, The Depression and the Developing World, 1914 1939 (1981).
Shiroyama, Tomoko. China during the Great Depression : market, state, and the world economy, 1929-1937 (2008) online
Focus on economic theory or econometrics
Bernanke, Ben. "The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative Approach" Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking (1995) 27#1 pp 1 28 online
Eichengreen, Barry J. Hall of mirrors : the Great Depression, the great recession, and the uses-and misuses-of history (2015), leading economist compares economic decline after 1929 and after 2008. online
Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters: The gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919 1939. 1992.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Marc Flandreau. The Gold Standard in Theory and History (1997)
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 1960 (1963), monetarist interpretation (heavily statistical)
Glasner, David, ed. Business Cycles and Depressions (Routledge, 1997), 800 pp. Excerpt
Grinin, L., Korotayev, A. and Tausch A. eds. Economic Cycles, Crises, and the Global Periphery (2016).
Haberler, Gottfried. The World Economy, money, and the great depression 1919 1939 (1976)
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Edward C. Prescott, eds. Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century (2007), essays by economists on the U.S., Britain, France, Germany, Italy and on tariffs; statistical
Kindleberger, Charles P. The World in Depression, 1929 1939 (3rd ed. 2013) online
Madsen, Jakob B. "Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the Great Depression", Southern Economic Journal, (2001) 67#4 pp. 848 68 online at JSTOR.
Markwell, Donald. John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace (Oxford University Press, 2006).
Mundell, R.A. "A Reconsideration of the Twentieth Century", American Economic Review 90#3 (2000), pp. 327 40 online version
Richardson, H. W.  The Basis of Economic Recovery in the Nineteen-Thirties: A Review and a New Interpretation.  Economic History Review, 15#2 (1962), pp. 344 63. online; focus on United Kingdom.
Romer, Christina D. "The Nation in Depression," Journal of Economic Perspectives (1993) 7#2 pp. 19 39 in JSTOR Archived July 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, statistical comparison of U.S. and other countries
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Great Depression.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Great Depression.
vteGreat DepressionTopics
Causes
Wall Street Crash of 1929
Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act
Dust Bowl
Effect in cities
Recession of 1937 1938
Timeline
By country
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Latin America
Netherlands
Romania
South Africa
United Kingdom
United States
United States
Bonus Army
New Deal
Category
Commons
vteNew DealCauses and legacy
Great Depression
New Deal Coalition
Brain Trust
American Liberty League
Criticism
New Deal
Emergency Banking Act
Economy Act
Agricultural Adjustment Act
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
Civil Works Administration
Communications Act
Executive Order 6102
Homeowners Refinancing Act
Farm Credit Administration
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
Federal Emergency Relief Administration
Frazier Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act
Glass Steagall Act
National Industrial Recovery Act
National Housing Act
National Recovery Administration
National Youth Administration
Public Works Administration (PWA)
Public Works of Art Project
Reciprocal Tariff Act
Railroad Retirement Act
Securities Act
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
Second New Deal
Works Progress Administration (WPA)
Federal Project Number One
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Farm Security Administration
Judicial Procedures Reform Act
National Bituminous Coal Conservation Act
National Labor Relations Board (Act)
Rural Electrification Act
Rural Electrification Administration
Social Security
United States Housing Authority
Fair Labor Standards Act
Individuals
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Harold L. Ickes
Frances Perkins
Harry Hopkins
Henry Morgenthau Jr.
Huey Long
Herbert Hoover
Francis Townsend
Robert F. Wagner
Category
Commons
vteRecessions in the United States and Commonwealth of Nations countries
Balance sheet recession
Business cycle
Chronic inflation
Deflation
Depression
Disinflation
Economic expansion
U.S. expansions
Economic recovery
General glut
Global recession
Inflation
Recession
U.K. recessions
U.S. recessions
Recession shapes
Rolling recession
Shock
Demand
Supply
Stagflation
Yield curve
Inverted yield curve
Commercial Revolution(1000 1760)
Great Slump (1430 1490)
Great Frost of 1709
1st Industrial Revolution(1760 1840)
British credit crisis of 1772-1773
1772 1774; England
Scotland
Thirteen Colonies
1785 1788
Copper Panic of 1789/Panic of 1792 (1789 1793)
Panic of 1796 1797 (1796 1799)
1802 1804
1807 1810
1812
Post-Napoleonic Depression (1815 1821)
1822 23
Panic of 1825 (1825 1826)
1828 29
1833 34
Panic of 1837 (1836 1838 and 1839 1843)
Civil War-era United States/Victorian Britain(1840 1870)
1845 46
Panic of 1847 (1847 1848)
1853 54
Panic of 1857 (1857 1858)
Panic of 1866 (1865 1867)
Black Friday (1869 1870)
2nd Industrial Revolution(1870 1914)
Long Depression
1873 1879; United Kingdom
United States
Depression of 1882 1885
1887 88
Baring crisis (1890 1891)
Panic of 1893 (1893 1897)
1899 1900
Panic of 1901 (1902 1904)
Panic of 1907 (1907 1908)
Panic of 1910 1911 (1910 1912)
1913 14
Interwar period(1918 1939)
Post World War I recession (1918 1919)
Depression of 1920 1921
1923 1924
1926 1927
Great Depression
1929 1933; Australia
Canada
India
New Zealand
South Africa
United Kingdom
United States
Recession of 1937 1938
Post WWII expansion(1945 1973)
1945
Recession of 1949 (1948 1949)
Recession of 1953 (1953 1954)
Recession of 1958 (1957 1958)
Recession of 1960 1961
Recession of 1969 1970
Great Inflation(1973 1982)
1973 1975 recession
United Kingdom
United States
Early 1980s recession
1980 1982; Canada
United Kingdom
United States
Great Moderation/Great Regression(1982 2007)
Early 1990s recession
1990 1991; Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
1997 Asian financial crisis
Early 2000s recession (2001)
Digital Revolution(2007 present)
Great Recession
2007 2009; Australia
Bangladesh
Canada
India
Malaysia
New Zealand
Pakistan
South Africa
Sri Lanka
United Kingdom
United States
COVID-19 recession
2020 present; Australia
Bangladesh
Belize
Botswana
Canada
India
Malaysia
Namibia
New Zealand
Singapore
United Kingdom
United States
Zambia
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteEconomicsTheoretical economics
Microeconomics
Decision theory
Price theory
Game theory
Contract theory
Mechanism design
Macroeconomics
Mathematical economics
Computational economics
Behavioral economics
Empirical economics
Econometrics
Economic statistics
Experimental economics
Economic history
Applied economics
Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic geography
Education
Environmental
Ecological
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Participation
Economic policy
Public economics
Public choice
Regional
Socioeconomics
Transportation
Urban
Welfare
Schools (history)of economic thought
Mainstream
Heterodox
American (National)
Ancient thought
Anarchist
Mutualism
Austrian
Behavioral
Buddhist
Chartalism
Modern Monetary Theory
Chicago
Classical
Critique of political economy
Disequilibrium
Ecological
Evolutionary
Feminist
Georgism
Historical
Institutional
Keynesian
Neo- (neoclassical Keynesian synthesis)
New
Post-
Circuitism
Malthusianism
Marginalism
Marxian
Neo-
Mercantilism
Neoclassical
Lausanne
New classical
Real business-cycle theory
New institutional
Physiocracy
Socialist
Stockholm
Supply-side
Thermoeconomics
Notable economistsand thinkerswithin economics
Fran ois Quesnay
Adam Smith
David Ricardo
Thomas Robert Malthus
Johann Heinrich von Th nen
Friedrich List
Hermann Heinrich Gossen
Jules Dupuit
Antoine Augustin Cournot
John Stuart Mill
Karl Marx
William Stanley Jevons
Henry George
L on Walras
Alfred Marshall
Georg Friedrich Knapp
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Vilfredo Pareto
Friedrich von Wieser
John Bates Clark
Thorstein Veblen
John R. Commons
Irving Fisher
Wesley Clair Mitchell
John Maynard Keynes
Joseph Schumpeter
Arthur Cecil Pigou
Frank Knight
John von Neumann
Alvin Hansen
Jacob Viner
Edward Chamberlin
Ragnar Frisch
Harold Hotelling
Micha  Kalecki
Oskar R. Lange
Jacob Marschak
Gunnar Myrdal
Abba P. Lerner
Roy Harrod
Piero Sraffa
Simon Kuznets
Joan Robinson
E. F. Schumacher
Friedrich Hayek
John Hicks
Tjalling Koopmans
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen
Wassily Leontief
John Kenneth Galbraith
Hyman Minsky
Herbert A. Simon
Milton Friedman
Paul Samuelson
Kenneth Arrow
William Baumol
Gary Becker
Elinor Ostrom
Robert Solow
Amartya Sen
Robert Lucas Jr.
Joseph Stiglitz
Richard Thaler
Paul Krugman
Thomas Piketty
more
Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business portal
vteEmploymentClassifications
Academic tenure
Casual
Contingent work
Full-time job
Gig worker
Job sharing
Part-time job
Self-employment
Side job
Skilled worker
Journeyman
Technician
Independent contractor
Labour hire
Temporary work
Laborer
Wage labour
Hiring
Application
Background check
Business networking
Cover letter
Curriculum vitae
Drug testing
Employment contract
Employment counsellor
Executive search
list
Induction programme
Job fair
Job fraud
Job hunting
Job interview
Letter of recommendation
Onboarding
Overqualification
Person environment fit
Personality job fit theory
Probation
Recruitment
R sum 
Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates
Underemployment
Work-at-home scheme
Roles
Cooperative
Employee
Employer
Internship
Job
Labour hire
Permanent employment
Supervisor
Volunteering
Working class
Blue-collar
Green-collar
Grey-collar
Pink-collar
Precariat
White-collar
Career and training
Apprenticeship
Artisan
Master craftsman
Avocation
Career assessment
Career counseling
Career development
Coaching
Creative class
Education
Continuing education
E-learning
Employability
Further education
Graduate school
Induction training
Knowledge worker
Licensure
Lifelong learning
Overspecialization
Practice-based professional learning
Professional association
Professional certification
Professional development
Professional school
Reflective practice
Retraining
Vocational education
Vocational school
Vocational university
Mentorship
Occupational Outlook Handbook
Practice firm
Profession
Operator
Professional
Tradesman
Vocation
Attendance
Break
Career break
Furlough
Gap year
Leave of absence
Long service leave
No call, no show
Sabbatical
Sick leave
Time clock
Schedules
35-hour workweek
Four-day week
Eight-hour day
996 working hour system
Flextime
On-call
Overtime
Remote work
Retroactive overtime
Six-hour day
Shift work
Working time
Workweek and weekend
Wages and salaries
Income bracket
Income tax
Living wage
Maximum wage
National average salary
World
Europe
Minimum wage
Canada
Hong Kong
Europe
United States
Progressive wage
Singapore
Overtime rate
Paid time off
Performance-related pay
Salary cap
Working poor
Benefits
Annual leave
Casual Friday
Child care
Disability insurance
Health insurance
Life insurance
Marriage leave
Parental leave
Pension
Sick leave
Take-home vehicle
Safety and health
Crunch
Epilepsy and employment
Human factors and ergonomics
Karoshi
Occupational burnout
Occupational disease
Occupational exposure limit
Occupational health psychology
Occupational injury
Occupational noise
Occupational stress
Personal protective equipment
Repetitive strain injury
Right to sit
Sick building syndrome
Work accident
Occupational fatality
Workers' compensation
Workplace health promotion
Workplace phobia
Workplace wellness
Equal opportunity
Affirmative action
Equal pay for equal work
Gender pay gap
Glass ceiling
Infractions
Corporate collapses and scandals
Accounting scandals
Control fraud
Corporate behaviour
Corporate crime
Discrimination
Exploitation of labour
Dress code
Employee handbook
Employee monitoring
Evaluation
Labour law
Sexual harassment
Sleeping while on duty
Wage theft
Whistleblower
Workplace bullying
Workplace harassment
Workplace incivility
Willingness
Boreout
Careerism
Civil conscription
Conscription
Critique of work
Dead-end job
Job satisfaction
McJob
Organizational commitment
Refusal of work
Slavery
Bonded labour
Human trafficking
Labour camp
Penal labour
Peonage
Truck wages
Unfree labour
Wage slavery
Work ethic
Work life interface
Downshifting
Slow living
Workaholic
Termination
At-will employment
Dismissal
Banishment room
Constructive dismissal
Wrongful dismissal
Employee offboarding
Exit interview
Layoff
Notice period
Pink slip
Resignation
Letter of resignation
Restructuring
Retirement
Mandatory retirement
Retirement age
Retirement planning
Severance package
Golden handshake
Golden parachute
Turnover
Unemployment
Barriers to entry
Discouraged worker
Economic depression
Great Depression
Long Depression
Frictional unemployment
Full employment
Graduate unemployment
Involuntary unemployment
Jobless recovery
Phillips curve
Recession
Great Recession
Job losses caused by the Great Recession
Lists of recessions
Recession-proof job
Reserve army of labour
Structural unemployment
Technological unemployment
Types of unemployment
Unemployment benefits
Unemployment Convention, 1919
Unemployment extension
List of countries by unemployment rate
Employment rates
Employment-to-population ratio
Wage curve
Youth unemployment
Public programs
Workfare
Unemployment insurance
Make-work job
Job creation program
Job creation index
Job guarantee
Employer of last resort
Guaranteed minimum income
Right to work
Historical:
U.S.A:
Civil Works Administration
Works Progress Administration
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
See also
Bullshit job
Busy work
Credentialism and educational inflation
Emotional labor
Evil corporation
Going postal
Kiss up kick down
Labor rights
Make-work job
Money-rich, time-poor
Narcissism in the workplace
Post-work society
Presenteeism
Psychopathy in the workplace
Slow movement (culture)
Toxic leader
Toxic workplace
Workhouse
 See also templates
Aspects of corporations
Aspects of jobs
Aspects of occupations
Aspects of organizations
Aspects of workplaces
Corporate titles
Organized labor
Portals: United States Economics 1920s
Authority control National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Poland
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Depression&oldid=1146918059"