Employment and labour law
For other uses, see Overtime (disambiguation).
The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onOrganised labour
Labour movement
Timeline
New unionismProletariat
Social movement unionism
Social democracyDemocratic socialismSocialismCommunismSyndicalism
Anarcho-syndicalismNational-syndicalism
Labour rights
Freedom of associationCollective bargaining
Child labourUnfree Labour
Equal payEmployment discrimination
Legal working ageFour-day weekEight-hour day
Annual leavePaid time offSick leaveMinimum wage
Occupational safety and healthEmployment protection
Trade unions
Trade unions by country
Trade union federations
International comparisons
ITUCIWAWFTU
Strike action
Chronological list of strikes
General strikeSecondary actionOvertime banQuiet quitting
Sitdown strikeWork-to-ruleLockout
Labour parties
Australia
Barbados
Brazil
Fiji
Georgia
Hong Kong
Ireland
Israel
Malta
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Singapore
South Korea
United Kingdom
Academic disciplines
Industrial relations
Labour economics
Labour history
Labour law
vte
Overtime is the amount of time someone works beyond normal working hours. The term is also used for the pay received for this time. Normal hours may be determined in several ways:
by custom (what is considered healthy or reasonable by society),
by practices of a given trade or profession,
by legislation,
by agreement between employers and workers or their representatives.
Most national countries have overtime labour laws designed to dissuade or prevent employers from forcing their employees to work excessively long hours (such as the situation in the textile mills in the 1920s). These laws may take into account other considerations than humanitarian concerns, such as preserving the health of workers so that they may continue to be productive, or increasing the overall level of employment in the economy.  One common approach to regulating overtime is to require employers to pay workers at a higher hourly rate for overtime work. Companies may choose to pay workers higher overtime pay even if not obliged to do so by law, particularly if they believe that they face a backward bending supply curve of labour.
Overtime pay rates can cause workers to work longer hours than they would at a flat hourly rate.  Overtime laws, attitudes toward overtime and hours of work vary greatly from country to country and between various sectors.
Time off in lieu[edit]
Time off in lieu (TOIL),[1] compensatory time, or comp time is a type of work schedule arrangement that allows (or requires) workers to take time off instead of, or in addition to, receiving overtime pay. A worker may receive overtime pay plus equal time off for each hour worked on certain agreed days, such as public holidays.
In the United States, such arrangements are currently legal in the public sector but not in the private sector.[2]
For example, non-exempt workers must receive at least one and one half times their normal hourly wage for every hour worked beyond 40 hours in a work week. For example, workers who clock 48 hours in one week would receive the pay equivalent to 52 hours of work (40 hours + 8 hours at 1.5 times the normal hourly wage). With comp time, the worker could (or would have to) forgo the 12 hours of overtime pay and instead take 8 paid hours off at some future date.[clarification needed][citation needed]
In some other jurisdictions, such as Canada, employers might be required to pay the overtime at the higher rate (e.g. 1.5 times the normal rate), but also be allowed to require time off in lieu at the normal rate. Thus, an employee might work 48 hours in one week, and 32 hours the next week (assuming over 40 hours is overtime), and be paid an extra amount equivalent to 4 hours work (8 multiplied by 0.5).
In Australia, such arrangements both in the private and public sector are common.
In some cases, particularly when employees are represented by a labour union, overtime may be paid at a higher rate than 1.5 times the hourly pay. In some factories, for example, if workers are required to work on a Sunday, they may be paid twice their regular rate (i.e., "double time").
Overtime laws by jurisdiction[edit]
European Union[edit]
Directives issued by the European Union must be incorporated into law by member states.
Directives 93/104/EC (1993), 2000/34/EC (2000), which limited working hours, were consolidated into 2003/88/EC (2003). Employers and employees can agree to opt out, under certain circumstances.
The directives require:[3]
maximum average working week (including overtime) of 48 hours over a 17-week reference period
minimum daily rest period of 11 consecutive hours in every 24
breaks when the working day exceeds 6 hours
minimum weekly rest period of 24 hours plus the 11 hours daily rest period in every 7-day period
minimum of 4 weeks paid annual leave
night work restricted to an average of 8 hours in any 24-hour period
The directives apply to:
all sectors of activity, both public and private
Doctors in training used to work a maximum week of 58 hours until 2009. From 1 August 2009 their maximum working week fell to 48 hours.
Exemptions:
Member States of the EC may exempt: managing executives or other persons with autonomous decision-making power; family workers; and workers officiating at religious ceremonies. These are workers whose working time is not measured or pre-determined or can be determined by the workers.
Other categories can be exempted from the directive's key provisions provided compensatory rest or appropriate protection is granted. These include employees who work a long way from home, or whose activities require a permanent presence or continuity of service or production, or who work in sectors which have peaks of activity. Examples include off-shore workers, security guards, journalists, emergency workers, agricultural workers, tour guides, etc.
Japan[edit]
In Japan the Labour Standards Act ( )  of 1947 provides for an eight-hour work day and 40-hour workweek with at least one day off per week. The act requires a premium of at least 25% over the ordinary hourly wage for any overtime work, 35% for any work on prescribed off days, and an additional 25% for any work between 10 pm and 5 am.[4] Employers must enter into an overtime agreement with a labour representative prior to any overtime work by employees, and this agreement must stipulate to the maximum number of overtime hours that an employee may work, which may be no more than 15 hours per week, 45 hours per month and 360 hours per year.[5]
United States[edit]
Federal overtime law[edit]
In the United States the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 applies to employees in industries engaged in or producing goods for interstate commerce.  The FLSA establishes a standard work week of 40 hours for certain kinds of workers, and mandates payment for overtime hours to those workers of one and one-half times the workers' normal rate of pay for any time worked above 40 hours.
The law creates two broad categories of employees, 
those who are "exempt" from the regulation and
those who are "non-exempt".
Employers are not required to pay exempt employees overtime but must do so for non-exempt employees.
Law Enforcement Availability Pay[edit]
Law Enforcement Availability Pay (LEAP) is a type of premium pay that is paid to federal law enforcement officers who are classified as GS-1811 or FP-2501, criminal investigator or special agent. Due to the nature of their work, criminal investigators are required to work, or be available to work, substantial amounts of "unscheduled duty." Availability pay is generally an entitlement that an agency must provide if the required conditions are met, but is optional in any agency's Office of the Inspector General that may employ fewer than five criminal investigators.[6]
The following agencies are covered under LEAP:
Air Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI)
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)
Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
Defense Criminal Investigative Service (DCIS)
Department of Labor, Office of Inspector General (DOL-OIG)
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
Federal Air Marshal Service (FAMS)
General Services Administration, Office of Inspector General (GSA-OIG)
Homeland Security Investigations, part of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE-HSI)
IRS Criminal Investigation Division (IRS-CI)
Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS)
United States Marshals Service (USMS)
United States Postal Inspection Service (USPIS)
United States Secret Service (USSS)
Exempt[edit]
Independent contractors are not considered employees and therefore are not protected by the FLSA.  Several factors determine whether a worker is an employee, who might be entitled to overtime compensation, or an independent contractor, who would not be so entitled. The employment agreement stating that a party is an independent contractor does not make it necessarily so. The nature of a job determines whether an employee is entitled to overtime pay, not employment status or the field of work.[7]
Classes of workers who are exempt from the regulation include certain types of administrative, professional, and executive employees. To qualify as an administrative, professional, or executive employee and therefore not be entitled to overtime, three tests must be passed based on salary basis, duties, and salary level. There are many other classes of workers who may be exempt including outside salespeople, certain agricultural employees, certain live-in employees, and certain transportation employees. Employees can neither waive their FLSA protections nor abridge them by contract.
Protections[edit]
An employer may not retaliate[8] against an employee for filing a complaint or instituting a proceeding based on the FLSA.  An employer that engages in any form of verifiable  retaliation would be liable under the Fair Labor Standards Act Section 216(b) for equitable relief including reinstatement, promotion, payment of lost wages, and payment of liquidated damages. Acts of retaliation include terminating employment, disrupting the workplace, threats, acts of physical violence, and constructive discharge.
Statistics[edit]
Out of approximately 120 million American workers, nearly 50 million are exempt from overtime laws (US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, 1998). As of 2021, salaried workers making $684 per week or more are exempt from overtime pay (equivalent to $35,568 per year).[9] In 2004, the United States was 7th out of 24 OECD countries in terms of annual working hours per worker. (See Working time for a complete listing.) 
On August 23, 2004, President George W. Bush and the Department of Labor proposed changes to regulations governing implementation of the law.  According to one study, the changes would have had significant impact on the number of workers covered by overtime laws and have exempted several million additional workers.[10] The Bush administration maintained that the practical impact on working Americans would be minimal and that the changes would help clarify an outdated regulation. In particular, the new rules would have allowed more companies to offer flextime to their workers instead of overtime. The definition of exempt employees (ineligible for overtime) is regularly tested in the courts.  A recent case is Encino Motorcars v. Navarro, which addresses the question of whether automobile dealer service advisors are eligible for overtime.
A company may harm themselves by docking a salaried employee for disciplinary reasons.
"Once pay is reduced using an hourly calculation,  ... the employee is considered nonexempt, and so is every other worker in that job group."[11]
Uber is an example of a company that, in various jurisdictions, has been subject to litigation regarding exemptions. The New York Times noted in 2017 that "Despite their appeal, the apps have faced a wave of criticism, including concerns over wheelchair accessibility and driver pay."[12]
California overtime law[edit]
The state of California's overtime laws differ from federal overtime laws in many respects, and they involve overlapping statutes, regulations, and precedents that govern the compensation of employees in California.  
Governing federal law is the Fair Labor Standards Act (29 USC 201 219)
California overtime law is codified in provisions of:
the California Labor Code and in
Wage orders of the Industrial Welfare Commission[13]
California employers must comply with both, since there are two sources of applicable law (federal and state).
In California, based on California Labor Code 1171, only an employment relationship is required for overtime rules to apply.  Under the California Industrial Welfare Commission Wage Orders, an "employer" is "any person ... who directly or indirectly, or through an agent or any other person, employs or exercises control over wages, hours, or working conditions of any person." Under the California Labor Code, an "employee" is "[any] person, including aliens and minors, rendering actual service  in any business for an employer, whether gratuitously or for wages or pay, whether the wages or pay are measured by the standard of time, piece, task, commission, or other method of calculation, and whether the service is rendered on a commission, concessionaire, or other basis."
California: who is covered[edit]
Independent contractors are not employees covered by overtime laws and so it is important to determine if a worker is an independent contractor or an employee.
Foremost, pursuant to California Labor Code Section 510, non-exempt employees must be compensated at one and a half times the regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of eight hours in a workday, 40 hours in a workweek and the first eight hours of a seventh consecutive workday. Employees in California are entitled to double-time for working more than twelve hour workdays or more than eight hours on the seventh consecutive workday of a single workweek.  Under federal law there are only 40 hour weekly overtime limits. The eight-hour overtime limit in California frequently gives rise to wage-and-hour litigation for violations of state (but not federal) labour laws.
For example, "comp time" schemes in which employers tell employees that since they worked 10 hours on Monday they can work 6 hours on Tuesday are illegal because even though employees are not working more than 40 hours for the purposes of overtime compensation under federal law, they are working more than 8 hours for purposes of California overtime law, and rounding the 6- and 10-hour workdays to two 8-hour workdays would cheat the employee out of two hours of overtime pay.
Perhaps the biggest difference between California and federal overtime law relates to the administrative exemption's "primarily engaged" in duties that meet the test for the exemption requirement, such as duties that involve exercising independent discretion and judgment as set forth in the controversial Order No. 4. Under the Fair Labor Standards Act "primarily engaged" does not necessarily mean at least half, but California wage-and-hour laws, working less than half of exempt duties automatically eliminates the overtime exemption.
See also[edit]
Organized labour portal
Eight-hour day
Fair Labor Standards Act
Flextime
Retroactive overtime
Work-life balance
Effects of overtime
Shturmovshchina
References[edit]
^ Jane Clarke, Alex White, A Guide to Good Employment Practice in the Community and Voluntary Sector, 1995, ISBN 1871643899, p. 30
^ See 29 U.S.C. 207(o)
^ "EUR-Lex - 32003L0088 - EN - EUR-Lex".
^ " ".  . Retrieved 8 July 2013.
^ "   " (PDF).  . Retrieved 8 July 2013.
^ "Federal Employees - Availability Pay". U.S. Office of Personnel Management. Retrieved 2021-12-04.
^ "Wage and Hour Division Questions and Answers". United States Department of Labor.
^ "Can My Employer Retaliate Against Me for Seeking To Get Overtime? - findUSlaw". finduslaw.com. Retrieved 4 April 2018.
^ "Final Rule: Overtime Update". US Department of Labor. Retrieved 12 May 2021.
^ (Economic Policy Institute) Archived December 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ Leone, Marie (May 2001). "Whitewashing Blue Collars". CFO. p. 16.
^ Fitzsimmons, Emma G.; Hi, Winnie (March 6, 2017). "The Downside of Ride-Hailing: More New York City Gridlock". The New York Times.
^ DIR. "DIR - IWC Home Page". www.dir.ca.gov. Retrieved 4 April 2018.
Further reading[edit]
US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, Minimum Wage and Overtime Hours Under the Fair Labor Standards Act: 1998 Report to the Congress Required by Section 4(d)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act, tab. 2 at 14 (1998).
External links[edit]
Look up overtime in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Questions and Answers about working time (European Union)
US Department of Labor page on the FLSA
2004 changes in overtime regulations, via aflcio.org
The Economic Policy Institute (epinet.org)
Analysis of 2004 change in overtime regulations, via epinet.org
Study Finds Many Day Laborers Exploited
Supreme Court Clarifies Wage and Hour Law
Text of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)    29 US Code Chapter 8
Hanuaer, Nick, "The Death of Overtime"
vteEmploymentClassifications
Academic tenure
Casual
Contingent work
Full-time job
Gig worker
Job sharing
Part-time job
Self-employment
Side job
Skilled worker
Journeyman
Technician
Independent contractor
Labour hire
Temporary work
Laborer
Wage labour
Hiring
Application
Background check
Business networking
Cover letter
Curriculum vitae
Drug testing
Employment contract
Employment counsellor
Executive search
list
Induction programme
Job fair
Job fraud
Job hunting
Job interview
Letter of recommendation
Onboarding
Overqualification
Person environment fit
Personality job fit theory
Probation
Recruitment
R sum 
Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates
Underemployment
Work-at-home scheme
Roles
Cooperative
Employee
Employer
Internship
Job
Labour hire
Permanent employment
Supervisor
Volunteering
Working class
Blue-collar
Green-collar
Grey-collar
Pink-collar
Precariat
White-collar
Career and training
Apprenticeship
Artisan
Master craftsman
Avocation
Career assessment
Career counseling
Career development
Coaching
Creative class
Education
Continuing education
E-learning
Employability
Further education
Graduate school
Induction training
Knowledge worker
Licensure
Lifelong learning
Overspecialization
Practice-based professional learning
Professional association
Professional certification
Professional development
Professional school
Reflective practice
Retraining
Vocational education
Vocational school
Vocational university
Mentorship
Occupational Outlook Handbook
Practice firm
Profession
Operator
Professional
Tradesman
Vocation
Attendance
Break
Career break
Furlough
Gap year
Leave of absence
Long service leave
No call, no show
Sabbatical
Sick leave
Time clock
Schedules
35-hour workweek
Four-day week
Eight-hour day
996 working hour system
Flextime
On-call
Overtime
Remote work
Retroactive overtime
Six-hour day
Shift work
Working time
Workweek and weekend
Wages and salaries
Income bracket
Income tax
Living wage
Maximum wage
National average salary
World
Europe
Minimum wage
Canada
Hong Kong
Europe
United States
Progressive wage
Singapore
Overtime rate
Paid time off
Performance-related pay
Salary cap
Working poor
Benefits
Annual leave
Casual Friday
Child care
Disability insurance
Health insurance
Life insurance
Marriage leave
Parental leave
Pension
Sick leave
Take-home vehicle
Safety and health
Crunch
Epilepsy and employment
Human factors and ergonomics
Karoshi
Occupational burnout
Occupational disease
Occupational exposure limit
Occupational health psychology
Occupational injury
Occupational noise
Occupational stress
Personal protective equipment
Repetitive strain injury
Right to sit
Sick building syndrome
Work accident
Occupational fatality
Workers' compensation
Workplace health promotion
Workplace phobia
Workplace wellness
Equal opportunity
Affirmative action
Equal pay for equal work
Gender pay gap
Glass ceiling
Infractions
Corporate collapses and scandals
Accounting scandals
Control fraud
Corporate behaviour
Corporate crime
Discrimination
Exploitation of labour
Dress code
Employee handbook
Employee monitoring
Evaluation
Labour law
Sexual harassment
Sleeping while on duty
Wage theft
Whistleblower
Workplace bullying
Workplace harassment
Workplace incivility
Willingness
Boreout
Careerism
Civil conscription
Conscription
Critique of work
Dead-end job
Job satisfaction
McJob
Organizational commitment
Refusal of work
Slavery
Bonded labour
Human trafficking
Labour camp
Penal labour
Peonage
Truck wages
Unfree labour
Wage slavery
Work ethic
Work life interface
Downshifting
Slow living
Workaholic
Termination
At-will employment
Dismissal
Banishment room
Constructive dismissal
Wrongful dismissal
Employee offboarding
Exit interview
Layoff
Notice period
Pink slip
Resignation
Letter of resignation
Restructuring
Retirement
Mandatory retirement
Retirement age
Retirement planning
Severance package
Golden handshake
Golden parachute
Turnover
Unemployment
Barriers to entry
Discouraged worker
Economic depression
Great Depression
Long Depression
Frictional unemployment
Full employment
Graduate unemployment
Involuntary unemployment
Jobless recovery
Phillips curve
Recession
Great Recession
Job losses caused by the Great Recession
Lists of recessions
Recession-proof job
Reserve army of labour
Structural unemployment
Technological unemployment
Types of unemployment
Unemployment benefits
Unemployment Convention, 1919
Unemployment extension
List of countries by unemployment rate
Employment rates
Employment-to-population ratio
Wage curve
Youth unemployment
Public programs
Workfare
Unemployment insurance
Make-work job
Job creation program
Job creation index
Job guarantee
Employer of last resort
Guaranteed minimum income
Right to work
Historical:
U.S.A:
Civil Works Administration
Works Progress Administration
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
See also
Bullshit job
Busy work
Credentialism and educational inflation
Emotional labor
Evil corporation
Going postal
Kiss up kick down
Labor rights
Make-work job
Money-rich, time-poor
Narcissism in the workplace
Post-work society
Presenteeism
Psychopathy in the workplace
Slow movement (culture)
Toxic leader
Toxic workplace
Workhouse
 See also templates
Aspects of corporations
Aspects of jobs
Aspects of occupations
Aspects of organizations
Aspects of workplaces
Corporate titles
Organized labor
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Overtime&oldid=1140377925"