Vietnamese communist leader (1890 1969)
For other uses, see Ho Chi Minh (disambiguation).
Ch  t chH  Ch  MinhPortrait of H  Ch  Minh, c. 19461st President of the Democratic Republic of VietnamHonoured asFather of the peopleNg i cha gi  c a d n t cIn office2 September 1945  2 September 1969Preceded byB o  i (as Emperor)Succeeded byT n  c Th ngChairman of the Workers' Party of VietnamIn office19 February 1951  2 September 1969General SecretaryTr ng ChinhL  Du n (acting)Preceded byPosition establishedSucceeded byPosition abolishedFirst Secretary of the Workers' Party of VietnamIn office1 November 1955  10 September 1960Preceded byTr ng ChinhSucceeded byL  Du n1st Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of VietnamIn office2 September 1945  20 September 1955Preceded byTr n Tr ng Kim (as Prime Minister of the Empire of Vietnam)Succeeded byPh m V n  ngMinister of Foreign AffairsIn office28 August 1945  2 March 1946Preceded byTr n V n Ch ng (Empire of Vietnam)Succeeded byNguy n T ng TamIn office3 November 1946  March 1947Preceded byNguy n T ng TamSucceeded byHo ng Minh Gi mFull Member of the 2nd and 3rd PolitburoIn office31 March 1935  2 September 1969
Personal detailsBornNguy n Sinh Cung(1890-05-19)19 May 1890Kim Li n, French IndochinaDied2 September 1969(1969-09-02) (aged 79)Hanoi, North VietnamResting placeHo Chi Minh Mausoleum, HanoiPolitical partyCommunist Party of Vietnam (1924 1969)Other politicalaffiliationsFrench Section of the Workers' International (1919 1921)French Communist Party (1921 1925)SpouseT ng Tuy t Minh  (m. 1926) Relations
B ch Li n (or Nguy n Th  Thanh; sister)
Nguy n Sinh Khi m (or Nguy n T t  t; brother)
Nguy n Sinh Xin (brother)
ParentsNguy n Sinh S c (father)Ho ng Th  Loan (mother)Alma materCommunist University of the Toilers of the EastOccupationPoliticianrevolutionarypastry chefSignature
Ho Chi Minh's voice
Ho Chi Minh declaring the independence of VietnamRecorded 2 September 1945
H  Ch  Minh[a][b] (n e: Nguy n Sinh Cung;[c][3][4] 19 May 1890   2 September 1969),[d] commonly known as Uncle Ho (B c H ),[e][7] President Ho (H  Ch  t ch)[f] and by other aliases[g] and sobriquets,[h] was a Vietnamese revolutionary and statesman. He served as Prime Minister of Vietnam from 1945 to 1955, and as President of Vietnam from 1945 until his death in 1969. Ideologically a Marxist Leninist, he was the Chairman and First Secretary of the Workers' Party of Vietnam.[i]
H  Ch  Minh was born in Ngh  An province in the French protectorate of Annam. From 1911, he left French Indochina to continue his revolutionary activities. He was also one of the founding members of the French Communist Party. In 1930, he founded the Communist Party of Vietnam and in 1941, he returned to Vietnam and founded the Vi t Minh independence movement, an umbrella group. Then, H  led the August Revolution against the Japanese in August 1945, which resulted in the independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. After the French returned to power the following month, H 's government retreated to the Vi t B c region and began guerrilla warfare. The Vi t Minh defeated the French Union in 1954 at the Battle of  i n Bi n Ph , ending the First Indochina War, and resulting in the division of Vietnam, with the Vi t Minh in control of North Vietnam, and anti-communists in control of South Vietnam. He was a key figure in the People's Army of Vietnam and the Vi t C ng during the Vietnam War, which lasted from 1955 to 1975. H  officially stepped down from power in 1965 due to health problems and died in 1969. North Vietnam was ultimately victorious against South Vietnam and its allies. Vietnam was officially unified in 1976. Saigon, the former capital of South Vietnam, was renamed Ho Chi Minh City in his honor.
The details of H  Ch  Minh's life before he came to power in Vietnam are uncertain. He is known to have used between 50[8]: 582  and 200 pseudonyms.[9] Information on his birth and early life is ambiguous and subject to academic debate. At least four existing official biographies vary on names, dates, places, and other hard facts while unofficial biographies vary even more widely.[10]
Aside from being a politician, H  was a writer, poet, and journalist. He wrote several books, articles, and poems in Chinese, Vietnamese, and French.
Early life[edit]
H  Ch  Minh was born as Nguy n Sinh Cung[3][c][4] in 1890 in the village of L ng Ch a or Ho ng Tr  in Kim Li n commune, Ngh  An province, in Central Vietnam which was then a French protectorate. Although 1890 is generally accepted as his birth year, at various times he used four other birth years:[11][page needed] 1891,[12] 1892,[j] 1894[k] and 1895.[13] He lived in his father Nguy n Sinh S c's village of L ng Sen in Kim Li n until 1895 when his father sent him to Hu  for study. He had three siblings: his sister B ch Li n (Nguy n Th  Thanh), a clerk in the French Army; his brother Nguy n Sinh Khi m (Nguy n T t  t), a geomancer and traditional herbalist; and another brother (Nguy n Sinh Nhu n), who died in infancy. As a young child, Cung (H ) studied with his father before more formal classes with a scholar named Vuong Thuc Do. He quickly mastered Ch  H n, a prerequisite for any serious study of Confucianism while honing his colloquial Vietnamese writing.[8]: 21  In addition to his studies, he was fond of adventure and loved to fly kites and go fishing.[8]: 21  Following Confucian tradition, his father gave him a new name at the age of 10: Nguy n T t Th nh.
His father was a Confucian scholar and teacher and later an imperial magistrate in the small remote district of Binh Khe (Qui Nh n). He was demoted for abuse of power after an influential local figure died several days after having received 102 strokes of the cane as punishment for an infraction.[8]: 21  His father was eligible to serve in the imperial bureaucracy, but he refused because it meant serving the French.[14] This exposed Th nh (H ) to rebellion at a young age and seemed to be the norm for the province. Nevertheless, he received a French education, attending Coll ge Qu c h c (lyc e or secondary education) in Hu  in Central Vietnam. His disciples, Ph m V n  ng and V  Nguy n Gi p, also attended the school, as did Ng   nh Di m, the future President of South Vietnam and political rival.[15]
His early life is uncertain but there are some documents indicating activities regarding an early revolutionary spirit during French-occupied Vietnam, but conflicting sources remain. Previously, it was believed that Th nh (H ) was involved in an anti-slavery (anti-corv e) demonstration of poor peasants in Hu  in May 1908, which endangered his student status at Coll ge Qu c h c. However, a document from the Centre des archives d'Outre-mer in France shows that he was admitted to Coll ge Qu c h c on 8 August 1908, which was several months after the anti-corv e demonstration (9 13 April 1908).[c]
Later in life, he claimed the 1908 revolt had been the moment when his revolutionary outlook emerged,[citation needed] but his application to the French Colonial Administrative School in 1911 undermines this version of events, in which he stated that he left school to go abroad. Because his father had been dismissed, he no longer had any hope for a governmental scholarship and went southward, taking a position at D c Thanh school in Phan Thi t for about six months, then traveled to Saigon.[citation needed]
Overseas sojourn[edit]
In France[edit]
 Commemorative plaque in Haymarket in London
In Saigon, he applied to work as a kitchen helper on a French merchant steamer, the Amiral de Latouche-Tr ville, using the alias V n Ba. The ship departed on 5 June 1911 and arrived in Marseille, France on 5 July 1911. The ship then left for Le Havre and Dunkirk, returning to Marseille in mid-September. There, he applied for the French Colonial Administrative School, but his application was rejected. He instead decided to begin traveling the world by working on ships and visiting many countries from 1911 to 1917.[16][page needed]
In the United States[edit]
While working as the cook's helper on a ship in 1912, Th nh (H ) traveled to the United States. From 1912 to 1913, he may have lived in New York City (Harlem) and Boston, where he claimed to have worked as a baker at the Parker House Hotel. The only evidence that he was in the United States is a letter to French colonial administrators dated 15 December 1912 and postmarked New York City (he gave his address as the poste restante in Le Havre and his occupation as a sailor)[17] and a postcard to Phan Chu Trinh in Paris where he mentioned working at the Parker House Hotel. Inquiries to the Parker House management revealed no records of his ever having worked there.[8]: 51  It is believed that while in the US he made contact with Korean nationalists, an experience that developed his political outlook. Sophie Quinn-Judge states that this is "in the realm of conjecture".[17] He was also influenced by Pan-Africanist and black nationalist Marcus Garvey during his stay, and said he attended meetings of the Universal Negro Improvement Association.[18][19][page needed]
In Britain[edit]
At various points between 1913 and 1919, Th nh (H ) claimed to have lived in West Ealing and later in Crouch End, Hornsey. He reportedly worked as either a chef or dishwasher (reports vary) at the Drayton Court Hotel in West Ealing.[20] Claims that he was trained as a pastry chef under Auguste Escoffier at the Carlton Hotel in Haymarket, Westminster are not supported by documentary evidence.[21][22] However, the wall of New Zealand House, home of the New Zealand High Commission which now stands on the site of the Carlton Hotel, displays a blue plaque. During 1913, Th nh was also employed as a pastry chef on the Newhaven Dieppe ferry route.[23]
Political education in France[edit]
 H  Ch  Minh, 1921, going by the pseudonym Nguy n  i Qu c, attending a Communist congress in Marseille, France.
From 1919 to 1923, Th nh (H ) began to show an interest in politics while living in France, being influenced by his friend and Socialist Party of France comrade Marcel Cachin. Th nh claimed to have arrived in Paris from London in 1917, but the French police had only documents recording his arrival in June 1919.[17] In Paris he joined the Groupe des Patriotes Annamites (The Group of Vietnamese Patriots) that included Phan Chu Trinh, Phan V n Tr ng, Nguy n Th  Truy n and Nguy n An Ninh.[24] They had been publishing newspaper articles advocating for Vietnamese independence under the pseudonym Nguy n  i Qu c ("Nguy n the Patriot") prior to Th nh's arrival in Paris.[25] The group petitioned for recognition of the civil rights of the Vietnamese people in French Indochina to the Western powers at the Versailles peace talks, but they were ignored. Citing the principle of self-determination outlined before the peace accords, they requested the allied powers to end French colonial rule of Vietnam and ensure the formation of an independent government.
Before the conference, the group sent their letter to allied leaders, including French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau and United States President Woodrow Wilson. They were unable to obtain consideration at Versailles, but the episode would later help establish the future H  Ch  Minh as the symbolic leader of the anti-colonial movement at home in Vietnam.[26] Since Th nh was the public face behind the publication of the document (although it was written by Phan V n Tr ng),[27] he soon became known as Nguy n  i Qu c, and first used the name in September during an interview with a Chinese newspaper correspondent.[8] Many authors have stated that 1919 was a lost "Wilsonian moment", where the future H  Ch  Minh could have adopted a pro-American and less radical position if only President Wilson had received him. However, at the time of the Versailles Conference, H  Ch  Minh was committed to a socialist program. While the conference was ongoing, Nguy n  i Qu c was already delivering speeches on the prospects of Bolshevism in Asia and was attempting to persuade French socialists to join Lenin's Communist International.[28]
 A 1920 security report by the French Indochinese government on Nguy n T t Th nh listing his aliases, places of residence, his father's occupation, as well as other information.
In December 1920, Qu c (H ) became a representative to the Congress of Tours of the Socialist Party of France, voted for the Third International and was a founding member of the French Communist Party. Taking a position in the Colonial Committee of the party, he tried to draw his comrades' attention towards people in French colonies including Indochina, but his efforts were often unsuccessful. While living in Paris, he reportedly had a relationship with a dressmaker named Marie Bri re. As discovered in 2018, Qu c also had relations with the members of Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea like Kim Kyu-sik, Jo So-ang while in Paris.[29]
During this period, he began to write journal articles and short stories as well as run his Vietnamese nationalist group. In May 1922, he wrote an article for a French magazine criticizing the use of English words by French sportswriters.[30] The article implored Prime Minister Raymond Poincar  to outlaw such Franglais as le manager, le round and le knock-out. His articles and speeches caught the attention of Dmitry Manuilsky, who would soon sponsor his trip to the Soviet Union and under whose tutelage he would become a high-ranking member of the Soviet Comintern.[31]
In the Soviet Union and China[edit]
Part of a series onMarxism Leninism
Concepts
Administrative-command system
Anti-imperialism
Anti-revisionism
Central planning
Soviet-type economic planning
Collective farming
Collective leadership
Commanding heights of the economy
Democratic centralism
Dialectical logic
Dialectical materialism
Foco
Intensification of the class struggleunder socialism
Labor aristocracy
Marxist Leninist atheism
One-party state
Partiinost'
People's democracy
Popular front
Proletarian internationalism
Protracted people's war
Self-criticism
Social fascism
Socialism in one country
Socialist patriotism
Soviet
Yugoslav
State
Socialist
Theory of the productive forces
Third Period
Vanguardism
Wars of national liberation
Variants
Castroism
Guevarism
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Hoxhaism
Husakism
K d rism
Khrushchevism
Maoism
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Stalinism
Titoism
People
Joseph Stalin
Mao Zedong
Ernst Th lmann
Khorloogiin Choibalsan
Ehmetjan Qasim
Jos  D az
Maurice Thorez
Palmiro Togliatti
Ho Chi Minh
V  Nguy n Gi p
Earl Browder
Nikita Khrushchev
Walter Ulbricht
Josip Broz Tito
M ty s R kosi
Lazar Kaganovich
Georgi Dimitrov
Boles aw Bierut
Valko Chervenkov
Klement Gottwald
Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej
Enver Hoxha
Kaysone Phomvihane
Khalid Bakdash
Leonid Brezhnev
Deng Xiaoping
Pol Pot
Nikos Zachariadis
Che Guevara
Fidel Castro
Agostinho Neto
Mengistu Haile Mariam
Kim Il-sung
Chin Peng
Hardial Bains
Sanz  Nosaka
Nicolae Ceau escu
Gust v Hus k
J nos K d r
Erich Honecker
W adys aw Gomu ka
Samora Machel
Thomas Sankara
Mathieu K r kou
Siad Barre
Nur Muhammad Taraki
Alfonso Cano
Rohana Wijeweera
Gus Hall
Harry Pollitt
Harpal Brar
Gennady Zyuganov
Xi Jinping
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Todor Zhivkov
Theoretical works
Foundations of Leninism
Dialectical and Historical Materialism
The History of the Communist Partyof the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)
Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR
A Critique of Soviet Economics
Fundamentals of Marxism Leninism
Guerrilla Warfare
Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung
President Ho Chi Minh's Testament
The Governance of China
History
Soviet Union
1927 1953
1953 1964
1964 1982
1982 1991
Great Break
Collectivization in the Soviet Union
Industrialization in the Soviet Union
Great Purge
Spanish Civil War
World War II
Great Patriotic War
Greek Civil War
Cold War
Eastern Bloc
Chinese Revolution
China
1949 1976
1976 1989
1989 2002
2002 present
Korean War
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
De-Stalinization
Warsaw Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
Vietnam War
Sino-Soviet split
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Great Leap Forward
Portuguese Colonial War
Black power movement
Nicaraguan Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Naxalite insurgency
Revolutions of 1989
Nepalese Civil War
By country
Afghanistan
Albania
Angola
Benin
Bulgaria
Cambodia
China
Congo
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Czechia
Slovakia
East Germany
Ethiopia
Grenada
Hungary
Laos
Mongolia
Mozambique
North Korea
Poland
Romania
Somalia
South Yemen
Soviet Union
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Byelarus
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yugoslavia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Macedonia
Montenegro
Serbia
Slovenia
Organizations
Comecon
Comintern
Chinese Communist Party
Communist Party of Cuba
Communist Party of India
Communist Party of Kampuchea
Communist Party of the Russian Federation
Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Communist Party of Vietnam
French Communist Party
Indochinese Communist Party
Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party
Lao People's Revolutionary Party
Nepal Communist Party
Party of Labour of Albania
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
Sandinista National Liberation Front
Workers' Party of Korea
Related topics
Bolshevism
Leninism
Marxism Leninism Maoism
Trotskyism
See also
All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)
Anti-communism
Mass killings
Crimes against humanityunder communist regimes
Mass killings
Criticism of communist party rule
Cult of personality
Marxist schools of thought
National Bolshevism
New class
Post-communism
Red fascism
Red Scare
Second
Second World
State capitalism
State socialism
State ideology of China
State ideology of the Soviet Union
Third-Worldism
Totalitarianism
 Communism portal
 Politics portal
 Socialism portalvte
External video Booknotes interview with William Duiker on H  Ch  Minh: A Life, 12 November 2000, C-SPAN
 A plaque in Compoint Lane [fr], District 17, Paris indicates where H  Ch  Minh lived from 1921 to 1923
In 1923, Qu c (H ) left Paris for Moscow carrying a passport with the name Chen Vang, a Chinese merchant,[8]: 86  where he was employed by the Comintern, studied at the Communist University of the Toilers of the East[8]: 92 [32] and participated in the Fifth Comintern Congress in June 1924 before arriving in Canton (present-day Guangzhou), China in November 1924 using the name Ly Thuy.
In 1925 1926, he organized "Youth Education Classes" and occasionally gave socialist lectures to Vietnamese revolutionary young people living in Canton at the Whampoa Military Academy. These young people would become the seeds of a new revolutionary, pro-communist movement in Vietnam several years later. According to William Duiker, he lived with a Chinese woman, Zeng Xueming (T ng Tuy t Minh), whom he married on 18 October 1926.[33] When his comrades objected to the match, he told them: "I will get married despite your disapproval because I need a woman to teach me the language and keep house".[33] She was 21 and he was 36. They married in the same place where Zhou Enlai had married earlier and then lived in the residence of a Comintern agent, Mikhail Borodin. [33]
Ho ng V n Ch  argued that in June 1925 he betrayed Phan B i Ch u, the famous leader of a rival revolutionary faction and his father's old friend, to French Secret Service agents in Shanghai for 100,000 piastres.[34] A source states that he later claimed he did it because he expected Ch u's trial to stir up anti-French sentiment and because he needed the money to establish a communist organization.[34] In Ho Chi Minh: A Life, William Duiker considered this hypothesis, but ultimately rejected it.[8]: 126 128  Other sources claim that Nguy n Th ng Huy n was responsible for Chau's capture. Chau, sentenced to lifetime house arrest, never denounced Qu c.[citation needed]
After Chiang Kai-shek's 1927 anti-communist coup, Qu c (H ) left Canton again in April 1927 and returned to Moscow, spending part of the summer of 1927 recuperating from tuberculosis in Crimea before returning to Paris once more in November. He then returned to Asia by way of Brussels, Berlin, Switzerland, and Italy, where he sailed to Bangkok, Thailand, arriving in July 1928. "Although we have been separated for almost a year, our feelings for each other do not have to be said to be felt", he reassured Minh in an intercepted letter.[33] In this period, he served as a senior agent undertaking Comintern activities in Southeast Asia.[citation needed]
 Ho Chi Minh worked as a cook all over the world from 1911 to 1928, also in Milano. This plaque in Via Pasubio, on the left next to "Antica Trattoria Della Pesa", remembers one of his workplaces.
 House on Memorium for H  Ch  Minh in Ban Nachok, Nakhon Phanom, Thailand
Qu c (H ) remained in Thailand, staying in the Thai village of Nachok[35]until late 1929, when he moved on to India and then Shanghai. In Hong Kong in early 1930, he chaired a meeting with representatives from two Vietnamese communist parties to merge them into a unified organization, the Communist Party of Vietnam.[36] He also founded the Indochinese Communist Party.[37] In June 1931, H  was arrested in Hong Kong as part of a collaboration between the French colonial authorities in Indochina and the Hong Kong Police Force; scheduled to be deported back to French Indochina, H  was successfully defended by British solicitor Frank Loseby.[36] Eventually, after appeals to the Privy Council in London, H  was reported as dead in 1932 to avoid a French extradition agreement;[38] it was ruled that, though he would be deported from Hong Kong as an undesirable, it would not be to a destination controlled by France.[36] H  was eventually released and, disguised as a Chinese scholar, boarded a ship to Shanghai. He subsequently returned to the Soviet Union and in Moscow studied and taught at the Lenin Institute.[39] In this period H  reportedly lost his positions in the Comintern because of a concern that he had betrayed the organization. However, according to Ton That Thien's research, he was a member of the inner circle of the Comintern, a prot g  of Dmitry Manuilsky and a member in good standing of the Comintern throughout the Great Purge.[40][page needed][41] H  was removed from control of the Party he had founded. Those who replaced him charged him with nationalist tendencies.[37]
In 1938, Qu c (H ) returned to China and served as an advisor to the Chinese Communist armed forces.[17] He was also the senior Comintern agent in charge of Asian affairs.[42] He worked extensively in Chungking and traveled to Guiyang, Kunming, and Guilin. He was using the name H  Quang during this period.[citation needed]
Independence movement[edit]
In 1941, H  Ch  Minh returned to Vietnam to lead the Vi t Minh independence movement. The Japanese occupation of Indochina that year, the first step toward an invasion of the rest of Southeast Asia, created an opportunity for patriotic Vietnamese.[14] The so-called "men in black" were a 10,000 member guerrilla force that operated with the Vi t Minh.[43] He oversaw many successful military actions against the Vichy France and the Japanese occupation of Vietnam during World War II, supported closely yet clandestinely by the United States Office of Strategic Services and later against the French bid to reoccupy the country (1946 1954). He was jailed in China by Chiang Kai-shek's local authorities before being rescued by Chinese Communists.[44] Following his release in 1943, he returned to Vietnam. It was during this time that he began regularly using the name H  Ch  Minh, a Vietnamese name combining a common Vietnamese surname (H ,  ) with a given name meaning "Bright spirit" or "Clear will" (from Sino-Vietnamese    : Ch  meaning "will" or "spirit" and Minh meaning "bright").[8]: 248 49  His new name was a tribute to General Hou Zhiming ( ), Chief Commissar of the 4th Military Region of the National Revolutionary Army, who helped release him from a KMT prison in 1943.[citation needed]
 H  Ch  Minh (third from left, standing) with the OSS in 1945
In April 1945, he met with the OSS agent Archimedes Patti and offered to provide intelligence, asking only for "a line of communication" between his Viet Minh and the Allies.[45] The OSS agreed to this and later sent a military team of OSS members to train his men and H  Ch  Minh himself was treated for malaria and dysentery by an OSS doctor.[46]
Following the August Revolution organized by the Vi t Minh, H  Ch  Minh became Chairman of the Provisional Government (Premier of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam) and issued a Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.[47] Although he convinced Emperor B o  i to abdicate, his government was not recognized by any country. He repeatedly petitioned President Harry S. Truman for support for Vietnamese independence,[48] citing the Atlantic Charter, but Truman never responded.[49]
In 1946, future Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and H  Ch  Minh became acquainted when they stayed at the same hotel in Paris.[50][51] He offered Ben-Gurion a Jewish home-in-exile in Vietnam.[50][51] Ben-Gurion declined, telling him: "I am certain we shall be able to establish a Jewish Government in Palestine".[50][51]
In 1946, when he traveled outside of the country, his subordinates imprisoned 2,500 non-Communist nationalists and forced 6,000 others to flee.[52] Hundreds of political opponents were jailed or exiled in July 1946, notably, members of the Nationalist Party of Vietnam and the Dai Viet National Party after a failed attempt to raise a coup against the Viet Minh government.[53] All rival political parties were hereafter banned and local governments were purged[54] to minimize opposition later on. However, it was noted that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam's first Congress had over two-thirds of its members come from non-Vi t Minh political factions, some without an election. Nationalist Party of Vietnam leader Nguy n H i Th n was named vice president. They also held four out of ten ministerial positions (Government of the Union of Resistance of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam [vi]).
Birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam[edit]
Following Emperor B o  i's abdication in August, H  Ch  Minh read the Declaration of Independence of Vietnam on 2 September 1945[55] under the name of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. In Saigon, with violence between rival Vietnamese factions and French forces increasing, the British commander, General Sir Douglas Gracey, declared martial law. On 24 September, the Vi t Minh leaders responded with a call for a general strike.[56][page needed]
In the same month, a force of 200,000 National Revolutionary Army troops arrived in Hanoi to accept the surrender of the Japanese occupiers in northern Indochina. H  Ch  Minh made a compromise with their general, Lu Han, to dissolve the Communist Party and to hold an election that would yield a coalition government. When Chiang forced the French to give the French concessions in Shanghai back to China in exchange for withdrawing from northern Indochina, he had no choice but to sign an agreement with France on 6 March 1946 in which Vietnam would be recognized as an autonomous state in the Indochinese Federation and the French Union. The agreement soon broke down. The purpose of the agreement, for both the French and Vietminh, was for Chiang's army to leave North Vietnam. Fighting broke out in the North soon after the Chinese left.
Historian Professor Liam Kelley of the University of Hawaii at Manoa on his Le Minh Khai's Asian History Blog challenged the authenticity of the alleged quote where H  Ch  Minh said he "would rather smell French shit for five years than eat Chinese shit for a thousand," noting that Stanley Karnow provided no source for the extended quote attributed to him in his 1983 Vietnam: A History and that the original quote was most likely forged by the Frenchman Paul Mus in his 1952 book Vietnam: Sociologie d'une Guerre. Mus was a supporter of French colonialism in Vietnam and H  Ch  Minh believed there was no danger of Chinese troops staying in Vietnam. The Vietnamese at the time were busy spreading anti-French propaganda as evidence of French atrocities in Vietnam emerged while H  Ch  Minh showed no qualms about accepting Chinese aid after 1949.[57][58]
 V  Nguy n Gi p (left) with H  Ch  Minh (right) in Hanoi in 1945
The Vi t Minh then collaborated with French colonial forces to massacre supporters of the Vietnamese nationalist movements in 1945 1946,[59][60][61] and of the Trotskyists. Trotskyism in Vietnam did not rival the Party outside of the major cities, but particularly in the South, in Saigon-Cochinchina, they had been a challenge. From the outset, they had called for armed resistance to a French restoration and an immediate transfer of industry to workers and land to peasants.[62][63] The French Socialist leader Daniel Gu rin recalls that when in Paris in 1946 he asked H  Ch  Minh about the fate of the Trotskyist leader T  Thu Th u, H  Ch  Minh had replied, "with unfeigned emotion," that "Th u was a great patriot and we mourn him, but then a moment later added in a steady voice 'All those who do not follow the line which I have laid down will be broken.'"[64]
The Communists eventually suppressed all non-Communist parties, but they failed to secure a peace deal with France. In the final days of 1946, after a year of diplomatic failure and many concessions in agreements, such as the Dalat and Fontainebleau conferences, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam government found that war was inevitable. The bombardment of Haiphong by French forces at Hanoi only strengthened the belief that France had no intention of allowing an autonomous, independent state in Vietnam. The bombardment of Haiphong reportedly killed more than 6000 Vietnamese civilians. French forces marched into Hanoi, now the capital city of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. On 19 December 1946, after the Haiphong incident, H  Ch  Minh declared war against the French Union, marking the beginning of the Indochina War.[65] The Vietnam National Army, mostly armed with machetes and muskets immediately attacked. They assaulted the French positions, smoking them out with straw bundled with chili pepper, destroying armored vehicles with "lunge mines" (a hollow-charge warhead on the end of a pole, detonated by thrusting the charge against the side of a tank; typically a suicide weapon)[66] and Molotov cocktails, holding off attackers by using roadblocks, landmines and gravel. After two months of fighting, the exhausted Vi t Minh forces withdrew after systematically destroying any valuable infrastructure. H  was reported to be captured by a group of French soldiers led by Jean  tienne Valluy at Vi t B c in Operation L a. The person in question turned out to be a Vi t Minh advisor who was killed trying to escape.
According to journalist Bernard Fall, H  decided to negotiate a truce after fighting the French for several years. When the French negotiators arrived at the meeting site, they found a mud hut with a thatched roof. Inside they found a long table with chairs. In one corner of the room, a silver ice bucket contained ice and a bottle of good champagne, indicating that H  expected the negotiations to succeed. One demand by the French was the return to French custody of several Japanese military officers (who had been helping the Vietnamese armed forces by training them in the use of weapons of Japanese origin) for them to stand trial for war crimes committed during World War II. H  Ch  Minh replied that the Japanese officers were allies and friends whom he could not betray, therefore he walked out to seven more years of war. [67]
In February 1950, after the successful removal of the French border blockade, (Battle of Route Coloniale 4) he met with Joseph Stalin and Mao Zedong in Moscow after the Soviet Union recognized his government. They all agreed that China would be responsible for backing the Vi t Minh.[68] Mao Zedong's emissary to Moscow stated in August that China planned to train 60,000 70,000 Viet Minh shortly.[69] The road to the outside world was open for Vi t Minh forces to receive additional supplies which would allow them to escalate the fight against the French regime throughout Indochina. At the outset of the conflict, H  reportedly told a French visitor: "You can kill ten of my men for every one I kill of yours. But even at those odds, you will lose and I will win".[70] In 1954, the First Indochina War came to an end after the decisive Battle of Dien Bien Phu, where more than 10,000 French soldiers surrendered to the Viet Minh. The subsequent Geneva Accords peace process partitioned North Vietnam at the 17th parallel.
Arthur Dommen estimates that the Vi t Minh assassinated between 100,000 and 150,000 civilians during the war.[71] By comparison to Dommen's calculation, Benjamin Valentino estimates that the French were responsible for 60,000 250,000 civilian deaths.[72]
Becoming president[edit]
The 1954 Geneva Accords concluded between France and the Vi t Minh, allowing the latter's forces to regroup in the North whilst anti-Communist groups settled in the South. His Democratic Republic of Vietnam relocated to Hanoi and became the government of North Vietnam, a Communist-led one-party state. Following the Geneva Accords, there was to be a 300-day period in which people could freely move between the two regions of Vietnam, later known as South Vietnam and North Vietnam. During the 300 days, Di m and CIA adviser Colonel Edward Lansdale staged a campaign to convince people to move to South Vietnam. The campaign was particularly focused on Vietnam's Catholics, who were to provide Di m's power base in his later years, with the use of the slogan "God has gone south". Between 800,000 and 1,000,000 people migrated to the South, mostly Catholics. At the start of 1955, French Indochina was dissolved, leaving Di m in temporary control of the South.[73][74]
All the parties at Geneva called for reunification elections, but they could not agree on the details. Recently appointed Vi t Minh acting foreign minister Pham Van Dong proposed elections under the supervision of "local commissions". The United States, with the support of Britain and the Associated States of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, suggested United Nations supervision. This plan was rejected by Soviet representative Vyacheslav Molotov, who argued for a commission composed of an equal number of communist and non-communist members, which could determine "important" issues only by unanimous agreement.[75] The negotiators were unable to agree on a date for the elections for reunification. North Vietnam argued that the elections should be held within six months of the ceasefire while the Western allies sought to have no deadline. Molotov proposed June 1955, then later softened this to any time in 1955 and finally July 1956.[76] The Diem government supported reunification elections, but only with effective international supervision, arguing that genuinely free elections were otherwise impossible in the totalitarian North.[77] By the afternoon of 20 July 1954, the remaining outstanding issues were resolved as the parties agreed that the partition line should be at the 17th parallel and the elections for a reunified government should be held in July 1956, two years after the ceasefire.[78] The Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam was only signed by the French and Vi t Minh military commands, with no participation or consultation of the State of Vietnam.[79] Based on a proposal by Chinese delegation head Zhou Enlai, an International Control Commission (ICC) chaired by India, with Canada and Poland as members, was placed in charge of supervising the ceasefire.[80][81] Because issues were to be decided unanimously, Poland's presence in the ICC provided the Communists with effective veto power over supervision of the treaty.[82] The unsigned Final Declaration of the Geneva Conference called for reunification elections, which the majority of delegates expected to be supervised by the ICC. The Vi t Minh never accepted ICC authority over such elections, insisting that the ICC's "competence was to be limited to the supervision and control of the implementation of the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities by both parties".[83] Of the nine nations represented, only the United States and the State of Vietnam refused to accept the declaration. Undersecretary of state Walter Bedell Smith delivered a "unilateral declaration" of the United States position, reiterating: "We shall seek to achieve unity through free elections supervised by the United Nations to ensure that they are conducted fairly".[84]
 H  Ch  Minh with East German sailors in Stralsund harbor during his 1957 visit to East Germany
 H  Ch  Minh with members of the East German Young Pioneers near Berlin, 1957
Between 1953 and 1956, the North Vietnamese government instituted various agrarian reforms, including "rent reduction" and "land reform", which were accompanied by political repression. During the land reform, testimonies by North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution per 160 village residents, which if extrapolated would indicate a nationwide total of nearly 100,000 executions. Because the campaign was concentrated mainly in the Red River Delta area, a lower estimate of 50,000 executions was widely accepted by scholars at the time.[85][86][l] However, declassified documents from the Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate that the number of executions was much lower than reported at the time, although it was likely greater than 13,500.[87][88][89]
Vietnam War[edit]
As early as June 1956 the idea of overthrowing the South Vietnamese government was presented at a politburo meeting. In 1959, H  Ch  Minh began urging the Politburo to send aid to the Vi t C ng in South Vietnam; a "people's war" on the South was approved at a session in January 1959, and this decision was confirmed by the Politburo in March.[90][91] North Vietnam invaded Laos in July 1959 aided by the Pathet Lao and used 30,000 men to build a network of supply and reinforcement routes running through Laos and Cambodia that became known as the H  Ch  Minh trail.[92] It allowed the North to send manpower and material to the Vi t C ng with much less exposure to South Vietnamese forces, achieving a considerable advantage.[93] To counter the accusation that North Vietnam was violating the Geneva Accord, the independence of the Vi t C ng was stressed in communist propaganda. North Vietnam created the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam in December 1960 as a "united front", or political branch of the Viet Cong intended to encourage the participation of non-Communists. [90][91]
At the end of 1959, conscious that the national election would never be held and that Diem intended to purge opposing forces (mostly ex Vi t Minh) from the South Vietnamese society, H  Ch  Minh informally chose L  Du n to become the next party leader. This was interpreted by Western analysts as a loss of influence for H , who was said to have preferred the more moderate V  Nguy n Gi p for the position.[94] From 1959 onward, the elderly H  became increasingly worried about the prospect of his death, and that year he wrote down his will.[95] L  Du n was officially named party leader in 1960, leaving H  to function in a secondary role as head of state and member of the Politburo. He nevertheless maintained considerable influence in the government. L  Du n, T  H u, Tr ng Chinh and Ph m V n  ng often shared dinner with H , and all of them remained key figures throughout and after the war. In the early 1960s, the North Vietnamese Politburo was divided into the "North first" faction who favored focusing on the economic development of North Vietnam, and the "South first" faction, who favored a guerrilla war in South Vietnam to reunite Vietnam shortly.[96] Between 1961 and 1963, 40,000 Communist soldiers infiltrated into South Vietnam from the North.[90]
In 1963, H  purportedly corresponded with South Vietnamese President Diem in hopes of achieving a negotiated peace.[97] During the so-called "Maneli Affair" of 1963, a French diplomatic initiative was launched to achieve a federation of the two Vietnams, which would be neutral in the Cold War.[98] The four principal diplomats involved in the "Maneli affair" were Ramchundur Goburdhun, the Indian Chief Commissioner of the ICC; Mieczys aw Maneli, the Polish Commissioner to the ICC; Roger Lalouette, the French ambassador to South Vietnam; and Giovanni d'Orlandi, the Italian ambassador to South Vietnam.[98] Maneli reported that H  was very interested in the signs of a split between President Diem and President Kennedy and that his attitude was: "Our real enemies are the Americans. Get rid of them, and we can cope with Diem and Nhu afterward".[98] H  also told Maneli about the Ho Minh Chi Trail, which passed through officially neutral Cambodia and Laos, saying "Indochina is just one single entity".[99]
At a meeting in Hanoi held in French, H  told Goburdhun that Diem was "in his way a patriot", noting that Diem had opposed French rule over Vietnam, and ended the meeting saying that the next time Goburdhun met Diem "shake hands with him for me".[100] The North Vietnamese Premier Ph m V n  ng, speaking on behalf of H , told Maneli he was interested in the peace plan, saying that just as long as the American advisers left South Vietnam "we can agree with any Vietnamese".[101] On 2 September 1963, Maneli met with Ng   nh Nhu, the younger brother and right-hand man to Diem to discuss the French peace plan.[102] It remains unclear if the Ngo brothers were serious about the French peace plan or were merely using the possibility of accepting it to blackmail the United States into supporting them at a time when the Buddhist crisis had seriously strained relations between Saigon and Washington.[101] Supporting the latter theory is the fact that Nhu promptly leaked his meeting with Maneli to the American columnist Joseph Alsop, who publicized it in a column entitled "Very Ugly Stuff".[101] The possibility that the Ngo brothers might accept the peace plan contributed to the Kennedy administration's plan to support a coup against them. On 1 November 1963, a coup overthrew Diem, who was killed the next day together with his brother. [101]
Diem had followed a policy of "deconstructing the state" by creating several overlapping agencies and departments who were encouraged to feud with one another to disorganize the South Vietnamese state to such an extent that he hoped that it would make a coup against him impossible.[103] When Diem was overthrown and killed, without any kind of arbiter between the rival arms of the South Vietnamese state, South Vietnam promptly disintegrated.[104] The American Defense Secretary Robert McNamara reported after visiting South Vietnam in December 1963 that "there is no organized government worthy of the name" in Saigon.[105] At a meeting of the plenum of the Politburo in December 1963, L  Du n's "South first" faction triumphed with the Politburo passing a resolution calling for North Vietnam to complete the overthrow of the regime in Saigon as soon as possible while the members of the "North first" faction were dismissed.[106] As South Vietnam descended into chaos, whatever interest H  might have had in the French peace plan ended, as it become clear the Viet Cong could overthrow the government in Saigon. A CIA report from 1964 stated the factionalism in South Vietnam had reached "almost the point of anarchy" as various South Vietnamese leaders fought one another, making any sort of effort against the Viet Cong impossible, which was rapidly taking over much of the South Vietnamese countryside.[107]
As South Vietnam collapsed into factionalism and in-fighting while the Viet Cong continued to win the war, it became increasingly apparent to President Lyndon Johnson that only American military intervention could save South Vietnam.[108] Though Johnson did not wish to commit American forces until he had won the 1964 election, he decided to make his intentions clear to Hanoi. In June 1964, the "Seaborn Mission" began as J. Blair Seaborn, the Canadian commissioner to the ICC, arrived in Hanoi with a message from Johnson offering billions of American economic aid and diplomatic recognition in exchange for which North Vietnam would cease trying to overthrow the government of South Vietnam.[109] Seaborn also warned that North Vietnam would suffer the "greatest devastation" from American bombing, saying that Johnson was seriously considering a strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam.[110] Little came of the backchannel of the "Seaborn Mission" as the North Vietnamese distrusted Seaborn, who pointedly was never allowed to meet H . [111]
In late 1964, People's Army of Vietnam combat troops were sent southwest into officially neutral Laos and Cambodia.[112] By March 1965, American combat troops began arriving in South Vietnam, first to protect the airbases around Chu Lai and Da Nang, later to take on most of the fight as "[m]ore and more American troops were put in to replace Saigon troops who could not, or would not, get involved in the fighting".[113] As fighting escalated, widespread aerial and artillery bombardment all over North Vietnam by the United States Air Force and Navy began with Operation Rolling Thunder. On 8 9 April 1965, H  made a secret visit to Beijing to meet Mao Zedong.[114] It was agreed that no Chinese combat troops would enter North Vietnam unless the United States invaded North Vietnam, but that China would send support troops to North Vietnam to help maintain the infrastructure damaged by American bombing.[114] There was a deep distrust and fear of China within the North Vietnamese Politburo, and the suggestion that Chinese troops, even support troops, be allowed into North Vietnam, caused outrage in the Politburo.[115] H  had to use all his moral authority to obtain Politburo's approval.[115]
According to Chen Jian, during the mid-to-late 1960s, L  Du n permitted 320,000 Chinese volunteers into North Vietnam to help build infrastructure for the country, thereby freeing a similar number of PAVN personnel to go south.[116] There are no sources from Vietnam, the United States, or the Soviet Union that confirm the number of Chinese troops stationed in North Vietnam. However, the Chinese government later admitted to sending 320,000 Chinese soldiers to Vietnam during the 1960s and spent over $20 billion to support Hanoi's regular North Vietnamese Army and Vi t C ng guerrilla units.[117]
To counter the American bombing, the entire population of North Vietnam was mobilized for the war effort with vast teams of women being used to repair the damage done by the bombers, often at a speed that astonished the Americans.[118] The bombing of North Vietnam proved to be the principal obstacle to opening peace talks as H  repeatedly stated that no peace talks would be possible unless the United States unconditionally cease bombing North Vietnam.[119] Like many of the other leaders of the newly independent states of Asia and Africa, H  was extremely sensitive about threats, whether perceived or real, to his nation's independence and sovereignty.[119] H  regarded the American bombing as a violation of North Vietnam's sovereignty, and he felt that to negotiate with the Americans reserving the right to bomb North Vietnam should he not behave as they wanted him to do, would diminish North Vietnam's independence. [119]
In March 1966, a Canadian diplomat, Chester Ronning, arrived in Hanoi with an offer to use his "good offices" to begin peace talks.[120] However, the Ronning mission foundered upon the bombing issue, as the North Vietnamese demanded an unconditional halt to the bombing, an undertaking that Johnson refused to give.[120] In June 1966, Janusz Lewandowski, the Polish Commissioner to the ICC, was able via d'Orlandi to see Henry Cabot Lodge Jr, the American ambassador to South Vietnam, with an offer from H . [120] H 's offer for a "political compromise" as transmitted by Lewandowski included allowing South Vietnam to maintain its alliance with the U.S, instead of becoming neutral; having the Viet Cong "take part" in negotiations for a coalition government, instead of being allowed to automatically enter a coalition government; and allowing a "reasonable calendar" for the withdrawal of American troops instead of an immediate withdrawal.[121] Operation Marigold as the Lewandowski channel came to be code-named almost led to American-North Vietnamese talks in Warsaw in December 1966 but collapsed over the bombing issue.[122]
In January 1967, General Nguy n Ch  Thanh, the commander of the forces in South Vietnam, returned to Hanoi, to present a plan that became the genesis of the Tet Offensive a year later.[123] Thanh expressed much concern about the Americans invading Laos to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and to preempt this possibility, urged an all-out offensive to win the war with a sudden blow.[123] L ' Du n supported Thanh's plans, which were stoutly opposed by the Defense Minister, General V  Nguy n Gi p, who preferred to continue with guerrilla war, arguing that the superior American firepower would ensure the failure of Thanh's proposed offensive.[124] With the Politburo divided, it was agreed to study and debate the issue more.[125]
In July 1967, H  Ch  Minh and most of the Politburo of the Communist Party met in a high-profile conference where they concluded the war had fallen into a stalemate. The American military presence forced the PAVN to expend the majority of their resources on maintaining the H  Ch  Minh trail rather than reinforcing their comrades' ranks in the South. H  seems to have agreed to Thanh's offensive because he wanted to see Vietnam reunified within his lifetime, and the increasingly ailing H  was painfully aware that he did not have much time left.[126] With H 's permission, the Vi t C ng planned a massive Tet Offensive that would commence on 31 January 1968, to take much of the South by force and deal a heavy blow to the American military. The offensive was executed at great cost and with heavy casualties on Vi t C ng's political branches and armed forces. The scope of the action shocked the world, which until then had been assured that the Communists were "on the ropes". The optimistic spin that the American military command had sustained for years was no longer credible. The bombing of North Vietnam and the H  Ch  Minh trail was halted, and American and Vietnamese negotiators held discussions on how the war might be ended. From then on, H  Ch  Minh and his government's strategy, based on the idea of not using conventional warfare and facing the might of the United States Army, which would wear them down eventually while merely prolonging the conflict, would lead to the eventual acceptance of Hanoi's terms, materialized.
In early 1969, H  suffered a heart attack and was in increasingly bad health for the rest of the year.[127] In July 1969, Jean Sainteny, a former French official in Vietnam who knew H  secretly relayed a letter written to him from President Richard Nixon.[127] Nixon's letter proposed working together to end this "tragic war", but also warned that if North Vietnam made no concessions at the peace talks in Paris by 1 November, Nixon would resort to "measures of great consequence and force".[127] H 's reply letter, which Nixon received on 30 August 1969, welcomed peace talks with the U.S. to look for a way to end the war but made no concessions, as Nixon's threats made no impression on him. [127]
Personal life[edit]
 H  Ch  Minh holding his god-daughter, baby Elizabeth (Babette) Aubrac, with Elizabeth's mother, Lucie, 1946
In addition to being a politician, H  Ch  Minh was also a writer, journalist, poet[128] and polyglot. His father was a scholar and teacher who received a high degree in the Nguy n dynasty Imperial examination. H  was taught to master Classical Chinese at a young age. Before the August Revolution, he often wrote poetry in Ch  H n (the Vietnamese name for the Chinese writing system). One of those is Poems from the Prison Diary, written when he was imprisoned by the police of the Republic of China. This poetry chronicle is Vietnam National Treasure No. 10 and was translated into many languages. It is used in Vietnamese high schools.[129] After Vietnam gained independence from France, the new government exclusively promoted Ch  Qu c Ng  (Vietnamese writing system in Latin characters) to eliminate illiteracy. H  started to create more poems in the modern Vietnamese language for dissemination to a wider range of readers. From when he became president until the appearance of serious health problems, a short poem of his was regularly published in the newspaper Nh n D n T t (Lunar new year) edition to encourage his people in working, studying or fighting Americans in the new year.
 H  Ch  Minh watching a football game in his favorite fashion, with his closest comrade Prime Minister Ph m V n  ng seated to H 's left (photo right)
Because he was in exile for nearly 30 years, H  could speak fluently as well as read and write professionally in French, English, Russian, Cantonese and Mandarin as well as his mother tongue Vietnamese.[8] In addition, he was reported to speak conversational Esperanto.[130] In the 1920s, he was bureau chief/editor of many newspapers which he established to criticize French Colonial Government of Indochina and serving communism propaganda purposes. Examples are Le Paria (The Pariah) first published in Paris 1922 or Thanh Nien (Youth) first published on 21 June 1925 (21 June was named by The Socialist Republic of Vietnam Government as Vietnam Revolutionary Journalism Day). In many state official visits to the Soviet Union and China, he often talked directly to their communist leaders without interpreters, especially about top-secret information. While being interviewed by Western journalists, he used French.[citation needed] His Vietnamese had a strong accent from his birthplace in the central province of Ngh  An, but could be widely understood throughout the country. [m]
As President, he held formal receptions for foreign heads of state and ambassadors at the Presidential Palace, but he did not live there. He ordered the building of a stilt house at the back of the palace, which is today known as the Presidential Palace Historical Site. His hobbies (according to his secretary V  K ) included reading, gardening, feeding fish (many of which are still[when?] living), and visiting schools, and children's homes.[citation needed]
H  Ch  Minh remained in Hanoi during his final years, demanding the unconditional withdrawal of all non-Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. By 1969, with negotiations still dragging on, his health began to deteriorate from multiple health problems, including diabetes which prevented him from participating in further active politics. However, he insisted that his forces in the South continue fighting until all of Vietnam was reunited regardless of the length of time that it might take, believing that time was on his side.[citation needed]
H  Ch  Minh's marriage has long been swathed in secrecy and mystery. He is believed by several scholars of Vietnamese history, to have married Zeng Xueming in October 1926,[132][33] although only being able to live with her for less than a year. Historian Peter Neville claimed that H  (at the time known as Ly Thuy[33]) wanted to engage Zeng in the communist movements but she demonstrated a lack of ability and interest in it.[132] In 1927, the mounting repression of Chiang Kai-shek's KMT against the Chinese Communists compelled H  to leave for Hong Kong, and his relationship with Zeng appeared to have ended at that time.[133] In addition to the marriage with Zeng Xueming, there is a number of published studies indicating that H  had a romantic relationship with Nguy n Th  Minh Khai.[134] As a young and high-spirited female revolutionary, Minh Khai was delegated to Hong Kong to serve as an assistant to Ho Chi Minh in April 1930 and quickly drew H 's attention owing to her physical attractiveness. [135] H  even approached the Far Eastern Bureau and requested permission to marry Minh Khai even though the previous marriage with Zeng remained legally valid.[136][137] However, the marriage was unable to take place since Minh Khai had been detained by the British authorities in April 1931.[138][137]
Death[edit]
With the outcome of the Vietnam war still in question, H  Ch  Minh died of heart failure at his home in Hanoi at 9:47 on the morning of 2 September 1969; he was 79 years old.[5][139] His embalmed body is currently on display in a mausoleum in Ba  nh Square in Hanoi despite his will which stated that he wanted to be cremated.[8]: 565 
The North Vietnamese government originally announced H 's death on 3 September. A week of mourning for his death was decreed nationwide in North Vietnam from 4 to 11 September 1969.[140] His funeral was attended by about 250,000 people and 5,000 official guests, which included many international mourners.
Representatives from 40 countries and regions were also presented. During the mourning period, North Vietnam received more than 22,000 condolences letters from 20 organizations and 110 countries across the world, such as France, Ethiopia, Yugoslavia, Cuba, Zambia, China, the USSR and many others, mostly Socialist countries.
He was not initially replaced as president; instead, a "collective leadership" composed of several ministers and military leaders took over, known as the Politburo. During North Vietnam's final campaign in 1975, a famous song written by composer Huy Thuc [vi] was often sung by PAVN soldiers: "B c v n c ng ch ng ch u h nh qu n" ("You are still marching with us, Uncle H ").[citation needed]
During the Fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975, several PAVN tanks displayed a poster with those same words on it. The day after the battle ended, on 1 May, veteran Australian journalist Denis Warner reported that "When the North Vietnamese marched into Saigon yesterday, they were led by a man who wasn't there".[141]
Legacy[edit]
 H  Ch  Minh Mausoleum, Hanoi.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam still praises the legacy of Uncle H  (B c H ), the Bringer of Light (Ch  Minh). It is comparable to that of Mao Zedong in China and of Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il in North Korea. Although H  Ch  Minh wished for his body to be cremated and his ashes spread to North, Central, and South Vietnam, the body instead is embalmed on view in a mausoleum. His image is featured in many public buildings and schoolrooms, and other displays of reverence.[142] There is at least one temple dedicated to him, built-in then Vi t C ng controlled V nh Long shortly after his death in 1970.[143]
 H  Ch  Minh statue and a yellow star as depicted in the Vietnamese flag
 H  Ch  Minh statue outside H  Ch  Minh City Hall, H  Ch  Minh City
In The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam (1982), Duiker suggests that H  Ch  Minh's cult of personality is indicative of a larger legacy, one that drew on "elements traditional to the exercise of control and authority in Vietnamese society."[144] Duiker is drawn to an "irresistible and persuasive" comparison with China. As in China, leading party cadres were "most likely to be intellectuals descended [like H  Ch  Minh] from rural scholar-gentry families" in the interior (the protectorates of Annam and Tonkin). Conversely, the pioneers of constitutional nationalism tended to be from the more "Westernised" coastal south (Saigon and surrounding French direct-rule Cochinchina) and to be from "commercial families without a traditional Confucian background".[145]
 Shrine devoted to H  Ch  Minh
In Vietnam, as in China, Communism presented itself as a root and branch rejection of Confucianism, condemned for its ritualism, inherent conservatism, and resistance to change. Once in power, the Vietnamese Communists may not have fought Confucianism "as bitterly as did their Chinese counterparts", but its social prestige was "essentially destroyed." In the political sphere, the puppet son of heaven (which had been weakly represented by the B o  i) was replaced by the people's republic. Orthodox materialism accorded no place to heaven, gods, or other supernatural forces. Socialist collectivism undermined the tradition of the Confucian family leader (Gia Truong). The socialist conception of social equality destroyed the Confucian views of class.[146][147]
 Temple devoted to Nguy n Sinh S c, H  Ch  Minh's father
Duiker argues many were to find the new ideology "congenial" precisely because of its similarities with the teachings of the old Master: "the belief in one truth, embodied in quasi-sacred texts"; in "an anointed elite, trained in an all-embracing doctrine and responsible for leading the broad masses and indoctrinating them in proper thought and behavior"; in "the subordination of the individual to the community"; and in the perfectibility, through corrective action, of human nature.[148] All of this, Duiker suggests, was in some manner present in the aura of the new Master, Chi Minh, "the bringer of light", "Uncle H " to whom "all the desirable qualities of Confucian ethics" are ascribed.[149] Under H  Ch  Minh, Vietnamese Marxism developed, in effect, as a kind of "reformed Confucianism" revised to meet "the challenges of the modern era" and, not least among these, of "total mobilization in the struggle for national independence and state power."[150]
This "congeniality" with Confucian tradition was remarked on by Nguyen Khac Vien, a leading Hanoi intellectual of the 1960s and 70s. In Confucianism and Marxism in Vietnam[151] Nguyen Khac Vien, saw definite parallels between Confucian and party discipline, between the traditional scholar gentry and H  Ch  Minh's party cadres.[152]
A completely different form of the cult of H  Ch  Minh (and one tolerated by the government with uneasiness) is his identification in Vietnamese folk religion with the Jade Emperor, who supposedly incarnated again on earth as H  Ch  Minh. Today, H  Ch  Minh as the Jade Emperor is supposed to speak from the spirit world through Spiritualist mediums. The first such medium was one Madam Lang in the 1990s, but the cult acquired a significant number of followers through another medium, Madam Xoan. She established on 1 January 2001  o Ng c Ph t H  Ch  Minh (the Way of H  Ch  Minh as the Jade Buddha) also known as  o B c H  (the Way of Uncle H ) at  n H a B nh (the Peace Temple) in Ch  Linh-Sao   district of H i D ng province. She then founded the Peace Society of Heavenly Mediums ( o n  ng thi n H a B nh). Reportedly, by 2014 the movement had around 24,000 followers.[153]
The Vietnamese government's attempts to immortalize H  Ch  Minh was also met with significant controversies and opposition. The regime is sensitive to anything that might question the official hagiography. This includes references to H  Ch  Minh's personal life that might detract from the image of the dedicated "the father of the revolution",[154] the "celibate married only to the cause of revolution".[155] William Duiker's Ho Chi Minh: A Life (2000) was candid on the matter of H  Ch  Minh's liaisons.[8]: 605, fn 58  The government sought cuts in the Vietnamese translation[156] and banned distribution of an issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review, which carried a small item about the controversy.[156]
Many authors writing on Vietnam argued on the question of whether H  Ch  Minh was fundamentally a nationalist or a Communist.[157]
Depictions of H  Ch  Minh[edit]
This article or section possibly contains synthesis of material which does not verifiably mention or relate to the main topic. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Ho Chi Minh pictured with children in a photo by state media
Busts, statues, and memorial plaques and exhibitions are displayed in destinations on his extensive world journey in exile from 1911 to 1941 including France, the United Kingdom, Russia, China, and Thailand.[158]
Many activists and musicians wrote songs about H  Ch  Minh and his revolution in different languages during the Vietnam War to demonstrate against the United States. Spanish songs were composed by F lix Pita Rodr guez, Carlos Puebla and Al  Primera. In addition, the Chilean folk singer V ctor Jara referenced H  Ch  Minh in his anti-war song "El derecho de vivir en paz" ("The Right to Live in Peace"). Pete Seeger wrote "Teacher Uncle Ho". Ewan MacColl produced "The Ballad of Ho Chi Minh" in 1954, describing "a man who is the father of the Indo-Chinese people, And his name [it] is Ho Chi Minh."[159] Russian songs about him were written by Vladimir Fere, and German songs about him were written by Kurt Demmler.[citation needed]
Various places, boulevards, and squares are named after him around the world, especially in Socialist states and former Communist states. In Russia, there is a H  Ch  Minh square and monument in Moscow, a H  Ch  Minh boulevard in Saint Petersburg, and a H  Ch  Minh square in Ulyanovsk (the birthplace of Vladimir Lenin, a sister city of Vinh, the birthplace of H  Ch  Minh). During the Vietnam War, the then-West Bengal government, in the hands of CPI(M), renamed Harrington Street to Ho Chi Minh Sarani, which is also the location of the consulate general of the United States in Kolkata.[160] According to the Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as many as 20 countries across Asia, Europe, America and Africa have erected monuments or statues in remembrance of H  Ch  Minh.[161]
International influence[edit]
 H  Ch  Minh bust in Kolkata, India
H  Ch  Minh is considered one of the most influential leaders in the world. Time magazine listed him in the list of 100 Most Important People of the Twentieth Century (Time 100) in 1998.[162][163] His thought and revolution inspired many leaders and people on a global scale in Asia, Africa and Latin America during the decolonization movement which occurred after World War II. As a communist, he was one of the few international figures who were relatively well regarded in the West, and did not face the same extent of international criticism as much as other Communist factions, going to even win praise for his actions.[164]
In 1987, UNESCO officially recommended that its member states "join in the commemoration of the centenary of the birth of President H  Ch  Minh by organizing various events as a tribute to his memory", considering "the important and many-sided contributions of President H  Ch  Minh to the fields of culture, education and the arts" who "devoted his whole life to the national liberation of the Vietnamese people, contributing to the common struggle of peoples for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress".[165]
One of H  Ch  Minh's works, The Black Race, much of it originally written in French, highlights his views on the oppression of peoples from colonialism and imperialism in 20 written articles.[166][167] Other books such as Revolution which published selected works and articles of H  Ch  Minh in English also highlighted H  Ch  Minh's interpretation and beliefs in socialism and communism, and in fighting against what he perceived to be evils stemming from capitalism, colonialism, and imperialism.[168]
See also[edit]
Communism in Vietnam
Explanatory notes[edit]
^ / ho  t i   m n/ HOH chee MIN,[1] Vietnamese: [h  c  m ] (listen), Saigon: [h  c  m n].
^ Ch  H n:  
^ a b c His birth name appeared in a letter from the director of Coll ge Qu c h c, dated 7 August 1908.[2]
^ The North Vietnamese government initially announced his death on 3 September in order to prevent it from coinciding with National Day. In 1989, the Politburo of unified Vietnam revealed the change, along with changes which were made to his original will, and it revised the date of death to 2 September.[5][6]
^ Or simply as B c, pronounced [ k].
^ or more formally as President Ho Chi Minh (Ch  t ch H  Ch  Minh)
^ including Nguy n T t Th nh, Nguy n  i Qu c, V n Ba and over 50 200 aliases.
^ including Ng i cha gi  c a d n t c ('Father of the people')
^ Predecessor of the current Communist Party of Vietnam
^ In his application to the French Colonial School   "Nguyen Tat Thanh, born 1892 at Vinh, son of Mr. Nguyen Sinh Huy (sub doctor in literature)"
^ He told Paris Police (Surete) he was born 15 January 1894.
^  Dommen (2001), p.340 gives a lower estimate of 32,000 executions
^ He sometimes went on-air to deliver important political messages and encourage soldiers.[131][page needed]
References[edit]
^ "Ho Chi Minh". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ V  Ng  Chi u (23 October 2011). "V i v n n n l ch s  th  k  XX: H  Ch  Minh Nh  ngo i giao, 1945 1946". H p L u Magazine (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Note: See the document in French, from Centre des archives d'Outre-mer [CAOM] (Aix)/Gouvernement General de l'Indochine [GGI]/Fonds Residence Superieure d'Annam [RSA]/carton R1, and the note in English at the end of the cited article
^ a b Tr n Qu c V ng. "L i truy n mi ng d n gian v  H  Ch  Minh". BBC Vietnamese. Retrieved 10 December 2013.
^ a b Nguy n V nh Ch u. "Ph ng v n s  gia V  Ng  Chi u v  nh ng nghi n c u l ch s  li n quan  n H  Ch  Minh". H p L u Magazine. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013.
^ a b Nguy n Xu n T ng (18 September 2014). "Gi i thi u nh ng t  li u v  Di ch c c a Ch  t ch H  Ch  Minh" [Introduction to documents related to President Ho Chi Minh's will] (in Vietnamese). Ministry of Justice (Vietnam). Retrieved 1 October 2021.
^ Ngo, Tam T. T. (2018). "The Uncle H  religion in Vietnam".  In Dean, Kenneth; van der Veer, Peter (eds.). The Secular in South, East, and Southeast Asia. Springer. p. 219. ISBN 978-3-319-89369-3.
^ "Uncle Ho's legacy lives on in Vietnam". BBC News. 6 June 2012. Retrieved 25 April 2022.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Duiker, William J. Ho Chi Minh: A Life. New York: Hyperion, 2000. 
^ Duncanson 1957, p. 85.
^ Pike 1976.
^ Tr n D n Ti n 1994.
^ Yen Son. "Nguyen Ai Quoc, the Brilliant Champion of the Revolution." Thuong Tin Hanoi. 30 August 1945.
^ Ton That Thien 18, 1890 is the most likely year of his birth. There is troubling conflicting evidence, however. When he was arrested in Hong Kong in 1931, he attested in court documents that he was 36. The passport he used to enter Russia in 1921 also gave the year 1895 as his birth date. His application to the Colonial School in Paris gave his birth year as 1892
^ a b Hunt 2016, p. 125.
^ "Ngo Dinh Diem and ho Chi Minh". nguoiviet.com. 3 November 2018.
^ Tucker 1999.
^ a b c d Quinn-Judge 2002, p. 20.
^ Debolt, Abbe A; Baugess, James S (12 December 2011). Encyclopedia of the Sixties: A Decade of Culture and Counterculture [2 volumes]: A Decade of Culture and Counterculture. ISBN 9781440801020.
^ Duiker 2012.
^ "The Drayton Court Hotel". Government of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 30 January 2013.
^ Quinn-Judge 2002, p. 25.
^ Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2012). Vietnam Past and Present: The North. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Cognoscenti Books.
^ Harries, David. "Maritime Sussex". Sussex Express. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 12 June 2015.
^ Gisele Bousquet, Behind the Bamboo Hedge: The Impact of Homeland Politics in Parisian Vietnamese Community, University of Michigan Press, pp. 47 48
^ Phong, Huy; Anh, Yen (1989). "Unmasking Ho Chi Minh". Viet Quoc. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 11 June 2015.
^ Huynh, Kim Kh hn, Vietnamese Communism, 1925 1945. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982; pg. 60.
^ Tran Dan, Tien. "Ho Chi Minh, Life and Work". Communist Party of Vietnam Online Newspaper. Gioi Publishers. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015.
^ Brett Reilly, review of Embers of War: The Fall of an Empire and the Making of America's Vietnam by Fredrik Logevall, Journal of Vietnamese Studies 11.1 (2016), 147.r
^ "               ". 15 December 2018. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 21.
^ T n Th t Thi n 1990, p. 23 24.
^ "The Learning Network". The New York Times.
^ a b c d e f Brocheux 2007, p. 39.
^ a b Davidson, Phillip B., Vietnam at War: The History: 1946 1975 (1991), p. 4.Ho ng V n Ch . From Colonialism to Communism (1964), p. 18.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 44 and xiii.
^ a b c "Then & now: In the name of the law". 30 June 2013.
^ a b Moise 1988, p. 11.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 57 58.
^ "Ho Chi Minh". u-s-history.com. Archived from the original on 13 February 2018. Retrieved 25 July 2014.
^ T n Th t Thi n 1990.
^ Hong Ha (2010). B c H  Tr n  t N c L -Nin. Nh  Xu t B n Thanh Ni n.[page needed]
^ T n Th t Thi n 1990, p. 39.
^ "Ho Chi Minh Was Noted for Success in Blending Nationalism and Communism", The New York Times
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 198.
^ Interview with Archimedes L. A. Patti, 1981,
^ Interview with OSS officer Carleton Swift, 1981
^ Zinn 1995, p. 460.
^ "Collection of Letters by Ho Chi Minh". Rationalrevolution.net. Retrieved 26 September 2009.
^ Zinn 1995, p. 461.
^ a b c "Ben-gurion Reveals Suggestion of North Vietnam's Communist Leader". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 8 November 1966. Retrieved 5 September 2015.
^ a b c "ISRAEL WAS EVERYTHING". The New York Times. 21 June 1987. Retrieved 5 September 2015.
^ Currey, Cecil B. Victory At Any Cost (Washington: Brassey's, 1997), p. 126 
^ Tucker, Spencer. Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: a political, social, and military history (vol. 2), 1998[page needed]
^ Colvin, John. Giap: the Volcano under the Snow (New York: Soho Press, 1996), p. 51 
^ "Vietnam Declaration of Independence". Coombs.anu.edu.au. 2 September 1945. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009. Retrieved 26 September 2009.
^ Karnow 1983.
^ "Liam Kelley | Department of History". 14 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014.
^ "Chiang Kai-shek and Vietnam in 1945". 25 April 2013. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016.
^ Turner 1975, p. 57 9, 67 9, 74.
^ "Myths of the Vietnam War". Southeast Asian Perspectives. September 1972. pp. 14 8.
^ Dommen 2001, p. 153 4.
^ Daniel Hemery (1975) Revolutionnaires Vietnamiens et pouvoir colonial en Indochine. Fran ois Maspero, Paris. 1975[page needed]
^ Ngo Van (2000) Viet-nam 1920 1945: R volution et Contre-r volution sous la domination coloniale, Paris: Nautilus Editions[page needed]
^ Daniel Gu rin (1954) Aux services des colonises, 1930 1953, Editions Minuit, Paris, p. 22
^ A nationwide call for resistance [vi]
^ "Lone Sentry: New Weapons for Jap Tank Hunters (U.S. WWII Intelligence Bulletin, March 1945)". lonesentry.com. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
^ Fall 1967, p. 88.
^ Luo, Guibo. pp. 233 36
^ Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Chronology", p. 45.
^ McMaster, H.R. (1997) "Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, The Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Lies that Led to Vietnam", pg. 35.
^ Dommen 2001, p. 252.
^ Valentino 2005, p. 83.
^ Maclear, pp. 65 68.
^ Jacobs 2006, pp. 43 53.
^ Turner 1975, pp. 89, 91, 97.
^ Logevall 2012, p. 610.
^ Turner 1975, p. 107.
^ Logevall 2012, p. 604.
^ Turner 1975, p. 97.
^ Logevall 2012, p. 603.
^ Turner 1975, pp. 90, 97.
^ Turner 1975, pp. 97 98.
^ Turner 1975, p. 99.
^ Turner 1975, pp. 95, 99 100.
^ Turner 1975, p. 143.
^ Gittinger, J. Price (1959). "Communist Land Policy in North Viet Nam". Far Eastern Survey. 28 (8): 113 126. doi:10.2307/3024603. JSTOR 3024603.
^ Vu, Tuong (25 May 2007). "Newly released documents on the land reform" (Mailing list). Vietnam Studies Group. Retrieved 30 November 2017. Thus the number of 13,500 executed people seems to be a low-end estimate of the real number. This is corroborated by Edwin Moise in his recent paper "Land Reform in North Vietnam, 1953 1956" presented at the 18th Annual Conference on SE Asian Studies, Center for SE Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley (February 2001). In this paper, Moise (7 9) modified his earlier estimate in his 1983 book (which was 5,000) and accepted an estimate of close to 15,000 executions. Moise made the case based on Hungarian reports provided by Balazs, but the document I cited above offers more direct evidence for his revised estimate. This document also suggests that the total number should be adjusted up some more, taking into consideration the later radical phase of the campaign, the unauthorized killings at the local level, and the suicides following arrest and torture (the central government bore less direct responsibility for these cases, however).
^ Szalontai, Balazs (November 2005). "Political and Economic Crisis in North Vietnam, 1955 56" (PDF). Cold War History. 5 (4): 395 426. doi:10.1080/14682740500284630. S2CID 153956945. Retrieved 30 November 2017.
^ Vu 2010, p. 103. "Clearly Vietnamese socialism followed a moderate path relative to China.  ... Yet the Vietnamese 'land reform' campaign ... testified that Vietnamese communists could be as radical and murderous as their comrades elsewhere".
^ a b c Ang 2002, p. 55 58, 76.
^ a b "The History Place  Vietnam War 1945 1960". Retrieved 21 December 2017.
^ The Economist, 26 February 1983.
^ Lind, 1999
^ Ang 2002, p. 21.
^ Langguth 2000, p. 550.
^ Nguyen 2012, p. 62.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 174.
^ a b c Karnow 1983, p. 291.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 237.
^ Jacobs 2006, p. 165.
^ a b c d Karnow 1983, p. 292.
^ Langguth 2000, p. 233-234.
^ Shafer 1988, p. 255.
^ Shafer 1988, p. 271-273.
^ Shafer 1988, p. 271.
^ Gaiduk 2003, p. 203.
^ Shafer 1988, p. 272.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 340-342.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 348.
^ Hunt 1993, p. 15.
^ Langguth 2000, p. 290.
^ Davidson, Vietnam at War: the history, 1946 1975, 1988[page needed]
^ "Vietnam Veterans Against the War: History of the U.S. War in Vietnam". vvaw.org.
^ a b Langguth 2000, p. 355.
^ a b Langguth 2000, p. 356.
^ Chen Jian. "China's Involvement in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964 69", China Quarterly, No. 142 (June 1995), pp. 366 69.
^ "CHINA ADMITS COMBAT IN VIETNAM WAR". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 21 April 2018.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 456.
^ a b c Langguth 2000, p. 413.
^ a b c Karnow 1983, p. 492.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 492-493.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 493.
^ a b Langguth 2000, p. 439.
^ Langguth 2000, p. 439-440.
^ Langguth 2000, p. 440.
^ Karnow 1983, p. 535.
^ a b c d Karnow 1983, p. 597.
^ Minh, Ho Chi (7 May 1968). "Ho Chi Minh: From 'Prison Diary'". The Nation.
^ Translated version:
French   Ng i t nh nguy n v o ng c Bastille d ch "Nh t k  trong t "
Czech   by Ivo Vasiljev [cs].
Korean   "Prison Diary" published in Korean Archived 16 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine by Ahn Kyong Hwan.
English   by Steve Bradbury, Tinfish Press
Older version   by Aileen Palmer
Spanish   [1] by F lix Pita Rodr guez
Romanian   by ro:Constantin Lupeanu
Russian   by Pavel Antokolsky
^ Brown, Simon Leo (6 June 2014). "Esperanto the language of love". ABC. Retrieved 29 May 2019.
^ Marr 2013.
^ a b Neville 2018, p. 33.
^ Duiker 2000, pp. 143 145, 198; Brocheux 2007, p. 40; Neville 2018, p. 33.
^ Duiker 2000, pp. 198 189; Brocheux 2007, pp. 62 63; Neville 2018, p. 34; Lanzona & Rettig 2020, p. 34. Quote: "In fact, Minh Khai managed to gain the attention of Nguyen Ai Quoc [...] whom she married in late 1930 or early 1931.".
^ Duiker 2000, pp. 185, 198.
^ Brocheux 2007, p. 63.
^ a b Duiker 2000, p. 199.
^ Marr 1984, p. 244.
^ Duiker 2000, p. 561.
^ "Ho Chi Minh dies of heart attack". The Globe and Mail. 4 September 1969. p. 1.
^ The Sun News-Pictorial, 1 May 1975, p. 1.
^ Marsh, Viv (7 June 2012). "Uncle Ho's legacy lives on in Vietnam". BBC. BBC. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015. Retrieved 2 December 2012.
^ " n Th  B c H " [Temple of Uncle H ]. SkyDoor (in Vietnamese). Vietnam National Administration of Tourism. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 14 December 2011.
^ Manfred McDowell, "Sky without Light: a Vietnamese Tragedy", New Politics, Vol XIII, No. 3, 2011, pp. 131 136, p. 133.
^ Duiker 1982, p. 25.
^ Pham Duy Nghia (2005), "Confucianism and the conception of the law in Vietnam," Asian Socialism and Legal Change: The dynamics of Vietnamese and Chinese Reform, John Gillespie, Pip Nicholson eds., Australian National University Press, pp. 76 90, pp. 83 84
^ Pham, Duy Nghia (2005). "4 Confucianism and the conception of the law in Vietnam".  In Gillespie, John; Nicholson, Pip (eds.). Asian Socialism and Legal Change: The dynamics of Vietnamese and Chinese Reform (PDF). ANU Press. pp. 76 90. ISBN 978-1-920942-27-4. JSTOR j.ctt2jbjds.12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2019.
^ See also R. Peerenboom (2001).'Globalization, path dependency and the limits of the law: administrative law reform and the rule of law in the PRC', Berkeley Journal of International Law, 19(2):161 264.
^ Duiker 1982, p. 26 28.
^ McDowell, p. 133
^ Nguyen Khac Vien, ' Confucianism and Marxism in Vietnam' in Nguyen Khac Vien, Tradition and Revolution in Vietnam, Berkeley, the Indochina Resource Center, 1974
^ Stein Tonnesson, From Confucianism to Communism and Back: Vietnam 1925 1995 Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine, paper presented to the Norwegian Association of Development Studies, "State and Society in East Asia", 29 April   2 May 1993.
^ Chung Van Hoang, New Religions and State's Response to Religious Diversification in Contemporary Vietnam: Tensions from the Reinvention of the Sacred, Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, 87 107.
^ Dinh, Thuy. "The Writer's Life Stephen B. Young and Hoa Pham Young: Painting in Lacquer". The Zenith by Duong Thu Huong. Da Mau magazine. Retrieved 25 December 2013.
^ Baker, Mark (15 August 2002). "Uncle Ho: a legend on the battlefield and in the boudoir". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 25 December 2013.
^ a b "Great 'Uncle Ho' may have been a mere mortal". The Age. 15 August 2002. Retrieved 2 August 2009.
^ Moise 1988, p. 6.
^ The places where President Ho Chi Minh lived and worked in Thailand Archived 6 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Vietnam Breaking News, 19 May 2017
^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "The Ballad of Ho Chi Minh   Ewan MacColl with the London Critics Group". Youtube. Retrieved 21 June 2021.
^ "LAYERS OF HISTORY   Most Indian street names honor little men for the wrong reasons". www.telegraphindia.com.
^ "Remembering Vietnam's late President Ho Chi Minh in foreign countries   Tuoi Tre News". 4 December 2014.
^ "Time Magazine   U.S. Edition   April 13, 1998 Vol. 151 No. 14". content.time.com.
^ Karnow, Stanley (13 April 1998). "Ho Chi Minh". Time   via content.time.com.
^ "[Ho Chi Minh: A Life] | C-SPAN.org". www.c-span.org.
^ "UNESCO. General Conference; 24th; Records of the General Conference, 24th session, Paris, 20 October to 20 November 1987, v. 1: Resolutions; 1988" (PDF). Retrieved 26 September 2009.
^ VietnamPlus (20 February 2022). "Foreign scholars highlights values of President Ho Chi Minh's writings on anti-racism | Society | Vietnam+ (VietnamPlus)". VietnamPlus. Retrieved 20 February 2022.
^ "The Black Race by Ho Chi Minh by New Vietnam Publishing   Issuu". issuu.com. Retrieved 20 February 2022.
^ HoChiMinhOnRevolution-SelectedWritings.pdf
Bibliography[edit]
Ang, Cheng Guan (2002). The Vietnam War from the Other Side. RoutledgeCurzon. pp. 55 58, 76. ISBN 978-0-7007-1615-9.
Brocheux, Pierre (2007). Ho Chi Minh: A Biography. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85062-9.
Dommen, Arthur J. (2001). The Indochinese Experience of the French and the Americans. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253338549.
Duncanson, Dennis J (1957). "Ho Chi Minh in Hong Kong 1931 1932". The China Quarterly. 57 (Jan Mar 1957): 85.
Duiker, William J. (1982). The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. OCLC 864836133.
  (2000). Ho Chi Minh: A Life. Hyperion Books. ISBN 9780786887019. Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2021.
  (2012). Ho Chi Minh: A Life. Hachette Books. ISBN 9781401305611.
Fall, Bernard. B (1967). Last Reflections on a War. Doubleday. ISBN 9780805203295.
Gaiduk, Ilya (2003). Confronting Vietnam: Soviet Policy Toward the Indochina Conflict, 1954-1963. Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0804747121.
Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2012). Vietnam Past and Present: The North. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Cognoscenti Books.
Hunt, David (1993). The American War in Vietnam. SEAP Publications. ISBN 0877271313.
Hunt, Michael H. (2016). The World Transformed 1945 To the Present. New York City: Oxford University Press. p. 125. ISBN 978-0-19-937102-0.
Jacobs, Seth (2006). Cold War Mandarin: Ngo Dinh Diem and the Origins of America's War in Vietnam, 1950 1963. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742573956.
Karnow, Stanley (1983). Vietnam: A History. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 9780712600101.
Langguth, A.J. (2000). Our Vietnam: The War 1954 1975. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9780743212441.
Lanzona, V.A.; Rettig, F. (2020). Women Warriors in Southeast Asia. Routledge Studies in the Modern History of Asia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-57184-1. Retrieved 19 November 2021.
Logevall, Fredrik (2012). Embers of War: The fall of an Empire and the making of America's Vietnam. Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-64519-1.
Marr, David G. (2013). Vietnam: State, War, and Revolution (1945 1946). University of California Press. ISBN 9780520954977.
  (1984). Vietnamese Tradition on Trial, 1920-1945. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-90744-7. Retrieved 17 November 2021.
Moise, Edwin E. (1988). "Nationalism and Communism in Vietnam". Journal of Third World Studies. University Press of Florida. 5 (2): 6 22. JSTOR 45193059.
Neville, Peter (2018). "Chapter 3: Survival". Ho Chi Minh. Routledge Historical Biographies. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-429-82822-5. Retrieved 17 November 2021.
Nguyen, Lien-Hang T (2012). Hanoi's War: An International History of the War for Peace in Vietnam. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0807882696.
Pike, Douglas (1976). Ho Chi Minh: A Post-War Re-evaluation. 30th Annual Congress of Orientalists. Mexico City. Retrieved 21 December 2017   via Vietnam Center and Sam Johnson Vietnam Archive.
Quinn-Judge, Sophie (2002). Ho Chi Minh: The Missing Years 1919   1941. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0520235335.
Shafer, D. Michael (1988). Deadly Paradigms: The Failure of U.S. Counterinsurgency Policy. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400860586. JSTOR j.ctt7zvtwm.
Tr n D n Ti n (1994). Nh ng m u chuy n v   i ho t  ng c a H  Ch  t ch [The tales of the life of President Ho]. Nh  xu t b n Ch nh tr  qu c gia [National Political Publishing House].
T n Th t Thi n (1990). Ho Chi Minh and the Comintern. Singapore: Information and Resource Center. ISBN 978-9810021399.
Tucker, Spencer C. (1999). Vietnam. UCL Press. ISBN 9781857289220.
Turner, Robert F. (1975). Vietnamese Communism: Its Origin and Development. Hoover Institution Press.
Valentino, Benjamin (2005). Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9780801472732.
Vu, Tuong (2010). Paths to Development in Asia: South Korea, Vietnam, China, and Indonesia. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139489010.
Zinn, Howard (1995). A People's History of the United States: 1492 present. New York: Harper Perennial. pp. 460 461. ISBN 978-0-06-092643-4.
Further reading[edit]
Library resources about  Ho Chi Minh 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Essays[edit]
Bernard B. Fall, ed., 1967. Ho Chi Minh on Revolution and War: Selected Writings 1920 1966. New American Library.
Biography[edit]
Osborne, Milton. "Ho Chi Minh" History Today (Nov 1980), Vol. 30 Issue 11, p40-46; popular history; online.
Morris, Virginia and Hills, Clive. 2018. Ho Chi Minh's Blueprint for Revolution: In the Words of Vietnamese Strategists and Operatives, McFarland & Co Inc.
Jean Lacouture. 1968. Ho Chi Minh: A Political Biography. Random House.
Kh c Huy n. 1971. Vision Accomplished? The Enigma of Ho Chi Minh. The Macmillan Company.
David Halberstam. 1971. Ho. Rowman & Littlefield.
H  ch  Minh to n t p. NXB ch nh tr  qu c gia
T n Th t Thi n, Was Ho Chi Minh a Nationalist? Ho Chi Minh and the Comintern. Information and Resource Centre, Singapore, 1990
William J. Duiker. Ho Chi Minh: A Life. New York: Hyperion, 2001
Vi t Minh, NLF and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam[edit]
Hoang Van Chi. 1964. From colonialism to communism. Praeger.
Tr ng Nh  T ng. 1986. A Viet Cong Memoir. Vintage.
War in Vietnam[edit]
Frances FitzGerald. 1972. Fire in the Lake: The Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam. Little, Brown and Company.
David Hunt. 1993. The American War in Vietnam, SEAP Publications
Ilya Gaiduck 2003 Confronting Vietnam: Soviet Policy Toward the Indochina Conflict, 1954 1963, Stanford University Press
Nguyen Lien-Hang T. 2012 Hanoi's War: An International History of the War for Peace in Vietnam, University of North Carolina Press
American foreign policy[edit]
Henry A. Kissinger. 1979. White House Years. Little, Brown.
Richard Nixon. 1987. No More Vietnams. Arbor House Pub Co.
External links[edit]
Wikisource has original works by or about:Ho Chi Minh
Wikiquote has quotations related to Ho Chi Minh.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
H  Ch  Minh (category)
Chi Minh Ho (1890 1969) at IMDb
Works by or about Ho Chi Minh at Internet Archive
The Drayton Court Hotel
H  Ch  Minh obituary, The New York Times, 4 September 1969
TIME 100: H  Ch  Minh
Ho Chi Minh Selected Writings in PDF format
H  Ch  Minh's biography
Satellite photo of the mausoleum on Google Maps
Final Tribute to H  from the Central Committee of the Vietnam Workers' Party[permanent dead link]
Bibliography: Writings by and about H  Ch  Minh
Political offices
Preceded byB o  ias Emperor
 President of North Vietnam 2 September 1945   2 September 1969
Succeeded byT n  c Th ng
Preceded byTr n Tr ng Kimas Prime Minister of the Empire of Vietnam
 Prime Minister of North Vietnam 2 September 1945   20 September 1955
Succeeded byPh m V n  ng
Party political offices
Preceded byNew title
 Chairman of the Workers' Party of Vietnam 1951 1969
Succeeded byNone
Preceded byTr ng Chinh
 First Secretary of the Workers' Party of Vietnam 1956 1960
Succeeded byL  Du n
vteVietnamese independence movementsEvents
Siege of Saigon
Capture of the Citadel of Saigon
Cochinchina Campaign
Ba Dinh uprising / C n V ng
Pacification of Tonkin
B i S y uprising
Hanoi Poison Plot
Y n Th  Insurrection
World War I
1916 Cochinchina uprising
Th i Nguy n uprising
Bazin assassination
Y n B i mutiny
Ngh -T nh Soviets
World War II
1940 Cochinchina uprising
Japanese coup d' tat in French Indochina
August Revolution
Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
First Indochina War
Battle of Dien Bien Phu
Geneva Conference
Organisations
C n V ng
 ng Du
Duy T n h i
Empire of Vietnam
Nguy n dynasty
Tonkin Free School
Vi t Nam Quang Ph c H i
Vietnamese Revolutionary Youth League
Vi t Nam Qu c D n  ng
Vi t Minh
Communist Party of Vietnam
Uprising Leaders
Ph m B nh
Nguy n Quang B ch
V  Duy D ng
Tr ng  nh
Nguy n H u Hu n
Phan X ch Long
Nguy n Xu n  n
Phan  nh Ph ng
T ng Duy T n
Ho ng Hoa Th m
Nguy n Thi n Thu t
T n Th t Thuy t
C m B  Th c
 inh C ng Tr ng
Nguy n Trung Tr c
Revolutionaries
L ng V n Can
Tr n Qu  C p
Phan B i Ch u
C ng  
Hu nh Th c Kh ng
V  H ng Khanh
Ng   c K 
Nguy n Th n Hi n
Nguy n Th ng Hi n
Nguy n Th i H c
H  Ch  Minh
Nguy n An Ninh
Nguy n Quy n
Nguy n Th nh
T  Thu Th u
Phan Chu Trinh
Phan V n Tr ng
Tr n Cao V n
Emperors
T   c
H m Nghi
Th nh Th i
Duy T n
B o  i
French rulers
Albert Sarraut
Jean Decoux
French Indochina
Governor-General
French protectorate of Annam
Administrator
French protectorate of Tonkin
Administrator
French colony of Cochinchina
Administrator
Collaborators
Ho ng Cao Kh i
Tr n B  L c
Nguy n Tr ng H p
Hu nh C ng T n
Nguy n Th n
L  Hoan
Wars in Vietnam
independence movement
vte Heads of state of Vietnam since 1945Empire of Vietnam (1945)
B o  iDemocratic Republic of Vietnam (1945 1976)
Ho Chi Minh
Hu nh Th c Kh ng1
T n  c Th ng
State of Vietnam (1949 1955)
B o  i
Ng   nh Di m1Republic of Vietnam (1955 1975)
Ng   nh Di m
D ng V n Minh2
Nguy n Kh nh2
Provisional Leadership Committee3
D ng V n Minh2
Phan Kh c S u2
Nguy n V n Thi u2
Tr n V n H ng
D ng V n MinhRepublic of South Vietnam (1969 1976)
Nguy n H u Th Socialist Republic of Vietnam (1976 present)
T n  c Th ng (1976 1980)
Nguy n H u Th  (1980 1981)1
Council of State (1981 1987) (Chairman: Tr ng Chinh)3
Council of State (1987 1992) (Chairman: V  Ch  C ng)3
L   c Anh (1992 1997)
Tr n  c L ng (1997 2006)
Nguy n Minh Tri t (2006 2011)
Tr ng T n Sang (2011 2016)
Tr n  i Quang (2016 2018)
 ng Th  Ng c Th nh (2018)1
Nguy n Ph  Tr ng (2018 2021)
Nguy n Xu n Ph c (2021 2023)
V  Th   nh Xu n (2023)1
V  V n Th ng (2023 present)
1acting
2military
3collective leadership
vte Prime ministers of Vietnam since 1945Empire of Vietnam (1945)
Tr n Tr ng KimRepublic of Cochinchina (1946 1949)
Nguy n V n Thinh
L  V n Ho ch
Nguy n V n Xu n
Tr n V n H uProvisional Central Government of Vietnam(1948 1949)
Nguy n V n Xu n
State of Vietnam (1949 1955)
B o  i
Nguy n Phan Long
Tr n V n H u
Nguy n V n T m
B u L c
Phan Huy Qu t
Ng   nh Di mRepublic of Vietnam (1955 1975)
Nguy n Ng c Th 2
Nguy n Kh nh2
Nguy n Xu n O nh1, 2
Nguy n Kh nh2
Tr n V n H ng2
Nguy n Xu n O nh1, 2
Phan Huy Qu t2
Nguy n Cao K 2
Nguy n V n L c
Tr n V n H ng
Tr n Thi n Khi m
Nguy n B  C n
V  V n M uDemocratic Republic of Vietnam (1945 1976)
Ho Chi Minh
Hu nh Th c Kh ng1
Ph m V n  ngRepublic of South Vietnam (1975 1976)
Hu nh T n Ph tSocialist Republic of Vietnam (1976 present)
Ph m V n  ng
Ph m H ng
V  V n Ki t1
  M i
V  V n Ki t
Phan V n Kh i
Nguy n T n D ng
Nguy n Xu n Ph c
Ph m Minh Ch nh
1acting
2head of a military government
vteCommunist Party of VietnamCentral CommitteeGeneral Secretary
Tr n Ph  (1930 31)
L  H ng Phong (1931 36)
H  Huy T p (1936 38)
Nguy n V n C  (1938 40)
Tr ng Chinh (1940 56)
H  Ch  Minh (1956 1960)
L  Du n (1960 86)
Tr ng Chinh (Jul. Dec. 1986)
Nguy n V n Linh (1986 91)
  M i (1991 97)
L  Kh  Phi u (1997 01)
N ng  c M nh (2001 11)
Nguy n Ph  Tr ng (2011 present)
Permanent Member
Nguy n Duy Trinh (1976 82)
L   c Th  (1980 82)
L  Thanh Ngh  (1980 82)
V  Ch  C ng (1982 86)
Nguy n V n Linh (June Dec. 1986)
  M i (1986 88)
Nguy n Thanh B nh (1988 91)
L   c Anh (1991 92)
 o Duy T ng (1991 96)
L  Kh  Phi u (1996 97)
Ph m Th  Duy t (1998 01)
Nguy n Ph  Tr ng (1999 01)
Tr n  nh Hoan (Apr. Jul. 2001)
Phan Di n (2002 06)
Tr ng T n Sang (2006 11)
L  H ng Anh (2011 16)
 inh Th  Huynh (2016 18)
Tr n Qu c V ng (2018 21)
V  V n Th ng (2021 2023)
Tr ng Th  Mai (2023 present)
Decision-making bodies
Politburo
Secretariat
Central Military Commission
Central Inspection Commission
Apparatus
Central Commission for External Relations
Central Office
Central Mass Mobilization Commission
Central Propaganda Department
Central Organizing Commission
Central Theoretical Council
H  Ch  Minh National Academy of Politics and Public Administration
National Political Publishing House   The Truth
Nh n D n
Communist
Steering committees
Anti-corruption
Central Highlands
Judicial Reform
Northwest
Southwest
National meetingsNational Congress
1st (1935)
2nd (1951)
3rd (1960)
4th (1976)
5th (1982)
6th (1986)
7th (1991)
8th (1996)
9th (2001)
10th (2006)
11th (2011)
12th (2016)
13th (2021)
Leadership sittingsElected by theCentral CommitteePolitburo
1st: 1935 51
2nd: 1951 60
3rd: 1960 76
4th: 1976 82
5th: 1982 86
6th: 1986 91
7th: 1991 96
8th: 1996 01 (Enlarged & Standing)
9th: 2001 06
10th: 2006 11
11th: 2011 16
12th: 2016 21
13th: 2021 present
Secretariat
2nd: 1951 60
3rd: 1960 76
4th: 1976 82
5th: 1982 86
6th: 1986 91
7th: 1991 96
9th: 2001 06
10th: 2006 11
11th: 2011 16
12th: 2016 21
13th: 2021 
Military Commission
1946 48
1952 60
1960 76
1976 82
1980 85
1985 90
1990 95
1995 00
2000 05
2005 10
2010 15
2015 20
2020 25
Inspection Commission
1st: 1948 51
2nd: 1951 60
3rd: 1960 76
4th: 1976 82
5th: 1982 86
6th: 1986 91
7th: 1991 96
8th: 1996 01
9th: 2001 06
10th: 2006 11
11th: 2011 16
12th: 2016 21
13th: 2021 present
Elected byCongressCentral Committee
Provisional: 1930 35
1st: 1935 51
2nd: 1951 60
3rd: 1960 76
4th: 1976 82
5th: 1982 86
6th: 1986 91
7th: 1991 96
8th: 1996 01
9th: 2001 06
10th: 2006 11
11th: 2011 16
12th: 2016 21 (Members
Alternates
Apparatus)
13th: 2021 present
Wider organisation
Other organs
Constitution
Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union
Ho Chi Minh Young Pioneer Organization
Vietnam People's Armed Forces
Ideology
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Marxism Leninism
Socialist-oriented market economy
 i M i
vteCommunismConcepts
Anti-capitalism
Class conflict
Class consciousness
Classless society
Collective leadership
Communist party
Communist revolution
Communist state
Commune
Communist society
Critique of political economy
Free association
"From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs"
Market abolitionism
Proletarian internationalism
Labour movement
Social revolution
Stateless society
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management
World communism
World revolution
Economics
Planned economy
Gift economy
Common ownership
Socialization (Marxism)
Economic democracy
Use value
Variants
Anarchist
Marxism
Leninist
Libertarian
Pre-Marxist
Utopian
Primitive
Religious
Christian
History
History of communism
Communist symbolism
Communist League
First International
Second International
Third International
Fourth International
Organisations
Communist Parties
WPC
WFTU
WFDY
IUS
WIDF
WFSW
IOR
People
More
Meslier
Babeuf
Marx
Engels
Morris
Kropotkin
Malatesta
Pannekoek
Du Bois
Lenin
Luxemburg
Kollontai
Stalin
Trotsky
Pankhurst
Luk cs
Th lmann
Makhno
Bukharin
Ho
Gramsci
Tito
Benjamin
Khrushchev
Mao
Zhou
James
Padmore
Sartre
Hoxha
Beauvoir
Nkrumah
Kim
Hobsbawm
Althusser
Freire
Pasolini
Mandel
Fanon
Castro
Berger
Guevara
Guattari
Debord
Amin
Negri
Guzm n
Badiou
Sison
Newton
Ali
Davis
Sankara
 calan
Gordillo
Gilmore
Marcos
Dean
Graeber
Fisher
Prashad
Hatherley
Moufawad-Paul
By region
Britain
Colombia
France
India
Kerala
Korea
Nepal
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Soviet Union
Sumatra
Vietnam
Symbols
Hammer and sickle
Red flag (politics)
Red star
"The Internationale"
"Workers of the world, unite!"
Related topics
21st-century communist theorists
Anti-communism
Anti anti-communism
Anti-communist mass killings
Anti-fascism
Communitarianism
Crimes against humanity under communist regimes (Mass killings)
Internationalism
Intentional community
Left-wing politics
Old Left
New Left
LGBT rights
Marx's theory of alienation
National communism
Romania
Red Scare
Revolutionary socialism
Socialist economics
Socialist mode of production
Trade union
War communism
Worker cooperative
Portal
Portal
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vteHo Chi Minh ThoughtBasic concepts
Anti-imperialism
Anti-revisionism
Marxism Leninism
Social Morality
Land Reform
Self-criticism
Socialist-oriented market economy
Key figures
Ho Chi Minh
V  Nguy n Gi p
Le Duan
Nguy n V n Linh
  M i
N ng  c M nh
Nguy n Ph  Tr ng
Organizations
Communist Party of Vietnam
Vietnamese Fatherland Front
Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union
Key works
Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
The Path Which Led Me To Leninism
The Last Testament of Ho Chi Minh
The Vietnamese Revolution: Fundamental Problems, Essential Tasks
Renewal in Vi t Nam: Theory and Reality
Related topics
Politics of Vietnam
Communism in Vietnam
History of the Communist Party of Vietnam
Five-Year Plans of Vietnam
6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam
Vi t Minh
Vietnam War
North Vietnam
Viet Cong
Vietnam
Communism
Socialism
Politics
vteDeclarations of independence of Vietnam
Nam qu c s n h  (L  Th ng Ki t)
B nh Ng   i c o (Nguy n Tr i)
Tuy n ng n  c l p (H  Ch  Minh)
vteTime 100: The Most Important People of the 20th CenturyLeaders & Revolutionaries
David Ben-Gurion
Winston Churchill
Mahatma Gandhi
Mikhail Gorbachev
Adolf Hitler
Ho Chi Minh
Pope John Paul II
Ruhollah Khomeini
Martin Luther King Jr.
Vladimir Lenin
Nelson Mandela
Mao Zedong
Ronald Reagan
Eleanor Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Margaret Sanger
Margaret Thatcher
Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel
Lech Wa sa
Artists & Entertainers
Louis Armstrong
Lucille Ball
The Beatles
Marlon Brando
Coco Chanel
Charlie Chaplin
Le Corbusier
Bob Dylan
Builders & Titans
Stephen Bechtel Sr.
Leo Burnett
Willis Carrier
Walt Disney
Henry Ford
Bill Gates
Amadeo Giannini
Ray Kroc
Est e Lauder
William Levitt
Lucky Luciano
Louis B. Mayer
Charles E. Merrill
Akio Morita
Walter Reuther
Pete Rozelle
David Sarnoff
Juan Trippe
Sam Walton
Thomas J. Watson Jr.
Scientists & Thinkers
Leo Baekeland
Tim Berners-Lee
Rachel Carson
Albert Einstein
Philo Farnsworth
Enrico Fermi
Alexander Fleming
Sigmund Freud
Robert H. Goddard
Kurt G del
Edwin Hubble
John Maynard Keynes
Leakey family
Jean Piaget
Jonas Salk
William Shockley
Alan Turing
Francis Crick & James Watson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Wright brothers
Heroes & Icons
Muhammad Ali
The American G.I.
Lady Diana Spencer
Anne Frank
Billy Graham
Che Guevara
Edmund Hillary & Tenzing Norgay
Helen Keller
Kennedy family
Bruce Lee
Charles Lindbergh
Harvey Milk
Marilyn Monroe
Emmeline Pankhurst
Rosa Parks
Pel 
Jackie Robinson
Andrei Sakharov
Mother Teresa
Bill W.
Portals: Communism Socialism Politics Literature Asia Vietnam Biography
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ho_Chi_Minh&oldid=1149622363"