1968 mass murder of civilians by American soldiers during the Vietnam War
"My Lai" redirects here. For the documentary, see My Lai (film).
M  Lai MassacreTh m s t M  LaiPart of the Vietnam WarPhoto taken by U.S. Army photographer Ronald L. Haeberle on 16 March 1968, in the aftermath of the M  Lai Massacre showing mostly women and children dead on a roadLocationS n M  village, S n T nh district, Qu ng Ng i province, South VietnamCoordinates15 10 42 N 108 52 10 E  /  15.17833 N 108.86944 E  / 15.17833; 108.86944Coordinates: 15 10 42 N 108 52 10 E  /  15.17833 N 108.86944 E  / 15.17833; 108.86944Date16 March 1968; 55 years ago (1968-03-16)TargetM  Lai 4 and M  Khe 4 hamletsAttack typeMassacre, war rape, tortureDeathsMore than 500 people were killed based on the estimations and the number of people who were wounded is unknown; the Vietnamese government lists 504 killed in total from both M  Lai and M  Khe. However, United States Army lists 347 (not including M  Khe killings).PerpetratorsUnited States Army, specifically the C Company, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment and B Company, 4th Battalion, 3rd Infantry Regiment, 23rd Infantry DivisionConvictedWilliam CalleyConvictionsPremeditated murder (22 counts)
vteMass killings during the Vietnam War
Ch u  c
Hu  Ph t  n
X  L i Pagoda
U.S. Embassy bombing
Saigon bombing
B nh An/T y Vinh
B nh Tai
B nh H a
Th y B 
 k S n
Hu 
Phong Nh  and Phong Nh t
H  My
M  Lai
S n Tr 
Thanh Phong
S n Th ng
Th nh M 
 c D c
Highway 1
Cai L y schoolyard
Tiger Force
Viet Cong and PAVN terror
Vietnam War Crimes Working Group
Winter Soldier Investigation
The M  Lai massacre (/ mi la /; Vietnamese: Th m s t M  Lai [t m  t m  l j] (listen)) was the mass murder of unarmed South Vietnamese civilians by United States troops in S n T nh district, South Vietnam, on 16 March 1968 during the Vietnam War. Between 347 and 504 unarmed people were killed by U.S. Army soldiers from Company C, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment and Company B, 4th Battalion, 3rd Infantry Regiment, 11th Brigade, 23rd (Americal) Infantry Division. Victims included men, women, children, and infants. Some of the women were gang-raped and their bodies mutilated, and some soldiers mutilated and raped children who were as young as 12.[1][2] Twenty-six soldiers were charged with criminal offenses, but only Lieutenant William Calley Jr., a platoon leader in C Company, was convicted. Found guilty of murdering 22 villagers, he was originally given a life sentence, but served three-and-a-half years under house arrest after President Richard Nixon commuted his sentence.
This war crime, which was later called "the most shocking episode of the Vietnam War",[3] took place in two hamlets of S n M  village in Qu ng Ng i Province.[4] These hamlets were marked on the U.S. Army topographic maps as M  Lai and M  Kh .[5]
The U.S. Army slang name for the hamlets and sub-hamlets in that area was Pinkville,[6] and the carnage was initially referred to as the Pinkville Massacre.[7][8] Later, when the U.S. Army started its investigation, the media changed it to the Massacre at Songmy.[9] Currently, the event is referred to as the M  Lai Massacre in the United States and called the S n M  Massacre in Vietnam.[10]
The massacre prompted global outrage when it became public knowledge in November 1969. The massacre contributed[11] to domestic opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, both because of the scope of killing and cover-up attempts.
Initially, three U.S. servicemen who had tried to halt the massacre and rescue the hiding civilians were shunned, and even denounced as traitors by several U.S. Congressmen, including Mendel Rivers (D SC), Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. Thirty years later, these servicemen were recognized and decorated, one posthumously, by the U.S. Army for shielding non-combatants from harm in a war zone.[12]
M  Lai is the largest publicized massacre of civilians by U.S. forces in the 20th century.[13]
Operation[edit]
 S n M  operations, 16 March 1968
Charlie Company, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, 11th Brigade, 23rd Infantry Division, arrived in South Vietnam in December 1967. Though their first three months in Vietnam passed without any direct contact with People's Army of Vietnam or Viet Cong (VC) forces, by mid-March the company had suffered 28 casualties involving mines or booby-traps.[14]
During the Tet Offensive in January 1968, attacks were carried out in Qu ng Ng i by the VC 48th Local Force Battalion. U.S. military intelligence assumed that the 48th Battalion, having retreated and dispersed, was taking refuge in the village of S n M , in Qu ng Ng i Province. A number of specific hamlets within that village   designated M  Lai (1) through M  Lai (6)   were suspected of harboring the 48th.[15] S n M  was located southwest of the Batangan Peninsula, a VC stronghold throughout the war.
In February and March 1968, the U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV) was aggressively trying to regain the strategic initiative in South Vietnam after the Tet Offensive, and the search-and-destroy operation against the 48th Battalion thought to be located in S n M  became a small part of the US military's overall strategy. Task Force Barker (TF Barker), a battalion-sized ad hoc unit of 11th Brigade, was to be deployed for the operation. It was formed in January 1968, composed of three rifle companies of the 11th Brigade, including Charlie Company, led by Lieutenant Colonel (LTC) Frank A. Barker. S n M  village was included in the area of operations of TF Barker. The area of operations (AO) was codenamed Muscatine AO,[16] after Muscatine County, Iowa, the home county of the 23rd Division's commander, Major General Samuel W. Koster.
In February 1968, TF Barker had already tried to secure S n M , with limited success.[17] After that, the village area began to be referred to as Pinkville by TF Barker troops.[18]
On 16 18 March, TF Barker planned to engage and destroy the remnants of the 48th Battalion, allegedly hiding in the S n M  village area. Before the engagement, Colonel Oran K. Henderson, the 11th Brigade commander, urged his officers to "go in there aggressively, close with the enemy and wipe them out for good".[19] In turn, LTC Barker reportedly ordered the 1st Battalion commanders to burn the houses, kill the livestock, destroy food supplies, and destroy and/or poison the wells.[20]
On the eve of the attack, at the Charlie Company briefing, Captain Ernest Medina told his men that nearly all the civilian residents of the hamlets in S n M  village would have left for the market by 07:00, and that any who remained would most likely be VC or VC sympathizers.[21] He was asked whether the order included the killing of women and children. Those present later gave differing accounts of Medina's response. Some, including platoon leaders, testified that the orders, as they understood them, were to kill all VC and North Vietnamese combatants and "suspects" (including women and children, as well as all animals), to burn the village, and pollute the wells.[22] He was quoted as saying, "They're all VC, now go and get them", and was heard to reply to the question "Who is my enemy?", by saying, "Anybody that was running from us, hiding from us, or appeared to be the enemy. If a man was running, shoot him, sometimes even if a woman with a rifle was running, shoot her."[23]
At Calley's trial, one defense witness testified that he remembered Medina instructing to destroy everything in the village that was "walking, crawling or growling".[24]
Charlie Company was to enter the village of S n M  spearheaded by 1st Platoon, engage the enemy, and flush them out. The other two companies from TF Barker were ordered to secure the area and provide support if needed. The area was designated a free fire zone, where American forces were allowed to deploy artillery and air strikes in populated areas, without consideration of risk to civilian or non-combatant lives.[25] Varnado Simpson, a rifleman in Charlie Company, said, "We were told to leave nothing standing. We did what we were told, regardless of whether they were civilians."[26][27]
Killings[edit]
 South Vietnamese women and children in M  Lai before being killed in the massacre, 16 March 1968. [28] According to court testimony, they were killed seconds after the photo was taken.[29] The woman on the right is adjusting her blouse buttons following an attempted sexual assault that happened before the massacre.[30]
On the morning of 16 March at 07:30, around 100 soldiers from Charlie Company led by Medina, following a short artillery and helicopter gunship barrage, landed in helicopters at S n M , a patchwork of individual homesteads, grouped settlements, rice paddies, irrigation ditches, dikes, and dirt roads, connecting an assortment of hamlets and sub-hamlets. The largest among them were the hamlets M  Lai, C  L y, M  Kh , and Tu Cung.[31]: 1 2 
The GIs expected to engage the Vietcong Local Force 48th Battalion, which was one of the Vietcong's most successful units.[32] Although the GIs were not fired upon after landing, they still suspected there were VC guerrillas hiding underground or in the huts. Confirming their suspicions, the gunships engaged several armed enemies in a vicinity of M  Lai, killing four; later, one weapon was retrieved from the site.[33]
According to the operational plan, 1st Platoon, led by Second Lieutenant (2LT) William Calley, and 2nd Platoon, led by 2LT Stephen Brooks, entered the hamlet of Tu Cung in line formation at 08:00, while the 3rd Platoon, commanded by 2LT Jeffrey U. Lacross,[34][35] and Captain Medina's command post remained outside. On approach, both platoons fired at people they saw in the rice fields and in the brush.[36]
Instead of the expected enemy, the GIs found women, children and old men, many of whom were cooking breakfast over outdoor fires.[32] The villagers were getting ready for a market day and at first did not panic or run away, as they were herded into the hamlet's common spaces and homestead yards. Harry Stanley, a machine gunner from Charlie Company, said during the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Division inquiry that the killings started without warning. He first observed a member of 1st Platoon strike a Vietnamese man with a bayonet. Then the same trooper pushed another villager into a well and threw a grenade in the well. Next, he saw fifteen or twenty people, mainly women and children, kneeling around a temple with burning incense. They were praying and crying. They were all killed by shots to the head.[37]
Most of the killings occurred in the southern part of Tu Cung, a sub-hamlet of Xom Lang, which was a home to 700 residents.[38] Xom Lang was erroneously marked on the U.S. military operational maps of Qu ng Ng i Province as M  Lai.
A large group of approximately 70 80 villagers was rounded up by 1st Platoon in Xom Lang and led to an irrigation ditch east of the settlement. They were then pushed into the ditch and shot dead by soldiers after repeated orders issued by Calley, who was also shooting. PFC Paul Meadlo testified that he expended several M16 rifle magazines. He recollected that women were saying "No VC" and were trying to shield their children.[37] He remembered that he was shooting old men and women, ranging in ages from grandmothers to teenagers, many with babies or small children in their arms, since he was convinced at that time that they were all booby-trapped with grenades and were poised to attack.[39] On another occasion during the security sweep of My Lai, Meadlo again fired into civilians side by side with Lieutenant Calley.[40]
PFC Dennis Konti, a witness for the prosecution,[41] told of one especially gruesome episode during the shooting, "A lot of women had thrown themselves on top of the children to protect them, and the children were alive at first. Then, the children who were old enough to walk got up and Calley began to shoot the children".[42] Other 1st Platoon members testified that many of the deaths of individual Vietnamese men, women and children occurred inside M  Lai during the security sweep. To ensure the hamlets could no longer offer support to the enemy, the livestock was shot as well.[43]
When PFC Michael Bernhardt entered the subhamlet of Xom Lang, the massacre was underway:
"I walked up and saw these guys doing strange things ... Setting fire to the hootches and huts and waiting for people to come out and then shooting them ... going into the hootches and shooting them up ... gathering people in groups and shooting them ... As I walked in you could see piles of people all through the village ... all over. They were gathered up into large groups. I saw them shoot an M79 grenade launcher into a group of people who were still alive. But it was mostly done with a machine gun. They were shooting women and children just like anybody else. We met no resistance and I only saw three captured weapons. We had no casualties. It was just like any other Vietnamese village  old papa-sans, women and kids. As a matter of fact, I don't remember seeing one military-age male in the entire place, dead or alive".[44]
One group of 20 50 villagers was herded south of Xom Lang and killed on a dirt road. According to U.S. Army photographer Sgt. Ronald Haeberle's eyewitness account of the massacre, in one instance,
"There were some South Vietnamese people, maybe fifteen of them, women and children included, walking on a dirt road maybe 100 yards [90 m] away. All of a sudden the GIs just opened up with M16s. Beside the M16 fire, they were shooting at the people with M79 grenade launchers ... I couldn't believe what I was seeing".[45]
Calley testified that he heard the shooting and arrived on the scene. He observed his men firing into a ditch with Vietnamese people inside, then began to take part in the shooting himself, using an M16 from a distance of no more than 5 feet (1.5 m). During the massacre, a helicopter landed on the other side of the ditch and the pilot asked Calley if they could provide any medical assistance to the wounded civilians in M  Lai; Calley admitted replying that "a hand grenade was the only available means he had for their evacuation". At 11:00 Medina radioed an order to cease fire, and 1st Platoon took a break, during which they ate lunch.[46]
 An unidentified man and child who were killed on a road
Members of 2nd Platoon killed at least 60 70 Vietnamese, as they swept through the northern half of M  Lai and through Binh Tay, a small sub-hamlet about 400 metres (1,300 ft) north of M  Lai.[5] The platoon suffered one dead and seven wounded by mines and booby traps.[citation needed] After the initial sweeps by 1st and 2nd Platoons, 3rd Platoon was dispatched to deal with any "remaining resistance". 3rd Platoon, which stayed in reserve, also reportedly rounded up and killed a group of seven to twelve women and children.[5]
Since Charlie Company had not met any enemy opposition at M  Lai and did not request back-up, Bravo Company, 4th Battalion, 3rd Infantry Regiment of TF Barker was transported by air between 08:15 and 08:30 3 km (2 mi) away. It attacked the subhamlet My Hoi of the hamlet known as C  L y, which was mapped by the Army as M  Kh . During this operation, between 60 and 155 people, including women and children, were killed.[47]
Over the remaining day, both companies were involved in the further burning and destruction of dwellings, as well as continued mistreatment of Vietnamese detainees. While it was noted in the later Courts Martial proceedings that some soldiers of Charlie Company did not participate in any killings, it was also noted that they neither openly protested against them nor filed complaints later to their superiors.[48]
William Thomas Allison, a professor of Military History at Georgia Southern University, wrote, "By midmorning, members of Charlie Company had killed hundreds of civilians and raped or assaulted countless women and young girls. They encountered no enemy fire and found no weapons in My Lai itself".[49]
By the time the killings stopped, Charlie Company had suffered one casualty  a soldier who had intentionally shot himself in the foot to avoid participating in the massacre  and just three enemy weapons were confiscated.[50]
Rapes[edit]
See also: Rape during the Vietnam War
According to the Peers Commission Investigation, the US government allocated commission for inquiry into the incident, concluded at least 20 Vietnamese women and girls were raped during the M  Lai massacre. Since there had been little research over the case other than that of the Peers Commission, which solely accounts the cases with explicit rapes signs like torn cloth and nudity, the actual number of rapes are not easy to estimate. According to the reports, the rape victims ranged between the ages of 10   45, with nine being under 18. The sexual assaults included gang rapes and sexual torture.[51]
No U.S. serviceman was charged with rape. According to an eyewitness, as reported by Seymour Hersh in his book on the massacre, a woman was raped after her children were killed by the U.S. soldiers. Another Vietnamese villager also noticed soldiers raped a 13-year-old girl.[51]
Helicopter crew intervention[edit]
 Warrant officer Hugh Thompson Jr. played a major role in ending the M  Lai Massacre and later testified in the military prosecution against the war criminals responsible.
Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson Jr., a helicopter pilot from Company B (Aero-Scouts), 123rd Aviation Battalion, Americal Division, saw dead and wounded civilians as he was flying over the village of S n M , providing close-air support for ground forces.[52] The crew made several attempts to radio for help for the wounded. They landed their helicopter by a ditch, which they noted was full of bodies and in which they could discern movement by survivors.[52] Thompson asked a sergeant he encountered there (David Mitchell of 1st Platoon) if he could help get the people out of the ditch; the sergeant replied that he would "help them out of their misery". Thompson, shocked and confused, then spoke with 2LT Calley, who claimed to be "just following orders". As the helicopter took off, Thompson saw Mitchell firing into the ditch.[52]
Thompson and his crew witnessed an unarmed woman being kicked and shot at point-blank range by Medina, who later claimed that he thought she had a hand grenade.[53] Thompson then saw a group of civilians at a bunker being approached by ground personnel. Thompson landed, and told his crew that if the soldiers shot at the villagers while he was trying to get them out of the bunker, then they were to open fire on the soldiers.[52]
Thompson later testified that he spoke with a lieutenant (identified as Stephen Brooks of 2nd Platoon) and told him there were women and children in the bunker, and asked if the lieutenant would help get them out. According to Thompson, "he [the lieutenant] said the only way to get them out was with a hand grenade". Thompson testified that he then told Brooks to "just hold your men right where they are, and I'll get the kids out." He found 12 16 people in the bunker, coaxed them out and led them to the helicopter, standing with them while they were flown out in two groups.[52]
Returning to M  Lai, Thompson and other air crew members noticed several large groups of bodies.[54] Spotting some survivors in the ditch, Thompson landed again. A crew member, Specialist 4 Glenn Andreotta, entered the ditch and returned with a bloodied but apparently unharmed four-year-old girl, who was then flown to safety.[52]
Upon returning to the LZ Dottie base in his OH-23, Thompson reported to his section leader, Captain Barry Lloyd, that the American infantry were no different from Nazis in their slaughter of innocent civilians: "It's mass murder out there. They're rounding them up and herding them in ditches and then just shooting them."[55] Thompson then reported what he had seen to his company commander, Major Frederic W. Watke, using terms such as "murder" and "needless and unnecessary killings". Thompson's statements were confirmed by other helicopter pilots and air crew members.[56]
For his actions at M  Lai, Thompson was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, while his crew members Glenn Andreotta and Lawrence Colburn were awarded the Bronze Star. Glenn Andreotta was awarded his medal posthumously, as he was killed in Vietnam on April 8, 1968.[57] As the DFC citation included a fabricated account of rescuing a young girl from M  Lai from "intense crossfire",[58] Thompson threw his medal away.[59][60] He later received a Purple Heart for other services in Vietnam.[61]
In March 1998, the helicopter crew's medals were replaced by the Soldier's Medal, the highest the U.S. Army can award for bravery not involving direct conflict with the enemy. The medal citations state they were "for heroism above and beyond the call of duty while saving the lives of at least 10 Vietnamese civilians during the unlawful massacre of non-combatants by American forces at My Lai".[62]
Thompson initially refused to accept the medal when the U.S. Army wanted to award it quietly. He demanded it be done publicly and that his crew also be honored in the same way.[63][64] The veterans also contacted the survivors of M  Lai.[65][failed verification]
Aftermath[edit]
 Dead bodies outside a burning home.
After returning to base at about 11:00, Thompson reported the massacre to his superiors.[66]: 176 179  His allegations of civilian killings quickly reached LTC Barker, the operation's overall commander. Barker radioed his executive officer to find out from Medina what was happening on the ground. Medina then gave the cease-fire order to Charlie Company to "cut [the killing] out   knock it off".[67]
Since Thompson made an official report of the civilian killings, he was interviewed by Colonel Oran Henderson, the commander of the 11th Infantry Brigade.[68] Concerned, senior American officers canceled similar planned operations by Task Force Barker against other villages (My Lai 5, My Lai 1, etc.) in Qu ng Ng i Province.[69] Despite Thompson's revealing information, Henderson issued a Letter of Commendation to Medina on 27 March 1968.
The following day, 28 March, the commander of Task Force Barker submitted a combat action report for the 16 March operation, in which he stated that the operation in M  Lai was a success, with 128 VC combatants killed. The Americal Division commander, General Koster, sent a congratulatory message to Charlie Company.
General William C. Westmoreland, the head of MACV, also congratulated Charlie Company, 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry for "outstanding action", saying that they had "dealt [the] enemy [a] heavy blow".[70]: 196  Later, he changed his stance, writing in his memoir that it was "the conscious massacre of defenseless babies, children, mothers, and old men in a kind of diabolical slow-motion nightmare that went on for the better part of a day, with a cold-blooded break for lunch".[71]
Owing to the chaotic circumstances of the war and the U.S. Army's decision not to undertake a definitive body count of noncombatants in Vietnam, the number of civilians killed at M  Lai cannot be stated with certainty. Estimates vary from source to source, with 347 and 504 being the most commonly cited figures. The memorial at the site of the massacre lists 504 names, with ages ranging from one to 82. A later investigation by the U.S. Army arrived at a lower figure of 347 deaths,[citation needed] the official U.S. estimate. The official estimate by the local government remains 504.[72]
Investigation and cover-up[edit]
Initial reports claimed "128 Viet Cong and 22 civilians" had been killed in the village during a "fierce fire fight". Westmoreland congratulated the unit on the "outstanding job". As relayed at the time by Stars and Stripes magazine, "U.S. infantrymen had killed 128 Communists in a bloody day-long battle."[73]
On 16 March 1968, in the official press briefing known as the "Five O'Clock Follies", a mimeographed release included this passage: "In an action today, Americal Division forces killed 128 enemy near Quang Ngai City. Helicopter gunships and artillery missions supported the ground elements throughout the day."[74]
Initial investigations of the M  Lai operation were undertaken by Colonel Henderson, under orders from the Americal Division's executive officer, Brigadier General George H. Young. Henderson interviewed several soldiers involved in the incident, then issued a written report in late-April claiming that some 20 civilians were inadvertently killed during the operation. According to Henderson's report, the civilian casualties that occurred were accidental and mainly attributed to long-range artillery fire.[75] The Army at this time was still describing the event as a military victory that had resulted in the deaths of 128 enemy combatants.[32]
Six months later, Tom Glen, a 21-year-old soldier of the 11th Light Infantry Brigade, wrote a letter to General Creighton Abrams, the new MACV commander.[76] He described an ongoing and routine brutality against Vietnamese civilians on the part of American forces in Vietnam that he had personally witnessed, and then concluded,It would indeed be terrible to find it necessary to believe that an American soldier that harbors such racial intolerance and disregard for justice and human feeling is a prototype of all American national character; yet the frequency of such soldiers lends credulity to such beliefs. ... What has been outlined here I have seen not only in my own unit, but also in others we have worked with, and I fear it is universal. If this is indeed the case, it is a problem which cannot be overlooked, but can through a more firm implementation of the codes of MACV (Military Assistance Command Vietnam) and the Geneva Conventions, perhaps be eradicated.[77]
Colin Powell, then a 31-year-old Army major serving as an assistant chief of staff of operations for the Americal Division, was charged with investigating the letter, which did not specifically refer to M  Lai, as Glen had limited knowledge of the events there. In his report, Powell wrote, "In direct refutation of this portrayal is the fact that relations between Americal Division soldiers and the Vietnamese people are excellent." A 2018 US Army case study of the massacre noted that Powell "investigated the allegations described in the [Glen] letter. He proved unable to uncover either wide-spread unnecessary killings, war crimes, or any facts related to My Lai ..."[78] 
Powell's handling of the assignment was later characterized by some observers as "whitewashing" the atrocities of M  Lai.[77]
In May 2004, Powell, then United States Secretary of State, told CNN's Larry King, "I mean, I was in a unit that was responsible for M  Lai. I got there after M  Lai happened. So, in war, these sorts of horrible things happen every now and again, but they are still to be deplored."[79]
Seven months prior to the massacre at M  Lai, on Robert McNamara's orders, the Inspector General of the U.S. Defense Department investigated press coverage of alleged atrocities committed in South Vietnam. In August 1967, the 200-page report "Alleged Atrocities by U.S. Military Forces in South Vietnam" was completed.[47]
Independently of Glen, Specialist 5 Ronald L. Ridenhour, a former door gunner from the Aviation Section, Headquarters Company, 11th Infantry Brigade, sent a letter in March 1969 to thirty members of Congress imploring them to investigate the circumstances surrounding the "Pinkville" incident.[80][81] He and his pilot, Warrant Officer Gilbert Honda, flew over M  Lai several days after the operation and observed a scene of complete destruction. At one point, they hovered over a dead Vietnamese woman with a patch of the 11th Brigade on her body.[82]
Ridenhour himself had not been present when the massacre occurred, but his account was compiled from detailed conversations with soldiers of Charlie Company who had witnessed and, in some cases, participated in the killing.[83] He became convinced that something "rather dark and bloody did indeed occur" at M  Lai, and was so disturbed by the tales he heard that within three months of being discharged from the Army he penned his concerns to Congress[80] as well as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the President.[75] He included the name of Michael Bernhardt, an eyewitness who agreed to testify, in the letter.[84]
Most recipients of Ridenhour's letter ignored it, with the exception of Congressman Mo Udall[85] and Senators Barry Goldwater and Edward Brooke.[86] Udall urged the House Armed Services Committee to call on Pentagon officials to conduct an investigation.[81]
Public revelation and reaction[edit]
Under mounting pressure caused by Ridenhour's letter, on 9 September 1969, the Army quietly charged Calley with six specifications of premeditated murder for the deaths of 109 South Vietnamese civilians near the village of S n M , at a hamlet called simply "My Lai".[87][88]
Calley's court martial was not released to press and did not commence until over a year later. However, word of Calley's prosecution found its way to American investigative reporter and freelance journalist Seymour Hersh.[89] My Lai was first revealed to the American public on November 13, 1969 almost two years after the incident when Hersh published a story through the Dispatch News Service. The article threatened to undermine the U.S. war effort and severely damage the Nixon presidency. Inside the White House, officials privately discussed how to contain the scandal. On November 21, National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger emphasized that the White House needed to develop a "game plan", to establish a "press policy", and maintain a "unified line" in its public response to the incident. The White House established a "My Lai Task Force" whose mission was to "figure out how best to control the problem", to make sure that administration officials "all don't go in different directions" when discussing the incident, and to "engage in dirty tricks". These included discrediting key witnesses and questioning Hersh's motives for releasing the story. What soon followed was a public relations offensive by the administration designed to shape how My Lai would be portrayed in the press and understood among the American public.[90]
After extensive interviews with Calley, Hersh broke the M  Lai story in 35 newspapers on 13 November 1969; additionally, the Alabama Journal in Montgomery and the New York Times ran separate stories on the allegations against Calley on the 12th and 13th of November, respectively;[91] on 20 November, Time, Life and Newsweek all covered the story, and CBS televised an interview with Paul Meadlo, a soldier in Calley's unit during the massacre. The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio) published explicit photographs of dead villagers killed at M  Lai.[92]
As members of Congress called for an inquiry and news correspondents abroad expressed their horror at the massacre, the General Counsel of the Army Robert Jordan was tasked with speaking to the press. He refused to confirm allegations against Calley. Noting the significance of the fact that the statement was given at all, Bill Downs of ABC News said it amounted to the first public expression of concern by a "high defense official" that American troops "might have committed genocide".[93]
In November 1969, Lieutenant General William R. Peers was appointed by the Secretary of the Army and the Army Chief of Staff to conduct a thorough review of the My Lai incident, 16 19 March 1968, and its investigation by the Army. Peers's final report,[5] presented to higher-ups on 17 March 1970, was highly critical of top officers at brigade and divisional levels for participating in the cover-up, and the Charlie Company officers for their actions at M  Lai.[94]
According to Peers's findings:
[The 1st Battalion] members had killed at least 175 200 Vietnamese men, women, and children. The evidence indicates that only 3 or 4 were confirmed as Viet Cong although there were undoubtedly several unarmed VC (men, women, and children) among them and many more active supporters and sympathizers. One man from the company was reported as wounded from the accidental discharge of his weapon. ... a tragedy of major proportions had occurred at Son My.[5]
In a 2003 US Naval Academy lecture Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson said of the Peers report:
The Army had Lieutenant General William R. Peers conduct the investigation. He conducted a very thorough investigation. Congress did not like his investigation at all, because he pulled no punches, and he recommended court-martial for I think 34 people, not necessarily for the murder but for the cover-up. Really the cover-up phase was probably as bad as the massacre itself, because he recommended court-martial for some very high-ranking individuals.[95]: 28 
In 1968, an American journalist, Jonathan Schell, wrote that in the Vietnamese province of Quang Ngai, where the M  Lai massacre occurred, up to 70% of all villages were destroyed by the air strikes and artillery bombardments, including the use of napalm; 40 percent of the population were refugees, and the overall civilian casualties were close to 50,000 a year.[96] Regarding the massacre at M  Lai, he stated, "There can be no doubt that such an atrocity was possible only because a number of other methods of killing civilians and destroying their villages had come to be the rule, and not the exception, in our conduct of the war".[97]
In May 1970, a sergeant who participated in Operation Speedy Express wrote a confidential letter to then Army Chief of Staff Westmoreland describing civilian killings he said were on the scale of the massacre occurring as "a My Lai each month for over a year" during 1968 69. Two other letters to this effect from enlisted soldiers to military leaders in 1971, all signed "Concerned Sergeant", were uncovered within declassified National Archive documents. The letters describe common occurrences of civilian killings during population pacification operations. Army policy also stressed very high body counts and this resulted in dead civilians being marked down as combatants. Alluding to indiscriminate killings described as unavoidable, the commander of the 9th Infantry Division, then Major General Julian Ewell, in September 1969, submitted a confidential report to Westmoreland and other generals describing the countryside in some areas of Vietnam as resembling the battlefields of Verdun.[98][99]
In July 1969, the Office of Provost Marshal General of the Army began to examine the evidence collected by the Peers inquiry regarding possible criminal charges. Eventually, Calley was charged with several counts of premeditated murder in September 1969, and 25 other officers and enlisted men were later charged with related crimes.[100]
Court martial[edit]
On 17 November 1970, a court-martial in the United States charged 14 officers, including Major General Koster, the Americal Division's commanding officer, with suppressing information related to the incident. Most of the charges were later dropped. Brigade commander Colonel Henderson was the only high ranking commanding officer who stood trial on charges relating to the cover-up of the M  Lai massacre; he was acquitted on 17 December 1971.[101]
During the four-month-long trial, Calley consistently claimed that he was following orders from his commanding officer, Captain Medina. Despite that, he was convicted and sentenced to life in prison on 29 March 1971, after being found guilty of premeditated murder of not fewer than 20 people. Two days later, President Richard Nixon made the controversial decision to have Calley released from armed custody at Fort Benning, Georgia, and put under house arrest pending appeal of his sentence. Calley's conviction was upheld by the Army Court of Military Review in 1973 and by the U.S. Court of Military Appeals in 1974.[102]
In August 1971, Calley's sentence was reduced by the convening authority from life to twenty years. Calley would eventually serve three and one-half years under house arrest at Fort Benning including three months in the disciplinary barracks at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. In September 1974, he was paroled by the Secretary of the Army, Howard Callaway.[102][103]
In a separate trial, Medina denied giving the orders that led to the massacre, and was acquitted of all charges, effectively negating the prosecution's theory of "command responsibility", now referred to as the "Medina standard". Several months after his acquittal, however, Medina admitted he had suppressed evidence and had lied to Henderson about the number of civilian deaths.[104]
Captain Kotouc, an intelligence officer from 11th Brigade, was also court-martialed and found not guilty. Koster was demoted to brigadier general and lost his position as the Superintendent of West Point. His deputy, Brigadier General Young, received a letter of censure. Both were stripped of Distinguished Service Medals which had been awarded for service in Vietnam.[105]
Of the 26 men initially charged, Calley was the only one convicted.[106] Some have argued that the outcome of the M  Lai courts-martial failed to uphold the laws of war established in the Nuremberg and Tokyo War Crimes Tribunals.[107] Telford Taylor, a senior American prosecutor at Nuremberg, wrote that legal principles established at the war crimes trials could have been used to prosecute senior American military commanders for failing to prevent atrocities such as the one at M  Lai.[108]
Howard Callaway, Secretary of the Army, was quoted in The New York Times in 1976 as stating that Calley's sentence was reduced because Calley honestly believed that what he did was a part of his orders a rationale that contradicts the standards set at Nuremberg and Tokyo, where following orders was not a defense for committing war crimes.[107] On the whole, aside from the M  Lai courts-martial, there were 36 military trials held by the U.S. Army from January 1965 to August 1973 for crimes against civilians in Vietnam.[70]: 196 
Some authors[109] have argued that the light punishments of the low-level personnel present at M  Lai and unwillingness to hold higher officials responsible was part of a pattern in which the body-count strategy and the so-called "Mere Gook Rule" encouraged U.S. soldiers to err on the side of killing suspected Vietnamese enemies even if there was a very good chance that they were civilians. This in turn, Nick Turse argues, made lesser known massacres similar to M  Lai and a pattern of war crimes common in Vietnam.[109]
Survivors[edit]
In early 1972, the camp at M  Lai (2) where the survivors of the M  Lai massacre had been relocated was largely destroyed by Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) artillery and aerial bombardment, and remaining eyewitnesses were dispersed. The destruction was officially attributed to "Viet Cong terrorists". Quaker service workers in the area gave testimony in May 1972 by Martin Teitel at hearings before the Congressional Subcommittee to Investigate Problems Connected with Refugees and Escapees in South Vietnam. In June 1972, Teitel's account was published in The New York Times.[110]
Many American soldiers who had been in M  Lai during the massacre accepted personal responsibility for the loss of civilian lives. Some of them expressed regrets without acknowledging any personal guilt, as, for example, Ernest Medina, who said, "I have regrets for it, but I have no guilt over it because I didn't cause it. That's not what the military, particularly the United States Army, is trained for."[111]
Lawrence La Croix, a squad leader in Charlie Company in M  Lai, stated in 2010: "A lot of people talk about M  Lai, and they say, 'Well, you know, yeah, but you can't follow an illegal order.' Trust me. There is no such thing. Not in the military. If I go into a combat situation and I tell them, 'No, I'm not going. I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to follow that order', well, they'd put me up against the wall and shoot me."[112]
On 16 March 1998, a gathering of local people and former American and Vietnamese soldiers stood together at the place of the M  Lai massacre in Vietnam to commemorate its 30th anniversary. American veterans Hugh Thompson and Lawrence Colburn, who were shielding civilians during the massacre, addressed the crowd. Among the listeners was Phan Thi Nhanh, a 14-year-old girl at the time of the massacre. She was saved by Thompson and vividly remembered that tragic day, "We don't say we forget. We just try not to think about the past, but in our hearts we keep a place to think about that".[113] Colburn challenged Lieutenant Calley "...to face the women we faced today who asked the questions they asked, and look at the tears in their eyes and tell them why it happened".[113] No American diplomats or any other officials attended the meeting.
More than a thousand people turned out on 16 March 2008, forty years after the massacre. The S n M  Memorial drew survivors and families of victims and some returning U.S. veterans. One woman (an 8-year-old at the time) said, "Everyone in my family was killed in the M  Lai massacre my mother, my father, my brother and three sisters. They threw me into a ditch full of dead bodies. I was covered with blood and brains."[114] The U.S. was unofficially represented by a volunteer group from Wisconsin called Madison Quakers, who in 10 years built three schools in M  Lai and planted a peace garden.[114]
On 19 August 2009, Calley made his first public apology for the massacre in a speech to the Kiwanis club of Greater Columbus, Georgia:[115][116]"There is not a day that goes by that I do not feel remorse for what happened that day in M  Lai", he told members of the club. "I feel remorse for the Vietnamese who were killed, for their families, for the American soldiers involved and their families. I am very sorry....If you are asking why I did not stand up to them when I was given the orders, I will have to say that I was a 2nd lieutenant getting orders from my commander and I followed them foolishly, I guess."[117][118]
Tr n V n  c, who was seven years old at the time of the M  Lai massacre and now resides in Remscheid, Germany, called the apology "terse". He wrote a public letter to Calley describing the plight of his and many other families to remind him that time did not ease the pain, and that grief and sorrow over lost lives will forever stay in M  Lai.[119]
Participants[edit]
Officers[edit]
LTC Frank A. Barker   commander of the Task Force Barker, a battalion-sized unit, assembled to attack the VC 48th Battalion supposedly based in and around M  Lai. He allegedly ordered the destruction of the village and supervised the artillery barrage and combat assault from his helicopter. Reported the operation as a success; was killed in Vietnam on 13 June 1968, in a mid-air collision before the investigation had begun.[5][120]
CPT Kenneth W. Boatman   an artillery forward observer; was accused by the Army of failure to report possible misconduct, but the charge was dropped.[121]
MAJ Charles C. Calhoun   operations officer of Task Force Barker; charges against him of failure to report possible misconduct were dropped.[121]
2LT William Calley   platoon leader, 1st Platoon, Charlie Company, First Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, 11th Infantry Brigade, 23rd Infantry Division. Was charged in premeditating the murder of 102 civilians,[122] found guilty and sentenced to life. Was paroled in September 1974 by the Secretary of the Army Howard Callaway.
LTC William D. Guinn Jr.   Deputy Province Senior Advisor/Senior Sector Advisor for Quangngai Province. Charges against him of dereliction of duty and false swearing brought by the Army were dropped.[121]
COL Oran K. Henderson   11th Infantry Brigade commander, who ordered the attack and flew in a helicopter over M  Lai during it. After Hugh Thompson immediately reported multiple killings of civilians, Henderson started the cover-up by dismissing the allegation about the massacre and reporting to the superiors that indeed 20 people from M  Lai died by accident. Accused of cover-up and perjury by the Army; charges dropped.[5]
MG Samuel W. Koster   commander of the 23rd Infantry Division, was not involved with planning the M  Lai search-and-destroy mission. However, during the operation he flew over M  Lai and monitored the radio communications.[123] Afterward, Koster did not follow up with the 11th Brigade commander COL Henderson on the initial investigation, and later was involved in the cover-up. Was charged by the Army with failure to obey lawful regulations, dereliction of duty, and alleged cover-up; charges dropped. Later was demoted to brigadier general and stripped of a Distinguished Service Medal.[121]
CPT Eugene M. Kotouc   military intelligence officer assigned to Task Force Barker;[124] he partially provided information, on which the M  Lai combat assault was approved; together with Medina and a South Vietnamese officer, he interrogated, tortured and allegedly executed VC and NVA suspects later that day. Was charged with maiming and assault, tried by the jury and acquitted.[48]
CPT Dennis H. Johnson   52d Military Intelligence Detachment, assigned to Task Force Barker, was accused of failure to obey lawful regulations; however, charges were later dropped.[121]
2LT Jeffrey U. Lacross   platoon leader, 3rd Platoon, Charlie Company; testified that his platoon did not meet any armed resistance in M  Lai, and that his men did not kill anybody; however, since, in his words, both Calley and Brooks reported a body count of 60 for their platoons, he then submitted a body count of 6.[125]
MAJ Robert W. McKnight   operations officer of the 11th Brigade; was accused of false swearing by the Army, but charges were subsequently dropped.[121]
CPT Ernest Medina   commander of Charlie Company, First' battalion, 20th Infantry; nicknamed Mad Dog by subordinates. He planned, ordered, and supervised the execution of the operation in S n M  village. Was accused of failure to report a felony and of murder; went to trial and was acquitted.[126]
CPT Earl Michaels   Charlie Company commander during My Lai operation; he died in a helicopter crash three months later.
BG George H. Young Jr.   assistant division commander, 23rd Infantry Division; charged with alleged cover-up, failure to obey lawful regulations and dereliction of duty by the Army; charges were dismissed.[121]
MAJ Frederic W. Watke   commander of Company B, 123rd Aviation Battalion, 23rd Infantry Division, providing helicopter support on 16 March 1968. Testified that he informed COL Henderson about killings of civilians in My Lai as reported by helicopter pilots.[127] Accused of failure to obey lawful regulations and dereliction of duty; charges dropped.[121]
CPT Thomas K. Willingham   Company B, Fourth Battalion, 3rd Infantry Regiment, assigned to Task Force Barker; charged with making false official statements and failure to report a felony; charges dropped.[121]
Altogether, 14 officers directly and indirectly involved with the operation, including two generals, were investigated in connection with the M  Lai massacre, except for LTC Frank A. Barker, CPT Earl Michaels, and 2LT Stephen Brooks, who all died before the beginning of the investigation.[121][105][128]
1st Platoon, Charlie Company 1st Battalion 20th Infantry[edit]
PFC James Bergthold, Sr.   Assistant gunner and ammo bearer on a machine gun team with Maples. Was never charged with a crime. Admitted that he killed a wounded woman he came upon in a hut, to put her out of her misery.
PFC Michael Bernhardt   Rifleman; he dropped out of the University of Miami to volunteer for the Army.[129] Bernhardt refused to kill civilians at M  Lai. Captain Medina reportedly later threatened Bernhardt to deter him from exposing the massacre. As a result, Bernhardt was given more dangerous assignments such as point duty on patrol, and would later be afflicted with a form of trench foot as a direct result. Bernhardt told Ridenhour, who was not present at M  Lai during the massacre, about the events, pushing him to continue his investigation.[130] Later he would help expose and detail the massacre in numerous interviews with the press, and he served as a prosecution witness in the trial of Medina, where he was subjected to intense cross examination by defense counsel F. Lee Bailey backed by a team of attorneys including Gary Myers. Bernhardt is a recipient of the New York Society for Ethical Culture's 1970 Ethical Humanist Award.[131]
PFC Herbert L. Carter   "Tunnel Rat"; shot himself in the foot while reloading his pistol and claimed that he shot himself in the foot in order to be MEDEVACed out of the village when the massacre started.[132]
PFC Dennis L. Conti   Grenadier/Minesweeper; testified that he initially refused to shoot but later fired some M79 rounds at a group of fleeing people with unknown effect.
SP4 Lawrence C. La Croix   Squad Leader; testified favourably for Captain Medina during his trial. In 1993 sent a letter to Los Angeles Times, saying, "Now, 25 years later, I have only recently stopped having flashbacks of that morning. I still cannot touch a weapon without vomiting. I am unable to interact with any of the large Vietnamese population in Los Angeles for fear that they might find out who I am; and, because I cannot stand the pain of remembering or wondering if maybe they had relatives or loved ones who were victims at M  Lai... some of us will walk in the jungles and hear the cries of anguish for all eternity".[133]
PFC James Joseph Dursi   Rifleman; killed a mother and child, then refused to kill anyone else even when ordered to do so by Lieutenant Calley.[134]
PFC Ronald Grzesik   a team leader. He claimed he followed orders to round up civilians, but refused to kill them.[citation needed]
SP4 Robert E. Maples   Machine gunner attached to SSG Bacon's squad; stated that he refused an order to kill civilians hiding in a ditch and claimed his commanding officer threatened to shoot him.[135]
PFC Paul D. Meadlo   Rifleman; said he was afraid of being shot if he did not participate. Lost his foot to a land mine the next day; later, he publicly admitted his part in the massacre.
SSG David Mitchell   Squad Leader; accused by witnesses of shooting people at the ditch site; pleaded not guilty. Mitchell was acquitted.[136]
SP4 Charles Sledge   Radiotelephone Operator; later a prosecution witness.
PV2 Harry Stanley   Grenadier; claimed to have refused an order from Lieutenant Calley to kill civilians that were rounded-up in a bomb-crater but refused to testify against Calley. After he was featured in a documentary and several newspapers, the city of Berkeley, California, designated 17 October as Harry Stanley Day.[137]
SGT Esequiel Torres   previously had tortured and hanged an old man because Torres found his bandaged leg suspicious. He and Roschevitz (described below) were involved in the shooting of a group of ten women and five children in a hut. Calley ordered Torres to man the machine gun and open fire on the villagers that had been grouped together. Before everyone in the group was down, Torres ceased fire and refused to fire again. Calley took over the M60 and finished shooting the remaining villagers in that group himself.[138] Torres was charged with murder but acquitted.
SP4 Frederick J. Widmer   Assistant Radiotelephone Operator; Widmer, who has been the subject of pointed blame, is quoted as saying, "The most disturbing thing I saw was one boy and this was something that, you know, this is what haunts me from the whole, the whole ordeal down there. And there was a boy with his arm shot off, shot up half, half hanging on and he just had this bewildered look in his face and like, 'What did I do, what's wrong?' He was just, you know, it's, it's hard to describe, couldn't comprehend. I, I shot the boy, killed him and it's I'd like to think of it more or less as a mercy killing because somebody else would have killed him in the end, but it wasn't right."[139] Widmer died on 11 August 2016, aged 68.[140]
Before being shipped to South Vietnam, all of Charlie Company's soldiers went through an advanced infantry training and basic unit training at Pohakuloa Training Area in Hawaii.[141][142] At Schofield Barracks they were taught how to treat POWs and how to distinguish VC guerrillas from civilians by a Judge Advocate.[132]
Other soldiers[edit]
Nicholas Capezza   Chief Medic; HHQ Company;[143] insisted he saw nothing unusual.
William Doherty and Michael Terry   3rd Platoon soldiers who participated in the killing of the wounded in a ditch.[80]
SGT Ronald L. Haeberle   Photographer; Information Office, 11th Brigade; was attached to Charlie Company. Then SGT Haeberle carried and operated two cameras during the operation: an official US Army-issued camera using black and white film, which was submitted as part of the report in the operation to brigade authorities, and a privately owned camera loaded with colour film. Haeberle by his own testimony at the Courts Martial, admitted that official photographs generally did not include soldiers committing the killings and generally avoided identifying the individual perpetrators, while the colour camera contained numerous images of soldiers killing elderly men, women of various ages and children. Haeberle also testified that he destroyed most of the colour slides which incriminated individual soldiers on the basis that he believed it was unfair to place the blame only on these individuals when many more were equally guilty. He made attempts to sell these photographs to US newspapers on his return home and was investigated by the US Army for this. Considerable criticism has been levelled at Haeberle for remaining silent during the initial attempts at covering up the incident when he had considerable evidence in his possession, as well as his later seeming attempts to benefit financially from the sale of this evidence.
Sergeant Minh, Duong   ARVN interpreter, 52nd Military intelligence Detachment, attached to Task Force Barker; confronted Captain Medina about the number of civilians that were killed. Medina reportedly replied, "Sergeant Minh, don't ask anything   those were the orders."[144]
SGT Gary D. Roschevitz   Grenadier; 2nd platoon;[145] according to the testimony of James M. McBreen, Roschevitz killed five or six people standing together with a canister shot from his M79 grenade launcher, which had a shotgun effect after exploding;[146] also grabbed an M16 rifle from Varnado Simpson to kill five Vietnamese prisoners. According to various witnesses, he later forced several women to undress with the intention of raping them. When the women refused, he reportedly shot at them.[147]: 19 20 
PFC Varnado Simpson   Rifleman; 2nd Platoon; admitted that he slew around 10 people in My Lai on CPT Medina's orders to kill not only people, but even cats and dogs.[148][149] He fired at a group of people where he allegedly saw a man with a weapon, but instead killed a woman with a baby.[37] He committed suicide in 1997, after repeatedly acknowledging remorse for several murders in M  Lai.[citation needed]
SGT Kenneth Hodges, squad leader, was charged with rape and murder during the My Lai Massacre. In every interview given he strictly claimed that he was following orders.[150]
Rescue helicopter crew[edit]
WO1 Hugh Thompson Jr.
SP4 Glenn Andreotta
SP4 Lawrence Colburn
Media coverage[edit]
A photographer and a reporter from the 11th Brigade Information Office were attached to Task Force Barker and landed with Charlie Company in S n M  on 16 March 1968. Neither the Americal News Sheet published 17 March 1968, nor the Trident, 11th Infantry Brigade newsletter from 22 March 1968, reported the deaths of noncombatants in M  Lai. The Stars and Stripes published a laudatory piece, "U.S. troops Surrounds Red, Kill 128", on March 18.[151]
On 12 April 1968, the Trident wrote, "The most punishing operations undertaken by the brigade in Operation Muscatine's area involved three separate raids into the village and vicinity of My Lai, which cost the VC 276 killed".[152] On 4 April 1968, the information office of the 11th Brigade issued a press-release, Recent Operations in Pinkville, without reporting mass casualties among civilians.[153] Subsequent criminal investigation found that, "Both individuals failed to report what they had seen, the reporter wrote a false and misleading account of the operation, and the photographer withheld and suppressed from proper authorities the photographic evidence of atrocities he had obtained."[154]
Vietnam was an atrocity from the get-go... There were hundreds of My Lais. You got your card punched by the numbers of bodies you counted.
  David H. Hackworth[155]
The first reporting of the M  Lai massacre appeared in the American media after Fort Benning issued a press release related to the charges pressed against Lieutenant William Calley. This was issued on 5 September 1969.[156]
Consequently, NBC aired on 10 September 1969 a segment in the Huntley-Brinkley Report which reported the killings of numerous civilians in South Vietnam. Following that, Ronald Ridenhour decided to disobey the Army's order to withhold the information from the media. He approached reporter Ben Cole of the Phoenix Republic, who chose not to handle the scoop. Charles Black from the Columbus Enquirer uncovered the story on his own but also decided to put it on hold. Two major national news press outlets The New York Times and The Washington Post received some tips with partial information but did not act on them.[157]
External image Front page of The Plain Dealer scoop on M  Lai Massacre, 20 November 1969
Ridenhour called Seymour Hersh on 22 October 1969. The freelance investigative journalist conducted an independent inquiry, and published to break the wall of silence that was surrounding the M  Lai massacre. Hersh initially tried to sell the story to Life and Look magazines; both turned it down. Hersh went to the small, Washington-based Dispatch News Service, which sent it to fifty major American newspapers; thirty accepted it for publication.[158] New York Times reporter Henry Kamm investigated further and found several survivors of the M  Lai massacre in South Vietnam. He estimated the number of civilians killed as 567.[159]
Next, Ben Cole published an article about Ronald Ridenhour, a helicopter gunner and an Army whistleblower, who was among the first who started to uncover the truth about the M  Lai massacre. Joseph Eszterhas of The Plain Dealer, a friend of Ron Haeberle, knew about the photo evidence of the massacre; he published the grisly images of the dead bodies of old men, women, and children on 20 November 1969.[44] Time Magazine's article on 28 November 1969 and in Life magazine on 5 December 1969,[160] finally brought M  Lai to the fore of the public debate about Vietnam War.[161]
Richard L. Strout, the Christian Science Monitor political commentator, wrote: "American press self-censorship thwarted Mr. Ridenhour's disclosures for a year. 'No one wanted to go into it', his agent said of telegrams sent to Life, Look, and Newsweek magazines outlining allegations...."[162]
Afterward, interviews and stories connected to the M  Lai massacre started to appear regularly in the American and international press.[163][49]
Concluding an ABC television news broadcast, anchor man Frank Reynolds said to his audience that, as a consequence of the allegations,  our spirit as a people is scarred.  The massacre, he believed, offered  the most compelling argument yet advanced for America to end its involvement in Vietnam, not alone because of what the war is doing to the Vietnamese or to our reputation abroad, but because of what it is doing to us. [164]
War crimes investigation[edit]
Following the massacre a Pentagon task force called the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) investigated alleged atrocities which were committed against South Vietnamese civilians by U.S. troops and created a secret archive of some 9,000 pages which documents 320 alleged incidents from 1967 1971 including 7 massacres in which at least 137 civilians died; 78 additional attacks targeting noncombatants in which at least 57 were killed, 56 were wounded and 15 were sexually assaulted; and 141 incidents of U.S. soldiers torturing civilian detainees or prisoners of war. 203 U.S. personnel were charged with crimes, 57 of them were court-martialed and 23 of them were convicted. The VWCWG also investigated over 500 additional alleged atrocities but it could not verify them.[165][166]
Cultural representations[edit]
Music[edit]
Over 100 songs were released about the My Lai massacre and Lt. William Calley, identified by the Vietnam War Song Project.[167] During the war years (from 1969 1973), around half of the songs displayed support for Calley, while around half took an anti-war position and criticized the actions of Calley.[168] All the songs in the post-war era were critical of the actions of Calley and his platoon. Commercially, the most successful song was "The Battle Hymn of Lt. Calley" by Terry Nelson, which peaked at No. 37 in the Billboard Hot 100 on 1 May 1971, selling over 1 million records.[169] Despite success, Tex Ritter cancelled his cover of the song because his record label, Capitol, viewed it as controversial.[170] John Deer's cover of the song bubbled under the Billboard Hot 100 on 1 May 1971, at No. 114.[171]
On television, film and video[edit]
The Hawaii Five-O episode "To Kill or Be Killed" aired January 13, 1971, has a highly decorated army officer relate events alluding to the massacre just prior to committing suicide.
The 1971 documentary Interviews with My Lai Veterans won the Academy Award for Best Documentary, Short Subjects. In it, five American soldiers discussed their participation in the massacres.[172]
In 1975, Stanley Kramer and Lee Bernhard directed a docudrama, Judgment: The Court Martial of Lieutenant William Calley, with Tony Musante as Lieutenant Calley, and Harrison Ford as Frank Crowder.[173]
On 2 May 1989, the British television station Yorkshire Television broadcast the documentary Four Hours in My Lai, directed by Kevin Sim, as part of the networked series First Tuesday. Using eyewitness statements from both Vietnamese and Americans, the programme revealed new evidence about the massacre. The program was subsequently aired by PBS in the United States on 23 May as Remember My Lai (Frontline, Season 7).[174]
In 1994, a video film My Lai Revisited was aired on 60 Minutes by CBS.[175]
On 15 March 2008, the BBC broadcast the documentary The My Lai Tapes[176] on Radio 4 and subsequently on the BBC World Service, in both English[177] and Vietnamese,[178] that used never-before-heard audio recordings of testimony taken at The Pentagon during the 1969 70 Peers's Inquiry.
On 26 April 2010, the American PBS broadcast a documentary as part of its American Experience series, entitled The American Experience: My Lai.[179]
On 10 December 2010, Italian producer Gianni Paolucci released a movie entitled My Lai Four,[180] directed by Paolo Bertola, starring American actor Beau Ballinger as Calley, and adapted from the Pulitzer Prize winning book by Seymour Hersh.[181]
Episode 8 of Ken Burns' 2017 documentary series "The Vietnam War" relates to these events.
In 2018, My Lai Inside, a documentary by Christoph Felder was released[182]
In theater[edit]
The Lieutenant is a 1975 Broadway rock opera that concerns the M  Lai massacre and resulting courts martial. It was nominated for four Tony Awards including Best Musical and Best Book of a Musical.[183]
Photography[edit]
The M  Lai massacre, like many other events in Vietnam, was captured on camera by U.S. Army personnel. The most published and graphic images were taken by Ronald Haeberle, a U.S. Army Public Information Detachment photographer who accompanied the men of Charlie Company that day.[184]
In 2009, Haeberle said that he destroyed a number of photographs he took during the massacre. Unlike the photographs of the dead bodies, the destroyed photographs depicted Americans in the actual process of murdering Vietnamese civilians.[185][186] According to M. Paul Holsinger, the And babies poster, which used a Haeberle photo, was "easily the most successful poster to vent the outrage that so many felt about the human cost of the conflict in Southeast Asia. Copies are still frequently seen in retrospectives dealing with the popular culture of the Vietnam War era or in collections of art from the period."[187]
Another soldier, John Henry Smail of the 3rd Platoon, took at least 16 color photographs depicting U.S. Army personnel, helicopters, and aerial views of M  Lai.[188][189] These, along with Haeberle's photographs, were included in the "Report of the Department of the Army review of the Preliminary Investigations into the My Lai Incident".[190] Former First Lieutenant (1LT) Roger L. Alaux Jr., a forward artillery observer, who was assigned to Charlie Company during the combat assault on M  Lai 4,[191] also took some photographs from a helicopter that day, including aerial views of M  Lai, and of the Charlie Company's landing zone.[citation needed]
Mrs Nguy n Th  T u (ch n T u), killed by U.S. soldiers
Unidentified dead Vietnamese man
Unidentified corpse thrown down a well
SP5 Capezza burning a dwelling
PFC Mauro, PFC Carter, and SP4 Widmer (Carter shot himself in the foot with a .45 pistol during the My Lai Massacre.)
SP4 Dustin setting fire to a dwelling
Unidentified Vietnamese man
Victims at M  Lai
A 2.4-hectare (5.9-acre) S n M  Memorial dedicated to victims of the S n M  (M  Lai) massacre was created in the village of T nh Kh , S n T nh District, Qu ng Ng i Province, Vietnam. The graves with headstones, signs on the places of killing and a museum are all located on memorial site. The War Remnants Museum in Ho Chi Minh City has an exhibition on M  Lai.[citation needed]
Some American veterans chose to go on pilgrimage to the site of the massacre to heal and reconcile.[192]
On the 30th anniversary of the massacre, 16 March 1998, a groundbreaking ceremony for the M  Lai Peace Park was held 2 km (1 mi) away from the site of the massacre. Veterans, including Hugh Thompson Jr. and Lawrence Colburn from the helicopter rescue crew, attended the ceremony. Mike Boehm,[193] a veteran who was instrumental in the peace park effort, said, "We cannot forget the past, but we cannot live with anger and hatred either. With this park of peace, we have created a green, rolling, living monument to peace."[113]
On 16 March 2001, the M  Lai Peace Park was dedicated, a joint venture of the Qu ng Ng i Province Women's Union, the Madison Quakers' charitable organization, and the Vietnamese government.[194]
See also[edit]
Vietnam portalUnited States portal
Human rights in the United States
Massacre at Hu 
Operation Speedy Express
Operation Wheeler/Wallowa
Phoenix Program
Russell Tribunal
United States war crimes#Vietnam War
Vietnam War Crimes Working Group
Seymour Hersh
Tiger Force
References[edit]
^ Brownmiller, Susan (1975). Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape. Simon & Schuster. pp. 103 05. ISBN 978-0-671-22062-4.
^ Murder in the name of war: My Lai, BBC News, 20 July 1998.
^ Greiner, Bernd. War Without Fronts: The USA in Vietnam, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2009.[ISBN missing]
^ Department of the Army. Report of the Department of the Army Review of the Preliminary Investigations into the My Lai Incident, Volumes I III (1970).
^ a b c d e f g Summary of Peers Report.
^ My Lai   Letters Archived 20 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine, due to the reddish-pink color used on military maps to denote a more densely populated area. 11th Light Infantry Brigade Veterans Association website.
^ Frontline (PBS): Remember My Lai Originally Broadcast 23 May 1989.
^ "The My Lai Massacre: Seymour Hersh's Complete and Unabridged Reporting for the St. Louis Post Dispatch, November 1969 /Candide's Notebooks". Pierretristam.com. Archived from the original on 15 July 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Ex-G.I. Says He Saw Calley Kill a Vietnamese Civilian. The New York Times, 27 November 1969.
^ "Commemorating victims of Son My massacre" VOV News, 13 March 2012.
^ Corley, Christopher L. Effects on Public Opinion Support During War or Conflict. Monterey, California: Naval Postgraduate School, 2007, p. 39.
^ "Moral Courage In Combat: The My Lai Story" (lecture by Hugh Thompson), Center for the Study of Professional Military Ethics, United States Naval Academy, 2003.
^ Rozman, Gilbert (2010). U.S. Leadership, History, and Bilateral Relations in Northeast Asia. Cambridge University Press. p. 56.
^ Jones, Howard (2017). My Lai: Vietnam, 1968, and the Descent into Darkness. New York: Oxford University Press. Kindle location 684. ISBN 978-0-195-39360-6.
^ MAJ Tony Raimondo, JA. The M  Lai Massacre: A Case Study. Human Rights Program, School of the Americas, Fort Benning, Georgia.
^ History of the 20th Infantry: 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry 11th Light Infantry Brigade Veterans Association website
^ United States v. First Lieutenant William L. Calley, Jr. 46 Court of Military Review, 1131 (1973).
^ "The 'Pinkville' Incident". Lapham's Quarterly, 14 September 2013.
^ M  Lai: A Question of Orders, Time, 25 January 1971.
^ Summary Report: The Son My Village IncidentSignificantly, he gave no instructions about segregating and safeguarding non-combatants. My Lai: An American Tragedy by William George Eckhardt Archived 2007-11-07 at the Wayback Machine
^ Peers Report: The Omissions and Commissions Of CPT Ernest L. Medina, law.umkc.edu; accessed 24 February 2018.
^ Smith, Karen D., American soldiers testify in M  Lai court martial Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Amarillo Globe-News, 6 December 2000.
^ Walzer, Michael. Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations. Preview through Google Books. New York: Basic Books, 1977. p. 310, ISBN 978-0465052707.
^ Calley's Trial Puts Emphasis on CO. Bangor Daily News, 21 December 1970.
^ "Charlie Company and the Massacre | American Experience". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
^ Neale, Jonathan (2003). A People's History of the Vietnam War. The New Press. pp. 122 23. ISBN 1565848071.
^ Michael Bilton; Kevin Sim (1993). Four Hours in My Lai. Penguin. p. 130. ISBN 9780140177091.
^ Report of the Department of Army review of the preliminary investigations into the M  Lai incident. Volume III, Exhibits, Book 6  Photographs, 14 March 1970, Library of Congress, Military Legal Resources
^ "My Lai", Original broadcast PBS American Experience, 9 pm, 26 April 2010 Time Index 00:35' into the first hour (no commercials)
^ 
"Report of the Department of the Army Review of the Preliminary Investigations into the My Lai Incident"
^ Oliver, Kendrick. The My Lai Massacre in American History and Memory. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006.
^ a b c Hersh, Seymour M. (22 January 1972). "The Massacre at My Lai". The New Yorker. Retrieved 25 May 2021.
^ Company C: Actions on 16 and 17 March 1968, The Peers Report.
^ Robert Lester, The Peers Inquiry of the Massacre at My Lai. A Guide to the Microfilm Edition of Vietnam War Research Collections.
^ 20th Infantry Regiment: C Company Roster  1968, research and compilation by Daniel Malin.
^ My Lai: A Half Told Story, Sunday Times Magazine (London), 23 April 1989, pp. 24 35.
^ a b c Hersh, Seymour. My Lai: Soldiers' Bullets Silenced Pleas, Prayers of Victims, The Milwaukee Journal, 27 May 1970.
^ "The Villagers of My Lai", umkc.edu; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ Bigart, Homer. "M  Lai G.I. Feared Babies Held Grenades", The New York Times, 13 January 1971.
^ Meadlo Testifies He Shot Women and Their Babies. Herald-Journal, 13 January 1971.
^ "Dennis Conti, Witness for the Prosecution", westvalley.edu; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ "...They were killing everything in the village", The Palm Beach Post, 29 May 1970.
^ Summary of Peers report, umkc.edu; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ a b Hersh, Seymour M. Eyewitness accounts of the My Lai massacre; story by Seymour Hersh, The Plain Dealer, 20 November 1969.
^ Women, children died in village. The Sydney Morning Herald, 21 November 1969.
^ Defense Rests in Calley Trial: Capt. Medina Called Fine, Strict Officer. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 25 February 1971.
^ a b Hersh, Seymour M. "My Lai, And Its Omens", The New York Times, 16 March 1998.
^ a b Eckhardt, William George. My Lai: An American Tragedy Archived 7 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine. An evaluative essay of the chief prosecutor in the M  Lai cases William G. Eckhardt, Teaching Professor of Law at UMKC School of Law, University of Missouri-Kansas City, 2002.
^ a b Allison, William Thomas. My Lai: An American Atrocity in the Vietnam War. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012.
^ Rowling, Charles; Sheets, Penelope; Jones, Timothy (2015). "American Atrocity Revisited: National Identity, Cascading Frames, and the My Lai Massacre". Political Communication. 32 (2): 310 11. doi:10.1080/10584609.2014.944323. S2CID 143846178   via Routledge: Taylor & Francis Group.
^ a b Good, Jennifer; Lardinois, Brigitte; Lowe, Paul (16 October 2014). Mythologizing the Vietnam War: Visual Culture and Mediated Memory. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4438-6948-5.
^ a b c d e f Angers, Trent. The Forgotten Hero of My Lai: The Hugh Thompson Story, Revised Edition. Lafayette, Louisiana: Acadian House, pp. 59 80, 86.
^ "Hugh Thompson". The Times. London. 11 January 2006. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ Bock, Paula. The Choices Made: Lessons from My Lai on Drawing the Line Archived 8 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine The Seattle Times, 10 March 2002.
^ Jones, Howard (2017). My Lai : Vietnam, 1968, and the Descent into Darkness. Oxford University Press. p. 127.
^ The Heroes of My Lai: Hugh Thompson's Story Thompson's own account during the conference on M  Lai at Tulane University in New Orleans, Louisiana, in December 1994.
^ Glenn Urban Andreotta profile Archived 17 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine Names on the Wall, The Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
^ Bilton, M. & Sim, K. (1992). Four hours of My Lai: The Hugh Thompson Story. LA Acadian House. pp. 204 05. ISBN 978-0-925417-33-6.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Koenig, Rhoda (1992). "Books: Enemies of the People". New York Magazine. Vol. 25, no. 11. p. 86. ISSN 0028-7369. Retrieved 19 April 2011.
^ Jones, Adam (2010). Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction. Taylor & Francis. p. 408. ISBN 978-0-415-48618-7.
^ Johnson, Claudia D., & Vernon Elso Johnson (2003). Understanding the Odyssey: a student casebook to issues, sources, and historic documents. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 206. ISBN 978-0-313-30881-9. My Lai.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Heroes of My Lai honored", BBC News, 7 March 1998.
^ Zutz, John (1998). "My Lai". The Veteran. Vietnam Veterans Against the War. 28 (1). Retrieved 19 April 2011.
^ "Hugh Thompson: Helicopter pilot who intervened to save lives during the U.S. Army massacre of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai". The Times. 11 January 2006. Retrieved 19 April 2011.
^ "Moral Courage In Combat: The M  Lai Story" (PDF). USNA Lecture. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2012.
^ Bilton, Michael & Kevin Sim. Four Hours in My Lai. New York: Viking, 1992.
^ Medina said to have "encouraged" murder, The Calgary Herald, 17 August 1971.
^ The Omissions and Commissions of Colonel Oran K. Henderson Archived 24 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine; An extract from the official U.S. Army Peers Report into My Lai Massacre. University of Missouri-Kansas City Law school website.
^ Angers (1999), pp. 219 20.
^ a b Bourke, Joanna. An Intimate History of Killing: Face-to-Face Killing in Twentieth-Century Warfare, New York: Basic Books, 1999.
^ Westmoreland, William C. A Soldier Reports. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976, p. 378.[ISBN missing]
^ "My Lai Massacre". HISTORY. Retrieved 26 September 2018.
^ "Clemency is last hope for a more normal life", Stars and Stripes, 12 May 2009; retrieved 21 July 2012.
^ "The Press: Farewell to the Follies" (subscriber-only access), Time, 12 February 1973.
^ a b Oliver, Kendrick (2003). "Atrocity, Authenticity and American Exceptionalism: (Ir)rationalising the Massacre at My Lai". Journal of American Studies. 37 (2): 247 268. doi:10.1017/S0021875803007102. ISSN 0021-8758. JSTOR 27557330. S2CID 145094745.
^ Kurlansky, Mark. 1968: The Year That Rocked the World. New York: Ballantine, 2004, p. 106.
^ a b Robert Parry and Norman Solomon"Behind Colin Powell's Legend   My Lai", Consortium News, 22 July 1996.
^ "My Lai at 50: Written Case Study". Center for the Army Profession and Leadership. US Army. 2021. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021.
^ "Interview on CNN's Larry King Live with Secretary Colin L. Powell". 4 May 2004. Retrieved 16 March 2006.
^ a b c "Text of Ron Ridenhour's 1969 letter". Law.umkc.edu. 29 March 1969. Archived from the original on 9 February 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2012.
^ a b "The Heroes of My Lai". Law.umkc.edu. December 1994. Retrieved 21 July 2012.
^ "The Men Talked of the Killing", The Palm Beach Post, 1 June 1970.
^ Kendrick, Oliver (2003). "Atrocity, authenticity and American exceptionalism: (Ir)rationalising the Massacre at My Lai". Journal of American Studies. 37 (2): 248   via ProQuest.
^ The Heroes of My Lai: Ron Ridenhour's Story Ridenhour's own account during the conference on M  Lai at Tulane University in New Orleans, Louisiana, in December 1994.
^ "Mo Udall, The Education of a Congressman". Udall.gov. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Brooke, Edward William (2007). Bridging the Divide: My Life. Rutgers University Press. p. 166. ISBN 978-0-8135-3905-8.
^ "The Press: Miscue on the Massacre". Time. 5 December 1969. Archived from the original on 14 December 2008. Retrieved 30 August 2013.
^ Oliver, Kendick (2006). The My Lai massacre in American history and memory. Manchester UP. pp. 43 44. ISBN 978-0-7190-6891-1.
^ Kendrick, Oliver, "Coming to Terms with the Past: My Lai", History Today, 00182753, February 2006, Vol. 56, Issue 2.
^ Rowling, Charles; Sheets, Penelope; Jones, Timothy (2015). "American Atrocity Revisited: National Identity, Cascading Frames, and the My Lai Massacre". Political Communication. 32 (2): 311. doi:10.1080/10584609.2014.944323. S2CID 143846178.
^ "The Press: Miscue on the Massacre". Time. 5 December 1969. Archived from the original on 14 December 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "Plain Dealer exclusive in 1969: My Lai massacre photos by Ronald Haeberle". The Plain Dealer. 21 September 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2018.
^ Oliver, Kendrick (2006). The My Lai Massacre in American History and Memory. Manchester: Manchester University Press. p. 48. ISBN 0719068916.
^ Linder, Douglas (1999). "Biography of General William R. Peers". Law.umkc.edu. Archived from the original on 27 April 1999. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Thompson, Hugh (2003). Moral Courage In Combat: The My Lai Story (PDF) (Speech). William C. Stutt Ethics Lecture. Annapolis, MD. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 7 March 2022.
^ Schell, Jonathan. The Military Half: An Account of Destruction in Quang Ngai and Quang Tin. New York: Knopf, 1968.
^ The New Yorker, Volume 45, Issues 41 45, 1969, p. 27.
^ Turse, Nick (2008). "A My Lai a Month". The Nation.
^ Nelson, Deborah (2008). The War Behind Me: Vietnam Veterans Confront the Truth about U.S. War Crimes. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00527-7.
^ "Lt. William Calley charged for My Lai massacre". History. 5 September 1969. Retrieved 19 January 2020.
^ Linder, Douglas (1999). "Biographies of Key Figures in the My Lai Courts-Martial: Oran Henderson". UMKC School of Law. Archived from the original on 6 November 2010. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ a b McCarty, Mary. 45 years later, impact from My Lai case is still felt, Dayton Daily News, 16 March 2013.
^ Neier, Aryeh. War Crimes: Brutality, Genocide, Terror, and the Struggle for Justice, New York: Times Books, 1998.
^ Linder, Douglas (1999). "An Introduction to the My Lai Courts-Martial". Law.umkc.edu. Archived from the original on 24 December 2010. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ a b Hersh, Seymour M. Cover-Up: the Army's Secret Investigation of the Massacre at My Lai 4. New York: Random House, 1972.
^ Cosgrove, Ben. "American Atrocity: Remembering My Lai". Time. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2018.
^ a b Marshall, Burke; Goldstein, Joseph (2 April 1976). "Learning From My Lai: A Proposal on War Crimes". The New York Times. p. 26.
^ Taylor, Telford. Nuremberg and Vietnam: An American Tragedy, Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1970, p. 139. Cited in Oliver, Kendrick. The My Lai Massacre in American History and Memory. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006, p. 112.
^ a b Turse, Nick (2013). Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in Vietnam. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0805086911.
^ Teitel, Martin (6 June 1972). "Again, the Suffering of Mylai". The New York Times. p. 45. Retrieved 19 March 2008.
^ Esper, George.'It's Something You've Got to Live With': My Lai Memories Haunt Soldiers, Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1988.
^ Complete Program Transcript, My Lai   WGBH American Experience, pbs.org; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ a b c "'Blood and fire' of My Lai remembered 30 years later", CNN.com, 16 March 1998.
^ a b My Lai Survivors Gather to Pray for Victims, Peace 40 Years After Massacre Associated Press, 16 March 2008.
^ Siegel, R. "My Lai Officer Apologizes for Massacre": All Things Considered, NPR.org, 21 August 2009.
^ Calley Apologizes for 1968 My Lai Massacre. A video report by Democracy Now!; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ "Ex-Vietnam lieutenant apologizes for massacre". The Seattle Times. 21 August 2009. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009.
^ "Calley expresses remorse for role in My Lai massacre in Vietnam". Los Angeles Times. 22 August 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ King, Tim. "M  Lai Survivor Disappointed in Calley's 'Terse Apology' for War Atrocities", salem-news.com, 22 November 2010.
^ "Ltc Frank Akeley Barker". Thewall-usa.com. 26 November 1967. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Peers, William R., Joseph Goldstein, Burke Marshall, and Jack Schwartz. The My Lai Massacre and Its Cover-Up: Beyond the Reach of Law?: The Peers Commission Report. New York: Free Press, 1976.
^ Calley admits slayings on Capt. Medina's order, Rome News-Tribune, 23 February 1971.
^ General Heard My Lai Radio Conversations: Pentagon Says Americal Commander Was in Copter During Alleged Massacre. Los Angeles Times, 19 December 1969.
^ Calley jury to call own witnesses, The Milwaukee Journal, 6 March 1971.
^ Greider, William. Kill Order Refuted at Court-Martial, The Victoria Advocate, 10 March 1971.
^ "Peers Report: Captain Ernest Medina". Law.umkc.edu. Archived from the original on 8 May 1999. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Henderson Witness Admits False Statement about My Lai. Daytona Beach Morning Journal, 17 September 1971.
^ Peers, William R. The My Lai Inquiry. New York: Norton, 1979. ISBN 0394474600
^ Lelyveld, Joseph. A soldier who refused to fire at Songmy, The New York Times, 14 December 1969.
^ The My Lai Massacre in American History and Memory. Manchester University Press. 2006. ISBN 9780719068911. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "The Ethical Humanist Award: New York Society for Ethical Culture". Nysec.org. 7 September 2010. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ a b Timeline: Charlie Company and the Massacre at My Lai, American Experience, pbs.org. accessed February 23, 2018
^ Lawrence C. La Croix. Reflection on My Lai,. Los Angeles Times, 25 March 1993.
^ "In Cally testimony: Soldier refused 'order'", Ellensburg Daily Record, 7 December 1970.
^ Digital History Archived 7 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine, an online textbook maintained by the University of Utah.
^ "Armed Forces: The My Lai Trials Begin". Time. 2 November 1970. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 2 May 2010.
^ War Hero Relives Day He Refused To Murder, Orlando Sentinel, 19 November 1989.
^ "My Lai Testimony of Mr. Andress Delgado", pg. 975, 7 October 1969.
^ "Remember My Lai". WGBH Educational Foundation, 23 May 1989; retrieved 28 June 2009.
^ "Frederick Widmer Obituary", Lower Burrell, Pennsylvania | Legacy.com, 13 August 2016.
^ "History of the 1st Battalion 20th Infantry", A History Of The Unit From Its Formation At Schofield Barracks, Hawaii Through Its Deactivation After Service In The Republic Of Viet Nam. Research And Compilation By Cpt. Chuck Seketa.
^ Website with history of the Charlie Company, charlie1-20.org; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ "1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, HHQ Company Roster - 1968". Retrieved 11 March 2016.
^ "Four Hours in M  Lai: A Case Study". Fsa.ulaval.ca. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Charlie Company Roster, 1968, Research and compilation Of "C Company" Rosters provided by Daniel Malin.
^ Bigart, Homer. Calley Trial Off for the Holidays: Defense Presses View That Medina Was to Blame, The New York Times, 18 December 1970.
^ Yarborough, Trin. Surviving Twice: Amerasian Children of the Vietnam War. Washington, D.C.: Potomac Books, 2005; ISBN 1-57488-864-1
^ Pilot Testifies Senior Officers Knew Something Amiss On Day Of Massacre. Lewiston Morning Tribune, 14 January 1971.
^ Reed, Roy. "Veteran Says He Slew Ten in Vietnam Village", The New York Times, 27 November 1969.
^ Dahlia Wren, "My Lai: No Accident, Says Soldier Who Was There", Orlando Sentinel, 30 July 1989.
^ U.S. troops Surrounds Red, Kill 128. Pacific Star and Stripes (Three Star edition), 18 March 1969.
^ "Muscatine bats 1000", Trident, 11th Infantry Brigade, Volume 1, Number 10, 12 April 1968.
^ Roberts, Jay A. Recent Operations in Pinkville. Press-Release   112-68-75, Information office, 11th Infantry Brigade, 4 April 1968.
^ Summary of Peers's Report, umkc.edu; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ John Kifner, Report on Brutal Vietnam Campaign Stirs Memories, New York Times, 28 December 2003.
^ Belknap, Michael R. The Vietnam War on Trial. The My Lai Massacre and the Court-Martial of Lieutenant Calley. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2002.
^ Toppe, Jana. Catering to the silent majority: The M  Lai massacre as a media challenge. Free University of Berlin, 10 October 2011.
^ Hersh, Seymour M. M  Lai 4: A Report on the Massacre and its Aftermath. New York: Random House, 1970.
^ Kamm, Henry. "Vietnamese Say G.I.'s Slew 567 in Town", The New York Times, 17 November 1969.
^ "The massacre at M  Lai", Life, Vol. 67,   23, 5 December 1969.
^ "Nation: The My Lai Massacre". Time. 28 November 1969. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007.
^ Christian Science Monitor, 24 November 1969.
^ Oliver, Kendrick. The My Lai Massacre in American History and Memory. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006.
^ Oliver, Kendrick (2003). "Atrocity, authenticity, and American exceptionalism: (ir)rationalising the massacre at My Lai". Journal of American Studies. 37 (2): 251. doi:10.1017/S0021875803007102. S2CID 145094745.
^ Turse, Nick; Nelson, Deborah (6 August 2006). "Civilian Killings Went Unpunished". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 28 October 2019.
^ Nelson, Deborah (14 August 2006). "Vietnam, The War Crimes Files". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 1 November 2019.
^ Brummer, Justin. "The Vietnam War: A History in Song". History Today. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
^ Brosnahan, Cori. "Music of My Lai". PBS. Retrieved 21 August 2020.
^ "Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. May 1971. Retrieved 20 August 2020.
^ "Cap Nixes Disk; Seeks Not to Glorify Calley". Billboard. 19 June 1971. Retrieved 20 August 2020.
^ "Bubbling Under the Hot 100". Billboard. May 1971. Retrieved 20 August 2020.
^ Interviews with My Lai Veterans (1971), IMDb; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ Judgment: The Court Martial of Lieutenant William Calley (1975)
^ Remember My Lai
^ My Lai Revisited, cbsnews.com; accessed 23 February 2018.
^ "The My Lai Tapes, 1968 Myth or Reality". BBC Radio 4. 15 March 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "The My Lai Tapes (audio file in English)". BBC. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "The My Lai Tapes (audio file and transcript in Vietnamese)". BBC. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ "My Lai". American Experience. Boston. 26 April 2010. PBS. WGBH.
^ My Lai Four  2009 on YouTube
^ Cigognini, Carla, "My Lai Four   Foto, trailer e locandina del film di Paolo Bertola", cineblog.it, 9 December 2010.
^ "My Lai Inside". Retrieved 12 January 2021.
^ "The Lieutenant". Broadway World. Retrieved 22 February 2019.
^ Frascina, Francis, Art, Politics, and Dissent: Aspects of the Art Left in Sixties America, pp. 175 86.
^ "Photographic Evidence of the Massacre at My Lai". PBS. Retrieved 23 February 2018.
^ "My Lai photographer Ron Haeberle admits he destroyed pictures of soldiers in the act of killing". Cleveland Plain Dealer Extra. 20 November 2009. Retrieved 23 February 2018.
^ M. Paul Holsinger (1999). "And Babies". War and American Popular Culture. Greenwood Press. p. 363. ISBN 9780313299087.
^ Bilton, Michael, and Kevin Sim. Four Hours in My Lai: A War Crime and Its Aftermath. London: Viking, 1992.
^ "LHCMA Catalogue: Papers of Four Hours in My Lai television documentary archive, 1964 1992". King's College, London. Retrieved 18 June 2011.
^ Peers, William R. Report of the Department of the Army Review of the Preliminary Investigations into the My Lai Incident. Vol. 1. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1974.
^ Psychiatrist backs Hutto defense. The News-Dispatch, 12 January 1971.
^ Becker, Carol. Pilgrimage to My Lai: Social Memory and the Making of Art, Art Journal, Vol. 62, No. 4, Winter, 2003.
^ Westfall, Marilyn. "The Humanitarian Impulse: Not 'God's Work' for this Veteran" Archived 29 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine The Humanist: A Magazine of Critical Inquiry and Social Concern, March/April 2009.
^ Our Projects: M  Lai Peace Park, Mylaipeacepark.org; accessed 23 February 2018.
Further reading[edit]
161st Assault Helicopter Company. Unit History of the 161st Assault Helicopter Company (who intervened in the massacre)
Americal Division Veterans Association; Americal Locations in Vietnam, cited 3 June 2006.
Anderson, David L. (1998) Facing My Lai: Moving Beyond the Massacre University Press of Kansas: Lawrence, Kansas   extensive interviews with trial participants and soldiers.[ISBN missing]
Angers, Trent (1999) The Forgotten Hero of My Lai: The Hugh Thompson Story Lafayette, La.: Acadian House.
Becker, Elizabeth. Kissinger Tapes Describe Crises, War and Stark Photos of Abuse., The New York Times, 27 May 2004 (mirrored)
Belknap, Michal R. (2002) The Vietnam War on Trial: The My Lai Massacre and the Court-Martial of Lieutenant Calley. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0700612114.
Beidler, Philip D., "Calley's Ghost", Virginia Quarterly Review, Winter 2003.
Bilton, Michael and Sim, Kevin. (1992) Four Hours in My Lai New York: Viking   a re-examination, draws extensively on interviews with participants and contains detailed bibliographic references.[ISBN missing]
Chomsky, Noam. After Pinkville, Bertrand Russell War Crimes Tribunal on Vietnam, 1971[ISBN missing]
Chomsky, Noam and Edward S. Herman. Counter-Revolutionary Violence: Bloodbaths in Fact & Propaganda, 1973 and 2004
Colburn, Lawrence and Paula Brock. The Choices Made   Lessons from My Lai on Drawing the Line, Seattle Times, 10 March 2002
Gershen, Martin. (1971) Destroy or Die: The True Story of My Lai New York: Arlington House.[ISBN missing]
Goldstein, Joseph. (1976) The My Lai Massacre and its Cover-Up New York: Free Press.[ISBN missing]
Greiner, Bernd. (2009) War without Fronts: The USA in Vietnam New Haven: Yale University Press.[ISBN missing]
Greiner, Bernd. (2009) The March 1968 Massacre in My Lai 4 and My Khe 4, Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence, [online], published on 5 October 2009, URL, ISSN 1961-9898
Hammer, Richard. (1971) The Court-Martial of Lt. Calley New York: Coward.
Hastings, Max, "Wrath of the Centurions" (review of Howard Jones, My Lai: Vietnam, 1968 and the Descent into Darkness, Oxford, 2017, 504 pp., ISBN 978-0195393606), London Review of Books, vol. 40, no. 2 (25 January 2018), pp. 19 22.
Hersh, Seymour M. (1972). Cover-up: the Army's secret investigation of the massacre at My Lai 4. Random House. ISBN 0394474600.
Hersh, Seymour M. (1970). My Lai 4: A Report on the Massacre and Its Aftermath. Random House. ISBN 0394437373.
Hersh, Seymour M. The original, Pulitzer-Prize winning articles about the My Lai Massacre for the St. Louis Post Dispatch, 13 November, 20 November and 25 November 1969.
Hersh, Seymour M. " Looking for Calley - How a young journalist untangled the riddle of My Lai", Harper's Magazine, June 2018.
My Lai and Why It Matters: Review of Ron Ridenhour's Videotaped Lecture
Jones, Howard (2017) My Lai, Vietnam, 1968, and the Descent into Darkness. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195393606.
O'Brien, Tim. (1994) In the Lake of the Woods, McClelland & Stewart. ISBN 1895246318   historical fiction about a Vietnam Vet who can't escape his own experience of My Lai.
Olson, James S. and Roberts, Randy (eds.) (1998) My Lai: A Brief History with Documents, Palgrave MacMillan. ISBN 0312177674
Peers, William R. (1970). Robert E. Lester, ed. The Peers inquiry of the massacre at My Lai. Bethesda, MD: University Publications of America, 1996. ISBN 978-1556556609
Raimondo, Maj. Tony, JA. The My Lai Massacre: A Case Study, Human Rights Program, School of the Americas, Fort Benning, Georgia
Ridenhour, Ron. "Jesus Was a Gook"
Rockwood, Lawrence. "The Lesson Avoided: the Official Legacy of the My Lai Massacre", The Moral Dimension of Asymmetrical Warfare, Counter-terrorism, Democratic Values and Military Ethics, Netherlands Defense College (2008).[ISBN missing]
Sack, John. (1971) Lieutenant Calley: His Own Story New York: Viking.[ISBN missing]
"My Lai: An American Tragedy". Time. 5 December 1969. Archived from the original on 28 November 2007.
University of Missouri-Kansas City Law School. The My Lai Courts-Martial, 1970
Teitel, Martin. Again, the Suffering of Mylai, article preview, New York Times, 7 June 1972, p. 45.
Texas Tech University. The Vietnam Oral History Project
Toledo Blade. Special Report: Tiger Force
Valentine, Douglas (1990). The Phoenix Program. iUniverse. ISBN 978-0595007387. Retrieved 18 June 2011.Chapter 24 "Transgressions" deals with the My Lai Massacre.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to My Lai massacre.
Wikiquote has quotations related to M  Lai massacre.
My Lai   An American Experience, WGBH, PBS Documentary
The Peers Inquiry of the Massacre at My Lai, Library of Congress.
Into The Dark: The My Lai Massacre Crime Library on truTV.com
The My Lai Courts-Martial, 1970
The My Lai Massacre
BBC World Service: The My Lai Tapes
My Lai Revisited: 47 Years Later, Seymour Hersh Travels to Vietnam Site of U.S. Massacre He Exposed from Democracy Now!
1st Battalion, 20th Infantry   members of Company C, including 2LT Calley (original source)
HHC 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry, daily report 16 March 1968 (original source)
vteVietnam WarParticipants
North Vietnam (Vi t Minh / PAVN, PRG, Viet Cong)
South Vietnam (ARVN)
International participants
United States
Thailand
Australia
China
Republic of China
South Korea
New Zealand
Related conflicts
Laotian Civil War
Cambodian Civil War
Cold War (1962 1979)
Background
French Indochina
Japanese occupation
State of Vietnam (1949 1955)
First Indochina War (Vi t Minh, Battle of Dien Bien Phu)
1954 Geneva Conference
Vietnamese migration of 1954 55
1955 referendum
North Vietnamese invasion of Laos
1960 South Vietnamese coup attempt
Events
1962: Strategic Hamlet Program
Independence Palace bombing
1963: Buddhist crisis
Coup against Diem
1964: Coup against Minh
Gulf of Tonkin incident / Resolution
December coup
1965: U.S. escalation / "Americanization"
1965 South Vietnamese coup
Bombing of North Vietnam
1966: Buddhist Uprising
1968: Tet Offensive (Khe Sanh, Hue)
1970: Cambodian campaign
1971: Vietnamization policy, ARVN campaign in Laos
1972: Easter Offensive
Christmas bombings
1973: Paris Peace Accords
1974: Battle of Ph c Long
1975: 1975 spring offensive
Fall of Saigon
Other topics
Agent Orange
Body count
Canada and the Vietnam War
C  Chi tunnels
Ho Chi Minh trail
Opposition to United States involvement
Pentagon Papers
POW/MIA issue
Rape during the Vietnam War
SEATO
Sihanouk Trail
United States news media and Vietnam
Vietnam War in film
Vietnam War in games
War crimes (Hu , M  Lai,  k S n)
Weapons of the Vietnam War
Aftermath
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Vietnamese boat people
Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Normalization of US Vietnam relations
 Category
 Battles and operations
 Commons
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=M _Lai_massacre&oldid=1149591014"