This is a timeline of the civil rights movement in the United States, a nonviolent mid-20th century freedom movement to gain legal equality and the enforcement of constitutional rights for people of color. The goals of the movement included securing equal protection under the law, ending legally institutionalized racial discrimination, and gaining equal access to public facilities, education reform, fair housing, and the ability to vote.
1947 1953[edit]
1947[edit]
April 14  In Mendez v. Westminster, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit rules that the forced segregation of Mexican-American students into separate "Mexican schools" was unconstitutional and unlawful.
1948[edit]
In Delgado v Bastrop I.S.D., the Texas Attorney General decided that segregation of Mexican-American children was illegal.[1]
In Shelley v. Kraemer, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that racially restrictive covenants violate the Fourteenth Amendment's equal protection clause and thus cannot be enforced by courts, though they may still be agreed to by private parties.
The anthology series Destination Freedom premiers on local Chicago radio. This radio drama, produced by Richard Durham, will appear on Sunday mornings until mid-1950.
1950[edit]
During the early years of the Miss America pageant, under the directorship of Lenora Slaughter, it became racially segregated via rule number seven that stated: "contestants must be of good health and of the white race. [2][3] Rule number seven was abolished in 1950.[4]
In Henderson v. United States, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that racial segregation on railway dining cars violated the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887.
1951[edit]
In April 1951, students at Robert Russa Moton High School, a segregated "Colored" school in Prince Edward County Virginia, staged a student strike over poor conditions and racial segregation. That strike led to the NAACP filing Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County in 1952.[5]
1952[edit]
On behalf of Black parents and children, the NAACP filed five lawsuits against school segregation that challenged the legality of the 1896 "separate but equal" ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson. The five cases were Brown v. Board of Education, from Topeka Kansas, Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County from Virginia, Bolling v. Sharpe from Washington DC, Briggs v. Elliott from Clarendon County South Carolina, and Bulah v. Gebhart from Delaware. The five cases were later consolidated in the Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of Education ruling.[6]
1954 1959[edit]
1954[edit]
May 3  In Hernandez v. Texas, the U.S. Supreme Court rules that Mexican Americans and all other racial groups in the United States are entitled to equal protection under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
May 17  In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kans. and Bolling v. Sharpe, the U.S. Supreme Court rules against the "separate but equal" doctrine, overturning Plessy v. Ferguson and saying that segregation of public schools is unconstitutional.
July 27  The Charleston, Arkansas school board unanimously votes to end segregation in the school district. Ending segregation for first through twelfth grades, the Charleston school district was the first school district among the former Confederate States to desegregate. The schools opened for the new school year on August 23.
July 30  At a special meeting in Jackson, Mississippi, called by Governor Hugh White, T.R.M. Howard of the Regional Council of Negro Leadership, along with nearly one hundred other black leaders, publicly refuse to support a segregationist plan to maintain "separate but equal" in exchange for a crash program to increase spending on black schools.
September 2  In Montgomery, Alabama, 23 black children are prevented from attending all-white elementary schools, defying the recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling.
September 7   The District of Columbia ends segregated education; Baltimore, Maryland, follows suit on September 8.
September 15  Protests by white parents in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, force schools to postpone desegregation another year.
September 16  Mississippi attempts to abolish all public schools with an amendment to its State Constitution, but the amendment fails.[7]
September 30  Integration of a high school in Milford, Delaware, collapses when white students boycott classes.
October 4  Student demonstrations take place against integration of Washington, DC, public schools.
October 19  Federal judge upholds an Oklahoma law requiring African-American candidates to be identified on voting ballots as "negro".
October 30  Desegregation of the U.S. Armed Forces said to be complete.
Frankie Muse Freeman is the lead attorney for the landmark NAACP case Davis et al. v. the St. Louis Housing Authority, which ended legal racial discrimination in the city's public housing. Constance Baker Motley was an attorney for NAACP: it was unusual to have two women attorneys leading such a high-profile case.
1955[edit]
January 15  President Dwight D. Eisenhower signs Executive Order 10590, establishing the President's Committee on Government Policy to enforce a nondiscrimination policy in Federal employment.
January 20  Demonstrators from CORE and Morgan State University stage a successful sit-in to desegregate Read's Drug Store in Baltimore, Maryland.
April 5  Mississippi passes a law penalizing white students by jail and fines who attend school with blacks.
March 2   15-year-old Claudette Colvin refuses to give up her seat on the bus to a white woman, eventually resulting in the Browder v. Gayle case.
May 7  NAACP and Regional Council of Negro Leadership activist Reverend George W. Lee is killed in Belzoni, Mississippi.
May 31  The U.S. Supreme Court rules in " Brown II" that desegregation must occur with "all deliberate speed".
June 8  University of Oklahoma decides to allow black students.
June 23  Virginia Governor Thomas B. Stanley and Board of Education decide to continue segregated schools into 1956.
June 29  The NAACP wins a U.S. Supreme Court suit which orders the University of Alabama to admit Autherine Lucy.
July 11  The Georgia Board of Education orders that any teacher supporting integration be fired.
July 14  A Federal Appeals Court overturns segregation on Columbia, South Carolina buses.
August 1  Georgia Board of Education fires all black teachers who are members of the NAACP.
August 13  Regional Council of Negro Leadership registration activist Lamar Smith is murdered in Brookhaven, Mississippi.
August 28  Teenager Emmett Till is killed for allegedly whistling at a white woman in Money, Mississippi.
November 7  The Interstate Commerce Commission bans bus segregation in interstate travel in Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company. On the same day, the U.S. Supreme Court bans segregation on public parks and playgrounds. Georgia Governor Marvin Griffin responds that his state would "get out of the park business" rather than allow playgrounds to be desegregated.
December 1  Rosa Parks refuses to give up her seat on a bus, starting the Montgomery bus boycott. This occurs nine months after 15-year-old high school student Claudette Colvin became the first to refuse to give up her seat. Colvin's was the legal case that eventually ended the practice in Montgomery.
Roy Wilkins becomes the NAACP executive secretary.
1956[edit]
January 2  Georgia Tech president Blake R. Van Leer stands up to Governor Griffin's threats to fire him, bar Georgia Tech and Pittsburgh player Bobby Grier over segregation.
January 9  Virginia voters and representatives decide to fund private schools with state money to maintain segregation.
January 16  FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover writes a rare open letter of complaint directed to civil rights leader T. R. M. Howard after Howard charged in a speech that the "FBI can pick up pieces of a fallen airplane on the slopes of a Colorado mountain and find the man who caused the crash, but they can't find a white man when he kills a Negro in the South."[8]
January 24  Governors of Georgia, Mississippi, South Carolina, and Virginia agree to block the integration of schools.
February 1  The Virginia General Assembly passes a resolution that the U.S. Supreme Court integration decision was an "illegal encroachment".
February 3  Autherine Lucy is admitted to the University of Alabama. Whites riot for days, and she is suspended. Later, she is expelled for her part in filing legal action against the university.
February 24  The policy of Massive Resistance is declared by U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, Sr. from Virginia.
February/March  The Southern Manifesto, opposing integration of schools, is drafted and signed by members of the Congressional delegations of Southern states, including 19 members of the Senate and 81 members of the House of Representatives, notably the entire delegations of the states of Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Virginia. On March 12, it is released to the press.
February 13  Wilmington, Delaware's school board decides to end segregation.
February 22  Ninety black leaders in Montgomery, Alabama, are arrested for leading a bus boycott.
February 29  The Mississippi Legislature declares the U.S. Supreme Court integration decision "invalid" in that state.
March 1  The Alabama Legislature votes to ask for federal funds to deport blacks to northern states.
March 12  U.S. Supreme Court orders the University of Florida to admit a black law school applicant "without delay".
March 22  King sentenced to fine or jail for instigating Montgomery bus boycott, suspended pending appeal.
April 23  U.S. Supreme Court strikes down segregation on buses nationwide.
May 26  Circuit Judge Walter B. Jones issues an injunction prohibiting the NAACP from operating in Alabama.
May 28  The Tallahassee, Florida bus boycott begins.
June 5  The Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (ACMHR) is founded at a mass meeting in Birmingham, Alabama.
September 2 11  Tear gas and National Guard used to quell segregationists rioting in Clinton, Tennessee; 12 black students enter high school under Guard protection. Smaller disturbances occur in Mansfield, Texas, and Sturgis, Kentucky.
September 10  Two black students are prevented by a mob from entering a junior college in Texarkana, Texas. Schools in Louisville, Kentucky, are successfully desegregated.
September 12  Four black children enter an elementary school in Clay, Kentucky, under National Guard protection; white students boycott. The school board bars the four again on September 17.
October 15  Integrated athletic or social events are banned in Louisiana.
November 13  In Browder v. Gayle, the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down Alabama laws requiring segregation of buses. This ruling, together with the ICC's 1955 ruling in Keys v. Carolina Coach banning "Jim Crow laws" in bus travel among the states, is a landmark in outlawing "Jim Crow" in bus travel. The Browder case was brought and won by noted civil rights attorney Fred Gray.
December 20  Federal marshals enforce the ruling to desegregate bus systems in Montgomery.
December 24  Blacks in Tallahassee, Florida, begin defying segregation on city buses.
December 25  The parsonage in Birmingham, Alabama, occupied by Fred Shuttlesworth, movement leader, is bombed. Shuttlesworth receives only minor injuries.
December 26  The ACMHR tests the Browder v. Gayle ruling by riding in the white sections of Birmingham city buses. 22 demonstrators are arrested.
Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission formed.
Director J. Edgar Hoover orders the FBI to begin the COINTELPRO program to investigate and disrupt "dissident" groups within the United States.
1957[edit]
February 8  The Georgia Senate votes to declare the 14th and 15th Amendments to the United States Constitution null and void in that state.
February 14  Southern Christian Leadership Conference is formed; Martin Luther King Jr. is named its chairman.
April 18  The Florida Senate votes to consider U.S. Supreme Court's desegregation decisions "null and void".
May 17  The Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom in Washington, DC, at which Martin Luther King Jr. gives his "Give Us the Ballot" speech, is at the time the largest nonviolent demonstration for civil rights.
September 2  Orval Faubus, governor of Arkansas, calls out the National Guard to block integration of Little Rock Central High School.
September 6  Federal judge orders Nashville public schools to integrate immediately.
September 15  New York Times reports that in three years since the decision, there has been minimal progress toward integration in four southern states, and no progress at all in seven.
September 24  President Dwight Eisenhower federalizes the National Guard and also orders US Army troops to ensure Little Rock Central High School in Arkansas is integrated. Federal and National Guard troops escort the Little Rock Nine.
September 27  Civil Rights Act of 1957 signed by President Eisenhower.
October 7  The finance minister of Ghana is refused service at a Dover, Delaware restaurant. President Eisenhower hosts him at the White House to apologize on October 10.
October 9  The Florida Legislature votes to close any school if federal troops are sent to enforce integration.
October 31  Officers of NAACP were arrested in Little Rock for failing to comply with a new financial disclosure ordinance.
November 26  The Texas Legislature votes to close any school where federal troops might be sent.
1958[edit]
June 29  Bethel Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, is bombed by Ku Klux Klan members.[9]
June 30  In NAACP v. Alabama, the U.S. Supreme Court rules that the NAACP was not required to release membership lists to continue operating in the state.
July  NAACP Youth Council sponsored sit-ins at the lunch counter of a Dockum Drug Store in downtown Wichita, Kansas. After three weeks, the movement successfully gets the store to change its policy and soon afterward all Dockum stores in Kansas are desegregated.
August 19  Clara Luper and the NAACP Youth Council conduct the largest successful sit-in to date, on drug store lunch-counters in Oklahoma City. This starts a successful six-year campaign by Luper and the council to desegregate businesses and related institutions in Oklahoma City.
September 2  Governor J. Lindsay Almond of Virginia threatens to shut down any school if it is forced to integrate.
September 4  The U.S. Justice Department sues under Civil Rights Act to force Terrell County, Georgia, to register blacks to vote.
September 8  A Federal judge orders Louisiana State University to desegregate; sixty-nine African-Americans enroll successfully on September 12.
September 12  In Cooper v. Aaron the U.S. Supreme Court rules that the states were bound by the Court's decisions. Governor Orval Faubus responds by shutting down all four high schools in Little Rock, and Governor Almond shuts one in Front Royal, Virginia.
September 18  Governor Lindsay closes two more schools in Charlottesville, Virginia, and six in Norfolk on September 27.
September 29  The U.S. Supreme Court rules that states may not use evasive measures to avoid desegregation.
October 8  A Federal judge in Harrisonburg, Virginia, rules that public money may not be used for segregated private schools.
October 20  Thirteen black Alabamians arrested for sitting in the front of a bus in Birmingham.
November 28  Federal court throws out Louisiana law against integrated athletic events.
December 8  Voter registration officials in Montgomery refuse to cooperate with US Civil Rights Commission investigation.
1959[edit]
January 9  One Federal judge throws out segregation on Atlanta, Georgia buses while another orders Montgomery buses to comply.
January 19  Federal Appeals court overturns Virginia's closure of the schools in Norfolk; they reopen January 28 with 17 black students.
April 18  Martin Luther King Jr. speaks for the integration of schools at a rally of 26,000 at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC.
November 20  Alabama passes laws to limit black voter registration.
1960 1968[edit]
1960[edit]
February 1  Four black students sit at the Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, sparking six months of the Greensboro Sit-Ins.
February 13  The Nashville, Tennessee Sit-in begins, although the Nashville students, trained by activists and nonviolent teachers James Lawson and Myles Horton, had been doing preliminary groundwork towards the action for two months. The sit-in ends successfully in May.
February 17  Alabama grand jury indicts Martin Luther King Jr. for tax evasion.
February 19  Virginia Union University students, called the Richmond 34, stage a sit-in at Woolworth's lunch counter in Richmond, Virginia.[10]
February 22  The Richmond 34 stage a sit-in the Richmond Room at Thalhimer's department store.
March 3  Vanderbilt University expels James Lawson for sit-in participation.
March 4  Houston's first sit-in, led by Texas Southern University students, was held at Weingarten supermarket, located at 4110 Almeda in Houston, Texas.
March 9  An Appeal for Human Rights was published.
March 15  The Atlanta sit-ins begin.
March 19  San Antonio becomes the first city to integrate lunch counters.
April 8  Weak civil rights bill survives Senate filibuster.
April 15 17  The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) is formed in Raleigh, North Carolina.
April 19  Z. Alexander Looby's home is bombed, with no injuries. Looby, a Nashville civil rights lawyer, was active in the city's ongoing Nashville sit-in for integration of public facilities.
May  Nashville sit-ins end with business agreements to integrate lunch counters and other public areas.
May 6  Civil Rights Act of 1960 signed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
May 28  William Robert Ming and Hubert Delaney obtain an acquittal of Dr. King from an all-white jury in Alabama.[11]
June 28  Bayard Rustin resigns from SCLC after condemnation by Representative Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.
July 31  Elijah Muhammad calls for an all-black state; membership in Nation of Islam is estimated at 50,000 to 100,000.
August  Rev. Wyatt Tee Walker replaces Ella Baker as SCLC's Executive Director.
October 19  King and 50 others arrested at a sit-in at Atlanta's Rich's Department Store.
October 26  King's earlier probation was revoked; he is transferred to Reidsville State Prison.
October 28  After intervention from Robert F. Kennedy, King is freed on bond.
November 14  Ruby Bridges becomes the first African-American child to attend an all-white elementary school in the South (William Frantz Elementary School) following court-ordered integration in New Orleans, Louisiana. This event was portrayed by Norman Rockwell in his 1964 painting The Problem We All Live With.
December 5  In Boynton v. Virginia, the U.S. Supreme Court holds that racial segregation in bus terminals is illegal because such segregation violates the Interstate Commerce Act. This ruling, in combination with the Interstate Commerce Commission's 1955 decision in Keys v. Carolina Coach Co., effectively outlaws segregation on interstate buses and at the terminals servicing such buses.
1961[edit]
January 11  Rioting in Athens, Georgia, over court-ordered admission of first two African-Americans (Hamilton E. Holmes and Charlayne Hunter-Gault) at the University of Georgia leads to their suspension, but they are ordered reinstated.
January 31  Members of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and nine students are arrested in Rock Hill, South Carolina, for a sit-in at a McCrory's lunch counter.
March 6  President John F. Kennedy issues Executive Order 10925, which establishes a Presidential committee that later becomes the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
May 4  The first group of Freedom Riders, with the intent of integrating interstate buses, leaves Washington, DC, by Greyhound bus. The group, organized by the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), leaves shortly after the U.S. Supreme Court has outlawed segregation in interstate transportation terminals.[12]
May 6  Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy delivers a speech to the students of the University of Georgia School of Law in Athens, Georgia, promising to enforce civil rights legislation. It is the Kennedy administration's first formal endorsement of civil rights.[13]
May 14  The Freedom Riders' bus is attacked and burned outside of Anniston, Alabama. A mob beats the Freedom Riders upon their arrival in Birmingham. The Freedom Riders are arrested in Jackson, Mississippi, and spend 40 to 60 days in Parchman Penitentiary.[12]
May 17  Nashville students, coordinated by Diane Nash, John Lewis, and James Bevel of the Nashville Student Movement, take up the Freedom Ride, signaling the increased involvement of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).
May 20  Freedom Riders are assaulted in Montgomery, Alabama, at the Greyhound Bus Station.
May 21  King, the Freedom Riders, and congregation of 1,500 at Rev. Ralph Abernathy s First Baptist Church in Montgomery are besieged by a mob of segregationists; RFK as Attorney General sends federal marshals to protect them.
May 29  Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, citing the 1955 landmark ICC ruling in Keys v. Carolina Coach Company and the U.S. Supreme Court's 1960 decision in Boynton v. Virginia, petitions the ICC to enforce desegregation in interstate travel.
June August  U.S. Department of Justice initiates talks with civil rights groups and foundations on beginning Voter Education Project.
July  SCLC begins citizenship classes; Andrew J. Young hired to direct the program. Bob Moses begins voter registration in McComb, Mississippi. He leaves because of violence.
September  James Forman becomes SNCC s Executive Secretary.
September 23  The Interstate Commerce Commission, at RFK s insistence, issues new rules ending discrimination in interstate travel, effective November 1, 1961, six years after the ICC's ruling in Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company.
September 25  Voter registration activist and NAACP member Herbert Lee is shot and killed by a white state legislator in McComb, Mississippi.
November 1  All interstate buses are required to display a certificate that reads: "Seating aboard this vehicle is without regard to race, color, creed, or national origin, by order of the Interstate Commerce Commission."[14]
November 1  SNCC workers Charles Sherrod and Cordell Reagon and nine Chatmon Youth Council members test new ICC rules at Trailways bus station in Albany, Georgia.[15]
November 17  SNCC workers help encourage and coordinate black activism in Albany, Georgia, culminating in the founding of the Albany Movement as a formal coalition.[15]
November 22  Three high school students from Chatmon's Youth Council were arrested after using "positive actions" by walking into white sections of the Albany bus station.[15]
November 22  Albany State College students Bertha Gober and Blanton Hall were arrested after entering the white waiting room of the Albany Trailways station.[15]
December 10  Freedom Riders from Atlanta, SNCC leader J. Charles Jones, and Albany State student Bertha Gober are arrested at Albany Union Railway Terminal, sparking mass demonstrations, with hundreds of protesters arrested over the next five days.[16]
December 11 15  Five hundred protesters arrested in Albany, Georgia.
December 15  King arrives in Albany, Georgia in response to a call from Dr. W. G. Anderson, the leader of the Albany Movement to desegregate public facilities.[12]
December 16  King is arrested at an Albany, Georgia demonstration. He is charged with obstructing the sidewalk and parading without a permit.[12]
December 18  Albany truce, including a 60-day postponement of King's trial; King leaves town.[17]
Whitney Young is appointed executive director of the National Urban League and begins expanding its size and mission.
Black Like Me by John Howard Griffin, a white Southerner who deliberately darkened his skin to pass as a Negro in the Deep South, is published, describing "Jim Crow" segregation for a national audience.
An amendment to the Library Bill of Rights was passed in 1961 that made clear that an individual's library use should not be denied or abridged because of race, religion, national origin, or political views. Some communities decided to close their doors rather than desegregate.[18]
From 1934 through November 1961, the Professional Golfers Association of America maintained a "Caucasian-only" membership clause in its bylaws. The clause was removed by amending its constitution.[19][20]
1962[edit]
January 18 20  Student protests over sit-in leaders  expulsions at Baton Rouge s Southern University, the nation's largest black school, close it down.
February  Representatives of SNCC, CORE, and the NAACP form the Council of Federated Organizations (COFO). A grant request to fund COFO voter registration activities is submitted to the Voter Education Project (VEP).
February 26  Segregated transportation facilities, both interstate and intrastate, ruled unconstitutional by U.S. Supreme Court.
March  SNCC workers sit-in at US Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy's office to protest jailings in Baton Rouge.
March 20  FBI installs wiretaps on NAACP activist Stanley Levison s office.
April 3  Defense Department orders full racial integration of military reserve units, except the National Guard.
June  SNCC workers establish voter registration projects in rural southwest Georgia.
July 10  August 28 SCLC renews protests in Albany; MLK in jail July 10 12 and July 27   August 10.
August 31  Fannie Lou Hamer attempts to register to vote in Indianola, Mississippi.
September 9  Two black churches used by SNCC for voter registration meetings are burned in Sasser, Georgia.
September 20  James Meredith is barred from becoming the first black student to enroll at the University of Mississippi.
September 30-October 1  U.S. Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black orders James Meredith admitted to Ole Miss.; he enrolls and a white riot in Oxford ensues. French photographer Paul Guihard and Oxford resident Ray Gunter are killed.
October  Leflore County, Mississippi, supervisors cut off surplus food distribution in retaliation against voter drive.
October 23  FBI begins Communist Infiltration (COMINFIL) investigation of SCLC.
November 20  Attorney General Kennedy authorizes FBI wiretap on Stanley Levison s home telephone.
November 20  President Kennedy upholds 1960 presidential campaign promises to eliminate housing segregation by signing Executive Order 11063 banning segregation in Federally funded housing.
1963[edit]
January 14  Incoming Alabama governor George Wallace calls for "segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever" in his inaugural address.
April 3 May 10  The Birmingham campaign, organized by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, protests segregation in Birmingham by daily mass demonstrations.
April  Mary Lucille Hamilton, Field Secretary for the Congress of Racial Equality, refuses to answer a judge in Gadsden, Alabama until she is addressed by the honorific "Miss". At the time, it was the southern custom to address white people by honorifics and people of color by their first names. Jailed for contempt of court Hamilton refused to pay bail. The case Hamilton v. Alabama is filed by the NAACP. It reached the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled in 1964 that courts must address persons of color with the same courtesy extended to whites.
April 7  Ministers John Thomas Porter, Nelson H. Smith, and A. D. King lead a group of 2,000 marchers to protest the jailing of movement leaders in Birmingham.
April 12  King is arrested in Birmingham for "parading without a permit".
April 16  King's "Letter from Birmingham Jail" is completed.
April 23  CORE activist William L. Moore is murdered in Gadsden, Alabama.
May 2 4  Birmingham's juvenile court is inundated with African-American children and teenagers arrested after James Bevel, SCLC's Director of Direct Action and Director of Nonviolent Education, launches his "D-Day" youth march. The actions span three days to become the Birmingham Children's Crusade where over a thousand children and students are arrested. The images of fire hoses and police dogs turned on the protesters are televised around the world.[21]
May 9 10  The Children's Crusade lays the groundwork for the terms of a negotiated truce on Thursday, May 9, which puts an end to mass demonstrations in return for rolling back segregation laws and practices. Dr. King and Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth announce the settlement terms on Friday, May 10, only after King holds out to orchestrate the release of thousands of jailed demonstrators with bail money from Harry Belafonte and Robert Kennedy.[22]
May 11 12  A double bombing in Birmingham, probably organized by the KKK with help from local police, precipitates rioting, police retaliation, the intervention of state troopers, and finally mobilization of federal troops.
May 13  In United States of America and Interstate Commerce Commission v. the City of Jackson, Mississippi et al., the United States Court of Appeals Fifth Circuit rules the city's attempt to circumvent laws desegregating interstate transportation facilities by posting sidewalk signs outside Greyhound, Trailways and Illinois Central terminals reading "Waiting Room for White Only   By Order Police Department" and "Waiting Room for Colored Only  By Order Police Department" to be unlawful.[23]
May 24  A group of Black leaders (assembled by James Baldwin) meets with Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to discuss race relations.
May 29  Violence escalates at NAACP picket of Philadelphia construction site.[24]
May 30  Police attack Florida A&M anti-segregation demonstrators with tear gas; arrest 257.[25]
June 9  Fannie Lou Hamer is among several SNCC workers badly beaten by police in the Winona, Mississippi, jail after their bus stops there.
June 11  "The Stand in the Schoolhouse Door": Alabama Governor George Wallace stands in front of a schoolhouse door at the University of Alabama in an attempt to stop desegregation by the enrollment of two black students, Vivian Malone and James Hood. Wallace stands aside after being confronted by federal marshals, Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, and the Alabama National Guard. Later in life, he apologizes for his opposition to racial integration.
June 11  President Kennedy makes his historic civil rights address, promising a bill to Congress the next week. About civil rights for "Negroes", in his speech, he asks for "the kind of equality of treatment which we would want for ourselves."
June 12  NAACP field secretary Medgar Evers is assassinated in Jackson, Mississippi. (His murderer is convicted in 1994.)[26]
Summer  80,000 blacks quickly register to vote in Mississippi by a test project to show their desire to participate in the political system.
June 19  President Kennedy sends Congress (H. Doc. 124, 88th Cong., 1st session.) his proposed Civil Rights Act.[27] White leaders in business and philanthropy gather at the Carlyle Hotel to raise initial funds for the Council on United Civil Rights Leadership
August 28  Gwynn Oak Amusement Park in Northwest Baltimore County, Maryland is desegregated.
August 28  March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom is held. Martin Luther King Jr. gives his "I Have a Dream" speech.[28]
September 10  Birmingham, Alabama City Schools are integrated by National Guardsmen under orders from President Kennedy.
September 15  16th Street Baptist Church bombing in Birmingham kills four young girls. That same day, in response to the killings, James Bevel and Diane Nash begin the Alabama Project, which will later develop as the Selma Voting Rights Movement.
1964[edit]
All year  The Alabama Voting Rights Project continues organizing led by James Bevel, Diane Nash, and James Orange. Although Bevel is SCLC's Director of Direct Action and Nonviolent Education, the organization itself is not yet participating.
All year - Throughout Mississippi approximately fifty Freedom Libraries are established and run by librarian volunteers.[29]
January 23  Twenty-fourth Amendment abolishes the poll tax for Federal elections.
March 30 - Hamilton v. Alabama, 376 U.S. 650 (1964), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that an African-American woman, Mary Hamilton, was entitled to be greeted with the same courteous forms of address which were customarily and solely reserved for whites in the Southern United States,[30] and that calling a black person by their first name in a formal context was "a form of racial discrimination".[31][32]
April - The Chester school protests culminate in violent clashes with police in Chester, Pennsylvania.[33]
Summer  Freedom Summer   movement for voter education and registration in the Mississippi. The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party was founded and elected an alternative slate of delegates for the national convention, as blacks are still officially disenfranchised.
June 9  Bloody Tuesday   peaceful marchers beaten, arrested, and tear-gassed by Tuscaloosa, Alabama police on a peaceful march to the County Courthouse to protest whites-only restroom signs and drinking fountains
June 21  Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner, three civil rights workers disappear from Philadelphia, Mississippi, later to be found murdered and buried in an earthen dam.
June 28  Organization of Afro-American Unity is founded by Malcolm X, lasts until his death.
July 2  Civil Rights Act of 1964[34] signed, banning discrimination based on "race, color, religion, sex or national origin" in employment practices and public accommodations.[35]
August  Congress passes the Economic Opportunity Act which, among other things, provides federal funds for legal representation of Native Americans in both civil and criminal suits. This allows the ACLU and the American Bar Association to represent Native Americans in cases that later win them additional civil rights.
August  The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party delegates challenge the seating of all-white Mississippi representatives at the Democratic national convention.
December 10  King is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the youngest person so honored.[36]
December 14  In Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States, the U.S. Supreme Court upholds the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[34]
 The Edmund Pettus Bridge on "Bloody Sunday" in 1965.
1965[edit]
February 18  After a peaceful nighttime protest march in Marion, Alabama, state troopers turn off the streetlights, break up the march, and one trooper shoots Jimmie Lee Jackson. Jackson dies on February 26. Though not prosecuted at the time, James Bonard Fowler is indicted for Jackson's murder in 2007.
February 21  Malcolm X is assassinated in Manhattan, New York, probably by three members of the Nation of Islam.
March 7  Bloody Sunday: Civil rights workers in Selma, Alabama, begin the Selma to Montgomery march but are attacked and stopped by a massive Alabama State trooper and police blockade as they cross the Edmund Pettus Bridge into Dallas County. Many marchers are seriously injured, including SNCC leader John Lewis and long-time major Selma activist Amelia Boynton. This march, initiated and organized by James Bevel, becomes the visual symbol of the Selma Voting Rights Movement.
March 9   Joined by clergy from all over the country who responded to his urgent appeals for reinforcements in Selma, King leads a second attempt to cross the Pettus Bridge. Although amassed law enforcement personnel are ordered to draw back when the protesters near the foot of the bridge on the other side, King responds by telling the marchers to turn around, and they return to Brown Chapel nearby. He thereby obeys a just-minted federal order prohibiting the group from walking the highway to Montgomery.[37]
March 11  Rev. James Reeb, a white Unitarian minister who had heeded King's call for clergy to come to Selma, is beaten by Klansmen. Reeb dies of his injuries. Reeb's murder shocks the nation.[38]
March 15  President Lyndon Johnson uses the phrase "We Shall Overcome" in a speech before Congress to urge passage of the voting rights bill.[39]
March 21  Participants in the third and successful Selma to Montgomery march stepped off on a five-day 54-mile march to Montgomery, Alabama's capitol.
March 25  After the successful completion of the Selma to Montgomery March, and after King has delivered his "How Long, Not Long" speech on the steps of the state capitol, a white volunteer, Viola Liuzzo, is shot and killed by KKK members in Alabama, one of whom was an FBI informant.
June 2  Black deputy sheriff Oneal Moore is murdered in Varnado, Louisiana.
July 2  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission begins operations.
August 6  Voting Rights Act of 1965 is signed by President Johnson. It provides for federal oversight and enforcement of voter registration in states and individual voting districts with a history of discriminatory tests and underrepresented populations. It prohibits discriminatory practices preventing African Americans and other minorities from registering and voting, and electoral systems diluting their vote.[39]
August 11 15  Following the accusations of mistreatment and police brutality by the Los Angeles Police Department towards the city's African-American community, Watts riots erupt in South Central Los Angeles which last over five days. Over 34 are killed, 1,032 injured, 3,438 arrested, and cost over $40 million in property damage.
September  Raylawni Branch and Gwendolyn Elaine Armstrong become the first African-American students to attend the University of Southern Mississippi.
September 24  President Johnson signs Executive Order 11246 requiring Equal Employment Opportunity by federal contractors.
1966[edit]
January 10  NAACP local chapter president Vernon Dahmer is injured by a bomb in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. He dies the next day.
June 5  James Meredith begins a solitary March Against Fear from Memphis, Tennessee, to Jackson, Mississippi. Shortly after starting, he is shot with a birdshot and injured. Civil rights leaders and organizations rally and continue the march leading to, on June 16, Stokely Carmichael first using the slogan Black power in a speech. Twenty-five thousand marchers entered the capital.
Summer  The Chicago Open Housing Movement, led by Martin Luther King Jr., James Bevel[40][41] and Al Raby, includes a large rally, marches, and demands to Mayor Richard J. Daley and the City of Chicago which are discussed in a movement-ending Summit Conference.
October  Black Panther Party founded by Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale in Oakland, California.
1967[edit]
April 4  King delivers "Beyond Vietnam" speech, calling for the defeat of "the giant triplets of racism, materialism, and militarism".
June 12  In Loving v. Virginia, the U.S. Supreme Court rules that prohibiting interracial marriage is unconstitutional.
In the trial of accused killers in the murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner, the jury convicts 7 of 18 accused men. Conspirator Edgar Ray Killen is later convicted in 2005.
June - August  Over 150 communities burn during the Long, Hot Summer of 1967. The largest and deadliest riots of the summer take place in Newark, New Jersey, and Detroit with 26 fatalities reported in Newark and 43 people losing their lives in the Motor City.
October 2  Thurgood Marshall is sworn in as the first African-American justice of the United States Supreme Court.
1968[edit]
February 1  Two Memphis sanitation workers are killed in the line of duty, exacerbating labor tensions.
February 8  The Orangeburg Massacre occurs during a university protest in South Carolina.
February 12  First day of the (wildcat) Memphis sanitation strike.
April 3  King returns to Memphis; delivers his "I've Been to the Mountaintop" speech in support of the workers.
April 4  Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in Memphis, Tennessee.
April 4 8 and one in May 1968  Riots break out in Chicago, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Louisville, Kansas City, and more than 100 U.S. cities in response to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.
April 11  Civil Rights Act of 1968 is signed. The Fair Housing Act is Title VIII of this Civil Rights Act, and bans discrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of housing. The law is passed following a series of Open Housing campaigns throughout the urban North, the most significant being the 1966 Chicago Open Housing Movement and the organized events in Milwaukee during 1967 68. In both cities, angry white mobs had attacked nonviolent protesters.[42][43]
May 12  Poor People's Campaign encamps on the National Mall in Washington, D.C. for six weeks
October 16  In Mexico City, African-American athletes Tommie Smith and John Carlos raise their fists in a black power salute after winning, respectively, the gold and bronze medals in the Olympic men's 200 meters.
December 23  In Powe v. Miles, a federal court holds that the portions of private colleges that are funded by public money are subject to the Civil Rights Act.
See also[edit]
Timeline of African-American history
History of civil rights in the United States
Civil right acts in the United States
Civil rights movement in popular culture
Racism against African Americans
Racism in the United States
References[edit]
^ Allsup, V. Carl. [2010] 2019. "Delgado v Bastrop I.S.D." Handbook of Texas Online. Austin: Texas State Historical Association.
^ "Miss America, People & Events: Breaking the Color Line at the Pageant". PBS.
^ Shirley Jennifer Lim (2007). A Feeling of Belonging: Asian-American Women's Popular Culture, 1930 1960. NYU Press. pp. 126 127. ISBN 978-0814751930.
^ Daniel, G. Reginald (2006). Race and Multiraciality in Brazil and the United States: Converging Paths?. Pennsylvania State University. ISBN 978-0271045542. Retrieved September 22, 2013.
^ Student Strike at Moton High ~ Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ Students & Parents Challenge School Segregation ~ Civil Rights Movement Archive
^ "Private Academy Backlash | A Shaky Truce : Starkville Civil Rights, 1960-1980". Retrieved February 15, 2022.
^ David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito, Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009, pp.154-55.
^ Staff, Times; Reports, Wire (April 28, 2005). "J.B. Stoner, 81; White Supremacist Bombed Black Church". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ "The Virginia Center for Digital History". Vcdh.virginia.edu. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
^ Clayborne Carson (1998). The autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr. Grand Central Publishing. p. 141. ISBN 978-0446524124.
^ a b c d The King Center, The Chronology of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. "1961". Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved October 20, 2007.
^ Catsam, Derek Charles (2009). Freedom's Main Line: The Journey of Reconciliation and the Freedom Rides. Civil Rights and the Struggle for Black Equality in the Twentieth Century. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0813138862.
^ Arsenault, Raymond (2006). Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice. Oxford Univ. Press. p. 439. ISBN 0195136748.
^ a b c d Branch, Taylor (1988). Parting the Waters: America in the King Years. Simon & Schuster Paperbacks. pp. 527 530. ISBN 978-0671687427.
^ Branch, pp.533 535
^ Branch, pp. 555 556
^ Rubin, R. E. (2010). Foundations of library and information science (3rd edn). New York: Neal-Schuman, p.294
^ "Race, religion, nationality no longer barrier to PGA". Milwaukee Journal. Associated Press. November 10, 1961. p. 18, part 2.
^ "PGA group abolishes 'Caucasian'". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. Florida. Associated Press. November 10, 1961. p. 22.
^ Branch, pp. 756 765
^ Branch, pp. 786 791
^ The United States of America and Interstate Commerce Commission v. The City of Jackson, Mississippi, Allen Thompson, Douglas L. Lucky, and Thomas B. Marshall, Commissioners of the City of Jackson, and W.D. Rayfield, Chief of Police of the City of Jackson, United States Court of Appeals Fifth Circuit, May 13, 1963.
^ "Northern City Site of Most Violent Negro Demonstrations". Rome News-Tribune (CWS). May 30, 1963.
^ "Tear Gas Used to Stall Florida Negroes, Drive Continues". Evening News (AP). May 31, 1963.
^ "Medgar Evers". Olemiss.edu. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
^ The Dirksen Congressional Center. "Proposed Civil Rights Act". Archived from the original on August 23, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
^ "March on Washington". Abbeville.com. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ Cook, Karen (2008). Freedom Libraries in the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Summer Project: A History.
^ Bobrow, Jerry (2005). Barron's How to Prepare for the LSAT, Law School Admission Test. Barron's Educational Series. p. 587. ISBN 978-0764124129. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
^ "Call Her Miss". Time. April 10, 1964. Archived from the original on July 19, 2005. Retrieved July 13, 2013. (Subscription required.)
^ "Hamilton v. Alabama, 376 US 650 - Supreme Court 1964 - Google Scholar".
^ "RIOTS MAR PEACE IN CHESTER, PA.; Negro Protests Continue - School Policy at Issue". The New York Times. April 26, 1964. Retrieved July 13, 2018.
^ a b "Civil Rights Act of 1964Zwebsite=Finduslaw.com". Retrieved October 30, 2014.
^ 
Loevy, Robert. "A Brief History of the Civil Rights Act of 1964". Retrieved December 31, 2007.
^ "Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech". Nobelprize.org. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
^ Branch, Taylor (2006). At Canaan's Edge: America in the King Years, 1965-68. Simon and Schuster Paperbacks, pp. 75-77.
^ "Reeb, James". June 21, 2017.
^ a b 
Gavin, Philip. "The History Place, Great Speeches Collection, Lyndon B. Johnson, "We Shall Overcome"". Historyplace.com. Retrieved December 31, 2007.
^ "James L. Bevel The Strategist of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement" by Randall Kryn, published in David Garrow's 1989 book We Shall Overcome, Volume II, Carlson Publishing Company
^ "Randy Kryn: Movement Revision Research Summary Regarding James Bevel - Chicago Freedom Movement". Cfm40.middlebury.edu. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ James R. Ralph, Jr. Northern Protest: Martin Luther King, Jr., Chicago, and the Civil Rights Movement (1993) Harvard University Press ISBN 0674626877
^ Patrick D. Jones (2009). The Selma of the North: Civil Rights Insurgency in Milwaukee. Harvard University Press. pp. 1 6, 169ff. ISBN 978-0674031357.
Further reading[edit]
Richardson, Christopher M.; Luker, Ralph E., eds. (2014). Historical Dictionary of the Civil Rights Movement (2nd ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0810880375.
Finkelman, Paul. ed. Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present (5 vol. 2009).
Hornsby, Jr., Alton, ed. Chronology of African American History (2nd Ed. 1997) 720pp.
Hornsby, Jr., Alton, ed. Black America: A State-by-State Historical Encyclopedia (2 vol 2011) excerpt
Lowery, Charles D. and John F. Marszalek Encyclopedia of African-American civil rights: from emancipation to the present (Greenwood, 1992).
External links[edit]
University of Southern Mississippi's Civil Rights Documentation Project
Freedom Riders website chronology, extremely detailed
Civil Rights Movement Archive movement timeline
Civil Rights Timeline, sections on Martin Luther King Jr.
Civil Rights: Pivotal Events   slideshow by Life magazine
"Cases: U.S. Civil rights Movement". Global Nonviolent Action Database. Pennsylvania: Swarthmore College.
vteCivil rights movement (1954 1968)Events(timeline)Prior to 1954
Journey of Reconciliation
Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore
Sweatt v. Painter (1950)
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950)
Baton Rouge bus boycott
1954 1959
Brown v. Board of Education
Bolling v. Sharpe
Briggs v. Elliott
Davis v. Prince Edward County
Gebhart v. Belton
Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company
Emmett Till
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle
Tallahassee bus boycott
Mansfield school desegregation
1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
"Give Us the Ballot"
Royal Ice Cream sit-in
Little Rock Nine
Cooper v. Aaron
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Ministers' Manifesto
Katz Drug Store sit-in
Kissing Case
Biloxi wade-ins
1960 1963
New Year's Day March
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Atlanta sit-ins
Sit-in movement
Greenville Eight
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Ax Handle Saturday
Gomillion v. Lightfoot
Boynton v. Virginia
University of Georgia desegregation riot
Rock Hill sit-ins
Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address
Freedom Rides
Anniston bombing
Birmingham attack
Garner v. Louisiana
Albany Movement
Cambridge movement
University of Chicago sit-ins
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot
Atlanta's Berlin Wall
"Segregation now, segregation forever"
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
1963 Birmingham campaign
Letter from Birmingham Jail
Children's Crusade
Birmingham riot
16th Street Baptist Church bombing
John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights
Detroit Walk to Freedom
March on Washington
"I Have a Dream"
Big Six
St. Augustine movement
1964 1968
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Chester school protests
Bloody Tuesday
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests
Freedom Summer
workers' murders
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States
Katzenbach v. McClung
1964 1965 Scripto strike
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches
"How Long, Not Long"
Voting Rights Act of 1965
Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections
March Against Fear
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement
Loving v. Virginia
Memphis sanitation strike
King assassination
funeral
riots
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Poor People's Campaign
Green v. County School Board of New Kent County
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.
Activistgroups
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
Atlanta Student Movement
Black Panther Party
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Committee for Freedom Now
Committee on Appeal for Human Rights
An Appeal for Human Rights
Council for United Civil Rights Leadership
Council of Federated Organizations
Dallas County Voters League
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Georgia Council on Human Relations
Highlander Folk School
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights
Lowndes County Freedom Organization
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
Montgomery Improvement Association
NAACP
Youth Council
Nashville Student Movement
Nation of Islam
Northern Student Movement
National Council of Negro Women
National Urban League
Operation Breadbasket
Regional Council of Negro Leadership
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Southern Regional Council
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
The Freedom Singers
United Auto Workers (UAW)
Wednesdays in Mississippi
Women's Political Council
Activists
Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Zev Aelony
Mathew Ahmann
Muhammad Ali
William G. Anderson
Gwendolyn Armstrong
Arnold Aronson
Ella Baker
James Baldwin
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
James Bevel
Claude Black
Gloria Blackwell
Randolph Blackwell
Unita Blackwell
Ezell Blair Jr.
Joanne Bland
Julian Bond
Joseph E. Boone
William Holmes Borders
Amelia Boynton
Bruce Boynton
Raylawni Branch
Stanley Branche
Ruby Bridges
Aurelia Browder
H. Rap Brown
Ralph Bunche
Guy Carawan
Stokely Carmichael
Johnnie Carr
James Chaney
J. L. Chestnut
Shirley Chisholm
Colia Lafayette Clark
Ramsey Clark
Septima Clark
Xernona Clayton
Eldridge Cleaver
Kathleen Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Abraham Lincoln Davis
Angela Davis
Joseph DeLaine
Dave Dennis
Annie Devine
Patricia Stephens Due
Joseph Ellwanger
Charles Evers
Medgar Evers
Myrlie Evers-Williams
Chuck Fager
James Farmer
Walter Fauntroy
James Forman
Marie Foster
Golden Frinks
Andrew Goodman
Robert Graetz
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Lawrence Guyot
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
Fred Hampton
William E. Harbour
Vincent Harding
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Oliver Hill
Donald L. Hollowell
James Hood
Myles Horton
Zilphia Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Ruby Hurley
Cecil Ivory
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Richie Jean Jackson
T. J. Jemison
Esau Jenkins
Barbara Rose Johns
Vernon Johns
Frank Minis Johnson
Clarence Jones
J. Charles Jones
Matthew Jones
Vernon Jordan
Tom Kahn
Clyde Kennard
A. D. King
C.B. King
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Martin Luther King Sr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
Sanford R. Leigh
Jim Letherer
Stanley Levison
John Lewis
Viola Liuzzo
Z. Alexander Looby
Joseph Lowery
Clara Luper
Danny Lyon
Malcolm X
Mae Mallory
Vivian Malone
Bob Mants
Thurgood Marshall
Benjamin Mays
Franklin McCain
Charles McDew
Ralph McGill
Floyd McKissick
Joseph McNeil
James Meredith
William Ming
Jack Minnis
Amzie Moore
Cecil B. Moore
Douglas E. Moore
Harriette Moore
Harry T. Moore
Queen Mother Moore
William Lewis Moore
Irene Morgan
Bob Moses
William Moyer
Elijah Muhammad
Diane Nash
Charles Neblett
Huey P. Newton
Edgar Nixon
Jack O'Dell
James Orange
Rosa Parks
James Peck
Charles Person
Homer Plessy
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Fay Bellamy Powell
Rodney N. Powell
Al Raby
Lincoln Ragsdale
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond
George Raymond Jr.
Bernice Johnson Reagon
Cordell Reagon
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Walter Reuther
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Bernice Robinson
Jo Ann Robinson
Angela Russell
Bayard Rustin
Bernie Sanders
Michael Schwerner
Bobby Seale
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Alexander D. Shimkin
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
Glenn E. Smiley
A. Maceo Smith
Kelly Miller Smith
Mary Louise Smith
Maxine Smith
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Charles Kenzie Steele
Hank Thomas
Dorothy Tillman
A. P. Tureaud
Hartman Turnbow
Albert Turner
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Hollis Watkins
Walter Francis White
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Kale Williams
Robert F. Williams
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Sammy Younge Jr.
Bob Zellner
James Zwerg
By region
Omaha, Nebraska
South Carolina
Movementsongs
"Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round"
"If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus"
"Kumbaya"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
"Oh, Freedom"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"We Shall Not Be Moved"
"We Shall Overcome"
""Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)"
Influences
Nonviolence
Padayatra
Sermon on the Mount
Mahatma Gandhi
Ahimsa
Satyagraha
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Mary McLeod Bethune
Related
Jim Crow laws
Lynching in the United States
Plessy v. Ferguson
Separate but equal
Buchanan v. Warley
Hocutt v. Wilson
Sweatt v. Painter
Hernandez v. Texas
Loving v. Virginia
African-American women in the movement
Fifth Circuit Four
16th Street Baptist Church
Kelly Ingram Park
A.G. Gaston Motel
Brown Chapel
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
Holt Street Baptist Church
Edmund Pettus Bridge
March on Washington Movement
African-American churches attacked
List of lynching victims in the United States
Freedom Schools
Freedom songs
Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"
Voter Education Project
1960s counterculture
African American founding fathers of the United States
Eyes on the Prize
Legacy
In popular culture
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument
Civil Rights Memorial
Civil Rights Movement Archive
Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument
Freedom Rides Museum
Freedom Riders National Monument
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
other King memorials
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum
National Civil Rights Museum
National Voting Rights Museum
St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument
Notedhistorians
Taylor Branch
Clayborne Carson
John Dittmer
Michael Eric Dyson
Chuck Fager
Adam Fairclough
David Garrow
David Halberstam
Vincent Harding
Steven F. Lawson
Doug McAdam
Diane McWhorter
Charles M. Payne
Thomas E. Ricks
Timothy Tyson
Akinyele Umoja
Movement photographers
 Civil rights movement portal
vteMartin Luther King Jr.Speeches, writings, movements, and protestsSpeeches
"Give Us the Ballot" (1957)
"I Have a Dream" (1963)
"How Long, Not Long" (1965)
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence" (1967)
"I've Been to the Mountaintop" (1968)
Writings
Stride Toward Freedom (1958)
"What Is Man?" (1959)
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Strength to Love (1963)
"Letter from Birmingham Jail" (1963)
Why We Can't Wait (1964)
Conscience for Change (1967)
Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (1967)
Movementsand protests
Montgomery bus boycott (1955 1956)
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom (1957)
Albany Movement (1961 1962)
Birmingham campaign (1963)
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom (1963)
St. Augustine movement (1963 1964)
Selma to Montgomery marches (1965)
Chicago Freedom Movement (1966)
Mississippi March Against Fear (1966)
Anti-Vietnam War movement (1967)
Memphis sanitation strike (1968)
Poor People's Campaign (1968)
PeopleFamily
Coretta Scott King (wife)
Yolanda King (daughter)
Martin Luther King III (son)
Dexter King (son)
Bernice King (daughter)
Martin Luther King Sr. (father)
Alberta Williams King (mother)
Christine King Farris (sister)
A. D. King (brother)
James Albert King (grandfather)
Alveda King (niece)
Otherleaders
Ralph Abernathy (mentor, colleague)
Ella Baker (colleague)
James Bevel (strategist / colleague)
Dorothy Cotton (colleague)
Jesse Jackson (prot g )
Bernard Lafayette (colleague)
James Lawson (colleague)
John Lewis (colleague)
Joseph Lowery (colleague)
Benjamin Mays (mentor)
Diane Nash (colleague)
James Orange (colleague)
Bayard Rustin (advisor)
Fred Shuttlesworth (colleague)
C. T. Vivian (colleague)
Wyatt Walker (colleague)
Hosea Williams (colleague)
Andrew Young (colleague)
Assassination
Lorraine Motel (now National Civil Rights Museum)
Riots
Funeral
James Earl Ray
Jack Kershaw
U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA)
Martin Luther King Jr. Records Collection Act
Loyd Jowers
Trial
Conspiracy theories
MediaFilm
King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis (1970 documentary)
Our Friend, Martin (1999 animated)
Boycott (2001 film)
The Witness: From the Balcony of Room 306 (2008 documentary)
Selma (2014 film)
All the Way (2016 film)
King in the Wilderness (2018 documentary)
MLK/FBI (2020 documentary)
Rustin (upcoming film)
Television
King (1978 miniseries)
"The First Store" (The Jeffersons, 1980)
"Great X-Pectations" (A Different World, 1993)
"The Promised Land" (New York Undercover, 1997)
Selma, Lord, Selma (1999)
"Return of the King" (The Boondocks, 2006)
Alpha Man: The Brotherhood of MLK (2011 documentary)
Genius
Plays
The Meeting (1987)
The Mountaintop (2009)
I Dream (2010)
All the Way (2012)
Illustrated
Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story (1957 comic book)
Music
"Abraham, Martin and John" (Dion)
"March! For Martin Luther King" (John Fahey)
"Martin Luther King's Dream" (Strawbs)
"Happy Birthday" (Stevie Wonder)
"Pride (In the Name of Love)" (U2)
"MLK" (U2)
"King Holiday" (King Dream Chorus and Holiday Crew)
"By the Time I Get to Arizona" (Public Enemy)
"Shed a Little Light" (James Taylor)
"Up to the Mountain" (Patti Griffin)
"Never Alone Martin" (Jason Upton)
"Symphony of Brotherhood" (Miri Ben-Ari)
Joseph Schwantner: New Morning for the World; Nicolas Flagello: The Passion of Martin Luther King (1995 album)
"A Dream" (Common featuring will.i.am)
"Glory" (Common and John Legend)
Related
Civil rights movement in popular culture
Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., Inc. v. CBS, Inc.
King v. Trustees of Boston Univ.
Related topics
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
passage
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
National Historical Park
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
National Civil Rights Museum
Big Six
African American founding fathers of the United States
Authorship issues
FBI King suicide letter
Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity
Season for Nonviolence
U.S. Capitol Rotunda sculpture
Oval Office bust
Homage to King sculpture, Atlanta
Hope Moving Forward statue, Atlanta
Statues of Martin Luther King Jr.
Atlanta
Boston
Denver
Houston
Jersey City
Milwaukee
Mexico City
Newark
Statue of Martin Luther King Jr. (Pueblo, Colorado)
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial, San Francisco
Landmark for Peace Memorial, Indianapolis
The Dream sculpture, Portland, Oregon
Kennedy King College
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Library, San Jose
Memorials to Martin Luther King Jr.
King County, Washington
Eponymous streets
America in the King Years
Civil rights movement in popular culture
Lee Jackson King Day
High schools named after King
Schools in France named after King
Portals: Freedom of speech Journalism Language Law Society United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_the_civil_rights_movement&oldid=1148328862"