Capability to understand one's emotions and use it to guide thinking and behavior.
For the book, see Emotional Intelligence.
Part of a series onEmotions
Affect
Classification
In animals
Emotional intelligence
Mood
Regulation
Interpersonal
Dysregulation
Valence
Emotions
Acceptance
Admiration
Affection
Amusement
Anger
Angst
Anguish
Annoyance
Anticipation
Anxiety
Apathy
Arousal
Awe
Boredom
Confidence
Confusion
Contempt
Contentment
Courage
Curiosity
Depression
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Distrust
Doubt
Ecstasy
Elevation
Embarrassment
Empathy
Enthusiasm
Envy
Euphoria
Faith
Fear
Frustration
Gratification
Gratitude
Greed
Grief
Guilt
Happiness
Hatred
Hope
Horror
Hostility
Humiliation
Interest
Jealousy
Joy
Kindness
Limerence
Loneliness
Love
Lust
Nostalgia
Outrage
Panic
Passion
Pity
Pleasure
Pride
Rage
Regret
Rejection
Relief
Remorse
Resentment
Sadness
Saudade
Schadenfreude
Self-pity
Shame
Shock
Shyness
Social connection
Sorrow
Suffering
Surprise
Suspicion
Trust
Wonder
Worry
vte
Emotional intelligence (EI) is most often defined as the ability to perceive, use, understand, manage, and handle emotions. People with high emotional intelligence can recognize their own emotions and those of others, use emotional information to guide thinking and behavior, discern between different feelings and label them appropriately, and adjust emotions to adapt to environments.[1]
Although the term first appeared in 1964,[2] it gained popularity in the 1995 best-selling book Emotional Intelligence, written by science journalist Daniel Goleman. Goleman defined EI as the array of skills and characteristics that drive leadership performance.[3] Emotional intelligence refers to the ability to perceive, control, and evaluate emotions. Some researchers suggest that emotional intelligence can be learned and strengthened, while others claim it is an inborn characteristic.[4]
Various models have been developed to measure EI. The trait model, developed by Konstantinos V. Petrides in 2001, focuses on self reporting of behavioral dispositions and perceived abilities.[5] The ability model, developed by Peter Salovey and John Mayer in 2004, focuses on the individual's ability to process emotional information and use it to navigate the social environment.[6] Goleman's original model may now be considered a mixed model that combines what has since been modeled separately as ability EI and trait EI. More recent research has focused on emotion recognition, which refers to the attribution of emotional states based on observations of visual and auditory nonverbal cues.[7][8] In addition, neurological studies have sought to characterize the neural mechanisms of emotional intelligence.[9][10]
Studies have shown that people with high EI have greater mental health, job performance, and leadership skills, although no causal relationships have been shown. EI is typically associated with empathy because it involves an individual connecting their personal experiences with those of others. Since its popularization in recent decades, methods of developing EI have become widely sought by individuals seeking to become more effective leaders.
Criticisms have centered on whether EI is a real intelligence, and whether it has incremental validity over IQ and the Big Five personality traits.[11][12] However, meta-analyses have found that certain measures of EI have validity even when controlling for IQ and personality.[13][14][15]
History[edit]
The concept of Emotional Strength was first introduced by Abraham Maslow in the 1950s.[16] The term "emotional intelligence" seems first to have appeared in a 1964 paper by Michael Beldoch,[17][18] and in the 1966 paper by B. Leuner titled Emotional intelligence and emancipation which appeared in the psychotherapeutic journal: Practice of child psychology and child psychiatry.[19]
In 1983, Howard Gardner's Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences[20] introduced the idea that traditional types of intelligence, such as IQ, fail to fully explain cognitive ability. He introduced the idea of multiple intelligences which included both interpersonal intelligence (the capacity to understand the intentions, motivations and desires of other people) and intrapersonal intelligence (the capacity to understand oneself, to appreciate one's feelings, fears and motivations).[21]
The first published use of the term 'EQ' (Emotional Quotient) is an article by Keith Beasley in 1987 in the British Mensa magazine.[22]
In 1989, Stanley Greenspan put forward a model to describe EI, followed by another by Peter Salovey and John Mayer published in the following year.[23]
However, the term became widely known with the publication of Goleman's book: Emotional Intelligence   Why it can matter more than IQ (1995).[24] It is to this book's best-selling status that the term can attribute its popularity.[25] Goleman has followed up with several similar publications that reinforce use of the term.[26][27][28][29]
Late in 1998, Goleman's Harvard Business Review article entitled "What Makes a Leader?"[3] caught the attention of senior management at Johnson & Johnson's Consumer Companies (JJCC). The article spoke to the importance of Emotional Intelligence (EI) in leadership success, and cited several studies that demonstrated that EI is often the distinguishing factor between great leaders and average leaders. JJCC funded a study which concluded that there was a strong relationship between superior performing leaders and emotional competence, supporting theorist's suggestions that the social, emotional and relational competency set commonly referred to as Emotional Intelligence, is a distinguishing factor in leadership performance.[30]
Tests measuring EI have not replaced IQ tests as a standard metric of intelligence,[31] and Emotional Intelligence has received criticism regarding its role in leadership and business success.[32]
Definitions[edit]
Emotional intelligence has been defined, by Peter Salovey and John Mayer, as "the ability to monitor one's own and other people's emotions, to discriminate between different emotions and label them appropriately, and to use emotional information to guide thinking and behavior". This definition was later broken down and refined into four proposed abilities: perceiving, using, understanding, and managing emotions. These abilities are distinct yet related.[1] Emotional intelligence also reflects abilities to join intelligence, empathy and emotions to enhance thought and understanding of interpersonal dynamics.[33] However, substantial disagreement exists regarding the definition of EI, with respect to both terminology and operationalizations. Currently, there are three main models of EI:
Ability model
Mixed model (usually subsumed under trait EI)[34][35]
Trait model
Different models of EI have led to the development of various instruments for the assessment of the construct. While some of these measures may overlap, most researchers agree that they tap different constructs.
Specific ability models address the ways in which emotions facilitate thought and understanding. For example, emotions may interact with thinking and allow people to be better decision makers.[33] A person who is more responsive emotionally to crucial issues will attend to the more crucial aspects of his or her life.[33] Aspects of emotional facilitation factor is to also know how to include or exclude emotions from thought depending on context and situation.[33] This is also related to emotional reasoning and understanding in response to the people, environment and circumstances one encounters in his or her day-to-day life.[33]
Ability model[edit]
Salovey and Mayer's conception of EI strives to define EI within the confines of the standard criteria for a new intelligence.[36][37] Following their continuing research, their initial definition of EI was revised to "The ability to perceive emotion, integrate emotion to facilitate thought, understand emotions and to regulate emotions to promote personal growth." However, after pursuing further research, their definition of EI evolved into "the capacity to reason about emotions, and of emotions, to enhance thinking. It includes the abilities to accurately perceive emotions, to access and generate emotions so as to assist thought, to understand emotions and emotional knowledge, and to reflectively regulate emotions so as to promote emotional and intellectual growth."[6]
The ability-based model views emotions as useful sources of information that help one to make sense of and navigate the social environment.[38][39] The model proposes that individuals vary in their ability to process information of an emotional nature and in their ability to relate emotional processing to a wider cognition. This ability is seen to manifest itself in certain adaptive behaviors. The model claims that EI includes four types of abilities:
Perceiving emotions   the ability to detect and decipher emotions in faces, pictures, voices, and cultural artifacts including the ability to identify one's own emotions. Perceiving emotions represents a basic aspect of emotional intelligence, as it makes all other processing of emotional information possible.
Using emotions   the ability to harness emotions to facilitate various cognitive activities, such as thinking and problem-solving. The emotionally intelligent person can capitalize fully upon his or her changing moods in order to best fit the task at hand.
Understanding emotions   the ability to comprehend emotion language and to appreciate complicated relationships among emotions. For example, understanding emotions encompasses the ability to be sensitive to slight variations between emotions, and the ability to recognize and describe how emotions evolve over time.
Managing emotions   the ability to regulate emotions in both ourselves and in others. Therefore, the emotionally intelligent person can harness emotions, even negative ones, and manage them to achieve intended goals.
The ability EI model has been criticized in the research for lacking face and predictive validity in the workplace.[40] However, in terms of construct validity, ability EI tests have great advantage over self-report scales of EI because they compare individual maximal performance to standard performance scales and do not rely on individuals' endorsement of descriptive statements about themselves.[41]
Measurement[edit]
The current measure of Mayer and Salovey's model of EI, the Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test (MSCEIT), is based on a series of emotion-based problem-solving items.[39][42] Consistent with the model's claim of EI as a type of intelligence, the test is modeled on ability-based IQ tests. By testing a person's abilities on each of the four branches of emotional intelligence, it generates scores for each of the branches as well as a total score.
Central to the four-branch model is the idea that EI requires attunement to social norms. Therefore, the MSCEIT is scored in a consensus fashion, with higher scores indicating higher overlap between an individual's answers and those provided by a worldwide sample of respondents. The MSCEIT can also be expert-scored so that the amount of overlap is calculated between an individual's answers and those provided by a group of 21 emotion researchers.[39]
Although promoted as an ability test, the MSCEIT test is unlike standard IQ tests in that its items do not have objectively correct responses. Among other challenges, the consensus scoring criterion means that it is impossible to create items (questions) that only a minority of respondents can solve, because, by definition, responses are deemed emotionally "intelligent" only if the majority of the sample has endorsed them. This and other similar problems have led some cognitive ability experts to question the definition of EI as a genuine intelligence.[43]
In a study by F llesdal,[44] the MSCEIT test results of 111 business leaders were compared with how their employees described their leader. It was found that there were no correlations between a leader's test results and how he or she was rated by the employees, with regard to empathy, ability to motivate, and leader effectiveness. F llesdal also criticized the Canadian company Multi-Health Systems, which administers the test. The test contains 141 questions but it was found after publishing the test that 19 of these did not give the expected answers. This has led Multi-Health Systems to remove answers to these 19 questions before scoring but without stating this officially.
Other measurements[edit]
Various other specific measures have also been used to assess ability in emotional intelligence. These measures include:
Diagnostic Analysis of Non-verbal Accuracy (DANVA)[45]  The Adult Facial version includes 24 photographs of equal amount of happy, sad, angry, and fearful facial expressions of both high and low intensities which are balanced by gender. The tasks of the participants is to answer which of the four emotions is present in the given stimuli.
Japanese and Caucasian Brief Affect Recognition Test (JACBART)[46]  Participants try to identify 56 faces of Caucasian and Japanese individuals expressing seven emotions such happiness, contempt, disgust, sadness, anger, surprise, and fear, which may also trail off for 0.2 seconds to a different emotion.
Situational Test of Emotional Understanding (STEU)[47]   Test-takers complete 42 multiple-choice items assessing whether they understand which of five emotions a person would be experiencing in a given situation. There is also a brief version (STEU-B) consisting of 19 items.
Situational Test of Emotion Management (STEM)[47]   Test-takers complete 44 multiple-choice items where they select which of four possible responses is the most effective action to manage emotions in a specified situation. There is also a brief version (STEM-B) consisting of 18 items.
Mixed model[edit]
The model introduced by Daniel Goleman[26] focuses on EI as a wide array of competencies and skills that drive leadership performance. Goleman's model outlines five main EI constructs (for more details see "What Makes A Leader" by Daniel Goleman, best of Harvard Business Review 1998):
Self-awareness   the ability to know one's emotions, strengths, weaknesses, drives, values and goals and recognize their impact on others while using gut feelings to guide decisions.
Self-regulation   involves controlling or redirecting one's disruptive emotions and impulses and adapting to changing circumstances.
Social skill   managing relationships to get along with others
Empathy   considering other people's feelings especially when making decisions
Motivation   being aware of what motivates them.
Goleman includes a set of emotional competencies within each construct of EI. Emotional competencies are not innate talents, but rather learned capabilities that must be worked on and can be developed to achieve outstanding performance. Goleman posits that individuals are born with a general emotional intelligence that determines their potential for learning emotional competencies.[48] Goleman's model of EI has been criticized in the research literature as mere "pop psychology".[33]
Measurement[edit]
Two measurement tools are based on the Goleman model:
The Emotional Competence Inventory (ECI), which was created in 1999, and the Emotional and Social Competence Inventory (ESCI), a newer edition of the ECI was developed in 2007. The Emotional and Social Competence   University Edition (ESCI-U) is also available. These tools developed by Goleman and Boyatzis provide a behavioral measure of the Emotional and Social Competencies.
The Emotional Intelligence Appraisal, which was created in 2001 and which can be taken as a self-report or 360-degree assessment.[49]
Trait model[edit]
See also: Trait theory
Konstantinos V. Petrides ("K. V. Petrides") proposed a conceptual distinction between the ability based model and a trait based model of EI and has been developing the latter over many years in numerous publications.[50][51] Trait EI is "a constellation of emotional self-perceptions located at the lower levels of personality."[51] In layman's terms, trait EI refers to an individual's self-perceptions of their emotional abilities. This definition of EI encompasses behavioral dispositions and self-perceived abilities and is measured by self report, as opposed to the ability based model which refers to actual abilities, which have proven highly resistant to scientific measurement. Trait EI should be investigated within a personality framework.[52] An alternative label for the same construct is trait emotional self-efficacy.
The trait EI model is general and subsumes the Goleman model discussed above. The conceptualization of EI as a personality trait leads to a construct that lies outside the taxonomy of human cognitive ability. This is an important distinction in as much as it bears directly on the operationalization of the construct and the theories and hypotheses that are formulated about it.[50]
Measurement[edit]
There are many self-report measures of EI,[53] including the EQ-i, the Swinburne University Emotional Intelligence Test (SUEIT), and the Schutte EI model. None of these assess intelligence, abilities, or skills (as their authors often claim), but rather, they are limited measures of trait emotional intelligence.[51] The most widely used and widely researched measure of self-report or self-schema (as it is currently referred to) emotional intelligence is the EQ-i 2.0.[citation needed] Originally known as the BarOn EQ-i, it was the first self-report measure of emotional intelligence available, the only measure predating Goleman's best-selling book.[citation needed]
The Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire (TEIQue) provides an operationalization for the model of Konstantinos V. Petrides and colleagues, that conceptualizes EI in terms of personality.[54] The test encompasses 15 subscales organized under four factors: well-being, self-control, emotionality, and sociability. The psychometric properties of the TEIQue were investigated in a study on a French-speaking population, where it was reported that TEIQue scores were globally normally distributed and reliable.[55]
The researchers also found TEIQue scores were unrelated to nonverbal reasoning (Raven's matrices), which they interpreted as support for the personality trait view of EI (as opposed to a form of intelligence). As expected, TEIQue scores were positively related to some of the Big Five personality traits (extraversion, agreeableness, openness, conscientiousness) as well as inversely related to others (alexithymia, neuroticism). A number of quantitative genetic studies have been carried out within the trait EI model, which have revealed significant genetic effects and heritabilities for all trait EI scores.[56] Two recent studies (one a meta-analysis) involving direct comparisons of multiple EI tests yielded very favorable results for the TEIQue.[35][57]
The Big Five Personality Traits theory gives a simple blueprint to understand others and improving relationships by knowing why people tend to behave the way they do. You can also use this theory to help better understand yourself and how to get along with others better than ever before. The Big Five Model, is also known as the Five Factor Model, is the most widely accepted personality theory held by psychologist today. The theory states that personality can boil down to five factors, known as the acronym CANOE or OCEAN (conscientiousness, agreeableness, neuroticism, openness, extraversion). Unlike other trait theories that sort individuals into binary categories (introvert or extrovert), the Big Five Model asserts that each personality trait is a spectrum. Therefore, individuals are ranked on a scale between two extreme ends.[58][59][60][61]
General effects[edit]
A review published in the Annual Review of Psychology in 2008 found that higher emotional intelligence is positively correlated with:[33]
Better social relations for children   Among children and teens, emotional intelligence positively correlates with good social interactions, relationships and negatively correlates with deviance from social norms, anti-social behavior measured both in and out of school as reported by children themselves, their own family members as well as their teachers.
Better social relations for adults   High emotional intelligence among adults is correlated with better self-perception of social ability and more successful interpersonal relationships with less interpersonal aggression and problems.
Highly emotionally intelligent individuals are perceived more positively by others   Other individuals perceive those with high EI to be more pleasant, socially skilled and empathic to be around.
Better academic achievement[62]   Emotional intelligence is correlated with greater achievement in academics as reported by teachers but generally not higher grades once the factor of IQ is taken into account.
Better social dynamics at work as well as better negotiating ability.
Better well-being   Emotional intelligence is positively correlated with higher life satisfaction, self-esteem and lower levels of insecurity or depression. It is also negatively correlated with poor health choices and behavior.
Emotionally intelligent individuals are more likely to have a better understanding of themselves and to make conscious decisions based on emotion and rationale combined. Overall, it leads a person to self-actualization.[63][64]
In recent years the relevance and importance of emotional intelligence in contexts of business leadership, commercial negotiation and dispute resolution has been increasingly recognized, and professional qualifications and continuous professional development have incorporated aspects of understanding emotions and developing greater insight into emotional interactions.[65][66][67] Especially in the globalizied world, the ability to be a global leader is becoming more important than ever. A high EQ will allow business leaders to interact with various different cultures, and they must be comfortable in these diverse cultural environments, especially with a high chance of having a diverse team and organization. EQ has become an essential part of leading an organization.[citation needed]
Interactions with other phenomena[edit]
Bullying[edit]
Main article: Bullying and emotional intelligence
Bullying is abusive social interaction between peers which can include aggression, harassment, and violence. Bullying is typically repetitive and enacted by those who are in a position of power over the victim. A growing body of research illustrates a significant relationship between bullying and emotional intelligence.[68][69][70] They also have shown that emotional intelligence is a key factor in the analysis of cases of cybervictimization,[71] by demonstrating a relevant impact on health and social adaptation.
Emotional intelligence (EI) is a set of abilities related to the understanding, use and management of emotion as it relates to one's self and others. Mayer et al., (2008) defines the dimensions of overall EI as: "accurately perceiving emotion, using emotions to facilitate thought, understanding emotion, and managing emotion".[72] The concept combines emotional and intellectual processes.[73] Lower emotional intelligence appears to be related to involvement in bullying, as the bully and/or the victim of bullying. EI seems to play an important role in both bullying behavior and victimization in bullying; given that EI is illustrated to be malleable, EI education could greatly improve bullying prevention and intervention initiatives.[74]
Job performance[edit]
Main article: Job performance and emotional intelligence
The most recent meta-analysis of emotional intelligence and job performance showed correlations of r=.20 (for job performance & ability EI) and r=.29 (for job performance and mixed EI).[15] Earlier research on EI and job performance had shown mixed results: a positive relation has been found in some of the studies, while in others there was no relation or an inconsistent one.[15] This led researchers Cote and Miners (2006)[75] to offer a compensatory model between EI and IQ, that posits that the association between EI and job performance becomes more positive as cognitive intelligence decreases, an idea first proposed in the context of academic performance (Petrides, Frederickson, & Furnham, 2004). The results of the former study supported the compensatory model: employees with low IQ get higher task performance and organizational citizenship behavior directed at the organization, the higher their EI. It has also been observed that there is no significant link between emotional intelligence and work attitude-behavior.[76]
A more recent study suggests that EI is not necessarily a universally positive trait.[77] They found a negative correlation between EI and managerial work demands; while under low levels of managerial work demands, they found a negative relationship between EI and teamwork effectiveness. An explanation for this may suggest gender differences in EI, as women tend to score higher levels than men.[13] This furthers the idea that job context plays a role in the relationships between EI, teamwork effectiveness, and job performance. Another find was discussed in a study that assessed a possible link between EI and entrepreneurial behaviors and success.[78]
Although studies between emotional intelligence (EI) and job performance have shown mixed results of high and low correlations, EI is an undeniably better predictor than most of the hiring methods commonly used in companies, such as letter of references, cover letter, among others. By 2008, 147 companies and consulting firms in U.S had developed programmes that involved EI for training and hiring employees.[15] Van Rooy and Viswesvaran (2004)[79] showed that EI correlated significantly with different domains in performance, ranging from .24 for job performance to .10 for academic performance. These findings may contribute to organizations in different ways. For instance, employees high on EI would be more aware of their own emotions and from others, which in turn, could lead companies to better profits and less unnecessary expenses. This is especially important for expatriate managers, who have to deal with mixed emotions and feelings, while adapting to a new working culture.[79] Moreover, employees high in EI show more confidence in their roles, which allow them to face demanding tasks positively.[80]
According to a popular science book by the journalist Daniel Goleman, emotional intelligence accounts for more career success than IQ.[81] Similarly, other studies argued that employees high on EI perform substantially better than employees low in EI. This is measured by self-reports and different work performance indicators, such as wages, promotions and salary increase.[82] According to Lopes and his colleagues (2006),[83] EI contributes to develop strong and positive relationships with co-workers and perform efficiently in work teams. This benefits performance of workers by providing emotional support and instrumental resources needed to succeed in their roles.[84] Also, emotionally intelligent employees have better resources to cope with stressing situations and demanding tasks, which enable them to outperform in those situations.[83] For instance, Law et al. (2004)[82] found that EI was the best predictor of job performance beyond general cognitive ability among IT scientists in computer company in China.
In the job performance   emotional intelligence correlation is important to consider the effects of managing up, which refers to the good and positive relationship between the employee and his/her supervisor.[85] Previous research found that quality of this relationship could interfere in the results of the subjective rating of job performance evaluation.[86] Emotionally intelligent employees devote more of their working time on managing their relationship with supervisors. Hence, the likelihood of obtaining better results on performance evaluation is greater for employees high in EI than for employees with low EI.[80] Based on theoretical and methodological approaches, EI measures are categorized in three main streams: (1) stream 1: ability-based measures (e.g. MSCEIT), (2) stream 2: self-reports of abilities measures (e.g. SREIT, SUEIT and WLEIS) and (3) stream 3: mixed-models (e.g. AES, ECI, EI questionnaire, EIS, EQ-I and GENOS), which include measures of EI and traditional social skills.[87] O'Boyle Jr. and his colleagues (2011)[14] found that the three EI streams together had a positive correlation of 0.28 with job performance. Similarly, each of EI streams independently obtained a positive correlation of 0.24, 0.30 and 0.28, respectively. Stream 2 and 3 showed an incremental validity for predicting job performance over and above personality (Five Factor model) and general cognitive ability. Both, stream 2 and 3 were the second most important predictor of job performance below general cognitive ability. Stream 2 explained 13.6% of the total variance; whereas stream 3, explained 13.2%. In order to examine the reliability of these findings, a publication bias analysis was developed. Results indicated that studies on EI-job performance correlation prior to 2010 do not present substantial evidences to suggest the presence of publication bias. Noting that O'Boyle Jr. et al. (2011) had included self-rated performance and academic performance in their meta-analysis, Joseph, Jin, Newman, & O'Boyle (2015) collaborated to update the meta-analysis to focus specifically on job performance; using measures of job performance, these authors showed r=.20 (for job performance & ability EI) and r=.29 (for job performance and mixed EI).[15]
The Consortium for Research on Emotional Intelligence in Organizations argues that there is a business case in favour of emotional intelligence [88] but, despite the validity of previous findings, some researchers still question whether EI   job performance correlation makes a real impact on business strategies. Critics argue that the popularity of EI studies is due to media advertising, rather than objective scientific findings.[75] Also, it is mentioned that the relationship between job performance and EI is not as strong as suggested. This relationship requires the presence of other constructs to raise important outcomes. For instance, previous studies found that EI is positively associated with teamwork effectiveness under job contexts of high managerial work demands, which improves job performance. This is due to the activation of strong emotions during the performance on this job context. In this scenario, emotionally intelligent individuals show a better set of resources to succeed in their roles. However, individuals with high EI show a similar level of performance than non-emotionally intelligent employees under different job contexts.[77] Moreover, Joseph and Newman (2010)[13] suggested that emotional perception and emotional regulation components of EI highly contribute to job performance under job contexts of high emotional demands. Moon and Hur (2011)[89] found that emotional exhaustion ("burn-out") significantly influences the job performance   EI relationship. Emotional exhaustion showed a negative association with two components of EI (optimism and social skills). This association impacted negatively to job performance, as well. Hence, job performance   EI relationship is stronger under contexts of high emotional exhaustion or burn-out; in other words, employees with high levels of optimism and social skills possess better resources to outperform when facing high emotional exhaustion contexts.
Leadership[edit]
There are several studies that attempt to study the relationship between EI and leadership. Although EI does play a positive role when it comes to leadership effectiveness, what actually makes a leader effective is what he/she does with his role, rather than his interpersonal skills and abilities. Although in the past a good or effective leader was the one who gave orders and controlled the overall performance of the organization, almost everything is different nowadays: leaders are now expected to motivate and create a sense of belongingness that will make employees feel comfortable, thus, making them work more effectively.[90]
However, this does not mean that actions are more important than emotional intelligence. Leaders still need to grow emotionally in order to handle different problems of stress, and lack of life balance, among other things.[91] A proper way to grow emotionally, for instance, is developing a sense of empathy since empathy is a key factor when it comes to emotional intelligence. In a study conducted to analyze the relationship between School Counselors' EI and leadership skills, it was concluded that several participants were good leaders because their emotional intelligence was developed in counselor preparations, where empathy is taught.[92]
Health[edit]
A 2007 meta-analysis of 44 effect sizes by Schutte found that emotional intelligence was associated with better mental and physical health. Particularly, trait EI had the stronger association with mental and physical health.[93] This was replicated again in 2010 by researcher Alexandra Martin who found trait EI as a strong predictor for health after conducting a meta-analysis based on 105 effect sizes and 19,815 participants. This meta-analysis also indicated that this line of research reached enough sufficiency and stability in concluding EI as a positive predictor for health.[35]
An earlier study by Mayer and Salovey argued that high EI can increase one's own well-being because of its role in enhancing relationships.[94]
Self-esteem and drug dependence[edit]
A 2012 study in India cross-examined emotional intelligence, self-esteem and marijuana dependence.[95] Out of a sample of 200, 100 of whom were dependent on cannabis and the other 100 emotionally healthy, the dependent group scored exceptionally low on EI when compared to the control group. They also found that the dependent group also scored low on self-esteem when compared to the control.
Another study in 2010 examined whether or not low levels of EI had a relationship with the degree of drug and alcohol addiction in Australia.[96] In the assessment of 103 residents in a drug rehabilitation center, they examined their EI along with other psychosocial factors in a one-month interval of treatment. They found that participants' EI scores improved as their levels of addiction lessened as part of their treatment.
Academic performance[edit]
A 2020 meta-analysis showed that students with higher emotional intelligence show higher academic performance at school.[62] This was a large summary of over 1,246 effects from 158 different studies, with a sample size of 42,529. Students with higher emotional intelligence had better scores on standardized tests and achieved higher grades. The effect was significantly larger for humanities than for science/maths areas of study, and significantly larger for ability emotional intelligence (measured with objective tasks), than for rating scales of emotional intelligence. The association of emotional intelligence with higher academic achievement was still significant even after considering the effect of students' Big Five personality and intelligence.
There are three possible reasons why greater emotional intelligence might predict stronger academic performance. First, emotionally intelligent students are able to regulate their emotions at school they are able to control their anxiety surrounding tests and assessment, and their boredom when material is not intrinsically interesting. This means their emotions do not impede their test scores or their ability to learn. Second, emotionally intelligent students are able to build better social relationships with other students and with instructors. This means that they have sources of help when needed other students and teachers are more willing to help them when they get stuck. Third, some of the abilities of emotional intelligence (understanding emotions, for example) overlap with academic content, particularly in the humanities. That is, analyzing universal themes in literature or the social forces underpinning historic events require a knowledge of human emotions.
Criticisms[edit]
EI, and Goleman's original 1995 analysis, have been criticized by some writers within the scientific community:[97][98]
Predictive power[edit]
Landy distinguishes between the "commercial" and "academic" discussion of EI, basing this distinction on the alleged predictive power of EI as seen by each of the two.[99] According to Landy, the former makes expansive claims on the applied value of EI, while the latter is trying to warn users against these claims. As an example, Goleman (1998) asserts that "the most effective leaders are alike in one crucial way: they all have a high degree of what has come to be known as emotional intelligence. ...emotional intelligence is the sine qua non of leadership." In contrast, Mayer (1999) cautions "the popular literature's implication that highly emotionally intelligent people possess an unqualified advantage in life appears overly enthusiastic at present and unsubstantiated by reasonable scientific standards." Landy further reinforces this argument by noting that the data upon which these claims are based are held in "proprietary databases", which means they are unavailable to independent researchers for reanalysis, replication, or verification.[99] Furthermore, Murensky (2000) states it is difficult to create objective measures of emotional intelligence and demonstrate its influence on leadership as many scales are self-report measures.[100]
In a 2009 academic exchange, John Antonakis and Ashkanasy/Dasborough mostly agreed that researchers testing whether EI matters for leadership have not done so using robust research designs; therefore, currently there is no strong evidence showing that EI predicts leadership outcomes when accounting for personality and IQ.[101] Antonakis argued that EI might not be needed for leadership effectiveness (he referred to this as the "curse of emotion" phenomenon, because leaders who are too sensitive to their and others' emotional states might have difficulty making decisions that would result in emotional labor for the leader or followers). A 2010 meta-analysis seems to support the Antonakis position: In fact, Harms and Cred  found that overall (and using data free from problems of common source and common methods), EI measures correlated only   = 0.11 with measures of transformational leadership.[102] Barling, Slater, and Kelloway (2000) also support Harms and Crede's position on transformational leadership.[103]
Ability-measures of EI fared worst (i.e.,   = 0.04); the WLEIS (Wong-Law measure) did a bit better (  = 0.08), and the Bar-On[104] measure slightly better (  = 0.18). However, the validity of these estimates does not include the effects of IQ or the big five personality, which correlate both with EI measures and leadership.[105] In a subsequent paper analyzing the impact of EI on both job performance and leadership, Harms and Cred [106] found that the meta-analytic validity estimates for EI dropped to zero when Big Five traits and IQ were controlled for. Joseph and Newman meta-analytically showed the same result for Ability EI.[13]
However, self-reported and Trait EI measures retain a fair amount of predictive validity for job performance after controlling Big Five traits and IQ.[13] Newman, Joseph, and MacCann[107] contend that the greater predictive validity of Trait EI measures is due to their inclusion of content related to achievement motivation, self efficacy, and self-rated performance. Meta-analytic evidence confirms that self-reported emotional intelligence predicting job performance is due to mixed EI and trait EI measures' tapping into self-efficacy and self-rated performance, in addition to the domains of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Conscientiousness, and IQ. As such, the predictive ability of mixed EI to job performance drops to nil when controlling for these factors.[15]
Rosete and Ciarrochi (2005) also explored the predictive ability of EI and job performance.[108] They concluded that higher EI was associated with higher leadership effectiveness regarding achievement of organizational goals. Their study shows EI may serve an identifying tool in understanding who is (or is not) likely to deal effectively with colleagues. Furthermore, there exists the ability to develop and enhance leadership qualities through the advancement of one's emotional intelligence. Groves, McEnrue, and Shen (2008) found EI can be deliberately developed, specifically facilitating thinking with emotions (FT) and monitoring and regulation of emotions (RE) in the workplace.[109]
Correlations with personality[edit]
Similarly, other researchers have raised concerns about the extent to which self-report EI measures correlate with established personality dimensions. Generally, self-report EI measures and personality measures have been said to converge because they both purport to measure personality traits.[51] Specifically, there appear to be two dimensions of the Big Five that stand out as most related to self-report EI  neuroticism and extraversion. In particular, neuroticism has been said to relate to negative emotionality and anxiety. Consistently, individuals scoring high on neuroticism are likely to score low on self-report EI measures.
Studies have examined the multivariate effects of personality and intelligence on EI and also attempted to correct estimates for measurement error. For example, a study by Schulte, Ree, Carretta (2004),[110] showed that general intelligence (measured with the Wonderlic Personnel Test), agreeableness (measured by the NEO-PI), as well as gender could reliably be used to predict the measure of EI ability. They gave a multiple correlation (R) of .81 with the MSCEIT (perfect prediction would be 1). This result has been replicated by Fiori and Antonakis (2011),;[111] they found a multiple R of .76 using Cattell's "Culture Fair" intelligence test and the Big Five Inventory (BFI); significant covariates were intelligence (standardized beta = .39), agreeableness (standardized beta = .54), and openness (standardized beta = .46). Antonakis and Dietz (2011a),[112] who investigated the Ability Emotional Intelligence Measure found similar results (Multiple R = .69), with significant predictors being intelligence, standardized beta = .69 (using the Swaps Test and a Wechsler scales subtest, the 40-item General Knowledge Task) and empathy, standardized beta = .26 (using the Questionnaire Measure of Empathic Tendency). Antonakis and Dietz (2011b) also show how including or excluding important controls variables can fundamentally change results.
Interpretations of the correlations between EI questionnaires and personality have been varied, but a prominent view in the scientific literature is the Trait EI view, which re-interprets EI as a collection of personality traits.[55][113][114]
A 2011 meta-analysis classified EI studies into three streams: "(1) ability based models that use objective test items; (2) self report or peer report measures based on the four branch model of EI; and (3) "mixed models" of emotional competencies." It found that these "three streams have corrected correlations ranging from 0.24 to 0.30 with job performance. The three streams correlated differently with cognitive ability and with neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Streams 2 and 3 have the largest incremental validity beyond cognitive ability and the Five Factor Model (FFM)." The meta-analysis concluded that "all three streams of EI exhibited substantial relative importance in the presence of FFM and intelligence when predicting job performance."[14] A follow-up meta-analysis in 2015 further substantiated these findings, and addressed concerns about "the questionable construct validity of mixed EI measures" by arguing that "mixed EI instruments assess a combination of ability EI and self-perceptions, in addition to personality and cognitive ability."[15]
A 2017 meta-analysis of 142 data sources found that a very large overlap between the general factor of personality and trait EI. The overlap was so large they concluded that "The findings suggest that the general factor of personality is very similar, perhaps even synonymous, to trait EI."[115] However, the overlap between the general factor of personality and ability EI was more moderate, with a correlation of about 0.28.[115]
In 2021, two separate review papers examined the relationship between emotional intelligence and the dark triad of personality traits (narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy).[116][117] This research found that emotional intelligence showed negative associations with all three dark triad domains of personality. Of the four ability branches of emotional intelligence, the largest effects were for emotion management (versus emotion perception, use, or understanding) and for psychopathy (versus narcissism or Machiavellianism). The two different facets of narcissism showed different relationships with emotional intelligence. Vulnerable narcissism (characterized by anxiety and fragile self-esteem) was associated with lower emotional intelligence. However, grandiose narcissism (characterized by self-confidence, dominance and an inflated sense of ego) related to higher levels of emotional intelligence. This indicates that not all 'dark' personalities lack emotional intelligence.
A 2021 meta-analysis showed that emotional intelligence was positively associated with secure attachment in adults, but negatively associated with insecure attachment styles such as anxious attachment and avoidant attachment.[118] The associations with anxious attachment and avoidant attachment were significant for both ability EI and for rating scales of EI. However, only rating scales of EI showed a significantly positive association with secure attachment. The authors suggest that the early development of attachment styles may facilitate (or hinder) the development of emotional abilities and traits involved in EI.
Socially desirable responding[edit]
Socially desirable responding (SDR), or "faking good", is defined as a response pattern in which test-takers systematically represent themselves with an excessive positive bias (Paulhus, 2002). This bias has long been known to contaminate responses on personality inventories (Holtgraves, 2004; McFarland & Ryan, 2000; Peebles & Moore, 1998; Nichols & Greene, 1997; Zerbe & Paulhus, 1987), acting as a mediator of the relationships between self-report measures (Nichols & Greene, 1997; Gangster et al., 1983).[full citation needed]
It has been suggested that responding in a desirable way is a response set, which is a situational and temporary response pattern (Pauls & Crost, 2004; Paulhus, 1991). This is contrasted with a response style, which is a more long-term trait-like quality. Considering the contexts some self-report EI inventories are used in (e.g., employment settings), the problems of response sets in high-stakes scenarios become clear (Paulhus & Reid, 2001).
There are a few methods to prevent socially desirable responding on behavior inventories. Some researchers believe it is necessary to warn test-takers not to fake good before taking a personality test (e.g., McFarland, 2003). Some inventories use validity scales in order to determine the likelihood or consistency of the responses across all items.
EI as behavior rather than intelligence[edit]
Goleman's early work has been criticized for assuming from the beginning that EI is a type of intelligence or cognitive ability. Eysenck (2000)[119] writes that Goleman's description of EI contains unsubstantiated assumptions about intelligence in general and that it even runs contrary to what researchers have come to expect when studying types of intelligence:
"[Goleman] exemplifies more clearly than most the fundamental absurdity of the tendency to class almost any type of behavior as an 'intelligence'... If these five 'abilities' define 'emotional intelligence', we would expect some evidence that they are highly correlated; Goleman admits that they might be quite uncorrelated, and in any case, if we cannot measure them, how do we know they are related? So the whole theory is built on quicksand: there is no sound scientific basis."
Similarly, Locke (2005)[120] claims that the concept of EI is in itself a misinterpretation of the intelligence construct, and he offers an alternative interpretation: it is not another form or type of intelligence, but intelligence the ability to grasp abstractions applied to a particular life domain: emotions. He suggests the concept should be re-labeled and referred to as a skill.
The essence of this criticism is that scientific inquiry depends on valid and consistent construct utilization and that before the introduction of the term EI, psychologists had established theoretical distinctions between factors such as abilities and achievements, skills and habits, attitudes and values, and personality traits and emotional states.[121] Thus, some scholars believe that the term EI merges and conflates such accepted concepts and definitions.
EI as skill rather than moral quality[edit]
Adam Grant warned of the common but mistaken perception of EI as a desirable moral quality rather than a skill.[122] Grant asserted that a well-developed EI is not only an instrumental tool for accomplishing goals, but can function as a weapon for manipulating others by robbing them of their capacity to reason.[122]
EI as a measure of conformity[edit]
 Tom Reed describes four stages of emotional intelligence: self-awareness, social consciousness, self-care and relationship management, as part of NAVAIR's "Mentoring at the Speed of Life" eventOne criticism of the works of Mayer and Salovey comes from a study by Roberts et al. (2001),[123] which suggests that the EI, as measured by the MSCEIT, may only be measuring conformity. This argument is rooted in the MSCEIT's use of consensus-based assessment, and in the fact that scores on the MSCEIT are negatively distributed (meaning that its scores differentiate between people with low EI better than people with high EI).
EI as a form of knowledge[edit]
Further criticism has been leveled by Brody (2004),[124] who claimed that unlike tests of cognitive ability, the MSCEIT "tests knowledge of emotions but not necessarily the ability to perform tasks that are related to the knowledge that is assessed". The main argument is that even though someone knows how he or she should behave in an emotionally laden situation, it doesn't necessarily follow that the person could actually carry out the reported behavior.
NICHD pushes for consensus[edit]
The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development has recognized that because there are divisions about the topic of emotional intelligence, the mental health community needs to agree on some guidelines to describe good mental health and positive mental living conditions. In their section, "Positive Psychology and the Concept of Health", they explain. "Currently there are six competing models of positive health, which are based on concepts such as being above normal, character strengths and core virtues, developmental maturity, social-emotional intelligence, subjective well-being, and resilience. But these concepts define health in philosophical rather than empirical terms. Dr. [Lawrence] Becker suggested the need for a consensus on the concept of positive psychological health...".[125]
See also[edit]
Psychology portalPhilosophy portal
Anabel Jensen
Claude Steiner
Empathy quotient
Emotional literacy
Emotional thought method
Four Cornerstone Model of Emotional Intelligence
Joshua Freedman
Life skills
Marc Brackett
Outline of human intelligence
People skills
Positive psychology
Religiosity and emotional intelligence
Psychological mindedness
Soft skills
Temperance (virtue)
Virtue ethics
References[edit]
^ a b Colman A (2008). A Dictionary of Psychology (3 ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199534067.
^ Beldoch, Michael; Davitz, Joel Robert (1976). The communication of emotional meaning. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. p. 39. ISBN 9780837185279. OCLC 647368022.
^ a b Goleman D (1998). "What Makes a Leader?". Harvard Business Review. 76: 92 105.
^ Jovanovski, Antonio (2020-03-28). "Emotional Intelligence". Trainers Library. Retrieved 2023-03-26.
^ Petrides KV, Furnham A (November 2001). "Trait Emotional Intelligence: Psychometric Investigation with Reference to Established Trait Taxonomies". European Journal of Personality. 15 (6): 425 48. doi:10.1002/per.416. S2CID 144031083.
^ a b Mayer JD, Salovey P, Caruso DR (July 2004). "Emotional Intelligence: Theory, Findings, and Implications". Psychological Inquiry. 15 (3): 197 215. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli1503_02. S2CID 144415437.
^ Durand K, Gallay M, Seigneuric A, Robichon F, Baudouin JY (May 2007). "The development of facial emotion recognition: the role of configural information" (PDF). Journal of Experimental Child Psychology. 97 (1): 14 27. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2006.12.001. PMID 17291524. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-07-21.
^ B nziger T (2014). "Measuring Emotion Recognition Ability".  In Michalos AC (ed.). Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. pp. 3934 3941. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5_4188. ISBN 978-94-007-0753-5.
^ "Scientists Complete 1st Map of 'Emotional Intelligence' in the Brain". U.S. News & World Report. 2013-01-28. Archived from the original on 2014-08-14.
^ Kosonogov VV, Vorobyeva E, Kovsh E, Ermakov PN (2019). "A review of neurophysiological and genetic correlates of emotional intelligence" (PDF). International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and Education. 7 (1): 137 142. doi:10.5937/IJCRSEE1901137K. ISSN 2334-847X. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-02-11.
^ Harms PD, Cred  M (2010). "Remaining Issues in Emotional Intelligence Research: Construct Overlap, Method Artifacts, and Lack of Incremental Validity". Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice. 3 (2): 154 158. doi:10.1111/j.1754-9434.2010.01217.x. S2CID 144371039.
^ Cavazotte F, Moreno V, Hickmann M (2012). "Effects of leader intelligence, personality and emotional intelligence on transformational leadership and managerial performance". The Leadership Quarterly. 23 (3): 443 455. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.10.003.
^ a b c d e Joseph DL, Newman DA (January 2010). "Emotional intelligence: an integrative meta-analysis and cascading model". The Journal of Applied Psychology. 95 (1): 54 78. doi:10.1037/a0017286. PMID 20085406.
^ a b c O'Boyle Jr EH, Humphrey RH, Pollack JM, Hawver TH, Story PA (2011-07-01). "The relation between emotional intelligence and job performance: A meta-analysis". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 32 (5): 788 818. doi:10.1002/job.714. ISSN 1099-1379.
^ a b c d e f g Joseph DL, Jin J, Newman DA, O'Boyle EH (March 2015). "Why does self-reported emotional intelligence predict job performance? A meta-analytic investigation of mixed EI". The Journal of Applied Psychology. 100 (2): 298 342. doi:10.1037/a0037681. PMID 25243996.
^ Dhani, Priyam (5 March 2021). "EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE; HISTORY, MODELS AND MEASURES". Research Gate.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ Beldoch M (1964). "Sensitivity to expression of emotional meaning in three modes of communication".  In Davitz JR,  et al. (eds.). The Communication of Emotional Meaning. McGraw-Hill. pp. 31 42.
^ Argyle (September 2017).  Argyle M (ed.). Contributions to social interactions: Social Encounters. ISBN 9780202368979.
^ Leuner B (1966). "Emotional intelligence and emancipation". Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie. 15: 193 203.
^ Gardner H (1983). Frames of mind. New York: Basic Books.
^ Smith MK (2002). "Howard Gardner, multiple intelligences and education". The Encyclopedia of Informal Education. Archived from the original on 2005-11-02. Retrieved 2005-11-01.
^ Beasley K (May 1987). "The Emotional Quotient" (PDF). Mensa: 25.
^ Salovey P, Mayer JD (1989). "Emotional intelligence". Imagination, Cognition, and Personality. 9 (3): 185 211. doi:10.2190/dugg-p24e-52wk-6cdg. hdl:10654/36316. S2CID 219900460.
^ Goleman D (1996). Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-38371-3.
^ Dan Schawbel. "Daniel Goleman on Leadership and The Power of Emotional Intelligence   Forbes". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2012-11-04. Retrieved 2014-03-07.
^ a b Goleman D (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
^ Lantieri L, Goleman D (2008). Building Emotional Intelligence: Techniques to Cultivate Inner Strength in Children. Sounds True. ISBN 978-1-59179-849-1.
^ Goleman D (2011). The Brain and Emotional Intelligence: New Insights. More Than Sound. ISBN 978-1-934441-15-2.
^ Goleman D (2011). Leadership: The Power of Emotional Intelligence. More Than Sound.
^ "Emotional Competence and Leadership Excellence at Johnson & Johnson: The Emotional Intelligence and Leadership Study". www.eiconsortium.org. 2001. Retrieved 8 September 2020.
^ "What is Emotional Intelligence and How to Improve it? (Definition + EQ Test)". positivepsychologyprogram.com. 14 November 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2019.
^ "Why emotional intelligence is just a fad   CBS News". CBS News. 2012-02-13. Archived from the original on 2012-11-28. Retrieved 2014-03-07.
^ a b c d e f g Mayer JD, Roberts RD, Barsade SG (2008). "Human abilities: emotional intelligence". Annual Review of Psychology. 59: 507 36. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093646. PMID 17937602. Archived from the original on 2015-12-22.
^ Kluemper DH (2008). "Trait emotional intelligence: The impact of core-self evaluations and social desirability". Personality and Individual Differences. 44 (6): 1402 1412. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2007.12.008.
^ a b c Martins A, Ramalho N, Morin E (2010). "A comprehensive meta-analysis of the relationship between emotional intelligence and health". Journal of Personality and Individual Differences. 49 (6): 554 564. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.05.029.
^ Mayer JD, Salovey P, Caruso DR, Sitarenios G (September 2001). "Emotional intelligence as a standard intelligence". Emotion. 1 (3): 232 42. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.1.3.232. PMID 12934682.
^ MacCann C, Joseph DL, Newman DA, Roberts RD (April 2014). "Emotional intelligence is a second-stratum factor of intelligence: evidence from hierarchical and bifactor models". Emotion. 14 (2): 358 374. doi:10.1037/a0034755. PMID 24341786.
^ Mayer JD, Salovey P (1997). "What is emotional intelligence?".  In Salovey P, Sluyter D (eds.). Emotional development and emotional intelligence: Implications for educators. New York: Basic Books. pp. 3 31. ISBN 978-0-521-51806-2.
^ a b c Salovey P, Grewal D (2005). "The Science of Emotional Intelligence". Current Directions in Psychological Science. 14 (6): 6. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00381.x. S2CID 2143869.
^ Bradberry TR, Su LD (2003). "Ability-versus skill-based assessment of emotional intelligence" (PDF). Psicothema. 18 Suppl: 59 66. PMID 17295959. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-09-05. Retrieved 2014-03-07.
^ Brackett MA, Mayer JD (September 2003). "Convergent, discriminant, and incremental validity of competing measures of emotional intelligence". Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin. 29 (9): 1147 58. doi:10.1177/0146167203254596. PMID 15189610. S2CID 5744173.
^ Mayer JD, Salovey P, Caruso DR, Sitarenios G (March 2003). "Measuring emotional intelligence with the MSCEIT V2.0". Emotion. 3 (1): 97 105. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.3.1.97. PMID 12899321.
^ Petrides KV (2015). "Ability and Trait Emotional Intelligence".  In Chamorro-Premuzic T, von Stumm S, Furnham A (eds.). The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of Individual Differences. London: John Wiley & Sons. pp. 656 78. ISBN 978-1-119-05030-8.
^ F llesdal H. Emotional Intelligence as Ability: Assessing the Construct Validity of Scores from the Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test (MSCEIT) (PhD thesis). University of Oslo 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-12-16.
^ Nowicki, Stephen; Duke, Marshall P. (1994-03-01). "Individual differences in the nonverbal communication of affect: The diagnostic analysis of nonverbal accuracy scale". Journal of Nonverbal Behavior. 18 (1): 9 35. doi:10.1007/BF02169077. ISSN 1573-3653. S2CID 144426091.
^ Matsumoto, David; LeRoux, Jeff; Wilson-Cohn, Carinda; Raroque, Jake; Kooken, Kristie; Ekman, Paul; Yrizarry, Nathan; Loewinger, Sherry; Uchida, Hideko; Yee, Albert; Amo, Lisa (2000-09-01). "A New Test to Measure Emotion Recognition Ability: Matsumoto and Ekman's Japanese and Caucasian Brief Affect Recognition Test (JACBART)". Journal of Nonverbal Behavior. 24 (3): 179 209. doi:10.1023/A:1006668120583. ISSN 1573-3653. S2CID 18039888.
^ a b MacCann, Carolyn; Roberts, Richard D. (2008). "New paradigms for assessing emotional intelligence: Theory and data". Emotion. 8 (4): 540 551. doi:10.1037/a0012746. PMID 18729584   via APA.
^ Boyatzis RE, Goleman D, Rhee K (2000). "Clustering competence in emotional intelligence: Insights from the Emotional Competence Inventory (ECI).".  In Bar-On R, Parker JD (eds.). Handbook of emotional intelligence. Vol. 99. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. pp. 343 62.
^ Bradberry T, Greaves J (2009). Emotional Intelligence 2.0. San Francisco: Publishers Group West. ISBN 978-0-9743206-2-5.
^ a b Petrides KV, Furnham A (2000a). "On the dimensional structure of emotional intelligence". Personality and Individual Differences. 29 (2): 313 320. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.475.5285. doi:10.1016/s0191-8869(99)00195-6.
^ a b c d Petrides KV, Pita R, Kokkinaki F (May 2007). "The location of trait emotional intelligence in personality factor space". British Journal of Psychology. 98 (Pt 2): 273 89. doi:10.1348/000712606x120618. PMID 17456273.
^ Petrides KV, Furnham A (2001). "Trait emotional intelligence: Psychometric investigation with reference to established trait taxonomies". European Journal of Personality. 15 (6): 425 448. doi:10.1002/per.416. S2CID 144031083.
^ P rez JC, Petrides PJ, Furnham A (2005). "Measuring trait emotional intelligence.".  In Schulze R, Roberts RD (eds.). International Handbook of Emotional Intelligence. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Hogrefe & Huber. pp. 123 43. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.474.294.
^ Petrides KV, Furnham A (2003). "Trait emotional intelligence: behavioral validation in two studies of emotion recognition and reactivity to mood induction". European Journal of Personality. 17: 39 75. doi:10.1002/per.466. S2CID 4287409.
^ a b Mikolajczak M, Luminet O, Leroy C, Roy E (June 2007). "Psychometric properties of the Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire: factor structure, reliability, construct, and incremental validity in a French-speaking population". Journal of Personality Assessment. 88 (3): 338 53. doi:10.1080/00223890701333431. PMID 17518555. S2CID 21196733.
^ Vernon PA, Petrides KV, Bratko D, Schermer JA (October 2008). "A behavioral genetic study of trait emotional intelligence". Emotion. 8 (5): 635 42. doi:10.1037/a0013439. PMID 18837613.
^ Gardner JK, Qualter P (2010). "Concurrent and incremental validity of three trait emotional intelligence measures". Australian Journal of Psychology. 62: 5 12. doi:10.1080/00049530903312857.
^ Checa P, Fern ndez-Berrocal P (2015). "The Role of Intelligence Quotient and Emotional Intelligence in Cognitive Control Processes". Frontiers in Psychology. 6: 1853. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01853. PMC 4664650. PMID 26648901.
^ Salovey P, Grewal D (2005). "The Science of Emotional Intelligence". Current Directions in Psychological Science. 14 (6): 281 285. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00381.x. ISSN 0963-7214. JSTOR 20183048. S2CID 2143869.
^ Lim AG (15 June 2020). "The Big Five Personality Traits". Retrieved 2020-12-11.
^ Lim AG. "Big Five Personality Traits". Simply Psychology.
^ a b MacCann, Carolyn; Jiang, Yixin; Brown, Luke E R; Double, Kit S; Bucich, Micaela; Minbashian, Amirali (2020). "Emotional intelligence predicts academic performance: A meta-analysis". Psychological Bulletin. 146 (2): 150 186. doi:10.1037/bul0000219. PMID 31829667. S2CID 209342554   via APA.
^ Heffernan M, Quinn Griffin MT, Fitzpatrick JJ (August 2010). "Self-compassion and emotional intelligence in nurses". International Journal of Nursing Practice. 16 (4): 366 73. doi:10.1111/j.1440-172X.2010.01853.x. PMID 20649668. S2CID 1902234.
^ Bratton VK, Dodd NG, Brown FW (January 2011). "The impact of emotional intelligence on accuracy of self awareness and leadership performance". Leadership & Organization Development Journal. 32 (2): 127 149. doi:10.1108/01437731111112971. ISSN 0143-7739.
^ Whitener, S., The Importance Of Emotional Intelligence In Business, Forbes, published 25 November 2020, accessed 26 February 2021
^ JCA Global Ltd. and CIPS (2017), Emotional Intelligence in the Procurement Sector, accessed 26 February 2021
^ Kelly, E. J. et al, Importance of emotional intelligence in negotiation and mediation, International Comparative Jurisprudence, Volume 2, Issue 1, September 2016, pages 55-60, accessed 25 February 2021
^ Lamb J, Pepler DJ, Craig W (April 2009). "Approach to bullying and victimization". Canadian Family Physician. 55 (4): 356 60. PMC 2669002. PMID 19366941.
^ Lomas J, Stough C, Hansen K, Downey LA (2011-07-26). "The relationship between bullying, victimization, trait emotional intelligence, self-efficacy and empathy among preadolescents". Social Psychology of Education. 15 (1): 41 58. doi:10.1007/s11218-011-9168-9. ISSN 1381-2890. S2CID 143679923.
^ Lomas J, Stough C, Hansen K, Downey LA (February 2012). "Brief report: Emotional intelligence, victimisation and bullying in adolescents". Journal of Adolescence. 35 (1): 207 11. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2011.03.002. hdl:1959.3/190030. PMID 21470670.
^ Rey L, Quintana-Orts C, M rida-L pez S, Extremera N (2018-07-01). "Emotional intelligence and peer cybervictimisation in adolescents: Gender as moderator". Comunicar (in Spanish). 26 (56): 09 18. doi:10.3916/c56-2018-01. ISSN 1134-3478.
^ Mayer JD, Roberts RD, Barsade SG (2008). "Human abilities: emotional intelligence". Annual Review of Psychology. 59: 507 36. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093646. PMID 17937602.
^ Tolegenova AA, Jakupov SM, Chung C, Saduova M, Jakupov MS (2012). "A theoretical formation of emotional intelligence and childhood trauma among adolescents". Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences. 69: 1891 1894. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.12.142.
^ Mckenna J, Webb J (2013). "Emotional intelligence". British Journal of Occupational Therapy. 76 (12): 560. doi:10.1177/030802261307601202. S2CID 208741104.
^ a b C t  S, Miners CT (2006-01-01). "Emotional Intelligence, Cognitive Intelligence, and Job Performance". Administrative Science Quarterly. 51 (1): 1 28. doi:10.2189/asqu.51.1.1. JSTOR 20109857. S2CID 142971341.
^ Relojo D, Pilao SJ, Dela Rosa R (2015). "From passion to emotion: Emotional quotient as predictor of work attitude behavior among faculty member" (PDF). Journal of Educational Psychology. 8 (4): 1 10. doi:10.26634/jpsy.8.4.3266. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-04-30.
^ a b Farh CI, Seo MG, Tesluk PE (July 2012). "Emotional intelligence, teamwork effectiveness, and job performance: the moderating role of job context". The Journal of Applied Psychology. 97 (4): 890 900. doi:10.1037/a0027377. PMID 22390388.
^ Ahmetoglu G, Leutner F, Chamorro-Premuzic T (December 2011). "EQ-nomics: Understanding the relationship between individual differences in trait emotional intelligence and entrepreneurship" (PDF). Personality and Individual Differences. 51 (8): 1028 1033. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.08.016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-11-01.
^ a b Van Rooy DL, Viswesvaran C (2004-08-01). "Emotional intelligence: A meta-analytic investigation of predictive validity and nomological net". Journal of Vocational Behavior. 65 (1): 71 95. doi:10.1016/S0001-8791(03)00076-9.
^ a b Sy T, Tram S, O'Hara LA (2006-06-01). "Relation of employee and manager emotional intelligence to job satisfaction and performance". Journal of Vocational Behavior. 68 (3): 461 473. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2005.10.003.
^ Godleman D (1994). Emotional Intelligence. Bantam Books. ISBN 9780747526254.
^ a b Law KS, Wong CS, Song LJ (June 2004). "The construct and criterion validity of emotional intelligence and its potential utility for management studies". The Journal of Applied Psychology. 89 (3): 483 96. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.89.3.483. PMID 15161407.
^ a b Lopes PN, Grewal D, Kadis J, Gall M, Salovey P (2006-01-01). "Evidence that emotional intelligence is related to job performance and affect and attitudes at work". Psicothema. 18 Suppl: 132 8. PMID 17295970.
^ Seibert SE, Kraimer ML, Liden RC (April 2001). "A social capital theory of career success". Academy of Management Journal. 44 (2): 219 237. doi:10.2307/3069452. JSTOR 3069452.
^ Rousmaniere, Dana (2015-01-23). "What Everyone Should Know About Managing Up". Harvard Business Review. Archived from the original on 2016-04-26. Retrieved 2016-04-19.
^ Janssen O, Van Yperen NW (2004-06-01). "Employees' Goal Orientations, the Quality of Leader-Member Exchange, and the Outcomes of Job Performance and Job Satisfaction". Academy of Management Journal. 47 (3): 368 384. doi:10.2307/20159587. hdl:2066/64290. ISSN 0001-4273. JSTOR 20159587. S2CID 221246676. Archived from the original on 2015-03-21.
^ Ashkanasy NM, Daus CS (2005-06-01). "Rumors of the death of emotional intelligence in organizational behavior are vastly exaggerated" (PDF). Journal of Organizational Behavior. 26 (4): 441 452. doi:10.1002/job.320. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-07-25.
^ Cherniss, C., The Business Case for Emotional Intelligence, Consortium for Research on Emotional Intelligence in Organizations, published 1999, accessed 14 September 2021
^ Moon TW, Hur WM (2011-09-01). "Emotional Intelligence, Emotional Exhaustion, And Job Performance". Social Behavior and Personality. 39 (8): 1087 1096. doi:10.2224/sbp.2011.39.8.1087.
^ Dabke D (2016). "Impact of Leader's Emotional Intelligence and Transformational Behavior on Perceived Leadership Effectiveness: A Multiple Source View". Business Perspectives and Research. 4 (1): 27 40. doi:10.1177/2278533715605433. S2CID 147415251.
^ Ahiauzu A, Nwokah NC (2010). "Marketing in governance: emotional intelligence leadership for effective corporate governance". Corporate Governance. 10 (2): 150 162. doi:10.1108/14720701011035675.
^ Mullen PR, Gutierrez D, Newhart S (2018). "School Counselors' Emotional Intelligence and Its Relationship to Leadership". Professional School Counseling. 32 (1b): 2156759X1877298. doi:10.1177/2156759X18772989. S2CID 149709509.
^ Schutte NS, Malouff JM, Thorsteinsson EB, Bhullar N, Rooke SE (April 2007). "A meta-analytic investigation of the relationship between emotional intelligence and health". Personality and Individual Differences. 42 (6): 921 33. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.09.003.
^ Mayer JD, Salovey P (1993). "The Intelligence of Emotional Intelligence" (PDF). Intelligence. 17 (4): 433 442. doi:10.1016/0160-2896(93)90010-3.
^ Nehra DK, Sharma V, Mushtaq H, Sharma NR, Sharma M, Nehra S (July 2012). "Emotional intelligence and self esteem in cannabis abusers" (PDF). Journal of the Indian Academy of Applied Psychology. 38 (2): 385 393. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-02-19.
^ Brown E, Chiu E, Neill L, Tobin J, Reid J (16 Jan 2012). "Is low emotional intelligence a primary causal factor in drug and alcohol addiction?". Australian Academic Press (Bowen Hills, QLD, Australia): 91 101. S2CID 73720582.
^ Murphy KR, ed. (February 2014). A critique of emotional intelligence: What are the problems and how can they be fixed?. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-1-317-82433-6.
^ Durlofsky P (30 October 2015). "The Benefits of Emotional Intelligence". psychcentral.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017.
^ a b Landy FJ (2005). "Some historical and scientific issues related to research on emotional intelligence". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 26 (4): 411 424. doi:10.1002/job.317.
^ Murensky CL (2000). "The relationships between emotional intelligence, personality, critical thinking ability and organizational leadership performance at upper levels of management". Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering   via PsyNET.
^ Antonakis J, Ashkanasy NM, Dasborough MT (2009). "Does leadership need emotional intelligence?". The Leadership Quarterly. 20 (2): 247 261. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.01.006.
^ Harms PD, Cred  M (2010). "Emotional Intelligence and Transformational and Transactional Leadership: A Meta-Analysis". Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies. 17 (1): 5 17. doi:10.1177/1548051809350894. S2CID 2247881. Archived from the original on 2011-06-12.
^ Barling J, Slater F, Kelloway EK (May 2000). "Transformational leadership and emotional intelligence: an exploratory study". Leadership & Organization Development Journal. 21 (3): 157 161. doi:10.1108/01437730010325040.
^ Bar-On R (2006). "The Bar-On model of emotional-social intelligence (ESI)". Psicothema. 18 Suppl: 13 25. PMID 17295953.
^ Antonakis J (2009). ""Emotional intelligence": What does it measure and does it matter for leadership?" (PDF).  In Graen GB (ed.). LMX leadership Game-Changing Designs: Research-Based Tools. Vol. VII. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing. pp. 163 192. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-11-20. Download article: ""Emotional intelligence": What does it measure and does it matter for leadership?" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-07-16. Retrieved 2010-09-06.
^ Harms PD, Cred  M (2010). "Remaining Issues in Emotional Intelligence Research: Construct Overlap, Method Artifacts, and Lack of Incremental Validity". Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice. 3 (2): 154 158. doi:10.1111/j.1754-9434.2010.01217.x. S2CID 144371039.
^ Newman DA, Joseph DL, MacCann C (2010). "Emotional Intelligence and Job Performance: The Importance of Emotion Regulation and Emotional Labor Context". Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice. 3 (2): 159 164. doi:10.1111/j.1754-9434.2010.01218.x. S2CID 145567449.
^ Rosete D, Ciarrochi J (2005-07-01). "Emotional intelligence and its relationship to workplace performance outcomes of leadership effectiveness". Leadership & Organization Development Journal. 26 (5): 388 399. doi:10.1108/01437730510607871. ISSN 0143-7739.
^ Groves KS, McEnrue MP, Shen W (2008-02-08). "Developing and measuring the emotional intelligence of leaders". Journal of Management Development. 27 (2): 225 250. doi:10.1108/02621710810849353. ISSN 0262-1711.
^ Schulte M, Ree MJ, Carretta TR (2004). "Emotional intelligence: Not much more than g and personality". Personality and Individual Differences. 37 (5): 1059 1068. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2003.11.014.
^ Fiori M, Antonakis J (2011). "The ability model of emotional intelligence: Searching for valid measures". Personality and Individual Differences (Submitted manuscript). 50 (3): 329 334. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.10.010.
^ Antonakis J, Dietz J (2011). "Looking for Validity or Testing It? The Perils of Stepwise Regression, Extreme-Scores Analysis, Heteroscedasticity, and Measurement Error". Personality and Individual Differences (Submitted manuscript). 50 (3): 409 415. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.09.014.
^ Smith L, Ciarrochi J, Heaven PC (2008). "The stability and change of trait emotional intelligence, conflict communication patterns, and relationship satisfaction: A one-year longitudinal study". Personality and Individual Differences. 45 (8): 738 743. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2008.07.023.
^ Austin EJ (2008). "A reaction time study of responses to trait and ability emotional intelligence test items" (PDF). Personality and Individual Differences. 46 (3): 381 383. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2008.10.025. hdl:20.500.11820/c3e59b2b-8367-4e8a-9d9c-9fb87c186fc1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-07-20.
^ a b van der Linden, Dimitri; Pekaar, Keri A.; Bakker, Arnold B.; Schermer, Julie Aitken; Vernon, Philip A.; Dunkel, Curtis S.; Petrides, K. V. (January 2017). "Overlap between the general factor of personality and emotional intelligence: A meta-analysis". Psychological Bulletin. 143 (1): 36 52. doi:10.1037/bul0000078. ISSN 1939-1455. PMID 27841449. S2CID 29455205.
^ Walker, Sarah A.; Double, Kit S.; Birney, Damian P. (2021). "The Complicated Relationship Between the Dark Triad and Emotional Intelligence: A Systematic Review". Emotion Review. 13 (3): 257 274. doi:10.1177/17540739211014585. S2CID 235779606   via SAGE.
^ Michels, Moritz; Ralf, Schulze (2021). "Emotional intelligence and the dark triad: A meta-analysis". Personality and Individual Differences. 180: 110961. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2021.110961.
^ Walker, Sarah A; Double, Kit S; Kunst, Hannah; Zhang, Michael; MacCann, Carolyn (2022). "Emotional intelligence and attachment in adulthood: A meta-analysis". Personality and Individual Differences. 184: 111174. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2021.111174. ISSN 0191-8869   via Elsevier Science Direct.
^ Eysenck HJ (2000). Intelligence: A New Look. ISBN 978-0-7658-0707-6.
^ Locke EA (2005). "Why emotional intelligence is an invalid concept". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 26 (4): 425 431. doi:10.1002/job.318.
^ Mattiuzzi PG (2008). "Emotional Intelligence? I'm not feeling it". Everyday Psicology. Archived from the original on 20 July 2009.
^ a b Grant A (January 2, 2014). "The Dark Side of Emotional Intelligence". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on January 3, 2014.
^ Roberts RD, Zeidner M, Matthews G (September 2001). "Does emotional intelligence meet traditional standards for an intelligence? Some new data and conclusions". Emotion. 1 (3): 196 231. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.1.3.196. PMID 12934681.
^ Brody N (2004). "What cognitive intelligence is and what emotional intelligence is not" (PDF). Psychological Inquiry. 15 (3): 234 238. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli1503_03. S2CID 219727559. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-02-07.
^ Nitkin R, Harris M (August 29, 2006). "National Advisory Board on Medical Rehabilitation Research: Meeting for Minutes for December 2 3, 2004". National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Archived from the original on July 16, 2009. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
Further reading[edit]
Goleman D (1996). Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-38371-3.
Harvard Business Review's 10 Must Reads: On Emotional Intelligence. Boston: HBR. 2015. ISBN 978-1511367196.
Mayer J, Salovey P (1993). "The Intelligence of Emotional Intelligence" (PDF). Intelligence. 17 (4): 433 442. doi:10.1016/0160-2896(93)90010-3. Retrieved 9 May 2018.
vteHuman intelligence topicsTypes
Collective
Emotional
Intellectual
Linguistic
Multiple
Social
Spatial (visuospatial)
Abilities, traits,and constructs
Cognition
Communication
Creativity
Fluid and crystallized intelligence
g factor
Intelligence quotient
Knowledge
Learning
Memory
Problem solving
Reasoning
Thought (abstraction)
Understanding
Visual processing
Models and theories
Cattell Horn Carroll theory
Fluid and crystallized intelligence
Multiple-intelligences theory
Three-stratum theory
Triarchic theory
PASS theory
Areas of research
Evolution of human intelligence
Heritability of IQ
Psychometrics
Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex
 Outline of human intelligence / thought
vteEmotions (list)Emotions
Acceptance
Admiration
Adoration
Aesthetic
Affection
Agitation
Agony
Amusement
Anger
Angst
Anguish
Annoyance
Anticipation
Anxiety
Apathy
Arousal
Attraction
Awe
Boredom
Calmness
Compassion
Confidence
Confusion
Contempt
Contentment
Courage
Cruelty
Curiosity
Defeat
Depression
Desire
Disappointment
Disgust
Distrust
Doubt
Ecstasy
Embarrassment
vicarious
Empathy
Emptiness
Enthrallment
Enthusiasm
Envy
Euphoria
Excitement
Faith
Fear
Flow
Frustration
Gratification
Gratitude
Greed
Grief
Guilt
Happiness
Hatred
Hiraeth
Homesickness
Hope
Horror
Hostility
Humiliation
Hygge
Hysteria
Indulgence
Infatuation
Insecurity
Inspiration
Interest
Irritation
Isolation
Jealousy
Joy
Kindness
Loneliness
Love
limerence
at first sight
Lust
Mono no aware
Neglect
Nostalgia
Outrage
Panic
Passion
Pity
self-pity
Pleasure
Pride
grandiosity
hubris
insult
vanity
Rage
Regret
Rejection
Relief
Remorse
Resentment
Sadness
melancholy
Saudade
Schadenfreude
Sehnsucht
Sentimentality
Shame
Shock
Shyness
Social connection
Sorrow
Spite
Stress
chronic
Suffering
Surprise
Sympathy
Trust
Wonder
sense of wonder
Worry
Worldviews
Cynicism
Defeatism
Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz
Related
Affect
consciousness
in education
measures
in psychology
Affective
computing
forecasting
neuroscience
science
spectrum
Affectivity
positive
negative
Appeal to emotion
Amygdala hijack
Emotion
and art
and memory
and music
and sex
and sleep
classification
evolution
expressed
functional accounts
group
homeostatic
in animals
perception
recognition
in conversation
regulation
interpersonal
work
Emotional
aperture
bias
blackmail
competence
conflict
contagion
detachment
dysregulation
eating
exhaustion
expression
and gender
intelligence
and bullying
Empathy quotient
intimacy
isolation
lability
labor
lateralization
literacy
prosody
reasoning
responsivity
security
symbiosis
Emotional thought method
well-being
Emotionality
bounded
Emotions
and culture
history
in decision-making
in the workplace
in virtual communication
moral
self-conscious
social
social sharing
sociology
Feeling
Group affective tone
Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems
Jealousy in art
Meta-emotion
Pathognomy
Pathos
Social emotional development
Stoic passions
Theory
affect
appraisal
constructed emotion
discrete emotion
somatic marker
Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages
vteNonverbal communicationModalitiesPhysical
Blushing
Body language / Kinesics
Facial expression
Facial Action Coding System
Microexpression
Subtle expression
Gesture
List
Speech-independent gestures
Haptic communication
Imitation
Interpersonal synchrony
Laughter
Oculesics
Eye contact
Pupil dilation
Posture
Proxemics
Speech
Affect
Emotional prosody
Paralanguage
Intonation
Loudness
Prosody
Rhythm
Stress
Tone
Voice quality
Social context
Chronemics
Conventions
Display rules
Habitus
High-context and low-context cultures
Interpersonal relationship
Social norm
Other
Emoticon / Smiley
One-bit message
Missed call
Yo
Punctuation
Silent service code
Unconscious
Microexpression
Non-verbal leakage
Multi-faceted
Affect display
Deception
Emotion recognition
First impression
Intimacy
Broader concepts
Basic interpersonal communicative skills
Communication
Emotional intelligence
Nunchi
People skills
Semiotics
Social behavior
Social cue
Social competence
Social skills
Unsaid
Further informationDisorders
Aprosodia
Autism spectrum
Asperger syndrome
Autism
Fragile X
Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified
Childhood disintegrative disorder
Rett syndrome
Dyssemia
Nonverbal learning disorder
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder
Neuroanatomy
Limbic system / Limbic lobe
Mirror neuron
Applications
Cold reading
Lie detection
Freudian slip
Poker tell
Targeted advertising
Technology
Computer processing of body language
Emotion recognition in conversation
Gesture recognition
List of facial expression databases
Sentiment analysis
Key people
Ray Birdwhistell
Charles Darwin
Paul Ekman
Related
Animal communication
Behavioral communication
Aggressive
Assertive
Passive
Passive-aggressive
Impression management
Meta-communication
Monastic sign lexicons
Verbal communication
Non-verbal language
Sign language
Tactile signing
Tadoma
Art and literature
Mime
Mimoplastic art
Subtext
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emotional_intelligence&oldid=1148209024"