Collection of islands
"Island chain" redirects here. For the strategy, see Island chain strategy. For other uses, see Archipelago (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with arpeggio or a cappella.
 The Aegean Sea with its large number of islands is the origin of the term archipelago.
 The Mergui Archipelago in Myanmar
An archipelago (/ rk p l o / (listen) AR-k -PEL- -goh),[1] sometimes called an island group or island chain, is a chain, cluster, or collection of islands, or sometimes a sea containing a small number of scattered islands.
Examples of archipelagos include: the Indonesian Archipelago, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Lakshadweep Islands, the Gal pagos Islands, the Japanese archipelago, the Philippine Archipelago, the Maldives, the Balearic Islands, The Bahamas, the Aegean Islands, the Hawaiian Islands, the Canary Islands, Malta, the Azores, the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, the British Isles, the islands of the Archipelago Sea, and Shetland. They are sometimes defined by political boundaries. For example, the Gulf archipelago off the northeastern Pacific coast forms part of a larger archipelago that geographically includes Washington state's San Juan Islands; while the Gulf archipelago and San Juan Islands are geographically related, they are not technically included in the same archipelago due to manmade geopolitical borders.[2]
Etymology
The word archipelago is derived from the Ancient Greek  -(arkhi-, "chief") and   (p lagos, "sea") through the Italian arcipelago. In antiquity, "Archipelago" (from Medieval Greek *  and Latin archipelagus) was the proper name for the Aegean Sea. Later, usage shifted to refer to the Aegean Islands (since the sea has a large number of islands).
Geographic types
Archipelagos may be found isolated in large amounts of water or neighbouring a large land mass. For example, Scotland has more than 700 islands surrounding its mainland, which form an archipelago.
Archipelagos are often volcanic, forming along island arcs generated by subduction zones or hotspots, but may also be the result of erosion, deposition, and land elevation. Depending on their geological origin, islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as oceanic islands, continental fragments, or continental islands.[3]
Oceanic islands
Oceanic islands are mainly of volcanic origin, and widely separated from any adjacent continent. The Hawaiian Islands and Galapagos Islands in the Pacific, and Mascarene Islands in the south Indian Ocean are examples.
Continental fragments
Continental fragments correspond to land masses that have separated from a continental mass due to tectonic displacement. The Farallon Islands off the coast of California are an example.
Continental archipelagos
 The Archipelago Sea with many islands in southwestern Finland.
Sets of islands formed close to the coast of a continent are considered continental archipelagos when they form part of the same continental shelf, when those islands are above-water extensions of the shelf. The islands of the Inside Passage off the coast of British Columbia and the Canadian Arctic Archipelago are examples.
Artificial archipelagos
Artificial archipelagos have been created in various countries for different purposes. Palm Islands and The World Islands off Dubai were or are being created for leisure and tourism purposes.[4][5] Marker Wadden in the Netherlands is being built as a conservation area for birds and other wildlife.[6]
Superlatives
The largest archipelago in the world is the Archipelago Sea which is part of Finland. There are approximately 40,000, mostly uninhabited, islands [7]
The largest archipelagic state in the world by area, and by population, is Indonesia.[8]
See also
Geography portalIslands portal
Island arc
List of landforms
List of archipelagos by number of islands
List of archipelagos
Archipelagic state
List of islands
Aquapelago
References
^ "archipelago". Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.
^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "What is an archipelago?". oceanservice.noaa.gov. Retrieved 7 July 2020.
^ Whittaker R. J. & Fern ndez-Palacios J. M. (2007) Island Biogeography: Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation. New York, Oxford University Press
^ McFadden, Christopher (22 December 2019). "7+ Amazing Facts About Dubai's Palm Islands". Interesting Engineering. Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ Wainwright, Oliver (13 February 2018). "Not the end of The World: the return of Dubai's ultimate folly". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ Boffey, Daniel (27 April 2019). "Marker Wadden, the manmade Dutch archipelago where wild birds reign supreme". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 July 2020.
^ "Nautical chart: International no. 1205, SE61, Baltic Sea, North, Sea of  land" (PDF).
^ "Indonesia". The World Factbook (2023 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 7 December 2008. (Archived 2008 edition)
External links
Look up archipelago in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archipelagoes.
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Archipelago" . Encyclop dia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
30 Most Incredible Island Archipelagos
vteCoastal geographyLandforms
Anchialine pool
Archipelago
Atoll
Avulsion
Ayre
Barrier island
Bay
Bight
Bodden
Brackish marsh
Cape
Channel
Cliff
Coast
Coastal plain
Coastal waterfall
Continental margin
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Cove
Dune
cliff-top
Estuary
Firth
Fjard
Fjord
Freshwater marsh
Fundus
Gat
Geo
Gulf
Gut
Hapua
Headland
Inlet
Intertidal wetland
Island
Islet
Isthmus
Lagoon
Machair
Mudflat
Natural arch
Peninsula
Reef
Ria
Salt marsh
Shoal
Shore
Skerry
Sound
Spit
Stack
Strait
Strand plain
Submarine canyon
Tidal island
Tidal marsh
Tide pool
Tied island
Tombolo
Waituna
Windwatt
Beaches
Beach cusps
Beach evolution
Coastal morphodynamics
Beach ridge
Beachrock
Beaches in estuaries and bays
Pocket beach
Raised beach
Recession
Shell beach
Shingle beach
Storm beach
Wash margin
River mouths
Debouch
River delta
mega
regressive
Mouth bar
baymouth
Processes
Blowhole
Cliffed coast
Coastal biogeomorphology
Coastal erosion
Concordant coastline
Current
Cuspate foreland
Discordant coastline
Emergent coastline
Feeder bluff
Fetch
Flat coast
Graded shoreline
Ingression coast
Large-scale coastal behaviour
Longshore drift
Marine regression
Marine transgression
Raised shoreline
Rip current
Rocky shore
Sea cave
Sea foam
Shoal
Steep coast
Submergent coastline
Surf break
Surf zone
Surge channel
Swash
Undertow
Volcanic arc
Wave-cut platform
Wave shoaling
Wind wave
Wrack zone
Management
Accretion
Coastal management
Integrated coastal zone management
Submersion
Related
Bulkhead line
Grain size
boulder
clay
cobble
granule
pebble
sand
shingle
silt
Intertidal zone
Littoral zone
Physical oceanography
River plume
Region of freshwater influence
 Geography portal
 Oceans portal
 Category
 Commons
Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archipelago&oldid=1144948158"