Arteries of the pelvis
External iliac arteryFront of abdomen, showing common iliac artery, the source of the external iliac arteryVolume rendered CT scan of abdominal and pelvic blood vessels.DetailsSourcecommon iliac arteriesBranchesfemoral arteries, inferior epigastric arteriesVeinexternal iliac veinsIdentifiersLatinarteria iliaca externaTA98A12.2.16.002TA24357FMA18805Anatomical terminology[edit on Wikidata]
The external iliac arteries are two major arteries which bifurcate off the common iliac arteries anterior to the sacroiliac joint of the pelvis.
Structure[edit]
The external iliac artery arises from the bifurcation of the common iliac artery. They proceed anterior and inferior along the medial border of the psoas major muscles. They exit the pelvic girdle posterior and inferior to the inguinal ligament.[1][2] This occurs about one third laterally from the insertion point of the inguinal ligament on the pubic tubercle.[1] At this point they are referred to as the femoral arteries.[1][3]
Branches[edit]
Branch
Description
Inferior epigastric artery
Goes upward to anastomose with superior epigastric artery (a branch of internal thoracic artery).
Deep circumflex iliac artery
Goes laterally, travelling along the iliac crest of the pelvic bone.
Femoral artery[3]
Terminal branch. When the external iliac artery passes posterior to the inguinal ligament, its name changes to femoral artery.
Function[edit]
The external iliac artery provides the main blood supply to the legs. It passes down along the brim of the pelvis and gives off two large branches - the "inferior epigastric artery" and a "deep circumflex artery." These vessels supply blood to the muscles and skin in the lower abdominal wall. The external iliac artery passes beneath the inguinal ligament in the lower part of the abdomen and becomes the femoral artery.
Clinical significance[edit]
The external iliac artery is usually the artery used to attach the renal artery to the recipient of a kidney transplant.
Additional images[edit]
Bifurcation of the aorta and the right common iliac artery - side view.  (External iliac artery is artery at upper left, seen splitting from common iliac artery at top.)
The relations of the femoral and abdominal inguinal rings, seen from within the abdomen. Right side. (External iliac artery is large artery at center, and inguinal ligament runs from upper right to lower left. When the artery crosses the ligament, it becomes the femoral artery.)
The internal mammary artery and its branches.
Dissection of side wall of pelvis showing sacral and pudendal plexuses.
Sacral plexus of the right side.
Posterior view of the anterior abdominal wall in its lower half. The peritoneum is in place, and the various cords are shining through.
The spermatic cord in the inguinal canal.
Front of abdomen, showing surface markings for arteries and inguinal canal.
External iliac artery
Lumbar and sacral plexus. Deep dissection.Anterior view.
Lumbar and sacral plexus. Deep dissection.Anterior view.
See also[edit]
Internal iliac artery
Common iliac artery
References[edit]
^ a b c Tortora, Gerard J.; Grabowski, Sandra R. (2003).  Roesch, Bonnie (ed.). Principles of Anatomy and Physiology: Volume 4 Maintenance and Continuity of the Human Body (Textbook). Vol. 4 (10th ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 734. ISBN 0-471-22934-2.
^ Madani, M. M.; Golts, E. (January 1, 2014), "Cardiovascular Anatomy", Reference Module in Biomedical Sciences, Elsevier, doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-801238-3.00196-3, ISBN 978-0-12-801238-3, retrieved January 18, 2021
^ a b Maynard, Robert Lewis; Downes, Noel (January 1, 2019),  Maynard, Robert Lewis; Downes, Noel (eds.), "Chapter 7 - The Cardiovascular System", Anatomy and Histology of the Laboratory Rat in Toxicology and Biomedical Research, Academic Press, pp. 77 90, ISBN 978-0-12-811837-5, retrieved January 18, 2021
External links[edit]
Anatomy photo:43:12-0104 at the SUNY Downstate Medical Center - "The Female Pelvis: The External and Internal Iliac Vessels"
Anatomy figure: 43:07-05 at Human Anatomy Online, SUNY Downstate Medical Center - "Sagittal view of the internal iliac artery and its branches in the female pelvis. "
Anatomy image:8970 at the SUNY Downstate Medical Center
pelvis at The Anatomy Lesson by Wesley Norman (Georgetown University) (pelvicarteries)
Hypogastric artery - thefreedictionary.com
vteArteries of the abdomen and pelvisAbdominalaortaInferior phrenic
Superior suprarenal
CeliacLeft gastric
Esophageal branches
Common hepatic
Proper hepatic
cystic
Right gastric
Gastroduodenal
right gastroepiploic
superior pancreaticoduodenal
supraduodenal
Splenic
Pancreatic branches
greater
dorsal
Short gastrics
Left gastroepiploic
Superior mesenteric
Inferior pancreaticoduodenal
Intestinal
jejunal
ileal
arcades
vasa recta
Ileocolic
colic
anterior cecal
posterior cecal
ileal branch
appendicular
Right colic
Middle colic
Marginal
Suprarenal
Middle suprarenal
Renal
Inferior suprarenal
Ureteral
Gonadal
Testicular artery
Ovarian artery
Lumbar
Lumbar arteries
Inferior mesenteric
Left colic
Marginal
Sigmoid
Superior rectal
Common iliacInternal iliacPosterior surfaceIliolumbar
Lumbar branch
Iliac branch
Anterior surfaceSuperior vesical artery
Umbilical artery
Medial umbilical ligament
to ductus deferens
Obturator
Anterior branch
Pubic branch
Posterior branch
Acetabular branch
Cruciate anastomosis
Corona mortis
Middle rectal
Vaginal branch   / Prostatic branch  
Uterine  
Arcuate
Vaginal branches
Ovarian branches
Tubal branches
Spiral
Vaginal   / Inferior vesical  
Inferior gluteal
Accompanying of sciatic nerve
Cruciate anastomosis
Internal pudendal
Inferior rectal
Perineal
posterior scrotal
posterior labial
Bulb of penis/vestibule
Urethral
Deep artery of the penis
helicine
Deep artery of clitoris
Dorsal of the penis
Dorsal of the clitoris
External iliac
Inferior epigastric
Corona mortis
Deep circumflex iliac
Femoral
see arteries of lower limbs
Median sacral
Coccygeal glomus
vteArteries of the human legInferior epigastric
cremasteric   / round ligament  
Deep circumflex iliac
no major branches
FemoralIn femoral canal
superficial epigastric
superficial circumflex iliac
superficial external pudendal
deep external pudendal
anterior scrotal  
Descending genicular
saphenous branch
articular branches
Deep femoral artery
medial circumflex femoral
ascending
descending
superficial
deep
acetabular
lateral circumflex femoral
descending
transverse
ascending
perforating
Cruciate anastomosis
Trochanteric anastomosis
PoplitealGenicular
superior genicular (medial, lateral)
middle genicular
inferior genicular (medial, lateral)
Sural
no major branches
Anterior tibial
tibial recurrent
posterior
anterior
anterior malleolar
medial
lateral
dorsalis pedis: tarsal (medial, lateral)
Tibial-fibular (Tibial-peroneal) trunk
Posterior tibial
circumflex fibular
medial plantar
lateral plantar
fibular (peroneal)
Arches
arcuate
dorsal metatarsal
first dorsal metatarsal
deep plantar
dorsal digital arteries
plantar arch
plantar metatarsal
common plantar digital
proper plantar digital
Authority control 
Terminologia Anatomica
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=External_iliac_artery&oldid=1031715183"