44th quadrennial U.S. presidential election
1960 United States presidential election
 1956
November 8, 1960
1964 
537 members of the Electoral College269 electoral votes needed to winTurnout63.8%[1]  3.6 pp
 
Nominee
John F. Kennedy
Richard Nixon
Party
Democratic
Republican
Home state
Massachusetts
California
Running mate
Lyndon B. Johnson
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Electoral vote
303
219
States carried
22
26
Popular vote
34,220,984[a]
34,108,157
Percentage
49.72%
49.55%
Presidential election results map. Blue denotes states won by Kennedy/Johnson, red denotes those won by Nixon/Lodge, light blue denotes the electoral votes for Byrd/Thurmond by Alabama and Mississippi unpledged electors, and a vote for Byrd/Goldwater by an Oklahoma faithless elector. Numbers indicate the number of electoral votes allotted to each state.
President before election
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Republican
Elected President 
John F. Kennedy
Democratic
The 1960 United States presidential election was the 44th quadrennial presidential election. It was held on Tuesday, November 8, 1960. In a closely contested election, Democratic United States Senator John F. Kennedy defeated the incumbent vice president Richard Nixon, the Republican nominee. This was the first election in which 50 states participated, and the last in which the District of Columbia did not, marking the first participation of Alaska and Hawaii. This made it the only presidential election where the threshold for victory was 269 electoral votes. It was also the first election in which an incumbent president was ineligible to run for a third term because of the term limits established by the 22nd Amendment.
This was the most recent election in which three of the four major party nominees for president and vice president were eventually elected president. Kennedy won the election, but was assassinated in 1963 and succeeded by Johnson, who won election in 1964. Then, Nixon won the 1968 election to succeed Johnson who decided not to run for re-election that year. Of the four candidates, only Republican vice-presidential nominee Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. failed to succeed to the presidency. As such, this was also the most recent election in which the defeated presidential nominee would later win the presidency.
The election saw the first time that a candidate won the presidency while carrying fewer states than the other candidate, something that would not occur again until 1976. When Kennedy was elected, he became the youngest president elected to the presidency at 43 years, while Theodore Roosevelt was still the youngest President at 42 years and 10 months when he became president in September 1901. No matter which candidate won, America would elect its first President and Vice President born in the 20th century as Kennedy was born in 1917, Nixon was born in 1913, Johnson was born in 1908, and Lodge was born in 1902.
Nixon faced little opposition in the Republican race to succeed popular incumbent Dwight D. Eisenhower. Kennedy, a junior U.S. senator from Massachusetts, established himself as the Democratic front-runner with his strong performance in the 1960 Democratic primaries, including a key victory in West Virginia over Senator Hubert Humphrey. He defeated Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson on the first presidential ballot of the 1960 Democratic National Convention, and asked Johnson to serve as his running mate. The issue of the Cold War dominated the election, as tensions were high between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy won a 303 to 219 Electoral College victory, and he won the reported national popular vote by 112,827, a margin of 0.17 percent. Fourteen unpledged electors from Mississippi and Alabama cast their vote for Senator Harry F. Byrd, as did a faithless elector from Oklahoma. The 1960 presidential election was the closest election since 1916, and this closeness can be explained by a number of factors.[3] Kennedy benefited from the economic recession of 1957 1958, which hurt the standing of the incumbent Republican Party, and he had the advantage of 17 million more registered Democrats than Republicans.[4] Furthermore, the new votes that Kennedy, the first Roman Catholic president, gained among Catholics almost neutralized the new votes Nixon gained among Protestants.[5] Nixon's advantages came from Eisenhower's popularity, as well as the economic prosperity of the past eight years. Kennedy's campaigning skills decisively outmatched Nixon's, who exhausted time and resources campaigning in all fifty states, while Kennedy focused on campaigning in populous swing states. Kennedy emphasized his youth, while Nixon focused heavily on his experience. Kennedy relied on Johnson to hold the South, and used television effectively. Despite this, Kennedy's popular vote margin was the second narrowest in presidential history, only surpassed by the 0.11% margin of the election of 1880.
This election marked the beginning of a decisive realignment in the Democratic presidential coalition; whereas Democrats had until this point relied on dominating in Southern states to win the electoral college, Kennedy managed to win without carrying a number of these states. As such, this marked the first election in history in which a Republican candidate carried any of Oklahoma, Tennessee, Kentucky, Florida, Virginia, or Idaho without winning the presidency, and the first time since statehood that Arizona backed any losing candidate in a presidential election. This in many ways foreshadowed the results of subsequent elections, in which Democratic candidates from northern states would rely on their performance in the northeast and midwest to win, while Republican candidates would rely on success in the former Solid South and the mountain west.
Nominations[edit]
Democratic Party[edit]
Main article: 1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries
1960 Democratic Party ticket 
John F. Kennedy
Lyndon B. Johnson
for President
for Vice President
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts(1953 1960)
Senate Majority Leader(1955 1961)
Campaign
Democratic candidates[edit]
Senator John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts
Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson from Texas
Senator Stuart Symington from Missouri
Senator Hubert Humphrey from Minnesota
Senator Wayne Morse from Oregon
Senator George Smathers from Florida
Former Governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois
The major candidates for the 1960 Democratic presidential nomination were United States Senator John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts, Governor Pat Brown of California, Senator Stuart Symington from Missouri, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson from Texas, former nominee Adlai Stevenson, Senator Wayne Morse from Oregon, and Senator Hubert Humphrey from Minnesota. Several other candidates sought support in their home state or region as "favorite son" candidates, without any realistic chance of winning the nomination. Symington, Stevenson, and Johnson all declined to campaign in the presidential primaries. While this reduced their potential delegate count going into the Democratic National Convention, each of these three candidates hoped that the other leading contenders would stumble in the primaries, thus causing the convention's delegates to choose him as a "compromise" candidate acceptable to all factions of the party.
Kennedy was initially dogged by suggestions from some Democratic Party elders (such as former United States President Harry S. Truman, who was supporting Symington) that he was too youthful and inexperienced to be president; these critics suggested that he should agree to be the running mate for another Democrat. Realizing that this was a strategy touted by his opponents to keep the public from taking him seriously, Kennedy stated frankly, "I'm not running for vice president; I'm running for president."[6]
 1960 Democratic primaries results
The next step was the primaries. Kennedy's Roman Catholic religion was an issue. Kennedy first challenged Minnesota Senator Hubert Humphrey in the Wisconsin primary, and defeated him. Kennedy's sisters, brothers, and wife Jacqueline combed the state, looking for votes, leading Humphrey to complain that he "felt like an independent merchant competing against a chain store."[7] However, some political experts argued that Kennedy's margin of victory had come almost entirely from Catholic areas, and, thus, Humphrey decided to continue the contest in the heavily Protestant state of West Virginia. The first televised debate of 1960 was held in West Virginia. Kennedy outperformed Humphrey and, in the days following, Kennedy made substantial gains over Humphrey in the polls.[8][9] Humphrey's campaign was low on funds, and could not compete for advertising and other "get-out-the-vote" drives with Kennedy's well-financed and well-organized campaign, which was not above using dirty tricks to win; prior to the Wisconsin primary, Catholic neighborhoods in Milwaukee were flooded with anti-Catholic pamphlets postmarked from Minnesota. It was assumed Humphrey's campaign had sent them, and it may have helped tilt voters in the Badger State away from him (it later came out that Robert Kennedy had deployed an assistant to mail the pamphlets). In the end, Kennedy defeated Humphrey with over 60% of the vote, and Humphrey ended his presidential campaign. West Virginia showed that Kennedy, a Catholic, could win in a heavily Protestant state. Although Kennedy had only competed in nine presidential primaries,[10] Kennedy's rivals, Johnson and Symington, failed to campaign in any primaries. Even though Stevenson had twice been the Democratic Party's presidential candidate, and retained a loyal following of liberals, his two landslide defeats to Republican United States President Dwight D. Eisenhower led most party leaders and delegates to search for a "fresh face" who could win a national election. Following the primaries, Kennedy traveled around the nation, speaking to state delegations and their leaders. As the Democratic Convention opened, Kennedy was far in the lead, but was still seen as being just short of the delegate total he needed to win.
Democratic convention[edit]
The 1960 Democratic National Convention was held in Los Angeles, California. In the week before the convention opened, Kennedy received two new challengers, when Lyndon B. Johnson, the powerful Senate Majority Leader, and Adlai Stevenson, the party's nominee in 1952 and 1956, officially announced their candidacies. However, neither Johnson nor Stevenson was a match for the talented and highly efficient Kennedy campaign team led by Robert F. Kennedy. Johnson challenged Kennedy to a televised debate before a joint meeting of the Texas and Massachusetts delegations, to which Kennedy accepted. Most observers believed that Kennedy won the debate, and Johnson was unable to expand his delegate support beyond the South. Stevenson's failure to launch his candidacy publicly until the week of the convention meant that many liberal delegates who might have supported him were already pledged to Kennedy, and Stevenson   despite the energetic support of former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt   could not break their allegiance. Kennedy won the nomination on the first ballot.
Then, in a move that surprised many, Kennedy asked Johnson to be his running mate. He realized that he could not be elected without the support of traditional Southern Democrats, most of whom had backed Johnson. He offered Johnson the vice presidential nomination at the Los Angeles Biltmore Hotel at 10:15 a.m. on July 14, 1960, the morning after being nominated for president.[11] Robert F. Kennedy, who hated Johnson for his attacks on the Kennedy family, and who favored labor leader Walter Reuther,[12] later said that his brother offered the position to Johnson as a courtesy and did not predict him to accept it.  When he did accept Robert Kennedy tried to change Johnson's mind and failed.[13]
Biographers Robert Caro and W. Marvin Watson offer a different perspective: They write that the Kennedy campaign was desperate to win what was forecast to be a very close race against Nixon and Lodge. Johnson was needed on the ticket to help carry votes from Texas and the Southern United States. Caro's research showed that on July 14, Kennedy started the process, while Johnson was still asleep. At 6:30 a.m., Kennedy asked his brother to prepare an estimate of upcoming electoral votes, "including Texas".[11] Robert Kennedy called Pierre Salinger and Kenneth O'Donnell to assist him. Realizing the ramifications of counting Texas votes as their own, Salinger asked him whether he was considering a Kennedy-Johnson ticket, and Robert replied, "Yes".[11] Between 9 and 10 am, John Kennedy called Pennsylvania governor David L. Lawrence, a Johnson backer, to request that Lawrence nominate Johnson for vice president if Johnson were to accept the role, and then went to Johnson's suite to discuss a mutual ticket at 10:15 am. John Kennedy then returned to his suite to announce the Kennedy-Johnson ticket to his closest supporters and Northern political bosses. He accepted the congratulations of Ohio Governor Michael DiSalle, Connecticut Governor Abraham A. Ribicoff, Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley, and New York City mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr. Lawrence said that "Johnson has the strength where you need it most"; he then left to begin writing the nomination speech.[11] O'Donnell remembers being angry at what he considered a betrayal by John Kennedy, who had previously cast Johnson as anti-labor and anti-liberal. Afterward, Robert Kennedy visited with labor leaders who were extremely unhappy with the choice of Johnson, and, after seeing the depth of labor opposition to Johnson, he ran messages between the hotel suites of his brother and Johnson, apparently trying to undermine the proposed ticket without John Kennedy's authorization and to get Johnson to agree to be the Democratic Party chairman, rather than vice president. Johnson refused to accept a change in plans, unless it came directly from John Kennedy. Despite his brother's interference, John Kennedy was firm that Johnson was who he wanted as running mate, and met with staffers such as Larry O'Brien, his national campaign manager, to say Johnson was to be vice president. O'Brien recalled later that John Kennedy's words were wholly unexpected, but that, after a brief consideration of the electoral vote situation, he thought "it was a stroke of genius".[11]
Republican Party[edit]
Main article: 1960 Republican Party presidential primaries
1960 Republican Party ticket
Richard Nixon
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
for President
for Vice President
36thVice President of the United States(1953 1961)
3rdU.S. Ambassador to the UN(1953 1960)
Campaign
Republican candidates[edit]
Vice President Richard Nixon
Former Senator George H. Bender from Ohio
State Senator James M. Lloyd from South Dakota
Governor Nelson Rockefeller of New York
Governor Cecil H. Underwood of West Virginia
With the ratification of the 22nd Amendment in 1951, President Dwight D. Eisenhower could not run for the office of president again; he had been elected in 1952 and 1956.
In 1959, it looked as if Vice President Richard Nixon might face a serious challenge for the Republican nomination from New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller, the leader of the Republican moderate-to-liberal wing. However, Rockefeller announced that he would not be a candidate for president, after a national tour revealed that the great majority of Republicans favored Nixon.[14]
After Rockefeller's withdrawal, Nixon faced no significant opposition for the Republican nomination. At the 1960 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Illinois, Nixon was the overwhelming choice of the delegates, with conservative Senator Barry Goldwater from Arizona receiving 10 votes from conservative delegates. In earning the nomination, Nixon became the first sitting vice president to run for president since John C. Breckinridge exactly a century prior. Nixon then chose former Massachusetts Senator and United Nations Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., as his vice presidential running mate. Nixon chose Lodge because his foreign-policy credentials fit into Nixon's strategy to campaign more on foreign policy than domestic policy, which he believed favored the Democrats. Nixon had previously sought Rockefeller as his running mate, but the governor had no ambitions to be vice president. However, he later served as Gerald Ford's vice president from 1974 to 1977.[15]
General election[edit]
Campaign promises[edit]
 Dwight D. Eisenhower, the incumbent president in 1960, whose term expired on January 20, 1961
During the campaign, Kennedy charged that under Eisenhower and the Republicans, the nation had fallen behind the Soviet Union in the Cold War, both militarily and economically, and that, as president, he would "get America moving again". The Eisenhower administration had established NASA in 1958, but Kennedy believed that the Republican Party had ignored the need to catch up to the Soviet Union in the Space Race. He promised that the new Democratic administration would fully appreciate the importance of space accomplishments for the national security and international prestige of the United States. Nixon responded that, if elected, he would continue the "peace and prosperity" that Eisenhower had brought the nation in the 1950s. Nixon also argued that, with the nation engaged in the Cold War with the Soviets, Kennedy was too young and inexperienced to be trusted with the presidency. Had Nixon been elected, at 48 years, 11 days, he would have been the fourth-youngest president at the date of inauguration. Kennedy, by contrast, was 43 years, 236 days, on the date of his inauguration; the second-youngest man to begin a Presidency. (At 42 Theodore Roosevelt, who assumed the Presidency upon the assassination of United States President William McKinley 60 years previously, was (and remains) the youngest.)
During Kennedy's campaign, he relied on his youth and promised to bring about change. Kennedy had a slogan emphasizing his youth, reading, "who's seasoned through and through/but not so dog-gone seasoned that he won't try something new." He was also endorsed by celebrities such as Frank Sinatra, Henry Fonda, and Harry Belafonte. Nixon asserted that his experience in politics made him more qualified to hold the office of president. He wanted voters to know that he had the abilities to take on communist threats.[16]
Campaign events[edit]
 Kennedy campaigning in LaGrange, Georgia, October 1960
Kennedy and Nixon both drew large and enthusiastic crowds throughout the campaign.[17] In August 1960, most polls gave Nixon a slim lead over Kennedy, and many political pundits regarded him as the favorite to win. However, Nixon was plagued by bad luck throughout the fall campaign. In August, President Eisenhower, who had long been ambivalent about Nixon, held a televised press conference in which a reporter, Charles Mohr of Time, mentioned Nixon's claims that he had been a valuable administration insider and adviser. Mohr asked Eisenhower if he could give an example of a major idea of Nixon's that he had heeded. Eisenhower responded with the flip comment, "If you give me a week, I might think of one."[18] Although both Eisenhower and Nixon later claimed that he was merely joking with the reporter, the remark hurt Nixon, as it undercut his claims of having greater decision-making experience than Kennedy. The remark proved so damaging to Nixon that the Democrats turned Eisenhower's statement into a television commercial.[19]
At the Republican National Convention, Nixon had pledged to campaign in all fifty states. This pledge backfired when, in August, Nixon injured his knee on a car door, while campaigning in North Carolina. The knee became infected, and Nixon had to cease campaigning for two weeks, while the infection was treated with antibiotics. When he left Walter Reed Hospital, Nixon refused to abandon his pledge to visit every state; he thus wound up wasting valuable time visiting states that he had no chance of winning, that had few electoral votes and would be of little help at the election, or states that he would almost certainly win regardless. In his effort to visit all 50 states, Nixon spent the vital weekend before the election campaigning in Alaska, which had only three electoral votes, while Kennedy campaigned in more populous states such as New Jersey, Ohio, Michigan, and Pennsylvania.
Throughout the campaign, Nixon's unfriendly relations with the media, which dated back to the "Fund" scandal eight years earlier, were a persistent liability to him. The Washington D.C. press corps, around 100 members, were largely liberal Democrats and by nature inclined to favor Kennedy, but Nixon often made things worse with his mutually antagonistic attitude towards them. Many of Nixon's stump speeches were filled with folksy homilies that resonated with rural and small town Americans, but were distasteful to the elitist D.C. reporters. Mary McGrory of the Washington Post said he was "just so icky, so yucky, humorless, self-righteous and smarmy." However, more important than that was the adulation the press had for Kennedy; as the campaign drew to its terminal phase, this love of the Massachusetts Senator took on an almost messianic fervor. Kennedy was expert at using this to his advantage and flattered reporters instead of arguing with them.
Nixon visited Atlanta, Georgia, on August 26, and acquired a very large turnout to his event. He rode through a parade in Atlanta, and was greeted by 150,000 people.[20] Nixon mentioned in his speech in Atlanta, "In the last quarter of a century, there hasn't been a Democratic candidate for President that has bothered to campaign in the State of Georgia."[21] However, Kennedy would not let Nixon take the Democratic states that easily. Kennedy would change that statistic, and visit some surprising states, including Georgia. He visited the cities of Columbus, Warm Springs, and LaGrange on his campaign trail in Georgia. In his visit to Warm Springs, state troopers tried to keep Kennedy from an immense crowd; however, Kennedy reached out to shake hands of those who were sick with polio.[22] He also visited small towns across Georgia and saw a total of about 100,000 people in the state. Kennedy also spoke at a rehabilitation facility in Warm Springs. Warm Springs was near and dear to Kennedy's heart, due to the effects the facility had on Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt spent time at the rehabilitation facility, and died there in 1945.[21]
In Warm Springs, Kennedy spoke to supporters at the facility, and mentioned Roosevelt in his speech. He admired Roosevelt, and commended him for sticking up for the farmers, workers, small towns, big cities, those in poverty, and those who were sick.[21] He said Roosevelt had a "spirit of strength and progress, to get America moving".[21] Kennedy discussed his six-point plan for health care. He wanted a medical program set up for retirement, and federal funding for the construction of medical schools and hospitals. He also planned for the government to loan students money to attend medical school, and provide grants to renovate old hospitals. He called for more money to be spent on medical research and, finally, expand effort for rehabilitation and come up with new ways to assist those in need.[21] Many Republicans disapproved of Kennedy's plans and described them as an "appeal to socialism".[23] Nevertheless, many residents of Warm Springs were supportive of Kennedy, with women wearing hats reading "Kennedy and Johnson" and[24] signs around the town saying "Douglas County For Kennedy, Except 17 Republicans 6 Old Grouches".[25] Joe O. Butts, the mayor of Warm Springs during Kennedy's visit, said: "He must've shaken hands with everybody within two miles of him, and he was smiling all the time."[26]
Eisenhower remained out of the fray until the general election in the fall, when it was agreed that he should take to the campaign trail in support of Nixon. The president was very much a party man, and although he had some antipathies towards his vice president, he badly wanted the White House to remain in Republican control and also feared that Kennedy was too young and inexperienced for the job. Eisenhower came out in a "cyclonic" campaign, making a series of fiery speeches in the swing states of New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania in support of Nixon and denouncing Democrat charges that he had neglected military preparedness. As the poll numbers with Kennedy narrowed to a close, Eisenhower's "fall offensive" was cut short by his own wife. Mamie Eisenhower was horrified to hear of this and became convinced that he would kill himself due to his bad heart. She phoned Nixon and told him he'd better tell the president to stop this right now, before something happened. Nixon had a luncheon with Eisenhower on October 3, but he was unable to explain exactly why his help in this campaign wasn't needed, instead clumsily beating around the bush. Eisenhower was surprised and slightly annoyed, but agreed to stop campaigning.
Despite the reservations Robert F. Kennedy had about Johnson's nomination, choosing Johnson as Kennedy's running mate proved to be a master stroke. Johnson vigorously campaigned for Kennedy, and was instrumental in helping the Democrats to carry several Southern states skeptical of him, especially Johnson's home state of Texas. Johnson made a "last-minute change of plans, and scheduled two 12-minute whistlestop speeches in Georgia".[27] One of these visits included stopping in Atlanta to speak from the rear of a train at Terminal Station.[28] On the other hand, Ambassador Lodge, Nixon's running mate, ran a lethargic campaign and made several mistakes that hurt Nixon. Among them was a pledge, made without approval, that Nixon would name at least one African American to a Cabinet post. Nixon was furious at Lodge and accused him of spending too much time campaigning with minority groups instead of the white majority.[29]
Nixon's inability to carry the African-American vote was another of many missteps in his campaign. Eisenhower had scored 40% of black votes four years earlier, and Nixon assumed he would perform as well with his strong support of civil rights. However, several missteps including the Lodge "pledge" and Nixon's refusal to comment on Martin Luther King Jr.'s arrest in Atlanta harmed his support with black voters. In addition to that, the Kennedy campaign drenched black churches with "soap" (bribe money) to buy votes. Attempts by the Nixon campaign to counter this were not very successful as they were out-spent three to one. Ultimately, Nixon won under 25% of the black vote on Election Day and strong black turnout for Kennedy in several important states including Illinois and South Carolina may have contributed to his defeat.
Debates[edit]
Main article: 1960 United States presidential debates
There were four presidential debates and no vice presidential debates during the 1960 general election.[30]
Debates among candidates for the 1960 U.S. presidential election
No.
Date
Host
Location
Panelists
Moderator
Participant
Viewership(millions)
P1
Monday, September 26, 1960
WBBM-TV
Chicago, Illinois
Sander VanocurCharles WarrenStuart Novins
Howard K. Smith
Senator John F. KennedyVice President Richard Nixon
66.4[30]
P2
Friday, October 7, 1960
WRC-TV
Washington, D.C.
Paul NivenEdward P. MorganAlan SpivakHarold R. Levy
Frank McGee
Senator John F. KennedyVice President Richard Nixon
61.9[30]
P3
Thursday, October 13, 1960
ABC Studios Los Angeles (Nixon)
Los Angeles, California
Frank McGeeCharles Van FremdDouglass CaterRoscoe Drummond
Bill Shadel
Senator John F. KennedyVice President Richard Nixon
63.7[30]
ABC Studios New York (Kennedy)
New York City
P4
Friday, October 21, 1960
ABC Studios New York
New York City
Frank SingiserJohn EdwardsWalter CronkiteJohn Chancellor
Quincy Howe
Senator John F. KennedyVice President Richard Nixon
60.4[30]
 Senator John F. Kennedy (left) and vice president Richard Nixon (right), prior to their first presidential debate.
 Second of the four Kennedy and Nixon debates, which took place at WRC-TV in Washington, D. C., on October 7, 1960[31]
 Full broadcast of the September 26 debate
The key turning point of the campaign came with the four Kennedy-Nixon debates; they were the first presidential debates ever (the Lincoln Douglas debates of 1858 had been the first for senators from Illinois), also the first held on television and thus attracted enormous publicity. Nixon insisted on campaigning until just a few hours before the first debate started. He had not completely recovered from his stay in hospital, and thus looked pale, sickly, under-weight, and tired.[32] His eyes moved across the room during the debate, and at various moments, sweat was visible on his face. He also refused make-up for the first debate, and as a result, his facial stubble showed prominently on the black-and-white TV screens at the time. Furthermore, the debate set appeared darker once the paint dried up, causing Nixon's suit color to blend in with the background, reducing his stature.[32] Nixon's poor appearance on television in the first debate was reflected by the fact that his mother called him immediately following the debate to ask if he was sick.[33] Kennedy, by contrast, rested and prepared extensively beforehand and thus appeared tanned,[b] confident, and relaxed during the debate.[35] An estimated 70 million viewers watched the first debate.[36]
It is often claimed that people who watched the debate on television overwhelmingly believed Kennedy had won, while radio listeners (a smaller audience) thought Nixon had ended up defeating him.[36][37][38] However, that has been disputed.[39] Indeed, one study has speculated that the viewer/listener disagreement could be due to sample bias, in that those without TV could be a skewed subset of the population:[40]
Evidence in support of this belief [i. e., that Kennedy's physical appearance over-shadowed his performance during the first debate] is mainly limited to sketchy reports about a market survey, conducted by Sindlinger & Company, in which 49% of those who listened to the debates on radio said Nixon had won, compared to 21% naming Kennedy, while 30% of those who watched the debates on television said Kennedy had won, compared to 29% naming Nixon. Contrary to popular belief, the Sindlinger evidence suggests not that Kennedy won on television, but that the candidates tied on television, while Nixon won on radio. However, no details about the sample have ever been reported, and it is unclear whether the survey results can be generalized to a larger population. Moreover, since 87% of American households had a television in 1960 [and that the] fraction of Americans lacking access to television in 1960 was concentrated in rural areas, and particularly in southern and western states, places that were unlikely to hold significant proportions of Catholic voters.[35]
Nonetheless, Gallup polls in October 1960 showed Kennedy moving into a slight but consistent lead over Nixon after the candidates were in a statistical tie for most of August and September.[41] For the remaining three debates, Nixon regained his lost weight, wore television make-up, and appeared more forceful than in his initial appearance.
However, up to 20 million fewer viewers watched the three remaining debates than the first. Political observers at the time felt that Kennedy won the first debate,[42] Nixon won the second[43] and third debates,[44] while the fourth debate,[45] which was seen as the strongest performance by both men, was a draw.
The third debate has been noted, as it brought about a change in the debate process. This debate was a monumental step for television. For the first time ever, split-screen technology was used to bring two people from opposite sides of the country together so they were able to converse in real time. Nixon was in Los Angeles, while Kennedy was in New York. The men appeared to be in the same room, thanks to identical sets. Both candidates had monitors in their respective studios, containing the feed from the opposite studio, so that they could respond to questions. Bill Shadel moderated the debate from a different television studio in Los Angeles.[46] The main topic of this debate was whether military force should be used to prevent Quemoy and Matsu, two island archipelagos off the Chinese coast, from falling under Communist control.[47][48]
Campaign issues[edit]
A key concern in Kennedy's campaign was the widespread skepticism among Protestants about his Roman Catholic religion. Some Protestants, especially Southern Baptists and Lutherans, feared that having a Catholic in the White House would give undue influence to the Pope in the nation's affairs.[49] Radio evangelists such as G. E. Lowman wrote that, "Each person has the right to their own religious belief ... [but] ... the Roman Catholic ecclesiastical system demands the first allegiance of every true member, and says in a conflict between church and state, the church must prevail".[50] The religious issue was so significant that Kennedy made a speech before the nation's newspaper editors in which he criticized the prominence they gave to the religious issue over other topics   especially in foreign policy   that he felt were of greater importance.[51]
To address fears among Protestants that his Roman Catholicism would impact his decision-making, Kennedy told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960: "I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party's candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters   and the Church does not speak for me."[52] He promised to respect the separation of church and state, and not to allow Catholic officials to dictate public policy to him.[53][54][55] Kennedy also raised the question of whether one-quarter of Americans were relegated to second-class citizenship just because they were Roman Catholic. Kennedy would become the first Roman Catholic to be elected president it would be 60 years before another Roman Catholic, Joe Biden, was elected.[56]
Kennedy's campaign took advantage of an opening when Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., the civil-rights leader, was arrested in Georgia while taking part in a sit-in.[57] Nixon asked President Dwight D. Eisenhower to pardon King, but the President declined to do so. Nixon refused to take further action, but Kennedy placed calls to local political authorities to get King released from jail, and he also called King's father and wife. As a result, King's father endorsed Kennedy, and he received much favorable publicity among the black electorate.[58] A letter to the Governor of Georgia regarding Martin Luther King, Jr.'s, arrest also helped Kennedy garner many African American votes. John F. Kennedy asked Governor Ernest Vandiver to look into the harsh sentencing, and stated his claim that he did not want to have to get involved in Georgia's justice system.[59] A member of Kennedy's civil rights team and King's friend, Harris Wofford, and other Kennedy campaign members passed out a pamphlet to black churchgoers the Sunday before the presidential election that said, ""No Comment" Nixon versus a Candidate with a Heart, Senator Kennedy."[60] On election day, Kennedy won the black vote in most areas by wide margins, and this may have provided his margin of victory in states such as New Jersey, South Carolina, Illinois, and Missouri.[citation needed] Researchers found that Kennedy's appeal to African American voters appears to be largely responsible for his receiving more African-American votes than Adlai Stevenson in the 1956 election.[citation needed] The same study conducted found that white voters were less influenced on the topic of civil rights than black voters in 1960. The Republican national chairman at the time, Thruston Ballard Morton, regarded the African-American vote as the single most crucial factor.[61]
The issue that dominated the election was the rising Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union.[62] In 1957, the Soviets had launched Sputnik, the first man-made satellite to orbit Earth.[62] Soon afterwards, some American leaders warned that the nation was falling behind communist countries in science and technology.[62] In Cuba, the revolutionary regime of Fidel Castro became a close ally of the Soviet Union in 1960, heightening fears of communist subversion in the Western Hemisphere.[62] Public opinion polls revealed that more than half the American people thought that war with the Soviet Union was inevitable.[62]
Kennedy took advantage of increased Cold War tension by emphasizing a perceived "missile gap" between the United States and Soviet Union. He argued that under the Republicans, the Soviets had developed a major advantage in the numbers of nuclear missiles.[63] He proposed a bi-partisan congressional investigation about the possibility that the Soviet Union was ahead of the United States in developing missiles.[26] He also noted in an October 18 speech that several senior US military officers had long criticized the Eisenhower Administration's defense spending policies.[64]
Both candidates also argued about the economy and ways in which they could increase the economic growth and prosperity of the 1950s, and make it accessible to more people (especially minorities). Some historians criticize Nixon for not taking greater advantage of Eisenhower's popularity (which was around 60 65% throughout 1960 and on election day), and for not discussing the prosperous economy of the Eisenhower presidency more often in his campaign.[65] As the campaign moved into the final two weeks, the polls and most political pundits predicted a Kennedy victory. However, President Eisenhower, who had largely sat out the campaign, made a vigorous campaign tour for Nixon over the last 10 days before the election. Eisenhower's support gave Nixon a badly needed boost. Nixon also criticized Kennedy for stating that Quemoy and Matsu, two small islands off the coast of Communist China that were held by Nationalist Chinese forces based in Taiwan, were outside the treaty of protection the United States had signed with the Nationalist Chinese. Nixon claimed the islands were included in the treaty, and accused Kennedy of showing weakness towards Communist aggression.[66] Aided by the Quemoy and Matsu issue, and by Eisenhower's support, Nixon began to gain momentum, and by election day, the polls indicated a virtual tie.[67]
Results[edit]
 Results by county explicitly indicating the percentage for the winning candidate. Shades of blue are for Kennedy (Democratic), shades of red are for Nixon (Republican), and shades of green are for Unpledged electors (Democratic/States' Rights).
 Results by congressional district.
The election was held on November 8, 1960. Nixon watched the election returns from his suite at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, while Kennedy watched them at the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. As the early returns poured in from large Northeastern and Midwestern cities, such as Boston, New York City, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Detroit, and Chicago, Kennedy opened a large lead in the popular and electoral votes, and appeared headed for victory. However, as later returns came in from rural and suburban areas in the Midwest, the Rocky Mountain states, and the Pacific Coast states, Nixon began to steadily close the gap on Kennedy.[68]
Before midnight, The New York Times had gone to press with the headline, "Kennedy Elected President". As the election again became too close to call, Times managing editor Turner Catledge hoped that, as he recalled in his memoirs, "a certain Midwestern mayor would steal enough votes to pull Kennedy through", thus allowing the Times to avoid the embarrassment of announcing the wrong winner, as the Chicago Tribune had memorably done twelve years earlier in announcing that Thomas E. Dewey had defeated President Harry S. Truman.[69]
Nixon made a speech at about 3 am, and hinted that Kennedy might have won the election. News reporters were puzzled, as it was not a formal concession speech. He talked of how Kennedy would be elected if "the present trend continues".[70] It was not until the afternoon of the next day that Nixon finally conceded the election, and Kennedy claimed his victory.
Kennedy won in twenty-seven of the thirty-nine largest cities, but lost in Southern cities that had voted for Adlai Stevenson II although he maintained Atlanta, New Orleans, and San Antonio. New Orleans and San Antonio were the only cities in the Southern United States to have large Catholic populations and Atlanta was a traditional Democratic stronghold.[71]
Of the 3,129 counties and county-equivalents making returns, Nixon won in 1,857 (59.35%), while Kennedy carried 1,200 (38.35%). "Unpledged" electors came first in 71 counties and parishes (2.27%) throughout Mississippi and Louisiana, and one borough (0.03%) in Alaska split evenly between Kennedy and Nixon.
 Kennedy casts his ballot at his polling place at a branch of the Boston Public Library.
A sample of how close the election was can be seen in California, Nixon's home state. Kennedy seemed to have carried the state by 37,000 votes when all of the voting precincts reported, but when the absentee ballots were counted a week later, Nixon came from behind to win the state by 36,000 votes.[72]
Similarly, in Hawaii, official results showed Nixon winning by a small margin of 141 votes, with the state being called for him early Wednesday morning. Acting Governor James Kealoha certified the Republican electors, and they cast Hawaii's three electoral votes for Nixon. However, clear discrepancies existed in the official electoral tabulations, and Democrats petitioned for a recount in Hawaii circuit court.[73] The court challenge was still ongoing at the time of the Electoral Count Act's safe harbor deadline, but Democratic electors still convened at the  Iolani Palace on the constitutionally-mandated date of December 19 and cast their votes for Kennedy.[73] The recount, completed before Christmas, resulted in Kennedy being declared winner by 115 votes. On December 30, the circuit court ruled that Hawaii's three electoral votes should go to Kennedy. It was decided that a new certificate was necessary, with only two days remaining before Congress convened on January 6, 1961, to count and certify the Electoral College votes. A letter to Congress saying a certificate was on the way was rushed out by registered air mail. Both Democrat and Republican electoral votes from Hawaii were presented for counting on January 6, 1961, and Vice President Nixon who presided over the certification, graciously, and saying "without the intent of establishing a precedent",[74] requested unanimous consent that the Democratic votes for Kennedy to be counted.[75][76]
In the national popular vote, Kennedy beat Nixon by less than two-tenths of one percentage point (0.17%), the closest popular-vote margin of the 20th century. So close was the popular vote that a shift of 18,858 votes in Illinois and Missouri, both won by Kennedy by less than 1%, would have left both Kennedy and Nixon short of the 269 electoral votes required to win, thus forcing a contingent election in the House of Representatives.
In the Electoral College, Kennedy's victory was larger, as he took 303 electoral votes, to Nixon's 219. A total of 15 electors   eight from Mississippi, six from Alabama, and one from Oklahoma   all refused to vote for either Kennedy or Nixon, and instead cast their votes for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, a conservative Democrat, even though he had not been a candidate for president.[77] Kennedy carried 12 states by three percentage points, or less, while Nixon won six by similarly narrow margins. Kennedy carried all but three states in the populous Northeast, and he also carried the large states of Michigan, Illinois, and Missouri in the Midwest. With Lyndon Johnson's help, he also carried most of the South, including the large states of North Carolina, Georgia, and Texas. Nixon carried all but three of the Western states (including California), and he ran strong in the farm belt states, where his biggest victory was in Ohio.
The New York Times, summarizing the discussion in late November, spoke of a "narrow consensus" among the experts that Kennedy had won more than he lost "as a result of his Catholicism",[78] as Northern Catholics flocked to Kennedy because of attacks on his religion. Interviewing people who voted in both 1956 and 1960, a University of Michigan team analyzing the election returns discovered that people who voted Democratic in 1956 split 33 6 for Kennedy, while the Republican voters of 1956 split 44 17 for Nixon. That is, Nixon lost 28% (17/61) of the Eisenhower voters, while Kennedy lost only 15% of the Stevenson voters. The Democrats, in other words, did a better job of holding their 1956 supporters.[79]
Kennedy said that he saw the challenges ahead and needed the country's support to get through them. In his victory speech, he declared: "To all Americans, I say that the next four years are going to be difficult and challenging years for us all; that a supreme national effort will be needed to move this country safely through the 1960s. I ask your help, and I can assure you that every degree of my spirit that I possess will be devoted to the long-range interest of the United States and to the cause of freedom around the world."[80]
Controversies[edit]
There were widespread allegations of vote fraud, especially in Texas, where his running mate Lyndon B. Johnson was Senator, and Illinois, home of Mayor Richard Daley's powerful Chicago political machine.[72] These two states were important because if Nixon had carried both, he would have earned 270 electoral votes, one more than the 269 needed to win the presidency. Republican senators such as Everett Dirksen and Barry Goldwater claimed vote fraud "played a role in the election",[69] and that Nixon actually won the national popular vote. Republicans tried, and failed, to overturn the results in both Illinois and Texas at the time, as well as in nine other states.[81] Earl Mazo, a conservative journalist and close friend of Nixon who later became Nixon's biographer, made unfounded accusations of voter fraud.[72]
 1960 Nixon campaign button
Nixon's campaign staff urged him to pursue recounts and challenge the validity of Kennedy's victory in several states, especially Illinois, Missouri, and New Jersey, where large majorities in Catholic precincts handed Kennedy the election.[69] Nixon gave a speech three days after the election, stating that he would not contest the election.[69] The Republican National chairman, Senator Thruston Ballard Morton of Kentucky, visited Key Biscayne, Florida, where Nixon had taken his family for a vacation, and pushed for a recount.[69] Morton challenged the results in 11 states,[72] keeping challenges in the courts into mid-1961, but the only result of these challenges was the loss of Hawaii to Kennedy on a recount.
Kennedy won Illinois by less than 9,000 votes, out of 4.75 million cast, a margin of 0.2%.[72] Nixon carried 92 of the state's 101 counties. Kennedy's victory in Illinois came from Chicago, which had favorable demographics for Kennedy, with its large populations of Catholic and African-American voters.[82] His victory margin in the city was 318,736, and 456,312 in Cook County. Daley was alleged to have phoned the Kennedy campaign with the promise "With a little bit of luck and the help of a few close friends, you're going to carry Illinois."[83] When the Republican Chicago Tribune went to press, 79% of Cook County precincts had reported, compared with just 62% of Illinois's precincts overall. Moreover, Nixon never led in Illinois, and Kennedy's lead merely shrank as election night went on.[82]
In Texas, Kennedy defeated Nixon by a 51 to 49% margin, or 46,000 votes.[72] Some Republicans argued, without evidence, that Johnson's formidable political machine had stolen enough votes in counties along the Mexican border to give Kennedy the victory. Kennedy's defenders, such as his speechwriter and special assistant Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., argued that Kennedy's margin in Texas was simply too large for vote fraud to have been a decisive factor.
Earl Mazo, writing in the New York Herald Tribune, argued that in Texas, "a minimum of 100,000 votes for the Kennedy-Johnson ticket simply were nonexistent." Allegations of voter fraud were made in Texas. Fannin County had only 4,895 registered voters; yet, 6,138 votes were cast in that county, three-quarters for Kennedy.[69] In an Angelina County precinct, Kennedy received 187 votes, to Nixon's 24, though there were only 86 registered voters in the precinct.[69] When Republicans demanded a statewide recount, they learned that the state Board of Elections, whose members were all Democrats, had already certified Kennedy as the winner.[69] This analysis has been challenged, since registered voter figures only counted people who had paid the poll tax,and "veterans and senior citizens and some other isolated groups" were exempt from that tax.[84]Earl Mazo's analysis produced evidence of voters casting up to six ballots at once, precinct chiefs bribing voters, and pre-primed voting machines, one of which was caught recording 121 ballots when 43 people voted.
Schlesinger and others have pointed out that even if Nixon had carried Illinois, the state would not have given him a victory, as Kennedy would still have won 276 electoral votes, to Nixon's 246. More to the point, Illinois was the site of the most extensive challenge process, which fell short, despite repeated efforts spearheaded by Cook County state's attorney, Benjamin Adamowski, a Republican, who also lost his re-election bid. Despite demonstrating net errors favoring both Nixon and Adamowski (some precincts, 40% in Nixon's case, showed errors favoring them, a factor suggesting error, rather than fraud), the totals found fell short of reversing the results for the candidates. While a Daley-connected circuit judge, Thomas Kluczynski (later appointed a federal judge by Kennedy, at Daley's recommendation), threw out a federal lawsuit "filed to contend" the voting totals,[69] the Republican-dominated State Board of Elections unanimously rejected the challenge to the results. Furthermore, there were signs of possible irregularities in downstate areas controlled by Republicans, which Democrats never seriously pressed, since the Republican challenges went nowhere.[85] More than a month after the election, the Republican National Committee abandoned its Illinois voter fraud claims.[72]
An academic study in 1985[86] later analyzed the ballots of two disputed precincts in Chicago which were subject to a recount. It found that while there was a pattern of miscounting votes to the advantage of Democratic candidates, Nixon suffered less from this than Republicans in other races, and, furthermore, the extrapolated error would only have reduced his Illinois margin from 8,858 votes (the final official total) to just under 8,000. It concluded there was insufficient evidence that he had been cheated out of winning Illinois
A special prosecutor assigned to the case brought charges against 650 people, which did not result in convictions.[69] Three Chicago election workers were convicted of voter fraud in 1962, and served short terms in jail.[69] Mazo, Nixon's conservative reporter friend, later claimed, without evidence, that he "found names of the dead who had voted in Chicago, along with 56 people from one house".[69] He claimed to have found cases of Republican voter fraud in southern Illinois, but said that the totals "did not match the Chicago fraud he found."[69] After Mazo had published four parts of an intended 12-part voter fraud series documenting his findings, which was re-published nationally, he said: "Nixon requested his publisher stop the rest of the series so as to prevent a constitutional crisis."[69] Nevertheless, the Chicago Tribune (which routinely endorsed GOP presidential candidates, including Nixon in 1960, 1968, and 1972) wrote that "the election of November 8 was characterized by such gross and palpable fraud as to justify the conclusion that [Nixon] was deprived of victory".[69]
Nixon's personal decision not to challenge the electoral results came despite pressure from Eisenhower, his wife Pat, and others. He explained in his memoirs that he did not do it for a number of reasons, one of them being that every state had different electoral laws, and some had no provisions for a vote recount. Consequently, a recount of the votes, if it was even possible, would take months, during which time the nation would be left without a president. Furthermore, Nixon feared that it would set a bad precedent for other countries, especially the Latin American states ("every pipsqueak politician down there would start claiming fraud when he lost an election"). "I had no doubt that had the results been the other way around, Kennedy wouldn't have hesitated to challenge the election."
Popular votes[edit]
Alabama[edit]
See also: 1960 United States presidential election in Alabama and United States presidential elections in which the winner lost the popular vote  1960 Alabama results ambiguity
The situation in Alabama was controversial, as the number of popular votes that Kennedy received in Alabama is difficult to determine because of the unusual situation there. Instead of having the voters use one vote to choose from a slate of electors, the Alabama ballot had voters choose the electors individually with up to 11 votes. In such a situation, a given candidate is traditionally assigned the popular vote of the elector who received the most votes. For instance, all 11 Republican candidates in Alabama were pledged to Nixon, and the 11 Republican electors received anywhere from as low as 230,951 votes (for George Witcher) to as high as 237,981 votes (for Cecil Durham); Nixon is therefore assigned 237,981 popular votes from Alabama.
The situation was more complicated on the Democratic side. The Alabama statewide Democratic primary had chosen 11 candidates for the Electoral College, five of whom were pledged to vote for Kennedy, but the other six of whom were unpledged and could therefore vote for anyone that they chose to be president. All 11 of these Democratic candidates won in the general election in Alabama, from as low as 316,394 votes for Karl Harrison, to as high as 324,050 votes for Frank M. Dixon. All six of the unpledged Democratic electors ended up voting against Kennedy, and instead voted for the Dixiecrat segregationist Harry F. Byrd. The number of popular votes that Kennedy received is therefore difficult to calculate. There are typically three methods that can be used. The first method, which is mostly used and the method used on the results table on this page below, is to assign Kennedy 318,303 votes in Alabama (the votes won by the most popular Kennedy elector, C.G. Allen), and to assign 324,050 votes in Alabama (the votes won by the most popular unpledged Democratic elector, Frank M. Dixon) to unpledged electors. However, using this method gives a combined voting total that is much higher than the actual number of votes cast for the Democrats in Alabama. The second method that can be used is to give Kennedy 318,303 votes in Alabama, and count the remaining 5,747 Democratic votes as unpledged electors. 
The third method would give a completely different outlook in terms of the popular vote in both Alabama and in the USA overall. The third method is to allocate the Democratic votes in Alabama between Kennedy electors and unpledged electors on a percentage basis, giving 5/11s of the 324,050 Democratic votes to Kennedy (which comes to 147,295 votes for Kennedy) and 6/11s of the 324,050 Democratic votes to unpledged electors (which comes to 176,755 votes for unpledged electors). Bearing in mind that the highest Republican/Nixon elector in Alabama got 237,981 votes, this third method of calculating the Alabama vote means that Nixon wins the popular vote in Alabama, and wins the popular vote in the USA overall, as it would give Kennedy 34,049,976 votes nationally, and Nixon 34,108,157 votes nationally.[87]
Georgia[edit]
See also: 1960 United States presidential election in Georgia
The number of popular votes Kennedy and Nixon received in Georgia is also difficult to determine because voters voted for 12 separate electors.[88] The vote totals of 458,638 for Kennedy and 274,472 for Nixon reflect the number of votes for the Kennedy and Nixon electors who received the highest number of votes. The Republican and Democratic electors receiving the highest number of votes were outliers from the other 11 electors from their party. The average vote totals for the 12 electors were 455,629 for the Democratic electors, and 273,110 for the Republican electors. This shrinks Kennedy's election margin in Georgia by 1,647 votes, to 182,519.[89]
Unpledged Democratic electors[edit]
Main article: Unpledged elector
 Senator Harry F. Byrd Sr. received 15 electoral votes
Many Southern Democrats were opposed to voting rights for African Americans living in the South. There was a call from segregationists for electoral votes to be withheld, or to be cast for Virginia senator Harry F. Byrd, a segregationist Democrat, as an independent candidate.[90] Both before and after the convention, they attempted to put unpledged Democratic electors on their states' ballots, in the hopes of influencing the race; the existence of such electors might influence which candidate would be chosen by the national convention, and in a close race, such electors might be in a position to extract concessions from either the Democratic or Republican presidential candidates in return for their electoral votes.
Most of these attempts failed. The Democrats in Alabama put up a mixed slate of five electors loyal to Kennedy and six unpledged electors. The Democrats in Mississippi put up two distinct slates   one of Kennedy loyalists, and one of unpledged electors. Louisiana also put up two distinct slates, although the unpledged slate did not receive the "Democratic" label. Georgia freed its Democratic electors from pledges to vote for Kennedy, although all 12 Democratic electors in Georgia did end up voting for Kennedy. Governor Ernest Vandiver wanted the Democratic electors to vote against Kennedy. Former governor Ellis Arnall supported Kennedy getting the electoral votes, with Arnall calling Vandiver's stand "utterly disgraceful".[91]
In total, 14 unpledged Democratic electors won election from the voters and chose not to vote for Kennedy, eight from Mississippi and six from Alabama. Because electors pledged to Kennedy had won a clear majority of the Electoral College, the unpledged electors could not influence the results. Nonetheless, they refused to vote for Kennedy. Instead, they voted for Byrd, even though he was not an announced candidate and did not seek their votes. In addition, Byrd received one electoral vote from a faithless Republican elector in Oklahoma, for a total of 15 electoral votes. The faithless Republican elector in Oklahoma voted for Barry Goldwater as vice president; whereas the 14 unpledged Democratic electors from Mississippi and Alabama voted for Strom Thurmond as vice president.
Electoral results
Presidential candidate
Party
Home state
Popular vote
Electoralvote
Running mate
Count
Percentage
Vice-presidential candidate
Home state
Electoral vote
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy
Democratic
Massachusetts
34,220,984(a)
49.72%
303
 Lyndon Baines Johnson
Texas
303
 Richard Milhous Nixon
Republican
California
34,108,157
49.55%
219
 Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Massachusetts
219
Harry Flood Byrd Sr.
Democratic
Virginia
 (b)
 (b)
15
James Strom Thurmond Sr.
South Carolina
14
Barry Morris Goldwater(c)
Arizona
1(c)
 (unpledged electors)
Democratic
(n/a)
286,359
0.42%
 (d)
 (n/a)
(n/a)
 (d)
 Eric Hass
Socialist Labor
New York
47,522
0.07%
0
 Georgia Olive Cozzini
Wisconsin
0
 Rutherford Losey Decker
Prohibition
Missouri
46,203
0.07%
0
 Earle Harold Munn
Michigan
0
 Orval Eugene Faubus
States' Rights
Arkansas
44,984
0.07%
0
 John Geraerdt Crommelin Jr.
Alabama
0
 Farrell Dobbs
Socialist Workers
New York
40,175
0.06%
0
 Myra Tanner Weiss
New York
0
 Charles L. Sullivan
Constitution
Mississippi
(TX) 18,162
0.03%
0
 Merritt Barton Curtis
California
0
 Joseph Bracken Lee
Conservative
Utah
(NJ) 8,708
0.01%
0
 Kent Courtney
Louisiana
0
Other
11,128
0.02%
 
Other
 
Total
68,832,482
100%
537
537
Needed to win
269
269
There were 537 electoral votes, up from 531 in 1956, because of the addition of two U.S. senators and one U.S. representative from each of the new states of Alaska and Hawaii. The House of Representatives was temporarily expanded from 435 members to 437, to accommodate this, and went back to 435 when re-apportioned, according to the 1960 census. The re-apportionment took place after the 1960 election.
Source (Popular Vote): Leip, David. "1960 Presidential Election Results". Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections. Retrieved February 18, 2012.Note: Sullivan / Curtis ran only in Texas. In Washington, the Constitution Party ran Curtis for president and B. N. Miller for vice president, receiving 1,401 votes.
Source (Electoral Vote): "Electoral College Box Scores 1789 1996". National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved August 2, 2005.
(a) This figure is problematic; see Alabama popular vote above.(b) Byrd was not directly on the ballot. Instead, his electoral votes came from unpledged Democratic electors and a faithless elector.(c) Oklahoma faithless elector Henry D. Irwin, though pledged to vote for Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., instead voted for non-candidate Harry F. Byrd. However, unlike other electors who voted for Byrd and Strom Thurmond as vice president, Irwin cast his vice presidential electoral vote for Arizona Republican Senator Barry Goldwater.(d) In Mississippi, the slate of unpledged Democratic electors won. They cast their 8 votes for Byrd and Thurmond.
Popular vote
Kennedy
 
49.72%
Nixon
 
49.55%
Unpledged (Byrd)
 
0.42%
Others
 
0.31%
Electoral vote
Kennedy
 
56.42%
Nixon
 
40.78%
Byrd
 
2.79%
Geography of results[edit]
 
Results by county, shaded according to winning candidate's percentage of the vote
Cartographic gallery[edit]
Presidential election results by county
Democratic presidential election results by county
Republican presidential election results by county
Unpledged electors presidential election results by county
"Other" presidential election results by county
Cartogram of presidential election results by county
Cartogram of Democratic presidential election results by county
Cartogram of Republican presidential election results by county
Cartogram of unpledged electors presidential election results by county
Cartogram of "Other" presidential election results by county
Results by state[edit]
[92]
States won by Kennedy/Johnson
States won by Byrd/Thurmond
States won by Nixon/Lodge
John F. KennedyDemocratic
Richard NixonRepublican
Unpledged ElectorsUnpledged Democratic
Eric Hass Socialist Labor
Margin
State Total
State
electoralvotes
#
%
electoralvotes
#
%
electoralvotes
#
%
electoralvotes
#
%
electoralvotes
#
%
#
Alabama
11
318,303
56.39
5
237,981
42.16
 
324,050
0.00
6
 
 
 
80,322
14.23
564,478
AL
Alaska
3
29,809
49.06
 
30,953
50.94
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1,144
 1.88
60,762
AK
Arizona
4
176,781
44.36
 
221,241
55.52
4
 
 
 
469
0.12
 
 44,460
 11.16
398,491
AZ
Arkansas
8
215,049
50.19
8
184,508
43.06
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30,541
7.13
428,509
AR
California
32
3,224,099
49.55
 
3,259,722
50.10
32
 
 
 
1,051
0.02
 
 35,623
 0.55
6,506,578
CA
Colorado
6
330,629
44.91
 
402,242
54.63
6
 
 
 
2,803
0.38
 
 71,613
 9.73
736,246
CO
Connecticut
8
657,055
53.73
8
565,813
46.27
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91,242
7.46
1,222,883
CT
Delaware
3
99,590
50.63
3
96,373
49.00
 
 
 
 
82
0.04
 
3,217
1.64
196,683
DE
Florida
10
748,700
48.49
 
795,476
51.51
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46,776
 3.03
1,544,176
FL
Georgia
12
458,638
62.54
12
274,472
37.43
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184,166
25.11
733,349
GA
Hawaii
3
92,410
50.03
3
92,295
49.97
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115
0.06
184,705
HI
Idaho
4
138,853
46.22
 
161,597
53.78
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22,744
 7.57
300,450
ID
Illinois
27
2,377,846
49.98
27
2,368,988
49.80
 
 
 
 
10,560
0.22
 
8,858
0.19
4,757,409
IL
Indiana
13
952,358
44.60
 
1,175,120
55.03
13
 
 
 
1,136
0.05
 
 222,762
 10.43
2,135,360
IN
Iowa
10
550,565
43.22
 
722,381
56.71
10
 
 
 
230
0.02
 
 171,816
 13.49
1,273,810
IA
Kansas
8
363,213
39.10
 
561,474
60.45
8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 198,261
 21.35
928,825
KS
Kentucky
10
521,855
46.41
 
602,607
53.59
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 80,752
 7.18
1,124,462
KY
Louisiana
10
407,339
50.42
10
230,980
28.59
 
169,572
20.99
 
 
 
 
176,359
21.83
807,891
LA
Maine
5
181,159
42.95
 
240,608
57.05
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 59,449
 14.10
421,767
ME
Maryland
9
565,808
53.61
9
489,538
46.39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76,270
7.23
1,055,349
MD
Massachusetts
16
1,487,174
60.22
16
976,750
39.55
 
 
 
 
3,892
0.16
 
510,424
20.67
2,469,480
MA
Michigan
20
1,687,269
50.85
20
1,620,428
48.84
 
539
0.02
 
1,718
0.05
 
66,841
2.01
3,318,097
MI
Minnesota
11
779,933
50.58
11
757,915
49.16
 
 
 
 
962
0.06
 
22,018
1.43
1,541,887
MN
Mississippi
8
108,362
36.34
 
73,561
24.67
 
116,248
38.99
8
 
 
 
 7,886
 2.64
298,171
MS
Missouri
13
972,201
50.26
13
962,221
49.74
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9,980
0.52
1,934,422
MO
Montana
4
134,891
48.60
 
141,841
51.10
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6,950
 2.50
277,579
MT
Nebraska
6
232,542
37.93
 
380,553
62.07
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 148,011
 24.14
613,095
NE
Nevada
3
54,880
51.16
3
52,387
48.84
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,493
2.32
107,267
NV
New Hampshire
4
137,772
46.58
 
157,989
53.42
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20,217
 6.84
295,761
NH
New Jersey
16
1,385,415
49.96
16
1,363,324
49.16
 
 
 
 
4,262
0.15
 
22,091
0.80
2,773,111
NJ
New Mexico
4
156,027
50.15
4
153,733
49.41
 
 
 
 
570
0.18
 
2,294
0.74
311,107
NM
New York
45
3,830,085
52.53
45
3,446,419
47.27
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
383,666
5.26
7,291,079
NY
North Carolina
14
713,136
52.11
14
655,420
47.89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57,716
4.22
1,368,556
NC
North Dakota
4
123,963
44.52
 
154,310
55.42
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30,347
 10.90
278,431
ND
Ohio
25
1,944,248
46.72
 
2,217,611
53.28
25
 
 
 
 
 
 
 273,363
 6.57
4,161,859
OH
Oklahoma
8
370,111
40.98
 
533,039
59.02
7
0
0.00
1
 
 
 
 162,928
 18.04
903,150
OK
Oregon
6
367,402
47.32
 
408,060
52.56
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40,658
 5.24
776,421
OR
Pennsylvania
32
2,556,282
51.06
32
2,439,956
48.74
 
 
 
 
7,185
0.14
 
116,326
2.32
5,006,541
PA
Rhode Island
4
258,032
63.63
4
147,502
36.37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110,530
27.26
405,535
RI
South Carolina
8
198,129
51.24
8
188,558
48.76
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9,571
2.48
386,688
SC
South Dakota
4
128,070
41.79
 
178,417
58.21
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 50,347
 16.43
306,487
SD
Tennessee
11
481,453
45.77
 
556,577
52.92
11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 75,124
 7.14
1,051,792
TN
Texas
24
1,167,567
50.52
24
1,121,310
48.52
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46,257
2.00
2,311,084
TX
Utah
4
169,248
45.17
 
205,361
54.81
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36,113
 9.64
374,709
UT
Vermont
3
69,186
41.35
 
98,131
58.65
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28,945
 17.30
167,324
VT
Virginia
12
362,327
46.97
 
404,521
52.44
12
 
 
 
397
0.05
 
 42,194
 5.47
771,449
VA
Washington
9
599,298
48.27
 
629,273
50.68
9
 
 
 
10,895
0.88
 
 29,975
 2.41
1,241,572
WA
West Virginia
8
441,786
52.73
8
395,995
47.27
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45,791
5.47
837,781
WV
Wisconsin
12
830,805
48.05
 
895,175
51.77
12
 
 
 
1,310
0.08
 
 64,370
 3.72
1,729,082
WI
Wyoming
3
63,331
44.99
 
77,451
55.01
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14,120
 10.03
140,782
WY
TOTALS:
537
34,220,984
49.72
303
34,108,157
49.55
219
286,359
0.42
15
47,522
0.07
 
112,827
0.16
68,832,482
US
Close states[edit]
Margin of victory less than 1% (95 electoral votes):
Hawaii, 0.06% (115 votes) 
Illinois, 0.19% (8,858 votes)
Missouri, 0.52% (9,980 votes) (tipping point state for Kennedy win)
California, 0.55% (35,623 votes)
New Mexico, 0.74% (2,294 votes)
New Jersey, 0.80% (22,091 votes) (tipping point state if Nixon wins)
Margin of victory less than 5% (161 electoral votes):
Minnesota, 1.43% (22,018 votes)
Delaware, 1.64% (3,217 votes)
Alaska, 1.88% (1,144 votes)
Texas, 2.00% (46,257 votes)
Michigan, 2.01% (66,841 votes)
Nevada, 2.32% (2,493 votes)
Pennsylvania, 2.32% (116,326 votes)
Washington, 2.41% (29,975 votes)
South Carolina, 2.48% (9,571 votes)
Montana, 2.50% (6,950 votes)
Mississippi, 2.64% (7,886 votes)
Florida, 3.03% (46,776 votes)
Wisconsin, 3.72% (64,370 votes)
North Carolina, 4.22% (57,716 votes)
Margin of victory over 5%, but under 10% (160 electoral votes):
Oregon, 5.24% (40,658 votes)
New York, 5.26% (383,666 votes)
West Virginia, 5.46% (45,791 votes)
Virginia, 5.47% (42,194 votes)
Ohio, 6.57% (273,363 votes)
New Hampshire, 6.84% (20,217 votes)
Arkansas, 7.13% (30,541 votes)
Tennessee, 7.15% (75,124 votes)
Kentucky, 7.18% (80,752 votes)
Maryland, 7.22% (76,270 votes)
Connecticut, 7.46% (91,242 votes)
Idaho, 7.56% (22,744 votes)
Utah, 9.64% (36,113 votes)
Colorado, 9.73% (71,613 votes)
Statistics[edit]
[93]
Counties with Highest Percent of Vote (Democratic)
Seminole County, Georgia 95.35%
Miller County, Georgia 94.74%
Hart County, Georgia 93.51%
Starr County, Texas 93.49%
Madison County, Georgia 92.18%
Counties with Highest Percent of Vote (Republican)
Jackson County, Kentucky 90.35%
Johnson County, Tennessee 86.74%
Owsley County, Kentucky 86.24%
Hooker County, Nebraska 86.19%
Sevier County, Tennessee 85.05%
Counties with Highest Percent of Vote (Other)
Amite County, Mississippi 72.72%
Wilkinson County, Mississippi 68.09%
Jefferson County, Mississippi 66.54%
Franklin County, Mississippi 66.37%
Rankin County, Mississippi 65.12%
Voter demographics[edit]
The 1960 presidential vote by demographic subgroup
Demographic subgroup
Kennedy
Nixon
Total vote
50.1
49.9
Gender
Men
52
48
Women
49
51
Age
18 29 years old
54
46
30 49 years old
54
46
50 and older
46
54
Race
White
49
51
Black
68
32
Religion
Protestants
38
62
Catholics
78
22
Party
Democrats
84
16
Republicans
5
95
Independents
43
57
Education
Less than high school
55
45
High school
52
48
College graduate or higher
39
61
Occupation
Professional and business
42
58
White-collar
48
52
Blue-collar
60
40
Farmers
48
52
Region
Northeast
53
47
Midwest
48
52
South
51
49
West
49
51
Union households
Union
65
35
Source: [94]
See also[edit]
History of the United States (1945 1964)
Inauguration of John F. Kennedy
Primary (film)
1960 United States House of Representatives elections
1960 United States Senate elections
1960 United States presidential debates
Contested elections in American history
Notes[edit]
^ Official tallies for the popular vote are complicated by unpledged electors in Alabama. The Democratic voters of Alabama were faced with voting multiple individual electors in a singular slate that featured both pledged and unpledged electors. Kennedy is provided the popular votes of the highest-voted Alabama elector to uphold their pledge to him in the Electoral College, while the unpledged slate's popular vote is determined by subtracting Kennedy's popular votes from the highest-voted anti-Kennedy elector.[2] See the Unpledged elector page for clarification.
^ His tanned appearance was likely darkening hyper-pigmentation of the skin due to Addison's disease.[34]
References[edit]
^ "National General Election VEP Turnout Rates, 1789 Present". United States Election Project. CQ Press.
^ 1960 Presidential General Election Results   Alabama Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections
^ Rorabaugh (2009)
^ May, Ann Mari (1990). "President Eisenhower, Economic Policy, and the 1960 Presidential Election". Journal of Economic History. 50 (2): 417 427. doi:10.1017/s0022050700036536. JSTOR 2123282. S2CID 45404782.
^ Casey (2009)
^ Zeleny, Jeff; Bosman, Julie (March 11, 2008). "Obama Rejects Idea of Back Seat on Ticket". The New York Times.
^ Humphrey, Hubert H. (1992). Kennedy also defeated Morse in the Maryland and Oregon primaries. The Education of a Public Man, p. 152. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 0-8166-1897-6.
^ Reston, James (May 5, 1960). "Sen. Kennedy More Effective in TV Debate". The Los Angeles Times. New York Times News Service. p. 2. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ Lawrence, W. H. (May 6, 1960). "West Virginia Poll Finds Kennedy Gain". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ "Another Race To the Finish". The News & Observer. November 2, 2008. Archived from the original on January 15, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
^ a b c d e Caro, Robert A. (2012). The Passage of Power, pp. 121 135. Alfred A. Knopf, New York. ISBN 978-0-679-40507-8
^ Cosgrave, Ben (May 24, 2014). "Head to Head: JFK and RFK, Los Angeles, July 1960". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2018.
^ Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. Robert Kennedy and Hiss Times (1978) pp 206 211.
^ (White, pp. 91 92)
^ (White, pp. 242 243)
^ Lee, Byung Joon (September 2016). "Attacking the Airwaves: How Television Changed the American Presidential Campaign". The New England Journal of History. 73: 1 27.
^ E. Thomas Wood, "Nashville now and then: Nixon paints the town red". NashvillePost.com. October 5, 2007. Archived from the original on September 27, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2007.
^ Ambrose, Stephen E. (1991). Eisenhower: Soldier and President, p. 525. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-671-74758-4.
^ "Nixon's Experience? (Kennedy, 1960)". The Living Room Candidate. Museum of the Moving Image. Retrieved August 25, 2016.
^ Fleming, K (November 1960). "The Nixon-Kennedy Campaigns In Georgia". The Atlanta-Journal and Constitution.
^ a b c d e "John F. Kennedy: Speech by Senator John F. Kennedy, the Little White House, Warm Springs, GA". www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved March 1, 2017.
^ Galphin, B (October 11, 1960). "Cheering Throng Engulfs Kennedy". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
^ Gaines, Marion (October 6, 1960). "Kennedy's Plans Altered: Crowd of 50,000 Is Seen". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
^ Johnson, Marion (October 10, 1960). "Women Dressed in Support of John F. Kennedy's Presidential Campaign, Little White House, Warm Springs, Georgia". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
^ Stovall, Hugh (October 11, 1960). "A Sign of Votes at Warm Springs". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
^ a b Hal, Gulliver (November 23, 1963). "A Friendly Georgia Greeted Kennedy During His 5 Visits". The Atlanta Constitution.
^ "Johnson Due in State Tonight". The Atlanta Constitution. October 11, 1960.
^ "New President Johnson An Old Friend to Georgia". The Atlanta Constitution. November 23, 1963.
^ White, Theodore H. (2009). The Making of the President, 1960. Pymble, NSW: HarperCollins. p. 297. ISBN 978-0-061-98601-7.
^ a b c d e "CPD: 1960 Debates". www.debates.org. Retrieved January 8, 2019.
^ "1960 debates". Commission on Presidential Debates. Retrieved December 30, 2014.
^ a b (Nixon, p. 270)
^ (Nixon, p. 271)
^ O'Brien, Michael. John F. Kennedy: A Biography (2005), pp. 407 408.
^ a b Scott L. Althaus.  Todd Schaefer and Tom Birkland (ed.). "Encyclopedia of Media and Politics" (PDF). Washington, D. C.: C.Q. Press. p. Kennedy-Nixon debates. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 3, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2013.
^ a b "THE KENNEDY-NIXON PRESIDENTIAL DEBATES, 1960   The Museum of Broadcast Communications". The Museum of Broadcast Communications (MBC). Archived from the original on August 21, 2010. Retrieved October 8, 2010.
^ "Nixon". American Experience. Season 3. Episode 2. October 15, 1990. PBS. WGBH. Retrieved June 15, 2022.
^ "JFK (Part 1)". American Experience. Season 25. Episode 7. November 11, 2013. PBS. WGBH. Retrieved September 24, 2019.
^ Campbell, W. Joseph (September 24, 2016), "Debate myth emerges anew", Media Myth Alert.
^ Vancil, David L. (1987). "The myth of viewer listener disagreement in the first Kennedy Nixon debate". Central States Speech Journal. 38: 16 27. doi:10.1080/10510978709368226.
^ "Gallup Presidential Election Trial-Heat Trends, 1936 2008". gallup.com. Gallup, Inc. September 24, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2020.
^ Kraus, Sidney (Autumn 1996). "Winners of the first 1960 televised presidential debate between Kennedy and Nixon". Journal of Communication. 46 (4): 78 96. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1996.tb01507.x   via Oxford Academic.
^ Reston, James (October 8, 1960). "The Second Debate; Vice President Apparently Came Out Ahead in a More Informative Show". The New York Times. p. 10. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ Wicker, Tom (October 15, 1960). "G.O.P. Ledaers Say Kennedy 'Cribbed'". The New York Times. p. 12. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ "Kennedy-Nixon Debates Viewed as Draw in 23 Major Cities". The New York Times. October 23, 1960. p. 70. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ "Clipped From The Record". The Record. October 13, 1960. p. 41.
^ "October 13, 1960 Debate Transcript". Debates.org. Retrieved December 5, 2013.
^ "Here Are Kennedy And Nixon Answers On Major Issues". The Tampa Tribune. Associated Press. October 14, 1960. p. 22. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ Shaun Casey (2009). The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960. Oxford University Press. pp. 143 46. ISBN 9780199743636.
^ Lowman, G. E. (1960). Should a Roman Catholic Be President?. Prophecies for the Times. Vol. Number 8. pp. 83 89. Archived at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.
^ "Remarks of Senator John F. Kennedy at American Society of Newspaper Editors, Washington, D. C., April 21, 1960, "The Religion Issue in American Politics"   John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum". Jfklibrary.org. April 21, 1960. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ Kennedy, John F. (June 18, 2002). "Address to the Greater Houston Ministerial Association". American Rhetoric. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
^ Carty, Thomas J. (2004). A Catholic in the White House? Religion, Politics, and John F. Kennedy's Presidential Campaign. New York City: Palgrave Macmillan.
^ Casey, Shaun A. (2009). The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960. New York City: Oxford University Press.
^ Lacroix, Patrick (2021). John F. Kennedy and the Politics of Faith. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp. 21 44.
^ Fleegler, Robert L (2013). Ellis Island Nation: Immigration Policy and American Identity in the Twentieth Century. U of Pennsylvania Press. p. 148. ISBN 978-0812208092.
^ White, Theodore H. (1961). The Making of the President 1960. New York, Atheneum Publishers. p. 385.
^ Farrington, Joshua D. (September 20, 2016). Black Republicans and the Transformation of the GOP. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-9326-5.
^ "President Kennedy's Letter to Georgia Governor Ernest Vandiver, October 26, 1960   John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum". www.jfklibrary.org. Retrieved March 1, 2017.
^ Kuhn, Clifford (1997). ""There's a Footnote to History!" Memory and the History of Martin Luther King's October 1960 Arrest and Its Aftermath". The Journal of American History: 586.
^ Middleton, Russell (March 1962). "The Civil Rights Issue And Presidential Voting Among Southern Negroes And Whites". Social Forces. 40 (3): 209 215. doi:10.2307/2573630. JSTOR 2573630.
^ a b c d e "Campaign of 1960   John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum". www.JFKLibrary.org. Retrieved July 26, 2017.
^ (Ambrose, p. 562)
^ Speech of Senator John F. Kennedy, American Legion Convention, Miami Beach, FL accessed November 17, 2013
^ "It's not the economy, stupid   it's what you do with it". Eurekalert.org. August 14, 2009. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
^ (Ambrose, pp. 579 580)
^ Perry, Paul (1962). "Gallup Poll Election Survey Experience, 1950 to 1960". The Public Opinion Quarterly. 26 (2): 272 279. doi:10.1086/267097. ISSN 0033-362X. JSTOR 2747357.
^ Beschloss, Michael (October 29, 2016). "No Concession, No Sleep: Glued to the TV on Election Night 1960". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 28, 2019.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o "Another Race To the Finish". The Washington Post. November 17, 2000. Retrieved May 12, 2016.
^ "Remarks Conceding the Presidential Election in Los Angeles, California | The American Presidency Project". www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved March 17, 2022.
^ Murphy, Paul (1974). Political Parties In American History, Volume 3, 1890 present. G. P. Putnam's Sons.
^ a b c d e f g Posner, Gerald (November 11, 2000). "The fallacy of Nixon's graceful exit". Salon. Retrieved March 8, 2021.
^ a b Tuttle, Daniel W. Jr. (March 1961).  Anderson, Totton J. (ed.). "The 1960 Election in Hawaii" (PDF). The Western Political Quarterly. The 1960 Elections in the West. University of Utah. 14 (1, Part 2): 331 338. doi:10.2307/443854. JSTOR 443854   via SAGE Journals.
^ Institution, Brookings (1961). The Presidential Election and Transition, 1960 1961: Brookings Lectures and Additional Papers. Brookings Institution. p. 152.
^ Burlingame, Burl. "Hawaii was the 'Florida' of 1960 election." Honolulu Star-Bulletin. November 18, 2000. Retrieved 2020-12-19.
^ Stern, Michael. "What the 1960 Hawaii Presidential Election Meant for Bush v. Gore." Point of Order. January 4, 2016. Retrieved 2020-12-19.
^ Dudley, Robert L.; Shiraev, Eric (2008). Counting Every Vote: The Most Contentious Elections in American History. Dulles, Virginia: Potomac Books. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-59797-224-6.
^ The New York Times, November 20, 1960, Section 4, p. E5
^ Campbell, Angus;  et al. (1966). Elections and the Political Order. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-471-13340-7.
^ "Kennedy Wins 1960 Presidential Election - 1960 Year In Review - Audio - UPI.com". UPI. Retrieved June 30, 2022.
^ Greenberg, David (October 16, 2000). "Was Nixon Robbed?". Slate.
^ a b von Hippel, Paul (August 8, 2017). "Here's a voter fraud myth: Richard Daley "stole" Illinois for John Kennedy in the 1960 election?". The Washington Post.
^ "Politics, Chicago Style". April 11, 1999.
^ The Houston Chronicle, April 13, 2012, "Vote ID law is a waste of money" by Terri Burke
^ Slate, October 16, 2000, "Was Nixon Robbed? The legend of the stolen 1960 presidential election" by David Greenberg
^ Kallina, Edmund F. (Winter 1985). "Was the 1960 Presidential Election Stolen? The Case of Illinois". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 15 (1): 113 118. JSTOR 27550168. Retrieved November 19, 2020.
^ "Did JFK Lose the Popular Vote?". RealClearPolitics. October 22, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012.
^ Novotny, Patrick (2004). "John F. Kennedy, the 1960 Election, and Georgia's Unpledged Electors in the Electoral College". Georgia Historical Quarterly. 88 (3): 375 397. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
^ Gaines, Brian J. (March 2001). "Popular Myths About Popular Vote Electoral College Splits" (PDF). PS: Political Science & Politics: 74. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 23, 2006. Retrieved April 2, 2006.
^ Novotny, Patrick (Fall 2004). "John F. Kennedy, the 1960 Election, and Georgia's Unpledged Electors in the Electoral College". The Georgia Historical Quarterly. 88.
^ Novotny, Patrick (Fall 2004). "John F. Kennedy, the 1960 Election, and Georgia's Unpledged Electors in the Electoral College". The Georgia Historical Quarterly. 88: 383.
^ "1960 Presidential General Election Data   National". Retrieved March 18, 2013.
^ "1960 Presidential General Election Data   National". Retrieved March 18, 2013.
^ "Election Polls   Vote by Groups, 1960 1964". Gallup. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2021.
Further reading[edit]
Alexander, Herbert E. (1962). Financing the 1960 Election. OCLC 249214383.
Ambrose, Stephen. Nixon: The Education of a Politician, 1913 1962 (1987) ch 25 26
Campbell, Angus; et al. (1966). Elections and the Political Order, statistical studies of survey data online
Casey, Shaun A. The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon, 1960 (Oxford UP, 2009) 261 pp.
Converse, Philip E., et al. "Stability and change in 1960: a reinstating election." American Political Science Review 55.2 (1961): 269 280. online
Cosman, Bernard. "Presidential Republicanism in the South, 1960." Journal of Politics 24.2 (1962): 303 322.
Cosman, Bernard. "Religion and Race in Louisiana Presidential Politics, 1960." Southwestern Social Science Quarterly (1962): 235 241. online
Dallek, Robert Gold (1991). "Chapter 16: The Making of a Vice President". Lone Star Rising: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908 1960. ISBN 978-0-19-505435-4.
Divine, Robert A. Foreign Policy and U.S. Presidential Elections, 1952 1960 (1974) online.
Donaldson, Gary A. The First Modern Campaign: Kennedy, Nixon, and the Election of 1960 (Rowman & Littlefield, 2007). 199 pp.
Gellman, Irwin F. Campaign of the Century: Kennedy, Nixon, and the Election of 1960 (Yale UP, 2022) excerpt.
Ingle, H. Larry, "Billy Graham: The Evangelical in Politics, 1960s-Style," in Peter Bien and Chuck Fager, eds. In Stillness there is Fullness: A Peacemaker's Harvest, (Kimo Press, 2000)
Johnstone, Andrew , and Andrew Priest, eds.  US Presidential Elections and Foreign Policy: Candidates, Campaigns, and Global Politics from FDR to Bill Clinton (2017) pp 128 153. online
Kallina, Edmund F. (1988). Courthouse Over White House: Chicago and the Presidential Election of 1960. ISBN 978-0-8130-0864-6.
Kraus, Sidney (1977). The Great Debates: Kennedy vs. Nixon, 1960. ISBN 978-0-253-32631-7.
Lacroix, Patrick (2021). John F. Kennedy and the Politics of Faith. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Lee, Eugene C., and William Buchanan. "The 1960 Election in California." Western Political Quarterly 14#1 (1961), pp. 309 26. online
Lisle, T. David (1988). "Southern Baptists and the Issue of Catholic Autonomy in the 1960 Presidential Campaign".  In Paul Harper; Joann P. Krieg (eds.). John F. Kennedy: The Promise Revisited. pp. 273 285. ISBN 9780313262012.
Massa, Mark S (1997). "A Catholic for President: John F. Kennedy and the Secular Theology of the Houston Speech, 1960". Journal of Church and State. 39 (2): 297 317. doi:10.1093/jcs/39.2.297.
Matthews, Chris (1996). Kennedy and Nixon: The Rivalry That Shaped Postwar America. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0684810300.
Menendez, Albert J. The Religious Factor in the 1960 Presidential election: an analysis of the Kennedy victory over anti-Catholic prejudice (McFarland, 2014).
O'Brien, Michael (2005). John F. Kennedy: A Biography. Ch. 21 24. ISBN 978-0312281298.
Pietrusza, David (2008). 1960: LBJ vs. JFK vs. Nixon: The Epic Campaign That Forged Three Presidencies. Union Square Press. ISBN 9781402761140.
Rorabaugh, William J. "The Election of 1960." in A Companion to John F. Kennedy (2014): 51-73.
Rorabaugh, W. J. (2009). The Real Making of the President: Kennedy, Nixon, and the 1960 Election. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1887-3.
Savage, Sean J. JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party (SUNY Press, 2012) pp 39-89.
Schlesinger Jr.  Arthur M. Robert Kennedy and His Times (1978) pp 192-221.
Wagner, Stanley P. "The Polish-American Vote in 1960." Polish American Studies (1964): 1 9. online
White, Theodore H. (1980) [1961]. The Making of the President, 1960. New York: Atheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-70600-4.
Primary sources[edit]
Gallup, George H., ed. The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion, 1935 1971. 3 vols. Random House, 1972. poll results
Nixon, Richard M. (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. ISBN 978-0-671-70741-5. online
Chester, Edward W A guide to political platforms (1977) online
Porter, Kirk H. and Donald Bruce Johnson, eds. National party platforms, 1840 1972 (1973)
Historiography[edit]
Brands, Hal (June 2010). "Burying Theodore White: Recent Accounts of the 1960 Presidential Election". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 40 (2): 364 367. doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2010.03761.x. JSTOR 23044826.
External links[edit]
The Election Wall's 1960 Election Video Page
1960 popular vote by counties
1960 popular vote by states (with bar graphs)
Gallery of 1960 Election Posters/Buttons at the Wayback Machine (archived November 7, 2007)
Campaign commercials from the 1960 election
Battleground West Virginia: Electing the President in 1960 Archived June 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine West Virginia Archives and History On-Line Exhibit
Election of 1960 in Counting the Votes
vte(  1956)   1960 United States presidential election   (  1964)Democratic Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: John F. Kennedy
campaign
VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson
Other candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson II
George Smathers
Stuart Symington
Republican Party
Convention
Primaries
Candidates
Nominee: Richard Nixon
VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
Other candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller
Third party and independent candidatesAmerican Vegetarian Party
Nominee
Symon Gould
National States' Rights Party
Nominee
Orval Faubus
VP nominee
J. B. Stoner
Prohibition Party
Nominee
Rutherford Decker
VP nominee
E. Harold Munn
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee
Eric Hass
VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini
Socialist Workers Party
Nominee
Farrell Dobbs
VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss
Independents and other candidates
Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan
Other 1960 elections: House
Senate
vteState and district results of the 1960 United States presidential election
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
vte(1959  )   1960 United States elections   (  1961)President
1960 United States presidential election
Democratic primaries
Republican primaries
Democratic convention
Republican convention
U.S.Senate
Alabama
Alaska
Arkansas
Colorado
Delaware
Georgia
Idaho
Illinois
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri (Special)
Montana
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
North Carolina
North Dakota (Special)
Oklahoma
Oregon
Oregon (Special)
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
West Virginia
Wyoming
U.S.House
Alabama
Alaska
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
23rd sp
North Carolina
12th sp
North Dakota
Ohio
6th sp
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
17th sp
18th sp Apr
18th sp Nov
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
3rd sp
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Stategovernors
Arizona
Arkansas
Delaware
Florida
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Louisiana
Maine (Special)
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Lt. Gov
Missouri
Lt. Gov
Montana
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Mexico
North Carolina
Lt. Gov
North Dakota
Rhode Island
South Dakota
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
State legislatures
Iowa Senate
vteNotable third party performances in United States elections* Third party is endorsed by a major partyPresidential
1788-89*
1792*
1832
1848
1856
1860
1872*
1892
1912
1924
1948
1960
1968
1980
1992
1996
Senatorial (since 1940)
California 1940
Minnesota 1940
North Dakota 1940
Wisconsin 1940
Minnesota 1942
Minnesota 1942
Nebraska 1942
Virginia 1942
North Dakota 1944
Wisconsin 1944
California 1946 (Republican write-in)
North Dakota 1946
North Dakota 1946
Tennessee 1946
Arkansas 1948
Alabama 1950
New Hampshire 1950
California 1952
Maine 1952
New York 1952
North Dakota 1952
Virginia 1952
South Carolina 1954 (Democratic write-in)
Virginia 1954
Utah 1958
Virginia 1958
Virginia 1960
Virginia 1964
Mississippi 1966
Virginia 1966
Virginia 1966
Alabama 1968
Alaska 1968
Maryland 1968
New York 1968
Connecticut 1970
Mississippi 1970
New York 1970
Virginia 1970
Louisiana 1972
Florida 1974
Hawaii 1974
Nevada 1974
New York 1974
Utah 1974
Minnesota 1976
Virginia 1976
Alabama 1978
Arkansas 1978
Maine 1978
Mississippi 1978
New York 1980
Washington 1982
Tennessee 1984
Virginia 1990
Alaska 1992
Arizona 1992
Hawaii 1992
Louisiana 1992
Ohio 1992
Arizona 1994
Minnesota 1994
Ohio 1994
Vermont 1994
Virginia 1994
Alaska 1996
Minnesota 1996
Arizona 2000
Massachusetts 2000
Minnesota 2000
Alaska 2002
Kansas 2002
Massachusetts 2002
Mississippi 2002
Oklahoma 2002
Virginia 2002
Oklahoma 2004
Connecticut 2006
Indiana 2006
Maine 2006
Vermont 2006*
Arkansas 2008
Idaho 2008
Minnesota 2008
Oregon 2008
Alaska 2010 (Republican write-in)
Florida 2010
Indiana 2010
South Carolina 2010
Utah 2010
Indiana 2012
Maine 2012
Maryland 2012
Missouri 2012
Montana 2012
Vermont 2012*
Kansas 2014
South Dakota 2014
Wyoming 2014
Alaska 2016
Arizona 2016
Idaho 2016
Indiana 2016
Kansas 2016
Maine 2018
New Mexico 2018
Vermont 2018*
Alaska 2020*
Arkansas 2020
Minnesota 2020
Nebraska 2020
Idaho 2022
North Dakota 2022
Utah 2022*
Gubernatorial (since 1940)
Minnesota 1940
Wisconsin 1940
Connecticut 1942
Minnesota 1942
New York 1942
Wisconsin 1942
North Dakota 1944
Wisconsin 1944
California 1946
Tennessee 1950
Maine 1952
Vermont 1952
Tennessee 1954
Nebraska 1956
Texas 1956
Utah 1956
Oklahoma 1958
Tennessee 1958
North Dakota 1960
Tennessee 1962
Virginia 1965
Alabama 1966
Georgia 1966
Idaho 1966
Maryland 1966
New York 1966
Tennessee 1966
Alabama 1970
Arkansas 1970
New Hampshire 1970
New York 1970
Mississippi 1971
New Hampshire 1972
Texas 1972
Washington 1972
Virginia 1973
Maine 1974
Nebraska 1974
Nevada 1974
Texas 1974
Vermont 1974
Vermont 1976
Alaska 1978
California 1978
Maine 1978
Rhode Island 1978
Alaska 1982
Arizona 1982
Hawaii 1982
Alaska 1986
Arizona 1986
Illinois 1986
Maine 1986
Oklahoma 1986
Vermont 1986
Utah 1988
Alaska 1990
Connecticut 1990
Kansas 1990
Maine 1990
New York 1990
Oklahoma 1990
Oregon 1990
Utah 1992
West Virginia 1992
Alaska 1994
Connecticut 1994
Hawaii 1994
Maine 1994
New Mexico 1994
Oklahoma 1994
Pennsylvania 1994
Rhode Island 1994
Vermont 1994
Alaska 1998
Maine 1998
Minnesota 1998
New York 1998
Pennsylvania 1998
Rhode Island 1998
Kentucky 1999
New Hampshire 2000
Vermont 2000
Arizona 2002
California 2002
Maine 2002
Minnesota 2002
New Mexico 2002
New York 2002
Oklahoma 2002
Vermont 2002
Wisconsin 2002
Alaska 2006
Illinois 2006
Maine 2006
Massachusetts 2006
Minnesota 2006
Texas 2006
Louisiana 2007
Vermont 2008
New Jersey 2009
Colorado 2010
Idaho 2010
Maine 2010
Massachusetts 2010
Minnesota 2010
Rhode Island 2010
Wyoming 2010
Kentucky 2011
Virginia 2013
Alaska 2014*
Hawaii 2014
Maine 2014
Rhode Island 2014
Wyoming 2014
Maine 2018
Kansas 2018
Indiana 2020
Vermont 2020*
Alaska 2022
Idaho 2022
Oregon 2022
Portal:Politics
Third party (United States)
Third party officeholders in the United States
Third-party members of the United States House of Representatives
vteJohn F. Kennedy
35th President of the United States (1961 1963)
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953 1960)
U.S. Representative for MA 11 (1947 1953)
Presidency(timeline)
Presidential office: Transition
Inauguration
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Presidential pardons
Domestic policy: Clean Air Act
Communications Satellite Act
Community Mental Health Act
Equal Pay Act
Federal affirmative action
Federal housing segregation ban
Fifty-mile hikes
Food for Peace
New Frontier
Pilot Food Stamp Program
Presidential Medal of Freedom
Space policy
Status of Women (Presidential Commission)
University of Alabama integration
Voter Education Project
All-Channel Receiver Act
Foreign policy: Alliance for Progress
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Flexible response
Kennedy Doctrine
Peace Corps
Trade Expansion Act
USAID
Vietnam War
Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Project
Cuban Missile Crisis
ExComm
Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis
Moscow Washington hotline
Vienna summit
White House: Presidential limousine
Presidential yacht
Resolute desk
Situation Room
Presidentialspeeches
Inaugural address
American University speech
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Report to the American People on Civil Rights
"Ich bin ein Berliner"
"A rising tide lifts all boats"
Remarks at Amherst College on the Arts
Elections
U.S. States House of Representatives elections: 1946
1948
1950
U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1952
1958
1960 presidential primaries
1960 presidential campaign
Democratic National Conventions: 1956
1960
U.S. presidential election 1960
debates
Personal life
Birthplace and childhood home
Kennedy Compound
Hickory Hill
Wexford
Navy service: PT-109
Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana
Arthur Evans
PT-59
Castle Hot Springs
Hammersmith Farm
Coretta Scott King phone call
Rocking chair
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President"
Books
Why England Slept (1940)
Profiles in Courage (1956)
A Nation of Immigrants (1958)
Death
Assassination
timeline
reactions
in popular culture
State funeral
Riderless horse
attending dignitaries
Gravesite and Eternal Flame
Legacy
Bibliography
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
Profile in Courage Award
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Apollo 11 Moon landing
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Round
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
VISTA
Cultural depictions
films
Kennedy half dollar
U.S. postage stamps
U.S. five cent stamp
Lincoln Kennedy coincidences
Operation Sail
Memorials,namesakes
Harvard Kennedy School
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts
John F. Kennedy Federal Building (Boston)
John F. Kennedy International Airport
Boston statue
Brooklyn memorial
Dallas memorial
London memorial
Portland memorial
Runnymede memorial
John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge
John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
John F. Kennedy University
John F. Kennedy Stadium
Kennedy Expressway
Mount Kennedy
MV John F. Kennedy
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67)
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)
Yad Kennedy
Family
Jacqueline Bouvier (wife)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Fitzgerald (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
P. J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)
Pushinka (dog)
  Dwight D. Eisenhower
Lyndon B. Johnson  
 Category
vteLyndon B. Johnson
36th President of the United States (1963 1969)
37th Vice President of the United States (1961 1963)
U.S. Senator from Texas (1949 1961)
U.S. Representative for TX 10 (1937 1949)
Presidency
1963 inauguration
Let Us Continue
1965 inauguration
Great Society (Model Cities Program)
Architectural Barriers Act
Child Nutrition Act
Clean Air Act
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Coinage Act of 1965
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Department of Transportation
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964
Head Start Program
Job Corps
Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Fair Housing Act
Truth in Lending Act
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968
Food Stamp Act of 1964
Glassboro Summit
Gun Control Act of 1968
Higher Education Act of 1965
Upward Bound
TRIO
Teacher Corps
Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965
Johnson Doctrine
Dominican Republic occupation
Social Security Amendments of 1965
Medicare
Medicaid
Meritorious Service Medal
National Endowment for the Arts
National Endowment for the Humanities
Executive Order 11246
Executive Order 11375
Older Americans Act
Operation CHAOS
Outer Space Treaty
Public Broadcasting Act of 1967
Corporation for Public Broadcasting
PBS
NPR
Foreign policy
Vietnam War
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
"Credibility gap"
VISTA
24th Amendment & Voting Rights Act of 1965
War on poverty
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Cannabis policy
White House preservation
State of the Union Address, 1966
1968
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
Thurgood Marshall Supreme Court nomination
controversies
Johnson desk
Presidential transition of Richard Nixon
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Life
Early years and career
Operation Texas
Texas Broadcasting Company
Johnson Amendment
Box 13 scandal
Bashir Ahmad
Legacy andmemorials
Bibliography
Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum
Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland
Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center
Lyndon Baines Johnson Day
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
Memorial Grove on the Potomac
U.S. Postage stamp
Elections
United States House of Representatives special elections, 1937
1938 United States House of Representatives elections
1940
1942
1944
1946
United States Senate special elections, 1941
1948 United States Senate elections
1954
1960
Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1960
1964
campaign
1968
Democratic National Convention 1956
1960
1964
1960 United States presidential election
1964
Public image
Lyndon B. Johnson in popular culture
Daisy advertisement
Johnson cult
The Years of Lyndon Johnson
LBJ (1991 television film)
Path to War (2002 film)
All the Way (2012 play, 2016 film)
Selma (2014 film)
LBJ (2017 film)
Family
Claudia "Lady Bird" Taylor Johnson (wife)
Lynda Bird Johnson Robb (daughter)
Luci Baines Johnson (daughter)
Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr. (father)
Sam Houston Johnson (brother)
Samuel Ealy Johnson, Sr. (grandfather)
Joseph Wilson Baines (grandfather)
George Washington Baines (great-grandfather)
Chuck Robb (son-in-law)
  John F. Kennedy
Richard Nixon  
  Richard Nixon
Hubert Humphrey  
 Category
vteRichard Nixon
37th President of the United States (1969 1974)
36th Vice President of the United States (1953 1961)
U.S. Senator from California (1950 1953)
U.S. Representative for CA 12 (1947 1950)
Pre-presidency
Checkers speech
Vice presidency
Presidential transition of Dwight D. Eisenhower
1958 motorcade attack
Kitchen Debate
Operation 40
Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy
Presidency
Transition
First inauguration
Second inauguration
Nixon Doctrine
"Bring Us Together"
Economic policies
Bank Secrecy Act
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Family Assistance Plan
Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973
Nixon shock
Revised Philadelphia Plan
Smithsonian Agreement
Tar Baby Option
Education Amendments of 1972
Title IX
Council on Environmental Quality
Environmental Quality Improvement Act
National Environmental Policy Act
Environmental Protection Agency
Clean Air Amendments of 1970
Clean Water Act
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants
New Source Performance Standards
Noise Control Act
Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970
Occupational Safety and Health Act
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Permissible exposure limit
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
Consumer Product Safety Act
Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act
Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Space exploration
1971 National Cancer Act
Vietnam War
Cambodian bombing
Paris Peace Accords
"Peace with Honor"
Vietnamization
Silent majority
Cold War period
Linkage policy
Drug  Abuse Prevention and Control Act
1970 Lincoln Memorial visit
1972 visit to China
Shanghai Communiqu 
D tente
1972 Moscow Summit
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
SALT I Treaty
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement
Threshold Test Ban Treaty
Endangered Species Act
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse
War on Drugs
Drug Enforcement Administration
Cannabis policy
Enemies List
list of opponents
Operation CHAOS
Watergate
timeline
White House tapes
United States v. Nixon
Senate Watergate Committee
impeachment process
"I am not a crook"
Resignation
speech
Pardon
State of the Union Address (1970
1973
1974)
Wilson desk
Judicial appointments
Supreme Court
controversies
Executive Orders
Presidential Proclamations
Life andpolitics
Richard Nixon Foundation
Presidential Library and Museum
Birthplace and boyhood home
"Last press conference"
Florida White House
"La Casa Pacifica"
Nixon Center
Nixon v. General Services Administration
Death and state funeral
Books
Six Crises (1962)
Bibliography
Elections
U.S. House of Representatives: 1946
1948
U.S. Senate: 1950
California gubernatorial election: 1962
GOP presidential primaries: 1960
1964
1968
1972
GOP national conventions: 1952
1956
1960
1968
campaign
1972
Presidential elections: 1952
1956
1960
debates
1968
1972
Popularculture
"Nixon goes to China"
Millhouse (1971 film)
An Evening with Richard Nixon (1972 play)
Richard (1972 film)
Another Nice Mess (1972 film)
Four More Years (1972 film)
Impeach the President (1973 song)
The Werewolf of Washington (1973 film)
White House Madness (1975 film)
All the President's Men (1976 film)
The Public Burning (1977 novel)
Washington: Behind Closed Doors (1977 miniseries)
Secret Honor (1984 film)
Nixon in China (1987 opera)
The Final Days (1989 film)
Nixon (1995 film)
Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film)
Futurama (1999 TV series)
Dick (1999 film)
Nixon's China Game (2000 film)
Dark Side of the Moon (2002 film)
The Assassination of Richard Nixon (2004 film)
Frost Nixon interviews (2006 play, 2008 film)
Black Dynamite (2009 film)
"The Impossible Astronaut" (2011 TV episode)
Our Nixon (2013 film)
X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014 film)
Crooked (2015 novel)
Elvis & Nixon (2016 film)
The Post (2017 film)
Watergate (2019 board game)
U.S. postage stamp
Related
Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act
Presidential Townhouse
Richard Nixon mask
Staff
Jack Brennan (aide de camp)
Murray Chotiner (early campaign manager)
Manolo Sanchez (valet)
Rose Mary Woods (secretary)
Family
Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife)
Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter)
Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter)
Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson)
Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter)
Francis A. Nixon (father)
Hannah Milhous Nixon (mother)
Donald Nixon (brother)
Edward Nixon (brother)
  Lyndon B. Johnson
Gerald Ford  
  Alben W. Barkley
Lyndon B. Johnson  
 Category
vteUnited States presidential electionsElections by year
1788 89
1792
1796
1800
1804
1808
1812
1816
1820
1824
1828
1832
1836
1840
1844
1848
1852
1856
1860
1864
1868
1872
1876
1880
1884
1888
1892
1896
1900
1904
1908
1912
1916
1920
1924
1928
1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Elections by state
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Primaries and caucuses
Iowa caucuses
New Hampshire presidential primary
Nevada presidential caucuses
South Carolina presidential primary
Super Tuesday
Nominating conventions
List of nominating conventions
Brokered convention
Convention bounce
Superdelegate
Electoral Collegeand popular vote
Results
summary
elections in which the winner lost the popular vote
Electoral College margins
Electoral College results by state
electoral vote changes between elections
electoral vote recipients
popular votes received
popular-vote margins
Electoral Count Act
Certificate of ascertainment
Certificate of vote
Contingent election
Faithless elector
Unpledged elector
Voter turnout
Related
Campaign slogans
Historical election polling
Election Day
Major party tickets
Major party losers
Presidential debates
October surprise
Red states and blue states
Swing state
Tipping-point state
Election recount
Guam straw poll
Vice presidential confirmations:
1973
1974
House elections
Senate elections
Gubernatorial elections
Authority control: National 
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1960_United_States_presidential_election&oldid=1149274798"