Sanskrit honorific
This article is about the word. For other uses of "Sri", "SRI" and "Shri", see Sri (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Shri" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
ShriBrahmi script character  r  ("Lord")Shri in Devanagari script used for Sanskrit
Shri (/ ri /;[1] Sanskrit:  , romanized: r , pronounced [ ri ]) is a Sanskrit term denoting resplendence, wealth and prosperity, primarily used as an honorific.[1]
The word is widely used in South and Southeast Asian languages such as Marathi, Malay (including Indonesian and Malaysian), Javanese, Balinese, Sundanese, Sinhala, Thai, Tamil, Telugu, Hindi, Nepali, Malayalam, Kannada, Sanskrit, Pali, Khmer, and also among Philippine languages. It is usually transliterated as Sri, Sree, Shri, Shiri, Shree, Si, or Seri based on the local convention for transliteration.
The term is used in Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia as a polite form of address equivalent to the English "Mr." in written and spoken language.
"Shri" is also used as a title of veneration for deities or as honorific title for individuals.
Shri is also another name for Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth, while a yantra or a mystical diagram popularly used to worship her is called Shri Yantra.
Etymology[edit]
 Mah r jaShr Gupta"Great King, Lord Gupta"in the Gupta script, on the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta (4th century CE).[2]
Monier-Williams Dictionary gives the meaning of the root verb  r  as  "to cook, boil, to burn, diffuse light", but as a feminine abstract noun, it has received a general meaning of "grace, splendour, beauty; wealth, affluence, prosperity".[3][4]
The word  r  may also be used as an adjective in Sanskrit, which is the origin of the modern use of shri as a title.  From the noun, is derived the Sanskrit adjective " r mat" ( rim n in the masculine nominative singular,  r mat  in the feminine), by adding the suffix indicating possession, literally  "radiance-having" (person, god, etc.). This is used in modern vernacular as form of address Shrimati (abbreviated Smt) for married women, while Sushri, (with "su", "good", added to the beginning), can be used for women in general (regardless of marital status).
Spelling and pronunciation[edit]
In Devanagari script for Sanskrit, Hindi, Marathi and other languages, the word   is combination of three sounds:   ( ),   (r) and   ( , long i). There are two conventions in India to transliterate the consonant   (ISO:  ) to English: some use s (which in narrower transcription represents only  ) as in Sri Lanka and Srinagar, while others use sh as in Shimla and Shimoga.[5] Similarly,   (r ;   +  ) is also transliterated to English in two different ways as  ri and  ree, although the latter is non-standard in Hindi.[5][6] Hence this word   may be rendered in English as Shri (the standard spelling), Shree, Sri or Sree; Some other transliterations used are Shri, Shiri, Shrii. Whatever the translitertion may be, its pronunciation remains the same.
Sanskrit is written in many other Indian scripts as well, each of which has its own equivalents of these Devan gari letters; the Sanskrit pronunciation remains the same regardless of script.
Usage[edit]
 Shri is an epithet of Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth, fortune, power, beauty and prosperity.
Shri is a polite form of address equivalent to the English "Mr." or "Ms.".[7]
Shri is also frequently used as an epithet of some Hindu gods, in which case it is often translated into English as Holy. Also, in language and general usage, Shri, if used by itself and not followed by any name, refers to the supreme consciousness, i.e. god.[citation needed]
Sridevi, also rendered Shri, is an epithet and name of Lakshmi, consort of Vishnu, the goddess of prosperity and wealth in Hinduism.[8] The Vedas speak of Shri as a goddess, who personified ten qualities coveted by other divine beings: food, royalty, holiness, kingdom, fortune, sovereignty, nobility, power, righteousness, and beauty. The Vedic Shri is believed to have identified with later conceptions of Lakshmi, as the embodiment of royalty and dignity.[9]
Shri is one of the names of Ganesha, the Hindu god of prosperity.
Shri is also used as a title of the Hindu deities R ma, Krishna, Saraswati and sometimes Durg . 
Repetition[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Shri may be repeated depending on the status of the person.
Shri: for anybody
Shri 2: honorific, guru, e.g. Ravi Shankar, Abhi Joshi
Shri 3: title used by former hereditary Prime Ministers of Nepal (example- Mohan Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana)
Shri 4: title used by Divine factor, e.g. Afactor Abinash
Shri 5: title used by former Maharajadhiraja (e.g. Shri p nch ko sark r, His Majesty's Government, where ko indicates genitive case (possessive, 'of His Majesty')
Shri 108: used by spiritual leaders
Shri 1008: used by spiritual leaders (e.g. Shri 1008 Satyatma Tirtha)
Other current usage[edit]
There is a common practice of writing Shri as the first word centralised in line at the beginning of a document.
During the Vidy ra bha  ceremony, the mantra "Om hari shri ganapataye namah" is written in sand or in a tray of rice grains by a child, under the supervision of a Guru or Priest.
Another usage is as an emphatic compound (which can be used several times: shri shri, or shri shri shri, etc.) in princely styles, notably in Darbar Shri, Desai Shri, and Thakur Shri or Shrii Shrii Anandamurti, the founder of the social and spiritual movement Ananda Marga (the Path of Bliss).
The honorific can also be applied to objects and concepts that are widely respected, such as the Sikh religious text, the Shri Guru Granth Sahib. Similarly, when the Ramlila tradition of reenacting the Ramayana is referred to as an institution, the term Shri Ramlila is frequently used.
Indian music[edit]
The use of the term is common in the names of ragas (musical motifs), either as a prefix or postfix. Some examples are Shree, Bhagyashree, Dhanashree, Jayashree, Subhashree, Itishree, Jiteshree, and Shree ranjani.
Other languages[edit]
South and Southeast Asia[edit]
Language/Script
Form
Notes
Bengali-Assamese script
 
Balinese
 
Comparable to the Javanese usage: a particle prefixed to royal names, the goddess of rice-culture.
Burmese
  (thiri)
See Tamil below.
Dhivehi
  (siree or sir )
Used in the full titles of sultans and kings
Gujarati
 
Gurmukhi  (Punjabi)
 
Javanese
  (Sri) alternatively written as   or  
Often used to address royal or venerated figures, such as the King of Yogyakarta, Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono and the title "Sri Bhaginda" (equivalent to "your majesty"), and for names of deities, such as the Javanese rice goddess Dewi Sri. In modern Javanese, it is a common part of proper names of Javanese people, e.g the name of Indonesian finance minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati and Indonesian marine corps officer Lt. Col Sri Utomo. "Sri" is also a widely used name in Java used for names of placements, organizations, institutions, etc
Kannada
  (Sri or Sree)
Khmer
  (Srey) and    (Serey)
Lao
  (Si) and    (Sri or Sree)
Malay (including Malaysian and Indonesian varieties)
Jawi:  , Latin: Seri (Malaysian)Sri (Indonesian)
Often used as a title of veneration for honorific titles in Malay kingdoms and sultanates. This includes the honorific title for the Sultan of Brunei: Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Paduka Seri Baginda Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah and King of Malaysia: Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda. It is also used for the name of places in the Malay world such as Bandar Seri Begawan in Brunei and Siak Sri Indrapura city in Sumatra, Indonesia
Usage of "Sri" in Indonesia is used for honorary titles for a king or other great person, for example the King of Yogyakarta Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwono and Sri Baginda which means "Your Majesty", and is also used for people's names, mainly Javanese people such as Indonesian finance minister Sri Mulyani, Indonesian marine officer Lt. Col Sri Utomo, Indian-Indonesian businessman Sri Prakash Lohia, etc. It also refers to the Javanese rice goddess "Dewi Sri". "Sri" is also used as names of companies, placements, institutions, etc (e.g   Sriwijaya Air, Sriwijaya University, etc). 
The oldest recorded word of "Sri" founded in Indonesia was written in the Mulawarman inscription founded in Kutai, East Kalimantan dating back to the 4th century AD which read: srimatah sri-narendrasya, kundungasya mahatmanah (meaning: "the maharaja Kudungga, who was very noble")
Malayalam
  (Sri or Sree)
Odia
 
Philippine languages / Baybayin
  (Sri or Si or Sree)
Formerly used as an honorific title for rulers in old Indianized pre-Hispanic states and polities in the Philippines, such as Sri Lumay of the Rajahnate of Cebu or Sri Bata Shaja of the Rajahnate of Butuan or Sri Pada/Sipad of Lupah S g or Sikatuna of Kedatuan of Dapitan.
Sinhala
  (Sri or Sree) also   (Sri or Sree) or   (Siri)
Meaning "resplendent", as in Sri Lanka, "Resplendent Island".
Tamil
  (Sri or Sree)
The Tamil equivalent Thiru is also used.
Telugu
  (Sri or Sree)
Thai
  (Siri) and    (Sri or Sree or Si)
Used in many Thai place names, as seen below.
Vietnamese/Cham
Ch 
Vietnamese transcription of honorific name prefix used among the Cham ethnic minority.
Place names[edit]
The honorific is incorporated into many place names. A partial list follows:
Sriharikota, India
Srimangal, Bangladesh
Srisailam, Andhra Pradesh, a Siva temple, also one of the holiest places of worship for Hindus.
Srikakulam, a town in northern Andhra Pradesh.
Sri City, an integrated township located on the Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu border.
Shri Kshetra, name of the Puri Jagannath Dham, Odisha. One of the four Dhams in the Hindu religion.
Sree Mandira is a famous Hindu temple dedicated to Jagannath (Krishna) and located in the coastal town of Puri in Odisha.
Sri Lanka, an island country at the southern tip of India.
Sri Perumbudur, a town in the state of Tamil Nadu
Sri Rangam, an island zone in the city of Tiruchirapalli, in Tamil Nadu.
Srinagar, nagar meaning "city", is the capital of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir
Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte, the administrative capital of Sri Lanka.
Sri Maha Bodhi, a sacred fig tree in the Mahamewna Gardens, Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka.
Srivijaya, a former kingdom centered on Sumatra, Indonesia.
Sriwijaya University, located in South Sumatra, Indonesia
Sri ( ), pronounced and usually transliterated Si in Thailand place names:
Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya ( ), formal name of the city and province of Ayutthaya
Nakhon Si Thammarat ( ) city and province
Sisaket ( ) city and province
Wat Si Saket in Vientiane, Laos.
Bandar Seri Begawan, the capital of Brunei.
Seri Menanti, the royal town of Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
Banteay Srei, a 10th-century Hindu temple in Angkor, Cambodia
Srey Santhor, a district located in Kampong Cham, Cambodia.
See also[edit]
Indian honorifics
Shrimati
Thai honorifics
Thai royal ranks and titles
Malay styles and titles
Filipino styles and honorifics
Indonesian honorifics
Sinhala honorifics
Greater India
References[edit]
^ a b "Shri". Lexico. Oxford English Dictionary. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019.
^ Full inscription, Fleet, John Faithfull (1888). Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum Vol. 3. pp. 1-17.
^ Turner, Sir Ralph Lilley; Dorothy Rivers Turner (January 2006) [1962]. A comparative dictionary of the Indo-Aryan languages. London: Oxford University Press. p. 736. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2010.  hr  12708  hr  feminine ' light, beauty ' R gveda, ' welfare, riches ' Avestan (Iranian) Pali Prakrit sir    feminine, Prakrit s    feminine ' prosperity '; Mar h    s honorific affix to names of relationship (e.g.  j    s,  j    s) Jules Bloch La Formation de la Langue Marathe Paris 1920, page 412.   Sinhalese siri  ' health, happiness ' (Wilhelm Geiger An Etymological Glossary of the Sinhalese Language Colombo 1941, page 180) a loanword from Pali <-> See addendum  r yas  ,  r ha   . See Addenda:  r    occurring for the first time in Addenda :  r par    .
^ Apte, Vaman Shivaram (1957 59). Revised and enlarged edition of Prin. V. S. Apte's The practical Sanskrit-English dictionary. Prasad Prakashan. p. 1575. 1 Wealth, riches, affluence, prosperity, plenty; ... -2 Royalty, majesty, royal wealth;... -3 Dignity, high position, state;... -4 Beauty, grace, splendour, lustre;... -5 Colour, aspect; ... -6 The goddess of wealth, Lak- m , the wife of Vi u;... -7 Any virtue or excellence. -8 Decoration. -9 Intellect, understanding. -1 Super- human power. -11 The three objects of human existence taken collectively ( ,   and  ). -12 The Sarala tree. -13 The Bilva tree. -14 Cloves. -15 A lotus. -16 The twelfth digit of the moon. -17 N. of Sarasvat , (the goddess of speech). -18 Speech. -19 Fame, glory. -2 The three Vedas ( );... -m. N. of one of the six R gas or musical modes. -a. Splendid, radiant, adorning. (The word   is often used as an honorific prefix to the names of deities and eminent persons;  ,  ,  ,  ; also celebrated works, generally of a sacred character;  ,  )&c.; it is also used as an auspicious sign at the commencement of letters, manuscripts &c
^ a b Malviya, Shrikant; Mishra, Rohit; Tiwary, Uma Shanker (2017). "Structural Analysis of Hindi Phonetics and a Method for Extraction of Phonetically Rich Sentences from a Very Large Hindi Text Corpus". p. 2. arXiv:1701.08655 [cs.CL].
^ United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2007), Technical reference manual for the standardization of geographical names, United Nations Publications, 2007, ISBN 978-92-1-161500-5, ... ISO 15919 ... There is no evidence of the use of the system either in India or in international cartographic products ... The Hunterian system is the actually used national system of romanization in India ...
^ Howard Measures (1962). Styles of address: a manual of usage in writing and in speech. Macmillan. pp. 136, 140. Retrieved 19 January 2011.
^ www.wisdomlib.org (2012-06-29). "Shri,  ri,  r ,  , S , S : 36 definitions". www.wisdomlib.org. Retrieved 2022-11-21.
^ Herman, Phyllis K.; Shimkhada, Deepak (2009-03-26). The Constant and Changing Faces of the Goddess: Goddess Traditions of Asia. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 56. ISBN 978-1-4438-0702-9.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shri&oldid=1142777257"