Mexican multi-day holiday
This article is about the Mexican holiday. For other uses, see Day of the Dead (disambiguation).
Day of the DeadD a de Muertos altar commemorating a deceased man in Milpa Alta, Mexico CityObserved byMexico, and regions with large Mexican populationsTypeCulturalChristian (with syncretic elements)[1]SignificancePrayer and remembrance of friends and family members who have diedCelebrationsCreation of home altars to remember the dead, traditional dishes for the Day of the DeadBeginsNovember 1EndsNovember 2DateNovember 2Next time2 November 2023 (2023-11-02)FrequencyAnnualRelated toAll Saints' Day, All Hallows' Eve, All Souls Day[1]
The Day of the Dead (Spanish: D a de Muertos or D a de los Muertos)[2][3] is a holiday traditionally celebrated on November 1 and 2, though other days, such as October 31 or November 6, may be included depending on the locality.[4][5][6] It is widely observed in Mexico, where it largely developed, and is also observed in other places, especially by people of Mexican heritage. Although related to the simultaneous Christian remembrances for Hallowtide,[1] it has a much less solemn tone and is portrayed as a holiday of joyful celebration rather than mourning.[7] The multi-day holiday involves family and friends gathering to pay respects and to remember friends and family members who have died. These celebrations can take a humorous tone, as celebrants remember funny events and anecdotes about the departed.[8]
Traditions connected with the holiday include honoring the deceased using calaveras and marigold flowers known as cempaz chitl, building home altars called ofrendas with the favorite foods and beverages of the departed, and visiting graves with these items as gifts for the deceased.[9] The celebration is not solely focused on the dead, as it is also common to give gifts to friends such as candy sugar skulls, to share traditional pan de muerto with family and friends, and to write light-hearted and often irreverent verses in the form of mock epitaphs dedicated to living friends and acquaintances, a literary form known as calaveras literarias.[10]
In 2008, the tradition was inscribed in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.[11]
Origins, history, and similarities to other festivities
Mexican academics are divided on whether the festivity has genuine indigenous pre-Hispanic roots or whether it is a 20th-century rebranded version of a Spanish tradition developed during the presidency of L zaro C rdenas to encourage Mexican nationalism through an "Aztec" identity.[12][13][14] The festivity has become a national symbol in recent decades and it is taught in the nation's school system asserting a native origin.[15] In 2008, the tradition was inscribed in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.[11]
Views differ on whether the festivity has indigenous pre-Hispanic roots, whether it is a more modern adaptation of an existing European tradition, or a combination of both as a manifestation of syncretism. Similar traditions can be traced back to Medieval Europe, where celebrations like All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day are observed on the same days in places like Spain and Southern Europe. Critics of the native American origin claim that even though pre-Columbian Mexico had traditions that honored the dead, current depictions of the festivity have more in common with European traditions of Danse macabre and their allegories of life and death personified in the human skeleton to remind us the ephemeral nature of life.[16][12] Over the past decades, however, Mexican academia has increasingly questioned the validity of this assumption, even going as far as calling it a politically motivated fabrication. Historian Elsa Malvido, researcher for the Mexican INAH and founder of the institute's Taller de Estudios sobre la Muerte, was the first to do so in the context of her wider research into Mexican attitudes to death and disease across the centuries. Malvido completely discards a native or even syncretic origin arguing that the tradition can be fully traced to Medieval Europe. She highlights the existence of similar traditions on the same day, not just in Spain, but in the rest of Catholic Southern Europe and Latin America such as altars for the dead, sweets in the shape of skulls and bread in the shape of bones.[16]
Agustin Sanchez Gonzalez has a similar view in his article published in the INAH's bi-monthly journal Arqueolog a Mexicana. Gonzalez states that, even though the "indigenous" narrative became hegemonic, the spirit of the festivity has far more in common with European traditions of Danse macabre and their allegories of life and death personified in the human skeleton to remind us the ephemeral nature of life. He also highlights that in the 19th century press there was little mention of the Day of the Dead in the sense that we know it today. All there was were long processions to cemeteries, sometimes ending with drunkenness. Elsa Malvido also points to the recent origin of the tradition of "velar" or staying up all night with the dead. It resulted from the Reform Laws under the presidency of Benito Juarez which forced family pantheons out of Churches and into civil cemeteries, requiring rich families having servants guarding family possessions displayed at altars.[16]
The historian Ricardo P rez Montfort has further demonstrated how the ideology known as indigenismo became more and more closely linked to post-revolutionary official projects whereas Hispanismo was identified with conservative political stances. This exclusive nationalism began to displace all other cultural perspectives to the point that in the 1930s, the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl was officially promoted by the government as a substitute for the Spanish Three Kings tradition, with a person dressed up as the deity offering gifts to poor children.[12]
In this context, the Day of the Dead began to be officially isolated from the Catholic Church by the leftist government of L zaro C rdenas motivated both by "indigenismo" and left-leaning anti-clericalism. Malvido herself goes as far as calling the festivity a "Cardenist invention" whereby the Catholic elements are removed and emphasis is laid on indigenous iconography, the focus on death and what Malvido considers to be the cultural invention according to which Mexicans venerate death.[14][17] Gonzalez explains that Mexican nationalism developed diverse cultural expressions with a seal of tradition but which are essentially social constructs which eventually developed ancestral tones. One of these would be the Catholic D a de Muertos which, during the 20th century, appropriated the elements of an ancient pagan rite.[12]
One key element of the re-developed festivity which appears during this time is La Calavera Catrina by Mexican lithographer Jos  Guadalupe Posada. According to Gonzalez, whereas Posada is portrayed in current times as the "restorer" of Mexico's pre-Hispanic tradition he was never interested in Native American culture or history. Posada was predominantly interested in drawing scary images which are far closer to those of the European renaissance or the horrors painted by Francisco de Goya in the Spanish war of Independence against Napoleon than the Mexica tzompantli. The recent trans-atlantic connection can also be observed in the pervasive use of couplet in allegories of death and the play Don Juan Tenorio by 19th Spanish writer Jos  Zorrilla which is represented on this date both in Spain and in Mexico since the early 19th century due to its ghostly apparitions and cemetery scenes.[12]
Opposing views assert that despite the obvious European influence, there exists proof of pre-Columbian festivities that were very similar in spirit, with the Aztec people having at least six celebrations during the year that were very similar to Day of the Dead, the closest one being Quecholli, a celebration that honored Mixc atl (the god of war) and was celebrated between October 20 and November 8. This celebration included elements such as the placement of altars with food (tamales) near the burying grounds of warriors to help them in their journey to the afterlife.[13] Influential Mexican poet and Nobel prize laureate Octavio Paz strongly supported the syncretic view of the D a de Muertos tradition being a continuity of ancient Aztec festivals celebrating death, as is most evident in the chapter "All Saints, Day of the Dead" of his 1950 book-length essay The Labyrinth of Solitude.[18]
Ruben C. Cordova emphasizes the zeal with which the Spanish attempted to extinguish indigenous religious beliefs and practices, such that it is often difficult to reconstruct their main features. Over time, indigenous converts became extremely devout Catholics. As Mexico modernized, the traditional practices that the Spanish had brought to the Americas survived most robustly in rural and less affluent communities, which had high concentrations of indigenous and mestizo populations. Thus archaic Spanish religious practices in marginal areas came to be mistakenly regarded as the "pure" core of primarily "indigenous" Day of the Dead festivities.[19][20][21]
The Aztecs devoted two twenty-day months in their ritual calendar to the dead: the ninth and tenth months, which were for children and adults, respectively. Cordova argues that some recollection of these festivals "was compressed down to two days and cryptically celebrated within the Catholic liturgical calendar," which is why, in Mexico, "unlike other Latin American countries with Day of the Dead traditions   All Saints  Day is dedicated to children, and All Souls  Day is dedicated to adults."[19] 
He also notes that the same object, such as a stone skull carved by the Aztecs, would have different meanings in different religious contexts. For the Aztecs, bones--and skulls in particular--were reservoirs of enormous sacred power. A stone skull could evoke sacrifice, and the skull racks where the skulls of sacrificed captives were displayed. The Spanish could take an Aztec skull and repurpose it by placing it on a holy water font, or under a cross in a cemetery, whereby it would be transformed into a memento mori.[19]
Regardless of its origin, the festivity has become a national symbol in Mexico and as such is taught in the nation's school system, typically asserting a native origin. It is also a school holiday nationwide.[15]
Observance in Mexico
Altars/Installations in Mexico City Museums and Public Spaces
A number of Mexico City's museums and public spaces have played an important part in developing and promoting urban Day of the Dead traditions through altars and installations. These notable organizations include: Anahuacalli, The Frida Kahlo Museum, The Museum of Popular Cultures, The Dolores Olmedo Museum, The Museum of the First Printing Press, and The Cloister of Sor Juana. From turn of the millennium until the imposition of the James Bond-inspired parade, remarkable large-scale installations were created on the Zocalo, Mexico City's central square.[22]
Altars (ofrendas)
During D a de Muertos, the tradition is to build private altars ("ofrendas") containing the favorite foods and beverages, as well as photos and memorabilia, of the departed. The intent is to encourage visits by the souls, so the souls will hear the prayers and the words of the living directed to them. These altars are often placed at home or in public spaces such as schools and libraries, but it is also common for people to go to cemeteries to place these altars next to the tombs of the departed.[8]
Mexican cempas chil (marigold) is the traditional flower used to honor the dead.Cempas chil, alfe iques and papel picado used to decorate an altar
Plans for the day are made throughout the year, including gathering the goods to be offered to the dead. During the three-day period families usually clean and decorate graves;[23] most visit the cemeteries where their loved ones are buried and decorate their graves with ofrendas (altars), which often include orange Mexican marigolds (Tagetes erecta) called cempas chil (originally named cemp hualx chitl, N huatl for 'twenty flowers'). In modern Mexico the marigold is sometimes called Flor de Muerto ('Flower of Dead'). These flowers are thought to attract souls of the dead to the offerings. It is also believed the bright petals with a strong scent can guide the souls from cemeteries to their family homes.[24][25]
Toys are brought for dead children (los angelitos, or 'the little angels'), and bottles of tequila, mezcal or pulque or jars of atole for adults. Families will also offer trinkets or the deceased's favorite candies on the grave. Some families have ofrendas in homes, usually with foods such as candied pumpkin, pan de muerto ('bread of dead'), and sugar skulls; and beverages such as atole. The ofrendas are left out in the homes as a welcoming gesture for the deceased.[23][25] Some people believe the spirits of the dead eat the "spiritual essence" of the ofrendas' food, so though the celebrators eat the food after the festivities, they believe it lacks nutritional value. Pillows and blankets are left out so the deceased can rest after their long journey. In some parts of Mexico, such as the towns of Mixquic, P tzcuaro and Janitzio, people spend all night beside the graves of their relatives. In many places, people have picnics at the grave site, as well.
 Families tidying and decorating graves at a cemetery in Almoloya del R o in the State of Mexico, 1995
Some families build altars or small shrines in their homes;[23] these sometimes feature a Christian cross, statues or pictures of the Blessed Virgin Mary, pictures of deceased relatives and other people, scores of candles, and an ofrenda. Traditionally, families spend some time around the altar, praying and telling anecdotes about the deceased. In some locations, celebrants wear shells on their clothing, so when they dance, the noise will wake up the dead; some will also dress up as the deceased.
Food
During Day of the Dead festivities, food is both eaten by living people and given to the spirits of their departed ancestors as ofrendas ('offerings').[26] Tamales are one of the most common dishes prepared for this day for both purposes.[27]
 Family altar for the Day of the Dead on a patio
Pan de muerto and calaveras are associated specifically with Day of the Dead. Pan de muerto is a type of sweet roll shaped like a bun, topped with sugar, and often decorated with bone-shaped pieces of the same pastry.[28] Calaveras, or sugar skulls, display colorful designs to represent the vitality and individual personality of the departed.[27]
In addition to food, drinks are also important to the tradition of Day of the Dead. Historically, the main alcoholic drink was pulque while today families will commonly drink the favorite beverage of their deceased ancestors.[27] Other drinks associated with the holiday are atole and champurrado, warm, thick, non-alcoholic masa drinks.
Agua de Jamaica (water of hibiscus) is a popular herbal tea made of the flowers and leaves of the Jamaican hibiscus plant (Hibiscus sabdariffa), known as flor de Jamaica in Mexico. It is served cold and quite sweet with a lot of ice. The ruby-red beverage is also known as hibiscus tea in English-speaking countries.[29]
In the Yucat n Peninsula, mukbil pollo (p ib chicken) is traditionally prepared on October 31 or November 1, and eaten by the family throughout the following days. It is similar to a big tamale, composed of masa and pork lard, and stuffed with pork, chicken, tomato, garlic, peppers, onions, epazote, achiote, and spices. Once stuffed, the mukbil pollo is bathed in kool sauce, made with meat broth, habanero chili, and corn masa. It is then covered in banana leaves and steamed in an underground oven over the course of several hours. Once cooked, it is dug up and opened to eat.[30][31]
Calaveras
A common symbol of the holiday is the skull (in Spanish calavera), which celebrants represent in masks, called calacas (colloquial term for skeleton), and foods such as chocolate or sugar skulls, which are inscribed with the name of the recipient on the forehead. Sugar skulls can be given as gifts to both the living and the dead.[32] Other holiday foods include pan de muerto, a sweet egg bread made in various shapes from plain rounds to skulls, often decorated with white frosting to look like twisted bones.[25]
Calaverita
In some parts of the country, especially the larger cities, children in costumes roam the streets, knocking on people's doors for a calaverita, a small gift of candies or money; they also ask passersby for it. This custom is similar to that of Halloween's trick-or-treating in the United States, but without the component of mischief to homeowners if no treat is given.[33]
Calaveras literarias
A distinctive literary form exists within this holiday where people write short poems in traditional rhyming verse, called calaveras literarias (lit. "literary skulls"), which are mocking, light-hearted epitaphs mostly dedicated to friends, classmates, co-workers, or family members (living or dead) but also to public or historical figures, describing interesting habits and attitudes, as well as comedic or absurd anecdotes that use death-related imagery which includes but is not limited to cemeteries, skulls, or the grim reaper, all of this in situations where the dedicatee has an encounter with death itself.[34][35] This custom originated in the 18th or 19th century after a newspaper published a poem narrating a dream of a cemetery in the future which included the words "and all of us were dead", and then proceeding to read the tombstones. Current newspapers dedicate calaveras literarias to public figures, with cartoons of skeletons in the style of the famous calaveras of Jos  Guadalupe Posada, a Mexican illustrator.[32] In modern Mexico, calaveras literarias are a staple of the holiday in many institutions and organizations, for example, in public schools, students are encouraged or required to write them as part of the language class.[10]
 Jos  Guadalupe Posada's depiction of La Calavera Catrina, shown wearing a then-fashionable early 20th century hat.[36]
Posada's most famous print, La Calavera Catrina ("The Elegant Skull"), was likely intended as a criticism of Mexican upper-class women who imitated European fashions. It was first published posthumously in a broadside with a text (not by Posada) that mocked working class vendors of chick peas.[36]
Posada's image of a skeletal figure with a big hat decorated with two ostrich feathers and flowers was elaborated into a full scale figure by Mexican Muralist Diego Rivera in a fresco painted in 1946-47. Rivera's Catrina has a simple Tehuana dress and a feather boa, as well as other features that make allusions to the indigenous peoples of Mexico. Through the addition of these indigenous features, Rivera rehabilitated Catrina into a nationalist emblem.[36]
The Catrina character has become deeply associated with the Day of the Dead. Catrina figures made of a wide range of materials, as well as people with Catrina costumes, have come to play a prominent role in modern Day of the Dead observances in Mexico and elsewhere. The Catrina phenomenon has in fact gone beyond Day of the Dead, resulting in non-seasonal and even permanent "Catrinas," including COVID-19 masks, tattoos, permanently decorated cars, and Catrina-themed artworks.[32][36][37][38] Some artists have even developed a sub-specialization in Catrina imagery.[39]
Theatrical presentations of Don Juan Tenorio by Jos  Zorrilla (1817 1893) are also traditional on this day.
Local traditions
This Local traditions section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Day of the Dead" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The traditions and activities that take place in celebration of the Day of the Dead are not universal, often varying from town to town. For example, in the town of P tzcuaro on the Lago de P tzcuaro in Michoac n, the tradition is very different if the deceased is a child rather than an adult. On November 1 of the year after a child's death, the godparents set a table in the parents' home with sweets, fruits, pan de muerto, a cross, a rosary (used to ask the Virgin Mary to pray for them), and candles. This is meant to celebrate the child's life, in respect and appreciation for the parents. There is also dancing with colorful costumes, often with skull-shaped masks and devil masks in the plaza or garden of the town. At midnight on November 2, the people light candles and ride winged boats called mariposas (butterflies) to Janitzio, an island in the middle of the lake where there is a cemetery, to honor and celebrate the lives of the dead there.
In contrast, the town of Ocotepec, north of Cuernavaca in the State of Morelos, opens its doors to visitors in exchange for veladoras (small wax candles) to show respect for the recently deceased. In return the visitors receive tamales and atole. This is done only by the owners of the house where someone in the household has died in the previous year. Many people of the surrounding areas arrive early to eat for free and enjoy the elaborate altars set up to receive the visitors.
Another peculiar tradition involving children is La Danza de los Viejitos (the Dance of the Old Men) where boys and young men dressed like grandfathers crouch and jump in an energetic dance.[40]
In the 2015 James Bond film Spectre, the opening sequence features a Day of the Dead parade in Mexico City. At the time, no such parade took place in Mexico City; one year later, due to the interest in the film and the government desire to promote the Mexican culture, the federal and local authorities decided to organize an actual D a de Muertos parade through Paseo de la Reforma and Centro Historico on October 29, 2016, which was attended by 250,000 people.[41][42][43] This could be seen as an example of the pizza effect. The idea of a massive celebration was also popularized in the Disney Pixar movie Coco.
Observances outside of Mexico
See also: Festival of the Dead
America
United States
 An  nima for the dead
 Women with calaveras makeup celebrating D a de Muertos in the Mission District of San Francisco, California
In many U.S. communities with Mexican residents, Day of the Dead celebrations are very similar to those held in Mexico. In some of these communities, in states such as Texas,[44] New Mexico,[45] and Arizona,[46] the celebrations tend to be mostly traditional. The All Souls Procession has been an annual Tucson, Arizona, event since 1990. The event combines elements of traditional Day of the Dead celebrations with those of pagan harvest festivals. People wearing masks carry signs honoring the dead and an urn in which people can place slips of paper with prayers on them to be burned.[47] Likewise, Old Town San Diego, California, annually hosts a traditional two-day celebration culminating in a candlelight procession to the historic El Campo Santo Cemetery.[48]
The festival also was held annually at historic Forest Hills Cemetery in Boston's Jamaica Plain neighborhood. Sponsored by Forest Hills Educational Trust and the folkloric performance group La Pi ata, the Day of the Dead festivities celebrated the cycle of life and death. People brought offerings of flowers, photos, mementos, and food for their departed loved ones, which they placed at an elaborately and colorfully decorated altar. A program of traditional music and dance also accompanied the community event. The Jamaica Plain celebration was discontinued in 2011.[49]
The Smithsonian Institution, in collaboration with the University of Texas at El Paso and Second Life, have created a Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum and accompanying multimedia e-book: D a de los Muertos: Day of the Dead. The project's website contains some of the text and images which explain the origins of some of the customary core practices related to the Day of the Dead, such as the background beliefs and the offrenda (the special altar commemorating one's deceased loved one).[50] The Made For iTunes multimedia e-book version provides additional content, such as further details; additional photo galleries; pop-up profiles of influential Latino artists and cultural figures over the decades; and video clips[51] of interviews with artists who make D a de Muertos-themed artwork, explanations and performances of Aztec and other traditional dances, an animation short that explains the customs to children, virtual poetry readings in English and Spanish.[52][53]
In 2021, the Biden-Harris administration celebrated the D a de Muertos.[54]
California
Santa Ana, California, is said to hold the "largest event in Southern California" honoring D a de Muertos, called the annual Noche de Altares, which began in 2002.[55] The celebration of the Day of the Dead in Santa Ana has grown to two large events with the creation of an event held at the Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center for the first time on November 1, 2015.[56]
In other communities, interactions between Mexican traditions and American culture are resulting in celebrations in which Mexican traditions are being extended to make artistic or sometimes political statements. For example, in Los Angeles, California, the Self Help Graphics & Art Mexican-American cultural center presents an annual Day of the Dead celebration that includes both traditional and political elements, such as altars to honor the victims of the Iraq War, highlighting the high casualty rate among Latino soldiers. An updated, intercultural version of the Day of the Dead is also evolving at Hollywood Forever Cemetery.[57] There, in a mixture of Native Californian art, Mexican traditions and Hollywood hip, conventional altars are set up side by side with altars to Jayne Mansfield and Johnny Ramone. Colorful native dancers and music intermix with performance artists, while sly pranksters play on traditional themes.
Similar traditional and intercultural updating of Mexican celebrations are held in San Francisco. For example, the Galer a de la Raza, SomArts Cultural Center, Mission Cultural Center, de Young Museum and altars at Garfield Square by the Marigold Project.[58] Oakland is home to Corazon Del Pueblo in the Fruitvale district. Corazon Del Pueblo has a shop offering handcrafted Mexican gifts and a museum devoted to Day of the Dead artifacts. Also, the Fruitvale district in Oakland serves as the hub of the D a de Muertos annual festival which occurs the last weekend of October. Here, a mix of several Mexican traditions come together with traditional Aztec dancers, regional Mexican music, and other Mexican artisans to celebrate the day.[59]
 Car ofrendas on display during the Oceanside, California Dia de los Muertos festival
In San Diego, California, the city that borders Mexico, the celebrations range across the entire county. All the way up at the most northern part of the county, Oceanside celebrates their annual event which includes community and family altars built around the Oceanside Civic Center and Pier View Way, as well as events at the Mission San Luis Rey de Francia. In the more central area of San Diego, City Heights celebrates through a public festival in Jeremy Henwood Memorial Park that includes at least 35 altars, lowriders, and entertainment, all for free. Down in Chula Vista, they celebrate the tradition through a movie night at Third and Davidson streets where they will be screening  Coco.  This movie night also consists of a community altar, an Altar contest, a catrin/catrina contest, as well as lots of music, food, and vendors. Overall, San Diego is booming with colorful celebrations honoring ancestors across the county.[60]
Italy
In Italy, November 2 is All Souls' Day and is colloquially known as Day of the Dead or "Giorno dei Morti". While many regional nuances exist, celebrations generally consist of placing flowers at cemeteries and family burial sites and speaking to deceased relatives.[61] Some traditions also include lighting a red candle or "lumino" on the window sills at sunset and laying out a table of food for deceased relatives who will come to visit. Like other Day of the Dead traditions around the world, Giorno dei Morti is a day dedicated to honoring the lives of those who have died. Additionally, it is a tradition that teaches children not to be afraid of death.
 A Sicilian cannistru dei morti
In Sicily, families celebrate a long-held Day of the Dead tradition called The Festival of the Dead or "Festa dei Morti". On the eve of November 1, La Festa di Ognissanti, or All Saints' Day, older family members act as the "defunti", or spirits of deceased family members, who sneak into the home and hide sweets and gifts for their young descendants to awake to. On the morning of November 2, children begin the day by hunting to find the gifts in shoes or a special wicker basket of the dead called "cannistru dei morti" or "u cannistru", which typically consist of various sweets, small toys, boned-shaped almond flavored cookies called "ossa dei morti", sugar dolls called "pupi di zucchero", and fruit, vegetable, and ghoul shaped marzipan treats called "Frutta martorana". The pupi di zucchero, thought to be an Arabic cultural import, are often found in the shapes of folkloric characters who represent humanized versions of the souls of the dead. Eating the sugar dolls reflects the idea of the individual absorbing the dead and, in doing so, bringing the dead back to life within themselves on November 2. After gifts are shared and breakfast is enjoyed, the whole family will often visit the cemetery or burial site bearing flowers. They will light candles and play amongst the graves to thank the deceased for the gifts, before enjoying a hearty feast. The tradition holds that the spirits of the deceased will remain with the family to enjoy a day of feasting and merriment.[62]
Acclaimed Sicilian author Andrea Camilleri recounts his Giorno dei Morti experience as boy, as well as the negative cultural impact that WWII era American influence had on the long-held tradition.
"Every Sicilian house where there was a little boy was populated with dead familiar to him. Not ghosts with white linz lo and with the scrunch of chains, mind you, not those that are frightening, but such and as they were seen in the photographs exhibited in the living room, worn, the occasional half smile printed on the face, the good ironed dress in a workmanlike manner, they made no difference with the living. We Nicareddri, before going to bed, put a wicker basket under the bed (the size varied according to the money there was in the family) that at night the dear dead would fill with sweets and gifts that we would find on the 2nd morning upon awakening. After a restless sleep we woke up at dawn to go hunting Because the dead wanted to play with us, to give us fun, and therefore they didn't put the basket back where they had found it, but went to hide it carefully, we had to look for it  The toys were tin trains, wooden toy cars, rag dolls, wooden cubes that formed landscapes  On November 2nd we returned the visit that the dead had paid us the day before: it was not a ritual, but an affectionate custom. Then, in 1943, with the American soldiers the Christmas tree arrived and slowly, year after year, the dead lost their way to the houses where they were waiting for them, happy and awake until the end, the children or the children of the children  Pity. We had lost the possibility of touching, materially, that thread that binds our personal history to that of those who had preceded us "
 Andrea Camilleri, English translation of  The Day That The Dead Lost Their Way Home [63]
Food plays an important part of Italy's day of the dead tradition, with various regional treats being used as offerings to the dead on their journey to the afterlife. In Tuscany and Milan the  pane dei morti  or "bread of the dead" is said to be the characteristic offering. In northern Apulia, a wheat growing region, a sweet dish for the Day of the Dead is Colva or  Grains of the Dead . Fave dei morti or  fava beans of the dead  are another dish for the day found widespread through Italy. Ossa dei morti, suitably elongated and frosted  bones of the dead  are sweets found in Apulia and Sicily. In Sicily, families enjoy special day of the dead cakes and cookies that are made into symbolic shapes such as skulls and finger bones. The "sweets of the dead" are a marzipan treats called frutta martorana.[64] On the night of November 1, Sicilian parents and grandparents traditionally buy Frutta di Martorana to gift to children on November 2.
In addition to visiting their own family members, some people pay respects to those without a family. Some Italians take it upon themselves to adopt centuries-old unclaimed bodies and give them offerings like money or jewelry as a way to ease their pain and ask for favors.[61]
Asia and Oceania
Mexican-style Day of the Dead celebrations occur in major cities in Australia, Fiji, and Indonesia. Additionally, prominent celebrations are held in Wellington, New Zealand, complete with altars celebrating the deceased with flowers and gifts.[65]
Philippines
Due to the close cultural connections of the Philippines and Mexico, the Day of the Dead is celebrated in this Hispanic-Asian country as well. In the Philippines "Und s", "Araw ng mga Yumao" (Tagalog: "Day of those who have died"), coincides with the Roman Catholic's celebration of All Saints' Day and continues on to the following day: All Souls' Day. Filipinos traditionally observe this day by visiting the family dead to clean and repair their tombs, just like in Mexico. Offerings of prayers, flowers, candles,[66] and even food, while Chinese Filipinos additionally burn joss sticks and joss paper (kim). Many also spend the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the cemetery, having feasts and merriment.
Czech Republic
As part of a promotion by the Mexican embassy in Prague, Czech Republic, since the late 20th century, some local citizens join in a Mexican-style Day of the Dead. A theater group conducts events involving candles, masks, and make-up using luminous paint in the form of sugar skulls.[67][68]
Similar or related festivities
See also: All Souls' Day
Americas
Belize
In Belize, Day of the Dead is practiced by people of the Yucatec Maya ethnicity. The celebration is known as Hanal Pixan which means 'food for the souls' in their language. Altars are constructed and decorated with food, drinks, candies, and candles put on them.
Bolivia
D a de las  atitas ("Day of the Skulls") is a festival celebrated in La Paz, Bolivia, on May 5. In pre-Columbian times indigenous Andeans had a tradition of sharing a day with the bones of their ancestors on the third year after burial. Today families keep only the skulls for such rituals. Traditionally, the skulls of family members are kept at home to watch over the family and protect them during the year. On November 9, the family crowns the skulls with fresh flowers, sometimes also dressing them in various garments, and making offerings of cigarettes, coca leaves, alcohol, and various other items in thanks for the year's protection. The skulls are also sometimes taken to the central cemetery in La Paz for a special Mass and blessing.[69][70][71]
Brazil
The Brazilian public holiday of Dia de Finados, Dia dos Mortos or Dia dos Fi is Defuntos (Portuguese: "Day of the Dead" or "Day of the Faithful Deceased") is celebrated on November 2. Similar to other Day of the Dead celebrations, people go to cemeteries and churches with flowers and candles and offer prayers. The celebration is intended as a positive honoring of the dead. Memorializing the dead draws from indigenous and European Catholic origins.
Costa Rica
Costa Rica celebrates D a De Los Muertos on November 2. The day is also called D a de Todos Santos (All Saints Day) and D a de Todos Almas (All Souls Day). Catholic masses are celebrated and people visit their loved ones' graves to decorate them with flowers and candles.[72]
Ecuador
In Ecuador the Day of the Dead is observed to some extent by all parts of society, though it is especially important to the indigenous Kichwa peoples, who make up an estimated quarter of the population. Indigena families gather together in the community cemetery with offerings of food for a day-long remembrance of their ancestors and lost loved ones. Ceremonial foods include colada morada, a spiced fruit porridge that derives its deep purple color from the Andean blackberry and purple maize. This is typically consumed with wawa de pan, a bread shaped like a swaddled infant, though variations include many pigs the latter being traditional to the city of Loja. The bread, which is wheat flour-based today, but was made with masa in the pre-Columbian era, can be made savory with cheese inside or sweet with a filling of guava paste. These traditions have permeated mainstream society, as well, where food establishments add both colada morada and gaugua de pan to their menus for the season. Many non-indigenous Ecuadorians visit the graves of the deceased, cleaning and bringing flowers, or preparing the traditional foods, too.[73]
Guatemala
Guatemalan celebrations of the Day of the Dead, on November 1, are highlighted by the construction and flying of giant kites.[74] It is customary to fly kites to help the spirits find their way back to Earth. A few kites have notes for the dead attached to the strings of the kites. The kites are used as a kind of telecommunication to heaven.[32] A big event also is the consumption of fiambre, which is made only for this day during the year.[32]  In addition to the traditional visits to grave sites of ancestors, the tombs and graves are decorated with flowers, candles, and food for the dead. In a few towns, Guatemalans repair and repaint the cemetery with vibrant colors to bring the cemetery to life. They fix things that have gotten damaged over the years or just simply need a touch-up, such as wooden grave cross markers. They also lay flower wreaths on the graves. Some families have picnics in the cemetery.[32]
Peru
It is common for Peruvians to visit the cemetery, play music and bring flowers to decorate the graves of dead relatives.[75]
Europe
Southern Italy and Sicily
A traditional biscotti-type cookie, ossa di morto or bones of the dead are made and placed in shoes once worn by dead relatives.[76]
See also
Bon (festival)
Danse Macabre
Qingming Festival
Literary Calaverita
Samhain
Santa Muerte
Skull art
Thursday of the Dead
Veneration of the dead
Walpurgis Night
References
^ a b c Foxcroft, Nigel H. (October 28, 2019). The Kaleidoscopic Vision of Malcolm Lowry: Souls and Shamans. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-4985-1658-7. However, owing to the subjugation of the Aztec Empire by the Spanish conquistador, Hernan Coretes in 1519 1521, this festival increasingly fell under Hispanic influence. It was moved from the beginning of summer to late October and then to early November so that it would conicide with the Western Christian triduum (or three-day religious observance) of Allhallowtide (Hallowtide, Allsaintide, or Hallowmas). It lasts from October 31 to November 2 and comprises All Saint's Eve (Halloween), All Saints' Day (All Hallows'), and All Souls' Day.
^ "D a de Todos los Santos, D a de los Fieles Difuntos y D a de (los) Muertos (M xico) se escriben con may scula inicial" [D a de Todos los Santos, D a de los Fieles Difuntos and D a de (los) Muertos (Mexico) are written with initial capital letter] (in Spanish). Fund u. October 29, 2010. Retrieved November 4, 2020.
^ " 'D a de Muertos' o 'D a de los Muertos'? El nombre usado en M xico para denominar a la fiesta tradicional en la que se honra a los muertos es 'D a de Muertos', aunque la denominaci n 'D a de los Muertos' tambi n es gramaticalmente correcta" ['D a de Muertos' or 'D a de los Muertos'? The name used in Mexico to denominate the traditional celebration in which death is honored is 'D a de Muertos', although the denomination 'D a de los Muertos' is also grammatically correct] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish Academy Official Twitter Account. November 2, 2019. Retrieved November 4, 2020.
^ Sacred Places of a Lifetime. National Geographic. 2008. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-4262-0336-7. Day of the Dead celebrations take place over October 31 ... November 1 (All Saints' Day), and November 2.
^ Skibo, James; Skibo, James M.; Feinman, Gary (January 14, 1999). Pottery and People. University of Utah Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-87480-577-2. In Yucatan, however, the Day of the Dead rituals occur on October 31, November 1, and November 6.
^ Arnold, Dean E. (February 7, 2018). Maya Potters' Indigenous Knowledge: Cognition, Engagement, and Practice. University Press of Colorado. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-60732-656-4. pottery as a distilled taskscape is best illustrated in the pottery required for Day of the Dead rituals (on October 31, November 1, and November 6), when the spirits of deceased ancestors come back to the land of the living.
^ Society, National Geographic (October 17, 2012). "Dia de los Muertos". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2019.
^ a b Palfrey, Dale Hoyt (1995). "The Day of the Dead". D a de los Muertos Index. Access Mexico Connect. Archived from the original on November 30, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2007.
^ "Dia de los Muertos". National Geographic Society. October 17, 2012. Archived from the original on November 2, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016.
^ a b Ch vez, X chitl (October 23, 2018). "Literary Calaveras". Smithsonian Voices.
^ a b "Indigenous festivity dedicated to the dead". UNESCO. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2014.
^ a b c d e "D a de muertos,  tradici n prehisp nica o invenci n del siglo XX?". Relatos e Historias en M xico. November 2, 2020.
^ a b "Dos historiadoras encuentran diverso origen del D a de Muertos en M xico". www.opinion.com.bo.
^ a b ""D a de Muertos, un invento cardenista", dec a Elsa Malvido". El Universal. November 3, 2017.
^ a b "El D a de Muertos mexicano naci  como arma pol tica o tradici n prehisp nica - Arte y Cultura - IntraMed". www.intramed.net.
^ a b c "Or genes profundamente cat licos y no prehisp nicos, la fiesta de d a de muertos". www.inah.gob.mx. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2020.
^ "09an1esp". www.jornada.com.mx.
^ Paz,Octavio. 'The Labyrinth of Solitude'. N.Y.: Grove Press, 1961.
^ a b c Cordova, Ruben C. (October 31, 2019). "Is Day of the Dead More Indigenous or Catholic? Friars Dur n and Sahag n vs. Wikipedia". Glasstire. Retrieved March 13, 2023.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). The Day of the Dead in Art (PDF). San Antonio: The City of San Antonio, Department of Arts & Culture. pp. 32 33.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (November 1, 2020). "A brief history of Day of the Dead". San Antonio Report. Retrieved March 13, 2023.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (November 2, 2019). "A Guide to Day of the Dead in Mexico City". Glasstire. Retrieved March 13, 2023.
^ a b c Salvador, R.J. (2003).  John D. Morgan and Pittu Laungani (ed.). Death and Bereavement Around the World: Death and Bereavement in the Americas. Death, Value and Meaning Series, Vol. II. Amityville, New York: Baywood Publishing Company. pp. 75 76. ISBN 978-0-89503-232-4.
^ "5 Facts About D a de los Muertos (The Day of the Dead)". Smithsonian Insider. October 30, 2016. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2018.
^ a b c Brandes, Stanley (1997). "Sugar, Colonialism, and Death: On the Origins of Mexico's Day of the Dead". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 39 (2): 275. doi:10.1017/S0010417500020624. ISSN 0010-4175. JSTOR 179316. S2CID 145402658.
^ Turim, Gayle (November 2, 2012). "Day of the Dead Sweets and Treats". History Stories. History Channel. Archived from the original on June 6, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015.
^ a b c Godoy, Maria (November 2016). "Sugar Skulls, Tamales And More: Why Is That Food On The Day Of The Dead Altar?". NPR. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017.
^ Castella, Krystina (October 2010). "Pan de Muerto Recipe". Epicurious. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2019.
^ "Jamaica iced tea". Cooking in Mexico. Archived from the original on November 4, 2011. Retrieved October 23, 2011.
^ Kennedy, D. (2018). Cocina esencial de M xico. Fondo de Cultura Econ mica. p. 156. ISBN 9786071656636. Retrieved June 1, 2021.
^ R., Mu oz. "Muc bil pollo". Diccionario enciclop dico de la Gastronom a Mexicana [Enciclopedic dictionary of Mexican Gastronomy] (in Spanish). Larousse Cocina.
^ a b c d e f Marchi, Regina M (2009). Day of the Dead in the USA : The Migration and Transformation of a Cultural Phenomenon. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-8135-4557-8.
^ "Mi Calaverita: Mexico's Trick or Treat". Mexperience. October 31, 2020.
^ "These wicked Day of the Dead poems don't spare anyone". PBS NewsHour. November 2, 2018. Retrieved May 6, 2019.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (2005). "Calaveras". In Ilan Stavans, ed. in chief, and Harold Augenbraum, assoc. ed., Encyclopedia Latina: History, Culture, and Society in the United States. Danbury, Conn.: Grolier Academic Reference, 4 vols.: I: 248   249.
^ a b c d Cordova, Ruben C. (November 2, 2019). "Jos  Guadalupe Posada and Diego Rivera Fashion Catrina: From Sellout To National Icon (and Back Again?)". Glasstire. Retrieved March 12, 2023.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (November 2, 2020). "Catrina Mania!". Glasstire. Retrieved March 12, 2023.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (November 1, 2021). "Catrina Mania III". Glasstire. Retrieved March 12, 2023.
^ Cordova, Ruben C. (October 30, 2022). "Catrina Mania IV: Brandon Maldonado's Catrinas". Glasstire. Retrieved March 13, 2023.
^ "D a de los Muertos or Day of the Dead". Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2018.
^ "Mexico City stages first Day of the Dead parade". BBC. October 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 30, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
^ "Fotogaler a: Desfile por D a de Muertos re ne a 250 mil personas". Exc lsior (in Spanish). October 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 31, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
^ "Galer as Archivo". Televisa News. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
^ Wise, Danno. "Port Isabel's Day of the Dead Celebration". Texas Travel. About.com. Archived from the original on December 9, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2007.
^ "Dia de los Muertos". visitalbuquerque.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.
^ Hedding, Judy. "Day of the Dead". Phoenix. About.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2007.
^ White, Erin (November 5, 2006). "All Souls Procession". Arizona Daily Star. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2007.
^ "Old Town San Diego's Dia de los Muertos". Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2014.
^ Oliveira, Rebeca (November 4, 2011). "Day of the Dead dies as cemetery cuts arts". Jamaica Plain Gazette. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022.
^ Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum. D a de los Muertos: Day of the Dead (Version 1.2 ed.). Archived from the original on December 22, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2014.
^ "Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum". Ustream. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2014.
^ Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum. "Day of the Dead". Theater of the Dead. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2014.
^ Smithsonian Institution. "Smithsonian-UTEP D a de los Muertos Festival: A 2D and 3D Experience!". Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum Press Release. Archived from the original on November 6, 2009.
^ @LaCasaBlanca (November 1, 2021). "Feliz D a de los Muertos de la Administraci n Biden-Harris. Hoy y ma ana, el Presidente y la Primera Dama reconocer n el D a de los Muertos con la primera ofrenda ubicada en la Casa Blanca" (Tweet) (in Spanish). Retrieved November 4, 2021   via Twitter.
^ "Less-scary holiday: Some faith groups offer alternatives to Halloween trick-or-treating". The Orange County Register. October 30, 2015. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
^ "Viva la Vida or Noche de Altares? Santa Ana's downtown division fuels dueling Day of the Dead events". The Orange County Register. October 30, 2015. Archived from the original on November 3, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
^ Quinones, Sam (October 28, 2006). "Making a night of Day of the Dead". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 26, 2006.
^ "Dia de los Muertos [Day of the Dead]   San Francisco". Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2014.
^ Elliott, Vicky (October 27, 2000). "Lively Petaluma festival marks Day of the Dead". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2010.
^ McIntosh, Linda; Groch, Laura (October 20, 2022). "Celebrate D a de los Muertos in San Diego County with these festive events". San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved November 1, 2022.
^ a b "Witness historic Day of the Dead rituals in Naples, Italy". National Geographic. November 20, 2018. Retrieved November 2, 2022.
^ "FESTA DEI MORTI: THE SICILIAN WAY TO REMEMBER THEIR LOVED ONES". Scent of Sicily. Retrieved November 2, 2022.
^ "ANDREA CAMILLERI TELLS US: "THE DAY OF THE DEAD IN SICILY"". Sicily Tourist (in Italian). Retrieved November 4, 2022.
^ "The Frutta Martorana, the Typical Sicilian Dessert for All Souls' day". Visit Italy. Retrieved November 2, 2022.
^ "Day of the Dead in Wellington, New Zealand". Scoop.co.nz. October 27, 2007. Archived from the original on June 4, 2009. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
^ "All Saints Day around the world". Guardian Weekly. November 1, 2010. Archived from the original on October 29, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2018.
^ "48 Best Sugar Skull Makeup Creations To Day of the Dead". August 22, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2019.
^ "Day of the Dead in Prague". Radio Czech. October 24, 2007. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007.
^ Guidi, Ruxandra (November 9, 2007). "Las Natitas". BBC. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008.
^ Smith, Fiona (November 8, 2005). "Bolivians Honor Skull-Toting Tradition". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 18, 2008. Retrieved December 30, 2007.
^ "All Saints day in Bolivia  "The skull festival"". Bolivia Line (May 2005). Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. Retrieved December 20, 2007.
^ Costa Rica Celebrates The Day of the Dead Outward Bound Costa Rica, 2012-11-01.
^ Ortiz, Gonzalo (October 30, 2010). "Diversity in Remembering the Dead". InterPress Service News Agency. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2010.
^ Burlingame, Betsy; Wood, Joshua. "Visit to cemetery in Guatemala". Expatexchange.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved August 13, 2009.
^ "Per : as  se vivi  D a de todos los santos en cementerios de Lima". Peru. peru.com. January 1, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017.
^ "Bones of the Dead Cookies - Ossa Di Morto". Savoring Italy. October 24, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2021.
Further reading
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Day of the Dead.
Andrade, Mary J. Day of the Dead A Passion for Life  D a de los Muertos Pasi n por la Vida. La Oferta Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-0-9791624-04
Anguiano, Mariana, et al. Las tradiciones de D a de Muertos en M xico. Mexico City 1987.
Brandes, Stanley (1997). "Sugar, Colonialism, and Death: On the Origins of Mexico's Day of the Dead". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 39 (2): 270 99. doi:10.1017/S0010417500020624. S2CID 145402658.
Brandes, Stanley (1998). "The Day of the Dead, Halloween, and the Quest for Mexican National Identity". Journal of American Folklore. 111 (442): 359 80. doi:10.2307/541045. JSTOR 541045.
Brandes, Stanley (1998). "Iconography in Mexico's Day of the Dead". Ethnohistory. Duke University Press. 45 (2): 181 218. doi:10.2307/483058. JSTOR 483058.
Brandes, Stanley (2006). Skulls to the Living, Bread to the Dead. Blackwell Publishing. p. 232. ISBN 978-1-4051-5247-1.
Cadafalch, Antoni. The Day of the Dead. Korero Books, 2011. ISBN 978-1-907621-01-7
Carmichael, Elizabeth; Sayer, Chloe. The Skeleton at the Feast: The Day of the Dead in Mexico. Great Britain: The Bath Press, 1991. ISBN 0-7141-2503-2
Conklin, Paul (2001). "Death Takes a Holiday". U.S. Catholic. 66: 38 41.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2005). "Calaveras". In Ilan Stavans, ed. in chief, and Harold Augenbraum, assoc. ed., Encyclopedia Latina: History, Culture, and Society in the United States. Danbury, Conn.: Grolier Academic Reference, 4 vols.: I: 248   249.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2005). "Posada, Jos  Guadalupe". In Ilan Stavans, ed. in chief, and Harold Augenbraum, assoc. ed., Encyclopedia Latina: History, Culture, and Society in the United States. Danbury, Conn.: Grolier Academic Reference, 4 vols.: II: 258   259.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2019).  Is Day of the Dead More Indigenous or Catholic? Friars Dur n and Sahag n vs. Wikipedia . Glasstire, October 31.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). "Jos  Guadalupe Posada and Diego Rivera Fashion Catrina: From Sellout To National Icon (and Back Again?)". Glasstire, November 2.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2019).  A Guide to Day of the Dead in Mexico City . Glasstire, November 2.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2019). The Day of the Dead in Art. San Antonio: City of San Antonio Department of Arts & Culture, Centro de Artes. https://www.getcreativesanantonio.com/Portals/3/Files/DOD_CATALGOGUE_digital.pdf
Cordova, Ruben C. (2020).  A Brief History of Day of the Dead . San Antonio Report, November 1,
Cordova, Ruben C. (2020).  Catrina Mania! . Glasstire, November 2.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2021).  Catrina Mania III . Glasstire, November 1.
Cordova, Ruben C. (2022).  Catrina Mania IV: Brandon Maldonado s Catrinas . Glasstire, October 30.
Garcia-Rivera, Alex (1997). "Death Takes a Holiday". U.S. Catholic. 62: 50.
Haley, Shawn D.; Fukuda, Curt. Day of the Dead: When Two Worlds Meet in Oaxaca. Berhahn Books, 2004. ISBN 1-84545-083-3
Lane, Sarah and Marilyn Turkovich, D as de los Muertos/Days of the Dead. Chicago 1987.
Lomnitz, Claudio. Death and the Idea of Mexico. Zone Books, 2005. ISBN 1-890951-53-6
Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo, et al. "Miccahuitl: El culto a la muerte," Special issue of Artes de M xico 145 (1971)
Nutini, Hugo G. Todos Santos in Rural Tlaxcala: A Syncretic, Expressive, and Symbolic Analysis of the Cult of the Dead. Princeton 1988.
Oliver Vega, Beatriz, et al. The Days of the Dead, a Mexican Tradition. Mexico City 1988.
Roy, Ann (1995). "A Crack Between the Worlds". Commonwealth. 122: 13 16.
vteUNESCO Oral and Intangible Heritage: Representative ListAfrica
Aka music
Chopi timbila
Garifuna culture
Afounkaha Gbofe
G l d 
Gule Wamkulu
If 
Ijele Masquerade
Kamablon re-roofing
Kankurang
Manden Charter
Mauritian Sega
Mbende Jerusarema
Ritual dance of the royal drum
Sega tambour of Rodrigues Island
Sosso Bala
Ugandan barkcloth making
Vimbuza healing dance
Yaaral and Degal
Zafimaniry woodcrafting
Zambian Makishi Festival
Arab States
Ahellil
Al-Sirah Al-Hilaliyyah
Bedu culture at Petra and Wadi Rum
Iraqi maqam
Jemaa el-Fnaa
Palestinian Hikaye
Shashmaqam
Song of Sana'a
Taghribat Bani Hilal
Tan-Tan Moussem
Asia and Pacific
Acupuncture and Moxibustion
Ainu dance
Akiu no Taue Odori
Akyn
Angklung
"Arirang"
Bakhshi music
Batik
Baul
Beijing opera
Boysun District
Bunraku
Cantonese opera
Ca tr 
Chakkirako
Cheoyongmu
Chhau dance
Chinese architecture
Chinese block printing
Chinese calligraphy
Chinese paper cutting
Chinese seal engraving
Chinese shadow puppetry
Daemokjang
Daimokutate
Dainichido Bugaku
Darangen Epic
Dragon Boat Festival
Drametse Ngacham
Durga Puja in Kolkata
Epic of King Gesar
Gagaku
Gagok
Ganggangsullae
Gangneung Danoje Festival
Gimjang
Gi ng Festival
Gong culture
Grand Song
Guqin
Guqin music
Haenyeo
Hansan Mosi
Hayachine Kagura
Hitachi Furyumono
Hua'er
Hudhud Chants
Indonesian kris
Jamdani
Jeju Chilmeoridang Yeongdeunggut
Jultagi
Kabuki
Kalbelia
Kashan rug
Katta Ashula
Khon
Khoomei
Koshikijima no Toshidon
Kumbh Mela
Kumiodori
Kunqu
Koodiyattam
Ladkah Buddhist chantings
Lakalaka
Lenj boats
Lhamo
Longquan celadon
Mak yong
Manipuri Sankirtana
Mangal Shobhajatra
Mazu belief
Meshrep
Mibu no Hana Taue
Morin khuur
Mosie ramie
Mudiyett
Muqam
Naadam
Namsadang Nori
Nanyin
Naqq li
Nh  nh c
Noh
Nora
Nowruz
Nuad Thai
Oku-noto no Aenokoto
Pencak silat
Pahlevani and zoorkhaneh rituals
Pansori
Pinisi
Pungmul
Quan h 
Radif
Ramlila
Ramman
Royal ballet of Cambodia
Regong arts
Royal Ancestral Ritual
Sada Shin Noh
Saman dance
Sand drawing
Sbek Toch
Sekishu-Banshi
Shiraz rug
Ssireum
Taekkyeon
Ta'z ye
Thathera utensil craft
Tugging rituals and games
Urtiin Duu
Vedic chantings
Wayang
Xi'an ensemble
Xuan paper
Yamahoko
Yeondeunghoe
Yeongsanjae
Yoga
Y ki-tsumugi
Yunjin
Europe andNorth America
Albanian iso-polyphony
Ashik
Ashiqs of Azerbaijan
Aubusson tapestry
Azerbaijani rug
weaving
Azerbaijani tar
Baltic song and dance celebrations
Be arac
Bus j r s
C lu ari
Cante Alentejano
Cantu a tenore
Carnival of Binche
Castell
Chovgan
Christmas Tsars
Council of Wise Men of the plain of Murcia and Water Tribunal of the plain of Valencia
Copper craftsmanship of Lahij
Cremona violins
Croatian lacemaking
Daina
Dancing procession of Echternach
Daredevils of Sassoun
Doina
Duduk
Fado
Falconry
Falles of the Pyrenees
La Mare de D u de la Salut Festival
Festivity of Saint Blaise
Flamenco
French timber framing scribing
Fujara
Georgian vocal polyphony
Horezu ceramics
Houtem Jaarmarkt
Hrvatsko Zagorje toys
Istrian scale
Jem
Karag z and Hacivat
Kelaghayi
Ke kek
Khachkar
Kihnu culture
K rkp nar
Klapa
Lithuanian cross crafting
Kvevri wine
La Patum
Lefkaritika
Licitar
Ljelje/Kraljice
Makishi Festival
Maldovan Christmas Carols
Maloya
Manas
Meddah
Mediterranean diet
Mesir Macunu
Mugham
Mystery Play of Elche
Nestinarstvo
Nijemo Kolo
Nowruz
Azerbaijani
Indian
Iranian
Turkish
Ojkanje
Olonkho
Opera dei Pupi
Petrykivka decorative painting
Procession of the Holy Blood
Sama
Sauna culture in Finland
Semeiskie culture
Seto leelo
Silbo Gomero
Sinjska alka
Slov cko Verbu k
Turkish Sohbet
The Song of the Sibyl
Suiti Cultural Space
Sutartin s
T nch z
Turkish coffee
Viennese cafes
Waj pi culture
Za kri en
Zvon ari
Caribbean andLatin America
Carnaval de Barranquilla
Brotherhood of the Holy Spirit of the Congos of Villa Mella
Candombe
Carnaval de Negros y Blancos
Bumba-meu-boi from Maranh o
Carnaval de Oruro
C rio de Nazar 
Cocolo
Costa Rican oxherding
Dancing Devils of Yare
Danza de los Voladores
Danza de tijeras
Frevo
Garifuna culture
Gi ng Festival
Harakmbut
Huaconada
Indigenous Day of the Dead
Kallawaya culture
Mexican cuisine
Moore Town's Maroon Heritage
Panama hat
Parachico
Pe a de Bernal
Pirekua
Popay n Holy Week processions
P tchip ' 
Quyllurit'i
Rabinal Ach 
Samba de Roda
San Basilio de Palenque
South Pacific Colombian marimba
Tango
Taquile textiles
Tumba francesa
Vallenato
Waj pi culture
Yaokwa
Z paro culture
vteGhosts and ghostloreList of ghostsManifestations
Ancestral spirits
Haunted locations
Haunted highways
Haunted house
Haunted trains
Haunted ships
Hungry ghost
Poltergeist
Residual haunting
Vengeful ghost
Procession of the dead
By continentand cultureAfrican
Madam Koi Koi
South Africa (locations)
Asian
Burmese
Chinese
locations
Ghost Festival
Tibetan
Filipino
locations
Indian
locations
Bengali
Japanese
locations
Onry 
Korean
Malay
Thai
locations
Vietnamese
Europe
English
locations in Scotland
locations in United Kingdom
France
locations
Slavic religion
Romania
North America
Canada
Caribbean
Duppy
Navajo
Chindi
Ghost sickness
Mexican
locations
Day of the Dead
United States
Canada
South America
Colombia
Oceania
Polynesian
Maori
History
Mesopotamian
Ancient Egyptian culture
Classical Antiquity
Parapsychology
Apparitional experience
Electronic voice phenomenon
kaidan
Ghost hunting
S ance
Mediumship
Spirit photography
Popular culture
Films about ghosts
India
Indonesia
Stories about ghosts
Halloween
Samhain
Paranormal television
Court cases
Booty v Barnaby
Hammersmith Ghost murder case
Related
Fear of ghosts
Spectrophilia
Spiritualism
Spiritism
The Ghost Club
Geist
Soul
Spirit
 Category
vteHalloweenMain topics
History
Samhain
Allhallowtide
Symbols
Activities
Geography
Christian observances
Traditions
Apple bobbing
Cards
Costumes
Food
Ghost tours
Jack-o'-lantern
Lighting candles on graves
Prayer for the dead
Soul cake
Trick-or-treating
Pangangaluluwa
Events
Bonfire
Great Pumpkin
Haunted attraction
Hell house
Pumpkin queen
Media
Books
Films
Music
albums
songs
Television
RelatedeventsFestival of the Dead
Bon Festival
Chuseok
D a de Muertos
Gai Jatra
Pitri Paksha
Qingming Festival
Totensonntag
Zh ng yu n ji 
Veneration of the dead
Death anniversary
Death customs
Kaddish
Yizkor
Other events
Allantide
Beggars Night
Devil's Night
Dziady
Eid il-Burbara
Hop-tu-Naa
Kekri
Korochun
Krampus
Mischief Night
Namahage
Old Halloween
Saci Day
Superstition
Will-o'-the-wisp
Hobgoblins
 Category: Halloween
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Day_of_the_Dead&oldid=1148622452"