Aspect of Jewish history
See also: History of Israel
Part of a series on the
History of Israel
Prehistoric Levant
Kebaran
Mushabian
Natufian
Harifian
Yarmukian
Lodian
Nizzanim
Ghassulian
Ancient historyAncient Israel and Judah
Canaan
Israelites
Philistines
United Monarchy
Kingdom of Israel
Kingdom of Judah
Yahwism
Babylonian rule
Second Temple period (530 BCE 70 CE)
Persian rule
Hellenistic period
Hasmonean dynasty
Herodian dynasty
Kingdom
Tetrarchy
Roman Judea
Late antiquity (70 636)
Syria Palaestina
Byzantine Palaestina
Prima
Secunda
Middle Ages (636 1517)
Caliphates
Filastin
Urdunn
Kingdom of Jerusalem
Ayyubid dynasty
Mamluk Sultanate
Modern historyModern history (1517 1948)
Ottoman rule
Eyalet
Mutasarrifate
Old Yishuv
Zionism
OETA
British Mandate
Yishuv
State of Israel (1948 present)
Timeline
Years
Independence
Arab Israeli conflict
Austerity
Silicon Wadi
Iran Israel conflict
By topic
Historical maps
Historical population
Historical literature
Judaism
Jerusalem
Zionism
Jewish leaders
Jewish warfare
Related
Jewish history
Hebrew calendar
Archaeology
Museums
 Israel portalvte
Part of a series onJews and Judaism
Etymology
Who is a Jew?
Religion
God in Judaism (names)
Principles of faith
Mitzvot (613)
Halakha
Shabbat
Holidays
Prayer
Tzedakah
Land of Israel
Brit
Bar and bat mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement
Philosophy
Ethics
Kabbalah
Customs
Rites
Synagogue
Rabbi
Texts
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
Talmud
Mishnah
Gemara
Rabbinic
Midrash
Tosefta
Targum
Beit Yosef
Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Zohar
Communities
Ashkenazim (Galician)
Mizrahim
Sephardim
Teimanim
Beta Israel
Gruzinim
Juhurim
Bukharim
Italkim
Romanyotim
Cochinim
Bene Israel
Berber
Related groups
Bnei Anusim
Lemba
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Kaifeng Jews
Igbo Jews
Samaritans
Crypto-Jews
Mosaic Arabs
Subbotniks
Noahides
Population
Judaism by country
Lists of Jews
Diaspora
Historical population by country
Genetic studies
Land of Israel
Old Yishuv
New Yishuv
Israeli Jews
Europe
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Czech lands
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Asia
Afghanistan
China
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Lebanon
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Syria
Turkey
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
Africa
Algeria
Angola
Egypt
Ethiopia
Somalia
Djibouti
Libya
Morocco
South Africa
Tunisia
Zimbabwe
Northern America
Canada
United States
Latin America and Caribbean
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guyana
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Paraguay
Peru
Puerto Rico
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
Oceania
Australia
Fiji
Guam
New Zealand
Palau
Denominations
Orthodox
Modern
Haredi
Hasidic
Reform
Conservative
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Science
Haymanot
Humanistic
Culture
Yiddish theatre
Dance
Humour
Minyan
Wedding
Clothing
Niddah
Pidyon haben
Kashrut
Shidduch
Zeved habat
Conversion to Judaism
Hiloni
Music
Religious
Secular
Cuisine
American
Ashkenazi
Bukharan
Ethiopian
Israeli
Israelite
Mizrahi
Sephardic
Yemenite
Literature
Israeli
Yiddish
American
Languages
Hebrew
Biblical
Yiddish
Yeshivish
Jewish Koine Greek
Yevanic
Juhuri
Shassi
Judaeo-Iranian
Ladino
Judeo-Gascon
Gharda a Sign
Bukharian
Knaanic
Zarphatic
Italkian
Gruzinic
Judeo-Aramaic
Judeo-Arabic
Judeo-Berber
Judeo-Malayalam
History
Timeline
Name "Judea"
Leaders
Twelve Tribes of Israel
Ancient history
Kingdom of Judah
Temple in Jerusalem
Babylonian captivity
Assyrian captivity
Yehud Medinata
Second Temple
Jerusalem (in Judaism
timeline)
Hasmonean dynasty
Sanhedrin
Schisms
Pharisees
Sadducees
Essenes
Bana'im
Hemerobaptists
Magh riya
Hellenistic Judaism
Jewish Roman wars
History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire
Christianity and Judaism (Jews and Christmas)
Hinduism and Judaism
Islamic Jewish relations
Middle Ages
Golden Age
Sabbateans
Hasidism
Haskalah
Emancipation
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Persecution
The Holocaust
Israel
Land of Israel
Aliyah
Jewish atheism
Baal teshuva
Arab Israeli conflict
Historical population comparisons
Politics
Jewish political movements
Anarchism
Autonomism
Bundism
Feminism
Leftism
Secularism
Territorialism
World Agudath Israel
Politics of Israel
Anarchism
Liberalism
Secularism
Zionism
General
Green
Labor
Kahanism
Maximalism
Neo-Zionism
Religious
Revisionist
Post-Zionism
Category
Portalvte
The history of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel is about the history and religion of the Jews, who originated in the Land of Israel, and have maintained physical, cultural, and religious ties to it ever since. First emerging in the later part of the 2nd millennium BCE as an outgrowth of southern Canaanites,[1][2][3][4] the Hebrew Bible claims that a United Israelite monarchy existed starting in the 10th century BCE. The first appearance of the name "Israel" in the non-Biblical historic record is the Egyptian Merneptah Stele, circa 1200 BCE. During biblical times, two kingdoms occupied the highland zone, the Kingdom of Israel (Samaria) in the north, and the Kingdom of Judah in the south. The Kingdom of Israel was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire (circa 722 BCE), and the Kingdom of Judah by the Neo-Babylonian Empire (586 BCE). Initially exiled to Babylon, upon the defeat of the Neo-Babylonian Empire by the Achaemenid Empire under Cyrus the Great (538 BCE), many of the Jewish exiles returned to Jerusalem, building the Second Temple.
In 332 BCE the kingdom of Macedonia under Alexander the Great conquered the Achaemenid Empire, which included Yehud (Judea). This event started a long religious struggle that split the Jewish population into traditional and Hellenized components.
In 165 BCE, after the religion-driven Maccabean Revolt, the independent Hasmonean Kingdom was established. In 64 BCE, the Roman Republic conquered Judea, turning it into a Roman province. Although coming under the sway of various empires and home to a variety of ethnicities, the area of ancient Israel was predominantly Jewish until the Jewish Roman wars of 66 136 CE. During the wars, the Roman Empire expelled most of the Jews from the area and formed the Roman province of Syria Palaestina, beginning the Jewish diaspora. After this time, Jews became a minority in most regions, except Galilee. The area became increasingly Christianized after the 3rd century, although the percentages of Christians and Jews are unknown, the former perhaps coming to predominate in urban areas, the latter remaining in rural areas.[5] Jewish settlements declined from over 160 to 50 by the time of the Muslim conquest of the Levant. Michael Avi-Yonah says that Jews constituted 10 15% of Palestine's population by the time of the Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem in 614,[6] while Moshe Gil says that Jews constituted the majority of the population until the 7th century Muslim conquest (638 CE).[7]
In 1099, the forces of the First Crusade conquered Jerusalem and nearby coastal areas, forming the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Over the following 200 years, Crusader forces lost and recaptured Jerusalem until their final ouster from Acre in 1291. In 1517, the Ottoman Empire conquered the region, ruling it until the British conquered it in 1917. The region was ruled under the British Mandate for Palestine until 1948, when the Jewish State of Israel was proclaimed in part of the ancient land of Israel. This was made possible by the Zionist movement and its promotion of mass Jewish immigration.
Etymology
Main article: Jew (word)
The term "Jews" originates from the Biblical Hebrew word Yehudi, and in its original meaning refers to the people of the Tribe of Judah or the people of the Kingdom of Judah. The name of both the tribe and kingdom derive from Judah, the fourth son of Jacob.[8] Originally, the Hebrew term Yehudi referred only to members of the tribe of Judah. Later, after the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel (Samaria), the term "Yehudi" was applied to anyone from the Kingdom of Judah, including the tribes of Judah, Benjamin and Levi, as well as scattered settlements from other tribes.[9]
The Land of Israel, which is considered by Jews to be the Promised Land, was the place where Jewish identity was formed,[10][need quotation to verify] although this identity was formed gradually reaching much of its current form in the Exilic and post-Exilic period. By the Hellenistic period (after 332 BCE) the Jews had become a self-consciously separate community based in Jerusalem.
Ancient times
Early Israelites
Main articles: Hebrews and Israelites
 The Merneptah Stele. While alternative translations exist, the majority of biblical archeologists translate a set of hieroglyphs as "Israel", representing the first instance of the name Israel in the historical record.
The Israelites were a confederation of Iron Age Semitic-speaking tribes of the ancient Near East, who inhabited a part of Canaan during the tribal and monarchic periods.[11][12][13][14][15] According to the religious narrative of the Hebrew Bible, the Israelites' origin is traced back to the biblical patriarchs and matriarchs Abraham and his wife Sarah, through their son Isaac and his wife Rebecca, and their son Jacob who was later called Israel, whence they derive their name, with his wives Leah and Rachel and the handmaids Zilpa and Bilhah.
Modern archaeology has largely discarded the historicity of the religious narrative,[16] with it being reframed as constituting an inspiring national myth narrative. The Israelites and their culture, according to the modern archaeological account, did not overtake the region by force, but instead branched out of the indigenous Canaanite peoples that long inhabited the Levant[17][18][19] through the development of a distinct monolatristic later cementing as monotheistic religion centered on Yahweh, one of the Ancient Canaanite deities. The outgrowth of Yahweh-centric belief, along with a number of cultic practices, gradually gave rise to a distinct Israelite ethnic group, setting them apart from other Canaanites.[20][21][4]
The name Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah c. 1209 BC, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is not."[22] This "Israel" was a cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organized state.[23] Ancestors of the Israelites may have included Semites who occupied Canaan and the Sea Peoples.[24] According to modern archaeologists, sometime during Iron Age I a population began to identify itself as 'Israelite', differentiating itself from the Canaanites through such markers as the prohibition of intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and religion.[25] Archaeological evidence indicates the emergence of a new culture in the highlands of central Canaan during Iron Age I. The area, which had been previously sparsely populated, saw a series of new villages established within a span of a few generations, and the inhabitants seem to have been culturally distinct from the Canaanites and Philistines. This is believed to be the origin of the Israelites as a distinct nation.[26]
Extensive archaeological excavations have provided a picture of Israelite society during the early Iron Age period. The archaeological evidence indicates a society of village-like centres, but with more limited resources and a small population. During this period, Israelites lived primarily in small villages, the largest of which had populations of up to 300 or 400.[27][28] Their villages were built on hilltops. Their houses were built in clusters around a common courtyard. They built three or four-room houses out of mudbrick with a stone foundation and sometimes with a second story made of wood. The inhabitants lived by farming and herding. They built terraces to farm on hillsides, planting various crops and maintaining orchards. The villages were largely economically self-sufficient and economic interchange was prevalent. According to the Bible, prior to the rise of the Israelite monarchy the early Israelites were led by the Biblical judges, or chieftains who served as military leaders in times of crisis. Scholars are divided over the historicity of this account. However, it is likely that regional chiefdoms and polities provided security. The small villages were unwalled but were likely subjects of the major town in the area. Writing was known and available for recording, even at small sites.[29][30][31][32][33]
Israel and Judah
Main article: History of ancient Israel and Judah
See also: Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy), Kingdom of Israel (Samaria), and Kingdom of Judah
 The Iron Age kingdom of Israel (blue) and kingdom of Judah (tan), with their neighbours (8th century BCE), based on Biblical accounts
The archaeological record indicates that the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah emerged in the Early Iron Age (Iron Age I, 1200 1000 BCE) from the Canaanite city-state culture of the Late Bronze Age, at the same time and in the same circumstances as the neighbouring states of Edom, Moab, Aram, and the Philistinian and Phoenician city-states.[34] The oldest Hebrew text ever found was discovered at the ancient Israelite settlement, Elah Fortress,[35] which dates to between 1050 and 970 BCE.[36]
The Bible states that David founded a dynasty and that his son Solomon built a Temple. Possible references to the House of David have been found at two sites, the Tel Dan Stele and the Mesha Stele.[37] Yigael Yadin's excavations at Hazor, Megiddo, Beit Shean and Gezer uncovered structures that he and others have argued date from Solomon's reign,[38] but others, such as Israel Finkelstein and Neil Silberman (who agree that Solomon was a historical king), argue that they should be dated to the Omride period, more than a century after Solomon.[39]
By around 930 BCE, the Israelite population had separated into a southern Kingdom of Judah and a northern Kingdom of Israel. By the middle of the 9th century BCE, it is possible that an alliance between Ahab of Israel and Ben Hadad II of Damascus managed to repulse the incursions of the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III, with a victory at the Battle of Qarqar (854 BCE).[40] The Tel Dan stele tells of the death of a king of Israel, probably Jehoram, at the hands of an Aramean king (c. 841).[41]
Archaeological records indicate that the Kingdom of Israel was fairly prosperous. The late Iron Age saw an increase in urban development in Israel. Whereas previously the Israelites had lived mainly in small and unfortified settlements, the rise of the Kingdom of Israel saw the growth of cities and the construction of palaces, large royal enclosures, and fortifications with walls and gates. Israel initially had to invest significant resources into defense as it was subjected to regular Aramean incursions and attacks, but after the Arameans were subjugated by the Assyrians and Israel could afford to put less resources into defending its territory, its architectural infrastructure grew dramatically. Extensive fortifications were built around cities such as Dan, Megiddo, and Hazor, including monumental and multi-towered city walls and multi-gate entry systems. Israel's economy was based on multiple industries. It had the largest olive oil production centers in the region, using at least two different types of olive oil presses, and also had a significant wine industry, with wine presses constructed next to vineyards.[42] By contrast, the Kingdom of Judah was significantly less advanced. Some scholars believe it was no more than a small tribal entity limited to Jerusalem and its immediate surroundings.[43] In the 10th and early 9th centuries BCE, the territory of Judah appears to have been sparsely populated, limited to small and mostly unfortified settlements.[44] The status of Jerusalem in the 10th century BCE is a major subject of debate among scholars. Jerusalem does not show evidence of significant Israelite residential activity until the 9th century BCE.[45] On the other hand, significant administrative structures such as the Stepped Stone Structure and Large Stone Structure, which originally formed part of one structure, contain material culture from earlier than that. The ruins of a significant Juhadite military fortress, Tel Arad, have also been found in the Negev, and a collection of military orders found there suggest literacy was present throughout the ranks of the Juhadite army. This suggests that literacy was not limited to a tiny priestly caste, indicating the presence of a substantial educational infrastructure in Judah.[46]
From the middle of the 8th century BCE Israel came into increasing conflict with the expanding neo-Assyrian empire. Under Tiglath-Pileser III it first split Israel's territory into several smaller units and then destroyed its capital, Samaria (722 BCE). Both the biblical and Assyrian sources speak of a massive deportation of the people of Israel and their replacement with an equally large number of forced settlers from other parts of the empire   such population exchanges were an established part of Assyrian imperial policy, a means of breaking the old power structure - and the former Israel never again became an independent political entity.[47] This deportation gave rise to the notion of the Lost Tribes of Israel. The Samaritan people claim to be descended from survivors of the Assyrian conquest.
The recovered seal of the Ahaz, king of Judah, (c. 732 716 BCE) identifies him as King of Judah.[48] The Assyrian king Sennacherib, tried and failed to conquer Judah. Assyrian records say he leveled 46 walled cities and besieged Jerusalem, leaving after receiving tribute.[49] During the reign of Hezekiah (c. 716 687 BCE) a notable increase in the power of the Judean state is reflected by archaeological sites and findings such as the Broad Wall and the Siloam tunnel in Jerusalem.[50]
Judah prospered in the 7th century BCE, probably in a cooperative arrangement with the Assyrians to establish Judah as an Assyrian vassal (despite a disastrous rebellion against the Assyrian king Sennacherib). However, in the last half of the 7th century Assyria suddenly collapsed, and the ensuing competition between the Egyptian and Neo-Babylonian empires for control of Palestine led to the destruction of Judah in a series of campaigns between 597 and 582.[51]
According to Professor Meir Bar-Ilan, on the eve of the end of the First Temple period and the Persian conquest, the population of the land was approximately 350,000, of whom 150,000 lived in Judea and 200,000 in the Galilee and Transjordan.[52]
Exile under Babylon (586 538 BCE)
Main articles: Babylonian exile and Yehud (Babylonian province)
 An artist's depiction of the deportation and exile of the Jews of the ancient Kingdom of Judah to Babylon and the destruction of Jerusalem and Solomon's temple
The Assyrian Empire was overthrown in 612 BCE by the Medes and the Neo-Babylonian Empire. In 586 BCE King Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon conquered Judah. According to the Hebrew Bible, he destroyed Solomon's Temple and exiled the Judean elites to Babylon. The defeat was also recorded by the Babylonians in the Babylonian Chronicles.[53][54] The exile of Judean elites may have been restricted to the priests and ruling class.
 One of the 21 LMLK seals found near the ancient city of Lachish, which has an inscription written in Paleo-Hebrew alphabet and is dated from the reign of Hezekiah
Babylonian Judah suffered a steep decline in both economy and population[55] and lost the Negev, the Shephelah, and part of the Judean hill country, including Hebron, to encroachments from Edom and other neighbours.[56] Jerusalem, while probably not totally abandoned, was much smaller than previously, and the town of Mizpah in Benjamin in the relatively unscathed northern section of the kingdom became the capital of the new Babylonian province of Yehud Medinata.[57] (This was standard Babylonian practice: when the Philistine city of Ashkalon was conquered in 604, the political, religious and economic ruling class (but not the bulk of the population) was banished and the administrative centre shifted to a new location).[58] There is also a strong probability that for most or all of the period the temple at Bethel in Benjamin replaced that at Jerusalem, boosting the prestige of Bethel's priests (the Aaronites) against those of Jerusalem (the Zadokites), now in exile in Babylon.[59]
The Babylonian conquest entailed not just the destruction of Jerusalem and its First Temple, but the ruination of the entire infrastructure which had sustained Judah for centuries.[60] The most significant casualty was the state ideology of "Zion theology,"[61] the idea that Yahweh, the god of Israel, had chosen Jerusalem for his dwelling-place and that the Davidic dynasty would reign there forever.[62] The fall of the city and the end of Davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile community   kings, priests, scribes and prophets   to reformulate the concepts of community, faith and politics.[63]
The exile community in Babylon thus became the source of significant portions of the Hebrew Bible: Isaiah 40 55, Ezekiel, the final version of Jeremiah, the work of the Priestly source in the Pentateuch, and the final form of the history of Israel from Deuteronomy to 2 Kings.[64] Theologically, they were responsible for the doctrines of individual responsibility and universalism (the concept that one god controls the entire world), and for the increased emphasis on purity and holiness.[64] Most significantly, the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a strong sense of identity as a people distinct from other peoples,[65] and increased emphasis on symbols such as circumcision and Sabbath-observance to maintain that separation.[66]
Second Temple period (538 BCE   70 CE)
Main article: Second Temple period
Persian rule (538 332 BCE)
Main article: Yehud (Persian province)
In 538 BCE, Cyrus the Great of the Achaemenid Empire conquered Babylon and took over its empire. Yehud remained a province of the Achaemenid empire until 332 BCE. According to the Bible, Cyrus issued a proclamation granting subjugated nations their freedom, and 50,000 Judeans, led by Zerubabel, returned to Judah to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem.[67] The Second Temple was subsequently built in Jerusalem, and is said to have been completed c. 515.[68] A second group of 5,000, led by Ezra and Nehemiah, returned to Judah in 456 BCE. Yet it was probably only in the middle of the next century, at the earliest, that Jerusalem again became the capital of Judah.[69] The completion of the Temple ushered in the Second Temple period of Jewish history, which was to last approximately 600 years until the Temple's destruction by the Romans in 70 CE. This era saw a dramatic increase in the population of the land over the centuries. Archaeological evidence testifies to the increase of the population, with evidence that existing cities were expanded and many new cities were founded. The construction of new aqueducts and the introduction of new crops also increased the productivity of the land.[52]
The Persians may have experimented initially with ruling Judah as a Davidic client-kingdom under descendants of Jehoiachin,[70] but by the mid 5th century BCE Judah had become in practice a theocracy, ruled by hereditary High Priests[71] and a Persian-appointed governor, frequently Jewish, charged with keeping order and seeing that tribute was paid.[72] According to the Bible, Ezra and Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem in the middle of the 5th century BCE, the first empowered by the Persian king to enforce the Torah, the second with the status of governor and a royal mission to restore the walls of the city.[73] The Bible mentions tension between the returnees and those who had remained in Judah, the former rebuffing the attempt of the "peoples of the land" to participate in the rebuilding of the Temple; this attitude was based partly on the exclusivism which the exiles had developed while in Babylon and, probably, partly on disputes over property.[74] The careers of Ezra and Nehemiah in the 5th century BCE were thus a kind of religious colonisation in reverse, an attempt by one of the many Jewish factions in Babylon to create a self-segregated, ritually pure society inspired by the prophesies of Ezekiel and his followers.[75]
Hellenistic and Hasmonean era (332 64 BCE)
Main articles: Hellenistic Judaism, Maccabean Revolt, and Hasmonean dynasty
 The Hasmonean kingdom at its greatest extent.
In 332 BCE the Achaemenid Empire was defeated by Alexander the Great. After his death in 322 BCE, his generals divided the empire between them and Judea became the frontier between the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Egypt, but in 198 Judea was incorporated into the Seleucid Empire.
At first, relations between the Seleucids and the Jews were cordial, but later on as the relations between the hellenized Jews and the religious Jews deteriorated, the Seleucid king Antiochus IV Epiphanes (174 163) attempted to impose decrees banning certain Jewish religious rites and traditions.[clarification needed] Consequently, this sparked a national rebellion led by Judas Maccabeus. The Maccabean Revolt (174 135 BCE), whose victory is celebrated in the Jewish festival of Hanukkah, is told in the deuterocanonical Books of the Maccabees. A Jewish group called the Hasideans opposed both Seleucid Hellenism and the revolt, but eventually gave their support to the Maccabees. The Jews prevailed with the expulsion of the Seleucids and the establishment of an independent Jewish kingdom under the Hasmonean dynasty.
The Maccabean Revolt led to a twenty-five-year period of Jewish independence due to the steady collapse of the Seleucid Empire under attacks from the rising powers of the Roman Republic and the Parthian Empire. The Hasmonean dynasty of priest-kings ruled Judea with the Pharisees, Saducees and Essenes as the principal social movements. As part of their struggle against Hellenistic civilization, the Pharisees established what may have been the world's first national male (religious) education and literacy program, based around synagogues.[76] Justice was administered by the Sanhedrin, whose leader was known as the Nasi. The Nasi's religious authority gradually superseded that of the Temple's high priest (under the Hasmoneans this was the king). In 125 BCE the Hasmonean King John Hyrcanus subjugated Edom and forcibly converted the population to Judaism.[77]
The same power vacuum that enabled the Jewish state to be recognized by the Roman Senate c. 139 BCE after the demise of the Seleucid Empire was next exploited by the Romans themselves. Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II, Simon's great-grandsons, became pawns in a proxy war between Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great that ended with the kingdom under the supervision of the Roman governor of Syria (64 BCE).
Early Roman period (64 BCE   70 CE)
See also: Herodian dynasty, Judaea (Roman province), and Jewish Roman wars
1st-century BCE   2nd-century CE
64 BCE
Rome conquers Judea andJerusalem
40 37
Antigonus the Hasmoneanrules as King of Judea
37
Herod the Great made rulerof Judea
19
Herod's Temple completed
4 BCE
Tetrarchy of Judea formed
6 CE
Iudaea province formed
20
Tiberias founded
66 73
First Jewish Roman War
67
Gamla and Jotapata fall
70
Second Temple destroyed,Council of Jamnia founded
73
Masada falls
115 117
Kitos War
130
Temple of Jupiter built uponTemple Mount
132
Judea merged into Syria Palaestina
132 136
Bar-Kochba revolt, Ten Martyrsexecuted
c. 200
Mishnah completed
In 63 BCE the Roman general Pompey sacked Jerusalem and made the Jewish kingdom a client of Rome. The situation was not to last, as the deaths of Pompey in 48 BCE and Caesar in 44 BCE, together with the related Roman civil wars, relaxed Rome's grip on Judea. This resulted in the Parthian Empire and their Jewish ally Antigonus the Hasmonean defeating the pro-Roman Jewish forces (high priest Hyrcanus II, Phasael and Herod the Great) in 40 BCE. They invaded the Roman eastern provinces and managed to expel the Romans. Antigonus was made King of Judea. Herod fled to Rome, where he was elected "King of the Jews" by the Roman Senate and was given the task of retaking Judea. In 37 BCE, with Roman support, Herod reclaimed Judea, and the short-lived reemergence of the Hasmonean dynasty came to an end. From 37 BCE to 6 CE, the Herodian dynasty, Jewish-Roman client kings, ruled Judea. In 20 BCE, Herod began a refurbishment and expansion of the Second Temple in Jerusalem. His son, Herod Antipas, founded the Jewish city of Tiberias in the Galilee.
 Model of Herod's Temple, (Israel Museum)
Judea under Roman rule was at first a client kingdom, but gradually the rule over Judea became less and less Jewish, until it became under the direct rule of Roman administration from Caesarea Maritima, which was often callous and brutal in its treatment of its Judean, Galilean, and Samaritan subjects. In this period Rabbinical Judaism, led by Hillel the Elder, began to assume popular prominence over the Temple priesthood.
Throughout this period, the Jewish population continued to increase. The final two centuries before the destruction of the Second Temple saw a massive wave of urbanization; as the villages and towns reached capacity, many people migrated to urban areas. More than 30 towns and cities of different sizes were founded, rebuilt, or enlarged in a relatively short period. A third wall was erected around Jerusalem to encompass the thousands of people living outside the old walls. Though this was not limited to the Jewish population, with the new towns not being Jewish-only and some having no Jews, this points to a high level of growth among the Jewish population. The Jewish population of the land on the eve of the first major Jewish rebellion may have been as high as 2.2 million. The monumental architecture of this period indicates a high level of prosperity.[52]
In 66 CE, the Jews of Judea rose in revolt against Rome, sparking the First Jewish Roman War. The reverse seized control of Judea and named their new kingdom "Israel"[78] (see also First Jewish Revolt coinage). The events were described by the Jewish historian Josephus, including the desperate defence of Jotapata, the siege of Jerusalem (69 70 CE), the heroic last stand at Gamla, where 9,000 died, and Masada (72 73 CE) where the Jewish defenders killed themselves rather than fall into the hand of their Roman enemy.
The revolt was crushed by the Roman emperors Vespasian and Titus. The Romans destroyed much of the Temple in Jerusalem and took as punitive tribute the Menorah and other Temple artefacts back to Rome. Josephus writes that 1,100,000 Jews perished during the revolt, while a further 97,000 were taken captive. The Fiscus Judaicus was instituted by the Empire as part of reparations.
It was during this period that the split of early Christianity and Judaism occurred. The Pharisee movement, led by Yochanan ben Zakai, made peace with Rome and survived. Judeans continued to live in their land in significant numbers, and were allowed to practice their religion. An estimated 2/3 of the population in the Galilee and 1/3 of the coastal region were Jewish.[79]
Talmudic period (70   636 CE)
Late Roman period (70 324)
See also: Jewish Roman wars and History of the Jews in the Roman EmpireThe 2nd century saw two further Jewish revolts against the Roman rule. The Kitos War (115 117) saw Jewish diaspora communities in North Africa, Cyprus, and Mesopotamia rise against Rome. After being defeated, the rebels fled to Judea, where they gathered at Lydda. The Romans pursued them, capturing Lydda and executing many of the rebel Jews. In the aftermath of the war, Jewish diaspora communities involved in the revolt were expelled to the eastern edges of the Roman Empire, and mainly settled in Judea. This was followed by the more fierce Bar-Kochba revolt (132 136) led by Simon Bar Kokhba. The Jewish rebels again regained temporary independence in Judea. An independent Jewish state existed in Judea for over two years. However, Julius Severus and Emperor Hadrian ultimately crushed the rebellion, and Judea was ravaged. According to Cassius Dio, 580,000 Jews were killed, and 50 fortified towns and 985 villages were razed.[80][81]
The Roman suppression of the two major revolts in Judea led to the growth of the Jewish diaspora at the expense of Judea's population. Many Jews taken captive by the Romans were deported from Judea and sold into slavery. Josephus wrote that 97,000 Jews were sold into slavery following the First Jewish-Roman War and 30,000 were deported from Judea to Carthage. Many Jews also fled Judea to other areas in the Mediterranean region. Jews were again deported from Judea and sold into slavery after the Bar-Kokhba revolt. Jews taken as slaves by the Romans and their children were eventually manumitted and joined established Jewish diaspora communities. Many other Jews migrated voluntarily from Judea in the aftermath of the Bar-Kokhba revolt.[82][83][84]
In 131, Emperor Hadrian renamed Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina and constructed the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the site of the former Jewish temple. Jews were banned from Jerusalem and Roman Judaea was renamed Syria Palaestina, from which derived "Palestine" in English and "Filistin" in Arabic.[85][need quotation to verify]
 The sack of Jerusalem depicted on the Arch of Titus, Rome
After suppressing the Bar Kochba revolt, the Romans permitted a hereditary rabbinical patriarch from the House of Hillel to represent the Jews in dealings with the Romans. The most famous of these was Judah the Prince. Jewish seminaries continued to produce scholars, of whom the most astute became members of the Sanhedrin.[86] The main Jewish population center was now the Galilee, and there were also significant Jewish communities in Beit She'an, Caesarea, the Golan Heights, and along the edges of Judea.[87] In this era, according to a popular theory, the Council of Jamnia developed the Jewish Bible canon which decided which books of the Hebrew Bible were to be included, the Jewish apocrypha being left out.[88] It was also the time when the tannaim and amoraim were active in debating and recording the Jewish Oral Law. Their discussions and religious instructions were compiled in the form of the Mishnah by Judah the Prince around 200 CE. Various other compilations, including the Beraita and Tosefta, also come from this period. These texts were the foundation of the Jerusalem Talmud, which was redacted in around 400 CE,[citation needed] probably in Tiberias.
During the Crisis of the Third Century, economic disruption and high taxation due to civil wars in the Roman Empire caused many Jews to migrate from the Land of Israel to Babylon under the more tolerant Persian Sassanid Empire, where an autonomous Jewish community existed in the area of Babylon. They were lured by the promise of economic prosperity and the ability to lead a full Jewish life there. During this time, the Land of Israel and Babylon were both great centers of Jewish scholarship. However, sages in the Land of Israel came to fear that the centrality of the land to Judaism would be lost. Many refused to consider Babylonian scholars their equals and would not ordain Babylonian students in their academies, fearing they would return to Babylon as rabbis. The large scale of Jewish emigration to Babylon adversely affected the academies of the Land of Israel, and by the end of the 3rd century they were increasingly reliant on donations from Babylon.[89]
Byzantine period (324 638)
Main article: History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire
Byzantine period
351 352 
Jewish revolt against Gallus,
Jewish communities and academiesin disarray
358
Hillel II institutes Hebrew calendar
361 363
Rebuilding of Temple attemptedunder Julian
425
Gamliel VI, last Prince of the Sanhedrin, dies
429
Jewish Patriarchate abolished byTheodosius II
438
Eudocia allows Jewish prayeron Temple Mount
450
Redaction of Jerusalem Talmud
614 617
Jews gain autonomy in Jerusalemunder Persian rule
625
Liturgical poet Yanai flourishes
 Eshtemoa synagogue menorah, carved during the 3rd or 4th century.
 The ancient synagogue at Nabratein was destroyed in the Galilee earthquake of 363
 Umm el-Kanatir, "Mother of the Arches" synagogue, Golan Heights, dated to the 6th-8th century
Early in the 4th century, Roman Empire split and Constantinople became the capital of the East Roman Empire known as the Byzantine Empire. Under the Byzantines, Christianity, dominated by the (Greek) Eastern Orthodox Church, was adopted as the official religion. Jerusalem became a Christian city and Jews were still banned from living there.
In 351 2, there was another Jewish revolt against a corrupt Roman governor.[90] The Jewish population in Sepphoris rebelled under the leadership of Patricius against the rule of Constantius Gallus. The revolt was eventually subdued by Ursicinus.
According to tradition, in 359 CE Hillel II created the Hebrew calendar based on the lunar year. Until then, The entire Jewish community outside the land of Israel depended on the calendar sanctioned by the Sanhedrin; this was necessary for the proper observance of the Jewish holy days. However, danger threatened the participants in that sanction and the messengers who communicated their decisions to distant congregations. As the religious persecutions continued, Hillel determined to provide an authorized calendar for all time to come.
During his short reign, Emperor Julian (361 363) abolished the special taxes paid by the Jews to the Roman government and also sought to ease the burden of mandatory Jewish financial support of the Jewish patriarchate.[91] He also gave permission for the Jews to rebuild and populate Jerusalem.[92] In one of his most remarkable endeavours, he initiated the restoration of the Jewish Temple which had been demolished in 70 CE. A contingent of thousands of Jews from Persian districts hoping to assist in the construction effort were killed en route by Persian soldiers.[93] The great earthquake together with Julian's death put an end to Jewish hopes of rebuilding the Third Temple.[94] Had the attempt been successful, it is likely that the re-establishment of the Jewish state with its sacrifices, priests and Sanhedrin or Senate would have occurred.[91]
Jews probably constituted the majority of the population of Palestine until some time after Constantine converted to Christianity in the 4th century.[95]
Jews lived in at least forty-three Jewish communities in Palestine: twelve towns on the coast, in the Negev, and east of the Jordan, and thirty-one villages in Galilee and in the Jordan valley. The persecuted Jews of Palestine revolted twice against their Christian rulers. In the 5th century, the Western Roman Empire collapsed leading to Christian migration into Palestine and development of a Christian majority. Jews numbered 10 15% of the population. Judaism was the only non-Christian religion tolerated, but there were bans on Jews building new places of worship, holding public office or owning slaves. There were also two Samaritan revolts during this period.[96] While a vibrant Jewish center had continued to exist in the Galilee following the Jewish-Roman wars, its importance declined with increased persecutions. In 425 CE, after continued persecution by the Eastern Roman Empire, the Sanhedrin was disbanded on the order of Theodosius II.[97]
In 438, The Empress Eudocia removed the ban on Jews' praying at the Temple site and the heads of the Community in Galilee issued a call "to the great and mighty people of the Jews": "Know that the end of the exile of our people has come"!
In about 450, the Jerusalem Talmud was completed.[citation needed]
According to Procopius, in 533 Byzantine general Belisarius took the treasures of the Jewish temple from Vandals who had taken them from Rome.
In 611, Sassanid Persia invaded the Byzantine Empire. In 613, a Jewish revolt against the Byzantine Empire led by Nehemiah ben Hushiel and Benjamin of Tiberias broke out. Jewish soldiers from Tiberias, Nazareth, and other Galilee settlements joined forces with these Persian invaders to capture Jerusalem in 614. The great majority of Christians in Jerusalem were subsequently deported to Persia.[98] The Jews gained autonomy in Jerusalem, with Hushiel appointed ruler of the city. The capture of Jerusalem was interpreted by Jewish writers in a messianic context. Hushiel began making arrangements for the construction of the Third Temple and sorting out genealogies to establish a new High Priesthood.[99][100][101][102] Jewish bands from Jerusalem, Tiberias, and the Galilee, joined by Jews from the diaspora communities of Damascus and Cyprus, also launched an expedition against Tyre after that city's Jewish community invited the rebels, but the expedition ultimately failed.[103] Although the Jews had hoped that the Persians would grant them the entire Land of Israel, they were too few in number. Jewish dominance in Jerusalem lasted until 617, when the Persians reneged on their alliance with the Jews. Further Jewish settlement in and around Jerusalem was prohibited, a synagogue on the Temple Mount was demolished, and heavy taxes were imposed on the Jews.[104][105] With return of the Byzantines in 628, the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius promised to restore Jewish rights and received Jewish help in ousting the Persians with the aid of Benjamin of Tiberias. Heraclius later reneged on the agreement after reconquering Palestine. A general massacre of the Jewish population ensued, devastating the Jewish communities of Jerusalem and the Galilee.[106] Many Jewish refugees from Palestine fled to Egypt, and of the Jews who remained in Palestine, only those who took refuge in the mountains and deserts are said to have been spared.[107] Jews were also banned from Jerusalem and prohibited from settling within a three-mile radius of the city. Egyptian Coptic Christians took responsibility for this broken pledge and still fast in penance.[108]
Middle Ages (638 1517)
 The ruins of the synagogue at Kfar Bar'am, an ancient Jewish village abandoned by its Jewish inhabitants sometime between the 7th and 13th centuries.
Under Islamic rule (638 1099)
Main articles: History of the Jews under Muslim rule and Dhimmi
Islamic period
638
Umar allows Jews backinto Jerusalem
691 705
Islamization of the Temple Mount
720
Jews permanently excludedfrom ascending Temple Mount
c. 750
Palestinian Gaonate based inTiberias
c. 850
Seat of the Gaonatetransferred to Jerusalem
875
Mourners of Zion reside inJerusalem 
921
Controversy erupts regardingcalendrical calculations ofAaron ben Me r
960
Masorete Aaron ben Asherdies in Tiberias
1071
Gaonate exiled to Tyre
In 638 CE, the Byzantine Empire lost the Levant to the Arab Islamic Empire. According to Moshe Gil, at the time of the Arab conquest in the 7th century, the majority of the population was Jewish or Samaritan.[7] According to one estimate, the Jews of Palestine numbered between 300,000 and 400,000 at the time.[109] This is contrary to other estimates which place the Jewish population at the time of the revolt against Heraclius as between 150,000 and 200,000.[110][111] After the conquest, Arabs gradually became the majority population of the land, with Arab culture, language, and the religion of Islam dominating.[112] The Muslims continued to ban the building of new synagogues.[113] Until the Crusades took Palestine in 1099, various Muslim dynasties controlled Palestine. It was first ruled by the Medinah-based Rashidun Caliphs, then by the Damascus-based Umayyad Caliphate and after by the Baghdad-based Abbasid Caliphs. In the early Middle Ages, the Jewish communities of Palestine were dispersed among the key cities of the military districts of Jund Filastin and Jund al-Urdunn, with a number of poor Jewish villages existing in the Galilee and Judea.
In succeeding centuries a common view is that Christians and Muslims were equally divided. The conversion of the Christians to Islam -Gil maintaining they were a majority- is generally thought to have occurred on a large scale only after the Crusades, in the wake of Saladin's conquest, and as a result of disaffection for the Latins.[114][115]
Historical sources mentions the settlement of Arab tribes and the establishment of new settlements in the 7th century, although little archaeological records have been preserved.[116] However some Arabian settlements like Khirbet Suwwwana, located on outskirts of Jerusalem provides archaeological records of Islamic nomadic settlement and sedentarization among local population. The establishment of new Arab settlements during 7th and 8th century was relatively rare. The religious transformation of the land is evident with large congregation style mosques built in cities like Tiberias, Jarash, Beth Shean, Jerusalem and possibly Cesarea. However the establishment of these mosques point to the influx of Muslim newcomers, rather than to conversion of Jews and Christians to Islam.[117] The settlement map of the land changed dramatically between 6th and 11th century. The sixth century map revealed an urban and rural society at its height, while the 11th century map shows a society that was economically and physically stagnant veering toward total collapse.[118]
After the conquest, Jewish communities began to grow and flourish. Umar allowed and encouraged Jews to settle in Jerusalem. It was first time, after almost 500 years of oppressive Christian rule, that Jews were allowed to enter and worship freely in their holy city.[119] Seventy Jewish families from Tiberias moved to Jerusalem in order to help strengthen the Jewish community there.[120] But with the construction of the Dome of the Rock in 691 and the Al-Aqsa Mosque in 705, the Muslims established the Temple Mount as an Islamic holy site. The dome enshrined the Foundation Stone, the holiest site for Jews. Before Omar Abd al-Aziz died in 720, he banned the Jews from worshipping on the Temple Mount,[121] a policy which remained in place for over the next 1,000 years of Islamic rule.[122] In 717, new restrictions were imposed against non-Muslims that affected the Jews' status. As a result of the imposition of heavy taxes on agricultural land, many Jews were forced to migrate from rural areas to towns. Social and economic discrimination caused substantial Jewish emigration from Palestine. In addition, Muslim civil wars in the 8th and 9th centuries drove many non-Muslims out of the country, with no evidence of mass conversions except among Samaritans. By the end of the 11th century, the Jewish population of Palestine had declined substantially and lost some of its organizational and religious cohesiveness.[123][124]
In around 875, Karaite leader Daniel al-Kumisi arrived in Jerusalem and established an ascetic community of Mourners of Zion.[125] Michael the Syrian notes thirty synagogues which were destroyed in Tiberias by the earthquake of 749.[126]
In the mid-8th-century, taking advantage of the warring Islamic factions in Palestine, a Persian Jewish false messiah from Isfahan named Abu Isa Obadiah inspired and organised a group of 10,000 armed Jews who hoped to restore the Holy Land to the Jewish nation. Soon after, when Al-Mansur came to power, Abu Isa joined forces with a Persian chieftain who was also conducting a rebellion against the caliph. The rebellion was subdued by the caliph and Abu Isa fell in battle in 755.[127]
From at least the middle of the ninth century, possibly earlier, to the 11th century, the Palestinian Gaonate served as the chief Talmudic academy and central legalistic body of the Jewish community in Palestine. The Gaonate moved from Tiberias to Jerusalem in the mid-ninth century. It competed with the Babylonian Gaonate for the support of diaspora communities.[128][129] In 1071, after Jerusalem was conquered by the Seljuq Turks, the Gaonate was expelled from Jerusalem and relocated to Tyre.
In 1039, part of the synagogue in Ramla was still in ruins, probably resulting from the earthquake of 1033.[130] Jews also returned to Rafah and documents from 1015 and 1080 attest to a significant community there.[131]
A large Jewish community existed in Ramle and smaller communities inhabited Hebron and the coastal cities of Acre, Caesarea, Jaffa, Ashkelon and Gaza.[citation needed] Al-Muqaddasi (985) wrote that "for the most part the assayers of corn, dyers, bankers, and tanners are Jews."[132] Under the Islamic rule, the rights of Jews and Christians were curtailed and residence was permitted upon payment of the special tax.
Between the 7th and 11th centuries, Masoretes (Jewish scribes) in the Galilee and Jerusalem were active in compiling a system of pronunciation and grammatical guides of the Hebrew language. They authorised the division of the Jewish Tanakh, known as the Masoretic Text, which is regarded as authoritative till today.[133]
Under Crusader rule (1099 1291)
Main article: History of the Jews and the Crusades
 Capture of Jerusalem, 1099
According to Gilbert, from 1099 to 1291 the Christian Crusaders "mercilessly persecuted and slaughtered the Jews of Palestine."[134]
In the crusading era, there were significant Jewish communities in several cities and Jews are known to have fought alongside Arabs against the Christian invaders.[135] During the First Crusade, Jews were among the rest of the population who tried in vain to defend Jerusalem against the Crusaders during the Siege of Jerusalem. When Jerusalem fell, a massacre of Jews occurred when the synagogue they were seeking refuge in was set alight. Almost all perished.[136] In Haifa, the Jewish inhabitants fought side by side with the Fatimid garrison in defending the city, and held out for a whole month, (June July 1099).[137]
Under Crusader rule, Jews were not allowed to hold land and involved themselves in commerce in the coastal towns during times of quiescence. Most of them were artisans: glassblowers in Sidon, furriers and dyers in Jerusalem.[citation needed] At this time there were Jewish communities scattered all over the country, including Jerusalem, Tiberias, Ramleh, Ashkelon, Caesarea, and Gaza. In line with trail of bloodshed the Crusaders left in Europe on their way to conquer the Holy Land, in Palestine, both Muslims and Jews were indiscriminately massacred or sold into slavery.[138] The Jewish community in Jerusalem was destroyed and would not be reconstituted for years, as most Jewish residents of the city were killed and the survivors were sold into slavery, some of whom were later redeemed by Jewish communities in Italy and Egypt. The redeemed slaves were subsequently brought to Egypt. Some Jewish prisoners of war were also deported by the Crusaders to Apulia in southern Italy. The Jewish communities of Jaffa and Ramleh were dispersed. However, Jewish communities in the Galilee were left unscathed.[139][140][141]
Jewish communities in Palestine were apparently left undisturbed during the Second Crusade. Benjamin of Tudela and Pethahiah of Regensburg, who visited Palestine around 1160 and 1180 respectively, found well-established Jewish communities in Ashkelon, Ramleh, Caesarea, Tiberias, and Acre, with communities in other localities and scattered individual Jews living elsewhere. However, they found only a handful of Jews in Jerusalem.[139]
A large volume of piyutim and midrashim originated in Palestine at this time.[citation needed] In 1165 Maimonides visited Jerusalem and prayed on the Temple Mount, in the "great, holy house".[142] In 1141 Spanish poet, Yehuda Halevi, issued a call to the Jews to emigrate to the Land of Israel, a journey he undertook himself.
Decline and gradual revival with increased immigration (1211 1517)
See also: Pre-Modern Aliyah
12th to 14th century
1191
Jews of Ascalon arrive in Jerusalem
1198
Maghreb Jews arrive in Jerusalem
1204
Maimonides buried in Tiberias
1209 1211
Immigration of 300 French andEnglish rabbis
1217
Judah al-Harizi bemoans stateof the Temple Mount
1260
Yechiel of Paris establishestalmudical academy in Acre
1266
Jews banned from entering theCave of the Patriarchs in Hebron
1267
Nachmanides arrives in Jerusalem,Ramban synagogue established
1286
Meir of Rothenburg incarceratedafter attempting to emigrateto Mamluk Palestine
1355
Physician and geographerIshtori Haparchi dies in Bet She'an
15th century
1428
Jews attempt to purchase Tombof David, Pope prevents shipscarrying Jews to Mamluk Palestine
1434
Elijah of Ferrara settles in Jerusalem
1441
Famine forces Jerusalem Jews tosend emissary to Europe
1455
Failed large scale immigrationattempt from Sicily
1474
Great Synagogue of Jerusalemdemolished by Arab mob
1488
Obadiah ben Abraham beginsrevival of Jerusalem
1507
Joseph Saragossi dies inSafed
The Crusader rule over Palestine had taken its toll on the Jews. Relief came in 1187 when Ayyubid Sultan Saladin defeated the Crusaders in the Battle of Hattin, taking Jerusalem and most of Palestine. (A Crusader state centered around Acre survived in weakened form for another century.) In time, Saladin issued a proclamation inviting all Jews to return and settle in Jerusalem,[143] and according to Judah al-Harizi, they did: "From the day the Arabs took Jerusalem, the Israelites inhabited it."[144] al-Harizi compared Saladin's decree allowing Jews to re-establish themselves in Jerusalem to the one issued by the Persian Cyrus the Great over 1,600 years earlier.[145]
 Synagogue of Nachmanides, Casale Pilgrim (16th-century)
In 1211, the Jewish community in the country was strengthened by the arrival of a group headed by over 300 rabbis from France and England,[146] among them Rabbi Samson ben Abraham of Sens.[147] The motivation of European Jews to emigrate to the Holyland in the 13th-century possibly lay in persecution,[148] economic hardship, messianic expectations or the desire to fulfill the commandments specific to the land of Israel.[149] In 1217, Spanish pilgrim Judah al-Harizi found the sight of the non-Jewish structures on the Temple Mount profoundly disturbing: "What torment to see our holy courts converted into an alien temple!" he wrote.[150] During his visit, al-Harizi found a prosperous Jewish community living in the city.[139] From 1219 to 1220, most of Jerusalem was destroyed on the orders of Al-Mu'azzam Isa, who wanted to remove all Crusader fortifications in the Levant, and as a result, the Jewish community, along with the majority of the rest of the population, left the city.
Nachmanides, the 13th-century Spanish rabbi and recognised leader of Jewry greatly praised the land of Israel and viewed its settlement as a positive commandment incumbent on all Jews. He wrote, "If the gentiles wish to make peace, we shall make peace and leave them on clear terms; but as for the land, we shall not leave it in their hands, nor in the hands of any nation, not in any generation."[151] In 1267 he arrived in Jerusalem and found only two Jewish inhabitants   brothers, dyers by trade. Wishing to re-establish a strong Jewish presence in the holy city, he brought a Torah scroll from Nablus and founded a synagogue. Nahmanides later settled at Acre, where he headed a yeshiva together with Yechiel of Paris who had emigrated to Acre in 1260, along with his son and a large group of followers.[152][153] Upon arrival, he had established the Beth Midrash ha-Gadol d'Paris Talmudic academy where one of the greatest Karaite authorities, Aaron ben Joseph the Elder, was said to have attended.[154] Title page of Ishtori Haparchi's Kaftor Vaferech, Venice 1549. In the first Hebrew book printed on the geography of Palestine, 180 locations mentioned in the Bible and Talmudic literature are identified.
In 1260, control passed to the Egyptian Mamluks and until 1291 Palestine became the frontier between Mongol invaders (occasional Crusader allies). The conflict impoverished the country and severely reduced the population. Sultan Qutuz of Egypt eventually defeated the Mongols in the Battle of Ain Jalut (near Ein Harod) and his successor (and assassin), Baibars, eliminated the last Crusader Kingdom of Acre in 1291, thereby ending the Crusader presence. Mamluk rule was to last until the Ottoman Empire conquered Palestine in 1517.
The era of Mamluk rule saw the Jewish population shrink substantially due to oppression and economic stagnation. The Mamluks razed Palestine's coastal cities, which had traditionally been trading centers that energized the economy, as they had also served as entry points for the Crusaders and the Mamluks wished to prevent any further Christian conquests. Mamluk misrule resulted in severe social and economic decline, and as the economy shrank, so did tax revenues, leading the Mamluks to raise taxes, with non-Muslims being taxed especially heavily. They also stringently enforced the dhimmi laws and added new oppressive and humiliating rules on top of the traditional dhimmi laws. Palestine's population decreased by two-thirds as people left the country and the Jewish and Christian communities declined especially heavily. Muslims became an increasingly larger percentage of the shrinking population. Although the Jewish population declined greatly during Mamluk rule, this period also saw repeated waves of Jewish immigration from Europe, North Africa, and Syria. These immigration waves possibly saved the collapsing Jewish community of Palestine from disappearing altogether.[155]
In 1266 the Mamluk Sultan Baybars converted the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron into an exclusive Islamic sanctuary and banned Christians and Jews from entering. They previously were able to enter it for a fee. The ban remained in place until Israel took control of the building in 1967.[156][157] In 1286, leader of German Jewry Meir of Rothenburg, was imprisoned by Rudolf I for attempting to lead a large group of Jews hoping to settle in Palestine.[158] Exiled from France in 1306, Ishtori Haparchi (d. 1355) arrived in Palestine and settled Bet She'an in 1313. Over the next seven years, he compiled an informative geographical account of the land in which he attempts to identify biblical and talmudic era locations.[159] Two other noted Spanish kabbalists, Hananel ibn Askara and Shem Tov ibn Gaon, emigrated to Safed around this time.[160] During the tolerant reign of Nassir Mahomet (1299 1341) Jewish pilgrims from Egypt and Syria were able to spend the festivals in Jerusalem, which had a large Jewish community.[160] Many of the Jerusalem Jews occupied themselves with study of the codes and the kabbalah. Others were artisans, merchants, calligraphers, or physicians.[160] The vibrant community of Hebron engaged in weaving, dyeing, and glassware manufacturing; others were shepherds.[160]
The 1428 attempt by German Jews to acquire rooms and buildings on Mount Zion over the Tomb of David had dire consequences. The Franciscans, who had occupied the site since 1335, petitioned Pope Martin V who issued a papal order prohibiting sea captains from carrying Jews to Palestine.[161] In 1438, Italian rabbi Elijah of Ferrara settled in Jerusalem and became a lecturer and dayyan.[162] In 1455, a large group of prospective emigrants from across Sicily were arrested for attempting to sail to Palestine.[163] Not wanting to forfeit revenue made from special Jewish taxes, the authorities were against the mass emigration of Jews and accused the group of planning to illegally smuggle gold off the island. After nine months of imprisonment, a heavy ransom freed 24 Jews who were then granted permission to travel to Palestine so long as they abandoned all their property.[164]
In 1470, Isaac b. Meir Latif arrived from Ancona and counted 150 Jewish families in Jerusalem.[162] In 1473, the authorities closed down the Nachmanides Synagogue after part of it had collapsed in a heavy rainstorm. A year later, after an appealing to Sultan Qaitbay, the Jews were given permission to repair it. The Muslims of the adjoining mosque however contested the verdict and for two days, proceeded to demolish the synagogue completely. The vandals were punished, but the synagogue was only rebuilt 50 years later in 1523.[165] 1481 saw Italian Joseph Mantabia being appointed dayyan in Jerusalem.[166] A few years later in 1488, Italian commentator and spiritual leader of Jewry, Obadiah ben Abraham arrived in Jerusalem. He found the city forsaken holding about seventy poor Jewish families.[167] By 1495, there were 200 families. Obadiah, a dynamic and erudite leader, had begun the rejuvenation of Jerusalem's Jewish community. This, despite the fact many refugees from the Spanish and Portuguese expulsion of 1492-97 stayed away worried about the lawlessness of Mamluk rule.[168] An anonymous letter of the time lamented: "In all these lands there is no judgement and no judge, especially for the Jews against Arabs."[168] Mass immigration would start after the Turks conquered the region in 1517.[168] Yet in Safed, the situation fared better. Thanks to Joseph Saragossi who had arrived in the closing years of the 15th century, Safed and its environs had developed into the largest concentration of Jews in Palestine. With the help of the Sephardic immigration from Spain, the Jewish population had increased to 10,000 by the early 16th century.[169] Twenty-five years earlier Joseph Mantabia had counted just 300 families in and around Safed.[170] The first record of Jews at Safed was provided by French explorer Samuel ben Samson 300 years earlier in 1210 when he found only 50 Jews in residence.[170] At the beginning of the 17th century, Safed was to boast eighteen talmudical colleges and twenty-one synagogues.[171]
Records cite at least 30 Jewish urban and rural communities in the country at the beginning of the 16th century.[172]
Modern history (1517 present)
Main article: Chronology of the Jewish settlement in the land of Israel in modern times
Ottoman rule (1517 1917)
Main articles: Old Yishuv and Ottoman Jews
Old YishuvJewish community in the Land of Israel under Ottoman rule
Key events
Alhambra (1492)
Manuel I decree (1496)
Hebron and Safed massacres (1517)
Revival of Tiberias (1563)
Sack of Tiberias (1660)
Plunder of Safed (June 1834)
Hebron massacre (August 1834)
Safed attack (1838)
Jerusalem expansion
Moshavot establishment
Key figures
Joseph Saragossi (d. 1507)
Obadiah MiBartenura (d. 1515)
Abraham ben Eliezer Halevi (d. 1528)
Levi ibn Habib (d. 1545)
Jacob Berab (d. 1546)
Joseph Nasi (d. 1579)
Moses Galante (d. 1689)
Moses ibn Habib (d. 1696)
Yehuda he-Hasid (d. 1700)
Haim Abulafia (d. 1744)
Menachem Mendel (d. 1788)
Haim Farhi (d. 1820)
Jacob Saphir (d. 1886)
Haim Aharon Valero (d. 1923)
Economy
Etrog cultivation
Winemaking
Banking
Printing
Soap production
Textiles
Philanthropy
Kollel
Halukka
Montefiore
Judah Touro
Communities
Musta'arabim
Sephardim
Perushim
Hasidim
Jerusalem
Mea Shearim
Mishkenot Sha'ananim
Hebron
Safed
Tiberias
Biriya
Jaffa
Haifa
Peki'in
Acco
Shechem
Gaza
Kafr Yasif
Shefa-'Amr
Petah Tikva
Synagogues
Great Academy of Paris (1258)
Ramban (1267)
Abuhav (1490s)
Abraham Avinu (1540)
Ari (1570s)
Johanan ben Zakai (1600s)
Hurva (1700)
Tifereth Israel (1872)
Related articles
History of Israel
Four Holy Cities
Applicability of religious laws
History of Zionism
Timeline
Pre-Modern Aliyah
Return to Zion
Three Oaths
Haredim and Zionism
Edah HaChareidis
ShaDaR
vte
 One of the earliest photographs of Jews praying at the Western Wall of Herod's Temple, 1870s. The Scroll of Ahimaaz (1050 CE) mentions the location as a Jewish prayer site.[173] In around 1560, Suleiman the Magnificent gave official recognition of the right of Jews to pray there.
 The Ari Synagogue in Safed. Founded in the 1570s, it was rebuilt in 1857 following an earthquake.
 Jewish workers in the Kerem Avraham neighborhood of Jerusalem in the mid-19th century
Palestine was conquered by Turkish Sultan Selim II in 1516 17, and became part of the province of Syria for the next four centuries. At the onset of Ottoman rule in 1517, there were an estimated 5,000 Jews, comprising about 1,000 Jewish families, in Palestine. Jews mainly lived in Jerusalem, Nablus, Hebron, Gaza, Safed, and villages in the Galilee. The Jewish community was composed of both descendants of Jews who had never left the land and Jewish migrants from the diaspora.[174][175][better source needed]
In 1534, Spanish refugee Jacob Berab settled in Safed. He believed the time was ripe to reintroduce the old "semikah" (ordination) which would create for Jews worldwide a recognised central authority.[176] In 1538, an assembly of twenty-five Safed rabbis ordained Berab, a step which they hoped would instigate the formation of a new Sanhedrin. But the plan faltered upon a strong and concerted protest by the chief rabbi of Jerusalem, Levi ben Jacob ibn Habib.[176] Additionally, worried about a scheme which would invest excessive authority in a Jewish senate, possibly resulting in the first step toward the restoration of the Jewish state, the new Ottoman rulers forced Berab to flee Palestine and the plan did not materialize.[176]
The 16th-century nevertheless saw a resurgence of Jewish life in Palestine. Palestinian rabbis were instrumental in producing a universally accepted manual of Jewish law and some of the most beautiful liturgical poems. Much of this activity occurred at Safed, which had become a spiritual centre, a haven for mystics. Joseph Karo's comprehensive guide to Jewish law, the Shulchan Aruch, was considered so authoritative that the variant customs of German-Polish Jewry were merely added as supplement glosses.[177] Some of the most celebrated hymns were written in Safed by poets such as Israel Najara and Solomon Alkabetz.[178] The town was also a centre of Jewish mysticism; notable kabbalists included Moses Cordovero and the German-born Naphtali Hertz ben Jacob Elhanan.[179][180][181] A new method of understanding the kabbalah was developed by Palestinian mystic Isaac Luria and espoused by his student Chaim Vital. In Safed, the Jews developed a number of branches of trade, especially in grain, spices, textiles and dyeing. In 1577, a Hebrew printing press was established in Safed. The 8,000 or 10,000 Jews in Safed in 1555 grew to 20,000 or 30,000 by the end of the century.
 The funeral of a rabbi in Jerusalem, 1903.
In around 1563, Joseph Nasi secured permission from Sultan Selim II to acquire Tiberias and seven surrounding villages to create a Jewish city-state.[182] He hoped that large numbers of Jewish refugees and Marranos would settle there, free from fear and oppression; indeed, the persecuted Jews of Cori, Italy, numbering about 200, decided to emigrate to Tiberias.[183][184] Nasi had the walls of the town rebuilt by 1564 and attempted to turn it into a self-sufficient textile manufacturing center by planting mulberry trees for the cultivation of silk. Nevertheless, a number of factors during the following years contributed to the plan's ultimate failure. Nasi's aunt, Do a Gracia Mendes Nasi supported a yeshiva in the town for many years until her death in 1569.[185]
In 1567, a Yemenite scholar and Rabbi, Zechariah Dhahiri, visited Safed and wrote of his experiences in a book entitled Sefer Ha-Musar. His vivid descriptions of the town Safed and of Rabbi Joseph Karo's yeshiva are of primary importance to historians, seeing that they are a first-hand account of these places, and the only extant account which describes the yeshiva of the great Sephardic Rabbi, Joseph Karo.[186]
In 1576, the Jewish community of Safed faced an expulsion order: 1,000 prosperous families were to be deported to Cyprus, "for the good of the said island", with another 500 the following year.[187] The order was later rescinded due to the realisation of the financial gains of Jewish rental income.[188] In 1586, the Jews of Istanbul agreed to build a fortified khan to provide a refuge for Safed's Jews against "night bandits and armed thieves."[187]
In 1569, the Radbaz moved to Jerusalem, but soon moved to Safed to escape the high taxes imposed on Jews by the authorities.
 Installation of the Chacham Bashi at the Ben Zakai Synagogue, 1893. According to legend, the synagogue stands on the site of the study hall of 1st-century sage, Rabban Yochanan ben Zakai. The current building was constructed in 1610.
In 1610, the Yochanan ben Zakai Synagogue in Jerusalem was completed.[189] It became the main synagogue of the Sephardic Jews, the place where their chief rabbi was invested. The adjacent study hall which had been added by 1625 later became the Synagogue of Elijah the Prophet.[189]
In the 1648 1654 Khmelnytsky Uprising in Ukraine over 100,000 Jews were massacred, leading to some migration to Israel. In 1660 (or 1662), the majority Jewish towns of Safed and Tiberias were destroyed by the Druze, following a power struggle in Galilee.[190][191][192][193][194][195][196]
The 17th century saw a steep decline in the Jewish population of Palestine due to the unstable security situation, natural catastrophes, and abandonment of urban areas, which turned Palestine into a remote and desolate part of the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman central government became feeble and corrupt, and the Jewish community was harassed by local rulers, janissaries, guilds, Bedouins, and bandits. The Jewish community was also caught between feuding local chieftains who extorted and oppressed the Jews. The Jewish communities of the Galilee heavily depended on the changing fortunes of a banking family close to the ruling pashas in Acre. As a result, the Jewish population significantly shrank.[197]
In 1700, about 500 to 1,000 European Jewish followers of Judah HeHasid immigrated to Palestine and settled in Jerusalem. They were forced to give the Turkish authorities financial guarantees in the name of Jerusalem's Jewish community in exchange for permission to enter the Ottoman Empire. At the time approximately 200 Ashkenazi Jews and 1,000 Sephardi Jews lived in the city, most of them reliant on charity from the diaspora. The sudden influx of so many Ashkenazi immigrants produced a crisis. The local community was unable to help so many people and suspected some of the new arrivals of being Sabbateans, who they viewed with hostility. The newcomers built the Hurva Synagogue and incurred debts doing so. In 1720, due to failure to repay the debts, Arab creditors broke into the synagogue, set it on fire, and took over the area. The Ottoman authorities held both HeHasid's group and the pre-existing Ashkenazi community collectively responsible and expelled all Ashkenazi Jews from Jerusalem.[198][199]
In 1714, Dutch researcher Adriaan Reland published an account of his visit to Palestine, and noted the existence of significant Jewish population centers throughout the country, particularly Jerusalem, Safed, Tiberias, and Gaza. Hebron also had a significant Jewish community at the time. The 18th century saw the Jewish population slightly recover. In 1740, Rabbi Haim Abulafia, the rabbi of Izmir, renewed Jewish settlement in Tiberias and the surrounding area under the patronage of local governor Zahir al-Umar. In 1742, a group of Jewish immigrants from Morocco and Italy led by Moroccan rabbi Chaim ibn Attar arrived in Palestine, and most settled in Jerusalem. At the time, the vast majority of Jews in Palestine were Sephardi or Mizrahi Jews, with only a small number of Ashkenazi Jews. The Ottoman authorities restricted the number of Jews permitted to live in Jerusalem. The Near East earthquake of 1759 destroyed much of Safed, killing 2,000 people with 190 Jews among the dead, and also destroyed Tiberias. In 1777, a group of about 300 Hasidic Jews from Lithuania led by Rabbi Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk immigrated to Palestine. This was the first group of Jewish immigrants in some time that maintained contact with its country of origin. They had considered settling in Safed but due to the opposition this aroused most settled in Tiberias and some settled in Peki'in instead. They augmented the Jewish presence in the Galilee and extended the Ashkenazi presence to places outside Safed, where it had been concentrated until then.[200] In 1800, there were about 6,500 Jews living in Palestine.[197]
In the early 19th century, the disciples of the Vilna Gaon, a prominent rabbi in Eastern Europe, who were known as the Perushim, settled in the land of Israel. They came almost a decade after the arrival of two of his pupils, R. Hayim of Vilna and R. Israel ben Samuel of Shklov. In all there were three groups of the Gaon's students which emigrated to the land of Israel. They formed the basis of the Ashkenazi communities of Jerusalem and Safed. Their arrival encouraged an Ashkenazi revival in Jerusalem, whose Jewish community was mostly Sephardi following the expulsion of the Ashkenazim nearly a century earlier. Many of the descendants of the disciples became leading figures in modern Israeli society. The Gaon himself also set forth with his pupils to the Land, but for an unknown reason he turned back and returned to Vilna, where he died soon after.
During the siege of Acre in 1799, Napoleon issued a proclamation to the Jews of Asia and Africa to help him conquer Jerusalem. The siege was lost to the British, however, and the plan was never carried out.
In 1821 the brothers of murdered Jewish adviser and finance minister to the rulers of the Galilee, Haim Farkhi, formed an army with Ottoman permission, marched south and conquered the Galilee. They were held up at Akko which they besieged for 14 months after which they gave up and retreated to Damascus.
During the Peasants' Revolt under Muhammad Ali of Egypt's occupation, Jews were targeted in the 1834 looting of Safed and the 1834 Hebron massacre. By 1844, some sources report that Jews had become the largest population group in Jerusalem and by 1890 an absolute majority in the city, but as a whole the Jewish population made up far less than 10% of the region.[201][202]
Throughout the 19th century up to the 1880s, Ashkenazi Jews from Eastern Europe as well as groups of Sephardi Jews from Turkey, Bulgaria, and North Africa immigrated to Palestine.[203] Jerusalem's Jewish population grew particularly fast as a result of Jewish migration from within the Land of Israel and abroad. In the aftermath of the Galilee earthquake of 1837, some Jewish residents of Safed and Tiberias, which had been hit hard by the earthquake, further expanded the population. As a result, the Jewish Quarter became overcrowded and squalid and Jews who moved to other parts of the city paid exorbitant rents to non-Jewish landlords. The Rothschild family attempted to ease the overcrowding by financing a set of apartments for Jews called the Batei Hamahse in the 1850s, but this proved inadequate. With the expansion of Jerusalem beyond the traditional Old City walls, Jews began settling outside of the Old City. In 1855, the Kerem Avraham district, which contained a vineyard and soap factory, was founded by James Finn, the British Consul in Jerusalem, to provide the Jews of Jerusalem employment so they would not have to subsist on donations from abroad.[204] The first Jewish neighborhood built outside of the Old City walls was Mishkenot Sha'ananim, established in 1860. Mahane Israel, the second Jewish neighborhood built outside the Old City walls, was founded in 1867 as a settlement for Maghrebi Jews. The third Jewish neighborhood built outside the Old City was Nahalat Shiv'a, which was founded in 1869 as a cooperative effort by seven families who pooled their funds to purchase the land and build homes. In 1875, the Jewish neighborhood of Kirya Ne'emana and the first of the Jewish neighborhoods that would make up the Nachlaot district were founded. Jewish settlement activities also began to take place outside Jerusalem in the 1870s. In 1870, Mikveh Israel was established as a Jewish agricultural school and the first new Jewish settlement in Palestine in modern times. In 1878, Jews from Safed founded the village of Gei Oni, later Rosh Pinna, and religious Jewish pioneers who had immigrated from Europe founded the settlement of Petah Tikva. The Jewish population of Haifa was also bolstered by immigration from Morocco and Turkey in the 1870s.[205]
In 1880, the Jewish population of Palestine numbered around 20,000 to 25,000, of whom two-thirds lived in Jerusalem.[206][207] The Jewish population, known as the Old Yishuv, was divided into two predominant clusters. The oldest group consisted of the Ladino-speaking Sephardic Jewish communities which had been established in the late Mamluk and early Ottoman periods and the Arabic-speaking communities who had already been living there since before the coming of Islam and had been culturally and linguistically Arabized. The Sephardic community traced its origins to not only Sephardim who settled in Palestine, but local Arabized Jews who had intermarried into the Sephardic community[208] and Mizrahi Jews who had migrated from other parts of the Middle East and integrated into the Sephardic community. The second group was the Ashkenazi community, composed of primarily Haredi Jews who had migrated from Europe to settle in Palestine in the 18th and 19th centuries.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, tens of thousands of Jewish immigrants began arriving in Palestine and establishing new Jewish settlements. These immigrants were largely motivated by nationalism and a desire to live in the land of their ancestors as Zionism, or support for founding a new Jewish state, emerged. The first major such wave was the First Aliyah, which took place between 1881 and 1903. About 25,000 to 35,000 Jews immigrated to Palestine, mostly from Eastern Europe and Yemen, though about half subsequently left. About 28 significant Jewish settlements were established, and about 90,000 acres of land were purchased by Jews.[209][210] During this period, the revival of the Hebrew language in Palestine began. A Hebrew school system was established and new words were coined to make Hebrew more practical for modern use. The effort was largely spearheaded by Eliezer Ben-Yehuda. As a result, Hebrew became an everyday spoken language again and gradually became the primary language of the Jewish population of Palestine. The Second Aliyah took place from 1904 to 1914 and saw around 35,000 Jews immigrate to Palestine. The majority of the Jewish immigrants came from the Russian Empire, though some also came from Yemen. Further Jewish settlements were established and in 1909, Tel Aviv was founded as the first modern Jewish city. The growth of the Jewish community of Palestine, which was known as the Yishuv, was disrupted by the outbreak of World War I in 1914. During the war, many Jews were expelled from Palestine by the Ottoman authorities as enemy nationals, since they had immigrated from countries now at war with the Ottoman Empire. In 1917, the Ottoman authorities carried out the Tel Aviv and Jaffa deportation, expelling the entire Jewish civilian populations of Tel Aviv and Jaffa. Many deportees subsequently died from hunger and disease.[211]
British Mandate (1917 1948)
Main articles: Mandatory Palestine and 1947 1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine
Part of a series onAliyah
Concepts
Promised Land
Gathering of Israel
Diaspora
Negation
Jews who remained in the Land of Israel
Homeland for the Jewish people
Zionism
Jewish question
Law of Return
Pre-Modern Aliyah
Return to Zion
Old Yishuv
Perushim
Aliyah in modern times
First
Second
during World War I
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Aliyah Bet
Bricha
from Muslim countries
Yemen
Iraq
Morocco
Lebanon
from the Soviet Union
post-Soviet
from Poland
from Ethiopia
from Romania
from Latin America
Absorption
Revival of the Hebrew language
Hebraization of surnames
Hebraization of place names
Ulpan
Kibbutz
Youth village
One Million Plan
Immigrant camps
Ma'abarot
Development town
Austerity
Organizations
World Zionist Organization
Jewish National Fund
Jewish Agency for Israel
Youth Aliyah
Mossad LeAliyah Bet
El Al
Ministry of Aliyah and Integration
Nefesh B'Nefesh
Am Yisrael Foundation
Related topics
Yishuv
Sabra
Yerida
Jewish refugees
History of the Jews in the Land of Israel
Demographic history of Palestine (region)
Historical Jewish population comparisons
Yom HaAliyah
vte
 The UN partition plan
In 1917, towards the end of World War I, following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire, Palestine was occupied by British forces. The United Kingdom was granted control of the area west of the River Jordan now comprising the State of Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip (Mandatory Palestine), and on the east bank of what later became Jordan (as a separate mandate) by the Versailles Peace Conference which established the League of Nations in 1919. Herbert Samuel, a former Postmaster General in the British cabinet, who was instrumental in drafting the Balfour Declaration was appointed the first High Commissioner of Mandatory Palestine, generally simply known as Palestine. During World War I the British had made two promises regarding territory in the Middle East. Britain had promised the local Arabs, through Lawrence of Arabia, independence for a united Arab country covering most of the Arab Middle East, in exchange for their supporting the British; and Britain had promised to create and foster a Jewish national home as laid out in the Balfour Declaration, 1917.
With the British conquest, Jews who had been expelled by the Ottomans were able to return, and Jewish immigration picked up again. The Third Aliyah saw about 40,000 Jewish immigrants arrive in Palestine from 1919 to the start of an economic crisis in Palestine in 1923, and between 1924 and 1928, the Fourth Aliyah saw about 80,000 more Jewish immigrants arrive in Palestine and the Fifth Aliyah, which took place between 1929 and 1939, saw the arrival of an estimated 225,000 to 300,000 Jewish immigrants. During this time, land continued to be purchased by Jews, many new Jewish settlements were established and existing Jewish communities in urban areas continued to grow. Tel Aviv in particular saw large-scale development and became a major city. It was home to over a third of the Jewish population by 1939.[212] During this time, tensions with the Arabs increased over Jewish immigration. The 1921 Jaffa riots and 1929 Palestine riots saw Arab mobs violently attack Jewish population centers, and the tensions culminated in the 1936-1939 Arab revolt in Palestine, which saw the Arabs launch widespread attacks against both Jews and the British.
In 1947, there were approximately 630,000 Jews living alongside approximately 1.2 million Arabs in Palestine. Following increasing levels of violence, the British government expressed a wish to withdraw from Palestine that year. The proposed plan of partition would have split Palestine into two states, an Arab state and a Jewish state, and the City of Jerusalem, giving slightly more than half the land area to the proposed Jewish state. Immediately following the adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of the Partition Plan (Resolution 181(II) ), and its subsequent acceptance by the Jewish leadership civil war broke out between the Arab community and the Jewish community, as armies of the Arab League, which rejected the Partition Plan which Israel accepted, sought to squelch the new Jewish state.[213]
On 14 May 1948, one day before the end of the British Mandate, the leaders of the Jewish community in Palestine led by the future prime minister David Ben-Gurion, declared the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz-Israel, to be known as the State of Israel.[214]
State of Israel (1948 present)
Main articles: History of Israel and Israeli Jews
 Western Wall in Jerusalem
 Yemenite Jews in Ma'abarat (Absorption Camp) Rosh Ha-Ayin in 1950
The armies of Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq marched into the territory of what had just ceased to be the British Mandate, thus starting the 1948 Arab Israeli War. The nascent Israel Defense Forces repulsed the Arab armies, and extended Israel's borders beyond the original Resolution 181(II) boundaries for the proposed Jewish state.[215] By December 1948, Israel controlled most of the portion of Mandate Palestine west of the Jordan River. The remainder of the Mandate came to be called the West Bank (controlled by Jordan), and the Gaza Strip (controlled by Egypt). Prior to and during this conflict, 711,000 Palestinians Arabs[216] were expelled or fled their homes to become Palestinian refugees.[217] One third went to the West Bank and one third to the Gaza Strip, occupied by Jordan and Egypt respectively, and the rest to Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and other countries.[218]
After the establishment of Israel, immigration of Holocaust survivors from Europe and a large influx of Jewish refugees from Arab countries had doubled Israel's population within one year of its independence. Overall, during the following years approximately 850,000 Sephardi and Mizrahi Jews fled or were expelled from Arab countries, Iran and Afghanistan. Of these, about 680,000 settled in Israel.
Israel's Jewish population continued to grow at a very high rate for years, fed by waves of Jewish immigration from round the world, including the massive immigration wave of Soviet Jews, who arrived in Israel in the early 1990s, according to the Law of Return. Some 380,000 Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union arrived in 1990 91 alone.
Since 1948, Israel has been involved in a series of major military conflicts, including the 1956 Suez Crisis, 1967 Six-Day War, 1973 Yom Kippur War, 1982 Lebanon War, and 2006 Lebanon War, as well as a nearly constant series of other conflicts, among them the ongoing Israeli Palestinian conflict. Despite the constant security threats, Israel a majorly Jewish state has thrived economically. Throughout the 1980s and the 1990s there were numerous liberalization measures: in monetary policy, in domestic capital markets, and in various instruments of governmental interference in economic activity. The role of government in the economy was considerably decreased. On the other hand, some governmental economic functions were increased: a national health insurance system was introduced, though private health providers continued to provide health services within the national system. Social welfare payments, such as unemployment benefits, child allowances, old age pensions and minimum income support, were expanded continuously, until they formed a major budgetary expenditure. These transfer payments compensated, to a large extent, for the continuous growth of income inequality, which had moved Israel from among the developed countries with the least income inequality to those with the most.
See also
Demographic history of Palestine (region)
Israeli Jews (Palestinian Jews)
List of Jewish communities by country
List of Jewish leaders in the Land of Israel
List of Yeshivas and Midrashas in Israel
Muslim history in Palestine (Islamization)
Time periods in the Palestine region
References
Citations
^ John Day, [In Search of Pre-Exilic Israel,] Bloomsbury Publishing, 2005 pp. 47.5, p. 48: 'In this sense, the emergence of ancient Israel is viewed not as the cause of the demise of Canaanite culture but as its upshot'.
^ ubb, 1998. pp. 13 14
^ Mark Smith in "The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities of Ancient Israel" states "Despite the long regnant model that the Canaanites and Israelites were people of fundamentally different culture, archaeological data now casts doubt on this view. The material culture of the region exhibits numerous common points between Israelites and Canaanites in the Iron I period (c. 1200 1000 BCE). The record would suggest that the Israelite culture largely overlapped with and derived from Canaanite culture... In short, Israelite culture was largely Canaanite in nature. Given the information available, one cannot maintain a radical cultural separation between Canaanites and Israelites for the Iron I period." (pp. 6 7). Smith, Mark (2002) "The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities of Ancient Israel" (Eerdman's)
^ a b Rendsberg, Gary (2008). "Israel without the Bible". In Frederick E. Greenspahn. The Hebrew Bible: New Insights and Scholarship. NYU Press, pp. 3 5
^ Catherine Hezser, Jewish Literacy in Roman Palestine, Mohr Siebeck, 2001, pp. 170 171.
^ Michael Avi-Yonah, The Jews Under Roman and Byzantine Rule: A Political History of Palestine from the Bar Kokhba War to the Arab Conquest, Magnes Press, Hebrew University, 1984, pp. 15 19, 20, 132 33, 241 cited William David Davies, Louis Finkelstein, Steven T. Katz (eds.), The Cambridge History of Judaism: Volume 4, The Late Roman-Rabbinic Period, pp. 407ff.
^ a b Moshe Gil, A History of Palestine: 634 1099, p. 3.
^ "Jew", Oxford English Dictionary.
^ "Who Is a Jew?". Judaism101. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ "A history of the Jewish nation: from the earliest times to the present day (1883) (archived)". 1883. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ Finkelstein, Israel. "Ethnicity and origin of the Iron I settlers in the Highlands of Canaan: Can the real Israel stand up?." The Biblical archaeologist 59.4 (1996): 198 212.
^ Finkelstein, Israel. The archaeology of the Israelite settlement. Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1988.
^ Finkelstein, Israel, and Nadav Na'aman, eds. From nomadism to monarchy: archaeological and historical aspects of early Israel. Yad Izhak Ben-Zvi, 1994.
^ Finkelstein, Israel. "The archaeology of the United Monarchy: an alternative view." Levant 28.1 (1996): 177 87.
^ Finkelstein, Israel, and Neil Asher Silberman. The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Sacred Texts. Simon and Schuster, 2002.
^ Dever, William (2001). What Did the Biblical Writers Know, and When Did They Know It?. Eerdmans. pp. 98 99. ISBN 3-927120-37-5. After a century of exhaustive investigation, all respectable archaeologists have given up hope of recovering any context that would make Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob credible "historical figures" [...] archaeological investigation of Moses and the Exodus has similarly been discarded as a fruitless pursuit.
^ Tubb 1998, pp. 13 14 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTubb1998 (help)
^ McNutt 1999, p. 47.
^ K. L. Noll, Canaan and Israel in Antiquity: An Introduction, A&C Black, 2001 p. 164: "It would seem that, in the eyes of Merneptah's artisans, Israel was a Canaanite group indistinguishable from all other Canaanite groups." "It is likely that Merneptah's Israel was a group of Canaanites located in the Jezreel Valley."
^ Tubb, 1998. pp. 13 14
^ Mark Smith in "The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities of Ancient Israel" states "Despite the long regnant model that the Canaanites and Israelites were people of fundamentally different culture, archaeological data now casts doubt on this view. The material culture of the region exhibits numerous common points between Israelites and Canaanites in the Iron I period (c. 1200 1000 BCE). The record would suggest that the Israelite culture largely overlapped with and derived from Canaanite culture... In short, Israelite culture was largely Canaanite in nature. Given the information available, one cannot maintain a radical cultural separation between Canaanites and Israelites for the Iron I period." (pp. 6 7). Smith, Mark (2002) "The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities of Ancient Israel" (Eerdman's)
^ Stager in Coogan 1998, p. 91.
^ Dever 2003, p. 206.
^ Miller 1986, pp. 78 9.
^ McNutt 1999, p. 35.
^ Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (2001). The Bible Unearthed. ISBN 9780743223386. P. 107
^ McNutt 1999, p. 70.
^ Miller 2005, p. 98.
^ McNutt 1999, p. 72.
^ Miller 2005, p. 99.
^ Miller 2005, p. 105.
^ Lehman in Vaughn 1992, pp. 156 62.
^ "Daily Life in Ancient Israel". Biblical Archaeology Society. 30 January 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Elizabeth Bloch-Smith and Beth Alpert Nakhai, "A Landscape Comes to Life: The Iron Age I", Near Eastern Archeology, Vol. 62, No. 2 (June 1999), pp. 62 92
^ Gil Ronen (31 October 2008). "Oldest Hebrew Text Discovered at King David's Border Fortress". Israel National News.
^ Yosef Garfinkel and Saar Ganor, Khirbet Qeiyafa: Sha'arayim Archived 4 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine, The Journal of Hebrew Scriptures, Volume 8, Article 22. ISSN 1203-1542.
^ Jerusalem: The Biography by Simon Sebag Montefiore pp 28 and 39 Phoenix 2011
^ Dever, William (2001). What Did the Biblical Writers Know, and When Did They Know It?. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802821263.
^ Finkelstein The Bible Unearthed
^ Kurkh stela: https://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=367117&partId=1 For original inscription see http://rbedrosian.com/Downloads3/ancient_records_assyria1.pdf page 223
^ Mazar in Finkelstein 2007, p. 163.
^ Brown, William. "Ancient Israelite Technology". World History Encyclopedia.
^ "The keys to the kingdom". Haaretz. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Mazar, Amihai (2010). "Archaeology and the Biblical Narrative: The Case of the United Monarchy". Archaeological and Biblical Perspectives: 29.
^ Moore, Megan Bishop; Kelle, Brad E. (17 May 2011). Biblical History and Israel S Past: The Changing Study of the Bible and History. ISBN 9780802862600.
^ Pileggi, Tamar; AP. "New look at ancient shards suggests Bible even older than thought". www.timesofisrael.com. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Lemche 1998, p. 85.
^ First Impression: What We Learn from King Ahaz's Seal Archived 22 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine by Robert Deutsch.
^ http://www.utexas.edu/courses/classicalarch/readings/sennprism.html column 2 line 61 to column 3 line 49
^ David M. Carr (2005). Writing on the Tablet of the Heart: Origins of Scripture and Literature. Oxford University Press. p. 164.
^ Thompson, p410.
^ a b c Bar-Ilan, Meir: Major trends in Jewish Society in the Land of Israel: From the 5th century BCE till the 7th century CE. Bar-Ilan University
^ "British Museum - Cuneiform tablet with part of the Babylonian Chronicle (605-594 BC)". Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014.
^ See https://www.livius.org/cg-cm/chronicles/abc5/jerusalem.html reverse side, line 12.
^ Grabbe 2004, p. 28.
^ Lemaire in Blenkinsopp 2003, p. 291.
^ Davies 2009.
^ Lipschits 2005, p. 48.
^ Blenkinsopp in Blenkinsopp 2003, pp. 103 5.
^ Blenkinsopp 2009, p. 228.
^ Middlemas 2005, pp. 1 2.
^ Miller 1986, p. 203.
^ Middlemas 2005, p. 2.
^ a b Middlemas 2005, p. 10.
^ Middlemas 2005, p. 17.
^ Bedford 2001, p. 48.
^ Schiffman, Lawrence H. (2003). Understanding Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism. New York: KTAV Publishing House. pp. 48 49. ISBN 978-0881258134.
^ Nodet 1999, p. 25.
^ Davies in Amit 2006, p. 141.
^ Niehr in Becking 1999, p. 231.
^ Wylen 1996, p. 25.
^ Grabbe 2004, pp. 154 5.
^ Soggin 1998, p. 311.
^ Miller 1986, p. 458.
^ Blenkinsopp 2009, p. 229.
^ Paul Johnson, History of the Jews, p. 106, Harper 1988
^ "HYRCANUS, JOHN (JOHANAN) I. - JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com.
^ Martin Goodman, Rome and Jerusalem: The Clash of Ancient Civilizations, Penguin 2008 pp. 18 19
^ M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 chapter I
^ The 'Five Good Emperors' Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine (roman-empire.net)
^ Mosaic or mosaic? The Genesis of the Israeli Language by Zuckermann, Gilad
^ Dubnov, Simon (June 1980). History of the Jews. ISBN 9780845366592.
^ Mary Smallwood, E. (2001). The Jews Under Roman Rule: From Pompey to Diocletian : A Study in Political Relations. ISBN 9780391041554.
^ Begley, Sharon (6 August 2012). "Genetic study offers clues to history of North Africa's Jews". Reuters. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Martin Goodman, Rome and Jerusalem: The Clash of Ancient Civilizations, Penguin 2008 p. 494
^ M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 sections II to V
^ David Goodblatt, 'The political and social history of the Jewish community in the Land of Israel,' in William David Davies, Louis Finkelstein, Steven T. Katz (eds.) The Cambridge History of Judaism: Volume 4, The Late Roman-Rabbinic Period, Cambridge University Press, 2006 pp.404-430, p.406.
^ For more information, see "The Canon Debate" edited by McDonald and Sanders, 2002 Hendrickson.
^ Cherry, Robert: Jewish and Christian Views on Bodily Pleasure: Their Origins and Relevance in the Twentieth-Century, p. 148 (2018), Wipf and Stock Publishers
^ Bernard Lazare. "Jewish History Sourcebook: Bernard Lazare: Antisemitism: Its History and Causes, 1894". Fordham University. Retrieved 8 February 2014.
^ a b "Julian and the Jews 361 363 CE" (Fordham University, The Jesuit University of New York).
^ Andrew Cain; Noel Emmanuel Lenski (2009). The power of religion in late antiquity. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 245 246. ISBN 978-0-7546-6725-4.
^ Abraham Malamat; Haim Hillel Ben-Sasson (1976). A History of the Jewish people. Harvard University Press. p. 353. ISBN 978-0-674-39731-6. Retrieved 22 December 2011.
^ G nter Stemberger (2000). Jews and Christians in the Holy Land: Palestine in the fourth century. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 215. ISBN 978-0-567-08699-0.
^ Edward Kessler (2010). An Introduction to Jewish-Christian Relations. Cambridge University Press. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-521-70562-2.
^ M. Avi-Yonah, The Jews under Roman and Byzantine Rule, Jerusalem 1984 chapters XI XII
^ Hayim Ben-Sasson (October 15, 1985). A History of the Jewish People. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-39731-6.
^ Peter Sch fer, The History of the Jews in the Greco-Roman World, Routledge, 2003, p. 191.
^ "Sefer Zerubbabel". 24 April 2013.
^ Stemberger, G nter (2010). Judaica Minora: Geschichte und Literatur des rabbinischen Judentums. ISBN 9783161505713.
^ Lipi ski, Edward (2004). Itineraria Phoenicia. ISBN 9789042913448.
^ Halperin, Raphael; Ben, Sasson Hayim; Malamat, Abraham; Stern, Mena em; Tadmor, Hayim (1976). A History of the Jewish people. ISBN 9780674397309.
^ "The library of the Palestine Pilgrims' Text Society".
^ Bagratunik ), Seb os (Bishop of; Howard-Johnston, James (1999). The Armenian History Attributed to Sebeos. ISBN 9780853235644.
^ "CHOSROES (KHOSRU) II. PARWIZ - JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com.
^ "The Arab Conquest of Egypt and the Last Thirty Years of the Roman Dominion". 1902.
^ Gil, Moshe (27 February 1997). A History of Palestine, 634-1099. ISBN 9780521599849.
^ While the Syrians and the Melchite Greeks ceased to observe the penance after the death of Heraclius; Elijah of Nisibis (Beweis der Wahrheit des Glaubens, translation by Horst, p. 108, Colmar 1886) see http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?letter=B&artid=1642#4756.
^ Israel Cohen (1950). Contemporary Jewry: a survey of social, cultural, economic, and political conditions. Methuen. p. 310. Retrieved 19 December 2011.
^ James Parkes (1949). A history of Palestine from 135 A.D. to modern times. Victor Gollancz.
^ Salo Wittmayer Baron (1957). Social and Religious History of the Jews, Volume 3: High Middle Ages: Heirs of Rome and Persia. Columbia University Press. p. 237. ISBN 9780231088404.
^ Lauren S. Bahr; Bernard Johnston (M.A.); Louise A. Bloomfield (1996). Collier's encyclopedia: with bibliography and index. Collier's. p. 328. Retrieved 19 December 2011.
^ Norman Roth (8 April 2014). "Synagogues". Medieval Jewish Civilization: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 622. ISBN 978-1-136-77155-2. The Muslims had reinforced the Byzantine prohibition against new synagogues in Palestine after their conquest of the land...
^ Gideon Avni, The Byzantine-Islamic Transition in Palestine: An Archaeological Approach, OUP Oxford, 2014, pp. 332 336.
^ Ira M. Lapidus,Islamic Societies to the Nineteenth Century: A Global History, Cambridge University Press, 2012, p. 201.
^ The Byzantine-Islamic Transition in Palestine: An Archaeological Approach, Gideon Avni, p. 354 in reference to Moshe Gil 1992, p. 112 114
^ The Byzantine-Islamic Transition in Palestine: An Archaeological Approach, Gideon Avni, p..337
^ The Byzantine-Islamic Transition in Palestine: An Archaeological Approach, Gideon Avni, p. 353
^ Gil, p. 70-71.
^ Moshe Dothan;  evrah la- a irat Erets-Yi ra el  e- ati oteha; Israel. Agaf ha- ati ot  eha-muze onim (2000). Hammath Tiberias: Late synagogues. Israel Exploration Society. p. 5. ISBN 978-965-221-043-2. Retrieved 28 December 2011.
^  lie Barnavi; Miriam Eliav-Feldon; Denis Charbit (2002). A historical atlas of the Jewish people: from the time of the patriarchs to the present. Schocken Books. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-8052-4226-3. Retrieved 27 December 2011.
^ Simon Sebag Montefiore (27 January 2011). Jerusalem: The Biography. Orion. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-297-85864-5. Retrieved 27 December 2011.
^ "HISTORY: Foreign Domination". Archived from the original on 15 June 2013.
^ Gil, M. A History of Palestine, 634 1099. p. 294
^ Marina Rustow (2008). Heresy and the politics of community: the Jews of the Fatimid caliphate. Cornell University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8014-4582-8. Retrieved 27 December 2011.
^ Moshe Gil (1997). A history of Palestine, 634 1099. Cambridge University Press. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-521-59984-9.
^ A History of the Jewish People, A. Marx. page 259.
^ Rubenstein, Jeffrey L. (2002). Rabbinic Stories. ISBN 9780809105335.
^ Adler, Cyrus; Schechter, Solomon; Neuman, Abraham Aaron; Zeitlin, Solomon (1942). "The Jewish Quarterly Review".
^ Stefan C. Reif; Shulamit Reif (2002). The Cambridge Genizah Collections: Their Contents and Significance. Cambridge University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-521-81361-7.
^ Raphael Patai (1999). The Children of Noah: Jewish Seafaring in Ancient Times. Princeton University Press. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-691-00968-1.
^ Salo Wittmayer Baron (1952). A Social and Religious History of the Jews: High Middle Ages, 500-1200. Columbia University Press. p. 168. Retrieved 21 December 2011.
^ The Encyclopedia Americana. Americana Corp. 1977. p. 370. ISBN 978-0-7172-0108-2. Retrieved 15 August 2011.
^ Martin Gilbert (2005). "The Jews of Palestine 636 AD to 1880". The Routledge Atlas of the Arab Israeli Conflict. Psychology Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-415-35901-6.
^ Alan John Day; Judith Bell (1987). Border and Territorial Disputes. Longman. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-582-00987-5. Retrieved 22 December 2011.
^ Allan D. Cooper (2009). The Geography of Genocide. University Press of America. p. 132. ISBN 978-0-7618-4097-8.
^ Alex Carmel; Peter Sch fer; Yossi Ben-Artzi. The Jewish Settlement in Palestine, 634 1881. L. Reichert. p. 20.
^ Jerusalem in the Crusader Period Jerusalem: Life throughout the ages in a holy city, David Eisenstadt, March 1997
^ a b c "The Crusades". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Kedar, Benjamin Z.; Phillips, Jonathan; Riley-Smith, Jonathan (12 August 2016). Crusades: Volume 3. ISBN 9781351985772.
^ Goitein, S.D. "Contemporary Letters on the Capture of Jerusalem by the Crusaders." Journal of Jewish Studies 3 (1952), pp. 162-177, pg 163
^ Sefer HaCharedim Mitzvat Tshuva Chapter 3. Maimonides established a yearly holiday for himself and his sons, 6 Cheshvan, commemorating the day he went up to pray on the Temple Mount, and another, 9 Cheshvan, commemorating the day he merited to pray at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron.
^ Abraham P. Bloch (1987). "Sultan Saladin Opens Jerusalem to Jews". One a Day: An Anthology of Jewish Historical Anniversaries for Every Day of the Year. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 277. ISBN 978-0-88125-108-1. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
^ Benzion Dinur (1974). "From Bar Kochba's Revolt to the Turkish Conquest".  In David Ben-Gurion (ed.). The Jews in Their Land. Aldus Books. p. 217. ISBN 9780490002609. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
^ Geoffrey Hindley (28 February 2007). Saladin: Hero of Islam. Pen & Sword Military. p. xiii. ISBN 978-1-84415-499-9. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
^ Alex Carmel; Peter Sch fer; Yossi Ben-Artzi (1990). The Jewish Settlement in Palestine, 634 1881. L. Reichert. p. 31. ISBN 978-3-88226-479-1. Retrieved 21 December 2011.
^ Samson ben Abraham of Sens, Jewish Encyclopedia.
^ Abraham P. Bloch (1987). One a Day: An Anthology of Jewish Historical Anniversaries for Every Day of the Year. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 201. ISBN 978-0-88125-108-1.
^ Alexandra Cuffel. Call and Response: European Jewish Emigration to Egypt and Palestine in the Middle Ages, 1999.
^ Karen Armstrong (29 April 1997). Jerusalem: One City, Three Faiths. Ballantine Books. p. 229. ISBN 9780345391681. Retrieved 25 May 2011.
^ Moshe Lichtman (September 2006). Eretz Yisrael in the Parshah: The Centrality of the Land of Israel in the Torah. Devora Publishing. p. 302. ISBN 978-1-932687-70-5. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
^ "Acre (Acco)". Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2012.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ Shlomo Pereira (26 May 2003). "Biographical Notes: Rabbanim of the Period of the Rishonim and Achronim" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2006.
^ Benjamin J. Segal. "Returning, the Land of Israel as a Focus in Jewish History. Section III: The Biblical Age. Chapter 17: Awaiting the Messiah". Archived from the original on 27 February 2012.
^ Brog, David (20 March 2017). Reclaiming Israel's History: Roots, Rights, and the Struggle for Peace. ISBN 9781621576099.
^ M. Sharon (2010). "Al Khalil". Encyclopedia of Islam, Second Edition. Koninklijke Brill NV.
^ International Dictionary of Historic Places: Middle East and Africa by Trudy Ring, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Boda, pp. 336 339
^ The Blackwell Dictionary of Judaica, Meir of Rothenburg.
^ Joan Comay; Lavinia Cohn-Sherbok (2002). Who's Who in Jewish History: After the Period of the Old Testament. Psychology Press. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-415-26030-5. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
^ a b c d Heinrich Graetz; Bella Lowy (2009). History of the Jews, Vol. IV (in Six Volumes): From the Rise of the Kabbala (1270 CE.) to the Permanent Settlement of the Marranos in Holland (1618 CE.). Cosimo, Inc. pp. 72 75. ISBN 978-1-60520-946-3.
^ Abraham David; Dena Ordan (2010). To Come to the Land: Immigration and Settlement in 16th-Century Eretz-Israel. University of Alabama Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-8173-5643-9.
^ a b Dan Bahat (1976). Twenty Centuries of Jewish life in the Holy Land: The Forgotten Generations. Israel Economist. p. 48. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
^ Berl Locker (1947). Covenant everlasting: Palestine in Jewish History. Sharon Books. p. 83. Retrieved 24 December 2011.
^ Abraham P. Bloch (1987). "Illegal Aliyah from Sicily". One a Day: An Anthology of Jewish Historical Anniversaries for Every Day of the Year. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-88125-108-1.
^ Denys Pringle (2007). The Churches of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem: The city of Jerusalem. Cambridge University Press. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-521-39038-5. Retrieved 24 December 2011.
^ "Land of Israel: Aliyah and Absorption | Encyclopedia.com". www.encyclopedia.com.
^ Abraham P. Bloch (1987). One a Day: An Anthology of Jewish Historical Anniversaries for Every Day of the Year. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-88125-108-1.
^ a b c Israel Zinberg (1978). "Spanish Exiles in Turkey and Palestine". A History of Jewish Literature: The Jewish Center of Culture in the Ottoman Empire. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-87068-241-4.
^ Fannie Fern Andrews (February 1976). The Holy Land Under Mandate. Hyperion Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-88355-304-6. Retrieved 25 December 2011.
^ a b Solomon Schechter (May 2003). Studies in Judaism. Gorgias Press LLC. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-59333-039-2. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
^ Max Leopold Margolis; Alexander Marx (1985). A History of the Jewish People. Atheneum. p. 519. ISBN 978-0-689-70134-4. Retrieved 25 December 2011.
^ "Judaism".
^ Koren, Zalman. "The Temple and the Western Wall". Western Wall Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 16 December 2007.
^ "Ottoman Rule (1517-1917)". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ "Jewish & Non-Jewish Population of Israel/Palestine (1517-Present)". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ a b c "BERAB, JACOB [B. MOSES?] - JewishEncyclopedia.com". www.jewishencyclopedia.com.
^ S. M. Dubnow; Simon Dubnow; Israel Friedlaender (June 2000). History of the Jews in Russia and Poland. Avotaynu Inc. pp. 56 57. ISBN 978-1-886223-11-0. Retrieved 2 August 2011.
^ William Lee Holladay (June 1993). The Psalms through three thousand years: prayerbook of a cloud of witnesses. Fortress Press. p. 143. ISBN 978-0-8006-2752-2. Retrieved 2 August 2011. This is followed by Lekhah Dodi   a hymn composed by Rabbi Shlomo Halevy Alkabetz, a Palestinian poet of the sixteenth century.
^ Raphael Patai (1 September 1990). The Hebrew goddess. Wayne State University Press. p. 232. ISBN 978-0-8143-2271-0. Retrieved 2 August 2011.
^ Paul A. Harrison (2004). Elements of Pantheism. Media Creations. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-59526-317-9.
^ Arthur A. Cohen; Paul Mendes-Flohr (February 2009). 20th Century Jewish Religious Thought: Original Essays on Critical Concepts, Movements, and Beliefs. Jewish Publication Society. p. 1081. ISBN 978-0-8276-0892-4. Retrieved 2 August 2011.
^ Shmuel Abramski (1963). Ancient towns in Israel. Youth and Hechalutz Dept. of the World Zionist Organization. p. 238. Retrieved 9 August 2011.
^ Franz Kobler (1952). Letters of Jews through the ages from Biblical times to the middle of the eighteenth century. Ararat Pub. Society. pp. 360 363. Retrieved 28 December 2011.
^ Elli Kohen (2007). History of the Turkish Jews and Sephardim: memories of a past golden age. University Press of America. pp. 77 78. ISBN 978-0-7618-3600-1.
^ Abraham David; Dena Ordan (2010). To Come to the Land: Immigration and Settlement in 16th-Century Eretz-Israel. University of Alabama Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-8173-5643-9.
^ Adena Tanenbaum, Didacticism or Literary Legerdemain? Philosophical and Ethical Themes in Zechariah Aldahiri's Sefer Hamusar, in Adaptations and Innovations: Studies on the Interaction between Jewish and Islamic Thought and Literature from the Early Middle Ages to the Late Twentieth Century, Dedicated to Professor Joel L. Kraemer, ed. Y. Tzvi Langermann and Josef Stern (Leuven: Peeters Publishers, 2008), pp. 355 379
^ a b Elli Kohen (2007). History of the Turkish Jews and Sephardim: Memories of a Past Golden Age. University Press of America. pp. 94 95. ISBN 978-0-7618-3600-1.
^ Bernard Lewis (1996). Cultures in Conflict: Christians, Muslims, and Jews in the Age of Discovery. Oxford University Press. pp. 42 43. ISBN 978-0-19-510283-3.
^ a b Babel Translations (Firm) (July 1987). Israel, a Phaidon Art and Architecture Guide. Prentice Hall Press. p. 205. ISBN 9780135063200. Retrieved 28 December 2011.
^ Isidore Singer; Cyrus Adler (1912). The Jewish Encyclopedia: A Descriptive Record of the History, Religion, Literature, and Customs of the Jewish People from the Earliest Times to the Present Day. Funk and Wagnalls. p. 283. In 1660, under Mohammed IV. (1649-87), Safed was destroyed by the Arabs.
^ Jacob De Haas (1934). History of Palestine. p. 345. Safed, hotbed of mystics, is not mentioned in the Zebi adventure. Its community had been massacred in 1660, when the town was destroyed by Arabs, and only one Jew escaped.
^ Sidney Mendelssohn. The Jews of Asia: especially in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. (1920), p. 241. "Long before the culmination of Sabbathai's mad career, Safed had been destroyed by the Arabs and the Jews had suffered severely, while in the same year (1660) there was a great fire in Constantinople in which they endured heavy losses..."
^ Franco, Mo se (1897). Essai sur l'histoire des Isra lites de l'Empire ottoman: depuis les origines jusqu'  nos jours. Librairie A. Durlacher. p. 88. Retrieved 13 July 2011. Moins de douze ans apr s, en 1660, sous Mohammed IV, la ville de Safed, si importante autrefois dans les annales juives parce qu'elle  tait habit e exclusivement par les Isra lites, fut d truite par les Arabes, au point qu'il n' y resta, dit une chroniquer une seule ame juive.
^ A Descriptive Geography and Brief Historical Sketch of Palestine, p. 409. "Sultan Seliman surrounded it with a wall in 5300 (1540), and it commenced to revive a little, and to be inhabited by the most distinguished Jewish literati; but it was destroyed again in 5420 (1660)." [1]
^ Joel Rappel. History of Eretz Israel from Prehistory up to 1882 (1980), vol. 2, p. 531. "In 1662 Sabbathai Sevi arrived to Jerusalem. It was the time when the Jewish settlements of Galilee were destroyed by the Druze: Tiberias was completely desolate and only a few of former Safed residents had returned..."
^ Barnai, Jacob. The Jews in Palestine in the Eighteenth Century: under the patronage of the Istanbul Committee of Officials for Palestine. University of Alabama Press, 1992. ISBN 978-0-8173-0572-7; p. 14
^ a b Halpern, Ben; Reinharz, Jehuda (1998). Zionism and the Creation of a New Society. ISBN 9780195357844.
^ "The Churva Synagogue in Jerusalem". www.jewishmag.com. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Aviezer Ravitzky. Messianism, Zionism, and Jewish religious radicalism. 1996, page 228
^ Malamat, Abraham; Tadmor, Hayim (1976). A History of the Jewish People. ISBN 9780674397316.
^ "How to Respond to Common Misstatements About Israel". Anti-Defamation League. 2006. Retrieved 4 October 2006.
^ "The Population of Palestine Prior to 1948". MidEastWeb.org. 2005. Retrieved 4 October 2006.
^ "WebHost4Life" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2007.
^ "History of Jerusalem". www.jewishmag.co.il. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Carmel, Alex (30 November 2010). Ottoman Haifa: A History of Four Centuries under Turkish Rule. ISBN 9780857718716.
^ Reich, Bernard (2008). A Brief History of Israel. ISBN 9781438108261.
^ "Jewish Immigration to Pre-State Israel". My Jewish Learning. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Piamenta, Moshe: Jewish Life in Arabic Language and Jerusalem Arabic in Communal Perspective: A Lexico-Semantic Study, p. 4
^ "The Jewish Agency for Israel - U.S." Archived from the original on 17 October 2007.
^ "The First Aliyah (1882-1903)". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org.
^ "The Expulsion of the Jews from Tel Aviv-Jaffa to the Lower Galilee, 1917-1918". 6 September 2016.
^ "Tel Aviv: From Spring Hill to Independence". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ "The 1948 War". Decoding the Conflict Between Israel and the Palestinians. Charles River Editors. 21 September 2013. ISBN 978-1492783619. Retrieved 16 August 2014.
^ Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948 Archived 21 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine
^ Smith, Charles D. Palestine and the Arab Israeli Conflict: A History With Documents. Bedford/St. Martin's: Boston. (2004). Pg. 198
^ General Progress Report and Supplementary Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, Covering the period from 11 December 1949 to 23 October 1950, Georgia A/1367/Rev.1 23 October 1950
^ Benny Morris (2004). The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited. Cambridge. passim.
^ Palestinian Refugees: An Overview, PRRN
General bibliography
Albertz, Rainer (1994) [Vanderhoek & Ruprecht 1992]. A History of Israelite Religion: Volume II: From the Beginnings to the End of the Monarchy. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664227203.
Albertz, Rainer (2003a). Israel in Exile: The History and Literature of the 6th century BCE. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 9781589830554.
Becking, Bob (2003b). "Law as Expression of Religion (Ezra 7 10)".  In Albertz, Rainer; Becking, Bob (eds.). Yahwism After the Exile: Perspectives on Israelite Religion in the Persian Era. Koninklijke Van Gorcum. ISBN 9789023238805.
Davies, Philip R (2006). "The Origin of Biblical Israel".  In Amit, Yaira;  et al. (eds.). Essays on Ancient Israel in its Near Eastern Context: A Tribute to Nadav Na'aman. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575061283.
Barstad, Hans M. (2008). History and the Hebrew Bible. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 9783161498091.
Becking, Bob, ed. (2001). Only One God? Monotheism in Ancient Israel and the Veneration of the Goddess Asherah. Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 9781841271996.
Dijkstra, Meindert. "El the God of Israel, Israel the People of YHWH: On the Origins of Ancient Israelite Yahwism". In Becking (2001).
Dijkstra, Meindert. "I Have Blessed You by Yahweh of Samaria and His Asherah: Texts with Religious Elements from the Soil Archive of Ancient Israel". In Becking (2001).
Niehr, Herbert (1999). "Religio-Historical Aspects of the Early Post-Exilic Period".  In Becking, Bob; Korpel, Marjo Christina Annette (eds.). The Crisis of Israelite Religion: Transformation of Religious Tradition in Exilic and Post-Exilic Times. Brill. ISBN 9004114963.
Bedford, Peter Ross (2001). Temple Restoration in Early Achaemenid Judah. Brill. ISBN 9004115099.
Ben-Sasson, H.H. (1976). A History of the Jewish People. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-39731-2.
Blenkinsopp, Joseph; Lipschits, Oded, eds. (2003). Judah and the Judeans in the Neo-Babylonian Period. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575060736.
Blenkinsopp, Joseph. "Bethel in the Neo-Babylonian Period". In Blenkinsopp & Lipschits (2003).
Lemaire, Andre. "Nabonidus in Arabia and Judea During the Neo-Babylonian Period". In Blenkinsopp & Lipschits (2003).
Blenkinsopp, Joseph (2009). Judaism, the First Phase: The Place of Ezra and Nehemiah in the Origins of Judaism. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802864505.
Edelman, Diana (2002). "Ethnicity and Early Israel".  In Brett, Mark G. (ed.). Ethnicity and the Bible. Brill. ISBN 0391041266.
Bright, John (2000). A History of Israel. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664220686.
Stager, Lawrence E (1998). "Forging an Identity: The Emergence of Ancient Israel".  In Coogan, Michael D. (ed.). The Oxford History of the Biblical World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195139372.
Coogan, Michael D. (2009). A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament. Oxford University Press.
Coote, Robert B.; Whitelam, Keith W. (1986). "The Emergence of Israel: Social Transformation and State Formation Following the Decline in Late Bronze Age Trade". Semeia (37): 107 47.
Davies, Philip R. (1992). In Search of Ancient Israel. Sheffield. ISBN 9781850757375.
Davies, Philip R. (2009). "The Origin of Biblical Israel". Journal of Hebrew Scriptures. 9 (47). Archived from the original on 28 May 2008.
Day, John (2002). Yahweh and the Gods and Goddesses of Canaan. Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 9780826468307.
Dever, William (2001). What Did the Biblical Writers Know, and When Did They Know It?. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802821263.
Dever, William (2003). Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come From?. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802809759.
Dever, William (2005). Did God Have a Wife?: Archaeology and Folk Religion in Ancient Israel. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802828521.
Doumani, Beshara (1995). Rediscovering Palestine: Merchants and Peasants in Jabal Nablus, 1700 1900. Berkeley: University of California Press ISBN 0-520-20370-4
Edelman, Diana, ed. (1995). The Triumph of Elohim: From Yahwisms to Judaisms. Kok Pharos. ISBN 9789039001240.
Farsoun, Samih K. & Naseer Aruri (2006). Palestine and the Palestinians. Westview Press ISBN 0-8133-4336-4
Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (2001). The Bible Unearthed. Simon and Schuster.
Mazar, Amihay (2007). "The Divided Monarchy: Comments on Some Archaeological Issues".  In Schmidt, Brian B. (ed.). The Quest for the Historical Israel. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 9781589832770.
Gnuse, Robert Karl (1997). No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel. Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 9781850756576.
Golden, Jonathan Michael (2004a). Ancient Canaan and Israel: An Introduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195379853.
Golden, Jonathan Michael (2004b). Ancient Canaan and Israel: New Perspectives. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781576078976.
Gordon, Benjamin Lee. New Judea: Jewish Life in Modern Palestine and Egypt, Manchester, New Hampshire, Ayer Publishing, 1977
Grabbe, Lester L. (2004). A History of the Jews and Judaism in the Second Temple Period. T&T Clark International. ISBN 9780567043528.
Grabbe, Lester L., ed. (2008). Israel in Transition: From Late Bronze II to Iron IIa (c. 1250 850 BCE.). T&T Clark International. ISBN 9780567027269.
Karpat, Kemal H. (2002) Studies on Ottoman Social and Political History. Leiden: Brill ISBN 90-04-12101-3
Katz, Shmuel (1973) Battleground: Fact and Fantasy in Palestine Shapolsky Pub; ISBN 978-0-933503-03-8
Killebrew, Ann E. (2005). Biblical Peoples and Ethnicity: An Archaeological Study of Egyptians, Canaanites, and Early Israel, 1300 1100 BCE. Society of Biblical Literature. ISBN 9781589830974.
King, Philip J.; Stager, Lawrence E. (2001). Life in Biblical Israel. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 0-664-22148-3.
Kuhrt, Am lie (1995). The Ancient Near East c. 3000 330 BC. Routledge. ISBN 9780415167635.
Le Strange, Guy (1890). Palestine under the Moslems: A Description of Syria and the Holy Land from A.D. 650 to 1500. Reprinted by Khayats, Beirut, 1965, ISBN 0-404-56288-4
Lemche, Niels Peter (1998). The Israelites in History and Tradition. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664227272.
LaBianca,  ystein S.; Younker, Randall W (1998). "The Kingdoms of Ammon, Moab and Edom: The Archaeology of Society in Late Bronze/Iron Age Transjordan (c. 1400 500 CE)".  In Levy, Thomas E. (ed.). The Archaeology of Society in the Holy Land. Continuum International Publishing. ISBN 9780826469960.
Lipschits, Oded (2005). The Fall and Rise of Jerusalem. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575060958.
Lipschits, Oded; Knoppers, Gary N; Albertz, Rainer, eds. (2006). Judah and the Judeans in the 4th century BCE. Eisenbrauns. ISBN 9781575061306.
Kottsieper, Ingo. "And They Did Not Care to Speak Yehudit". In Lipschits, Knoppers & Albertz (2006).
Lipschits, Oded; Vanderhooft, David. "Yehud Stamp Impressions in the 4th century BCE". In Lipschits, Knoppers & Albertz (2006).
Maniscalco, Fabio (2005). Protection, Conservation and Valorisation of Palestinian Cultural Patrimony, Massa Publisher. ISBN 88-87835-62-4.
Masterman, E. W. G. (1903). The Jews in Modern Palestine
McNutt, Paula (1999). Reconstructing the Society of Ancient Israel. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664222659.
McCarthy, Justin (1990). The Population of Palestine. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-07110-8.
Merrill, Eugene H. (1995). "The Late Bronze/Early Iron Age Transition and the Emergence of Israel". Bibliotheca Sacra. 152 (606): 145 162.
Middlemas, Jill Anne (2005). The Troubles of Templeless Judah. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199283866.
Miller, James Maxwell; Hayes, John Haralson (1986). A History of Ancient Israel and Judah. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 0-664-21262-X.
Miller, Robert D. (2005). Chieftains of the Highland Clans: A History of Israel in the 12th and 11th Centuries BC. Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802809889.
Nodet,  tienne (1999) [Editions du Cerf 1997]. A Search for the Origins of Judaism: From Joshua to the Mishnah. Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 9781850754459.
Parfitt, Tudor (1987). The Jews in Palestine, 1800 1882. Royal Historical Society studies in history (52). Woodbridge: Published for the Royal Historical Society by Boydell.
Pitk nen, Pekka (2004). "Ethnicity, Assimilation and the Israelite Settlement" (PDF). Tyndale Bulletin. 55 (2): 161 82. doi:10.53751/001c.29171. S2CID 204222638. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2011.
Rogan, Eugene L. (2002). Frontiers of the State in the Late Ottoman Empire: Transjordan, 1850 1921. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ISBN 0-521-89223-6.
Sicker, Martin (1999). Reshaping Palestine: From Muhammad Ali to the British Mandate, 1831 1922. New York: Praeger/Greenwood ISBN 0-275-96639-9
Silberman, Neil Asher; Small, David B., eds. (1997). The Archaeology of Israel: Constructing the Past, Interpreting the Present. Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 9781850756507.
Hesse, Brian; Wapnish, Paula. "Can Pig Remains Be Used for Ethnic Diagnosis in the Ancient Near East?". In Silberman & Small (1997).
Soggin, Michael J. (1998). An Introduction to the History of Israel and Judah. Paideia. ISBN 9780334027881.
Thompson, Thomas L. (1992). Early History of the Israelite People. Brill. ISBN 9789004094833.
Van der Toorn, Karel (1996). Family Religion in Babylonia, Syria, and Israel. Brill. ISBN 9004104100.
Vaughn, Andrew G.; Killebrew, Ann E., eds. (1992). Jerusalem in Bible and Archaeology: The First Temple Period. Sheffield. ISBN 9781589830660.
Cahill, Jane M. "Jerusalem at the Time of the United Monarchy". In Vaughn & Killebrew (1992).
Lehman, Gunnar. "The United Monarchy in the Countryside". In Vaughn & Killebrew (1992).
Wylen, Stephen M. (1996). The Jews in the Time of Jesus: An Introduction. Paulist Press. ISBN 9780809136100.
Zevit, Ziony (2001). The Religions of Ancient Israel: A Synthesis of Parallactic Approaches. Continuum. ISBN 9780826463395.
The Works of Josephus, Complete and Unabridged New Updated Edition. Translated by William Whiston, Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers, Inc., 1987. ISBN 1-56563-167-6.
External links
Yearning for Zion
The conquests of Jerusalem in 614CE and 638CE within the context of attempts at Jewish restoration
Timeline of the History of the Jews and the Land of Israel Based on "A Historical Survey of the Jewish Population in Palestine Presented to the United Nations in 1947
The Historyscoper
vteHistory of the Jews in AsiaSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States withlimited recognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau
 Category
 Asia portal
vteJews and Judaism
Outline of Judaism
Index of Jewish history-related articles
History
Timeline
Israelites
Origins of Judaism
Ancient Israel and Judah
Second Temple period
Rabbinic Judaism
Middle Ages
Haskalah
Zionism
Population
Assimilation
Atheists
Buddhists
Karaites
Samaritans
Lists of Jews
Persecution
Antisemitism
Diaspora
Ashkenazi
Chuts
Yekke
Bene Israel
Beta Israel
Beta Abraham
Bene Ephraim
Bnei Menashe
Cochini
Gruzinim
Italkim
Kaifeng Jews
Karaites
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Maghrebi
Berber Jews
Mizrahi
Baghdadi
Bukharim
Mountain Jews
Romaniote
Sephardi
Musta'arabi
Paradesi
Teimanim
Languages(Diasporic)
Hebrew
Modern
Ashkenazi
Sephardi
Mizrahi
Yemenite
Tiberian
Samaritan
Signed
Medieval
Mishnaic
Biblical
Babylonian
Palestinian
Catalanic
Judeo-Amazigh
Judeo-Arabic
Yahudic
Judeo-Baghdadi
Judeo-Moroccan
Judeo-Tripolitanian
Judeo-Tunisian
Judeo-Yemeni
Judaeo-Aramaic
Targum
Barzani
Betanure
Hulaul 
Lishana Deni
Lish n Did n
Lishanid Noshan
Biblical
Talmudic
Palestinian
Galilean
Judeo-Aragonese
Judeo-Italian
Judaeo-Piedmontese
Judeo-Gascon
Judaeo-Greek
Judeo-Latin
Judeo-Malayalam
Judeo-Marathi
Judaeo-Occitan
Judeo-Persian
Bukhori
Judeo-Borujerdi
Judeo-Golpaygani
Judeo-Hamedani
Judeo-Shirazi
Juhuri
Judaeo-Portuguese
Judeo-Urdu
Karaim
Kayli a
Kivruli
Knaanic
Koin  Greek
Krymchak
Lachoudisch
Ladino
Haketia
Tetuani
Lotegorisch
Qware a
Shassagh
Shassi
Shuadit
Yiddish
Zarphatic
Philosophy
Beliefs
Mitzvah
Rabbinic authority
Chosen people
Conversion
Eschatology
Messiah
Ethics
Holiness
God
Halakha
Kabbalah
Land of Israel
Who is a Jew?
Branches
Religious movements
Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Litvaks
Modern
Conservative
Reform
Reconstructionist
Humanistic
Neo-Hasidism
Renewal
relations
Haymanot
Hellenistic
Karaitism
Samaritanism
Science
Secularism
Schisms
Literature
Sifrei Kodesh
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
Rabbinic
Mishnah
Talmud
Tosefta
Midrash
Kabbalah texts
Hekhalot literature
Pardes Rimonim
Sefer HaBahir
Sefer HaEtz Chaim
Sefer Raziel HaMalakh
Sefer Yetzirah
Zohar
Shulchan Aruch
Siddur
Hebrew literature
Culture
Astrology
perspectives
Monen
Astronomy
Calendar
Holidays
Cuisine
Kashrut
Education
Leadership
Rabbi
Rebbe
Marriage
Music
Names
Politics
Prayer
Synagogue
Hazzan
Symbolism
Studies
Center for Jewish History
American Jewish Historical Society
American Sephardi Federation
Leo Baeck Institute New York
Yeshiva University Museum
YIVO Institute for Jewish Research
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation
Encyclopaedia Judaica
Genetics
Jew (word)
Jewish Encyclopedia
Jewish Virtual Library
National Library of Israel
YIVO Encyclopedia
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
Encyclopedia of the Holocaust
Holocaust Encyclopedia
Relations with other religions
Christian
Anabaptism
Catholicism
Mormonism
Protestantism
Jews and Christmas
non-Christian
Buddhism
Islam
Hinduism
Italics indicate extinct languages
 Category
 Judaism portal
vteJewish historyAntiquity
Origins
Israelites
Ancient Israel and Judah
Hasmoneans
Sanhedrin
Second Temple period
Ancient Greece
Hellenistic Judaism
Roman Empire
Rabbinic Judaism
Split of Christianity and Judaism
Diaspora
Carthage
Ancient Libya
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Persia
Babylon/Mesopotamia
Babylonian captivity
Middle Ages
Under Muslim rule
Byzantium
Crusades
Golden Age
Ottoman Empire
Medieval antisemitism
Modern
Jewish question
Disabilities
Emancipation
Enlightenment
Reform Judaism
Zionism
Soviet Union
United States
World War II
The Holocaust
Resistance
Israeli history
New Yishuv
See also
Jewish history in Israel/Palestine
Population history
Military history
Genetic history
Languages
Expulsions and exoduses
Schisms
Political movements
Timeline
WP:Jewish history
Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_the_Jews_and_Judaism_in_the_Land_of_Israel&oldid=1149521034"