Catholic feast day, public holiday in some countries
"Corpus Domini" redirects here. For other uses, see Corpus Domini (disambiguation).
Solemnity of The Most Holy Body and Blood of ChristCorpus Christi procession. Oil on canvas by Carl Emil Doepler.Official nameSolemnity of the Most Holy Body and Blood of ChristAlso calledCorpus DominiObserved byas a public holiday in Austria, Brazil, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, Croatia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, parts of Germany, Grenada, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Monaco, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Philippines, Saint Lucia, San Marino, parts of Spain, parts of Switzerland, Trinidad and TobagoDateThursday after Trinity Sunday; 60 days after Easter, or the Sunday immediately following this2022 dateJune 162023 dateJune 8[1]2024 dateMay 302025 dateJune 19Frequencyannual
 Rock of the Eucharistic Miracle in Bolsena (1263)
The Feast of Corpus Christi (Ecclesiastical Latin: Dies Sanctissimi Corporis et Sanguinis Domini Iesu Christi, lit. 'Day of the Most Holy Body and Blood of Jesus Christ the Lord'), also known as the Solemnity of the Most Holy Body and Blood of Christ,[2] is a Christian liturgical solemnity celebrating the Real Presence of the Body and Blood, Soul and Divinity of Jesus Christ in the elements of the Eucharist; it is observed by the Roman Catholic Church, in addition to certain Western Orthodox, Lutheran, and Anglican churches. Two months earlier, the institution of the Eucharist at the Last Supper is observed on Maundy Thursday in a sombre atmosphere leading to Good Friday. The liturgy on that day also commemorates Christ's washing of the disciples' feet, the institution of the priesthood, and the agony in the Garden of Gethsemane.
The feast of Corpus Christi was proposed by Saint Thomas Aquinas, Doctor of the Church, to Pope Urban IV, in order to create a feast focused solely on the Holy Eucharist, emphasizing the joy of the Eucharist being the Body and Blood, Soul and Divinity of Jesus Christ. Having recognized in 1264 the authenticity of the Eucharistic Miracle of Bolsena, on input of Aquinas,[3][unreliable source?] the pontiff, then living in Orvieto, established the feast of Corpus Christi as a Solemnity and extended it to the whole Roman Catholic Church.[4][5]
The feast is liturgically celebrated on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday or, "where the Solemnity of The Most Holy Body and Blood of Christ is not a holy day of obligation, it is assigned to the Sunday after the Most Holy Trinity as its proper day".[6]
At the end of Holy Mass, there is often a procession of the Blessed Sacrament, generally displayed in a monstrance. The procession is followed by the Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament.[7] A notable Eucharistic procession is that presided over by the Pope each year in Rome, where it begins at the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran and passes to the Basilica of Saint Mary Major, where it concludes with the aforementioned Benediction. Corpus Christi wreaths, which are made of flowers, are hung on the doors and windows of the Christian faithful, in addition to being erected in gardens and fields.[7]
The celebration of the feast was suppressed in Protestant churches during the Reformation for theological reasons: outside Lutheranism, which maintained the confession of the Real Presence, many Protestants denied the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist other than as a merely symbolic or spiritual presence. Today, most Protestant denominations do not recognize the feast day,[8] with exception of certain Lutheran churches and the Church of England, the latter of which abolished it in 1548 as the English Reformation progressed, but later reintroduced it.[9] Some Anglican churches now observe Corpus Christi, sometimes under the name "Thanksgiving for Holy Communion".
History[edit]
 A stained glass window in the Saint Mary Basilica in Tongeren
The institution of Corpus Christi as a feast in the Christian calendar resulted from approximately forty years of work on the part of Juliana of Li ge, a 13th-century Norbertine canoness, also known as Juliana de Cornillon, born in 1191 or 1192 in Li ge, Belgium, a city where there were groups of women dedicated to Eucharistic worship. Guided by exemplary priests, they lived together, devoted to prayer and to charitable works. Orphaned at the age of five, she and her sister Agnes were entrusted to the care of the Augustinian nuns at the convent and leprosarium of Mont-Cornillon, where Juliana developed a special veneration for the Blessed Sacrament.[10]
She always longed for a feast day outside of Lent in its honour. Her vita reports that this desire was enhanced by a vision of the church under the appearance of the full moon having one dark spot, which signified the absence of such a solemnity.[11][12] In 1208, she reported her first vision of Christ in which she was instructed to plead for the institution of the feast of Corpus Christi. The vision was repeated for the next 20 years but she kept it a secret. When she eventually relayed it to her confessor, he relayed it to the bishop.[13]
Juliana also petitioned the learned Dominican Hugh of St-Cher, and Robert de Thorete, Bishop of Li ge. At that time bishops could order feasts in their dioceses, so Bishop Robert ordered in 1246 a celebration of Corpus Christi to be held in the diocese each year thereafter on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday.[14][15][16] The first such celebration occurred at St Martin's Church in the city that same year.
Hugh of St-Cher travelled to Li ge as Cardinal-Legate in 1251 and, finding that the feast was not being observed, reinstated it. In the following year, he established the feast for his whole jurisdiction (Germany, Dacia, Bohemia, and Moravia), to be celebrated on the Thursday after the Octave of Trinity (one week later than had been indicated for Li ge), but with a certain elasticity, for he granted an indulgence for all who confessed their sins and attended church "on a date and in a place where [the feast] was celebrated".[17]
Jacques Pantal on of Troyes was also won over to the cause of the Feast of Corpus Christi during his ministry as Archdeacon in Li ge under the diocesan bishop Robert of Thourotte. It was he who, having become Pope as Urban IV in 1264, instituted the Solemnity of Corpus Christi on the Thursday after Pentecost as a feast for the entire Latin Church, by the papal bull Transiturus de hoc mundo.[10][17] The legend that this act was inspired by a procession to Orvieto in 1263, after a village priest in Bolsena and his congregation witnessed a Eucharistic miracle of a bleeding consecrated host at Bolsena,[16] has been called into question by scholars who note problems in the dating of the miracle, whose tradition begins in the 14th century, and the interests of Urban IV, a former Archdeacon in Li ge.[citation needed]
Though this was the first papally imposed universal feast for the Latin Church,[18] it was not widely celebrated for half a century. It was adopted by a number of dioceses in Germany and by the Cistercians, and in 1295 was celebrated in Venice.[19] It became a truly universal feast only after the bull of Urban IV was included in the collection of laws known as the Clementines, compiled under Pope Clement V, but promulgated only by his successor Pope John XXII in 1317.[19][20]
While the institution of the Eucharist is celebrated on Holy (Maundy) Thursday, the liturgy on that day also commemorates Christ's washing of the disciples' feet, the institution of the priesthood and the agony in the Garden of Gethsemane. So many other functions took place on this day that the principal event was almost lost sight of. This is mentioned in the Bull Transiturus as the chief reason for the introduction of the new feast. Hence, the feast of Corpus Christi was established to create a feast focused solely on the Holy Eucharist.[11]
Three versions of the office for the feast of Corpus Christi in extant manuscripts provide evidence for the Li ge origins and voice of Juliana in an original office, which was followed by two later versions of the office. A highly sophisticated and polished version can be found in BNF 1143, a musical manuscript devoted entirely to the feast, upon which there is wide scholarly agreement: the version in BNF 1143 is a revision of an earlier version found in Prague, Abbey of Strahov MS D.E.I. 7, and represents the work of Thomas Aquinas following or during his residency at Orvieto from 1259 to 1265. The office can also be found in the 1343 codex Regimen Animarum.[21]: 13  This liturgy may be used as a votive Mass of the Blessed Sacrament on weekdays in ordinary time.[22] The hymn Aquinas composed for Vespers of Corpus Christi, Pange Lingua or another eucharistic hymn, is also used on Maundy Thursday during the procession of the Blessed Sacrament to the altar of repose.[23]
The last two verses of Pange Lingua are also used as a separate hymn, Tantum Ergo, which is sung at Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament. O Salutaris Hostia, another hymn sung at Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, comprises the last two verses of Verbum Supernum Prodiens, Aquinas' hymn for Lauds of Corpus Christi. Aquinas also composed the propers for the Mass of Corpus Christi, including the sequence Lauda Sion Salvatorem. The epistle reading for the Mass was taken from Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (1 Corinthians 11:23 29), and the Gospel reading was taken from the Gospel of John (John 6:56 59).
 Silver-gilt Corpus Christi monstrance of Toledo, Spain
When Pope Pius V revised the General Roman Calendar (see Tridentine Calendar), Corpus Christi was one of only two "feasts of devotion" that he kept, the other being Trinity Sunday.[24] In that calendar, Corpus Christi was celebrated on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday.[25] The feast had an octave until 1955, when Pope Pius XII suppressed all octaves, even in local calendars, except those of Christmas, Easter and Pentecost (see General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII).
From 1849 until 1969, a separate Feast of the Most Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ was assigned originally to the first Sunday in July, later to the first day of the month. This feast was removed from the General Roman Calendar in 1969, "because the Most Precious Blood of Christ the Redeemer is already venerated in the solemnities of the Passion, of Corpus Christi and of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and in the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. But the Mass of the Most Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ is placed among the votive Masses".[26]
Celebration[edit]
Roman Catholic Church[edit]
The feast of Corpus Christi is one of five occasions in the year on which a diocesan bishop is not to be away from his diocese unless for a grave and urgent reason.[27]
 Procession in Ottersweier, Germany
In many countries, the day is a holy day of obligation to participate in the celebration of Mass and takes place on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday. On that day or on the following Sunday, which is the feast day where it is not a holy day of obligation, it is traditional to hold in the streets of a town or in an individual parish a procession with prayers and singing to honor the Blessed Sacrament. German processional hymns include the 1687 "Kommt her, ihr Kreaturen all". During the procession, the consecrated host is displayed in a monstrance held aloft by a member of the clergy. At the end of the procession, Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament is imparted.[28]
Anglicanism[edit]
The celebration of Corpus Christi was abolished in England in 1548.[29][30] However, in the Church of England "the Thursday after Trinity Sunday may be observed as The Day of Thanksgiving for the Institution of Holy Communion (Corpus Christi)" as one of the church's Festivals and with a special liturgy.[31]
The feast is also celebrated by Anglo-Catholic parishes, even in provinces of the Anglican Communion that do not officially include it in their calendars. McCausland's Order of Divine Service, the most commonly used ordo in the Anglican Church of Canada, provides lections for the day.[citation needed]
Other churches[edit]
Corpus Christi is also celebrated by the Old Catholic Church, the Liberal Catholic Church and by some Western Rite Orthodox Christians. It is commemorated in the liturgical calendars of the more Latinized Eastern Catholic Churches.[citation needed]
Lutheranism[edit]
Martin Luther spoke out against processing with the consecrated elements, which he viewed as "only play-acting" and "just vain idolatry". In one of his postils (homilies), he wrote
I am to no festival more hostile   than this one. Because it is the most shameful festival. At no festival are God and his Christ more blasphemed, than on this day, and particularly by the procession. For then people are treating the Blessed Sacrament with such ignominy that it becomes only play-acting and is just vain idolatry. With its cosmetics and false holiness it conflicts with Christ's order and establishment. Because He never commanded us to carry on like this. Therefore, beware of such worship![32]
However, the feast was retained in the calendars of the Lutheran Church until about 1600.[33]
Calvinism[edit]
Like Lutherans, followers of the Reformed tradition do not observe the feast.[34]
Folk traditions[edit]
On the eve of the Feast of Corpus Christi, clergy bless Corpus Christi wreaths that are made of flowers.[7] Corpus Christi wreaths and bouquets are often "attached to flags and banners, to houses, and to the arches of green boughs that span the streets."[7] In Christian homes, these Corpus Christi wreaths are suspended on walls or displayed on doors and in windows.[7] Corpus Christi wreaths are also "put up in gardens, fields, and pastures, with a prayer for protection and blessing upon the growing harvest."[7]
Throughout Christendom, "the custom developed of carrying the Blessed Sacrament in a splendid procession through the town after the Mass on Corpus Christi Day."[7] The monstrance which holds the host is surrounded by a Corpus Christi wreath of flowers.[7] During the procession, church bells are rung and "the faithful kneel in front of their homes to adore the Eucharistic Lord."[7] Along the route in which the procession occurs, Christian homes "are decorated with little birch trees and green boughs", with candles being lit in the windows.[7] Oftentimes, stops are made at various points called "stations" during the procession and "the Blessed Sacrament is put on an altar table" while a Gospel passage is read and hymns are sung, along with prayer being made.[7]
England[edit]
In medieval times in many parts of Europe, Corpus Christi was a time for the performance of mystery plays. The plays in York, England, were performed on Corpus Christi Day for some 200 years until their suppression in the sixteenth century during the Protestant Reformation.[35]
Peru[edit]
In the southern highlands of the Cusco Region of Peru, the festival of Quyllurit'i is held near Corpus Christi in the Sinaqara Valley. As many as 10,000 pilgrims come from neighboring areas. Culminating on Trinity Sunday, this festival marks the return in the sky of the Pleiades constellation, known in the Quechua language as Qullqa, or "storehouse", as it is associated with the upcoming harvest and New Year. The festival precedes the official feast of Corpus Christi, held the Thursday following Trinity Sunday, but it is closely associated with it.[36]
Poland[edit]
 Spycimierz, Poland
In Spycimierz in central Poland (Gmina Uniej w), parishioners arrange a carpet of live flowers about one kilometre long. A solemn procession passes over it at 5 pm. [37] Long carpets of flowers are also laid in four parishes in the Opole Voivodship in southern Poland. Flower carpets tradition for Corpus Christi processions was inscribed on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2021. [38]
Spain[edit]
Andalucia[edit]
The celebrations in Seville are depicted in a section of Iberia, the masterpiece of the composer Alb niz.
Castile-La Mancha[edit]
Corpus Christi is one of the main festivals in Toledo, Spain.[citation needed]
Castile and Le n[edit]
In the village of Castrillo de Murcia near Burgos, the celebration includes the practice of El Colacho (baby jumping).[39]
Catalonia[edit]
 Dancing egg, Barcelona
 Patum de Berga
In Catalonia, Corpus Christi is celebrated with the tradition of the dancing egg. There is evidence this tradition dates from the 16th century.[40]
The Patum de Berga is a popular and traditional festival that is celebrated each year in the Catalan city of Berga (Barcelona) during Corpus Christi. It consists of a series of "dances" (balls) by townspeople dressed as mystical and symbolical figures. The balls are marked by their solemnity and their ample use of fire and pyrotechnics. It was declared a Traditional Festival of National Interest by the Generalitat de Catalunya in 1983, and as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO in 2005.[41]
Date[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Corpus Christi is a moveable feast, celebrated on the Thursday after Trinity Sunday,[11] 60 days after Easter, or, in countries where it is not a holy day of obligation, on the following Sunday.[42]
The earliest possible Thursday celebration falls on 21 May (as in 1818 and 2285), the latest on 24 June (as in 1943 and 2038). The Sunday celebration of the feast, introduced in the second half of the 20th century, occurs three days later, between 24 May at earliest (for the first time in 2285) and 27 June at latest (for the first time in 2038). For Western Rite Orthodox Christians, since they use the Julian Calendar, at least for all Feast Days dependent on the date of Pascha, their date of the celebration of Corpus Christi, translates to, in the Gregorian Calendar, from 3 June at the earliest, to 7 July, at the latest.
Corpus Christi is a public holiday in some countries with a predominantly Catholic population including, among others, Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Colombia, Croatia, Dominican Republic, East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, parts of Germany, Grenada, Haiti, Jerusalem in Israel, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, parts of Puerto Rico, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Spain, parts of Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, parts of the United States, and Venezuela.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Catholicism portalChristianity portal
Adoro te devote
Dancing devils of Corpus Christi
Feast of the Most Pure Heart of Mary
Feast of the Sacred Heart
Lauda Sion
List of festivals in Costa Rica
Pange Lingua Gloriosi Corporis Mysterium
Sacris solemniis
Spello's Infiorate
Transubstantiation
Verbum Supernum Prodiens
References[edit]
^ Richert, Scott P., When is Corpus Christi?, LearnReligions.com
^ "Solemnity of the Most Holy Body and Blood of Christ". Catholic News Agency. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019.
^ "The Eucharistic Miracle of Bolsena (Orvito, Italy)". therealpresence.org. Archived from the original on 11 January 2001. Retrieved 21 June 2019.
^ Robert E. Alexander; John A. Elliott (1 April 2018). Livio Orazio Valentini: An Artist's Spiritual Odyssey. University of South Carolina Press. p. 43. ISBN 9781611178999. OCLC 1019855530. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019.
^ "Italy's Orvieto miracle inspires thousands during jubilee". Rome. 7 October 2013. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2019.
^ "Sanctissimi Corpus et Sanguis Christi." Roman Missal, 2011 Latin to English translation
^ a b c d e f g h i j k Weiser, Francis X. (1956). The Holyday Book. Harcourt, Brace and Company. p. 57.
^ "Corpus Christi, Feast of". Encyclop dia Britannica. 1974.
^ "Corpus Christi at Cyberbrethren". Redeemer Lutheran Church. 17 June 2006. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 13 June 2022.
^ a b "Benedict XVI. "St. Juliana: the Nun Who Gave Us the Feast of Corpus Christi", general audience address of Nov. 17, 2010, which he dedicated to St. Juliana". Zenit.org. 30 May 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2014.
^ a b c "Mershman, Francis. "Feast of Corpus Christi." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 17 Jun. 2013". Newadvent.org. Retrieved 23 January 2014.
^ Vie de Sainte Julienne de Cornillon, edited by J.-P. Delville, Published by the Institute of Medieval Studies at the Catholic University at Louvain, pp. 120 123
^ Phyllis Jestice, Holy people of the world Published by ABC-CLIO, 2004 ISBN 1-57607-355-6 p. 457
^ Barbara R. Walters, The Feast of Corpus Christi (Penn State Press 2006 ISBN 978-0-271-04831-4), p. 9
^ The decree is preserved in Anton Joseph Binterim, Vorz glichsten Denkw rdigkeiten der Christkatholischen Kirche (Mainz, 1825 41), together with parts of the first liturgy written for the occasion.
^ a b Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Corpus Christi, Feast of" . Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 193.
^ a b Walters (2006), p. 12
^ Oxford History of Christian Worship By Geoffrey Wainwright, Oxford University Press 2006 ISBN 0-19-513886-4, p. 248
^ a b Miri Rubin, Corpus Christi: The Eucharist in Late Medieval Culture (Cambridge University Press 1991 ISBN 978-0-52143805-6), pp. 181 182
^ Walters (2006), p. 13
^ Mathiesen, Thomas J. (Winter 1983). ""The Office of the New Feast of Corpus Christi" in the Regimen Animarum at Brigham Young University". The Journal of Musicology. 2 (1): 13 44. doi:10.2307/763576. JSTOR 763576.
^ General Instruction of the Roman Missal, 375
^ Roman Missal, Mass of the Lord's Supper, 38
^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 66
^ Manlio Sodi, Achille Maria Triacca (editors), Missale Romanum: Editio Princeps (1570) (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1998 ISBN 978-88-209-2547-5), pp. 399 401
^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 128
^ Code of Canon Law, canon 395  3
^ "Katinas, Paula. "Brooklyn's Catholic churches celebrate Feast of Corpus Christi"". Brooklyneagle.com. 3 June 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2014.
^ King, John N., ed. (2004). Voices of the English Reformation: A Sourcebook. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 181. ISBN 9780812200805.
^ Rogerson, Margaret (2011). The York Mystery Plays: Performance in the City. York Medieval Press. ISBN 9781903153352.
^ The Church of England: Festivals
^ Luther Martin: Auslegung von Joh 6. 1530, Kirchenpostille 1521, Tischreden
^ Frank Senn: Christian Liturgy: Catholic and Evangelical, Fortress Press, 1997. p. 344. ISBN 0-8006-2726-1
^ "Protestant Sacred Space". 4 April 2017.
^ Beadle, Richard; King, Pamela M (1999). York Mystery Plays: A Selection in Modern Spelling. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-283710-9.
^ Antoinette Molini  Fioravanti, Celebrando el Cuerpo de Dios (Corpus Christi Festival), Fondo Editorial PUCP, 1999, pp. 197 198(in Spanish)
^ "History of the tradition".
^ "Elements inscribed in 2021 on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity" https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/flower-carpets-tradition-for-corpus-christi-processions-01743
^ "Spanish village holds baby jump". bbc.co.uk. BBC News   Europe. 25 May 2008.
^ VilaWeb TV: L'Ou com Balla a Ca l'Ardiaca (in Catalan)
^ info at UNESCO.org
^ "What is the Feast of Corpus Christi? | YOUCAT".
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Corpus Christi.
Corpus Christi, with order for procession at www.therealpresence.org
Feast of Corpus Christi: History
Carthusians and Corpus Christi
Corpus Christi background, from www.haverford.edu
Traditional Corpus Christi celebrations in Panama
Thomas M Landy, "Feasts, Processions & Festivals", Catholics & Cultures updated 12 June 2017
vteLiturgical year of the Catholic ChurchOrdinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1969 Calendar)Advent
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Immaculate Conception
December 17 to 23
Christmas Season
Christmas
Holy Family
Mary, Mother of God
Epiphany
Baptism of the Lord
Ordinary Time
Presentation of the Lord
Lent
Ash Wednesday
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Saint Joseph
Annunciation
Palm Sunday
Holy Week
Paschal Triduum
Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass
Mass of the Lord's Supper
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil
Easter Season
Easter Sunday
Octave
Divine Mercy Sunday
Sundays
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
Ascension
Pentecost
Ordinary Time
Trinity Sunday
Corpus Christi
Sacred Heart
Visitation
Saint John the Baptist
Saints Peter and Paul
Transfiguration
Assumption
Nativity of Mary
Exaltation of the Cross
All Saints' Day
All Souls' Day
Presentation of Mary
Christ the King
Tridentine Mass of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1960 Calendar)Advent
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Rorate Mass
Immaculate Conception
Greater Ferias
Winter Ember Days
Christmas Season
Christmas
Octave Day of Christmas
Holy Name of Jesus
Epiphany Season
Epiphany
Holy Family
Baptism of the Lord
Purification of MaryP
LentPre-Lent
Septuagesima
Sexagesima
Quinquagesima
Lent
Ash Wednesday
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Spring Ember Days
Saint Joseph
Annunciation
Passiontide
Passion Sunday
Palm SundayP
Holy WeekP
Paschal Triduum
Tenebrae
Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass
Mass of the Lord's Supper
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil
Easter Season
Easter SundayP
Octave
Sundays after Easter
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Rogation DaysP
AscensionP
Pentecost Season
Pentecost
Summer Ember Days
Trinity Sunday
Corpus ChristiP
Sacred Heart
Saint John the Baptist
Saints Peter and Paul
Precious Blood
Visitation
Transfiguration
Assumption
Nativity of Mary
Exaltation of the CrossP
Autumn Ember Days
Maternity of Mary
Christ the King
All Saints' Day
All Souls' Day
Presentation of Mary
Legend
P = Ordinary Procession according to the Roman Ritual
Legend
Italic font marks the 10 holy days of obligation in the universal calendar which do not normally fall on a Sunday.
Older calendars
1955
pre-1955
Tridentine
Liturgical colours
Ranking
Computus
Easter cycle
 Catholicism portal
vteTridentine Mass of the Catholic ChurchTypes
Chapter and conventual
Low
Deutsche Singmesse
Dialogue
French Organ
Missa cantata
Missa Sicca
Ritual
Coronation
Papal
Requiem
Nuptial
Solemn
Pontifical
Papal
Sine populo
Votive
Red
Order
Pre-Mass
Vesting prayers
Asperges me
Vidi aquam in Eastertide
Processional hymn
Mass of the Catechumens
Iudica me
Confiteor
mea culpa
Introit
Kyrie
Gloria in excelsis Deo
Collect
Lection
Gradual
Alleluia or Tract
Sequentia
Gospel
Homily
Mass of the Faithful
Credo
Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed
Offertory
Lavabo
Orate fratres
Secret
Preface
Sursum corda
Sanctus
Hosanna
Roman Canon
Oblation
Epiclesis
Words of Institution
Anamnesis
Elevation
Doxology
Pater Noster
Embolism
Pax
Agnus Dei
Dona nobis pacem
Fraction
Holy Communion
Communion antiphon
Ablutions
Postcommunio
Dismissal
Ite, missa est or Benedicamus Domino
Last Gospel
Post-Mass
Leonine prayers
Recessional hymn
For funeral Mass
Dies irae
Pie Iesu
Libera Me
Requiescant in pace
Absolution of the dead
In paradisum
De profundis
Participants
Acolyte
altar server
Bishop
Boat boy
Cantor or schola
Crucifer
Deacon
Laity
Lector
Master of ceremonies
Porter
Priest
Subdeacon
Altar
Altar cards
Altar crucifix
Altar rails
Ambo
Antependium
Credence table
Kneeler
Lavabo
Misericord
Piscina
Sacristy
Tabernacle
Altar cloths
Altar linens
Antependium
Burse
Chalice veil
Corporal
Pall
Purificator
Illumination
Altar (Catholic Church)#Candles and candlesticks
Paschal candle
Sanctuary lamp
Triple candlestick
Liturgicalobjects
Altar bell
Aspergillum
Chalice
Ciborium
Collection basket
Cruet
Fistula
Flabellum
Funghellino
Holy water
Incense
use
Manuterge
Paten
Processional cross
Pyx
Sacramental bread
wafer
Sacramental wine (or must)
Thurible
Literature
C remoniale Episcoporum
Missale Romanum
Pontificale Romanum
Rituale Romanum
Vestments(Pontifical/Papal)
Alb
Amice
Chasuble
Cincture
Cope
Crosier
Dalmatic
Episcopal gloves
Ecclesiastical ring
Episcopal sandals
Falda
Humeral veil
Mitre
Pallium
Papal fanon
Papal tiara
Pectoral cross
Stole
Sub-cinctorium
Superhumerale
Surplice
Tunicle
Vimpa
Music
Antiphon
Graduale Romanum
Gregorian chant
Hymn
Kyriale Romanum
Liber Usualis
Music for the Requiem Mass
Organ
voluntary
Organum
Polyphony
Reciting tone
Accentus
Recto tono
Tra le sollecitudini
Tonary
Gregorian Antiphonary
Liturgical yearCalendar
(1954/1955/1960)
Advent
Christmastide
Epiphanytide
Septuagesima
Lent
Passiontide
Holy Week
Paschal Triduum
Eastertide
Ascensiontide
After Pentecost
Calendar of saints
Holy day of obligation
Moveable feast
Octaves
Ranking of liturgical days: Solemnity
Memorial
Commemoration
Feria
Discipline
Church etiquette
Closed communion
Canon 844
Canon 915
Communion and the developmentally disabled
Communion under both kinds
Eucharistic fast
First Communion
Genuflection
Headcover
Host desecration
Infant communion
Reserved sacrament
Sign of the Cross
Thanksgiving after Communion
Viaticum
Theology
Blessed Sacrament
Body and Blood of Christ
Corpus Christi (feast)
Epiousion
Eucharistic miracle
Grace ex opere operato
In persona Christi
History of Catholic eucharistic theology
Koinonia
Liturgical colours
Origin of the Eucharist
Last Supper
Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature
Priesthood of Melchizedek
Pro multis
Real presence
Transubstantiation
Concepts
Ad orientem
Canon law
Code of Rubrics
Concelebration
Ecclesiastical Latin
Intercession of saints
Ordinary & propers (common)
Sunday
Lord's Day
Text and rubrics of the Roman Canon
Vulgate (Sixto-Clementine)
Latin Psalters
Related
Agape feast
Alternatim
Anaphora
Anima Christi
Aspersion
Catholic liturgy
Coetus Internationalis Patrum
Communities using the Tridentine Mass
Indult Catholic
traditionalist Catholic
Congregation for Divine Worship
Council of Trent
Eucharistic adoration & benediction
Holy Hour
Forty Hours' Devotion
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Gospel Book
History of the Roman Canon
Latin liturgical rites
Lex orandi, lex credendi
Litany
Liturgical Movement
Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII
Liturgical use of Latin
Mass of Paul VI
Missal
Plenary indulgence
Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei
Pope Pius V
Preces
Pre-Tridentine Mass
Quattuor abhinc annos
Quo primum
Catholic theology
Sacramentary
Sacraments of the Catholic Church
Summorum Pontificum
Traditionis custodes
Western Rite Orthodoxy
 Catholicism portal
Authority control: National 
Spain
Germany
Latvia
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feast_of_Corpus_Christi&oldid=1148303489"