One of the Earth's four temperate seasons
SpringTemperate seasonBlooming flowers and trees in springNorthern temperate zoneAstronomical season21 March   21 JuneMeteorological season1 March   31 MaySolar (Celtic) season1 February   30 AprilSouthern temperate zoneAstronomical season23 September   22 DecemberMeteorological season1 September   30 NovemberSolar (Celtic) season1 August   31 OctoberSummerSpring  AutumnWinter
Part of  a series onWeather
Temperate and polar seasons
Winter
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Tropical seasons
Dry season
Harmattan
Wet season
Storms
Cloud
Cumulonimbus cloud
Arcus cloud
Downburst
Microburst
Heat burst
Derecho
Lightning
Volcanic lightning
Thunderstorm
Air-mass thunderstorm
Thundersnow
Dry thunderstorm
Mesocyclone
Supercell
Tornado
Anticyclonic tornado
Landspout
Waterspout
Dust devil
Fire whirl
Anticyclone
Cyclone
Polar low
Extratropical cyclone
European windstorm
Nor'easter
Subtropical cyclone
Tropical cyclone
Atlantic hurricane
Typhoon
Storm surge
Dust storm
Simoom
Haboob
Monsoon
Amihan
Gale
Sirocco
Firestorm
Winter storm
Ice storm
Blizzard
Ground blizzard
Snow squall
Precipitation
Drizzle
Freezing
Graupel
Hail
Megacryometeor
Ice pellets
Diamond dust
Rain
Freezing
Cloudburst
Snow
Rain and snow mixed
Snow grains
Snow roller
Slush
Topics
Air pollution
Atmosphere
Chemistry
Convection
Physics
River
Climate
Cloud
Physics
Fog
Fog season
Cold wave
Heat wave
Jet stream
Meteorology
Severe weather
List
Extreme
Severe weather terminology
Canada
Japan
United States
Weather forecasting
Weather modification
Glossaries
Meteorology
Climate change
Tornado terms
Tropical cyclone terms
 Weather portalvte
Spring, also known as springtime, is one of the four temperate seasons, succeeding winter and preceding summer. There are various technical definitions of spring, but local usage of the term varies according to local climate, cultures and customs. When it is spring in the Northern Hemisphere, it is autumn in the Southern Hemisphere and vice versa. At the spring (or vernal) equinox, days and nights are approximately twelve hours long, with daytime length increasing and nighttime length decreasing as the season progresses until the Summer Solstice in June (Northern Hemisphere) and December (Southern Hemisphere).
Spring and "springtime" refer to the season, and also to ideas of rebirth, rejuvenation, renewal, resurrection and regrowth. Subtropical and tropical areas have climates better described in terms of other seasons, e.g. dry or wet, monsoonal or cyclonic. Cultures may have local names for seasons which have little equivalence to the terms originating in Europe.
Meteorological reckoning
Further information: Meteorological seasons
Meteorologists generally define four seasons in many climatic areas: spring, summer, autumn (fall), and winter. These are determined by the values of their average temperatures on a monthly basis, with each season lasting three months. The three warmest months are by definition summer, the three coldest months are winter, and the intervening gaps are spring and autumn. Meteorological spring can therefore, start on different dates in different regions.
In the US and UK, spring months are March, April, and May.[1][2]
In Ireland, following the Irish calendar, spring is often defined as February, March, and April.[3][4]
In Sweden, meteorologists define the beginning of spring as the first occasion on which the average 24 hours temperature exceeds zero degrees Celsius for seven consecutive days, thus the date varies with latitude and elevation (but no earlier than 15th Feb, and no later than 31st July).[5]
In Australia, the spring months are September, October, and November.[6]
In New Zealand, spring begins on 22nd or 23rd of September and ends on 21 December.[7][8]
In Brazil, spring months are September, October, November.
Astronomical and solar reckoning
In the Northern Hemisphere (e.g. Germany, the United States, Canada, and the UK),[9] the astronomical vernal equinox (varying between 19 and 21 March) can be taken to mark the first day of spring with the summer solstice (around 21 June) marked as first day of summer. By solar reckoning[citation needed], Spring is held to begin 1 February until the first day of Summer on May Day, with the summer solstice being marked as Midsummer instead of the beginning of Summer as with astronomical reckoning. 
In Persian culture the first day of spring is the first day of the first month (called Farvardin) which begins on 20 or 21 March.
In the traditional Chinese calendar, the "spring" season ( ) consists of the days between Lichun (3 5 February), taking Chunfen (20 22 March) as its midpoint, then ending at Lixia (5 7 May). Similarly, according to the Celtic tradition, which is based solely on daylight and the strength of the noon sun, spring begins in early February (near Imbolc or Candlemas) and continues until early May (Beltane).
The spring season in India is culturally in the months of March and April, with an average temperature of approx 32 C.[10] Some people in India especially from Karnataka state celebrate their new year in spring, Ugadi.
Ecological reckoning
The beginning of spring is not always determined by fixed calendar dates. The phenological or ecological definition of spring relates to biological indicators, such as the blossoming of a range of plant species, the activities of animals, and the special smell of soil that has reached the temperature for micro flora to flourish. These indicators, along with the beginning of spring, vary according to the local climate and according to the specific weather of a particular year.[citation needed] In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the National Trust runs the #BlossomWatch campaign, which encourages people to share images of blossom with one another, as an early indicator of the arrival of the season.[11]
Some ecologists divide the year into six seasons. In addition to spring, ecological reckoning identifies an earlier separate prevernal (early or pre-spring) season between the hibernal (winter) and vernal (spring) seasons. This is a time when only the hardiest flowers like the crocus are in bloom, sometimes while there is still some snowcover on the ground.[12]
Natural events
 Hundreds of sour cherry blooming in Extremadura, Spain, during spring
 Late April in the Alps. At high elevations[13] (or latitudes),[14] spring is often the snowiest period of the year.
 A willow in Stockholm in April 2016
 Sowing at spring in Estonia
During early spring, the axis of the Earth is increasing its tilt relative to the Sun, and the length of daylight rapidly increases for the relevant hemisphere. The hemisphere begins to warm significantly, causing new plant growth to "spring forth," giving the season its name.[15]
Any snow begins to melt, swelling streams with runoff and any frosts become less severe. In climates that have no snow, and rare frosts, air and ground temperatures increase more rapidly.
Many flowering plants bloom at this time of year, in a long succession, sometimes beginning when snow is still on the ground and continuing into early summer.[16] In normally snowless areas, "spring" may begin as early as February (Northern Hemisphere) or August (Southern Hemisphere), heralded by the blooming of deciduous magnolias, cherries, and quince.[17] Many temperate areas have a dry spring, and wet autumn (fall), which brings about flowering in this season, more consistent with the need for water, as well as warmth. Subarctic areas may not experience "spring" at all until May.
While spring is a result of the warmth caused by the changing orientation of the Earth's axis relative to the Sun, the weather in many parts of the world is affected by other, less predictable events. The rainfall in spring (or any season) follows trends more related to longer cycles such as the solar cycle or events created by ocean currents and ocean temperatures for example, the El Ni o effect and the Southern Oscillation Index.
Unstable spring weather may occur more often when warm air begins to invade from lower latitudes, while cold air is still pushing from the Polar regions. Flooding is also most common in and near mountainous areas during this time of year, because of snow-melt which is accelerated by warm rains. In North America, Tornado Alley is most active at this time of year, especially since the Rocky Mountains prevent the surging hot and cold air masses from spreading eastward, and instead force them into direct conflict. Besides tornadoes, supercell thunderstorms can also produce dangerously large hail and very high winds, for which a severe thunderstorm warning or tornado warning is usually issued. Even more so than in winter, the jet streams play an important role in unstable and severe Northern Hemisphere weather in springtime.[18]
In recent decades, season creep has been observed, which means that many phenological signs of spring are occurring earlier in many regions by around two days per decade.[citation needed]
Spring in the Southern Hemisphere is different in several significant ways to that of the Northern Hemisphere for several reasons, including:
There is no land bridge between Southern Hemisphere countries and the Antarctic zone capable of bringing in cold air without the temperature-mitigating effects of extensive tracts of water;
The vastly greater amount of ocean in the Southern Hemisphere at most latitudes;
There is a circumpolar flow of air (the roaring 40s and 50s) uninterrupted by large land masses;
No equivalent jet streams; and
The peculiarities of the reversing ocean currents in the Pacific.[19]
Cultural associations
 Holi in Nepal
Carnival
Main article: Carnival
Further information: Mardi Gras
Carnival is practiced by many Christians around the world in the days before Lent (40 days, without Sundays, before Easter).  It is the first spring festival of the new year for many.[20]
Easter
Main article: Easter
 Easter procession, commemorating the Resurrection of Jesus
Easter is the most important religious feast in the Christian liturgical year.[21]
Christians believe that Jesus was resurrected from the dead on the "third day"[note 1] (two days after his crucifixion), and celebrate this resurrection on Easter Day, two days after Good Friday. Since the Last Supper was a Passover Seder, the date of Easter can be calculated as the first Sunday after the start of Passover. This is usually (see Passover below) the first Sunday after the first full moon following the spring equinox. The date of Easter varies between 22 March and 25 April (which corresponds to between 4 April and 8 May in the Gregorian Calendar for the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches using the Julian Calendar). In this celebration, the children do an easter egg hunt.
May Day
Main article: May Day
Further information: Beltane
The First of May is the date of many public holidays.[22] In many countries, May Day is synonymous with International Workers' Day, or Labour Day, which celebrates the social and economic achievements of the labour movement. As a day of celebration, the holiday has ancient origins, and it can relate to many customs that have survived into modern times. Many of these customs are due to May Day being a cross-quarter day, meaning that (in the Northern Hemisphere where it is almost exclusively celebrated) it falls approximately halfway between the spring equinox and summer solstice. In the Celtic tradition, this date marked the end of spring and the beginning of summer.
Passover
Main article: Passover
The Passover begins on the 15th day of the month of Nisan, which typically falls in March or April of the Gregorian calendar on the night of a full moon after the northern spring equinox.[23] However, due to leap months falling after the vernal equinox, Passover sometimes starts on the second full moon after vernal equinox, as in 2016. Jews celebrate this holiday to commemorate their escape from slavery in Egypt as described in the book of Exodus in the Torah.
Foods consumed during Passover seders, such as lamb and barley, are tied to springtime seasonal availability. In this celebration, children recite the Four Questions during the seder and hunt for the afikoman afterwards.
Allhallowtide
The Western Christian season encompassing the triduum of All Saints' Eve (Halloween), All Saints' Day (All Hallows') and All Souls' Day are observed in the spring in the Southern hemisphere.
See also
Akitu (Ancient Mesopotamia, Sumer, Babylonia)
Bihu (India)
Chinese New Year
Floriade (Australia)
Holi (India, Nepal)
M r i or (Romania)
Nowruz (Iran)
Pahela Falgun (Bangladesh)
Saint Patrick's Day (Northern Hemisphere)
Sham el-Nessim (Egypt)
Sinhala New Year (Sri Lanka)
Spring break
Spring Carnival (Australia)
Spring cleaning
Spring Day (Many countries)
St Brigid's Day (Ireland)
T t (Vietnam)
Vasant panchami (India)
Notes
^ This resurrection is commonly said to have occurred "on the third day after resting for the Sabbath (Friday sundown to Saturday sundown), including the day of crucifixion." (e.g. Luke 24:21 KJV)
References
^ "Spring". Glossary of Meteorology. Retrieved 5 March 2018.
^ "Met Office: Spring". Retrieved 5 March 2018.
^ "Get ready for the seasons in Ireland". www.durbanresidence.com.
^ Farrell, Conor (5 February 2014). "Column: When does spring really start? Let's clear this is up once and for all". TheJournal.ie.
^ "Season arrival dates, Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute". Retrieved 20 March 2023.
^ "Australian Bureau of Meteorology   Climate Glossary   Seasons". Australian Bureau of Meteorology. bom.gov.au. Retrieved 18 March 2022.
^ Deguara, Brittney (27 May 2019). "When does winter officially start in New Zealand?". Stuff. Retrieved 4 October 2020.
^ WW Forecast Team (1 March 2012). "POLL: Do you want the dates of our seasons changed?". Weather Watch. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.
^ "Met Office: Spring". Retrieved 5 March 2018.
^ "Seasons in India | Different types of seasons in India with months". gupshups. October 2019.
^ "Blossom watch day: National Trust urges UK to share blooms". the Guardian. 24 April 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2022.
^ Allaby, Michael (1999). "A Dictionary of Zoology". Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 30 May 2012.
^ "Mean Snow Depths, 1983 2002" (maps, see April), Hydrological Atlas of Switzerland, Federal Office for the Environment
^ Warren, Stephen G.; Rigor, Ignatius G.; Untersteiner, Norbert; Radionov, Vladimir F.; Bryazgin, Nikolay N.; Aleksandrov, Yevgeniy I.; Colony, Roger (June 1999). "Snow Depth on Arctic Sea Ice". Journal of Climate. 12 (6): 1814 1829. Bibcode:1999JCli...12.1814W. doi:10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<1814:SDOASI>2.0.CO;2. Retrieved 6 May 2021. The deepest snow is just north of Greenland and Ellesmere Island, peaking in early June at more than 40 cm
^ Hiskey, Daven (26 September 2013). "Why Do We Call the Seasons Spring, Summer, Fall and Winter?". Mental Floss. Retrieved 8 August 2019.
^ "How do flowers bloom?". UCSB Science Line. UC Santa Barbara. 25 December 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2019.
^ Lelong-Lehoang, Claire (11 October 2019). "Flower trees   top 5 spring-blooming shrubs and trees". Nature & Garden. Retrieved 9 September 2019.
^ US Department of Commerce, NOAA. "NWS JetStream   The Jet Stream". www.weather.gov.
^ "El Ni o: Pacific Wind and Current Changes Bring Warm, Wild Weather". earthobservatory.nasa.gov. 14 February 2017.
^ "Carnival / Ash Wednesday". www.timeanddate.com.
^ Anthony Aveni, "The Easter/Passover Season: Connecting Time's Broken Circle," The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 64 78.
^ Anthony Aveni, "May Day: A Collision of Forces," The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 79 89.
^ Hopkins, Edward J. (1996). "Full Moon, Easter & Passover". University of Wisconsin. Retrieved 10 April 2017.
External links
Spring  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Word Lore
Online Etymology Dictionary
Glossary of Meteorology (archived 15 March 2012)
Solstice, Equinox & Cross-Quarter Moments for 2011 and other years, for several time zones (archived 7 July 2011)
Earth's Seasons, Equinoxes, Solstices, Perihelion, and Aphelion, 2000 2020 (from the United States Naval Observatory's Astronomical Applications Department) (archived 13 October 2007)
Seasons and Seasonal Cusps as Pagan and Religious Holidays (from Archaeoastronomy Archived 16 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine)
What day does spring start? (BBC, UK News Magazine)
Status of Spring   Maps of Spring Leaf and Bloom Indices for the United States
Tunno, Bianca Barr. "What's the difference between meteorological and astronomical spring?". AccuWeather. Retrieved 1 March 2020.
vteSeasonsTemperate seasons
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Science portalTropical seasons
Wet season
Dry season
Harmattan (West Africa)
Specific
Cyclone season
Fog season
Monsoon season
Mud / breakup / minoskamin
bezdorizhzhia / rasputitsa
Rainy season
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spring_(season)&oldid=1145818750"