Tools used in the practice of magic in the religion of Wicca
 The Magician from the Waite Smith tarot, who is depicted using the same tools that modern Wiccans use.
In the neopagan religion of Wicca a range of magical tools are used in ritual practice.[1] Each of these tools has different uses and associations and are commonly used at an altar, inside a magic circle.
In the traditional system of Gardnerian magic, there was as an established idea of covens which were groups composed of initiated members that conducted rituals involving magical tools and secret books (Book of Shadows).  These tools were predominately kept within a specific coven because they were considered sacred.  These items were owned and used by individual Wiccans, but could also be used collectively by the coven.
This practice may derive partly from Masonic traditions (such as the use of the Square and Compasses), from which Wicca draws some material,[2] and partly from the rituals of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. The latter made much use of material from medieval grimoires such as the Key of Solomon, which has many illustrations of magical tools and instructions for their preparation.[3]
Usage[edit]
In Wicca, magical tools are used during rituals which both honour the deities and work magic. The general idea is that the tool directs psychic energies to perform a certain action.
In modern-day Wicca, there is an encouragement of solitary practice of rituals and study. Covens are still a part of Wicca and related doctrines but there is now insistence that solitary practice is permissible. The allowance of solitary practice is clearly an important factor in terms of the growth of adherents, as the requirement to join a coven would involve transaction costs of locating fellow members and/or being initiated.
In Gardnerian Wicca as laid down by Gerald Gardner, someone who had been initiated in the first degree had to create (or, alternately purchase and then engrave) their own ritual tools. One of the requirements for being initiated into the second degree is that adherents had to name all of the ritual tools and explain what their purpose and associations were.[4]
Consecrating tools[edit]
Before tools are used in ritual they first are consecrated. In the Gardnerian Book of Shadows, there is a section based entirely on consecrating ritual items.[5][6] The Book of Shadows states items must be consecrated within a magic circle, at the centre of which lies a pentacle (or paten). Each item that is to be consecrated is placed upon the pentacle, sprinkled with salt and water and then passed through some incense. This is followed by the declaration,
Aradia and Cernunnos, deign to bless and to consecrate this [tool], that it may obtain necessary virtue through thee for all acts of love and beauty. Aradia and Cernunnos, bless this instrument prepared in thine honour.[5][7]
The Primary tools[edit]
Various different tools are used in Wiccan ritual. Chief amongst them in importance are the pentacle (or paten), Athame (or sword), wand, and chalice, each of which represents one of the four elements of earth, air, fire and water.
Pentacle (or Paten)[edit]
The Pentacle (or Paten) is a disc-shaped altar consecration tool with a sigil or magical symbol engraved or inscribed upon it. The most common symbol is a pentagram within a circle, specifically a pentacle, although some other symbols may be used such as the triquetra. The disc is symbolic of the element of earth. It is typically used during evocation as a symbol which blesses items, as well as magically energizing that which is placed upon it.[8][9][10]
Sword and knife[edit]
A sword or a ritual knife, commonly known as Athame, is often used in Wiccan ritual. In Gardnerian Wicca these are symbolic of the element of fire.[4]  Athame is elemental in nature while the sword is planetary in nature.[11]
Athame is traditionally black-handled and usually inscribed (sometimes in the Theban alphabet). It is used to direct energy for the casting of magic circles, controlling of spirits and other ritual purposes. Gerald Gardner described it as "the true Witch's weapon" in the Bricket Wood Book of Shadows,[12] something which he has been criticized for, by Frederic Lamond believing there should be no "weapons" in Wicca.[13][page needed] In some traditions, it is never used under any circumstances to draw blood, becoming tainted and requiring destruction if it does.[14]
The term "Athame" in its modern spelling first appears in Wicca, but it originates from words found in two historical copies of the Key of Solomon. The version currently held in the Biblioth que de l'Arsenal, Paris, uses the term "arthame" to describe a black-handled knife. This was adopted by C.J.S. Thompson in his 1927 book The Mysteries and Secrets of Magic and by Grillot de Givry in his 1931 book Witchcraft, Magic and Alchemy. The historian Ronald Hutton theorized that Gardner got it either directly or indirectly from one of these sources, although with a modified spelling.[12]
Wand[edit]
In Gardnerian Wicca, the wand is symbolic of the element of air, though in some traditions it instead symbolizes fire.[15] It can be made from any material, including wood, metal and rock, and Wiccan wands are sometimes set with gemstones or crystals.[9]
In his Book of Shadows, Gerald Gardner stated the wand is "used to summon certain spirits with whom it would not be meet to use the athame". Frederic Lamond states this referred to elemental spirits, who were traditionally believed to be scared of iron and steel.[4]
Chalice[edit]
The chalice, or goblet, is symbolic of the element of water. Many Wiccans do not consider it to be a tool, but instead to be a symbol of the Goddess, particularly her womb.[4] The chalice bears many similarities with the Holy Grail, except for its symbolism used in witchcraft. Rather than being the blood of Christ, it is symbolic of the Goddess' womb. The chalice is traditionally used to hold wine.
Other tools[edit]
Boline[edit]
The boline is a white handled knife, sometimes with a curved blade like that of a crescent moon. It is used for more practical uses than Athame, for instance harvesting and cutting herbs, inscribing candles with symbols or sigils, or cutting ritual cords. Unlike Athame, the boline is used in the physical process of magical works such as ritual cutting; the boline serves for the physical plane what Athame serves for work in the spiritual/astral planes.[citation needed]
Censer and incense[edit]
The censer is used to dispense incense.
Scourge[edit]
The scourge is a type of religious whip.  It is used in Gardnerian Wicca to flagellate members of the coven, primarily in initiation rites. Frederic Lamond said that whilst Gardner never told his Bricket Wood coven which element this was associated with, he believed that as an "instrument for exercising power over others" then it should be Fire.[4]
The scourge stands in contrast to "the Kiss" in Gardnerian and other forms of Wicca.  Being representative of the "gifts of the Goddess," the scourge standing for sacrifice and suffering one is willing to endure to learn, the kiss being the blessings of abundance in all life's aspects.
Cingulum[edit]
See also: Cincture
In the various forms of British Traditional Wicca, cords, known as cingulum, or singulum (which literally translates as "girdle" or "belt"), are worn about the waist by adherents. These are often given to a Wiccan upon their initiation, and worn at each subsequent ritual.[16] Traditionally they are nine feet in length (nine being three times three, the magical number), and are used to measure the circumference of the magic circle so that it can be set up correctly.[16]
In many traditions of Wicca, the colour of a person's cingulum indicates what rank of initiate they are; in several Australian covens for instance, green denotes a novice, white denotes an initiate of the first degree, blue for the second and a plaited red, white and blue for the third, with the High Priest wearing a gold cingulum (symbolising the sun), and the High Priestess wearing silver (symbolising the moon).[16]
Wiccan High Priest Raymond Buckland stated the cingulum should not be worn, but kept especially for spellcraft.
Besom[edit]
The besom or broom, is often associated with witches and witchcraft. The stories of witches flying on brooms originated from the besom. In Wicca, it is used in handfasting ceremonies wherein a couple jumps over it.  The besom is also used in seasonal fertility dances as a representation of a phallus.
Cauldron[edit]
A cauldron is often associated with witches and witchcraft in western culture. In Wicca, it is sometimes used to represent the womb of the Goddess, like the chalice.[citation needed] It is often used for making brews (such as oils), incense-burning, and can be used to hold large, wide pillar candles depending on how small it is. A fire is often lit within the vessel and the flames are leaped over as a simple fertility rite, or at the end of a handfasting. If filled with water, a cauldron can be used for scrying. It plays a large role in Celtic magic in a similar fashion to that of Cerridwen's cauldron.
Spear[edit]
In the tradition of Seax-Wica, the spear is used as a ritual tool symbolizing the god Woden, who, in Seax-Wicca tradition, is viewed as an emanation of God in place of the Horned God. According to Norse mythology, the god Odin who is the Norse equivalent to the Anglo-Saxon Woden carried the spear Gungnir. For the purpose of comparison it is notable Seax-Wica is not a part of traditional initiatory Wicca, nor is it substantially linked to the Gardnerian or Alexandrian traditions.
Other[edit]
Smudge Stick
Ritual[edit]
 Ritual tools from the Key of Solomon.There are elaborate rituals prescribed for the creation and consecration of magical tools.[17] These often include the ritual passing of the tool through representations of the four elements. Some tools are ascribed correspondences to a particular element, one commonly cited correspondence being:[18][page needed]
Earth - Pentacle
Fire - Wand
Air - Sword
Water - Chalice
These four tools may be seen in the occult tarot deck designed by Golden Dawn members A.E.Waite and Pamela Colman Smith, most obviously in the card known as The Magician. Some practitioners distinguish High Magic and Low Magic. The former is based on Ceremonial magic and may be more commonly practiced in Alexandrian covens. The latter is more typical of the Hedgewitch, who would be more likely to use everyday tools and utensils, rather than fabricating specially made magical tools.[19][page needed]
References[edit]
^ Valiente, Doreen. Witchcraft for Tomorrow (1993) London: Robert Hale. ISBN 978-0-7090-5244-9 (paperback edition) ISBN 978-0-312-88452-9 (first hardback edition 1978). Chapter 6: Witch Tools (pp 78-85.)
^ Hutton, Ronald The Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft (1999). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-285449-6 (pp52-61).
^ MacGregor Mathers, S. Liddell (ed.) The Key of Solomon (Clavicula Salomonis) Revised by Peterson, Joseph H. (1999, 2004, 2005). Available here
^ a b c d e Lamond, Frederic (2004). Fifty Years of Wicca. Green Magic. pp. 125 126.
^ a b "Gardnerian Book of Shadows: Consecrating Tools".
^ Gardner, Gerald. The Gardnerian Book of Shadows. Forgotten Books. ISBN 978-1605069333.
^ "Gardnerian Book of Shadows Index". www.sacred-texts.com. Retrieved 2020-12-07.
^ Farrar, Janet; Farrar, Stewart (1984). The Witches' Way: Principles, Rituals and Beliefs of Modern Witchcraft. Phoenix Publishing. pp. 259 260. ISBN 978-0-919345-71-3.
^ a b Gallagher, Anne-Marie (2005). The Wicca Bible. Godsfield. Page 201
^ Wren (2000). The Tools of Witchcraft by Wren. Witchvox. Page 1
^ Regardie, Israel (1990). The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic vol. Four (Fourth ed.). Scottsdale, Arizona: New Falcon Publications (Falcon Press). p. 33. ISBN 978-0-941404-12-9.
^ a b Hutton, Ronald (1999). Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft. Oxford University Press. pp. 229 230.
^ Lamond, Frederic (2004). Fifty Years of Wicca. Green Magic.
^ Sabin, Thea (2010). Wicca for Beginners: Fundamentals of Philosophy & Practice. Llewellyn Worldwide. pp. 138 139. ISBN 9780738717753.
^ Gallagher, Ann-Marie (2005). The Wicca Bible. Godsfield. Page 201
^ a b c Cingulum, an article in Pentacle Magazine, issue 22, Autumn 2007, by an anonymous author
^ Gardner, Gerald. Witchcraft and the Book of Shadows (2004) Edited by A. R. Naylor. Thame, Oxfordshire: I-H-O Books. ISBN 1-872189-52-0 (pp170-200)
^ Crowley, Vivianne. Wicca: The Old Religion in the New Age (1989) London: The Aquarian Press. ISBN 0-85030-737-6
^ Beth, Rae Hedge Witch: A Guide to Solitary Witchcraft, (1992) London: Robert Hale.
vteWiccaHistory
History of Wicca
Etymology of Wicca
Wicca and LGBT people
Dettmer v. Landon
TraditionsBritish Traditional
Alexandrian Wicca
Algard Wicca
Blue Star Wicca
Central Valley Wicca
Chthonioi Alexandrian Wicca
Gardnerian Wicca
Other
1734 Tradition
Celtic Wicca
Church and School of Wicca
Cochrane's Craft
Coven of Atho
Dianic Wicca
Faery Wicca
Feri
Georgian Wicca
Odyssean Wicca
Reclaiming
Seax-Wica
Stregheria
Universal Eclectic Wicca
Notablefigures
Gerald Gardner
Doreen Valiente
Alex Sanders
Maxine Sanders
Sybil Leek
Dafo
Margot Adler
Victor Anderson
Artemis
Gavin Bone
Lois Bourne
Jack Bracelin
Raymond Buckland
Eddie Buczynski
Zsuzsanna Budapest
Charles Cardell
Ipsita Roy Chakraverti
Patricia Crowther
Vivianne Crowley
Robert Cochrane
Scott Cunningham
Phyllis Curott
Cerridwen Fallingstar
Janet Farrar
Stewart Farrar
Raven Grimassi
Gavin Frost
Yvonne Frost
Philip Heselton
Frederic Lamond
Silver RavenWolf
Starhawk
Joseph Wilson
Deities
Triple Goddess
Horned God
Green Man
Holly King / Oak King
Mother goddess
Keyconcepts
Wiccan morality
Wiccan Rede
Rule of Three
Wiccan views of divinity
Coven
Craft name
Magic
Witchcraft
White magic
Otherworld
The Summerland
Reincarnation
Karma
Skyclad
Summoner
Watchtower
Familiar
Animism
Rites and ritual
Drawing down the Moon
Great Rite
Handfasting
Wiccaning
Fivefold kiss
Magic circle
Cone of power
Herbal medicine
Scrying
Spellwork / Incantation
Banishing
Divination
Invocation
Initiation
Rite of passage
Eko Eko Azarak
Solitary practitioner
Spiral dance
Holidays
Wheel of the Year
Solstice
Equinox
Imbolc
Ostara
Beltane
Midsummer
Lughnasadh
Mabon
Samhain
Yule
Esbat
Wild Hunt
Paraphernalia
Magical tools in Wicca
Altar
Amulet
Athame
Bell
Besom
Boline
Book of Shadows
Candles
Cauldron
Censer
Chalice/Goblet
Horn
Incense
Parchment
Pentacle
Runes
Scourge
Statue
Talisman
Tarot deck
Wand
Witch's ladder
Literature
Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches
The Meaning of Witchcraft
The Spiral Dance
What Witches Do
Witchcraft Today
Charge of the Goddess
Enchanted Feminism
Related
List of Wiccan organisations
Bricket Wood coven
New Forest coven
Traditional witchcraft
Witch-cult hypothesis
Left-hand path and right-hand path
Cunning folk in Britain
European witchcraft
Malleus Maleficarum
Granny woman
Cunning folk
Magical alphabets
Runes
Theban
Hebrew
Witching hour
Witch-hunt
Witches' Sabbath
Flying ointment
Museum of Witchcraft and Magic
Witchcraft Research Association
"Fluffy Bunny"
vteModern paganismApproaches
Eclectic
Nature religion
New Age
Neoshamanism
Reconstructionism
Secular
Western esotericism
Western philosophy
Arts and institutions
Festivals and events
Music
Temples
By country or region
Australia
German-speaking Europe
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Latin Europe
Scandinavia
South Africa
United Kingdom
United States
Minnesota
Movements (list)Ethnic
African
Ausar Auset
Godianism
American
Mexicayotl
Native American Church
Armenian
Baltic
Dievturi
Romuva
Canarian (Berber)
Caucasic
Abkhaz
Circassian
Vainakh
Celtic
Druidry
Reconstructionist
Daco-Thracian (Romanian)
Egyptian
Kemetic Orthodoxy
Germanic
Hellenic
Ossetian-Scythian
Roman
Semitic
Slavic
Rodnovery (list)
RUNVira
Peterburgian Vedism
Ynglism
Turko-Mongolic
list
Uralic
Estonian
Finnish
Hungarian
Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt
Interfaith: European Congress of Ethnic Religions   Foundation for Traditional Religions
Syncretic
Adonism
Church of All Worlds
Church of Aphrodite
Covenant of Unitarian Universalist Pagans
Goddess movement
Ivanovism
Pagan Federation
Ringing Cedars' Anastasianism
Witchcraft: Cochranianism
Feri
Reclaiming
Stregheria
Wicca
In society
Christianity and neopaganism
Criticism
Discrimination
LGBTQ+ and paganism
Pagan studies
Technopaganism
Writers on modern paganism
Related articles
Ariosophy
European witchcraft
Witch-cult hypothesis
Hermeticism
Neotribalism
Nine Noble Virtues
Platonism in the Renaissance
Shamanism in Siberia
Burkhanism
Thelema
Theosophy
Traditionalist School
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magical_tools_in_Wicca&oldid=1143040930"