Property of a mathematical space
This article is about the dimension of a space. For the dimension of an object, see size. For the dimension of a quantity, see Dimensional analysis. For other uses, see Dimension (disambiguation).
 From left to right: the square, the cube and the tesseract. The two-dimensional (2D) square is bounded by one-dimensional (1D) lines; the three-dimensional (3D) cube by two-dimensional areas; and the four-dimensional (4D) tesseract by three-dimensional volumes. For display on a two-dimensional surface such as a screen, the 3D cube and 4D tesseract require projection.
 The first four spatial dimensions, represented in a two-dimensional picture.  Two points  can be connected to create a line segment.Two parallel line segments  can be connected to form a square.Two parallel squares  can be connected to form a cube.Two parallel cubes  can be connected to form a tesseract.
GeometryProjecting a sphere to a plane
OutlineHistory (Timeline)
Branches
Euclidean
Non-Euclidean
Elliptic
Spherical
Hyperbolic
Non-Archimedean geometry
Projective
Affine
Synthetic
Analytic
Algebraic
Arithmetic
Diophantine
Differential
Riemannian
Symplectic
Discrete differential
Complex
Finite
Discrete/Combinatorial
Digital
Convex
Computational
Fractal
Incidence 
Noncommutative geometry
Noncommutative algebraic geometry
ConceptsFeaturesDimension
Straightedge and compass constructions
Angle
Curve
Diagonal
Orthogonality (Perpendicular)
Parallel
Vertex
Congruence
Similarity
Symmetry
Zero-dimensional
Point
One-dimensional
Line
segment
ray
Length
Two-dimensional
Plane
Area
Polygon
Triangle
Altitude
Hypotenuse
Pythagorean theorem
Parallelogram
Square
Rectangle
Rhombus
Rhomboid
Quadrilateral
Trapezoid
Kite
Circle
Diameter
Circumference
Area
Three-dimensional
Volume
Cube
cuboid
Cylinder
Pyramid
Sphere
Four- / other-dimensional
Tesseract
Hypersphere
Geometers
by name
Aida
Aryabhata
Ahmes
Alhazen
Apollonius
Archimedes
Atiyah
Baudhayana
Bolyai
Brahmagupta
Cartan
Coxeter
Descartes
Euclid
Euler
Gauss
Gromov
Hilbert
Jye hadeva
K ty yana
Khayy m
Klein
Lobachevsky
Manava
Minkowski
Minggatu
Pascal
Pythagoras
Parameshvara
Poincar 
Riemann
Sakabe
Sijzi
al-Tusi
Veblen
Virasena
Yang Hui
al-Yasamin
Zhang
List of geometers
by period
BCE
Ahmes
Baudhayana
Manava
Pythagoras
Euclid
Archimedes
Apollonius
1 1400s
Zhang
K ty yana
Aryabhata
Brahmagupta
Virasena
Alhazen
Sijzi
Khayy m
al-Yasamin
al-Tusi
Yang Hui
Parameshvara
1400s 1700s
Jye hadeva
Descartes
Pascal
Minggatu
Euler
Sakabe
Aida
1700s 1900s
Gauss
Lobachevsky
Bolyai
Riemann
Klein
Poincar 
Hilbert
Minkowski
Cartan
Veblen
Coxeter
Present day
Atiyah
Gromov
vte
In physics and mathematics, the dimension of a mathematical space (or object) is informally defined as the minimum number of coordinates needed to specify any point within it.[1][2] Thus, a line has a dimension of one (1D) because only one coordinate is needed to specify a point on it  for example, the point at 5 on a number line. A surface, such as the boundary of a cylinder or sphere, has a dimension of two (2D) because two coordinates are needed to specify a point on it  for example, both a latitude and longitude are required to locate a point on the surface of a sphere. A two-dimensional Euclidean space is a two-dimensional space on the plane. The inside of a cube, a cylinder or a sphere is three-dimensional (3D) because three coordinates are needed to locate a point within these spaces.
In classical mechanics, space and time are different categories and refer to absolute space and time. That conception of the world is a four-dimensional space but not the one that was found necessary to describe electromagnetism. The four dimensions (4D) of spacetime consist of events that are not absolutely defined spatially and temporally, but rather are known relative to the motion of an observer. Minkowski space first approximates the universe without gravity; the pseudo-Riemannian manifolds of general relativity describe spacetime with matter and gravity. 10 dimensions are used to describe superstring theory (6D hyperspace + 4D), 11 dimensions can describe supergravity and M-theory (7D hyperspace + 4D), and the state-space of quantum mechanics is an infinite-dimensional function space.
The concept of dimension is not restricted to physical objects. High-dimensional spaces frequently occur in mathematics and the sciences. They may be Euclidean spaces or more general parameter spaces or configuration spaces such as in Lagrangian or Hamiltonian mechanics; these are abstract spaces, independent of the physical space in which we live.
In mathematics[edit]
In mathematics, the dimension of an object is, roughly speaking, the number of degrees of freedom of a point that moves on this object. In other words, the dimension is the number of independent parameters or coordinates that are needed for defining the position of a point that is constrained to be on the object. For example, the dimension of a point is zero; the dimension of a line is one, as a point can move on a line in only one direction (or its opposite); the dimension of a plane is two, etc.
The dimension is an intrinsic property of an object, in the sense that it is independent of the dimension of the space in which the object is or can be embedded. For example, a curve, such as a circle, is of dimension one, because the position of a point on a curve is determined by its signed distance along the curve to a fixed point on the curve. This is independent from the fact that a curve cannot be embedded in a Euclidean space of dimension lower than two, unless it is a line.
The dimension of Euclidean n-space En is n. When trying to generalize to other types of spaces, one is faced with the question "what makes En  n-dimensional?" One answer is that to cover a fixed ball in En  by small balls of radius  , one needs on the order of  n such small balls. This observation leads to the definition of the Minkowski dimension and its more sophisticated variant, the Hausdorff dimension, but there are also other answers to that question. For example, the boundary of a ball in En  looks locally like En-1  and this leads to the notion of the inductive dimension. While these notions agree on En, they turn out to be different when one looks at more general spaces.
A tesseract is an example of a four-dimensional object. Whereas outside mathematics the use of the term "dimension" is as in: "A tesseract has four dimensions", mathematicians usually express this as: "The tesseract has dimension 4", or: "The dimension of the tesseract is 4" or: 4D.
Although the notion of higher dimensions goes back to Ren  Descartes, substantial development of a higher-dimensional geometry only began in the 19th century, via the work of Arthur Cayley, William Rowan Hamilton, Ludwig Schl fli and Bernhard Riemann. Riemann's 1854 Habilitationsschrift, Schl fli's 1852 Theorie der vielfachen Kontinuit t, and Hamilton's discovery of the quaternions and John T. Graves' discovery of the octonions in 1843 marked the beginning of higher-dimensional geometry.
The rest of this section examines some of the more important mathematical definitions of dimension.
Vector spaces[edit]
Main article: Dimension (vector space)
The dimension of a vector space is the number of vectors in any basis for the space, i.e. the number of coordinates necessary to specify any vector. This notion of dimension (the cardinality of a basis) is often referred to as the Hamel dimension or algebraic dimension to distinguish it from other notions of dimension.
For the non-free case, this generalizes to the notion of the length of a module.
Manifolds[edit]
The uniquely defined dimension of every connected topological manifold can be calculated. A connected topological manifold is locally homeomorphic to Euclidean n-space, in which the number n is the manifold's dimension.
For connected differentiable manifolds, the dimension is also the dimension of the tangent vector space at any point.
In geometric topology, the theory of manifolds is characterized by the way dimensions 1 and 2 are relatively elementary, the high-dimensional cases n > 4 are simplified by having extra space in which to "work"; and the cases n = 3 and 4 are in some senses the most difficult. This state of affairs was highly marked in the various cases of the Poincar  conjecture, in which four different proof methods are applied.
Complex dimension[edit]
The dimension of a manifold depends on the base field with respect to which Euclidean space is defined. While analysis usually assumes a manifold to be over the real numbers, it is sometimes useful in the study of complex manifolds and algebraic varieties to work over the complex numbers instead. A complex number (x + iy) has a real part x and an imaginary part y, in which x and y are both real numbers; hence, the complex dimension is half the real dimension.
Conversely, in algebraically unconstrained contexts, a single complex coordinate system may be applied to an object having two real dimensions. For example, an ordinary two-dimensional spherical surface, when given a complex metric, becomes a Riemann sphere of one complex dimension.[3]
Varieties[edit]
Main article: Dimension of an algebraic variety
The dimension of an algebraic variety may be defined in various equivalent ways. The most intuitive way is probably the dimension of the tangent space at any Regular point of an algebraic variety. Another intuitive way is to define the dimension as the number of hyperplanes that are needed in order to have an intersection with the variety that is reduced to a finite number of points (dimension zero). This definition is based on the fact that the intersection of a variety with a hyperplane reduces the dimension by one unless if the hyperplane contains the variety.
An algebraic set being a finite union of algebraic varieties, its dimension is the maximum of the dimensions of its components. It is equal to the maximal length of the chains 
V
0
 
V
1
 
 
 
V
d
{\displaystyle V_{0}\subsetneq V_{1}\subsetneq \cdots \subsetneq V_{d}}
 of sub-varieties of the given algebraic set (the length of such a chain is the number of "
 
{\displaystyle \subsetneq }
").
Each variety can be considered as an algebraic stack, and its dimension as variety agrees with its dimension as stack. There are however many stacks which do not correspond to varieties, and some of these have negative dimension. Specifically, if V is a variety of dimension m and G is an algebraic group of dimension n acting on V, then the quotient stack [V/G] has dimension m n.[4]
Krull dimension[edit]
The Krull dimension of a commutative ring is the maximal length of chains of prime ideals in it, a chain of length n being a sequence 
P
0
 
P
1
 
 
 
P
n
{\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}_{0}\subsetneq {\mathcal {P}}_{1}\subsetneq \cdots \subsetneq {\mathcal {P}}_{n}}
 of prime ideals related by inclusion. It is strongly related to the dimension of an algebraic variety, because of the natural correspondence between sub-varieties and prime ideals of the ring of the polynomials on the variety.
For an algebra over a field, the dimension as vector space is finite if and only if its Krull dimension is 0.
Topological spaces[edit]
For any normal topological space X, the Lebesgue covering dimension of X is defined to be the smallest integer n for which the following holds: any open cover has an open refinement (a second open cover in which each element is a subset of an element in the first cover) such that no point is included in more than n + 1 elements. In this case dim X = n. For X a manifold, this coincides with the dimension mentioned above. If no such integer n exists, then the dimension of X is said to be infinite, and one writes dim X =  . Moreover, X has dimension  1, i.e. dim X =  1 if and only if X is empty. This definition of covering dimension can be extended from the class of normal spaces to all Tychonoff spaces merely by replacing the term "open" in the definition by the term "functionally open".
An inductive dimension may be defined inductively as follows. Consider a discrete set of points (such as a finite collection of points) to be 0-dimensional. By dragging a 0-dimensional object in some direction, one obtains a 1-dimensional object. By dragging a 1-dimensional object in a new direction, one obtains a 2-dimensional object. In general one obtains an (n + 1)-dimensional object by dragging an n-dimensional object in a new direction. The inductive dimension of a topological space may refer to the small inductive dimension or the large inductive dimension, and is based on the analogy that, in the case of metric spaces, (n + 1)-dimensional balls have n-dimensional boundaries, permitting an inductive definition based on the dimension of the boundaries of open sets. Moreover, the boundary of a discrete set of points is the empty set, and therefore the empty set can be taken to have dimension -1.[5]
Similarly, for the class of CW complexes, the dimension of an object is the largest n for which the n-skeleton is nontrivial. Intuitively, this can be described as follows: if the original space can be continuously deformed into a collection of higher-dimensional triangles joined at their faces with a complicated surface, then the dimension of the object is the dimension of those triangles.[citation needed]
See also: dimension of a scheme
Hausdorff dimension[edit]
The Hausdorff dimension is useful for studying structurally complicated sets, especially fractals. The Hausdorff dimension is defined for all metric spaces and, unlike the dimensions considered above, can also have non-integer real values.[6] The box dimension or Minkowski dimension is a variant of the same idea. In general, there exist more definitions of fractal dimensions that work for highly irregular sets and attain non-integer positive real values. 
Hilbert spaces[edit]
Every Hilbert space admits an orthonormal basis, and any two such bases for a particular space have the same cardinality. This cardinality is called the dimension of the Hilbert space. This dimension is finite if and only if the space's Hamel dimension is finite, and in this case the two dimensions coincide.
In physics[edit]
Spatial dimensions[edit]
Classical physics theories describe three physical dimensions: from a particular point in space, the basic directions in which we can move are up/down, left/right, and forward/backward. Movement in any other direction can be expressed in terms of just these three. Moving down is the same as moving up a negative distance. Moving diagonally upward and forward is just as the name of the direction implies; i.e., moving in a linear combination of up and forward. In its simplest form: a line describes one dimension, a plane describes two dimensions, and a cube describes three dimensions. (See Space and Cartesian coordinate system.)
Number ofdimensions
Example co-ordinate systems
1
Number line
Angle
2
Cartesian (two-dimensional)
Polar
Latitude and longitude
3
Cartesian (three-dimensional)
Cylindrical
Spherical
Time[edit]
A temporal dimension, or time dimension, is a dimension of time. Time is often referred to as the "fourth dimension" for this reason, but that is not to imply that it is a spatial dimension. A temporal dimension is one way to measure physical change. It is perceived differently from the three spatial dimensions in that there is only one of it, and that we cannot move freely in time but subjectively move in one direction.
The equations used in physics to model reality do not treat time in the same way that humans commonly perceive it. The equations of classical mechanics are symmetric with respect to time, and equations of quantum mechanics are typically symmetric if both time and other quantities (such as charge and parity) are reversed. In these models, the perception of time flowing in one direction is an artifact of the laws of thermodynamics (we perceive time as flowing in the direction of increasing entropy).
The best-known treatment of time as a dimension is Poincar  and Einstein's special relativity (and extended to general relativity), which treats perceived space and time as components of a four-dimensional manifold, known as spacetime, and in the special, flat case as Minkowski space. Time is different from other spatial dimensions as time operates in all spatial dimensions. Time operates in the first, second and third as well as theoretical spatial dimensions such as a fourth spatial dimension. Time is not however present in a single point of absolute infinite singularity as defined as a geometric point, as an infinitely small point can have no change and therefore no time. Just as when an object moves through positions in space, it also moves through positions in time. In this sense the force moving any object to change is time.[7][8][9]
Additional dimensions[edit]
In physics, three dimensions of space and one of time is the accepted norm. However, there are theories that attempt to unify the four fundamental forces by introducing extra dimensions/hyperspace. Most notably, superstring theory requires 10 spacetime dimensions, and originates from a more fundamental 11-dimensional theory tentatively called M-theory which subsumes five previously distinct superstring theories. Supergravity theory also promotes 11D spacetime = 7D hyperspace + 4 common dimensions. To date, no direct experimental or observational evidence is available to support the existence of these extra dimensions. If hyperspace exists, it must be hidden from us by some physical mechanism. One well-studied possibility is that the extra dimensions may be "curled up" at such tiny scales as to be effectively invisible to current experiments.
In 1921, Kaluza Klein theory presented 5D including an extra dimension of space. At the level of quantum field theory, Kaluza Klein theory unifies gravity with gauge interactions, based on the realization that gravity propagating in small, compact extra dimensions is equivalent to gauge interactions at long distances. In particular when the geometry of the extra dimensions is trivial, it reproduces electromagnetism. However at sufficiently high energies or short distances, this setup still suffers from the same pathologies that famously obstruct direct attempts to describe quantum gravity. Therefore, these models still require a UV completion, of the kind that string theory is intended to provide. In particular, superstring theory requires six compact dimensions (6D hyperspace) forming a Calabi Yau manifold. Thus Kaluza-Klein theory may be considered either as an incomplete description on its own, or as a subset of string theory model building.
In addition to small and curled up extra dimensions, there may be extra dimensions that instead aren't apparent because the matter associated with our visible universe is localized on a (3 + 1)-dimensional subspace. Thus the extra dimensions need not be small and compact but may be large extra dimensions. D-branes are dynamical extended objects of various dimensionalities predicted by string theory that could play this role. They have the property that open string excitations, which are associated with gauge interactions, are confined to the brane by their endpoints, whereas the closed strings that mediate the gravitational interaction are free to propagate into the whole spacetime, or "the bulk". This could be related to why gravity is exponentially weaker than the other forces, as it effectively dilutes itself as it propagates into a higher-dimensional volume.
Some aspects of brane physics have been applied to cosmology. For example, brane gas cosmology[10][11] attempts to explain why there are three dimensions of space using topological and thermodynamic considerations. According to this idea it would be since three is the largest number of spatial dimensions in which strings can generically intersect. If initially there are many windings of strings around compact dimensions, space could only expand to macroscopic sizes once these windings are eliminated, which requires oppositely wound strings to find each other and annihilate. But strings can only find each other to annihilate at a meaningful rate in three dimensions, so it follows that only three dimensions of space are allowed to grow large given this kind of initial configuration.
Extra dimensions are said to be universal if all fields are equally free to propagate within them.
In computer graphics and spatial data[edit]
Main article: Geometric primitive
Several types of digital systems are based on the storage, analysis, and visualization of geometric shapes, including illustration software, Computer-aided design, and Geographic information systems. Different vector systems use a wide variety of data structures to represent shapes, but almost all are fundamentally based on a set of geometric primitives corresponding to the spatial dimensions:[12]
Point (0-dimensional), a single coordinate in a Cartesian coordinate system.
Line or Polyline (1-dimensional), usually represented as an ordered list of points sampled from a continuous line, whereupon the software is expected to interpolate the intervening shape of the line as straight or curved line segments.
Polygon (2-dimensional), usually represented as a line that closes at its endpoints, representing the boundary of a two-dimensional region. The software is expected to use this boundary to partition 2-dimensional space into an interior and exterior.
Surface (3-dimensional), represented using a variety of strategies, such as a polyhedron consisting of connected polygon faces. The software is expected to use this surface to partition 3-dimensional space into an interior and exterior.
Frequently in these systems, especially GIS and Cartography, a representation of a real-world phenomena may have a different (usually lower) dimension than the phenomenon being represented. For example, a city (a two-dimensional region) may be represented as a point, or a road (a three-dimensional volume of material) may be represented as a line. This dimensional generalization correlates with tendencies in spatial cognition. For example, asking the distance between two cities presumes a conceptual model of the cities as points, while giving directions involving travel "up," "down," or "along" a road imply a one-dimensional conceptual model. This is frequently done for purposes of data efficiency, visual simplicity, or cognitive efficiency, and is acceptable if the distinction between the representation and the represented is understood, but can cause confusion if information users assume that the digital shape is a perfect representation of reality (i.e., believing that roads really are lines).
More dimensions[edit]
Degrees of freedom
in mechanics
in physics and chemistry
in statistics
Exterior dimension
Hurst exponent
Isoperimetric dimension
Metric dimension
Order dimension
q-dimension
Fractal (q = 1)
Correlation (q = 2)
List of topics by dimension[edit]
Zero
Point
Zero-dimensional space
Integer
One
Line
Curve
Graph (combinatorics)
Real number
Length
Two
Plane
Surface
Polygon
Net
Complex number
Cartesian coordinate system
List of uniform tilings
Area
Three
Platonic solid
Polyhedron
Stereoscopy (3-D imaging)
3-manifold
Axis of rotation
Knots
Skew lines
Skew polygon
Volume
Four
Spacetime
Fourth spatial dimension
Convex regular 4-polytope
Quaternion
4-manifold
Polychoron
Rotations in 4-dimensional Euclidean space
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Higher dimensions
in mathematics
Octonion
Vector space
Plane of rotation
Curse of dimensionality
in physics
Kaluza Klein theory
String theory
M-theory
Infinite
Hilbert space
Function space
See also[edit]
Dimension (data warehouse)
Dimension tables
Dimensional analysis
Hyperspace (disambiguation)
Intrinsic dimension
Multidimensional analysis
Space-filling curve
Mean dimension
References[edit]
^ "Curious About Astronomy". Curious.astro.cornell.edu. Archived from the original on 2014-01-11. Retrieved 2014-03-03.
^ "MathWorld: Dimension". Mathworld.wolfram.com. 2014-02-27. Archived from the original on 2014-03-25. Retrieved 2014-03-03.
^ Yau, Shing-Tung; Nadis, Steve (2010). "4. Too Good to be True". The Shape of Inner Space: String Theory and the Geometry of the Universe's Hidden Dimensions. Basic Books. pp. 60 . ISBN 978-0-465-02266-3.
^ Fantechi, Barbara (2001), "Stacks for everybody" (PDF), European Congress of Mathematics Volume I, Progr. Math., vol. 201, Birkh user, pp. 349 359, archived (PDF) from the original on 2006-01-17
^ Hurewicz, Witold; Wallman, Henry (2015). Dimension Theory (PMS-4), Volume 4. Princeton University Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-4008-7566-5. Extract of page 24
^ Fractal Dimension Archived 2006-10-27 at the Wayback Machine, Boston University Department of Mathematics and Statistics
^ Rylov, Yuri A. (2007). "Non-Euclidean method of the generalized geometry construction and its application to space-time geometry". arXiv:math/0702552.
^ Lane, Paul M.; Lindquist, Jay D. (May 22, 2015). "Definitions for The Fourth Dimension: A Proposed Time Classification System1".  In Bahn, Kenneth D. (ed.). Proceedings of the 1988 Academy of Marketing Science (AMS) Annual Conference. Developments in Marketing Science: Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Science. Springer International Publishing. pp. 38 46. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-17046-6_8. ISBN 978-3-319-17045-9   via Springer Link.
^ Wilson, Edwin B.; Lewis, Gilbert N. (1912). "The Space-Time Manifold of Relativity. The Non-Euclidean Geometry of Mechanics and Electromagnetics". Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 48 (11): 389 507. doi:10.2307/20022840. JSTOR 20022840   via JSTOR.
^ Brandenberger, R.; Vafa, C. (1989). "Superstrings in the early universe". Nuclear Physics B. 316 (2): 391 410. Bibcode:1989NuPhB.316..391B. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(89)90037-0.
^ Scott Watson, Brane Gas Cosmology Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine (pdf).
^ Vector Data Models, Essentials of Geographic Information Systems, Saylor Academy, 2012
Further reading[edit]
Murty, Katta G. (2014). "1. Systems of Simultaneous Linear Equations" (PDF). Computational and Algorithmic Linear Algebra and n-Dimensional Geometry. World Scientific Publishing. doi:10.1142/8261. ISBN 978-981-4366-62-5.
Abbott, Edwin A. (1884). Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions. London: Seely & Co.
 . Flatland: ... Project Gutenberg.
 ; Stewart, Ian (2008). The Annotated Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-2183-2.
Banchoff, Thomas F. (1996). Beyond the Third Dimension: Geometry, Computer Graphics, and Higher Dimensions. Scientific American Library. ISBN 978-0-7167-6015-3.
Pickover, Clifford A. (2001). Surfing through Hyperspace: Understanding Higher Universes in Six Easy Lessons. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-992381-6.
Rucker, Rudy (2014) [1984]. The Fourth Dimension: Toward a Geometry of Higher Reality. Courier Corporation. ISBN 978-0-486-77978-2. Google preview
Kaku, Michio (1994). Hyperspace, a Scientific Odyssey Through the 10th Dimension. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-286189-4.
Krauss, Lawrence M. (2005). Hiding in the Mirror. Viking Press. ISBN 978-0-670-03395-9.
External links[edit]
Wikiquote has quotations related to Dimension.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dimensions.
Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclop dia Britannica article "Dimension".
Copeland, Ed (2009). "Extra Dimensions". Sixty Symbols. Brady Haran for the University of Nottingham.
vteDimensionDimensional spaces
Vector space
Euclidean space
Affine space
Projective space
Free module
Manifold
Algebraic variety
Spacetime
Other dimensions
Krull
Lebesgue covering
Inductive
Hausdorff
Minkowski
Fractal
Degrees of freedom
Polytopes and shapes
Hyperplane
Hypersurface
Hypercube
Hyperrectangle
Demihypercube
Hypersphere
Cross-polytope
Simplex
Hyperpyramid
Dimensions by number
Zero
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
n-dimensions
See also
Hyperspace
Codimension
Category
vteTensorsGlossary of tensor theoryScopeMathematics
Coordinate system
Differential geometry
Dyadic algebra
Euclidean geometry
Exterior calculus
Multilinear algebra
Tensor algebra
Tensor calculus
PhysicsEngineering
Computer vision
Continuum mechanics
Electromagnetism
General relativity
Transport phenomena
Notation
Abstract index notation
Einstein notation
Index notation
Multi-index notation
Penrose graphical notation
Ricci calculus
Tetrad (index notation)
Van der Waerden notation
Voigt notation
Tensordefinitions
Tensor (intrinsic definition)
Tensor field
Tensor density
Tensors in curvilinear coordinates
Mixed tensor
Antisymmetric tensor
Symmetric tensor
Tensor operator
Tensor bundle
Two-point tensor
Operations
Covariant derivative
Exterior covariant derivative
Exterior derivative
Exterior product
Hodge star operator
Lie derivative
Raising and lowering indices
Symmetrization
Tensor contraction
Tensor product
Transpose (2nd-order tensors)
Relatedabstractions
Affine connection
Basis
Cartan formalism (physics)
Connection form
Covariance and contravariance of vectors
Differential form
Dimension
Exterior form
Fiber bundle
Geodesic
Levi-Civita connection
Linear map
Manifold
Matrix
Multivector
Pseudotensor
Spinor
Vector
Vector space
Notable tensorsMathematics
Christoffel symbols
Kronecker delta
Levi-Civita symbol
Metric tensor
Nonmetricity tensor
Ricci curvature
Riemann curvature tensor
Torsion tensor
Weyl tensor
Physics
Moment of inertia
Angular momentum tensor
Spin tensor
Cauchy stress tensor
stress energy tensor
Einstein tensor
EM tensor
Gluon field strength tensor
Metric tensor (GR)
Mathematicians
 lie Cartan
Augustin-Louis Cauchy
Elwin Bruno Christoffel
Albert Einstein
Leonhard Euler
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Hermann Grassmann
Tullio Levi-Civita
Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro
Bernhard Riemann
Jan Arnoldus Schouten
Woldemar Voigt
Hermann Weyl
Authority control: National 
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dimension&oldid=1144121181"