Process to convert glucose to ATP in cells
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Cellular respiration" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Typical eukaryotic cell
Cellular respiration is the process by which biological fuels are oxidised in the presence of an inorganic electron acceptor, such as oxygen, to drive the bulk production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which contains energy. Cellular respiration may be described as a set of metabolic reactions and processes that take place in the cells of organisms to convert chemical energy from nutrients into ATP, and then release waste products.[1]
The reactions involved in respiration are catabolic reactions, which break large molecules into smaller ones, producing large amounts of energy (ATP). Respiration is one of the key ways a cell releases chemical energy to fuel cellular activity. The overall reaction occurs in a series of biochemical steps, some of which are redox reactions. Although cellular respiration is technically a combustion reaction, it is an unusual one because of the slow, controlled release of energy from the series of reactions.
Nutrients that are commonly used by animal and plant cells in respiration include sugar, amino acids and fatty acids, and the most common oxidizing agent is molecular oxygen (O2). The chemical energy stored in ATP (the bond of its third phosphate group to the rest of the molecule can be broken allowing more stable products to form, thereby releasing energy for use by the cell) can then be used to drive processes requiring energy, including biosynthesis, locomotion or transportation of molecules across cell membranes.
Aerobic respiration[edit]
Aerobic respiration requires oxygen (O2) in order to create ATP. Although carbohydrates, fats and proteins  are consumed as reactants, aerobic respiration is the preferred method of pyruvate production in glycolysis, and requires pyruvate to the mitochondria in order to be fully oxidized by the citric acid cycle. The products of this process are carbon dioxide and water, and the energy transferred is used to make bonds between ADP and a third phosphate group to form ATP (adenosine triphosphate), by substrate-level phosphorylation, NADH and FADH2.
Mass balance of the global reaction:
C6H12O6 (s) + 6 O2 (g)   6 CO2 (g) + 6 H2O (l) + energy
 G =  2880 kJ per mol of C6H12O6
The negative  G indicates that the reaction is exothermic (exergonic) and can occur spontaneously.
The potential of NADH and FADH2 is converted to more ATP through an electron transport chain with oxygen and protons (hydrogen) as the "terminal electron acceptors". Most of the ATP produced by aerobic cellular respiration is made by oxidative phosphorylation. The energy released is used to create a chemiosmotic potential by pumping protons across a membrane. This potential is then used to drive ATP synthase and produce ATP from ADP and a phosphate group. Biology textbooks often state that 38 ATP molecules can be made per oxidized glucose molecule during cellular respiration (2 from glycolysis, 2 from the Krebs cycle, and about 34 from the electron transport system).[2] However, this maximum yield is never quite reached because of losses due to leaky membranes as well as the cost of moving pyruvate and ADP into the mitochondrial matrix, and current estimates range around 29 to 30 ATP per glucose.[2]
Aerobic metabolism is up to 15 times more efficient than anaerobic metabolism (which yields 2 molecules ATP per 1 molecule glucose). However, some anaerobic organisms, such as methanogens are able to continue with anaerobic respiration, yielding more ATP by using inorganic molecules other than oxygen as final electron acceptors in the electron transport chain. They share the initial pathway of glycolysis but aerobic metabolism continues with the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. The post-glycolytic reactions take place in the mitochondria in eukaryotic cells, and in the cytoplasm in prokaryotic cells.
Although plants are net consumers of carbon dioxide and producers of oxygen via photosynthesis, plant respiration accounts for about half of the CO2 generated annually by terrestrial ecosystems.[3][4]: 87 
Glycolysis[edit]
 Out of the cytoplasm it goes into the Krebs cycle with the acetyl CoA. It then mixes with CO2 and makes 2 ATP, NADH, and FADH. From there the NADH and FADH go into the NADH reductase, which produces the enzyme. The NADH pulls the enzyme's electrons to send through the electron transport chain. The electron transport chain pulls H+ ions through the chain. From the electron transport chain, the released hydrogen ions make ADP for an result of 32 ATP. Lastly, ATP leaves through the ATP channel and out of the mitochondria.
Main article: Glycolysis
Glycolysis is a metabolic pathway that takes place in the cytosol of cells in all living organisms. Glycolysis can be literally translated as "sugar splitting",[5] and occurs with or without the presence of oxygen. In aerobic conditions, the process converts one molecule of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate (pyruvic acid), generating energy in the form of two net molecules of ATP. Four molecules of ATP per glucose are actually produced, but two are consumed as part of the preparatory phase. The initial phosphorylation of glucose is required to increase the reactivity (decrease its stability) in order for the molecule to be cleaved into two pyruvate molecules by the enzyme aldolase. During the pay-off phase of glycolysis, four phosphate groups are transferred to ADP by substrate-level phosphorylation to make four ATP, and two NADH are produced when the pyruvate is oxidized. The overall reaction can be expressed this way:
Glucose + 2 NAD+ + 2 Pi + 2 ADP   2 pyruvate + 2 H+ + 2 NADH + 2 ATP + 2 H+ + 2 H2O + energy
Starting with glucose,  1 ATP is used to donate a phosphate to glucose to produce glucose 6-phosphate. Glycogen can be converted into glucose 6-phosphate as well with the help of glycogen phosphorylase. During energy metabolism, glucose 6-phosphate becomes fructose 6-phosphate. An additional ATP is used to phosphorylate fructose 6-phosphate into fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by the help of phosphofructokinase. Fructose 1,6-biphosphate then splits into two phosphorylated molecules with three carbon chains which later degrades into pyruvate.[4]: 88 90 
Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate[edit]
Main article: Pyruvate decarboxylation
Pyruvate is oxidized to acetyl-CoA and CO2 by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC). The PDC contains multiple copies of three enzymes and is located in the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells and in the cytosol of prokaryotes. In the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, one molecule of NADH and one molecule of CO2 is formed.
Citric acid cycle[edit]
Main article: Citric acid cycle
This is also called the Krebs cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle. When oxygen is present, acetyl-CoA is produced from the pyruvate molecules created from glycolysis. Once acetyl-CoA is formed, aerobic or anaerobic respiration can occur. When oxygen is present, the mitochondria will undergo aerobic respiration which leads to the Krebs cycle.  However, if oxygen is not present, fermentation of the pyruvate molecule will occur. In the presence of oxygen, when acetyl-CoA is produced, the molecule then enters the citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle) inside the mitochondrial matrix, and is oxidized to CO2 while at the same time reducing NAD to NADH. NADH can be used by the electron transport chain to create further ATP as part of oxidative phosphorylation. To fully oxidize the equivalent of one glucose molecule, two acetyl-CoA must be metabolized by the Krebs cycle. Two low-energy waste products, H2O and CO2, are created during this cycle.[6][7]
The citric acid cycle is an 8-step process involving 18 different enzymes and co-enzymes. During the cycle, acetyl-CoA (2 carbons) + oxaloacetate (4 carbons) yields citrate (6 carbons), which is rearranged to a more reactive form called isocitrate (6 carbons). Isocitrate is modified to become  -ketoglutarate (5 carbons), succinyl-CoA, succinate, fumarate, malate and, finally, oxaloacetate.
The net gain from one cycle is 3 NADH and 1 FADH2 as hydrogen- (proton plus electron)-carrying compounds and 1 high-energy GTP, which may subsequently be used to produce ATP. Thus, the total yield from 1 glucose molecule (2 pyruvate molecules) is 6 NADH, 2 FADH2, and 2 ATP.[6][7][4]: 90 91 
Oxidative phosphorylation[edit]
Main articles: Oxidative phosphorylation, Electron transport chain, Electrochemical gradient, and ATP synthase
In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation occurs in the mitochondrial cristae. It comprises the electron transport chain that establishes a proton gradient (chemiosmotic potential) across the boundary of the inner membrane by oxidizing the NADH produced from the Krebs cycle. ATP is synthesized by the ATP synthase enzyme when the chemiosmotic gradient is used to drive the phosphorylation of ADP. The electrons are finally transferred to exogenous oxygen and, with the addition of two protons, water is formed.
Efficiency of ATP production[edit]
The table below describes the reactions involved when one glucose molecule is fully oxidized into carbon dioxide. It is assumed that all the reduced coenzymes are oxidized by the electron transport chain and used for oxidative phosphorylation.
Step
coenzyme yield
ATP yield
Source of ATP
Glycolysis preparatory phase
 2
Phosphorylation of glucose and fructose 6-phosphate uses two ATP from the cytoplasm.
Glycolysis pay-off phase
4
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2 NADH
3 or 5
Oxidative phosphorylation: Each NADH produces net 1.5 ATP (instead of usual 2.5) due to NADH transport over the mitochondrial membrane
Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate
2 NADH
5
Oxidative phosphorylation
Krebs cycle
2
Substrate-level phosphorylation
6 NADH
15
Oxidative phosphorylation
2 FADH2
3
Oxidative phosphorylation
Total yield
30 or 32 ATP
From the complete oxidation of one glucose molecule to carbon dioxide and oxidation of all the reduced coenzymes.
Although there is a theoretical yield of 38 ATP molecules per glucose during cellular respiration, such conditions are generally not realized because of losses such as the cost of moving pyruvate (from glycolysis), phosphate, and ADP (substrates for ATP synthesis) into the mitochondria. All are actively transported using carriers that utilize the stored energy in the proton electrochemical gradient.
Pyruvate is taken up by a specific, low Km transporter to bring it into the mitochondrial matrix for oxidation by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
The phosphate carrier (PiC) mediates the electroneutral exchange (antiport) of phosphate (H2PO4 ; Pi) for OH  or symport of phosphate and protons (H+) across the inner membrane, and the driving force for moving phosphate ions into the mitochondria is the proton motive force.
The ATP-ADP translocase (also called adenine nucleotide translocase, ANT) is an antiporter and exchanges ADP and ATP across the inner membrane. The driving force is due to the ATP ( 4) having a more negative charge than the ADP ( 3), and thus it dissipates some of the electrical component of the proton electrochemical gradient.
The outcome of these transport processes using the proton electrochemical gradient is that more than 3 H+ are needed to make 1 ATP. Obviously, this reduces the theoretical efficiency of the whole process and the likely maximum is closer to 28 30 ATP molecules.[2] In practice the efficiency may be even lower because the inner membrane of the mitochondria is slightly leaky to protons.[8] Other factors may also dissipate the proton gradient creating an apparently leaky mitochondria. An uncoupling protein known as thermogenin is expressed in some cell types and is a channel that can transport protons. When this protein is active in the inner membrane it short circuits the coupling between the electron transport chain and ATP synthesis. The potential energy from the proton gradient is not used to make ATP but generates heat. This is particularly important in brown fat thermogenesis of newborn and hibernating mammals.
 Stoichiometry of aerobic respiration and most known fermentation types in eucaryotic cell. [9] Numbers in circles indicate counts of carbon atoms in molecules, C6 is glucose C6H12O6, C1 carbon dioxide CO2. Mitochondrial outer membrane is omitted.
According to some newer sources, the ATP yield during aerobic respiration is not 36 38, but only about 30 32 ATP molecules / 1 molecule of glucose [9], because:
ATP : NADH+H+ and ATP : FADH2 ratios during the oxidative phosphorylation appear to be not 3 and 2, but 2.5 and 1.5 respectively. Unlike in the substrate-level phosphorylation, the stoichiometry here is difficult to establish.
ATP synthase produces 1 ATP / 3 H+. However the exchange of matrix ATP for cytosolic ADP and Pi (antiport with OH  or symport with H+) mediated by ATP ADP translocase and phosphate carrier consumes 1 H+ / 1 ATP as a result of regeneration of the transmembrane potential changed during this transfer, so the net ratio is 1 ATP : 4 H+.
The mitochondrial electron transport chain proton pump transfers across the inner membrane 10 H+ / 1 NADH+H+ (4 + 2 + 4) or 6 H+ / 1 FADH2 (2 + 4).
So the final stoichiometry is
1 NADH+H+ : 10 H+ : 10/4 ATP = 1 NADH+H+ : 2.5 ATP
1 FADH2 : 6 H+ : 6/4 ATP = 1 FADH2 : 1.5 ATP
ATP : NADH+H+ coming from glycolysis ratio during the oxidative phosphorylation is
1.5, as for FADH2, if hydrogen atoms (2H++2e ) are transferred from cytosolic NADH+H+ to mitochondrial FAD by the glycerol phosphate shuttle located in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
2.5 in case of malate-aspartate shuttle transferring hydrogen atoms from cytosolic NADH+H+ to mitochondrial NAD+
So finally we have, per molecule of glucose
Substrate-level phosphorylation: 2 ATP from glycolysis + 2 ATP (directly GTP) from Krebs cycle
Oxidative phosphorylation
2 NADH+H+ from glycolysis: 2   1.5 ATP (if glycerol phosphate shuttle transfers hydrogen atoms) or 2   2.5 ATP (malate-aspartate shuttle)
2 NADH+H+ from the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate and 6 from Krebs cycle: 8   2.5 ATP
2 FADH2 from the Krebs cycle: 2   1.5 ATP
Altogether this gives 4 + 3 (or 5) + 20 + 3 = 30 (or 32) ATP per molecule of glucose
These figures may still require further tweaking as new structural details become available. The above value of 3 H+/ATP for the synthase assumes that the synthase translocates 9 protons, and produces 3 ATP, per rotation. The number of protons depends on the number of c subunits in the Fo c-ring, and it is now known that this is 10 in yeast Fo[10] and 8 for vertebrates.[11] Including one H+ for the transport reactions, this means that synthesis of one ATP requires 1 + 10/3 = 4.33 protons in yeast and 1 + 8/3 = 3.67 in vertebrates. This would imply that in human mitochondria the 10 protons from oxidizing NADH would produce 2.72 ATP (instead of 2.5) and the 6 protons from oxidizing succinate or ubiquinol would produce 1.64 ATP (instead of 1.5). This is consistent with experimental results within the margin of error described in a recent review.[12]
The total ATP yield in ethanol or lactic acid fermentation is only 2 molecules coming from glycolysis, because pyruvate is not transferred to the mitochondrion and finally oxidized to the carbon dioxide (CO2), but reduced to ethanol or lactic acid in the cytoplasm.[9]
Fermentation[edit]
Main article: Fermentation
Without oxygen, pyruvate (pyruvic acid) is not metabolized by cellular respiration but undergoes a process of fermentation. The pyruvate is not transported into the mitochondrion but remains in the cytoplasm, where it is converted to waste products that may be removed from the cell. This serves the purpose of oxidizing the electron carriers so that they can perform glycolysis again and removing the excess pyruvate. Fermentation oxidizes NADH to NAD+ so it can be re-used in glycolysis.  In the absence of oxygen, fermentation prevents the buildup of NADH in the cytoplasm and provides NAD+ for glycolysis.  This waste product varies depending on the organism. In skeletal muscles, the waste product is lactic acid. This type of fermentation is called lactic acid fermentation. In strenuous exercise, when energy demands exceed energy supply, the respiratory chain cannot process all of the hydrogen atoms joined by NADH. During anaerobic glycolysis, NAD+ regenerates when pairs of hydrogen combine with pyruvate to form lactate. Lactate formation is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase in a reversible reaction. Lactate can also be used as an indirect precursor for liver glycogen. During recovery, when oxygen becomes available, NAD+ attaches to hydrogen from lactate to form ATP. In yeast, the waste products are ethanol and carbon dioxide. This type of fermentation is known as alcoholic or ethanol fermentation. The ATP generated in this process is made by substrate-level phosphorylation, which does not require oxygen.
Fermentation is less efficient at using the energy from glucose: only 2 ATP are produced per glucose, compared to the 38 ATP per glucose nominally produced by aerobic respiration.  Glycolytic ATP, however, is produced more quickly. For prokaryotes to continue a rapid growth rate when they are shifted from an aerobic environment to an anaerobic environment, they must increase the rate of the glycolytic reactions. For multicellular organisms, during short bursts of strenuous activity, muscle cells use fermentation to supplement the ATP production from the slower aerobic respiration, so fermentation may be used by a cell even before the oxygen levels are depleted, as is the case in sports that do not require athletes to pace themselves, such as sprinting.
Anaerobic respiration[edit]
Main article: Anaerobic respiration
Cellular respiration is the process by which biological fuels are oxidised in the presence of an inorganic electron acceptor such as oxygen to produce large amounts of energy, to drive the bulk production of ATP.
Anaerobic respiration is used by microorganisms either bacteria or archaea  in which neither oxygen (aerobic respiration) nor pyruvate derivatives (fermentation) is the final electron acceptor.  Rather, an inorganic acceptor such as sulfate (SO42-), nitrate (NO3 ), or sulfur (S) is used.[13]
Such organisms could be found in unusual places such as underwater caves or near hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean.[4]: 66 68 , as well as in anoxic soils or sediment in wetland ecosystems.
In July 2019, a scientific study of Kidd Mine in Canada discovered sulfur-breathing organisms which live 7900 feet (2400 meters) below the surface, and which breathe sulfur in order to survive. These organisms are also remarkable due to consuming minerals such as pyrite as their food source.[14][15][16]
See also[edit]
Maintenance respiration: maintenance as a functional component of cellular respiration
Microphysiometry
Pasteur point
Respirometry: research tool to explore cellular respiration
Tetrazolium chloride: cellular respiration indicator
Complex 1: NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductes
References[edit]
^ Bailey, Regina. "Cellular Respiration". Archived from the original on 2012-05-05.
^ a b c Rich, P. R. (2003). "The molecular machinery of Keilin's respiratory chain". Biochemical Society Transactions. 31 (Pt 6): 1095 1105. doi:10.1042/BST0311095. PMID 14641005.
^ O'Leary, Brendan M.; Plaxton, William C. (2016). "Plant Respiration". eLS. pp. 1 11. doi:10.1002/9780470015902.a0001301.pub3. ISBN 9780470016176.
^ a b c d Mannion, A. M. (12 January 2006). Carbon and Its Domestication. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-3956-0.
^ Reece, Jane; Urry, Lisa; Cain, Michael; Wasserman, Steven; Minorsky, Peter; Jackson, Robert (2010). Campbell Biology Ninth Edition. Pearson Education, Inc. p. 168.
^ a b R. Caspi (2012-11-14). "Pathway: TCA cycle III (animals)". MetaCyc Metabolic Pathway Database. Retrieved 2022-06-20.
^ a b R. Caspi (2011-12-19). "Pathway: TCA cycle I (prokaryotic)". MetaCyc Metabolic Pathway Database. Retrieved 2022-06-20.
^ Porter, R.; Brand, M. (1 September 1995). "Mitochondrial proton conductance and H+/O ratio are independent of electron transport rate in isolated hepatocytes". The Biochemical Journal (Free full text). 310 (Pt 2): 379 382. doi:10.1042/bj3100379. ISSN 0264-6021. PMC 1135905. PMID 7654171.
^ a b c Stryer, Lubert (1995). Biochemistry (fourth ed.). New York   Basingstoke: W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 978-0716720096.
^ Stock, Daniela; Leslie, Andrew G. W.; Walker, John E. (1999). "Molecular architecture of the rotary motor in ATP synthase". Science. 286 (5445): 1700 5. doi:10.1126/science.286.5445.1700. PMID 10576729.
^ Watt, Ian N.; Montgomery, Martin G.; Runswick, Michael J.; Leslie, Andrew G. W.; Walker, John E. (2010). "Bioenergetic Cost of Making an Adenosine Triphosphate Molecule in Animal Mitochondria". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 107 (39): 16823 16827. doi:10.1073/pnas.1011099107. PMC 2947889. PMID 20847295.
^ P.Hinkle (2005). "P/O ratios of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation". Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Bioenergetics. 1706 (1 2): 1 11. doi:10.1016/j.bbabio.2004.09.004. PMID 15620362.
^ Lumen Boundless Microbiology. "Anaerobic Respiration-Electron Donors and Acceptors in Anaerobic Respiration". courses.lumenlearning.org. Boundless.com. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Anaerobic respiration is the formation of ATP without oxygen. This method still incorporates the respiratory electron transport chain, but without using oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor. Instead, molecules such as sulfate (SO42-), nitrate (NO3 ), or sulfur (S) are used as electron acceptors
^ Lollar, Garnet S.; Warr, Oliver; Telling, Jon; Osburn, Magdalena R.; Sherwood Lollar, Barbara (2019). "'Follow the Water': Hydrogeochemical Constraints on Microbial Investigations 2.4 km Below Surface at the Kidd Creek Deep Fluid and Deep Life Observatory". Geomicrobiology Journal. 36 (10): 859 872. doi:10.1080/01490451.2019.1641770. S2CID 199636268.
^ World s Oldest Groundwater Supports Life Through Water-Rock Chemistry Archived 2019-09-10 at the Wayback Machine, July 29, 2019, deepcarbon.net.
^ Strange life-forms found deep in a mine point to vast 'underground Galapagos' Archived 2019-09-09 at the Wayback Machine, By Corey S. Powell, Sept. 7, 2019, nbcnews.com.
External links[edit]
Library resources about  Cellular respiration 
Resources in your library
A detailed description of respiration vs. fermentation
Kimball's online resource for cellular respiration
Cellular Respiration and Fermentation at Clermont College
vteMetabolism, catabolism, anabolismGeneral
Metabolic pathway
Metabolic network
Primary nutritional groups
Energy metabolismAerobic respiration
Glycolysis   Pyruvate decarboxylation   Citric acid cycle   Oxidative phosphorylation (electron transport chain + ATP synthase)
Anaerobic respiration
Electron acceptors other than oxygen
Fermentation
Glycolysis   Substrate-level phosphorylation
ABE
Ethanol
Lactic acid
Specific pathsProtein metabolism
Protein synthesis
Catabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism(carbohydrate catabolismand anabolism)Human
Glycolysis    Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis   Glycogenesis
Pentose phosphate pathway
Fructolysis
Galactolysis
Glycosylation
N-linked
O-linked
Nonhuman
Photosynthesis
Anoxygenic photosynthesis
Chemosynthesis
Carbon fixation
Xylose metabolism
Radiotrophism
Lipid metabolism (lipolysis, lipogenesis)Fatty acid metabolism
Fatty acid degradation (Beta oxidation)
Fatty acid synthesis
Other
Steroid metabolism
Sphingolipid metabolism
Eicosanoid metabolism
Ketosis
Reverse cholesterol transport
Amino acid
Amino acid synthesis
Urea cycle
Nucleotide metabolism
Purine metabolism
Nucleotide salvage
Pyrimidine metabolism
Other
Metal metabolism
Iron metabolism
Ethanol metabolism
vteMetabolism map
 
 Carbonfixation 
 Photo-respiration 
 Pentosephosphatepathway 
 Citricacid cycle 
 Glyoxylatecycle 
 Ureacycle 
 Fattyacidsynthesis 
 Fattyacidelongation 
 Betaoxidation 
 Peroxisomal 
 betaoxidation 
 Glyco-genolysis 
 Glyco-genesis 
 Glyco-lysis 
 Gluconeo-genesis 
 Pyruvatedecarb-oxylation 
 Fermentation 
 Keto-lysis 
 Keto-genesis 
 feeders togluconeo-genesis 
 Direct / C4 / CAMcarbon intake 
 Light reaction 
 Oxidativephosphorylation 
 Amino aciddeamination 
 Citrateshuttle 
 Lipogenesis 
 Lipolysis 
 Steroidogenesis 
 MVA pathway 
 MEP pathway 
 Shikimatepathway 
 Transcription &replication 
 Translation 
 Proteolysis 
 Glycosyl-ation 
 Sugaracids 
 Double/multiplesugars & glycans 
 Simplesugars 
 Inositol-P 
 Amino sugars& sialic acids 
 Nucleotide sugars 
 Hexose-P 
 Triose-P 
 Glycerol 
 P-glycerates 
 Pentose-P 
 Tetrose-P 
 Propionyl-CoA 
 Succinate 
 Acetyl-CoA 
 Pentose-P 
 P-glycerates 
 Glyoxylate 
 Photosystems 
 Pyruvate 
 Lactate 
 Acetyl-CoA 
 Citrate 
 Oxalo-acetate 
 Malate 
 Succinyl-CoA 
  -Keto-glutarate 
 Ketonebodies 
 Respiratorychain 
 Serine group 
 Alanine 
 Branched-chainamino acids 
 Aspartategroup 
 Homoserinegroup& lysine 
 Glutamategroup& proline 
 Arginine 
 Creatine& polyamines 
 Ketogenic &glucogenicamino acids 
 Amino acids 
 Shikimate 
 Aromatic aminoacids & histidine 
 Ascorbate(vitamin C) 
  -ALA 
 Bilepigments 
 Hemes 
 Cobalamins (vitamin B12) 
 Variousvitamin Bs 
 Calciferols(vitamin D) 
 Retinoids(vitamin A) 
 Quinones (vitamin K)& tocopherols (vitamin E) 
 Cofactors 
 Vitamins& minerals 
 Antioxidants 
 PRPP 
 Nucleotides 
 Nucleicacids 
 Proteins 
 Glycoproteins& proteoglycans 
 Chlorophylls 
 MEP 
 MVA 
 Acetyl-CoA 
 Polyketides 
 Terpenoidbackbones 
 Terpenoids& carotenoids (vitamin A) 
 Cholesterol 
 Bile acids 
 Glycero-phospholipids 
 Glycerolipids 
 Acyl-CoA 
 Fattyacids 
 Glyco-sphingolipids 
 Sphingolipids 
 Waxes 
 Polyunsaturatedfatty acids 
 Neurotransmitters& thyroid hormones 
 Steroids 
 Endo-cannabinoids 
 Eicosanoids 
 Major metabolic pathways in metro-style map. Click any text (name of pathway or metabolites) to link to the corresponding article.Single lines: pathways common to most lifeforms. Double lines: pathways not in humans (occurs in e.g. plants, fungi, prokaryotes).  Orange nodes: carbohydrate metabolism.  Violet nodes: photosynthesis.  Red nodes: cellular respiration.  Pink nodes: cell signaling.  Blue nodes: amino acid metabolism.  Grey nodes: vitamin and cofactor metabolism.  Brown nodes: nucleotide and protein metabolism.  Green nodes: lipid metabolism.
Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cellular_respiration&oldid=1149243934"