President of Russia from 2008 to 2012
For other people named Dmitry Medvedev, see Dmitry Medvedev (disambiguation).
In this name that follows Eastern Slavic naming conventions, the patronymic is  Anatolyevich and the family name is  Medvedev.
Dmitry Medvedev   Medvedev in 2022Deputy Chairman of the Security CouncilIncumbentAssumed office 16 January 2020ChairmanVladimir PutinPreceded byOffice establishedLeader of United RussiaIncumbentAssumed office 30 May 2012Secretary GeneralAndrey TurchakPreceded byVladimir PutinChairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union StateIn office18 July 2012  16 January 2020Secretary GeneralGrigory RapotaPreceded byVladimir PutinSucceeded byMikhail MishustinPrime Minister of RussiaIn office8 May 2012  16 January 2020PresidentVladimir PutinFirst DeputyViktor ZubkovIgor ShuvalovAnton SiluanovPreceded byViktor Zubkov (acting)Succeeded byMikhail MishustinPresident of RussiaIn office7 May 2008  7 May 2012Prime MinisterVladimir PutinPreceded byVladimir PutinSucceeded byVladimir PutinFirst Deputy Prime Minister of RussiaIn office14 November 2005  12 May 2008Serving with Sergei IvanovPrime MinisterMikhail FradkovViktor ZubkovPreceded byMikhail KasyanovSucceeded byViktor ZubkovIgor ShuvalovChief of Staff of the KremlinIn office30 October 2003  14 November 2005PresidentVladimir PutinPreceded byAlexander VoloshinSucceeded bySergey Sobyanin
Personal detailsBornDmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev (1965-09-14) 14 September 1965 (age 57)Leningrad, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union (now Saint Petersburg, Russia)Political partyUnited Russia(2012 present)Other politicalaffiliationsCPSU(before 1991)Independent(1991 2011)[1]SpouseSvetlana Linnik  (m. 1993) Children1ParentAnatoly Medvedev (father)EducationLeningrad State UniversitySignatureWebsiteOfficial websiteMilitary serviceAllegianceRussiaBranch/serviceRussian Armed ForcesYears of service2008-2012RankColonel1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian FederationCommandsSupreme Commander-in-ChiefBattles/warsRusso-Georgian WarInsurgency in the North Caucasus
Dmitry Medvedev's voice
Recorded 30 November 2008
Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev (Russian:      , IPA: [ dm itr j  n tol j v t  m d v ed f]; born 14 September 1965) is a Russian politician who has been serving as the deputy chairman of the Security Council of Russia since 2020.[2] Medvedev also served as the president of Russia between 2008 and 2012 and as the prime minister of Russia between 2012 and 2020.[3]
Medvedev was elected president in the 2008 election. He was regarded as more liberal than his predecessor, Vladimir Putin, who was also appointed prime minister during Medvedev's presidency. Medvedev's top agenda as president was a wide-ranging modernisation programme, aiming at modernising Russia's economy and society, and lessening the country's reliance on oil and gas. During Medvedev's tenure, the New START nuclear arms reduction treaty was signed by Russia and the United States, Russia emerged victorious in the Russo-Georgian War, and recovered from the Great Recession. Medvedev also launched an anti-corruption campaign, despite later being accused of corruption himself.
He served a single term in office and was succeeded by Putin following the 2012 presidential election. Medvedev was then appointed by Putin as prime minister. He resigned along with the rest of the government on 15 January 2020 to allow Putin to make sweeping constitutional changes; he was succeeded by Mikhail Mishustin on 16 January 2020. On the same day, Putin appointed Medvedev to the new office of deputy chairman of the Security Council.[4]
In the views of some analysts, Medvedev's presidency did seem to promise positive changes, both at home and in ties with the West, signaling "the possibility of a new, more liberal period in Russian politics"; however, he later seemed to adopt increasingly authoritarian and anti-West positions.[5][6][7]
This article is part of a series aboutDmitry Medvedev
Former Prime Minister of Russia
Former President of Russia
Early life
Political views
Medvedev Doctrine
Elections
2008 (campaign)
Presidency
Constitutional reform
Economic reform
Inauguration
International trips
Police reform
Obama-Medvedev Commission
Premiership
First cabinet
Second cabinet
Media gallery
vte
Early life and education
 Dmitry Medvedev in 1967, at approximately 2 years old
Dmitry Medvedev was born on 14 September 1965 in Leningrad, in the Soviet Union. His father, Anatoly Afanasyevich Medvedev (November 1926  2004), was a chemical engineer teaching at the Leningrad State Institute of Technology.[8][9] Dmitry's mother, Yulia Veniaminovna Medvedeva (n e Shaposhnikova, born 21 November 1939),[10] studied languages at Voronezh University and taught Russian at Herzen State Pedagogical University. Later, she would also work as a tour guide at Pavlovsk Palace. The Medvedevs lived in a 40m2 apartment at 6 Bela Kun Street in the Kupchino Municipal Okrug (district) of Leningrad.[11][12] Dmitry was his parents' only child. The Medvedevs were regarded at the time as a Soviet intelligentsia family.[12] His maternal grandparents were Ukrainians whose surname was Kovalev, originally Koval. Medvedev traces his family roots to the Belgorod region.[13]
As a child, Medvedev was intellectually curious, described by his first grade teacher Vera Smirnova as a "dreadful why-asker". After school, he would spend some time playing with his friends before hurrying home to work on his assignments. In the third grade, Medvedev studied the ten-volume Small Soviet Encyclopedia belonging to his father.[12] In the second and third grades, he showed interest in dinosaurs and memorised primary Earth's geologic development periods, from the Archean up to the Cenozoic. In the fourth and fifth grades he demonstrated interest in chemistry, conducting elementary experiments. He was involved to some degree with sport. In grade seven, his adolescent curiosity blossomed through his relationship with Svetlana Linnik, his future wife, who was studying at the same school in a parallel class.[12] This apparently affected Medvedev's school performance. He calls the school's final exams in 1982 a "tough period when I had to mobilize my abilities to the utmost for the first time in my life."[11][14]
Student years and academic career
 The Faculty of Law building of Saint Petersburg State University, the place where Medvedev studied and later taught
In the autumn of 1982, 17-year-old Medvedev enrolled at Leningrad State University to study law. Although he also considered studying linguistics, Medvedev later said he never regretted his choice, finding his chosen subject increasingly fascinating, stating that he was lucky "to have chosen a field that genuinely interested him and that it was really 'his thing'".[11][12] Fellow students described Medvedev as a correct and diplomatic person who in debates presented his arguments firmly, without offending.[12]
During his student years, Medvedev was a fan of the English rock bands Black Sabbath, Led Zeppelin, and Deep Purple. He was also fond of sports, and participated in athletic competitions in rowing and weight-lifting.[15]
He graduated from the Leningrad State University Faculty of Law in 1987 (together with Ilya Yeliseyev, Anton Ivanov, Nikolay Vinnichenko and Konstantin Chuychenko, who later became associates). After graduating, Medvedev considered joining the prosecutor's office to become an investigator however, he took an opportunity to pursue graduate studies as the civil law chair, deciding to accept three budget-funded post-graduate students to work at the chair itself.[11]
In 1990, Medvedev defended his dissertation titled, "Problems of Realisation of Civil Juridical Personality of State Enterprise" and received his Doctor of Juridical Science (Candidate of Juridical Sciences) degree in civil law.[16]
Anatoly Sobchak, a major democratic politician of the 1980s and 1990s was one of Medvedev's professors at the university. In 1988, Medvedev joined Sobchak's team of democrats and served as the de facto head of Sobchak's successful campaign for a seat in the new Soviet parliament, the Congress of People's Deputies of the USSR.[17]
After Sobchak's election campaign Medvedev continued his academic career in the position of docent at his alma mater, now renamed Saint Petersburg State University.[18] He taught civil and Roman law until 1999. According to one student, Medvedev was a popular teacher; "strict but not harsh". During his tenure Medvedev co-wrote a popular three-volume civil law textbook which over the years has sold a million copies.[12] Medvedev also worked at a small law consultancy firm which he had founded with his friends Anton Ivanov and Ilya Yeliseyev, to supplement his academic salary.[12]
Early career
Career in St Petersburg
 Facade of the Smolny Institute, meeting place of the City Hall's Committee for Foreign Affairs, where Medvedev worked as a consultant
In 1990, Anatoly Sobchak returned from Moscow to become chairman of the Leningrad City Council. Sobchak hired Medvedev who had previously headed his election campaign. One of Sobchak's former students, Vladimir Putin, became an adviser. The next summer, Sobchak was elected Mayor of the city, and Medvedev became a consultant to City Hall's Committee for Foreign Affairs. It was headed by Putin.[11][12]
In November 1993, Medvedev became the legal affairs director of Ilim Pulp Enterprise (ILP), a St. Petersburg-based timber company. Medvedev aided the company in developing a strategy as the firm launched a significant expansion. Medvedev received 20% of the company's stock. In the next seven years Ilim Pulp Enterprise became Russia's largest lumber company with an annual revenue of around $500 million. Medvedev sold his shares in ILP in 1999. He then took his first job at the central government of Russia. The profits realised by Medvedev are unknown.[12]
Career in the central government
 Medvedev with Vladimir Putin on 27 March 2000, a day after Putin's victory in the presidential election
In June 1996, Medvedev's colleague Vladimir Putin was brought into the Russian presidential administration. Three years later, on 16 August 1999, he became Prime Minister of Russia. Three months later, in November 1999, Medvedev became one of several from St. Petersburg brought in by Vladimir Putin to top government positions in Moscow. On 31 December, he was appointed deputy head of the presidential staff, becoming one of the politicians closest to future President Putin. On 17 January 2000, Dmitry Medvedev was promoted to 1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian Federation (the highest federal state civilian service rank) by the Decree signed by Vladimir Putin as acting President of Russia.[19] During the 2000 presidential elections, he was Putin's campaign manager. Putin won the election with 52.94% of the popular vote. Medvedev was quoted after the election commenting he thoroughly enjoyed the work and the responsibility calling it "a test of strength".[12]
As president, Putin launched a campaign against corrupt oligarchs and economic mismanagement. He appointed Medvedev chairman of gas company Gazprom's board of directors in 2000 with Alexei Miller. Medvedev put an end to the large-scale tax evasion and asset stripping by the previous corrupt management.[20] Medvedev then served as deputy chair from 2001 to 2002, becoming chair for the second time in June 2002,[11] a position which he held until his ascension to presidency in 2008.[21] During Medvedev's tenure, Gazprom's debts were restructured[22] and the company's market capitalisation grew from $7.8 billion[23] in 2000 to $300 billion in early 2008. Medvedev headed Russia's negotiations with Ukraine and Belarus during gas price disputes.[22]
In October 2003, Medvedev replaced Alexander Voloshin as presidential chief of staff. In November 2005, Medvedev moved from the presidential administration of the government when Putin appointed him as first deputy prime minister of Russia. In particular, Medvedev was made responsible for the implementation of the National Priority Projects focusing on improving public health, education, housing and agriculture. The program saw an increase of wages in healthcare and education and construction of new apartments but its funding, 4% of the federal budget, was not enough to significantly overhaul Russia's infrastructure. According to opinion polls, most Russians believed the money invested in the projects had been spent ineffectively.[12]
Presidential candidate
 President-elect Medvedev with Vladimir Putin in 2008
Following his appointment as first deputy prime minister, many political observers began to regard Medvedev as a potential candidate for the 2008 presidential elections,[24] although Western observers widely believed Medvedev was too liberal and too pro-Western for Putin to endorse him as a candidate. Instead, Western observers expected the candidate to arise from the ranks of the so-called siloviki, security and military officials many of whom were appointed to high positions during Putin's presidency.[12] The silovik Sergei Ivanov and the administrator-specialist Viktor Zubkov were seen as the strongest candidates.[25] In opinion polls which asked Russians to pick their favourite successor to Putin from a list of candidates not containing Putin himself, Medvedev often came out first, beating Ivanov and Zubkov as well as the opposition candidates.[26] In November 2006, Medvedev's trust rating was 17%, more than double than that of Ivanov. Medvedev's popularity was probably boosted by his high-profile role in the National Priority Projects.[27]
Many observers were surprised when on 10 December 2007, President Putin introduced Medvedev as his preferred successor. This was staged on TV with four parties suggesting Medvedev's candidature to Putin, and Putin then giving his endorsement. The four pro-Kremlin parties were United Russia, Fair Russia, Agrarian Party of Russia and Civilian Power.[25] United Russia held its party congress on 17 December 2007 where by secret ballot of the delegates, Medvedev was officially endorsed as their candidate in the 2008 presidential election.[28] He formally registered his candidacy with the Central Election Commission on 20 December 2007 and said he would step down as chairman of Gazprom, since under the current laws, the president is not permitted to hold another post.[29] His registration was formally accepted as valid by the Russian Central Election Commission on 21 January 2008.[30] Describing his reasons for endorsing Medvedev, Putin said:
I am confident that he will be a good president and an effective manager. But besides other things, there is this personal chemistry: I trust him. I just trust him.[12]
2008 presidential election
Main article: 2008 Russian presidential election
Election campaign
 Medvedev's election campaign took advantage of Putin's high popularity and his endorsement of Medvedev.
Main article: Dmitry Medvedev 2008 presidential campaign
As 2 March 2008 election approached, the outgoing president, Vladimir Putin, remained the country's most popular politician. An opinion poll by Russia's independent polling organisation, the Levada Center,[31] conducted over the period 21 24 December 2007 indicated that when presented a list of potential candidates, 79% of Russians were ready to vote for Medvedev if the election was immediately held.[32][33] The other main contenders, the Communist Gennady Zyuganov and the LDPR's Vladimir Zhirinovsky both received in 9% in the same poll.[34][35] Much of Putin's popularity transferred to his chosen candidate, with 42% of the survey responders saying that Medvedev's strength came from Putin's support to him.[36][37]
In his first speech after being endorsed, Medvedev stated that, as president, he would appoint Vladimir Putin to the post of prime minister to head the Russian government.[38] Although constitutionally barred from a third consecutive presidential term, such a role would allow Putin to continue as an influential figure in Russian politics.[39] Putin pledged that he would accept the position of prime minister should Medvedev be elected president. Although Putin had pledged not to change the distribution of authority between the president and prime minister, many analysts expected a shift in the center of power from the presidency to the prime minister post when Putin assumed the latter under a Medvedev presidency.[40] Election posters portrayed the pair side by side with the slogan "Together We Win"[41] ("   ").[42] Medvedev vowed to work closely with Putin once elected.[43]
In December 2007, in preparation for his election campaign, Medvedev promised that funding of the National Priority Projects would be raised by 260 billion rubles for 2008. Medvedev's election campaign was relatively low-key and, like his predecessor, Medvedev refused to take part in televised debates, citing his high workload as first deputy prime minister as the reason. Instead, Medvedev preferred to present his views on his election website Medvedev2008.ru.[44]
In January 2008, Medvedev launched his campaign with stops in the oblasts.[45] On 22 January 2008, Medvedev held what was effectively his first campaign speech at Russia's second Civic Forum, advocating a liberal-conservative agenda for modernising Russia. Medvedev argued that Russia needed "decades of stable development" because the country had "exhausted its share of revolutions and social upheavals back in the twentieth century". Medvedev therefore emphasised liberal modernisation while still aiming to continue his predecessor's agenda of stabilisation.[46] On 15 February 2008, Medvedev held a keynote speech at the Fifth Krasnoyarsk Economic Forum, saying that:
Freedom is better than non-freedom  this principle should be at the core of our politics. I mean freedom in all its manifestations  personal freedom, economic freedom and, finally, freedom of expression.[46]
In the Krasnoyarsk speech, Medvedev harshly condemned Russia's "legal nihilism" and highlighted the need to ensure the independence of the country's judicial system and the need for an anti-corruption program. Economically, Medvedev advocated private property, economic deregulation and lower taxes. According to him, Russia's economy should be modernised by focusing on four "I"s: institutions, infrastructure, innovation and investment.[46][47][48]
Election win
 Medvedev with Putin on election day on 2 March 2008
Medvedev was elected President of Russia on 2 March 2008. The final election results gave him 70.28% (52,530,712) of votes with a turnout of 69.78% of registered voters. The main contenders, Gennady Zyuganov and Vladimir Zhirinovsky received 17.72% and 9.35% respectively. Three-quarters of Medvedev's vote was Putin's electorate. According to surveys, had Putin and Medvedev both run for president in the same elections, Medvedev would have received 9% of the vote.[49]
The fairness of the election was disputed by international observers. Andreas Gross, head of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) mission, stated that the elections were "neither free nor fair". Moreover, the few western vote monitors bemoaned the inequality of candidate registration and the abuse of administrative resources by Medvedev allowing blanket television coverage.[50] Russian programmer Shpilkin analysed the results of Medvedev's election and came to the conclusion that the results were falsified by the election committees. However, after the correction for the alleged falsification factor, Medvedev still came out as the winner although with 63% of the vote instead of 70%.[51]
Presidency (2008 12)
Main article: Presidency of Dmitry Medvedev
Inauguration
Main article: Inauguration of Dmitry Medvedev
 Taking the presidential oath in the Grand Kremlin Palace on 7 May 2008
On 7 May 2008, Dmitry Medvedev took an oath as the third president of the Russian Federation in a ceremony held in the Grand Kremlin Palace.[52] After taking the oath of office and receiving a gold chain of double-headed eagles symbolising the presidency, he stated:[53]
I believe my most important aims will be to protect civil and economic freedoms... We must fight for a true respect of the law and overcome legal nihilism, which seriously hampers modern development.[53]
His inauguration coincided with the celebration of the Victory Day on 9 May. He attended the military parade at Red Square and signed a decree to provide housing to war veterans.[54]
Personnel appointments
See also: Vladimir Putin's Second Cabinet
 Medvedev appointed Sergei Naryshkin as the new head of the presidential administration.
On 8 May 2008, Dmitry Medvedev appointed Putin Prime Minister of Russia as he had promised during his election campaign. The nomination was approved by the State Duma with a clear majority of 392 56, with only Communist Party of the Russian Federation deputies voting against.[22]
12 May 2008, Putin proposed the list of names for his new cabinet which Medvedev approved.[citation needed] Most of the personnel remained unchanged from the period of Putin's initial presidency but there were several high-profile changes. The Minister of Justice, Vladimir Ustinov was replaced by Aleksandr Konovalov; the Minister of Energy, Viktor Khristenko was replaced with Sergei Shmatko; the Minister of Communications, Leonid Reiman was replaced with Igor Shchyogolev and Vitaliy Mutko received the newly created position of Minister of Sports, Tourism and Youth policy.[22]
In the presidential administration, Medvedev replaced Sergei Sobyanin with Sergei Naryshkin as the head of the administration. The head of the Federal Security Service, Nikolai Patrushev, was replaced with Alexander Bortnikov.[22] Medvedev's economic adviser Arkady Dvorkovich and his press attach  Natalya Timakova became part of the president's core team. Medvedev's old classmate from his student years, Konstantin Chuichenko, became his personal assistant.[27]
Medvedev was reported to have taken care not to upset the balance of different factions in the presidential administration and in the government. However, the influence of the powerful security/military-related siloviki weakened after Medvedev's inauguration for the first time in 20 years. In their place, Medvedev brought in the so-called civiliki, a network of St. Petersburg civil law scholars preferred by Medvedev for high positions.[27][55]
"Tandem rule"
Main article: Tandemocracy
 Medvedev with Putin in 2008
From the beginning of Medvedev's tenure, the nature of his presidency and his relationship with Putin was subject to considerable media speculation. In a unique situation in the Russian Federation's political history, the constitutionally powerful president was now flanked with a highly influential prime minister (Putin), who also remained the country's most popular politician. Previous prime ministers had proven to be almost completely subordinate to the president and none of them had enjoyed strong public approval, with Yevgeny Primakov and Putin's previous tenure (1999 2000) as prime minister under Boris Yeltsin being the only exceptions.[22] Journalists quickly dubbed the new system with a practically dual-headed executive as "government by tandem" or "tandemocracy", with Medvedev and Putin called the "ruling tandem".[12]
Daniel Treisman has argued that early in Medvedev's presidency, Putin seemed ready to disengage and started withdrawing to the background. In the first year of Medvedev's presidency, two external events threatening Russia the late-2000s financial crisis and the 2008 South Ossetia war changed Putin's plans and caused him to resume a stronger role in Russian politics.[12]
Main external events
2008 Russo-Georgian War
Main article: Russo-Georgian War
 Russian invasion in Russo-Georgian War
 Presidential decree recognising South Ossetia's independence, signed by Medvedev on 26 August 2008
The long-lingering conflict between Georgia and the separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, which were supported by Russia, escalated during the summer of 2008. On 1 August 2008, the Russian-backed South Ossetian forces started shelling Georgian villages, with a sporadic response from Georgian peacekeepers in the area. Intensifying artillery attacks by the South Ossetians broke a 1992 ceasefire agreement. To put an end to these attacks, the Georgian army units were sent in to the South Ossetian conflict zone on 7 August. Georgian troops took control of most of Tskhinvali, a separatist stronghold, in hours.[56][57]
At the time of the attack, Medvedev was on vacation and Putin was attending the opening ceremony of the 2008 Beijing Olympics.[58] At about 1:00 a.m on 8 August, Medvedev held a telephone conversation with the Defence Minister, Anatoliy Serdyukov. It is likely that during this conversation, Medvedev authorised the use of force against Georgia.[59] The next day, Medvedev released a statement, in which he said:
Last night, Georgian troops committed what amounts to an act of aggression against Russian peacekeepers and the civilian population in South Ossetia ... In accordance with the Constitution and the federal laws, as President of the Russian Federation it is my duty to protect the lives and dignity of Russian citizens wherever they may be. It is these circumstances that dictate the steps we will take now. We will not allow the deaths of our fellow citizens to go unpunished. The perpetrators will receive the punishment they deserve. Dmitry Medvedev on 8 August 2008[60]
In the early hours of 8 August, Russian military forces launched a counter-offensive against Georgian troops. After five days of heavy fighting, all Georgian forces were routed from South Ossetia and Abkhazia. On 12 August, Medvedev ended the Russian military operation, entitled "Operation to force Georgia into peace". Later on the same day, a peace deal brokered by the French and EU president, Nicolas Sarkozy, was signed between the warring parties. On 26 August, after being unanimously passed by the State Duma, Medvedev signed a decree recognising South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states. The five-day conflict cost the lives of 48 Russian soldiers, including 10 peacekeepers, while the casualties for Georgia was 170 soldiers and 14 policemen.[61]
The Russian popular opinion of the military intervention was broadly positive, not just among the supporters of the government, but across the political spectrum.[62] Medvedev's popularity ratings soared by around 10 percentage points to over 70%,[63] due to what was seen as his effective handling of the war.[64]
Shortly in the aftermath of the conflict, Medvedev formulated a 5-point strategy of the Russian foreign policy, which has become known as the Medvedev Doctrine. On 30 September 2009, the European Union sponsored Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia stated that, while preceded by months of mutual provocations, "open hostilities began with a large-scale Georgian military operation against the town of Tskhinvali and the surrounding areas, launched in the night of 7 to 8 August 2008".[65][66]
2008 09 economic crisis
In September 2008, Russia was hit by repercussions of the global financial crisis. Before this, Russian officials, such as the Finance Minister, Alexei Kudrin, had said they believed Russia would be safe, due to its stable macroeconomic situation and substantial reserves accumulated during the years of growth. Despite this, the recession proved to be the worst in the history of Russia, and the country's GDP fell by over 8% in 2009.[67] The government's response was to use over a trillion rubles (more than $40 billion U.S. Dollars) to help troubled banks,[68] and initiated a large-scale stimulus programme, lending $50 billion to struggling companies.[67][68] No major banks collapsed, and minor failures were handled in an effective way. The economic situation stabilised in 2009, but substantial growth did not resume until 2010. Medvedev's approval ratings declined during the crisis, dropping from 83% in September 2008 to 68% in April 2009, before recovering to 72% in October 2009 following improvements in the economy.[69][70]
According to some analysts, the economic crisis, together with the 2008 South Ossetia war, delayed Medvedev's liberal programme. Instead of launching the reforms, the government and the presidency had to focus their efforts on anti-crisis measures and handling the foreign policy implications of the war.[71][72]
Domestic policy
Economy
Main article: Medvedev modernisation programme
 Model of a GLONASS-K satellite. Medvedev made space technology and telecommunications one of the priority areas of his modernisation programme.
In the economic sphere, Medvedev has launched a modernisation programme which aims at modernising Russia's economy and society, decreasing the country's dependency on oil and gas revenues and creating a diversified economy based on high technology and innovation.[73] The programme is based on the top 5 priorities for the country's technological development: efficient energy use; nuclear technology; information technology; medical technology and pharmaceuticals; and space technology in combination with telecommunications.[74]
In November 2010, on his annual speech to the Federal Assembly Medvedev stressed for greater privatisation of unneeded state assets both at the federal and regional level, and that Russia's regions must sell-off non-core assets to help fund post-crisis spending, following in the footsteps of the state's planned $32 billion 3-year asset sales. Medvedev said the money from privatisation should be used to help modernise the economy and the regions should be rewarded for finding their own sources of cash.[75][76]
Medvedev has named technological innovation one of the key priorities of his presidency. In May 2009, Medvedev established the Presidential Commission on Innovation, which he will personally chair every month. The commission comprises almost the entire Russian government and some of the best minds from academia and business.[77] Medvedev has also said that giant state corporations will inevitably be privatised, and although the state had increased its role in the economy in recent years, this should remain a temporary move.[citation needed]
On 7 August 2009, Dmitry Medvedev instructed the prosecutor general, Yury Chayka, and the chief of the Audit Directorate of the Presidential Administration of Russia, Konstantin Chuychenko, to probe state corporations, a new highly privileged form of organisation earlier promoted by President Putin, to question their appropriateness.[78]
In June 2010, he visited the Twitter headquarters in Silicon Valley declaring a mission to bring more high-tech innovation and investment to the country.[79]
Police reform
Main article: Russian police reform
Medvedev made reforming Russia's law enforcement one of his top agendas, the reason for which was a shooting started by a police officer in April 2009 in one of Moscow's supermarkets. Medvedev initiated the reform at the end of 2009, with a presidential decree issued on 24 December ordering the government to begin planning the reform. In early August 2010, a draft law was posted on the Internet at the address [1] for public discussion. The new website received more than 2,000 comments within 24 hours.[80] Based on citizen feedback, several modifications to the draft were made. On 27 October 2010, President Medvedev submitted the draft to the lower house of the Russian parliament, the State Duma.[81] The State Duma voted to approve the bill on 28 January 2011, and the upper house, the Federation Council followed suit on 2 February 2011. On 7 February 2011, President Medvedev signed the bill into law.[citation needed] The changes came into effect on 1 March 2011.[citation needed]
Under the reform, the salaries of Russian police officers were increased by 30%, Interior Ministry personnel were cut and financing and jurisdiction over the police were centralised.[citation needed] Around 217 billion rubles ($7 billion) were allocated to the police reform from the federal budget for the time frame 2012 2013.[82]
Anti-corruption campaign
Main articles: Russian anti-corruption campaign and Corruption in Russia
 Medvedev chairing a meeting the Anti-Corruption Council on 30 September 2008
On 19 May 2008, Medvedev signed a decree on anti-corruption measures, which included creation of an Anti-Corruption Council.[citation needed] In the first meeting of the council on 30 September 2008, Medvedev said:[83]
I will repeat one simple, but very painful thing. Corruption in our country has become rampant. It has become commonplace and characterises the life of the Russian society.
In July 2008, Medvedev's National Anti-Corruption Plan was published in the official Rossiyskaya Gazeta newspaper. It suggested measures aimed at making sanctions for corruption more severe, such as legislation to disqualify state and municipal officials who commit minor corruption offences and making it obligatory for officials to report corruption. The plan ordered the government to prepare anti-corruption legislation based on these suggestions.[84][85] The bill that followed, called On Corruption Counteraction was signed into law on 25 December 2008 as Federal Law N 273-FZ.[86] According to Professor Richard Sakwa, "Russia now at last had serious, if flawed, legislation against corruption, which in the context was quite an achievement, although preliminary results were meagre."[83] Russia's score in Corruption Perceptions Index rose from 2.1 in 2008 to 2.2 in 2009, which "could be interpreted as a mildly positive response to the newly adopted package of anti-corruption legislation initiated and promoted by president Medvedev and passed by the Duma in December 2008", according to Transparency International's CPI 2009 Regional Highlights report.[87]
On 13 April 2010, Medvedev signed presidential decree No. 460 which introduced the National Anti-Corruption Strategy, a midterm government policy, while the plan is updated every two years. The new strategy stipulated increased fines, greater public oversight of government budgets and sociological research.[88][89] According to Georgy Satarov, president of the Indem think tank, the latest decree "probably reflected Medvedev's frustration with the fact that the 2008 plan had yielded little result."[88]
In January 2011, President Medvedev admitted that the government had so far failed in its anti-corruption measures.[90]
On 4 May 2011, Medvedev signed the Federal Law On Amendments to the Criminal Code and the Code of Administrative Offences of the Russian Federation to Improve State Anti-Corruption Management.[91] The bill raised fines for corruption to up to 100 times the amount of the bribe given or received, with the maximum fine being 500 million rubles ($18.3 million).[citation needed]
Education
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2010)
President Medvedev initiated a new policy called "Our New School"[clarification needed] and instructed the government to present a review on the implementation of the initiative every year.[92]
Development of the political system
 A Just Russia's Sergey Mironov was very critical of the 2009 regional elections.
Regional elections held on 1 March 2009 were followed by accusations of administrative resources being used in support of United Russia candidates, with the leader of A Just Russia, Sergey Mironov, being especially critical. Responding to this, Medvedev met with the chairman of the Central Election Commission of Russia, Vladimir Churov, and called for moderation in the use of administrative resources.[93] In August 2009, Medvedev promised to break the near-dominant position of United Russia party in national and regional legislatures, stating that "New democratic times are beginning".[94] The next regional elections were held on 11 October 2009 and won by United Russia with 66% of the vote. The elections were again harshly criticised for the use of administrative resources in favour of United Russia candidates. Communist, LDPR and A Just Russia parliamentary deputies staged an unprecedented walkout on 14 15 October 2009 as a result.[93] Although Medvedev often promised to stand up for more political pluralism, Professor Richard Sakwa observed, after the 2009 regional elections, a gulf formed between Medvedev's words and the worsening situation, with the question arising "whether Medvedev had the desire or ability to renew Russia's political system."[93]
On 26 October 2009, the First Deputy Chief of Staff, Vladislav Surkov, warned that democratic experiments could result in more instability and that more instability "could rip Russia apart".[95] On 6 November 2010, Medvedev vetoed a recently passed bill which restricted antigovernment demonstrations. The bill, passed on 22 October, prohibited anyone who had previously been convicted of organising an illegal mass rally from seeking permission to stage a demonstration.[96]
In late November 2010, Medvedev made a public statement about the damage being done to Russia's politics by the dominance of the United Russia party. He claimed that the country faced political stagnation if the ruling party would "degrade" if not challenged; "this stagnation is equally damaging to both the ruling party and the opposition forces." In the same speech, he said Russian democracy was "imperfect" but improving. BBC Russian correspondents reported that this came on the heels of discontent in political circles and opposition that the authorities, in their view, had too much control over the political process.[97]
 Medvedev visits the Russian Republic of Tatarstan.
In his first State of the Nation address to the Russian parliament on 5 November 2008,[98] Medvedev proposed to change the Constitution of Russia in order to increase the terms of the president and State Duma from four to six and five years respectively (see 2008 Amendments to the Constitution of Russia).
Medvedev on 8 May 2009, proposed to the legislature and on 2 June signed into law an amendment whereby the chairperson of the Constitutional Court and his deputies would be proposed to the parliament by the president rather than elected by the judges, as was the case before.[99]
In May 2009, Medvedev set up the Presidential Commission of the Russian Federation to Counter Attempts to Falsify History to the Detriment of Russia's Interests.[100] In August of the same year, he stated his opposition to the equating of Stalinism with Nazism. Medvedev denied the involvement of the Soviet Union in the Soviet invasion of Poland together with Nazi Germany. Arguments of the European Union and of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) were called a lie. Medvedev said it was Joseph Stalin who in fact "ultimately saved Europe".[101]
On 30 October 2009, due to the Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Political Repressions, President Medvedev published a statement in his video blog. He stressed that the memory of national tragedies is as sacred as the memory of victory. Medvedev recalled that for twenty of the pre-war years entire layers and classes of the Russian people were destroyed (this period includes the Red Terror mainly under the lead of Felix Dzerzhinsky, the crimes of Joseph Stalin and other evil deeds of the Soviet Bolsheviks). Nothing can take precedence over the value of human life, said the president.[102]
 Medvedev and Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in Kyiv, Ukraine, on 17 September 2010
In a speech on 15 September 2009, Medvedev stated that he approved of the abolition in 2004 of direct popular elections of regional leaders, effectively in favour of their appointment by the Kremlin, and added that he did not see a possibility of a return to direct elections even in 100 years.[103]
Election law changes
In 2009, Medvedev proposed an amendment to the election law which would decrease the State Duma election threshold from 7% to 5%. The amendment was signed into law in Spring 2009. Parties receiving more than 5% but less than 6% of the votes would henceforward be guaranteed one seat, while parties receiving more than 6% but less than 7% will get two seats. These seats will be allocated before the seats for parties with over 7% support.[104]
Russian election law stipulates that parties with representatives in the State Duma are free to put forward a list of candidates for the Duma elections, while parties with no current representation need first to collect signatures. Under the 2009 amendments initiated by Medvedev, the number of signatures required was lowered from 200,000 to 150,000 for the 2011 Duma elections. In subsequent elections, only 120,000 signatures will be required.[104]
Foreign policy
Main article: List of international trips made by Dmitry Medvedev
 Medvedev with Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel in Germany in July 2011
 Medvedev with Obama after signing the New START treaty in Prague, Czech Republic[105][106]
In August, during the third month of Medvedev's presidency, Russia took part in the 2008 South Ossetia war with Georgia, which drove tension in Russia United States relations to a post Cold War high. On 26 August, following a unanimous vote of the Federal Assembly of Russia, Medvedev issued a presidential decree officially recognising Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states,[107] an action condemned by the G8.[108] On 31 August 2008, Medvedev shifted Russia's foreign policy under his government, built around five main principles:[citation needed]
Fundamental principles of international law are supreme.
The world will be multipolar.
Russia will not seek confrontation with other nations.
Russia will protect its citizens wherever they are.
Russia will develop ties in friendly regions.
 Medvedev meeting with Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European Council, and Jose Manuel Barroso, in Brussels, 2010
 BRICS leaders in 2012  Dilma Rousseff, Medvedev, Manmohan Singh, Hu Jintao, and Jacob Zuma
 Medvedev and President Abdelaziz Bouteflika in Algiers
 Medvedev meets with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, 2010.
In his address to the parliament on 5 November 2008 he also promised to deploy the Iskander missile system and radar-jamming facilities in Kaliningrad Oblast to counter the U.S. missile defence system in Eastern Europe.[109] Following U.S. President Barack Obama's 17 September 2009 decision to not deploy missile-defense elements in the Czech Republic and Poland, Dmitry Medvedev said he decided against deploying Iskander missiles in Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast.[citation needed]
In March 2011, Medvedev urged US President Barack Obama to prevent civilian casualties during NATO's military intervention in Libya. He said Russia was concerned about possible civilian casualties in what he called the "indiscriminate" use of force in Libya.[110]
On 21 November 2011, Medvedev claimed that the war on Georgia had prevented further NATO expansion.[citation needed]
In 2011, during the performance at the Yaroslavl Global Policy Forum, President Medvedev has declared that the doctrine of Karl Marx on class struggle is extremist and dangerous. Progressive economic stratification which can be less evident in period of economic growth, leads to acute conflicts between rich and poor people in period of downturn. In such conditions, the doctrine on class struggle is being revived in many regions of the world, riots and terrorist attacks become reality, by opinion of Medvedev.[111]
In August 2014, President Barack Obama said: "We had a very productive relationship with President Medvedev. We got a lot of things done that we needed to get done."[112]
During the official visit to Armenia on 7 April 2016, Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev visited the Tsitsernakaberd Memorial Complex to pay tribute to the victims of the Armenian genocide. Medvedev laid flowers at the Eternal Fire and honoured the memory of the victims with a minute of silence. Russia recognised the crime in 1995.[113]
Relationship with Putin
Although the Russian constitution clearly apportions the greater power in the state to the president, speculation arose over the question of whether it was Medvedev or Prime Minister Vladimir Putin who actually wielded the most power.[114] According to London Daily Telegraph, "Kremlin-watchers" note that Medvedev uses the more formal form of 'you' ( , 'vy') when addressing Putin, while Putin addresses Medvedev with the less formal 'ty' ( ).[114]
According to a poll conducted in September 2009 by the Levada Center in which 1,600 Russians took part, 13% believed Medvedev held the most power, 32% believed Putin held the most power, 48% believed that the two shared equal levels of influence, and 7% failed to answer.[115] However, Medvedev attempted to affirm his position by stating, "I am the leader of this state, I am the head of this state, and the division of power is based on this."[116]
2012 presidential elections
As both Putin and Medvedev could have run for president in the 2012 general elections, there was a view from some analysts that some of Medvedev's contemporaneous actions and comments at the time were designed to separate his image from Putin's. BBC News suggested these might include his dealings in late 2010 with NATO and the United States, possibly designed to show himself as being better able to deal with Western nations,[117] and comments in November about the need for a stronger opposition in Russian politics, to present himself as a moderniser. BBC News observed other analysts considered the split to be exaggerated, that Medvedev and Putin were "trying to maximise support for the authorities by appealing to different parts of society".[97] There was belief that the court verdict on former oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky and his partner Platon Lebedev, both of whom funded opposition parties before their arrests, would indicate whether or not Putin was "still calling all the shots".[118]
On 24 September 2011, while speaking at the United Russia party congress, Medvedev recommended Vladimir Putin as the party's presidential candidate and revealed that the two men had long ago cut a deal to allow Putin to return to the presidency in 2012 after he was forced to stand down in 2008 by term limits.[119] This switch was termed by many in the media as "rokirovka", the Russian term for the chess move "castling". Medvedev said he himself would be ready to perform "practical work in the government".[citation needed] Putin accepted Medvedev's offer the same day, and backed him for the position of the prime minister of Russia in case the United Russia, whose list of candidates in the elections Medvedev agreed to head, were to win in the upcoming Russian legislative election.[120] The same day, the Russian Orthodox Church endorsed the proposal by President Medvedev to let Putin return to the post of president of Russia.[121]
On 22 December 2011, in his last state of the nation address in Moscow, Medvedev called for comprehensive reform of Russia's political system   including restoring the election of regional governors and allowing half the seats in the State Duma to be directly elected in the regions. "I want to say that I hear those who talk about the need for change, and understand them", Medvedev said in an address to the Duma. "We need to give all active citizens the legal chance to participate in political life." However, the opposition to the ruling United Russia party of Medvedev and Prime Minister Putin dismissed the proposals as political posturing that failed to adequately address protesters who claimed 4 December election was rigged.[122]
On 7 May, on his last day in office, Medvedev signed the last documents as the head of state: in the sphere of civil society, protection of human rights and modernisation. He approved the list of instructions by the results of the meeting with the presidential council on civil society and human rights, which was held on 28 April. Medvedev also approved with his decree "Presidential programme for raising skills of engineers for 2012 2014" for modernisation and technological development of the Russian economy.[123]
Prime minister (2012 2020)
First term
Main article: Dmitry Medvedev's First Cabinet
 First Cabinet of Dmitry Medvedev
On 7 May 2012, the same day he ceased to be the president of Russia, Dmitry Medvedev was nominated by President Vladimir Putin to the office of prime minister.[124][125] On 8 May 2012, the State Duma of the Russian Federation voted on the nomination submitted by the new president, and confirmed the choice of Medvedev to the post. Putin's United Russia party, now led by Medvedev, secured a majority of the Duma's seats in the 2011 legislative election, winning 49% of the vote, and 238 of the 450 seats. Medvedev's nomination to the office of prime minister was approved by the State Duma in a 299 144 vote.[126][better source needed]
First year
 Medvedev with Latvian PM Valdis Dombrovskis, April 2013
Medvedev took office as prime minister of Russia also on 8 May 2012, after President Vladimir Putin signed the decree formalising his appointment to the office.[127]
On 19 May 2012, Dmitry Medvedev took part in the G-8 Summit at Camp David, in the United States, replacing President Putin, who decided not to represent Russia in the summit. Medvedev was the first prime minister to represent Russia at a G-8 meeting. On 21 May 2012, his Cabinet was appointed and approved by the president. On 26 May, he was approved and officially appointed as the chairman of United Russia, the ruling party. Earlier in the same week Medvedev officially joined the party and thereby became Russia's first prime minister affiliated to a political party.[128]
Crimea
In the wake of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution, Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula. On 31 March 2014, Medvedev visited Crimea after the peninsula became part of Russia on 18 March. During his visit he announced the formation of the Federal Ministry for Crimea Affairs.[129]
Second term
Main article: Dmitry Medvedev's Second Cabinet
 Medvedev at his confirmation hearing in the State Duma on 8 May 2018
On 7 May 2018, Dmitry Medvedev was nominated as prime minister by Vladimir Putin for another term.[130] On 8 May, Medvedev was confirmed by the State Duma as prime minister, with 374 votes in favour.[131] On 15 May, Putin approved the structure and on 18 May the composition of the Cabinet.[132][133]
In March 2017, discontentment was triggered through Medvedev's depiction in an investigative film by the Anti-Corruption Foundation titled He Is Not Dimon to You. This sparked demonstrations in central Moscow, with the crowd chanting "Medvedev, resign!" as well as "Putin is a thief!"[134] In the summer of 2018, country-wide protests took place against the retirement age hike introduced by Medvedev's government. The plan was unexpectedly announced by the government on 14 June, which coincided with the opening day of the 2018 FIFA World Cup hosted by Russia.[135] As a result of the demonstrations, the ratings of Medvedev as well as President Putin significantly declined. Following the 2019 Siberia wildfires, Medvedev proposed revising regulatory acts on extinguishing fires in regions, and instructed to consult with foreign experts in developing proposals to fight with wildfires.[136]
Resignation
Medvedev, along with his entire Cabinet, resigned on 15 January 2020 after Putin delivered the Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly, in which he proposed several amendments to the constitution. Medvedev stated that he was resigning to allow President Putin to make the significant constitutional changes suggested by Putin regarding shifting power away from the presidency.[137] Medvedev said that the constitutional changes would "significantly change Russia's balance of power".[138][139] Putin accepted the resignation.[140]
Although Medvedev had ostensibly resigned voluntarily (part 1 of Article 117 of the constitution),[141][142] the Executive Order that was released stated that Putin had dismissed the cabinet as per Article 83 (c) and part 2 of Article 117 of the constitution.[143][144] Kommersant reported that the use of these sections revealed that it was Putin who had sacked Medvedev and that the resignation was not voluntary but forced, since these sections give power to the president to dissolve the government without explanation or motivation.[145]
Putin suggested that Medvedev take the post of deputy chairman of the Security Council.[139]
Deputy chairman of the Security Council (2020 present)
On 16 January 2020, Medvedev was appointed to the post of deputy chairman of the Security Council of Russia.[146] His salary was set at 618,713 rubles (8,723.85 USD).[147] In a July interview with Komsomolskaya Pravda, Medvedev said he retains "good friendly relations" with President Putin, which was in contrast with the opinion of many circles that his departure from the role of prime minister was a result of a rift in the domestic policies of the two.[148]
Russian invasion of Ukraine
In February 2022, after Russia was suspended from the Council of Europe due to its invasion of Ukraine, and subsequently announced its intention to withdraw from the organization, Medvedev stated that while the decision to suspend Russia was "unfair", it was also a "good opportunity" to reinstate the death penalty in Russia.[149][150] He also stated that Russia did not need diplomatic relations with the West and that the sanctions imposed on the country gave it good reason to pull out of dialogue on nuclear stability and potentially New START.[151]
In April 2022, he addressed the global food crisis, caused in part by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, saying that Russia would supply food and agriculture products only to "friendly" countries. He said that Russia has many friends and they are not in Europe and North America.[152]
 Kyiv after Russian shelling on 14 March 2022. Medvedev expressed support for the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
On 6 July 2022, Medvedev wrote on Telegram that it would be "crazy to create tribunals or courts for the so-called investigation of Russia's actions", claiming the idea of "punishing a country that has one of the largest nuclear potentials" may potentially pose "a threat to the existence of humanity". Medvedev accused the United States of creating "chaos and devastation around the world under the guise of 'true democracy'", concluding his message by saying "the US and its useless stooges should remember the words of the Bible: 'Judge not, lest you be judged; so that one day the great day of His wrath will not come to their house, and who can stand?'"[153]
On 27 July 2022, Medvedev shared a map on Telegram, described as predictions of "Western analysts", showing Ukraine, including its occupied territories, mostly absorbed by Russia, as well as Poland, Romania and Hungary.[154][155]
Medvedev was interviewed at length by Darius Rochebin of French TV broadcaster La Cha ne Info on 27 August 2022.[156]
In September 2022 Medvedev said that any weapons in Russia's arsenal, including strategic nuclear weapons, could be used to protect territories annexed to Russia from Ukraine. He also said that referendums organized by Russia-installed and separatist authorities would take place in large swathes of Russian-occupied Ukrainian territory, and that there was "no turning back".[157][158] Later that month he said that Russia had the right to defend itself with nuclear weapons and that this was "certainly not a bluff".[159] The bluff comments were interpreted by a reputable news agency as "Medvedev raises spectre of Russian nuclear strike on Ukraine".[160]
On 4 November 2022 on the occasion of Russia's Day of National Unity state holiday, Medvedev thought that Russia "was fighting a sacred battle against Satan" who uses "intricate lies. And our weapon is the truth. That is why our cause is right. That is why victory will be ours!". The Ukrainians were "crazy Nazi drug addicts" backed by Westerners who he said had "saliva running down their chins from degeneracy".[161][162]
 Medvedev repeatedly threatened to use nuclear weapons.[163]
In November 2022 Medvedev was quoted as saying on his Telegram app channel that the Ukrainian desire to recapture the territory it had lost to Russia in the annexations "is a threat to the existence of our state and of a dismemberment of today s Russia", and "direct reason" to use Russia s nuclear weapons; something the reporter termed "worrying language".[164] In the same month another journalist quoted him as saying "Russia, for obvious reasons, has not yet used its entire arsenal of possible weapons, equipment and munitions. And did not attack all possible enemy targets located in populated areas. And not only from our inherent human kindness. Everything has its time."[165][159] He called the Russians who fled Russia after the invasion "cowardly traitors" and said that Russia was "stronger and cleaner" without them.[166]
On 21 December 2022, Medvedev visited Beijing and met with Chinese President Xi Jinping. They discussed strengthening the "strategic partnership" between Russia and China and the war in Ukraine.[167]
On 28 December 2022, he said that Russians who fled Russia after the invasion of Ukraine and are opposed to the war should be labeled "enemies of society" and barred from returning to Russia.[168] Medvedev called for the use of death squads against politically active Russian exiles.[169]
On 14 January 2023 Medvedev said that Japanese PM Fumio Kishida should disembowel himself by seppuku because the former was evidently frustrated by Kishida's joint statement with US President Joe Biden that "We state unequivocally that any use of a nuclear weapon by Russia in Ukraine would be an act of hostility against humanity and unjustifiable in any way".[170]
In February 2023, he warned that "all of Ukraine that remains under Kyiv's rule will burn" after the United States promised to send longer-range rockets that would double Ukraine's strike range.[171]
On 20 March 2023, in response to the ICC issuing a warrant for Putin, Medvedev posted on Telegram saying that "It is quite possible to imagine a hypersonic missile being fired from the North Sea from a Russian ship at The Hague courthouse".[172]
On 8 April 2023, Medvedev said that Ukraine will "disappear" as "no one needs it". He claimed that neither Europe nor the United States, Africa, Latin America or Asia need Ukraine and called the current Ukrainian state "a misunderstanding generated by the collapse of the USSR."[173] He said the Kremlin does not need "parts of Russia named as Ukraine in 1991," it instead needs "Big Great Russia."[174]
Personal life
 Dmitry Medvedev and his wife Svetlana Medvedeva in 2008
Medvedev is married and has a son,  Ilya Dmitrevich Medvedev (born 1995). His wife, Svetlana Vladimirovna Medvedeva, was both his childhood friend and school sweetheart. They married several years after their graduation from secondary school in 1982.[175]
Medvedev is a fan of British hard rock, listing Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, Pink Floyd, and Deep Purple as his favourite bands. He is a collector of their original vinyl records and has previously said that he has collected all of the recordings of Deep Purple.[176] As a youth, he made copies of their records, even though these bands were then on the official state-issued blacklist.[177] In February 2008, Medvedev and Sergei Ivanov attended a Deep Purple concert in Moscow together.[178]
During a visit to Serbia, Medvedev received the highest award of the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Order of St. Sava, for "his contribution to the unity of the world Orthodoxy and his love to the Serbian people."[179]
Medvedev always reserves an hour each morning and again each evening to swim[176] and weight train. He swims 1,500 metres (4,900 ft) twice a day. He also jogs, plays chess, and practices yoga. Among his hobbies are reading the works of Mikhail Bulgakov and he is also a fan of the Harry Potter series after asking J. K. Rowling for her autograph when they met during the G-20 London Summit in April 2009.[180] He is also a fan of football and follows his hometown professional football team, FC Zenit Saint Petersburg.[181]
 Medvedev with current members of Deep Purple in 2011
Medvedev is an avid amateur photographer. In January 2010, one of his photographs was sold at a charity auction for 51 million rubles (US$1,750,000), making it one of the most expensive ever sold.[182] The photo was purchased by Mikhail Zingarevich, a co-founder and member of the board of directors of the Ilim Group at which Medvedev worked as a lawyer in the 90s.[183]
Medvedev's reported 2007 annual income was $80,000, and he reported approximately the same amount as bank savings. Medvedev's wife reported no savings or income. They live in an upscale apartment house Zolotye Klyuchi in Moscow.[184] Despite this supposedly modest income, a video by anti-corruption activist Alexei Navalny[185] purports to show "the vast trove of mansions, villas and vineyards accumulated" by Medvedev.[186]
On the Russian-language Internet, Medvedev is sometimes associated with the Medved meme, linked to padonki slang, which resulted in many ironic and satirical writings and cartoons that blend Medvedev with a bear (the word medved means "bear" in Russian, and the surname "Medvedev" is a patronymic which means "of the bears"). Medvedev is familiar with this phenomenon and takes no offence, stating that the web meme has the right to exist.[187][188][189][190]
Medvedev speaks English, in addition to his native Russian,[191] but during interviews he speaks only Russian.[192]
In response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury added Medvedev to its list of persons sanctioned pursuant to Executive Order 14024 in April 2022;[193] he was also later sanctioned by New Zealand.[194][non-primary source needed]
Corruption allegations
See also: 2017 2018 Russian protests
 Anti-corruption rally in Saint Petersburg, 26 March 2017
In September 2016, opposition leader Alexei Navalny published a report with information about Dmitry Medvedev's alleged summer residence ("dacha")   an 80 hectare estate with plethora of houses, a ski run, a cascading swimming pool, three helipads and purpose-built communications towers. The estate even includes a house for ducks, which received public ridicule and led to ducks becoming a protest symbol in Russia a year later.[195] The area is surrounded by a six-foot (1.82 meter) fence and is allegedly 30 times the size of Red Square, the iconic square in Moscow.[196] This summer residence is an expensively renovated 18th century manor called Milovka Estate [ru] and located in Plyos on the shore of Volga River.[197]
In March 2017, Navalny and the Anti-Corruption Foundation published another in-depth investigation of properties and residences used by Medvedev and his family. A report called He Is Not Dimon To You shows how Medvedev allegedly owns and controls large areas of land, villas, palaces, yachts, expensive apartments, wineries and estates through complicated ownership structures involving shell companies and foundations.[198] Their total value is estimated at around US$1.2 billion. The report states that the original source of wealth is gifts by Russian oligarchs and loans from state owned banks. An hour long YouTube video in Russian was released together with the report. A month after release, the video had more than 24 million views.[199] Medvedev dismissed the allegations, calling them "nonsense".[200] These revelations have resulted in large protests throughout Russia. Russian authorities responded by arresting protesters in unauthorised protests hundreds were arrested including Alexei Navalny, which the government called "an illegal provocation".[201] An April 2017 Levada poll found that 45% of surveyed Russians supported the resignation of Medvedev.[202]
Publications
 Medvedev videoblog posted after his visit to Latin America in November 2008
Medvedev wrote two short articles on the subject of his doctoral dissertation in Russian law journals. He is also one of the authors of a textbook on civil law for universities first published in 1991 (the 6th edition of Civil Law. In 3 Volumes. was published in 2007). He is the author of a university textbook, Questions of Russia's National Development, first published in 2007, concerning the role of the Russian state in social policy and economic development. He is also the lead co-author of a book of legal commentary entitled, A Commentary on the Federal Law "On the State Civil Service of the Russian Federation". This work considers the Russian Federal law on the civil service,[203] which went into effect on 27 July 2004, from multiple perspectives  scholarly, jurisprudential, practical, enforcement- and implementation-related.[204]
In October 2008, President Medvedev delivered the first podcast at the presidential website.[205] His videoblog posts have also been posted in the official LiveJournal community blog_medvedev[206]
On 23 June 2011, Medvedev participated in launching of the "Eternal Values" project of RIA Novosti state-operated news agency together with Russian chapter of Wikimedia Foundation. RIA Novosti granted free Creative Commons licences to one hundred of its images, while Medvedev registered as Dmitry Medvedev for RIAN and personally uploaded one of those photographs to Wikimedia Commons.[207][208]
On 13 April 2009, Medvedev gave a major interview to the Novaya Gazeta newspaper. The interview was the first one he had ever given to a Russian print publication and covered such issues as civil society and the social contract, transparency of public officials and Internet development.[209][210]
Medvedev, Dmitry (2012). President Dmitry Medvedev. Photo book.
Electoral history
Presidential election
2008 presidential election
Candidates
Party
Votes
%
Dmitry Medvedev
United Russia
52,530,712
71.2
Gennady Zyuganov
Communist Party
13,243,550
18.0
Vladimir Zhirinovsky
Liberal Democratic Party
6,988,510
9.5
Andrei Bogdanov
Democratic Party
968,344
1.3
Source:    
Prime minister nominations
2012
For
Against
Abstaining
Did not vote
299
66.4%
144
32.0%
0
0.0%
7
1.6%
Source:        
2018
For
Against
Abstaining
Did not vote
374
83.9%
56
12.6%
0
0.0%
16
1.6%
Source:        
References
^ First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev Endorsed for the Next President's Post[dead link], Voice of Ruddia, 10 December 2007.
^ "Security Council structure". en.kremlin.ru/. Archived from the original on 18 January 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2020.
^ "Medvedev Announces Russian Government's Resignation". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2020.
^ "                 :         "             "". kremlin.ru. 16 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 January 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2020.
^ "Putin anoints Medvedev to be successor as Russian president". the Guardian. 10 December 2007.
^ "Russia's Putin and successor stage double act". Reuters. 19 December 2007   via www.reuters.com.
^ Prince, Todd (24 April 2022). "Once A Hope Of Russian Liberals And The West, Medvedev Beats A Bellicose Drum To Stay Safe, Relevant". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
^       Archived 9 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine Viperson.ru
^         Archived 12 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine Ekspress Gazeta 4 April 2008
^ "Transcript interview, First Deputy Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation Dmitry Medvedev" (in Russian). Government of the Russian Federation. 24 January 2008. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2008.
^ a b c d e f "Dmitry Medvedev: Biography". Kremlin.ru. 2008. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Treisman, Daniel (2011). The Return: Russia's Journey from Gorbachev to Medvedev. Free Press. pp. 123 163. ISBN 978-1-4165-6071-5.
^ "         ". medvedev.kremlin.ru. 3 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2009. Retrieved 2 November 2022.
^ Andreyev, Sergey. "   ?". Archived from the original on 11 August 2010.
^ "       :  ,      ". NEWSru.com (in Russian). 20 December 2007. Retrieved 2 November 2022.
^ "FACTBOX: Key facts on Russia's Dmitry Medvedev". Reuters. 24 February 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2022.
^ Umland, Andreas (11 December 2007). "The Democratic Roots of Putin's Choice". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2008.
^ Levy, Clifford J.; p. A18
^ "                     ". Decree No. 59 of 17 January 2000 (in Russian). President of Russia.
^ Goldmann, Marshall (2008). Petrostate: Putin, Power and the New Russia. Oxford University Press. pp. 141 142. ISBN 978-0-19-534073-0.
^ "Zubkov replaces Medvedev as Gazprom chairman". The New York Times. 27 June 2008. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 21 February 2017.
^ a b c d e f Willerton, John (2010). "Semi-presidentialism and the evolving executive".  In White, Stephen (ed.). Developments in Russian Politics. Vol. 7. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-230-22449-0.
^ "Shares". Gazprom. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
^ Russia: President's Potential Successor Debuts At Davos Archived 9 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine. 31 January 2007.
^ a b            . Lenta.Ru (in Russian). 10 December 2007. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2008.
^ Treisman, Daniel (2011). The Return: Russia's Journey from Gorbachev to Medvedev. Free Press. pp. 240 261. ISBN 978-1-4165-6071-5.
^ a b c Sakwa, Richard (2011). The Crisis of Russian Democracy: Dual State, Factionalism and the Medvedev Succession. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-14522-0.
^ United Russia endorses D Medvedev as candidate for presidency Archived 4 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine ITAR-TASS, 17 December 2007.
^ Medvedev Registers for Russian Presidency, Will Leave Gazprom, Bloomberg, 20 December 2007.
^ (in Russian)                       Archived 5 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Decision No. 88/688-5 of the Central Election Commission of the Russian Federation, 21 January 2008.
^ Yuri Levada Archived 9 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The Times, 21 November 2006.
^ 27 December 2007.       2007   Archived 16 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Levada Center, 27 December 2007. (In the same poll, when presented with the question of who they would vote for without a list of potential candidates, only 55% of those polled volunteered that they would vote for Medvedev, but another 24% said that they would vote for Putin. Putin is constitutionally ineligible for a consecutive presidential term.)
^ Putin's Chosen Successor, Medevedev, Starts Campaign (Update2) Archived 16 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Bloomberg.com, 11 January 2008.
^ Sakwa 2011, p.282
^       2007   Archived 16 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine Ledada Center, 27 December 2007
^ Medvedev's Strength Is Putin: Poll Archived 5 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine The Moscow Times, 16 January 2008.
^ Sakwa 2011, p. 275
^ Speech by Dmitry A. Medvedev Archived 24 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 11 December 2007
^ Drive Starts to Make Putin 'National Leader' Archived 22 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine The Moscow Times, 8 November 2007
^ Putin seeks prime minister's post[dead link] Associated Press, 17 December 2007.
^ "Moscow Times". webcache.googleusercontent.com. Archived from the original on 13 August 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "World | Europe | Profile: Dmitry Medvedev". BBC News. 7 May 2008. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "New Russian president: I will work with Putin=CNN". Archived from the original on 5 March 2008. Retrieved 3 March 2008.
^ Sakwa 2011, pp.282 283
^ Putin's successor dismisses fears of state "grab" Archived 21 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters, 17 January 2008.
^ a b c Sakwa 2011, p.287
^ "Foreign investors expect reforms from Russia's Medvedev".
^ Flintoff, Corey (4 March 2008). "Focus Shifts to How Medvedev Will Run Russia". NPR. Archived from the original on 26 January 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ Sakwa 2011, pp.284 275
^ "Europe Offers Congratulations and Criticism to Medvedev". Deutsche Welle. 3 March 2008. Archived from the original on 27 May 2009. Retrieved 13 April 2009.
^ Dmitri Medvedev votes were rigged, says computer boffin Archived 3 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine The Times 18 April 2008
^ "ABC Live". Abclive.in. Archived from the original on 27 May 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ a b Stott, Michael (7 May 2008). "www.reuters.com, Russia's Medvedev takes power, pledges freedom". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 May 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Medvedev decrees to provide housing to war veterans" Archived 22 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine  ITAR-TASS, 7 May 2008, 15.27
^ "All the Next President's Men". Russia Profile. 19 December 2007. Archived from the original on 4 August 2011.
^ "EU report, volume II" (PDF). Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia. 30 September 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2009.
^ Nicoll, Alexander; Sarah Johnstone (September 2008). "Russia's rapid reaction". International Institute for Strategic Studies. Archived from the original on 21 October 2008. Retrieved 9 December 2009.
^ China still on-side with Russia Asia Times, 6 September 2008
^ Lavrov, Anton (2010).  Ruslan Pukhov (ed.). The Tanks of August. Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies. p. 49. ISBN 978-5-9902320-1-3.
^ Statement on the Situation in South Ossetia Archived 16 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Website of the President of Russia, 8 August 2008.
^ Treisman, p.153
^ Treisman, p.154
^ Treisman, p.259
^ Sakwa 2011, p.343
^ "Georgia 'started unjustified war'". BBC News. 30 September 2009. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 25 June 2018.
^ "EU Report: Independent Experts Blame Georgia for South Ossetia War". Der Spiegel. 21 September 2009. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018.
^ a b Guriev, Sergei; Tsyvinski, Aleh (2010). "Challenges Facing the Russian Economy after the Crisis".  In Anders  slund; Sergei Guriev; Andrew C. Kuchins (eds.). Russia After the Global Economic Crisis. Peterson Institute for International Economics; Centre for Strategic and International Studies; New Economic School. pp. 9 39. ISBN 978-0-88132-497-6.
^ a b Treisman, p.149
^ "President's performance in office  Trends". Levada Center. May 2011. Archived from the original on 11 March 2017. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
^ Treisman, Daniel (2010). "Russian Politics in a Time of Turmoil".  In Anders  slund; Sergei Guriev; Andrew C. Kuchins (eds.). Russia After the Global Economic Crisis. Peterson Institute for International Economics; Centre for Strategic and International Studies; New Economic School. pp. 39 59. ISBN 978-0-88132-497-6.
^ Treisman, p.155
^ "Dmitry Medvedev's three years in office: achievements, results and influence". RIA Novosti. 11 May 2011. Archived from the original on 9 August 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2011.
^ "Russia Profile Weekly Experts Panel: 2009  Russia's Year in Review". Russia Profile. 31 December 2009. Archived from the original on 19 January 2011.
^ Presidential Commission on the modernisation and technological development of the Russian economy Archived 11 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine Official site. (in Russian)
^ Dyomkin, Denis (2010). "Russia tells regions to join privatization drive". Reuters.
^ "Privatization in regions to yield tens of billions of rbls-Kremlin". Itar-tass.com. Retrieved 19 February 2011.[dead link]
^ "Russia Profile Weekly Experts Panel: Medvedev's Quest for Innovation". Russia Profile. 5 June 2009. Archived from the original on 11 August 2010. Retrieved 30 June 2009.
^ " -Online           ". Kommersant.ru. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Dmitry Medvedev visits Twitter HQ and tweets". The Telegraph. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 14 June 2011.
^ "Russia Profile Weekly Experts Panel: Will Police Reform Result in Name Change Only?". Russia Profile. 27 August 2010. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011.
^ "Medvedev submits draft police law to Russian lower house". RIA Novosti. 27 October 2010. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011.
^ "Russia to spend around $7 billion on police reform in 2012 2013". RIA Novosti. 9 September 2010. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011.
^ a b Sakwa 2011, p.329
^ Medvedev's Anti-Corruption Crusade Archived 12 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine Russia Profile, 8 July 2008
^ National Anti-Corruption Plan Archived 16 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Website of the President of Russia, 31 July 2008.
^ The Russian Federation Federal Law On Corruption Counteraction, 25 December 2008, N 273-FZ Archived 16 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Website of President Of Russia
^ Grafting the Future Archived 28 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine Russia Profile, 29 November 2009
^ a b Nikolaus von Twickel (16 April 2010). "Medvedev Redefines Anti-Corruption Drive". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
^ National Anti-Corruption Strategy (Approved by Decree of the President of the Russian Federation  460 of 13 April 2010) Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine Website of the President of Russia.
^ Russian president admits failure in fighting corruption Archived 22 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine Xianhuanet 13 January 2011
^ Amendments to bolster anti-corruption legislation Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine Website of the President of Russia
^ Itar Tass, "Pres to launch education modernization project in few days"
^ a b c Sakwa 2011, p.327
^ Polls show Russians back crisis plan: Putin's party Archived 1 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Reuters, 12 October 2009
^ Kremlin warns against wrecking Russia with democracy Archived 30 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Kyiv Post (26 October 2009)
^ "Medvedev vetoes law restricting protests: Kremlin | Russian News | Expatica Moscow". www.expatica.com. 6 November 2010. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2015.
^ a b Steve Rosenberg (24 November 2010). "Medvedev warns of political 'stagnation' in Russia". BBC. Archived from the original on 28 July 2016. Retrieved 19 February 2011.
^ "Full text in English". Kremlin.ru. Archived from the original on 31 August 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Itar-Tass". Itar-Tass. Retrieved 28 September 2010.[dead link]
^ Andrew Osborn. Medvedev Creates History Commission Archived 23 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Wall Street Journal, 21 May 2009.
^ The war? Nothing to do with Stalin, says Russia's president, Dmitry Medvedev Archived 17 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine (30 August 2009)
^  .  :      ,         Archived 27 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine (30  , 2009)
^ "St. Petersburg Times". Times.spb.ru. 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ a b "How the Duma electoral system works". Levada Center. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
^ "Burger Time for President's Obama and Medvedev". YouTube.com. Associated Press, USA. 25 June 2010. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2017.
^ "The Obamas and The Medvedevs Dine Together". YouTube.com. WestEndNews. 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2017.
^ Russia recognises Georgian rebels Archived 17 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 26 August 2008. Retrieved 27 August 2008.
^ Russia faces fresh condemnation Archived 28 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 27 August 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008.
^ Steve Gutterman and Vladimir Isachenkov. Medvedev: Russia to deploy missiles near Poland[dead link], Associated Press, 5 November 2008.
^ "Medvedev tells Obama: prevent Libyan civilian deaths". Reuters. 24 March 2011.
^  .           (8 September 2011)
^ "The president on dealing with Russia". The Economist. 2 August 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2019.
^ "RF Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev Pays Tribute to Armenian Genocide Victims" Archived 21 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine (Thursday, 7 April 2016)
^ a b Osborn, Andrew (7 March 2010). "Dmitry Medvedev's Russia still feels the cold hand of Vladimir Putin, Telegraph". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ Poll: Medvedev and Putin: who holds the power? Archived 16 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Levada Center Retrieved on 12 March 2010
^ "Medvedev insists he's the boss". Television New Zealand. 30 March 2009. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 28 September 2011.
^ "Russia 'to work with Nato on missile defence shield'". BBC News. 20 November 2010. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016. Retrieved 19 February 2011.
^ Ostalski, Andrei (15 December 2010). "Russia's most important court trial". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 December 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2011.
^ Osborn, Andrew (24 September 2011). "Vladimir Putin on course to be Russia's next president as Dmitry Medvedev steps aside". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2011.
^ "Russia's Putin set to return as president in 2012". BBC News. 24 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017. Retrieved 25 September 2011.
^ "                 ". Gazeta.ru. 24 September 2011. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2011.
^ "Russia's Medvedev tries to appease protesters". Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 22 December 2011.
^ (in Russian) "Putin signs first decree as president", Itar Tass, 7 May 2012 Archived 14 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Itar-tass.com. Retrieved 10 May 2012.
^ Putin returns as Russia's president amid protests   CNN.com Archived 22 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Edition.cnn.com (7 May 2012). Retrieved 10 May 2012.
^ Putin Proposes Medvedev As Russian Prime Minister Archived 30 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Rttnews.com (7 May 2012). Retrieved 10 May 2012.
^ Putin hands Medvedev prime minister role amidst sustained unrest Archived 22 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Globe and Mail (8 May 2012). Retrieved 10 May 2012.
^ "Medvedev becomes Russia's PM". Voice of Russia. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2012.
^ "United Russia to face reforms". The Voice of Russia. 26 May 2012. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013.
^ "Russia creates ministry for Crimean affairs". Xinhuanet. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2014.
^ "                 - ".    . 7 May 2018. Archived from the original on 8 May 2018. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
^                .   (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 May 2018. Retrieved 8 May 2018.
^   "           ". Kremlin.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 15 May 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2018.
^              . Kremlin.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2018.
^ "Russian police arrest anti-corruption leader Navalny, hundreds more in nationwide rallies". The Washington Post. 26 March 2017. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2020.
^ Biryukov, A.; Andrianov , A. (14 June 2018). "World Cup gives Russia cover for unpopular pension-age increase". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018.
^         "   "     [Medvedev proposed revising the concept of "control zones" of wildfires]. Interfax (in Russian). 31 July 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2019.
^ "Russian prime minister and government resign after Putin speech". Reuters. 15 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 January 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2020.
^ "Russian PM resigns in shock move as Putin announces dramatic constitutional shake-up". The Independent. 15 January 2020. Archived from the original on 20 January 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2020.
^ a b "Russia's government resigns as Putin offers spot on Security Council to Medvedev". Meduza. 15 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021.
^ Roth, Andrew (15 January 2020). "Russian government quits as Putin plans to stay in power past 2024". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021.
^ "         :            ". 15 January 2020. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
^ "       ". Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
^ "Executive Order on the Government of the Russian Federation". en.kremlin.ru. Archived from the original on 16 January 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2020.
^ Article 117. 1. The Government of the Russian Federation may offer to resign and the President of the Russian Federation either shall accept or reject the resignation. 2. The President of the Russian Federation may take a decision on the resignation of the Government of the Russian Federation.
^ "       ".  . Archived from the original on 18 January 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2020. Immediately after the delivery of the address and consultations with the president, Dmitry Medvedev said that the government would resign itself   Vladimir Putin immediately accepted this resignation, also in words. ... The presidential decree issued in the evening meant that it was Vladimir Putin who resigned the government, and not Dmitry Medvedev and the government who resigned themselves: the president referred to paragraph "c" of art. 83 and paragraph 3 of article 117 of the same Constitution of the Russian Federation, according to which he can dissolve the government without explanation and motivation.
^ "                 ".    . Archived from the original on 17 January 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2020.
^ Mail.ru,   (30 January 2020). "      618 713            ".   Mail.ru. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 9 July 2020.
^ "Ex-PM Medvedev says he has 'good friendly relations' with Putin". tass.com. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 9 July 2020.
^ Times, The Moscow (10 March 2022). "Russia Quits Europe's Rule of Law Body, Sparking Questions Over Death Penalty". The Moscow Times. Retrieved 14 March 2022.
^ "Dmitry Medvedev vows to reintroduce death penalty". The Independent Barents Observer. Retrieved 14 March 2022.
^ "Russia doesn't 'especially need' diplomatic ties with West   ex-president Medvedev". Reuters. 26 February 2022.
^ "Putin ally warns agriculture supplies could be limited to 'friends". Reuters. 1 April 2022.
^ Holly Ellyatt (7 July 2022). "Russia says the West risks the 'wrath' of God if it punishes Moscow over the war; heavy weapons start to have an impact". CNBC. Retrieved 7 July 2022.
^ Dmitry Medvedev on Telegram
^ "Medvedev dreams of the collapse of Ukraine and showed a "map"". The Odessa Journal. 27 July 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022.
^ Rochebin, Darius (27 August 2022). "Dmitri Medvedev, ancien pr sident de la Russie, invit  exclusif de LCI". LCI. YouTube.
^ "Russia's Medvedev: new regions can be defended with strategic nuclear weapons". Reuters. 22 September 2022.
^ Dmitry Medvedev on Telegram
^ a b Porter, Tom (14 November 2023). "Putin ally Medvedev says Russia hasn't used all its weapons yet in Ukraine, a hint at its nuclear arsenal after another major loss". Insider Inc. Business Insider.
^ Faulconbridge, Guy; Davis, Caleb (27 September 2022). "Medvedev raises spectre of Russian nuclear strike on Ukraine". Reuters.
^ "Medvedev: Russia is fighting a sacred battle against Satan". Orthodox Times. 4 November 2022.
^ "Russia Fighting 'Sacred' Battle Against Satan, Medvedev Says". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 4 November 2022.
^ "Medvedev warns of nuclear war if Russia defeated in Ukraine". Al Jazeera. 19 January 2023.
^ KUZNETSOV, SERGEI (7 November 2022). "Ukrainians prep for a possible Russian nuclear attack". POLITICO.
^ "After "difficult decisions", Medvedev again threatens with an arsenal of weapons". Yahoo News. Ukrainska Pravda. 12 November 2022.
^ "Russia's Medvedev Rails Against 'Traitors' Who Fled Country". Barron's. 4 November 2022.
^ "Russia's Medvedev meets China's Xi in Beijing, says Ukraine conflict discussed". Reuters. 21 December 2022.
^ "Medvedev Calls for Recent Russian Emigres to Be Banned From Returning". The Moscow Times. 28 December 2022.
^ Soldatov, Andrei (16 January 2023). "How the Kremlin Is Taking Aim at its Russian Critics in Exile". The Moscow Times.
^ "Russian ex-President Medvedev says Japanese PM should disembowel himself". Microsoft. Reuters. 14 January 2023.
^ "Russia's Medvedev says more U.S. weapons supplies mean 'all of Ukraine will burn'". Reuters. 4 February 2023.
^ Jankowicz, Mia. "Russia's former president suggested firing a hypersonic missile at The Hague after Putin's ICC arrest warrant: 'Look carefully into the sky'". Business Insider. Retrieved 20 March 2023.
^ "Former Russian President Medvedev insists Ukraine will disappear 'since no one needs it'". EuroWeekly News. 8 April 2023.
^ "Ukraine will 'disappear' as 'no one needs it,' says top Russian security official". Anadolu Agency. 8 April 2022.
^ (in Russian)    ,        ,       Archived 13 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Factnews.ru
^ a b Putin's Purple reign man Archived 21 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine Guardian Unlimited, 10 December 2007
^ Medvedev Will Run Russia to Tune of Hard-Rock Band Deep Purple Archived 8 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 8 March 2008.
^ Times Online. How Deep Purple conquered the Kremlin in night of metal mayhem Archived 20 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Russian President Dmitry Medvedev awarded by the Serbian Orthodox Church: Department for External Church Relations of the Russian Orthodox Church". Mospat. 21 October 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ "Russian President Harry Potter fan, asks for Rowling's autograph". Mosnews. Archived from the original on 26 May 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ Nicholas II, FC Zenit, Black Sabbath  Medvedev's favorite things Archived 4 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine, ITAR-TASS, 11 December 2007.
^ "                   ". Lenta. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ Medvedev's Photo Outdoes Putin's Painting Archived 18 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Moscow Times, 18 January 2010
^ "187 Following tax statements by the presidential contenders" Archived 3 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Novayagazeta. Retrieved 27 February 2014
^ "       ". YouTube. Archived from the original on 28 March 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2017.
^ Diehl, Jackson (19 March 2017). "For this Russian dissident, holding Putin accountable was almost deadly   twice". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2017.
^ A Soft-Spoken, 'Smart-Kid' Lawyer Archived 22 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Moscow Times, 2 November 2007.
^ (in Russian)    :    ! Archived 17 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Lenta.ru, 5 March 2007.
^ (in Russian)  ,   Archived 16 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Polit.ru, 18 December 2007.
^ "Medvedev palatable to Russian liberals and western states". Financial Times. 11 December 2007.
^ "Medvedev speaks English /        ". YouTube. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2017.
^ "Medvedev shows media-savvy side". BBC. 29 March 2008. Archived from the original on 13 November 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2009.
^ Office of Foreign Assets Control. "Notice of OFAC Sanctions Actions." Published 2022-0418. 87 FR 23023
^ "Russia Sanctions Regulations 2022". Retrieved 11 February 2023.
^ "The Yellow Rubber Duck Is a Potent Protest Symbol". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 7 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^ Moscow, Marc Bennetts. "Medvedev forgets cares of office at  350m estate on the Volga". The Times UK. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^ "The dacha of my dreams". Financial Times. 5 July 2013. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^ "Ny anklagelse fr n Aleksej Navalnyj: "Premi rminister Medvedev inblandad i korruption"" (in Swedish). Yle Nyheter. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^         (in Russian). Alexei Navalny on YouTube. Archived from the original on 28 March 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017.
^ "Corruption claims 'nonsense'   Russian PM Medvedev". BBC News. 4 April 2017. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2018.
^ "Russia protests: Opposition leader Navalny and hundreds of others held". BBC News. 27 March 2017. Archived from the original on 27 March 2017. Retrieved 27 March 2017.
^ "Russian Polls Do Mean Something After All Archived 26 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine". Bloomberg. 26 April 2017.
^ (in Russian)     /       27   2004  . N 79-  "           " (      2   2006  ., 2  , 12  , 1   2007  .) Archived 4 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Garant Database of Laws with Commentary.
^ "     ". Ozon.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 23 October 2012.
^ Harding, Luke (7 October 2008). "Medvedev broadcasts first Kremlin podcast". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021.
^         Archived 23 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine  Lenta.ru
^ "     ,            ". RIA Novosti. 23 June 2011. Archived from the original on 27 June 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011.
^ "RIA Novosti celebrates 70th anniversary, uploads 100 images to Wikimedia Commons". WikiNews. 23 June 2011. Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011.
^ Whitmore, Brian (14 April 2009). "Novaya Gazeta Scores Presidential Interview". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021.
^ Muratov, Dmitry (14 April 2009). "   .   2009" [Declaration of Medvedev. Year 2009]. Novaya Gazeta (in Russian). Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021.
General sources
Black, J. L. (2015). The Russian Presidency of Dmitry Medvedev, 2008 2012: The next step forward or merely a time out?. Routledge.
Medvedev, Dmitry (2012). President Dmitry Medvedev. Photo book.
Sakwa, Richard (2011). The Crisis of Russian Democracy: Dual State, Factionalism and the Medvedev Succession. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-14522-0.
Svanidze, Nikolai; Svanidze, Marina (2008). Medvedev. Saint Petersburg: Amfora. ISBN 978-5-367-00743-5.
Treisman, Daniel (2011). The Return: Russia's Journey from Gorbachev to Medvedev. Free Press. ISBN 978-1-4165-6071-5.
White, Stephen, ed. (2010). Developments in Russian Politics 7. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-22449-0.
External links
Dmitry Medvedev  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Personal website
Personal video-blog (in Russian)
Official site of the Prime Minister of Russia
Video blogs
Official profile of Medvedev at VK
Appearances on C-SPAN
Political offices
Preceded byAlexander Voloshin
 Chief of Staff of the Kremlin 2003 2005
Succeeded bySergey Sobyanin
Preceded byMikhail Kasyanov
 First Deputy Prime Minister of Russia 2005 2008
Succeeded byIgor Shuvalov
Preceded byVladimir Putin
 President of Russia 2008 2012
Succeeded byVladimir Putin
 Prime Minister of Russia 2012 2020
Succeeded byMikhail Mishustin
New office
 Deputy Chairman of the Security Council of Russia 2020 present
Incumbent
Party political offices
Preceded byVladimir Putin
 Leader of United Russia 2012 present
Incumbent
vteDmitry Medvedev
Born 14 September 1965
3rd President of Russia (2008 2012)
37th Prime Minister of Russia (2012 2020)
Vice Chairman of the Security Council (2020 )
Political activities
2008 presidential election
campaign
Inauguration
Presidency
Leadership of United Russia
Legislative elections
2016
2021
Presidency
List of international trips
Modernisation
War in South Ossetia
Military reform
2008 09 recession
Amendments to the Constitution
Skolkovo Innovation Center
New START
Time zones reform
Police reform
Anti-corruption campaign
Premiership
First Cabinet
Second Cabinet
Pension reform
Family
Svetlana Medvedeva (spouse)
Ilya Medvedev (son)
Dorofei (family cat)
See also
He Is Not Dimon to You
2017 2018 Russian protests
Tandemocracy
  Vladimir Putin
 Category:Dmitry Medvedev
Vladimir Putin  
vtePresidents of the Russian FederationPresidents
Boris Yeltsin
Vladimir Putin
Dmitry Medvedev
Vladimir Putin
Acting Presidents
Alexander Rutskoy
Viktor Chernomyrdin
Vladimir Putin
vteHeads of government of RussiaNote: Acting chairmen shown in italics. Questionable heads of government are written in small type.Russian EmpireCommittee of Ministers
Vorontsov
Rumyantsev
Vyazmitinov
Saltykov
Lopukhin
Kochubey
Novosiltsev
Vasilchikov
Levashov
Chernyshyov
Orlov
Bludov
Gagarin
Ignatyev
Valuyev
von Reutern
Bunge
Durnovo
Witte
Council of Ministers
Witte
Goremykin
Stolypin
Kokovtsov
Goremykin
St rmer
Trepov
Golitsyn
Provisional Government
Lvov
Kerensky
Russian SFSRCouncil of People's Commissars
Lenin
Rykov
Syrtsov
Sulimov
Bulganin
Vakhrushev
Khokhlov
Pamfilov
Kosygin
Council of Ministers
Rodionov
Chernousov
Puzanov
Yasnov
Kozlov
Polyansky
Voronov
Solomentsev
Vorotnikov
Vlasov
Silayev
Lobov
Russian Federation
Yeltsin
Gaidar
Chernomyrdin
Kiriyenko
Chernomyrdin
Primakov
Stepashin
Putin
Kasyanov
Khristenko
Fradkov
Zubkov
Putin
Zubkov
Medvedev
Mishustin
Belousov
Russian Government Cabinets
Premiers of the USSR
Links to related articles
vteUnited RussiaChairmen
Sergey Shoygu/Yuri Luzhkov/Mintimer Shaimiev (2001 2005)
Boris Gryzlov (2005 2007)
Vladimir Putin (2007 2012)
Dmitry Medvedev (2012 )
Secretary-Generals
Valery Bogomolov (2003 2005)
Vyacheslav Volodin (2005 2011)
Sergey Neverov (2011 2017)
Andrey Turchak (2017 )
Presidents
Dmitry Medvedev (2008 2012)
Vladimir Putin (2012 )
Prime Ministers
Viktor Zubkov (2007 2008)
Vladimir Putin (2008 2012)
Dmitry Medvedev (2012 2020)
Federation Council Chairmen
Aleksander Torshin[1] (2011)
Valentina Matviyenko (2011 )
State Duma Chairmen
Boris Gryzlov (2003 2011)
Sergey Naryshkin (2011 2016)
Vyacheslav Volodin (2016 )
State Duma Leaders
Boris Gryzlov (2003 2011)
Andrey Vorobyov (2011 2012)
Vladimir Vasilyev (2012 2017)
Sergey Neverov (2017 2021)
Vladimir Vasilyev (2021  )
Presidential candidates
Vladimir Putin[2] (2004)
Dmitry Medvedev (2008)
Vladimir Putin (2012)
Vladimir Putin[2] (2018)
Notes
^ Acting Chairman
^ a b Supported by the party, but was nominated as an independent candidate
vteCurrent Cabinet of Ministers of the Russian FederationPrime Minister
Mikhail Mishustin
First Deputy Prime Minister
Andrey Belousov
Deputy Prime Ministers
Viktoria Abramchenko
Yury Borisov
Dmitry Chernyshenko
Tatyana Golikova
Dmitry Grigorenko
Marat Khusnullin
Alexey Overchuk 
Yury Trutnev
Alexander Novak
Federal Ministers
Dmitry Patrushev (Agriculture)
Irek Faizullin (CH)
Olga Lyubimova (Culture)
Maxut Shadayev (DDCMM)
Sergey Shoygu (Defence)
Aleksey Chekunkov (DRFEA)
Maxim Reshetnikov (ED)
Sergey Kravtsov (Education)
Aleksandr Kurenkov (EMERCOM)
Nikolay Shulginov (Energy)
Sergey Lavrov (FA)
Anton Siluanov (Finance)
Mikhail Murashko (Health)
Vladimir Kolokoltsev (IA)
Denis Manturov (IT)
Konstantin Chuychenko (Justice)
Anton Kotyakov (LSA)
Alexander Kozlov (NRE)
Valery Falkov (SHE)
Oleg Matytsin (Sport)
Vitaly Savelyev (Transport)
vteCandidates in the 2008 Russian presidential electionWinner
Dmitry Medvedev (United Russia) campaign
Other candidates
Gennady Zyuganov (Communist Party) campaign
Vladimir Zhirinovsky (Liberal Democratic Party) campaign
Andrei Bogdanov (Democratic Party)
Withdrew
Boris Nemtsov (Union of Right Forces) campaign
vteRussian invasion of UkrainePart of the Russo-Ukrainian WarOverviewGeneral
Outline
Timeline
Prelude
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Phase 4
Aerial warfare
Control of cities
Foreign fighters
Information war
Legality
Map
Order of battle
Peace negotiations
Proposed no-fly zone
Reparations
Women
Prelude
Reactions
Disinformation
Ukraine bioweapons conspiracy theory
Ukraine and weapons of mass destruction
2021 Russia United States summit
2021 Black Sea incident
2021 2022 Belarus European Union border crisis
"On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians"
Crimea Platform
Zapad 2021
Ukraine cyberattacks
Union Resolve 2022
Stanytsia Luhanska kindergarten bombing
British Polish Ukrainian trilateral pact
Evacuation of the Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR
Mobilization in Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR
"Address concerning the events in Ukraine"
"On conducting a special military operation"
Background
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine
historical background
Annexation of Crimea
reactions
War in Donbas
2022 timeline
Minsk agreements
humanitarian situation
international recognition of the Donetsk PR and Luhansk PR
Putinism
Foundations of Geopolitics
Novorossiya
Rashism
Russian irredentism
Russian imperialism
Foreignrelations
Russia Ukraine
Belarus Ukraine
Belarus Russia
Russia United States
Russia NATO
Ukraine NATO
enlargement of NATO
eastward expansion controversy in Russia
open door policy
Military engagementsSouthernUkraine
Snake Island campaign
Bombing of Odesa
Siege of Mariupol
Battle of Kherson
Battle of Melitopol
Battle of Mykolaiv
Battle of Enerhodar
Battles of Voznesensk
Battle of Huliaipole
Battle of Davydiv Brid
Kherson counteroffensive
Liberation of Kherson
Skirmishes on the Dnieper
EasternUkraine
Battle of Avdiivka
Battle of Marinka
Battle of Volnovakha
Battle of Izium
Battle of Rubizhne
Battle of Popasna
Battle of Dovhenke
Battle of Donbas
First Battle of Kreminna
Battle of the Siverskyi Donets
Battle of Sievierodonetsk
Battle of Bilohorivka
Battle of Toshkivka
First Battle of Lyman
Battle of Sviatohirsk
Battles of Bohorodychne and Krasnopillia
Battle of Lysychansk
Battle of Siversk
Battle of Pisky
Battle of Bakhmut
Battle of Soledar
Battles of Pervomaiske and Vodyane
Battle of Vuhledar
Ukrainian Kharkiv counteroffensive
Battle of Balakliia
Battle of Shevchenkove
Battle of Kupiansk
Second Battle of Lyman
Battle of the Svatove Kreminna line
Kyiv
Battle of Antonov Airport
Capture of Chernobyl
Battle of Ivankiv
Battle of Kyiv
Battle of Hostomel
Battle of Vasylkiv
Battle of Bucha
Battle of Irpin
Battle of Makariv
Russian Kyiv convoy
Battle of Moshchun
Battle of Brovary
Battle of Slavutych
NortheasternUkraine
Battle of Hlukhiv
Battle of Kharkiv
Battle of Konotop
Battle of Sumy
Battle of Trostianets
Siege of Chernihiv
Battle of Okhtyrka
Battle of Lebedyn
Battle of Romny
Northeastern Ukraine Russia border skirmishes
Strikes onmilitary targets
Chuhuiv air base attack
Millerovo air base attack
Chornobaivka attacks
Yavoriv military base attack
Berdiansk port attack
Sinking of the Moskva
Desna barracks airstrike
Attack on Nova Kakhovka
Crimea attacks
Novofedorivka explosions
Attack on the Sevastopol Naval Base
Dyagilevo and Engels air bases attacks
Makiivka military quarters shelling
ResistanceRussian-occupied Ukraine
Popular Resistance of Ukraine
Berdiansk Partisan Army
Yellow Ribbon
Atesh
Belarus and Russia
Civic Council
Irpin Declaration
Killing of Darya Dugina
National Republican Army
Military commissariats arsons
Ust-Ilimsk military commissariat shooting
Black Bridge
Rail war in Russia
Stop the Wagons
Combat Organization of Anarcho-Communists
Rail war in Belarus
Busly liacia 
BYPOL
Community of Railway Workers
Cyber Partisans
Saint Petersburg bombing
Death of Vladlen Tatarsky
Russianoccupations
Flags used in Russian-occupied Ukraine
Ongoing
Annexation referendums
Annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol
Donetsk Oblast
Kharkiv Oblast
Kherson Oblast
Luhansk Oblast
Mykolaiv Oblast
Zaporizhzhia Oblast
Previous
Chernihiv Oblast
Dnipropetrovsk Oblast
Kyiv Oblast
Odesa Oblast
Poltava Oblast
Sumy Oblast
Zhytomyr Oblast
Potentiallyrelated
Black Sea drone incident
Mystery fires in Russia
Nord Stream pipeline sabotage
Transnistria attacks
Zagreb Tu-141 crash
Other
Assassination attempts on Volodymyr Zelenskyy
Coup d' tat attempt in Ukraine
Crimean Bridge explosion
Dnipro missile strikes
Bombing of Ivano-Frankivsk
Bombing of Kryvyi Rih
Bombing of Lviv
Rivne missile strikes
Vinnytsia missile strikes
Bombing of Zaporizhzhia
Zhytomyr attacks
Missile explosion in Poland
Western Russia attacks
Bryansk Oblast attack
War crimesGeneral
Accusations of genocide in Donbas
Allegations of genocide of Ukrainians
child abductions
Attacks on hospitals
Cluster bombs
Incendiary weapons
Landmines
Russian filtration camps
Russian mobile crematoriums
Russian theft of Ukrainian grain
Russian torture chambers
Sacking
Sexual violence
Mistreatment of prisioners of war
Attacks oncivilians
February 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing
Kharkiv government building airstrike
3 March Chernihiv bombing
Irpin refugee column shelling
Mariupol hospital airstrike
Stara Krasnianka care house attack
Mykolaiv cluster bombing
March Donetsk attack
Bombing of Borodianka
Chernihiv breadline attack
Mariupol theatre airstrike
Mariupol art school bombing
Kyiv shopping centre bombing
Sumykhimprom ammonia leak
March 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing
Mykolaiv government building missile strike
Bucha massacre
Kramatorsk railway station attack
April 2022 Kharkiv cluster bombing
Bilohorivka school bombing
Shooting of Andrii Bohomaz
Maisky Market attack
Kremenchuk shopping mall attack
Serhiivka missile strike
Chasiv Yar missile strike
Olenivka prison massacre
Kharkiv dormitories missile strike
Chaplyne railway station attack
Izium mass graves
September Donetsk attack
Zaporizhzhia civilian convoy attack
Kupiansk civilian convoy shelling
Zaporizhzhia residential building airstrike
Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure
2023 Dnipro residential building airstrike
Attacks onprisoners of war
Torture of Russian soldiers in Mala Rohan
Torture and castration of a Ukrainian POW in Pryvillia
Murder of Yevgeny Nuzhin
Makiivka surrender incident
Execution of Oleksandr Matsievskyi
Legal cases
ICC investigation
Arrest warrants
ICJ court case
Task Force on Accountability
Universal jurisdiction
Crime of aggression
Criminal proceedings
Vadim Shishimarin
Alexander Bobikin and Alexander Ivanov
ReactionsStates andofficial entitiesGeneral
Sanctions
people and organizations
restrictions on transit to Kaliningrad Oblast
Military aid
European Union Military Assistance Mission in support of Ukraine
People's Bayraktar
Signmyrocket.com
Humanitarian aid
Sanctioned yachts
Ukraine
Application to NATO
Communication campaigns
Be Brave Like Ukraine
Embrace Ukraine. Strengthen the Union
Coordination Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War
Destroyed Russian military equipment exhibition
For Courage and Bravery [et; uk]
Grain From Ukraine
Headquarters of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief
Hero City
I Want to Live
International Legion and other foreign units
Canadian-Ukrainian Brigade
Freedom of Russia Legion
Karelian National Battalion
Kastu  Kalino ski Regiment
Norman Brigade
Pahonia Regiment
Russian Volunteer Corps
Separate Special Purpose Battalion
Forced confiscation law of Russian property [ru; uk]
Look for Your Own
Martial law
Mobilization
Media Center Ukraine
National Council for the Recovery of Ukraine from the War [uk]
National Multi-Subject Test [uk]
North Korea Ukraine relations
Points of Invincibility [uk]
Recognition of Ichkeria
Rescuer City [uk]
Syria Ukraine relations
Ukrainian Freedom Orchestra
United24
United News
Russia
2022 Moscow rally
2023 Moscow rally
2023 Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly
Chechnya
Pro-Ukrainian Chechen fighters
Conmemorative Medal "Participant of a Special Military Operation" [ru]
Conversations about the important [ru]
Krasovsky case
Legalization of parallel imports [ru]
Manifesto of the South Russian People's Council
Martial law
Medal "For the Liberation of Mariupol" [ru]
Metropolis of Crimea [pt; ru; uk]
Mobilization
Recruitment of irregular forces [ru]
Moscow Victory Day Parade
Orthodox Christmas truce proposal
Russian Orthodox clergymen appeal against war [ru]
Salvation Committee for Peace and Order
Special Coordinating Council
Ukraine bioweapons conspiracy theory
Unfriendly Countries List
"What Russia Should Do with Ukraine"
War censorship laws
We Are Together. Sports
United States
2022 Joe Biden speech in Warsaw
2022 State of the Union Address
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2022
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023
Disinformation Governance Board
Executive Order 14071
Leak of documents about the invasion
Task Force KleptoCapture
Ukraine Defense Contact Group
Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act
Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative
Other countries
Belarus
China
Croatia
Denmark
Danish European Union defence opt-out referendum
France
Mission Aigle
Georgia [ru]
Germany
Zeitenwende speech
India
Operation Ganga
Iran
Israel
Operation Israel Guarantees [he]
Lithuania
Moldova
New Zealand
Russia Sanctions Act
Syria [ru]
Taiwan [zh-yue]
United Kingdom
Economic Crime Act
Homes for Ukraine
Operation Interflex
United Nations
Emergency special session
Resolution ES-11/1
Resolution ES-11/2
Resolution ES-11/3
Resolution ES-11/4
Resolution ES-11/5
Security Council Resolution 2623
Easter truce
Internationalorganizations
Accession of Ukraine to the EU
Brussels summit
European Political Community
1st summit
Madrid summit
NATO virtual summit
Operation Oscar
Ramstein Air Base meeting
EU Ukraine Summit
REPowerEU
SWIFT ban against Russian banks
Ukraine Recovery Conference
Versailles declaration
Other
Consecration of Russia
Finland NATO relations
Finland Russia border barrier
Iron diplomacy
Proposed Russian annexation of South Ossetia
Recognition of Russia as a terrorist state
Removal of monuments and memorials
Streets renamed
Ukraine Square, Oslo
Serving heads of state and government that have visited Ukraine during the invasion
Sweden NATO relations
2023 Swedish anti-terrorism bill
PublicProtests
In Ukraine
in Russian-occupied Ukraine
demolition of monuments to Alexander Pushkin
ArmWomenNow
Ukrainian Artistic Front [uk]
In Russia
Anti-War Committee
Businessmen mystery deaths in Russia
Congress of People's Deputies
Council of Mothers and Wives
Feminist Anti-War Resistance
Flower protests
Marina Ovsyannikova
Russian Action Committee
North Caucasian protests
2022 Russian Far East protests
State Duma initiative for charging Vladimir Putin of high treason
White-blue-white flag
In Belarus
In China
Great Translation Movement
In Czech Republic
Czech Republic First!
Companies
Address of the Russian Union of Rectors
Boycott of Russia and Belarus
"Do not buy Russian goods!"
E.N.O.T. Corp.
Igor Mangushev
McDonald's in Russia
NashStore [ru]
Starlink satellites in Ukraine
Stop Bloody Energy
Vkusno i tochka
Wagner Group
Andrey Medvedev
Wagner Line [ru]
Yale CELI List of Companies
Technology
Anonymous and the invasion
alerts.in.ua
DDoS attacks on Romania
IT Army of Ukraine
Killnet
Liveuamap
Open-source intelligence
peacenotwar
Russian Asset Tracker
Squad303 [pl]
Ukraine Siren Alerts
Wikipedia
threat to block in Russia
detention of Mark Bernstein
Spies
Diplomatic expulsions during the Russo-Ukrainian War
Russian spies in the Russo-Ukrainian War
Other
2022 Pulitzer Prize
Black Sea Grain Initiative
Collaboration with Russia
We Are Together with Russia
Concert for Ukraine
DeepStateMapLive [uk]
Free Buryatia Foundation
Free Nations of Russia Forum
Global Tour for Peace
Guide to the Free World
Mozart Group
Olena Zelenska Foundation
Open letter from Nobel laureates
Pavel Sudoplatov Battalion
Russia's War Crimes House
Spain letter bomb attacks
Yermak-McFaul Expert Group on Russian Sanctions
Pavel Filatyev
True Russia
Wimbledon ban on Russian and Belarusian players
ImpactEffects
Aircraft losses
Casualties
journalists killed
Russian generals killed
Economic impact
Inflation surge
Moldovan energy crisis
protests
Protests in Europe
in France
Protests in Peru
Russia EU gas dispute
2022 Nord Stream pipeline sabotage
Russian debt default
2022 Russian oil price cap
2023 Russian oil products sanctions and price cap
EU natural gas price cap
Education
End of the Whisky War
Environmental impact
Eurovision Song Contest 2022
Russia
Ukraine
Eurovision Song Contest 2023
Food crises
Nuclear power plants
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant crisis
Nuclear threats
Religion
Russian emigration
Ship losses
Ukrainian theaters [uk]
Ukrainian cultural heritage
art theft and looting
damaged cultural sites
Urengoy Pomary Uzhhorod pipeline explosion
Women
Human rights
Humanitarian impact
Ukrainian refugee crisis
Sobieskiego 100
UN Commission of Inquiry
UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission
Terms and phrases
"And now I will show you where the attack on Belarus was prepared from"
"Grandpa in his bunker"
"Good evening, we are from Ukraine"
"Orcs [ru]"
"Putin khuylo!"
"Russian warship, go fuck yourself"
"Slava Ukraini!"
"Strength is in truth"
"Westsplaining"
"Where have you been for eight years?"
"Without you! [uk]"
Popular culture
"12"
Babylon'13
"Back to the Cold War"
"Bayraktar"
Borodianka cat [uk]
"City of Mary"
"Flowers of Minefields [uk]"
Follow Me
"Generation Cancellation"
"Generation Z"
"Oyda"
Ghost of Kyiv
"Hey, Hey, Rise Up!"
Kr lovec Region
Madonna of Kyiv
North Atlantic Fellas Organization
Newspeak in Russia [ru; uk]
"Oi u luzi chervona kalyna"
Patron
"Putler"
Raccoon of Kherson [ru]
"Russia is here forever [ru]"
Saint Javelin
Saint Mariuburg [ru; uk]
"Slava Ukraini!"
"Stefania"
"Ukraine"
"Ukraine on Fire 2 [uk]"
Vasylkiv maiolica rooster
Vladimir Putin's meeting table
Walk of the Brave
Watermelon symbol [uk]
"Z" military symbol
Key peopleUkrainians
Volodymyr Zelenskyy
speeches during the invasion
visit to the United States
visit to the United Kingdom
Denys Kireyev
Denys Monastyrsky
Denys Prokopenko
Denys Shmyhal
Iryna Venediktova
Kyrylo Budanov
Mykola Oleschuk
Oleksandr Pavlyuk
Oleksandr Syrskyi
Oleksii Reznikov
Oleksiy Danilov
Oleksiy Neizhpapa
Ruslan Khomchak
Sergiy Kyslytsya
Serhiy Shaptala
Valerii Zaluzhnyi
Vitali Klitschko
Yevhen Moisiuk
Russians
Vladimir Putin
Aleksandr Dvornikov
Aleksandr Lapin
Aleksey Nagin
Alexander Bortnikov
Andrei Kolesnikov
Andrei Sychevoi
Dmitry Medvedev
Gennady Zhidko
Igor Kastyukevich
Mikhail Mishustin
Maria Lvova-Belova
Nikolai Patrushev
Oleg Salyukov
Ramzan Kadyrov
Roman Berdnikov
Rustam Muradov
Sergei Shoigu
Sergey Surovikin
Sergey Lavrov
Sergey Naryshkin
Valery Gerasimov
Viktor Zolotov
Vitaly Gerasimov
Yevgeny Prigozhin
Other
 Alexander Lukashenko
 Denis Pushilin
 Leonid Pasechnik
Related
Anti-Russian sentiment
Anti-Ukrainian sentiment
Antonov An-225 Mriya
Azovstal iron and steel works
Brovary helicopter crash
Derussification in Ukraine
Demolition of monuments to Alexander Pushkin in Ukraine
Foreign leaders that have visited during the invasion
Ryazan military aircraft crash
Irkutsk military aircraft crash
Nord Stream 2
Proposed Russian annexation of Transnistria
Punisher
Russian nuclear weapons
Sarmat
Russian military presence in Transnistria
Siberian wildfires
Soloti military training ground shooting
Soviet imagery
U-24 association
Voronezh military aircraft crash
Yeysk military aircraft crash
Moldovan coup d' tat attempt allegations
2023 Pentagon document leaks
2023 visit by Joe Biden to Ukraine
2023 visit by Xi Jinping to Russia
 Category
 Commons
 Meta-Wiki
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Germany
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Poland
Academics
CiNii
Artists
Photographers' Identities
People
Deutsche Biographie
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dmitry_Medvedev&oldid=1149506280"