Study of the external features of the body of an animal
 Surface projections of the major organs of the trunk, using the vertebral column and rib cage as main reference points of surface anatomy.
Surface anatomy (also called superficial anatomy and visual anatomy) is the study of the external features of the body of an animal.[1] In birds this is termed topography. Surface anatomy deals with anatomical features that can be studied by sight, without dissection. As such, it is a branch of gross anatomy, along with endoscopic and radiological anatomy.[2] Surface anatomy is a descriptive science.[3] In particular, in the case of human surface anatomy, these are the form and proportions of the human body and the surface landmarks which correspond to deeper structures hidden from view, both in static pose and in motion.
In addition, the science of surface anatomy includes the theories and systems of body proportions and related artistic canons.[citation needed] The study of surface anatomy is the basis for depicting the human body in classical art.
Some pseudo-sciences such as physiognomy, phrenology and palmistry rely on surface anatomy.
Human surface anatomy[edit]
Surface anatomy of the thorax[edit]
 Front of thorax, showing surface relations of bones, lungs (purple), pleura (blue), and heart (red outline). Heart valves are labeled with "B", "T", "A", and "P".First heart sound: caused by atrioventricular valves - Bicuspid/Mitral (B) and Tricuspid (T). Second heart sound caused by semilunar valves -- Aortic (A) and Pulmonary/Pulmonic (P).
Knowledge of the surface anatomy of the thorax (chest) is particularly important because it is one of the areas most frequently subjected to physical examination, like auscultation and percussion.[4] In cardiology, Erb's point refers to the third intercostal space on the left sternal border where S2 heart sound is best auscultated.[5][6] Some sources include the fourth left interspace.[7]
Human female breasts are located on the chest wall, most frequently between the second and sixth rib.[4]
Anatomical landmarks[edit]
On the trunk of the body in the thoracic area, the shoulder in general is the acromial, while the curve of the shoulder is the deltoid.
The back as a general area is the dorsum or dorsal area, and the lower back as the limbus or lumbar region.
The shoulderblades are the scapular area and the breastbone is the sternal region.
The abdominal area is the region between the chest and the pelvis.
The breast is called the mamma or mammary, the armpit as the axilla and axillary, and the navel as the umbilicus and umbilical.
The pelvis is the lower torso, between the abdomen and the thighs.
The groin, where the thigh joins the trunk, are the inguen and inguinal area.
The entire arm is referred to as the brachium and brachial, the front of the elbow as the antecubitis and antecubital, the back of the elbow as the olecranon or olecranal, the forearm as the antebrachium and antebrachial, the wrist as the carpus and carpal area, the hand as the manus and manual, the palm as the palma and palmar, the thumb as the pollex, and the fingers as the digits, phalanges, and phalangeal.
The buttocks are the gluteus or gluteal region and the pubic area is the pubis.
Anatomists divide the lower limb into the thigh (the part of the limb between the hip and the knee) and the leg (which refers only to the area of the limb between the knee and the ankle).
The thigh is the femur and the femoral region.
The kneecap is the patella and patellar while the back of the knee is the popliteus and popliteal area.
The leg (between the knee and the ankle) is the crus and crural area, the lateral aspect of the leg is the peroneal area, and the calf is the sura and sural region.
The ankle is the tarsus and tarsal, and the heel is the calcaneus or calcaneal. The foot is the pes and pedal region, and the sole of the foot the planta and plantar.
As with the fingers, the toes are also called the digits, phalanges, and phalangeal area.
The big toe is referred to as the hallux.
List of features[edit]
Following are lists of surface anatomical features in humans and other animals. Sorted roughly from head to tail, cranial to caudal. Homologues share a bullet point and are separated by commas. Subcomponents are nested.  Class in which component occurs in italic.
In humans[edit]
Main article: List of human anatomical features
In other animals[edit]
Head
Tentacle Cephalopoda
Antler
Crest
Hood
Horn
Mane
Eye
Ear
Snout
Nose, Trunk
Nostril
Whiskers
Beak Aves only, Mouth
Lip not in Aves
Philtrum
Jaw not in Aves
Gums not in Aves
Teeth not in Aves, Tusk
Tongue
Throat
Vocal sac Ranidae
Vertebral column (extends dorsally
Thorax
Udder, Mammary gland
Gills
Arm Mammalia, Amphibia, ..., Fin Fish, Wing Aves
Elbow
Hand
Fingers (Thumb: Primate)
Knee
Leg
Shinbone
Foot
Toe
Hoof, Claw, Nail (anatomy), Nail (beak)
Webbing
Abdomen (roughly Stomach)
Pouch Marsupialia
Sex organs
Vulva (female)
Penis (male)
Scrotum (male)
Hair, Feather Aves, Scale Reptilia, Hair Mammalia, Fur
Shell
Tail
See also[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Surface anatomy.
Anatomy
Inspection (medicine)
List of human anatomical features
List of images in Gray's Anatomy: XII. Surface anatomy and Surface Markings
Palpation
Notes[edit]
^ Seeley (2003) chap.1 p.2
^ Standring (2008) Introduction, Anatomical nomenclature, p.2
^ "Journal of Morphology and Anatomy Surface Anatomy". Hilaris. Hilaris. Retrieved 1 June 2021.
^ a b Drake (2009) Ch.3 Thorax - Thorax surface anatomy, pp. 224-6 and Fig. 3.96 A
^ "Week 4". Archived from the original on 2008-01-29. Retrieved 2007-10-11.
^ Gavaghan, Mary (1998). "Cardiac anatomy and physiology: a review - includes examination questions AORN Journal - Find Articles". AORN Journal. Archived from the original on 2012-07-10. Retrieved 2007-10-11.
^ Constant, Jules (1999). Bedside cardiology. Hagerstwon, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 228. ISBN 0-7817-2168-7.
References[edit]
Drake, Richard; Vogl, A. Wayne; Mitchell, Adam W. M. (2009). Gray's Anatomy for Students (2nd ed.). Elsevier Health Sciences. pp. 157 164, 311 320, 538 547, 686 694, 882 892, 1097 1110, 1514 1524. ISBN 9781437720556. Retrieved 28 February 2014.
Seeley, Rod R.; Stephens, Trent D.; Tate, Philip (2002). Anatomy & physiology (6th ed.). McGraw & Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-235113-2.
Standring, Susan (2008) Gray's Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 39th Edition. ISBN 978-0-443-07168-3. Human surface anatomy photos at pp. 947, 1406-1410 Figs. 56.3, 110.12, 110.13, 110.15, 110.22
Further reading[edit]
Frederick, Roland Becker; Wilson, James Walter; Gehweiler, John A. (1971). The anatomical basis of medical practice (illustrated ed.). Williams and Wilkins.
Lumley, John S. P. (2008). Surface Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Examination (4th ed.). Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 978-0-7020-4776-3. Retrieved 28 February 2014.
Rohen, Johannes Wilhelm; Yokochi, Chihiro; L tjen-Drecoll, Elke (2011). Color Atlas of Anatomy   A Photographic Study of the Human Body (7th ed.). Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp. 204 5, 476 7. ISBN 978-1-58255-856-1.
Sheppard, Joseph (1991). Drawing the Living Figure. Dover Publications, Incorporated. ISBN 0-486-26723-7.
vteAnatomy and morphologyFields
Gross anatomy
Superficial anatomy
Neuroanatomy
brain morphometry
Comparative anatomy
Microscopic anatomy
histology
molecular
Morphometrics
Bacteria and fungi
Bacterial cell structure
cellular morphologies
morphological plasticity
Colonial morphology
Lichen morphology
Protists
Structures
Plants
Plant anatomy
fruit
Plant habit
Plant life-form
Plant morphology
reproductive
diseases
Soil morphology
Invertebrates
Decapod anatomy
Gastropod anatomy
Insect morphology
Diptera
Odonata
Spider anatomy
Arthropod cuticle
Mammals
Human anatomy
Neanderthal anatomy
Cat anatomy
Dog anatomy
Horse anatomy
Elephant anatomy
Giraffe anatomy
Other vertebrates
Bird anatomy
Fish anatomy
Shark anatomy
Glossaries
Anatomical terminology
Anatomical terms of location
Glossary of dinosaur anatomy
Glossary of plant morphology
leaf morphology
Related topics
Allometry
Anatomical variation
Anatomical plane
Body plan
Form classification
Gracility
Hertwig rule
History of anatomy
19th century
Physiognomy
Standard anatomical position
Transcendental anatomy
 Category
 Portal
Index of anatomy articles
vteHuman regional anatomyHead
Hair
Face
Forehead
Cheek
Chin
Eyebrow
Eye
Eyelid
Nose
Mouth
Lip
Tongue
Teeth
Ear
Jaw
Mandible
Occiput
Scalp
Temple
Neck
Adam's apple
Throat
Nape
Torso (Trunk)
Abdomen
Waist
Midriff
Navel
Vertebral column
Back
Thorax
Breast
Nipple
Pelvis
Sex organs
Penis
Scrotum
Vulva
LimbsArm
Shoulder
Axilla
Brachium
Elbow
Forearm
Wrist
Hand
Finger
Fingernail
Thumb
Index
Middle
Ring
Little
Leg
Buttocks
Hip
Thigh
Knee
Calf
Foot
Ankle
Heel
Toe
Toenail
Sole
vteHuman surface anatomy and general regionsHead
Nasolabial fold
Philtrum
Commissure of Lips
Vermilion border
Glabella
Brow ridge
Nostril
Ala of nose
NeckTriangles:
Anterior
Muscular
Carotid
Submandibular
Submental
Posterior
Occipital
Subclavian
Suboccipital
Supraclavicular fossa
Thorax
Triangle of auscultation
Clavipectoral triangle
Inframammary fold
Infraclavicular fossa
Arm
Cubital fossa
Anatomical snuffbox
Abdomen/pelvisregions
Epigastrium
Hypochondrium
Umbilical region
Flank
Hypogastrium
Inguinal region
Quadrants
Lumbar triangle
McBurney's point
Desjardins' point
Traube's space
Perineal
Anal triangle
Urogenital triangle
Leg
Buttocks
Gluteal sulcus
Intergluteal cleft
Femoral triangle
Popliteal fossa
Lap
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Surface_anatomy&oldid=1117791157#Surface_anatomy_of_the_thorax"