British and Irish blood sausage
This article is about the traditional food made with pork blood. For the fictional creature, see Black pudding (Dungeons & Dragons).
Black puddingCross section of a Stornoway black puddingAlternative namesIrish: Marag dhubh, put g dhubhPlace of originGreat Britain and IrelandRegion or stateEngland, Ireland, ScotlandAssociated cuisineUnited Kingdom and IrelandServing temperatureHot, occasionally coldMain ingredientsPork blood, fat, oats, or barleyIngredients generally usedMint, thyme, marjoram, spicesVariationsDrisheen, Sneem Black Pudding, Stornoway black puddingSimilar dishesBlodpl ttar, Sl tur  Media: Black pudding
Black pudding is a distinct regional type of blood sausage originating in the United Kingdom and Ireland. It is made from pork or beef blood, with pork fat or beef suet, and a cereal, usually oatmeal, oat groats, or barley groats. The high proportion of cereal, along with the use of certain herbs such as pennyroyal, serves to distinguish black pudding from blood sausages eaten in other parts of the world.[1]
Etymology[edit]
The word pudding is believed to derive from the French boudin, originally from the Latin botellus, meaning "small sausage".[2]
History and recipes[edit]
Blood puddings are often considered to be one of the oldest forms of sausage. Animals are generally bled at slaughter, and as blood rapidly spoils unless prepared in some way, making a pudding with it is one of the easiest ways of ensuring it does not go to waste.[1] While the majority of modern black pudding recipes involve pork blood, this has not always been the case. Sheep or cow blood was also used, and one 15th-century English recipe used that of a porpoise in a pudding eaten exclusively by the nobility.[1] Until at least the 19th century, cow or sheep blood was the usual basis for black puddings in Scotland; Jamieson's Scottish dictionary defined "black pudding" as "a pudding made of the blood of a cow or sheep".[3]
As a product of the slaughtering process, eating black puddings was historically associated with Martinmas, when the annual slaughter of livestock took place. By the 19th century black pudding manufacture was linked with towns known for their large markets for pork, such as Stretford,[4][5] then in Lancashire, and Cork, Ireland. By this time, black puddings were generally omitted from recipe books aimed at urban housewives, as they no longer usually had access to home-killed pork, although recipes continued to appear in Scottish books until the 20th century.[6]
 Sliced black pudding
 Black pudding ring
Most traditional recipes from the UK involve stirring the fresh blood,[7] adding fat and some form of rusk, and seasoning, before filling the mixture into a casing and boiling it. Natural casings of beef intestine were formerly used, though modern commercially made puddings use synthetic cellulose skins, and are usually produced from imported dried blood. The relatively limited range of ingredients and use of oats or barley to thicken and absorb the blood is typical of black pudding in comparison to Continental blood sausages.[1] Despite this, black pudding recipes still show more regional variation across the islands than other sausages, with many butchers having their own individual versions.[8] Breadcrumbs or flour are sometimes used to supplement the oats or barley, and the proportion and texture of the fat or suet used can also vary widely. Pennyroyal, marjoram, thyme, and mint are all traditional flavourings: pennyroyal was known as pudding-yerb in the North Riding of Yorkshire for its use in black puddings.[9] Other herbs and spices sometimes used in traditional black puddings include cumin, rue, and parsley.[10]
While the dish has been known as black pudding for centuries, blak podyngs having been recorded c. 1450,[11] a number of dialect names have also been used for the dish, such as black pot (in Somerset),[12] and bloody pot,[13] particularly in reference to versions cooked in an earthenware pot rather than in a sausage casing.[citation needed]
Regional popularity[edit]
In the United Kingdom,[14] black pudding is especially associated with the Black Country, the North West and Scotland; it is considered a particular delicacy in Stornoway and in Lancashire, notably in towns such as Bury, where it is traditionally boiled and served with malt vinegar out of a paper wrapping.[15] It was also found in Yorkshire, where black puddings were flavoured with lemon thyme and savory:[16] Barnsley black puddings were particularly well-known.[17] The Stornoway black pudding, made in the Western Isles of Scotland, has been granted Protected Geographical Indicator of Origin status. In the wake of this designation, butchers in Bury sought to demonstrate their history of manufacturing and selling the product. One such claim dates back to 1810.[18] Having been brought there by immigrants, black pudding is now part of the local cuisine of the Canadian provinces of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador.[19]
In Ireland, in addition to the more general type of black pudding, there is a distinct regional variety called drisheen, which is particularly associated with Cork.[20] Drisheen is usually made from cow's blood, although until the recent past it was often also made with sheep blood, and was sometimes flavoured with tansy.[20] Sneem Black Pudding is a local variety produced in County Kerry; it has Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status.[21][22][23][24]
Consumption[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Black pudding as part of a full breakfast
Black pudding can be grilled, fried, baked, or boiled in its skin. It can also be eaten cold, as it is cooked in production. In parts of north-western England and in the Black Country it was usual to serve a whole black pudding boiled as a complete meal, with bread or potatoes,[11] but elsewhere in the UK and Ireland slices of fried or grilled black puddings are more usually served as part of a traditional full breakfast, a tradition that followed British and Irish emigrants around the world.
 A single battered deep-fried chip shop black pudding (approx. 20 cm or 8 in long), sliced open
In Scotland and the north of England some chip shops sell deep-fried, battered black pudding.[25]
Novel culinary uses for black pudding include black pudding ice cream,[26] while perhaps a more conventional modern recipe is using it as an accompaniment to scallops.[27] Scotch eggs made with black pudding, such as the "Manchester egg",[28][29] have become common.
Nutrition[edit]
Black pudding is a good source of protein; it is low in carbohydrate and high in zinc and iron.[30] It has been described as a "superfood" because of these nutritional qualities,[31] although many recipes are also very high in saturated fat and salt.[citation needed]
Festivals[edit]
Since the 1980s, the World Black Pudding Throwing Championships has been held in Ramsbottom.[32] The humorous competition invokes the traditional Lancashire   Yorkshire rivalry, with participants throwing the black puddings at piles of Yorkshire puddings.[33] It takes place annually in September, and draws thousands of competitors and spectators to the town.[34]
In past years the Bacup Food and Black Pudding Festival has been held in Bacup.[35][26]
See also[edit]
Food portal
List of sausages
Boudin
Haggis
M pkenbrot  A German pork and grain sausage
Pig blood curd
Red pudding
White pudding
References[edit]
^ a b c d Jaine, T. and Davidson, A. The Oxford companion to food, OUP, 2006, p.104
^ Olver, Lynne (2000). "The Food Timeline: pudding". The Food Timeline. Retrieved 3 May 2007.
^ Jamieson, Supplement to the etymological dictionary of the Scottish language, v1, p.95
^ Waugh, E. (1869), Lancashire Sketches, p.78
^ The Encyclopedia Britannica, Volume 20, 1929, p.13
^ Leach, Helen. "Translating the 18th century pudding" in Clark et al (eds) (2008) Islands of Inquiry: Colonisation, Seafaring and the Archaeology of Maritime Landscapes, ANU, p.390
^ Floyd, K. (1988) Floyd on Britain and Ireland, BBC, p.97
^ Tatlow (1998) Good enough to eat: how we shop, what we eat, Macmillan, p.41
^ Robinson (1876) A glossary of words used in the neighbourhood of Whitby, English Dialect Society, p.147
^ Dampney (1977) All about herbs, Exeter, p.13
^ a b Black pudding, The Foods of England, accessed 25-05-18
^ Nares (1876) A Glossary: Or, a Collection of Words, Phrases, Names, and Allusions to Customs, Proverbs, Etc: Which Have Been Thought to Require Illustrations in the Works of English Authors, Particularly Shakespeare and His Contemporaries, vI, p.82
^ Wright, J. The English Dialect Dictionary, vol I, p.306
^ "The Black Pudding". The English Breakfast Society. Retrieved 6 January 2014.
^ Lancashire and Cheshire Regional Dishes Archived 21 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine, accessed 30 April 2010
^ Sinclair (ed). (1998) International Dictionary of Food and Cooking, Taylor and Francis, p.589
^ How  Albert's pudding put the town on the map, Barnsley Chronicle, 29 September 2006
^ Paul Britton (10 January 2013). "Proof of black pudding's birthplace is back home in Bury". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 12 March 2016.
^ "Marystown man enjoys making traditional Newfoundland fare". Southern Gazette. 15 October 2008. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
^ a b Walker, H. (ed) (1995) Disappearing Foods: Studies in Food and Dishes at Risk, Oxford, p.175
^ "Kerry-Based Sneem Black Pudding Secures Geographical Indication". Checkout.
^ "Proof is in the Sneem black pudding!". Farmersjournal.ie.
^ "Sneem Black Pudding granted special European status". 23 December 2019.
^ Nick, Callan. "Minister Creed welcomes approval of PGI status for Sneem Black Pudding". merrionstreet.ie.
^ Allen, George (7 November 2020). "What our Secret Service spy thought of these seven Derby fish and chip shops". Derbyshire Live. Local World. Retrieved 25 February 2022. One interesting item on the menu was deep-fried black pudding.
^ a b "Black pudding ice cream unveiled". 26 August 2005. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ "BBC Food: Scallops with bacon, black pudding and colcannon". Retrieved 30 September 2016.
^ Paul Vallely (19 November 2011). "Great Scotch! Manchester's take on the Scotch egg has become a snack sensation". The Independent. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ "Manchester egg recipe". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ "Blood sausage   Nutrition Facts". SELFNutritionData. Retrieved 7 January 2016.
^ Adam Boult (6 January 2016). "Black pudding hailed as a 'superfood'". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 6 October 2018.
^ "Ramsbottom World Black Pudding Throwing Championships". Retrieved 12 March 2016.
^ Paul Britton (7 September 2015). "The World Black Pudding Throwing Championships return to Ramsbottom on Sunday". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 12 March 2016.
^ Dan O'Donoghue (14 September 2015). "PICTURES: Thousands flock to Ramsbottom for World Black Pudding Throwing Championships". Rossendale Free Press. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
^ Samrana Hussain. "A crack at world record". Lancashire Telegraph. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
External links[edit]
 Media related to Black pudding at Wikimedia Commons
vtePuddingsSweet
Abbot of Priscos
 brystir
Annin tofu
Ashure
Asida
Banana pudding
B nh chu i
Bebinca
Blancmange
Bread and butter pudding
Bread pudding
Brown Betty
Cabinet pudding
Carrot pudding
Ch 
Cheese pudding
Chireta
Chocolate biscuit pudding
Chocolate pudding
Christmas pudding
Clootie dumpling
Cottage pudding
Cr me br l e
Cr me caramel
Diplomat pudding
Dutch baby pancake
Eton mess
Eve's pudding
Figgy duff
Flummery
Fruit pudding
Frumenty
Gajar Ka Halwa
Ginger milk curd
Goody
Got fan
Haupia
Herrencreme
Instant pudding
Jam Roly-Poly
Junket
Kalamai
K nga waru
Kazandibi
Ke k l
Kheer
Kig ha farz
Kue asida
Kue lapis
Kulolo
Kutia
Lemon delicious pudding
Mahallebi
Maja blanca
Malva pudding (Cape brandy pudding)
Malvern pudding
Mango pudding
Panna cotta
Pease pudding
Pepe ura
Persimmon pudding
Pistachio pudding
Platinum Pudding
Po'e
Put chai ko
Queen of Puddings
R ti'a
Rice pudding
R dgr d
Ro ata
Sago pudding
Spotted dick
Sticky toffee pudding
Summer pudding
Supangle
Sussex Pond Pudding
Tapioca pudding
Tembleque
Tibok-tibok
Treacle sponge pudding
Welf pudding
Savoury
Black pudding
Dock pudding
Drisheen
Flummadiddle
Groaty pudding
Haggis
Hasty pudding
Hog's pudding
Ka amak
Moin moin
Pudding corn
Rag pudding
Red pudding
Scrapple
Spoonbread
Tavuk g s 
Ti t canh
White pudding
Yorkshire pudding
vteEnglish cuisineRoman timesDishes
Sausages
Middle Agesto 15th centuryExemplars
Utilis Coquinario (c. 1300)
The Forme of Cury (c. 1390)
Dishes
Apple pie
Bacon
Banbury cake
Cheesecake
Custard
Game pie
Gingerbread
Kippers
Mince pie
Mortis
Pasty
Pease pudding
Pie
Pottage
16th centuryExemplars
Richard Pynson (The Boke of Cokery, 1500)
Thomas Dawson (The Good Huswifes Jewell, 1585)
Dishes
Black pudding
Fruit fool
Pancake
Scones
Syllabub
Trifle (without jelly)
17th centuryExemplars
Elinor Fettiplace (Receipt Book, 1604)
Gervase Markham (The English Huswife, 1615)
Robert May (The Accomplisht Cook, 1660)
Hannah Woolley (The Queen-like Closet or Rich Cabinet 1670)
Kenelm Digby (The Closet Opened 1699)
Dishes
Battalia pie
Currant bun
Queen of Puddings
Sponge cake
Sussex pond pudding
Sweet and sour
Tea
18th centuryExemplars
Mary Kettilby (A Collection of above Three Hundred Receipts in Cookery, Physick and Surgery 1714)
Mary Eales (Mrs Mary Eales's Receipts 1718)
John Nott (The Cooks and Confectioners Dictionary, 1723)
Eliza Smith (The Compleat Housewife 1727)
Hannah Glasse (The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy 1747)
Martha Bradley (The British Housewife 1758)
Elizabeth Raffald (The Experienced English Housekeeper 1769)
Richard Briggs (The English Art of Cookery 1788)
William Augustus Henderson (The Housekeeper's Instructor 1791)
Dishes
Bread and butter pudding
Christmas pudding
Chutney
Curry
Cottage or Shepherd's pie
Cumberland rum nicky
Eccles cake
Jellied eels
Jugged hare
Ketchup
Marmalade
Parkin
Piccalilli
Pork pie
Roast beef
Sandwich
Scouse
Suet pudding
Toad in the hole
Trifle (with jelly)
Welsh rabbit
Yorkshire pudding
19th centuryExemplars
Maria Rundell (A New System of Domestic Cookery 1806)
Eliza Acton (Modern Cookery for Private Families 1845)
Charles Elm  Francatelli (The Modern Cook 1846)
Isabella Beeton (Mrs. Beeton's Book of Household Management 1861)
Dishes
Bubble and squeak
Cauliflower cheese
Cobbler
Devilled kidneys
Faggots
Fish and chips
Full English breakfast
HP Sauce
Ice cream cone
Lancashire hotpot
Potted shrimps
Sausage roll
Steak and kidney pudding
Battenberg cake
Eton mess
Eve's pudding
Jam roly-poly
Lardy cake
Madeira cake
Summer pudding
Windsor soup
Worcestershire sauce
20th centuryExemplars
Florence Petty
Elizabeth David (A Book of Mediterranean Food 1950)
Constance Spry
Fanny Cradock
Marguerite Patten
Jane Grigson
Delia Smith
Rick Stein
Nigel Slater
Keith Floyd
Marco Pierre White
Nigella Lawson
Jamie Oliver
Fergus Henderson
Gordon Ramsay
Gary Rhodes
Mary Berry
Dishes
Bakewell tart
Beef Wellington
Carrot cake
Chicken tikka masala
Coronation chicken
Crumble
Knickerbocker glory
Ploughman's lunch
Salad cream
Sticky toffee pudding
21st centuryExemplars
Michel Roux Jr. (Le Gavroche)
Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall (River Cottage)
Antony Worrall Thompson
Heston Blumenthal (The Fat Duck)
Clarissa Dickson Wright (A History of English Food 2011)
Rachel Khoo
Dishes
Platinum Pudding
Related
Food in England (1954)
List of English dishes
List of English cheeses
List of savoury puddings
List of sweet puddings
Rationing in the United Kingdom
vteIrish cuisineList of Irish dishes
Bacon and cabbage
Barmbrack
Blaa
Boxty
Breakfast roll
Brown bread
Carrageen moss
Champ
Chicken fillet roll
Cider
Clare Island Salmon
Coddle
Colcannon
Comber Earlies
Connemara Hill Lamb
Crubeens
Dilisk
Dublin Bay prawns
Drisheen (Packet) & Tripe
Goody
Imokilly Regato
Irish cheeses
Irish Lumper potato
Irish stew
Jambon
Limerick ham
Northern Irish cuisine
Oriel Sea Minerals
Oriel Sea Salt
Potato bread
Skirts and kidneys
Sneem Black Pudding
Soda bread
Spice bag
Spiced beef
Timoleague Brown Pudding
Veda bread
Irish breakfast
including: Black pudding
White pudding
Sausages
Rashers
Fried eggs
Ulster Fry
 Ireland portal
 Food portal
 Category: Irish cuisine
vteScottish cuisineCereal
Brose
Porridge
Skirlie
Sowans
Soups
Cock-a-leekie soup
Cullen skink
Hairst bree, or hodge-podge
Partan bree
Powsowdie
Scotch broth
Meats
Balmoral Chicken
Black pudding (Stornoway black pudding)
Chicken tikka masala
Collops
Forfar bridie
Fried chicken
Fruit pudding
Full Scottish breakfast
Guga
Haggis
Haggis pakora
Killie pie
King Rib
Link sausage
Lorne sausage, or square sausage
Macon
Mince and tatties
Munchy box
Popeseye steak
Pottit heid and potted hough
Red pudding
Reestit mutton
Scotch pie
Steak pie
Stovies
White pudding
Fish and seafood
Arbroath smokie
Cabbie claw
Crappit heid
Eyemouth pale
Finnan haddie
Fish and chips
Kedgeree
Kipper (Loch Fyne kipper)
Rollmops
Smoked salmon (Lochmuir)
Vegetables
Clapshot
Kail
Kailkenny
Neeps and tatties
Rumbledethumps
Fruit
Blaeberry
Bramble
Raspberry
Rowan, and rowan jelly
Strawberry
Tayberry
Dairy
Bonchester cheese
Caboc
Crowdie
Dunlop cheese
Hatted kit
Isle of Mull Cheddar
Lanark Blue
Shropshire Blue (orig. Inverness-shire Blue, Blue Stuart)
Teviotdale cheese
Breads
Bannock
Buttery, or rowie
Deep-fried pizza
Macaroni pie
Morning roll
Oatcake
Pan loaf
Plain loaf
Soda bread (Farl)
Tattie scone
Puddings, sweets,cakes, biscuits
Abernethy biscuit
Barley sugar
Berwick cockle
Black bun
Caramel shortbread
Carrageen moss
Claggum, or clack
Clootie dumpling
Cranachan
Deep-fried Mars bar
Digestive biscuit
Dundee cake
Dundee marmalade (Keiller's marmalade)
Edinburgh rock
Empire biscuit
Fatty cutties
Festy cock
Flapjack
Fruit slice, or fly cemetery
Fudge doughnut
Hatted kit
Hawick balls
Heather honey
Jethart snails
Lucky tattie
Macaroon
Moffat toffee
Pan drop (Scotch mint)
Paris buns
Scone (Girdle scone)
Scottish crumpet
Scottish pancake, or drop scone
Selkirk bannock
Shortbread
Soor plooms
Star rock
Tablet
Tunnock's caramel wafer
Tunnock's teacake
Tipsy laird
Drinks
Atholl brose
Beer in Scotland (Scotch ale)
Bouvrage
Breakfast tea
Drambuie
Glayva
Irn-Bru
Red Kola
Scotch whisky (Single malt Scotch)
Other articles:
Barbara Gilmour
Brochan Lom
Fallaid
Haggis hurling
List of restaurants in Scotland
Scotland Food & Drink (Scottish Food and Drink Fortnight)
Scottish pork taboo
Spurtle
Wild haggis
 Scotland portal
 Food portal
 Category: Scottish cuisine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_pudding&oldid=1136800747"