Soy-based food used as a protein source
For other uses, see Tofu (disambiguation).
"Dubu" redirects here. For other uses, see Dubu (disambiguation).
TofuA block of Japanese raw silken tofuAlternative namesBean curdPlace of originAnhui, ChinaAssociated cuisine
East Asian cuisine & Southeast Asian cuisine
Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Filipino
Indonesian
Malaysian
Singaporean
Thai
Vietnamese
Main ingredientsSoy milk Cookbook: Tofu  Media: Tofu
Regional names"Tofu" in Chinese charactersChinese nameChinese Hanyu Pinyind ufu
Literal meaning"bean curd/ferment"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu Pinyind ufuBopomofo Gwoyeu Romatzyhdow.fuuWade Gilestou4-fuTongyong Pinyind uf MPS2d ufuIPA[to .fu]WuRomanizationdeu-vuHakkaRomanizationtheu-f Yue: CantoneseYale RomanizationdauhfuhJyutpingdau6fu6IPA[t u.f ]Southern MinHokkien POJt u-h Eastern MinFuzhou BUCd u-h Northern MinJian'ou Romanizeddae fuMiddle ChineseMiddle Chinesed uH-b oXOld ChineseBaxter Sagart (2014)*[N.t] o-s [b](r)o Zhengzhang*do s bo Burmese nameBurmese  tui. hu:Vietnamese nameVietnamese u h ,  u ph Ch  H n Thai nameThai RTGStaohuKorean nameHangul Hanja TranscriptionsRevised RomanizationdubuMcCune ReischauertubuJapanese nameKanji Kana TranscriptionsRevised Hepburnt fuKunrei-shikit huMalay nameMalaytauhuIndonesian nameIndonesiantahuFilipino nameTagalogtah , tokwaBengali nameBengali   ,  Tamil nameTamil   puKhmer nameKhmer  tauhu
Tofu (Chinese:  ; pinyin: d ufu; Wade Giles: tou4-fu) is a food prepared by coagulating soy milk and then pressing the resulting curds into solid white blocks of varying softness: silken, soft, firm, extra firm, or super firm. Tofu is also known as bean curd in English. Beyond these broad textural categories, there are many varieties of tofu. It has a subtle flavor, so it can be used in savory and sweet dishes. It is often seasoned or marinated to suit the dish and its flavors, and due to its spongy texture, it absorbs flavors well. It is a traditional component of East Asian and Southeast Asian cuisines,[1] and has been consumed in China for over 2,000 years.[2][3] In modern western cooking, it is most often treated as a meat substitute.
Nutritionally, tofu is low in calories, while containing a relatively large amount of protein. It is high in iron, and can have a high calcium or magnesium content depending on the coagulants (e.g. calcium chloride, calcium sulphate, magnesium sulphate) used in manufacturing.
Etymology[edit]
The English word "tofu" comes from Japanese t fu ( ). The Japanese tofu, in turn, is a borrowing of Chinese   (Mandarin: d uf ; tou4-fu) 'bean curd, bean ferment'.[4][5][6][7]
The earliest documentation of the word in English is in the 1704 translation of Domingo Fern ndez Navarrete's A Collection of Voyages and Travles, that describes how tofu was made.[8] The word towfu also appears in a 1770 letter from the English merchant James Flint to Benjamin Franklin.[9]: 73  The term "bean curd(s)" for tofu has been used in the United States since at least 1840.[10][11]
History[edit]
Tofu making was first recorded during the Chinese Han dynasty about 2000 years ago.[2] Chinese legend ascribes its invention to Prince Liu An (179 122 BC) of Anhui province. Tofu and its production technique were introduced to Japan[12][13][14] during the Nara period (710 794). Some scholars believe tofu arrived in Vietnam during the 10th and 11th centuries.[9]: 305  It spread to other parts of Southeast Asia as well.[15] This probably coincided with the spread of Buddhism as it is an important source of protein in the vegetarian diet of East Asian Buddhism.[12] Li Shizhen, during the Ming dynasty, described a method of making tofu in the Compendium of Materia Medica.[16] Since then, tofu has become a staple in many countries, including Vietnam, Thailand, and Korea, with regional variations in production methods, texture, flavor, and usage.
Theories of origin[edit]
The most commonly held of the three theories of tofu's origin maintains that tofu was discovered by Lord Liu An, a Han dynasty prince. While plausible, the paucity of reliable sources for this period makes this difficult to conclusively determine. In Chinese history, important inventions were frequently attributed to important leaders and figures of the time.[17] In 1960, a stone mural unearthed from an Eastern Han dynasty tomb provided support for the theory of the Han origin of tofu; however some scholars maintain that tofu during the Han dynasty was rudimentary and lacked the firmness and taste for it to be considered as tofu.[18]
Another theory suggests that the production method for tofu was discovered accidentally when a slurry of boiled, ground soybeans was mixed with impure sea salt. Such sea salt would probably have contained calcium and magnesium salts, allowing the soy mixture to curdle and produce a tofu-like gel.
The last group of theories maintains that the ancient Chinese learned the method for curdling soy milk by emulating the milk curdling techniques of the Mongolians or East Indians. Despite their advanced culture, no technology or knowledge of culturing and processing milk products existed within ancient Chinese society. The primary evidence for this theory is the etymological similarity between the Chinese term r f  ( ), which literally means "milk curdled", used during Sui dynasty (AD 581 618), for dishes with a consistency like yogurt or soft cheese), later influenced by Mongolian milk products and methods of production, and the term d ufu ( , "beans curdled" ) or tofu. Although intriguing and possible, there is no evidence to substantiate this theory beyond academic speculation.[17]
East Asia[edit]
China[edit]
See also: List of Chinese inventions
A form of tofu may have been discovered during the Han dynasty (202 BC  AD 220), but it did not become a popular food in China until the Song dynasty (960 1279).[7]
In China, tofu is traditionally used as a food offering when visiting the graves of deceased relatives. It is claimed that the spirits (or ghosts) have long lost their chins and jaws so that only tofu is soft enough for them to eat. Before refrigeration was available in China, tofu was often only sold during winter since tofu did not spoil as easily in cold weather. During the warmer months, tofu, once made, spoiled if stored for more than a day.
Japan[edit]
 Illustration of a tofu seller (right) and a s men seller (left) by Tosa Mitsunobu, from the Songs of the Seventy-one Craftsmen (  Shichij ichi-ban Shokunin Uta-awase), a poetry anthology written around 1500
Tofu was introduced to Japan during the Nara period (late 8th century) by Zen Buddhist monks, who initially called it "Chinese curd" ( , t fu).[7] A firm variation of tofu was introduced in Tosa Province, today's Kochi Prefecture, by a Korean doctor and prisoner of war following the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592 1598).[19][20][21] Much of tofu's early use in East Asia was as a vegetarian substitute for meat and fish by Buddhist monks, especially those following Zen Buddhism.[7][20]
The earliest Japanese document concerning tofu refers to the dish being served as an offering at the Kasuga Shrine in Nara in 1183.[22] The book Tofu Hyakuchin ( ), published in 1782 of the Edo period, lists 100 recipes for cooking tofu.[23]
Southeast Asia[edit]
In Southeast Asia, tofu was introduced to the region by Chinese immigrants from Fujian province, as evidenced by many countries in Southeast Asia referring to tofu using the Min Nan Chinese word for either soft or firm tofu, or "t u-h " or "t u-goan" respectively. In Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Cambodia, Myanmar, the Philippines and Vietnam, tofu is widely available and used in many local dishes.[citation needed]
Tofu is called tahu in Indonesia, and Indonesian dishes such as tahu sumbat, taugeh tahu, asinan, siomay and some curries, often add slices of tofu. Tahu goreng, tahu isi and tahu sumedang are popular fried tofu snacks.[citation needed]
Tofu is called tauhu in Malaysia and Singapore. Malaysian and Singaporean Indians use tofu in their cuisine, such as in Indian mee goreng, and rojak pasembor. Peranakan cuisine often uses tofu, as in Penang curry noodles and laksa. Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines are major producers of tofu and have plants in many municipalities.
Tofu in the Philippines is widely eaten as the breakfast snack tah  (soft tofu, from Philippine Hokkien   "t u-h "), or as tokwa (dry, firm tofu that is usually fried, from Philippine Hokkien   "t u-goan"), which is a staple alternative to meat in main meals and in numerous regional dishes. Tofu was introduced to the archipelago in the 10th to 13th centuries by Song dynasty Chinese mariners and merchants, along with many other foods that became staples of the Philippine diet. The use and production of tofu were first limited to urban centers with influential Chinese minorities, such as Cebu or Tondo, but quickly spread to even remote native villages and islands.[citation needed]
Elsewhere[edit]
Benjamin Franklin was the first American to mention tofu, in a 1770 letter to John Bartram.[9]: 73 [24] Franklin, who encountered it during a trip to London, included a few soybeans and referred to it as "cheese" from China.[25] In 1770, Franklin also corresponded with James Flint on the subject of how the Chinese converted callivances (soybeans) into tofu. Flint's writing "Towfu" in his letter is the earliest documented use of "tofu" in the English language.[9]: 73  The first tofu company in the United States was established in 1878.[26] In 1908, Li Yuying, a Chinese anarchist and a vegetarian with a French degree in agriculture and biology, opened a soy factory, the Usine de la Cas o-Soja ne. This was the world's first soy dairy and the first factory in France to manufacture and sell beancurd.[27] However, tofu was not well known to most Westerners before the middle of the 20th century. With increased cultural contact between the West and East Asia and growing interest in vegetarianism, knowledge of tofu has become widespread. Numerous types of pre-flavored tofu can be found in supermarket chains throughout the West. It is also used by many vegans and vegetarians as a source of protein.[citation needed]
Production[edit]
Making tofuCoagulated soy curdsCurds in a tofu mold
Regardless of the product or scale of the production, the production of tofu essentially consists of:
The preparation of soy milk
The coagulation of the soy milk to form curds (douhua)
The pressing of the soybean curds to form tofu cakes
It is similar to the production of dairy cheese by coagulating the milk of dairy animals to form curds and pressing and aging the curds to form cheese. Typical tofu-making procedures are cleaning, soaking, grinding beans in water, filtering, boiling, coagulation, and pressing.[28]
Coagulation of the protein and oil (emulsion) suspended in boiled soy milk is the most important step in the production of tofu. This process is accomplished with the aid of coagulants. Coagulation depends on complex interactions. There are many variables including the variety and percentage of protein in the soybeans used, slurry cooking temperature, coagulation temperature, and other factors.[29]
Soybean proteins are mainly composed of 7S and 11S proteins. The negative surface charges on these globulins usually cause them to repel each other. Heating soy milk denatures the proteins and exposes hydrophobic groups normally oriented toward the inside of the globulin structure. Cations from coagulants bind the negatively charged groups.[30] As the net charges of the protein molecules are neutralized, attractive hydrophobic interactions dominate over repulsive electrostatic charges, and protein aggregates are formed.[31]
Two types of coagulants (salts and acids) are used commercially.[32]
Salt coagulants[edit]
Tofu toolsDubu-teul ('tofu mold') from KoreaDubu-kal ('tofu knife') from Korea
Calcium sulfate (gypsum) (Chinese:  ; pinyin: sh g o)   a traditional and most widely used coagulant to produce Chinese-style tofu, it produces a tofu that is tender but slightly brittle in texture. The coagulant itself is tasteless. Also known as gypsum, calcium sulfate is quarried from geological deposits, and no chemical processing or refining is needed, making it the cheapest coagulant used in tofu production. When used in production, the coagulation reaction is slower due to its low solubility, forming a smooth, more gelatinous tofu with relatively high water content and soft texture.[28] Use of this coagulant also makes tofu that is rich in calcium. As such, many tofu manufacturers choose to use this coagulant to be able to market their tofu as a good source of dietary calcium.[citation needed]
Chloride-type nigari salts or lushui (Traditional:  ,  ; Simplified:  ; Pinyin: l shu )   Magnesium chloride and calcium chloride: Both of these salts are highly soluble in water and affect soy protein in the same way, whereas gypsum is only very slightly soluble in water and acts differently in soy protein precipitation, the basis of tofu formation. These are the coagulants used to make tofu with a smooth and tender texture. In Japan, a white powder called nigari, which consists primarily of magnesium chloride, is produced from seawater after the sodium chloride is removed and the water evaporated. Depending on its production method, nigari/Lushui may also contain small quantities of magnesium sulfate (Epsom salt), potassium chloride, calcium chloride, and trace amounts of other naturally occurring salts. Although the term nigari is derived from nigai, the Japanese word for "bitter", neither nigari nor pure magnesium chloride imparts a perceivable taste to the finished tofu. Calcium chloride is not found in seawater in significant quantities and therefore is not regarded as nigari. It is used extensively in the United States due to its flavor and low cost.[9]: 73 [33] Fresh clean seawater itself can also be used as a coagulant.[34]
Acid coagulants[edit]
Glucono delta-lactone (GDL): A naturally occurring organic acid also used in cheesemaking, this coagulant produces a very fine textured tofu that is almost jelly-like. It is used especially for "silken" and softer tofus and confers a faint sour taste to the finished product.[35] GDL is derived from glucose and takes the form of a white powder at room temperature. Its molecular structure contains a six-membered heterocyclic ring that is hydrolyzed upon contact with water, slowly converting GDL to gluconic acid.[36] When added to soy milk, it gradually lowers the pH and causes proteins to coagulate evenly throughout the mixture,[37] forming a single, smooth gel free of air gaps that resist breaking during transportation. Using GDL as a coagulant, silken tofu can be formed directly in its container, as it does not require pressing.[38] This acid coagulant is also commonly used together with calcium sulfate to give soft tofu a smooth, tender texture.
Other edible acids: Though they can affect the taste of the tofu more, and vary in density and texture, acids such as acetic acid (vinegar) and citric acid (such as lemon juice), can also be used to coagulate soy milk and produce tofu.[39]
Enzyme coagulants[edit]
Among enzymes that have been shown to produce tofu are papain, and alkaline and neutral proteases from microorganisms. Papain, moreover, has been studied as a gelling agent to produce "instant tofu" from soy protein isolate and soy glycinin (11S) protein.[40][41]
Contemporary tofu manufacturers may choose to use one or more of these coagulants since each plays a role in producing the desired texture in the finished tofu.[35] Different textures result from different pore sizes and other microscopic features in the tofu produced using each coagulant. The coagulant mixture is dissolved in water, and the solution is then stirred into boiled soy milk until the mixture curdles into a soft gel.[32]
Coagulants are typically added at concentrations between 1.5 and 5.0 g/kg. In all coagulants consisting of calcium or magnesium salts, the positive double-bonded ions of the calcium or magnesium are responsible for the coagulation of the soy proteins which become part of the tofu, thereby enhancing its nutritional value. Only 1 part per 1000 of the tofu eaten is coagulant; most of the coagulant reacts with soy protein and is broken down into ions. The non-reactive portion dissolves in the whey and is discarded.[42]
The curds are processed differently depending on the form of tofu that is being manufactured. For soft silken tofu ( ; n nd ufu in Chinese or   kinugoshi-d fu in Japanese) or tofu pudding ( , d uhu  OR  , d ufuhu  in Chinese or   Oboro-d fu in Japanese) the soy milk is curdled directly in the tofu's final packaging. For standard firm East Asian tofu, the soy curd is cut and strained of excess liquid using cheesecloth or muslin and then lightly pressed to produce a soft cake. Firmer tofus, such as East Asian dry tofu ( ' in Chinese or   Shimi-d fu in Japanese) or Western types of tofu, are further pressed to remove even more liquid. In Vietnam, the curd is strained and molded in a square mold, and the end product is called  u khu n (molded bean) or  u ph  (one of the Vietnamese ways to pronounce the Chinese d ufu). The tofu curds are allowed to cool and become firm. The finished tofu can then be cut into pieces, flavored or further processed.[citation needed]
Although tartness is sometimes desired in dessert tofu, the acid used in flavoring is usually not the primary coagulant, since concentrations sufficiently high to induce coagulation negatively affect the flavor or texture of the resulting tofu. A sour taste in tofu and a slight cloudiness in its storing liquid is also usually an indication of bacterial growth and, hence, spoilage.
Color[edit]
The whiteness of tofu is ultimately determined by the soybean variety, soybean protein composition, and degree of aggregation of the tofu gel network. The yellowish-beige color of soybeans is due to the color compounds including anthocyanin, isoflavones, and polyphenol compounds; therefore the soybean variety used will predicate the color of the final tofu product.[43] Ways to reduce the yellow color include reducing isoflavone content by changing the pH of the soy milk solution used in the production of the tofu so that the relevant compounds precipitate out and are removed during the extraction of okara.[44] The opacity of tofu gel and the off-white color typical of standard uncooked firm tofu is due to the scattering of light by the colloidal particles of the tofu. The addition of higher levels of calcium salts or a high protein content will contribute to forming a denser and more aggregated gel network which disperses more light, resulting in tofu with a whiter appearance.[45]
Flavor[edit]
See also: Soy odor
Tofu flavor is generally described as bland, which is the taste desired by customers in North America. A more beany flavor is preferred in East Asia. The beany or bland taste is generated during the grinding and cooking process, and either a "hot grind" or a "cold grind" can be used to influence the taste. The hot grind method reduces the beany flavor by inactivating the lipoxygenase enzyme in the soy protein that is known to generate off flavors. Eliminating these flavors makes tofu that is "bland".  If a cold grind is used lipoxygenase remains and produces the aldehyde, alcohol, and ester volatile compounds that create beany notes.[42]
Varieties[edit]
A wide variety of types and flavors of tofu is available in both Western and Eastern markets. Despite the range of options, tofu products can be split into two main categories: 'fresh tofu', which is produced directly from soy milk, and 'processed tofu', which is produced from fresh tofu. Tofu production also creates important by-products that are used in various cuisines.
Unpressed fresh[edit]
Unpressed fresh tofu is gelled soy milk with curd that has not been cut and pressed of its liquid. Depending on whether the soy milk is gelled with bittern (magnesium chloride) solution or a suspension of gypsum (calcium sulphate), different types of unpressed tofu is produced. Gypsum-gelled soft tofu has a smooth and gel-like texture and is commonly known as soft tofu, silken-tofu, or douhua ( ). The bittern-gelled variety has a very soft spongy curdled texture and is known as extra-soft or sun-dubu ( ).
Unpressed tofu is so soft that it is directly ladled out for serving or sold with its gelling container.
Extra soft[edit]
 Sun-dubu (extra soft tofu)
Extra soft tofuKorean nameHangul Hanja Literal meaningmild tofuTranscriptionsRevised Romanizationsun-dubuMcCune Reischauersun-tubu
Unpressed bittern-gelled soft tofu is called sun-dubu ( ; "mild tofu") in Korean. Soy milk is mixed with seawater,[46][47][48][49][50] or saline water made with sea salt, so that it curdles.[51][52] The curds remain loose and soft. Freshly made sun-dubu is eaten boiled with little or no seasoning. Manufactured sundubu is usually sold in tubes. It is also the main ingredient in sundubu-jjigae ( ; "soft tofu stew").
Although the word sun in sun-dubu does not have a Sino-Korean origin,[53] sun-dubu is often translated into Chinese and Japanese using the Chinese character  , whose Korean pronunciation is sun and the meaning is "pure". Thus in China, sun-dubu is called ch n d ufu ( ; "pure tofu"), and in Japan, it is called jun-t fu ( ) or sundubu ( ).
Soft[edit]
 Soft tofu
Soft tofuChinese nameChinese Literal meaning"soft tofu"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu Pinyinn nd ufuGwoyeu Romatzyhnenndow.fuuWade Gilesn n4-tou4-fuIPA[n n.to .fu]Alternative Chinese nameChinese Literal meaning"slippery tofu"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu Pinyinhu d ufuGwoyeu Romatzyhhwadow.fuuWade Gileshua2-tou4-fuIPA[xwa .to .fu]Korean nameHangul Hanja Literal meaning"soft tofu"TranscriptionsRevised Romanizationyeon-dubuMcCune Reischauery n-tubuJapanese nameKanji Kana TranscriptionsRevised Hepburnkinugoshi-d fu
Soft tofu, also known as "silken tofu", is called n nd ufu ( ; "soft tofu") or hu d ufu ( , "smooth tofu") in Chinese; kinugoshi-d fu ( ; "silk-filtered tofu") in Japanese; and yeon-dubu ( ;  ; "soft tofu") in Korean. Gelled with gypsum, this tofu is undrained, and unpressed, and contains a high moisture content.[42] Silken tofu is produced by coagulating soy milk without cutting the curd.[54][55] Silken tofu is available in several consistencies, including soft and firm, but all silken tofu is more delicate than regular firm tofu (pressed tofu) and it has different culinary uses.[56] Silken tofu can be used as a substitute for dairy products and eggs, especially for smoothies and baked desserts.[57]
Douhua ( , also known as  , d ufuhu  in Chinese), or tofu brain (  or  , d ufun o in Chinese) or dau fa (Cantonese) and tau hua (Fujianese) ( ; "bean flower") is similar to silken tofu, but is typically served a few hours after it is prepared. It is most often eaten as a hot dessert, but sometimes salty pickles or hot sauce are added. This is a type of soft tofu with very high moisture content. Because using chopsticks make douhua difficult to pick up, it is generally eaten with a spoon. With the addition of flavorings such as finely chopped spring onions, dried shrimp, soy sauce, or chilli sauce, douhua is a popular breakfast dish across China. In Malaysia, douhua is usually served warm with white or dark palm sugar syrup, or served cold with longans.  It is frequently served at breakfast or for dessert. It is usually served either with a sweet ginger syrup, or a mushroom gravy called da lu ( ). It's normally coagulated at the restaurant into a serving container. Douhua is not always considered a type of tofu, but rather a type of food in its own right.
Some variation exists among soft tofus. Black douhua ( , h id uhu ) is a type of silken tofu made from black soybeans, which is usually made into d uhu  ( ) rather than firm or dry tofu. The texture of black bean tofu is slightly more gelatinous than regular douhua and the color is greyish in tone. This type of tofu is eaten for its earthy "black bean taste". Edamame tofu is a Japanese variety of kinugoshi t fu made from edamame (fresh green soybeans); it is pale green in color and often studded with whole edamame.
Pressed fresh[edit]
Depending on the amount of water that is extracted from the cut and pressed curds two types of tofu are produced: firm, and extra firm. Fresh tofu is usually sold completely immersed in water to maintain its moisture content and freshness, and to suppress bacterial growth.
Firm[edit]
 Firm tofu
Firm tofuChinese nameChinese Literal meaning"old tofu"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu Pinyinl od ufuGwoyeu Romatzyhlaodow.fuuWade Gileslao3-tou4-fuIPA[la .to .fu]Korean nameHangul Hanja Literal meaning"block tofu"TranscriptionsRevised Romanizationmo-dubuMcCune Reischauermo-tubuJapanese nameKanji Kana TranscriptionsRevised Hepburnmomen-d fu
Firm tofu (called   l od ufu in Chinese;  , momen-d fu in Japanese, "cotton tofu";  , mo-dubu in Korean): Although drained and pressed, this form of fresh tofu retains a high moisture content. It has the firmness of raw meat and bounces back readily when pressed. The texture of the inside of the tofu is similar to that of a firm custard. The skin of this form of tofu retains the pattern of the muslin used to drain it, and the outside is slightly more resistant to damage than the inside. It can be picked up easily with chopsticks.[17][42]
A very firm type of momen-d fu is eaten in parts of Japan, called ishi-d fu ( , "stone tofu") in parts of Ishikawa, or iwa-d fu ( , "rock tofu") in Gokayama in the Toyama Prefecture and in Iya in the prefecture of Tokushima. These types of firm tofu are produced with seawater instead of nigari (magnesium chloride), or using concentrated soy milk. Some of them are squeezed using heavy weights to eliminate excess moisture. These products are produced in areas where traveling is inconvenient, such as remote islands, mountain villages, and heavy snowfall areas.
Extra-firm[edit]
Main article: Dougan
 D ug n (extra firm tofu)
Extra firm tofuChinese nameChinese Literal meaning"dry tofu"TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu Pinyind ug nGwoyeu RomatzyhdowganWade Gilestou4-kan1IPA[to .ka n]Korean nameHangul Hanja Literal meaning"dry tofu"TranscriptionsRevised Romanizationgeon-dubuMcCune Reischauerk n-tubu
D ug n ( , literally "dry tofu" in Chinese) or su ji ( , vegetarian chicken) is an extra firm variety of tofu where a large proportion of the liquid has been pressed out. D ug n contains the least moisture of all fresh tofu, the firmness of fully cooked meat, and a somewhat rubbery feel similar to that of paneer. When sliced thinly this tofu can be crumbled easily. The skin of this form of tofu has the pattern of the muslin used to drain and press it. Western firm tofu is milled and reformed after pressing.
Su ji is a more common type of unflavored, extra-firm tofu. It cannot be crumbled and has a more rubbery texture. One variety of dried tofu is pressed especially flat and sliced into long strings with a cross-section smaller than 2 mm   2 mm. Shredded dried tofu ( , d ug ns  in Chinese, or simply  , g ns ), which looks like loose cooked noodles, can be served cold, stir-fried, or added to soup, as with Japanese aburaage.[17][58]
Processed tofu[edit]
Many forms of processed tofu exist. Some processing techniques probably[citation needed] originate before the days of refrigeration from the need to preserve tofu or to increase its shelf life. Other production techniques are employed to create tofus with different textures and flavors.[59]
Fermented[edit]
 Pickled tofu
Pickled tofu (  in Chinese, pinyin: d ufur , or   f r ; chao in Vietnamese), also called "preserved tofu" or "fermented tofu", consists of cubes of dried tofu that have been allowed to fully air-dry under hay and slowly ferment with the help of aerial bacteria.[59] The dry fermented tofu is then soaked in salt water, Chinese rice wine, vinegar or minced chiles, or in a mixture of whole rice, bean paste, and soybeans. In the case of red pickled tofu (  in Chinese, Pinyin: h ng d ufur ), red yeast rice (cultivated with Monascus purpureus) is added for color.[a] In Japan, pickled tofu with miso paste is called tofu no misodzuke, and is a traditional preserved food in Kumamoto. In Okinawa, pickled and fermented tofu is called tofuyo ( ). It is made from Shima-doufu (an Okinawan variety of large and firm tofu). It is fermented and matured with koji mold, red koji mold, and awamori.
Stinky tofu (  in Chinese, Pinyin: ch ud ufu) is soft tofu that has been fermented in a vegetable and fish brine.[59] The blocks of tofu have a pungent cheese smell, sometimes resembling rotting food. Despite its strong odor, the flavor and texture of stinky tofu is appreciated by aficionados, who describe it as delightful. The texture of this tofu is similar to the soft East Asian tofu from which it is made. The rind that stinky tofu develops when fried is said to be best when especially crisp, and fried stinky tofu is usually served with soy sauce, sweet sauce, or hot sauce.[citation needed]
Frozen[edit]
 Thawed and sliced frozen tofu
 Koya-dofu after soaking in water
Thousand-layer tofu ( , qi ny  d ufu, literally "thousand-layer tofu", or   d ngd ufu,   b ngd ufu in Chinese, both meaning "frozen tofu") is a frozen tofu. The ice crystals that develop within it result in the formation of large cavities that appear to be layered. Frozen tofu takes on a yellowish hue in the freezing process. Thousand-layer tofu originates from the Jiangnan region of China and is commonly made at home from soft tofu. It is also commercially sold as a specialty in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and other areas with Jiangnan emigrants. It is regularly paired with tatsoi as a winter dish. Frozen tofu is defrosted before serving and sometimes pressed to remove moisture prior to use.
During freezing, the ice crystals puncture cell walls and facilitate the release of free and bound water and cause a decrease in total water content in tofu after freezing then thawing. The initial protein-water bonds are irreversibly replaced by protein-protein bonds, which are more elastic and cause a structural change to the gel network and lead to an increase in textural properties such as hardness, springiness, cohesiveness, and gumminess.[60][61]
In Japan, two kinds of freeze-dried tofu are produced. Those are usually rehydrated by being soaked in water prior to consumption. In their dehydrated state, they do not require refrigeration.
Kori tofu ( , literally "frozen tofu") is freeze-dried.[62] Koya-dofu (k ya-d fu,   in Japanese) is a freeze-dried tofu from Mount K ya, a center of Japanese Buddhism famed for its sh jin ry ri, or traditional Buddhist vegetarian cuisine. It is said that the method of Koya-dofu was discovered by accident by leaving tofu outdoors in the winter season. It is sold in freeze-dried blocks or cubes in Japanese markets. It is typically simmered in dashi, sake or mirin and soy sauce. In sh jin ry ri, vegetarian kombu dashi, made from seaweed, is used. When prepared in the usual manner, it has a spongy texture and a mildly sweet or savory flavor. The taste and flavor depend on what soup or cooking stock it was simmered in. A similar form of freeze-dried tofu, in smaller pieces, is found in instant soups (such as miso soup), in which the toppings are freeze-dried and stored in sealed pouches.
Shimidofu ( ) is mainly consumed in the Tohoku region. While Koya-dofu is made by shade-drying, shimidofu is made by sun-drying.
By-products[edit]
Tofu skin[edit]
 Tofu skin
Tofu skin is produced when soy milk is boiled in an open, shallow pan, thus producing a film or skin composed primarily of a soy protein-lipid complex on the liquid surface.[63] The films are collected and dried into yellowish sheets known as "soy milk skin" ( , f p  in Chinese;  , yuba in Japanese). Its approximate composition is 50 55% protein, 24 26% lipids (fat), 12% carbohydrate, 3% ash, and 9% moisture.[citation needed]
The skin can also be dried into a product known as "tofu bamboo" ( , f zh  in Chinese; ph  tr c in Vietnamese; kusatake, Japanese), or into many other shapes. Since tofu skin has a soft yet rubbery texture, it can be folded or shaped into different forms and cooked further to imitate meat in vegan cuisine. Some factories dedicate their production to tofu skin and other soy membrane products. Tofu skin is commonly sold in the form of dried leaves or sheets. Other people would put the "tofu bamboo" into congee (a watery rice mixture that is eaten for breakfast) so that the congee becomes more silky and smooth, and gives a whole new texture. Also, soft, fragile skin would be on the congee once it cools down.[citation needed]Tofu skin is cooked with noodles.[64]
Soy pulp[edit]
Main article: Okara (food)
Okara, from the Japanese  ( ) is known as   xu hu c i, in Chinese, lit. "snowflake vegetable";  , d ufuzh , also Chinese, lit. "tofu sediment/residue"; and  , kongbiji, in Korean).
Sometimes known in the west as "soy pulp" or "tofu lees",[65] okara is a tofu by-product consisting of the fiber, protein, and starch left over when soy milk has been extracted from ground soaked soybeans.[66] It is often used as animal feed in most tofu-producing cultures, but also has other uses in Japanese and Korean cuisines, such as in the Korean stew kongbiji jjigae ( ). It is also an ingredient for vegetarian burgers in many Western nations. In Japan, it is used to make ice cream.[67]
Tofu-like foods[edit]
The term tofu is used by extension for similarly textured curdled dishes that do not use soy products, such as "almond tofu" (almond jelly), tamago-d fu [ja] (egg), goma-d fu [ja] (sesame), or peanut tofu (Chinese   lu hu sh ng d ufu and Okinawan j m mi-d fu [ja]).
Due to their East Asian origins and their textures, many food items are called "tofu", even though their production processes are not technically similar. For instance, many sweet almond tofus are actually gelatinous desserts hardened using agar or gelatin. Some foods, such as Burmese tofu, are not coagulated from the "milk" of the legume but rather set in a manner similar to soft polenta, Korean muk, or the jidou liangfen of Yunnan province of southwest China.
Almond tofu[edit]
"Almond tofu" (Chinese:   x ngr n d ufu; Japanese: annind fu) is a milky white and gelatinous substance resembling tofu, but it does not use soy products or soy milk and is hardened with agar. A similar dessert made with coconut milk or mango juices may occasionally be referred to as "coconut tofu" or "mango tofu", although such names are also given to hot dishes that use soy tofu and coconut or mango in the recipe.
Chickpea tofu[edit]
Main article: Burmese tofu
Burmese tofu (to hpu in Burmese) is a legume product made from besan (chana dal) flour; the Shan variety uses yellow split pea flour instead. Both types are yellow in color and generally found only in Myanmar, though the Burman variety is also available in some overseas restaurants serving Burmese cuisine.[68] Burmese tofu may be fried as fritters cut into rectangular or triangular shapes.
A variety called hsan to hpu (or hsan ta hpo in Shan regions) is made from rice flour (called hsan hmont or mont hmont) and is white in color with the same consistency as yellow Burmese tofu when set. It is eaten as a salad in the same manner as yellow tofu.
Egg tofu[edit]
Egg tofu [ja] (Japanese:  ,  , tamagod fu) (Chinese:  , d nd ufu; often called  , R b n d ufu, lit. "Japan bean curd") is the main type of savory flavored tofu. Whole beaten eggs are combined with dashi, poured into molds, and cooked in a steamer (cf. chawanmushi). This tofu has a pale golden color that can be attributed to the addition of eggs and, occasionally, food coloring. This tofu has a fuller texture and flavor than silken tofu, due to the presence of egg fat and proteins. Plain "dried tofu" can be flavored by stewing in soy sauce ( ) to make soy-sauce tofu. It is common to see tofu sold from hot food stalls in this soy-sauce stewed form. Today Egg "Japanese" tofu is made of eggs, water, vegetable protein, and seasoning.[69]
Egg tofu was invented in Japan during the Edo period. The book written in 1785 recorded how to make Japanese tofu. Later the Japanese form of tofu entered Southeast Asia, being introduced to China in 1995 from Malaysia.[70][citation needed]
100 grams of Egg tofu has 17 mg calcium, 24 mg magnesium, and 5 grams protein while 100 grams tofu has 138 mg calcium, 63 mg magnesium and 12.2 grams protein. Compared with tofu, Japanese tofu's nutritional value is lower.[citation needed]
Tofu dishes common in Japan include three delicacies ( ) Japanese tofu; shrimp Japanese tofu; Japanese tofu in ketchup; teppanyaki Japanese tofu; and Japanese fish-flavored tofu.[citation needed]
Peanut tofu[edit]
In Okinawa, Japan, j m mi-d fu [ja] a peanut milk, made by crushing raw peanuts, adding water and straining, is combined with starch (usually sweet potato, known locally as umukuji or umukashi ( )) and heated until curdling occurs.
The Chinese equivalent is   lu hu sh ng d ufu.
Sesame tofu[edit]
The tofu known as goma-d fu [ja] is made by grinding sesame into a smooth paste, combining it with liquid and kudzu starch, and heating it until curdling occurs. It is often served chilled as hiyayakko.
Preparation[edit]
Tofu has very little flavor or smell of its own. Consequently, tofu can be used in both savory and sweet dishes, acting as a bland background for presenting the flavors of the other ingredients used. In order to flavor the tofu it is often marinated in soy sauce, chillis, sesame oil, etc.
In East Asian cooking, tofu is prepared in many ways, including raw, stewed, stir-fried, in soup, cooked in sauce, or stuffed with fillings. The idea of using tofu as a meat substitute is not common in East Asia.
East Asia[edit]
China[edit]
Many Chinese tofu dishes such as ji ch ng d ufu ( ) and m p  d ufu ( ) may include meat.
In Chinese cuisine, D uhu  ( ) is served with toppings such as boiled peanuts, azuki beans, cooked oatmeal, tapioca, mung beans, or a syrup flavored with ginger or almond. During the summer, "d uhu " is served with crushed ice; in the winter, it is served warm.[71]
In many parts of China, fresh tofu is eaten with soy sauce or further flavored with katsuobushi shavings, century eggs (  p d n), and sesame seed oil.
With the exception of the softest tofus, all forms of tofu can be fried. Thin and soft varieties of tofu are deep fried in oil until they are light and airy in their core   d up o,   d ufup o,   y ud ufu, or   d ub  in Chinese, literally "bean bubble", describing the shape of the fried tofu as a bubble.
Depending on the type of tofu used, the texture of deep-fried tofu may range from crispy on the outside and custardy on the inside, to puff up like a plain doughnut. The former is usually eaten plain in Chinese cuisine with garlic soy sauce, while the latter is either stuffed with fish paste to make Yong Tau Foo or cooked in soups.[71] In Taiwan, fried tofu is made into a dish called "A-gei", which consists of a fried aburage tofu package stuffed with noodles and capped with surimi.
Tofus such as firm East Asian and d ug n (Chinese dry tofu), with their lower moisture content, are cut into bite-sized cubes or triangles and deep fried until they develop a golden-brown, crispy surface (  in Chinese, zh d ufu, lit. "fried tofu"). These may be eaten on their own or with a light sauce, or further cooked in liquids; they are also added to hot pot dishes or included as part of the vegetarian dish called luohan zhai.
A spicy Sichuan preparation using firm East Asian tofu is m p  d ufu ( ). It involves braised tofu in a beef, chili, and fermented bean paste sauce. A vegetarian version is known as m l  d ufu ( ).[citation needed]
Dried tofu is usually not eaten raw but first stewed in a mixture of soy sauce and spices.[citation needed] Some types of dried tofu are pre-seasoned with special blends of spices, so that the tofu may either be called "five-spice tofu" (  w xi ng d ufu) or "soy sauce stewed tofu" (  l shu  d ufu). Dried tofu is typically served thinly sliced with chopped green onions or with slices of meat for added flavor.[71]
Tofu bamboos are often used in lamb stew or in a dessert soup. Tofu skins are often used as wrappers in dim sum.[citation needed] Freeze-dried tofu and frozen tofu are rehydrated and enjoyed in savory soups. These products are often taken along on camping trips since a small bag of them can provide protein for many days.[citation needed]
Pickled tofu is commonly used in small amounts together with its soaking liquid to flavor stir-fried or braised vegetable dishes (particularly leafy green vegetables such as water spinach). It is often eaten directly as a condiment with rice or congee.
Chinese soft tofu dish, pidan doufu
Prepared dried tofu threads ( , g ns 
Ch ud ufu is a very pungent type of tofu
Sichuan-style (m l  ch ud ufu) numbing spicy stinky tofu
Tofu and potatoes grilled at a street stall in Yuanyang, Yunnan province, China
Douhua ( ), is a soft tofu dish.  The fresh tofu is served warm and dressed with sweet syrup.
A dish prepared from Sichuan-style tofu
Japan[edit]
 Tofu varieties sold at a shop
In Japan, a common lunch in the summer months is hiyayakko ( ), silken or firm East Asian tofu served with freshly grated ginger, green onions, or katsuobushi shavings with soy sauce. In the winter, tofu is frequently eaten as yudofu, which is simmered in a clay pot in kombu dashi, with vegetables such as Chinese cabbage or green onion.
Deep fried tofu is called atsuage ( ) or namaage ( ) in Japan. The thinner variety called aburaage ( ), develops a tofu pouch often used for inarizushi.
In Japan, cubes of lightly coated and fried tofu topped with a kombu dashi-based sauce are called agedashi d fu ( ). Soft tofu that has been thinly sliced and deep fried, known as aburage in Japan, is commonly blanched, seasoned with soy sauce and mirin and served in dishes such as kitsune udon.
In Gifu Prefecture, there is a local specialty called komo-dofu, which consists of tofu that has been wrapped in a komo, or mat of woven straw, which leaves its imprint on the exterior. The wrapped tofu is then boiled in soup stock. Voids within the tofu develop during the boiling process, allowing the soup stock flavor to penetrate and giving it a distinctive porous appearance.[72][73]
Soft tofu can also be broken up or mashed and mixed with raw ingredients prior to being cooked. For example, Japanese ganmodoki is a mixture of chopped vegetables and mashed tofu. The mixture is bound together with starch and deep-fried. Chinese families sometimes make a steamed meatloaf or meatball dish from equal parts of coarsely mashed tofu and ground pork.[citation needed]
Japanese miso soup is frequently made with tofu.
Japanese-style silken tofu with soy sauce and a decorative carrot slice
Atsuage, thick fried tofu
Goma tofu, made from sesame seeds and kudzu starch
Yudofu, or tofu in hot water
Inarizushi, tofu skin with various fillings
Tofu in miso soup
Ganmodoki ( )
Local specialty komo-dofu on sale in a market in Takayama
Korea[edit]
Dubu plays an important part in Korean cuisine.[74] Tofu is often pan-fried and served as banchan with a dipping sauce.[75] It is also used in many soups. Cubes of firm tofu can be seasoned with soy sauce, garlic, and other ingredients before pan-frying. A dish of tofu cubes simmered with similar spicy seasoning is called dubu-jorim.[76] Dubu-kimchi features blanched tofu served in rectangular slices around the edges of a plate with pan-fried kimchi. This is a popular food to accompany alcoholic drinks (anju).[77] Soft, unpressed sun-dubu is used as the main ingredient of sundubu-jjigae (soft tofu stew),[78] while other soups and stews such as doenjang-guk (soybean paste soup), doenjang-jjigae (soybean paste stew), and kimchi-jjigae (kimchi stew) tend to have diced firm tofu in them. As in many other East Asian countries, tofu is also enjoyed in a hot pot dish called dubu-jeongol (tofu hot pot).
Pan-fried tofu served with seasoned soy sauce for dipping
Dubu-kimchi (blanched tofu served with stir-fried kimchi)
Boiled sun-dubu (extra soft tofu) served in ttukbaegi
Sundubu-jjigae (spicy soft tofu stew)
Dallae-doenjang-guk (soybean paste soup with wild chives and tofu)
Chilled tofu served with soy sauce seasonings
Crumbled tofu and mashed broccoli salad
Southeast Asia[edit]
Indonesia[edit]
In Indonesia, tofu is called tahu, a loanword from the Hokkien Chinese pronunciation of tofu (t u-h ,  ). In Indonesian markets, tofu is usually available in two forms: tahu putih or common white firm tofu; and tahu goreng or fried tofu that has developed a brown skin. Tahu yun yi or tahu Bandung is yellow tofu colored with turmeric.
A common cooking technique in many parts of East and Southeast Asia involves deep frying tofu in vegetable oil, sunflower oil, or canola oil. In Indonesia, it is usually fried in palm oil. Although pre-fried tofu is often sold cold, it is seldom eaten directly and requires additional cooking.
Popular Indonesian tofu dishes includes tahu gejrot and kupat tahu. Tahu gejrot is tahu pong type of hollow fried tofu cut into small pieces, served with a thin, watery dressing made by blending palm sugar, vinegar, and sweet soy sauce, garnished with chili pepper, garlic, and shallot.  Kupat tahu is slices of tofu served with ketupat rice cake, usually in peanut sauce dressing. Slices of tofu usually mixed in gado-gado, ketoprak and siomay.
Bacem is a method of cooking tofu originating in Central Java. The tofu is boiled in coconut water, mixed with lengkuas (galangal), Indonesian bay leaves, coriander, shallot, garlic, tamarind and palm sugar. After the spicy coconut water has completely evaporated, the tofu is fried until it is golden brown. The result is moist but rather firm, sweet, and spicy tofu. This cooked tofu variant is commonly known as tahu bacem in Indonesian. Tahu bacem is commonly prepared along with tempeh and chicken.
Tahu putih (firm white tofu)
Tahu goreng (fried tofu) has its brown skin
Tahu sumedang with bird's eye chili
Tahu gejrot with thin light spicy sauce
Yellow tofu (tofu colored with turmeric) on top of laksa
Tahu bacem, tofu simmered in palm sugar and spices
Kembang tahu, served in sweet ginger syrup
Perkedel tahu goreng (Dutch-Indonesian food based on tofu and Dutch cooking technique) Frikadeller
Tahu isi, Indonesian fried tofu filled with vegetable, shrimp, or chicken served with bird eye chili and sweet shrimp paste
Tahu telor or Tahu tek, omelette tofu served with vegetable, krupuk, peanut sauce, shrimp paste, sweet soy sauce, and sambal
Kupat tahu, tofu served with rice cake, noodles and sweet soy sauce
Tahu campur, tofu soup with beef and tendon served in broth, soy sauce, shrimp paste, vegetable, krupuk and sambal
Tahu bakso or batagor, literally bakso (meatball), tahu (tofu), goreng (fried). Fried tofu filled with fish, tapioca starch, or meat.
Tahu tuna. fried tofu filled with grounded tuna. a delicacy from pacitan, East java.
Tahu gimbal. a tofu dish with peanut sauce and gimbal (shrimp fritter) from Semarang.
Tahu petis. fried tofu filled with petis (black colored shrimp paste sauce). Originated from Semarang, Central Java.
Tahu aci. fried tofu stuffed with tapioca starch. Originated from Tegal, Central Java.
Philippines[edit]
In the Philippines, the sweet delicacy taho is made of fresh tofu with brown sugar syrup and sago. The Malaysian and Singaporean version of taho or douhua is called tofufa or taufufa. Warm soft tofu is served in slices (created by scooping it from a wooden bucket with a flat spoon) in a bowl with either pandan-flavored sugar syrup or palm sugar syrup.
A cup of taho
Vietnam[edit]
In Vietnam, d uhu , pronounced t o ph , ph , t o ph ,  c  u, t u h / u h  n c  ng,  u hoa, and  u pha is a variety of soft tofu made and carried around in an earthenware jar. It is served by being scooped into a bowl with a very shallow and flat spoon, and it is eaten hot together with either powdered sugar and lime juice or ginger-flavored syrup.
Another popular dish with tofu would be b n  u m m t m which is a dish with rice noodles served with tofu and shrimp paste.
B n  u m m t m
Myanmar[edit]
Main article: Burmese tofu
Elsewhere[edit]
Generally, the firmer styles of tofu are used for kebabs, mock meats, and dishes requiring a consistency that holds together, while the softer styles can be used for desserts, soups, shakes, and sauces.
Some people enjoy tofu made and prepared with chocolate and making it into pies and mousse along with other tofu desserts.
This came about due to vegans and vegetarians avoiding the usage of items such as milk and eggs.
Firm Western tofu types can be barbecued since they hold together on a barbecue grill. These types are usually marinated overnight as the marinade does not easily penetrate the entire block of tofu. (Techniques to increase the penetration of marinades include stabbing repeatedly with a fork or freezing and thawing prior to marinating.) Grated firm Western tofu is sometimes used in conjunction with textured vegetable protein (TVP) as a meat substitute. Softer tofus are sometimes used as a dairy-free or low-calorie filler. Silken tofu may be used to replace cheese in certain dishes, such as lasagna.[79] Tofu has also been fused into other cuisines in the West, for instance in Indian-style curries.
Tofu and soy protein can be industrially processed to match the textures and flavors of cheese, pudding, eggs, bacon, and similar products. Tofu's texture can also be altered by freezing, pur eing, and cooking. In the Americas, Europe, Australia and New Zealand, tofu is frequently associated with vegetarianism and veganism, as it is a source of non-animal protein.
In India tofu is used as a low-fat replacement for paneer, providing the same texture with a similar taste.[80]
Nutrition and health[edit]
Tofu (soft, typical)Nutritional value per 100 g (3.5 oz)Energy291 kJ (70 kcal)Carbohydrates1.5 g
Fat3.5 gSaturated0.5 g
Protein8 g
MineralsQuantity %DV Calcium13% 130 mgIron8% 1.10 mgSodium0% 4 mg
This sample is relatively rich in calcium due to the coagulant. Values for other varieties may be significantly lower.
Units
 g = micrograms  mg = milligrams
IU = International units
 Percentages are roughly approximated using US recommendations for adults. Source: USDA FoodData Central
Protein[edit]
Tofu is relatively high in protein, about 10.7% for firm tofu and 5.3% for soft "silken" tofu, with about 5% and 2% fat respectively,[81] as mass fraction.[82] Most of tofu mass is water, typically between 76% and 91%.[83]
Allergies[edit]
Because it is made of soy, individuals with allergies to legumes should not consume tofu.
Traditional Chinese medicine claims[edit]
Tofu is considered a cooling agent in traditional Chinese medicine. It is claimed to invigorate the spleen, replenish qi, moisten and cool off yang vacuity, and detoxify the body.[84] However, there is no scientific evidence supporting such claims, nor their implied notions.
Chemistry[edit]
Tofu is made from soy milk which is a turbid colloid liquid/solution. Tofu structure is related to soy milk components, particularly colloid components such as protein particles and oil globules. Protein particle content increases with the increase of the globulin ratio in the soybeans. Tofu varieties ensue from adding coagulants at various concentrations.[85]
Proteins[edit]
The two main components of the soybean important in tofu making are the 11S component, containing glycinin, and the 7S subunit, containing hemagglutinins, lipoxygenases, b-amylase, and  -conglycinin. The major soy protein components, in the two fractions that make up 65 85% of the proteins in soybeans, include glycinin and  -conglycinin. The soybean protein consists of many different subunits, which are sensitive to heat, pH, and ionic strength and become unevenly distributed among soluble and particulate fractions due to hydrophilic and hydrophobic interaction because of the amino acid composition.[9]: 73 
See also[edit]
Tempeh
Oncom
Seitan
Douhua
Buddhist cuisine
List of tofu dishes
List of soy-based foods
Vegetarian cuisine
Veganism
Los Angeles Tofu Festival
Portal: Food
Notes[edit]
^ The Hwang Ryh Shang Company of Taiwan, a major producer of pickled tofu, mislabels this ingredient as "red date" (jujube) on the English-language list of ingredients on its product labels, although the Chinese list of ingredients on the same product lists   (literally "red lees", i.e. red yeast rice). 
References[edit]
^ Du Bois (2008), pp. 13 14.
^ a b "History of tofu". Soya.be. 29 November 2015. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ "What is Tofu? What's the Best Way to Cook It?". devour.asia. Archived from the original on 10 April 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ American Heritage Dictionary.
^ Etymology, Tofu Magazine, archived from the original on 12 December 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ tofu, dictionary.com, archived from the original on 29 April 2010, retrieved 26 September 2009
^ a b c d Wilkinson (2015), p. 445.
^ "History of tofu". Soya.be. Retrieved 24 March 2023.
^ a b c d e f Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2013)
^ Davis, J. F. (1 January 1853). "Chusan, with a Survey Map of the Island". The Journal of the Royal Geographical Society of London. 23: 242 264. doi:10.2307/1797967. JSTOR 1797967.
^ Chronologies of Soy Foods, 2001, archived from the original on 2 June 2019, retrieved 12 December 2009
^ a b Shimbo, Hiroko (2001), The Japanese kitchen: 250 recipes in a traditional spirit, Harvard Common Press, p. 133, ISBN 978-1-55832-177-9
^ Dougill, John (2006), Kyoto: a cultural history, Oxford University Press US, p. 223, ISBN 978-0-19-530137-3, archived from the original on 20 September 2020, retrieved 12 May 2020
^ Shurtleff & Aoyagi (1998), p. 93.
^ Liu (2012), p. 137.
^ Needham, Vol 6 Part 5 Chapter 40, section d.2.
^ a b c d Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2004d).
^ Needham, Vol 6 Part 5 Chapter 40, pp. 306 307.
^ "    |  ". www.maff.go.jp. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021.
^ a b " ". www.tofu-as.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021.
^ " ". www.city.kochi.kochi.jp. Archived from the original on 29 March 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021.
^ A taste of Japan, Donald Richie, Kodansha, 2001, ISBN 4-7700-1707-3
^ " ". www.tofu-as.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021.
^ "From Benjamin Franklin to John Bartram, 11 January 1770". Founders Online. National Archives. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. I think we have Garavances with us; but I know not whether they are the same with these, which actually came from China, and are what the Tau-fu is made of.
^ "History, Travel, Arts, Science, People, Places | Smithsonian". Smithsonianmag.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ "Chronology of Tofu Worldwide". Soyinfocenter.com. Archived from the original on 2 June 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2013).
^ a b Hou, H.J.; Chang, K.C.; Shih, M.C. (1 July 1997). "Yield and Textural Properties of Soft Tofu as Affected by Coagulation Method". Journal of Food Science. 62 (4): 824 827. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1997.tb15464.x.
^ Saowapark, Suteera; Apichartsrangkoon, Arunee; Bell, Alan E. (1 April 2008). "Viscoelastic properties of high pressure and heat-induced tofu gels". Food Chemistry. 107 (3): 984 989. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.08.091.
^ Kohyama, Kaoru; Sano, Yoh; Doi, Etsushiro (1995). "Rheological Characteristics and Gelation Mechanism of Tofu (Soybean Curd)". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 43 (7): 1808 1812. doi:10.1021/jf00055a011. ISSN 0021-8561.
^ Hsia, Sheng-Yang; Hsiao, Yu-Hsuan; Li, Wen-Tai; Hsieh, Jung-Feng (2016). "Aggregation of soy protein-isoflavone complexes and gel formation induced by glucono- -lactone in soymilk". Scientific Reports. 6 (1): 35718. Bibcode:2016NatSR...635718H. doi:10.1038/srep35718. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 5071761. PMID 27760990.
^ a b "Technology of production of edible flours and protein products from soybeans. Chapter 9". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ Liu (2012), p. [page needed].
^ "[Homestead] Making tofu". Lists.ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ a b Guo & Ono (2005).
^ Salami. Elsevier. 2016. doi:10.1016/c2015-0-06154-8. ISBN 978-0-12-809598-0. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
^ Kuipers, Bas (2007). Aggregation of peptides in soy protein isolate hydrolysates: the individual contributions of glycinin- and beta-conglycinin-derived peptides. Wageningen. ISBN 978-90-8504-609-7. OCLC 146156585.
^ "How Tofu Is Processed". www.ift.org. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
^ "Make Your Own Tofu". Chowhound. 3 April 2008. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ Zhong, Fang; Wang, Zhang; Xu, Shi-Ying; Shoemaker, Charles F. (2007). "The evaluation of proteases as coagulants for soy protein dispersions". Food Chemistry. 100 (4): 1371. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2005.12.014.
^ Zhong, Fang; Yang, Xin; Li, Yue; Shoemaker, Charles F. (2006). "Papain-induced Gelation of Soy Glycinin (11S)". Journal of Food Science. 71 (5): E232. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3841.2006.00037.x.
^ a b c d Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2000).
^ "Transforming Soybeans to Improve Tofu". hort.purdue.edu. Archived from the original on 20 June 2015. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
^ US expired 7169425B2, Ruppe, Scott; Busch, Theodore C. & Smith, Houston, "Size exclusion chromatography process for the preparation of an improved soy protein-containing composition", published 2007-01-30,  assigned to Solae LLC  "Size exclusion chromatography process for the preparation of an improved soy protein-containing composition". 30 January 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
^ Maltais, Anne; Remondetto, Gabriel E.; Gonzalez, Rolando; Subirade, Muriel (2005). "Formation of Soy Protein Isolate Cold-set Gels: Protein and Salt Effects". Journal of Food Science. 70: C67 C73. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2005.tb09023.x.
^ Julia Moskin (5 January 2005), "Artisanal, Creamy ... Tofu?", The New York Times, archived from the original on 12 October 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ New tofu production method, FoodProductionDaily, archived from the original on 14 October 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ Deep Seawater Business To Develop Local Economies, Japan for sustainability, archived from the original on 27 September 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ Chodang Bean Curd Village, Gangneung-city Tour, archived from the original on 12 December 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ Chodang Sundubu (watery tofu) Village, Tour2Korea, archived from the original on 12 October 2007, retrieved 5 January 2008
^ (in English) Donghae Sundubu Archived 2013-01-20 at the Wayback Machine, visitkorea. Accessed on May 1st, 2010.
^ Kim Joo-young (Summer 1997). "Ch'odang Village in Kangnung" (PDF). Koreana. 11 (2). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
^ (in Korean) " -  (- )". Standard Korean Language Dictionary. National Institute of Korean Language. Archived from the original on 26 February 2017. Retrieved 26 February 2017.
^ All About Silken Tofu: An Interview with Andrea Nguyen, 16 May 2012, archived from the original on 21 November 2012, retrieved 17 October 2012
^ Types of Tofu: What is Silken Tofu?, Morinaga, archived from the original on 22 July 2013, retrieved 17 October 2012
^ Jolinda Hackett, What's the difference between silken and regular tofu?, archived from the original on 14 November 2012, retrieved 17 October 2012
^ Sung, Esther. "Our Favorite Tofu Recipes". Epicurious.com. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ A photo, 11 February 2007, archived from the original on 8 January 2017, retrieved 20 January 2017
^ a b c Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2004e).
^ Gandhi, A. P.; Bourne, M. C. (August 1988). "Effect of Pressure and Storage Time on Texture Profile Parameters of Soybean Curd (tofu)". Journal of Texture Studies. 19 (2): 137 142. doi:10.1111/j.1745-4603.1988.tb00930.x. ISSN 1745-4603.
^ Xu, Yangzi; Tao, Yukun; Shivkumar, Satya (December 2016). "Effect of freeze-thaw treatment on the structure and texture of soft and firm tofu". Journal of Food Engineering. 190: 116 122. doi:10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2016.06.022.
^ "An Accidental Discovery: Freeze-Dried Tofu", Mitoku Company Website, Mitoku Ltd, archived from the original on 20 December 2010, retrieved 29 April 2011
^ Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2004). "History of Yuba". History of Soybeans and Soyfoods: 1100 B.C. to the 1980s. Soyinfo Center. Archived from the original on 16 July 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021.
^ "Chichi's Chinese: Tofu Skin 'Noodles' and Rolls". Tofu skin noodles. 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2021.
^ Shurtleff & Aoyagi (1998), p. 22.
^ Shurtleff & Aoyagi (1998), p. 79.
^ Tsutsui, S. "Awareness about 'okara' and the preference for ice cream with 'okara' added to it". FAO. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2019.
^ Burmese tofu recipe, archived from the original on 26 March 2006, retrieved 16 February 2006
^   (20 October 2016). " ".  .[verification needed]
^ Manp  ry ri himitsubako.  . 1989. ISBN 978-4315508710.
^ a b c Shurtleff & Aoyagi (2005).
^ "Tofu (bean curd)". Japanese-English Bilingual Corpus of Wikipedia's Kyoto Articles. National Institute of Information and Communications Technology. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ "Komo dofu (tofu)". The Best of Gifu. Division of Agricultural Products and Logistics, Department of Agriculture, Gifu Prefecture. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021.
^ Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2004). "History of Tofu 'HISTORY OF TOFU IN SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA'". History of Soybeans and Soyfoods: 1100 B.C. to the 1980s. Soyinfo Center. p. 3. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
^ (in Korean)    ( ) Archived 2018-01-05 at the Wayback Machine, musoenara. Accessed on May 14, 2010.
^ (in English) Dubu Jorim Archived 2018-02-17 at the Wayback Machine,mykoreandiet. Accessed on May 12, 2010.
^ (in English) Dubu Kimchi Archived 2016-03-14 at the Wayback Machine, mykoreankitchen. Accessed on May 12, 2010.
^ (in English) Spicy Korean Soft Tofu Stew (Soondubuchigae) Archived 2017-02-13 at the Wayback Machine, koreanfood. Accessed on May 12, 2010.
^ "Oregon Live". 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018.
^ "Times of India". Archived from the original on 20 June 2018.
^ "tofu Nutrition Information in Legumes and Legume Products". Nutritiondata.self.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016.
^ Ang, Liu & Huang (1999), p. [page needed].
^ T. D. Kai and C. G. Chang, "Dry Tofu Characteristics Affected by Soymilk Solid Content and Coagulation Time", North Dakota State University, 1996.
^ "Chinese Medicine Encyclopedia   Tofu". 2009. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2015.
^ K Saio, M Kamiya, T Watanabe. "Food processing characteristics of soybean 11S and 7S proteins. Part I. Effect of difference of protein components among soybean varieties on formation of tofu-gel". Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 33 (1969), pp. 1301 1308
Sources[edit]
Anderson, J. W.; Johnstone, B.M.; Cook-Newell, M.E. (1995), "Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Soy Protein Intake on Serum Lipids", New England Journal of Medicine, 333 (5): 276 282, doi:10.1056/NEJM199508033330502, PMID 7596371
Ang, Catharina Y. W.; Liu, KeShun; Huang, Yao-Wen, eds. (1999), Asian Foods: Science & Technology, Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Technomic Publishing Co., archived from the original on 17 January 2006, retrieved 8 January 2006
Du Bois, Christine M., Chee Beng Tan and Sidney Wilfred Mintz (2008). The World of Soy. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-03341-4. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2015.
Guo, Shun-Tang; Ono, Tomotada (2005). "The Role of Composition and Content of Protein Particles in Soymilk on Tofu Curding by Glucono- -lactone or Calcium Sulfate". Journal of Food Science. 70 (4): 258 262. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2005.tb07170.x..
Liu, KeShun (2012). Soybeans: Chemistry, Technology and Utilization. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4615-1763-4. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2021.
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilisation in China. Cambridge University Press.
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (1998), The book of tofu: protein source of the future-- now!, Ten Speed Press, ISBN 978-1-58008-013-2, archived from the original on 13 January 2023, retrieved 12 May 2020.
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2000). Tofu & soymilk production: a craft and technical manual (3rd ed.). Lafayette, California: Soyfoods Center. ISBN 978-1-928914-04-4. Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2020.
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2004d). "Chapter 36: History of Tofu". History of Soybeans and Soyfoods: 1100 B.C. to the 1980s, Volume IV, The History of Traditional Non-Fermented Soyfoods. Soyinfo Center. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 16 June 2007.
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2004e). "Chapter 44: History of Fermented Tofu (to Nov. 1985)". History of Soybeans and Soyfoods: 1100 B.C. to the 1980s, Volume V, The History of Traditional Fermented Soyfoods. Soyinfo Center. Archived from the original on 11 November 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2008.
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2005), Dou fu zhi shu (The book of tofu), Taibei Shi, ISBN 978-986-81319-1-0. (In Chinese.)
Shurtleff, William; Aoyagi, Akiko (2013), History of Tofu and Tofu Products (965 CE to 2013), Lafayette, California: Soyinfo Center, ISBN 978-1-928914-55-6, archived from the original on 3 September 2013, retrieved 21 June 2013.
Wilkinson, Endymion (2015). Chinese History: A New Manual (4th ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN 978-0-674-08846-7.
Further reading[edit]
Berk, Zeki (1992), Technology of production of edible flours and protein products from soybeans, FAO agricultural services bulletin, vol. 97, Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, ISBN 978-92-5-103118-6.
Knopper, Melissa. (Jan 2002), The joy of soy, The Rotarian, Vol. 180, No. 1, p. 16, ISSN 0035-838X
White, L. R.; Petrovitch, H.; Ross, G. W.; Masaki, K.; Hardman, J.; Nelson, J.; Davis, D.; Markesbery, W. (1 April 2000), "Brain aging and midlife tofu consumption", Journal of the American College of Nutrition, 19 (2): 242 255, doi:10.1080/07315724.2000.10718923, PMID 10763906, S2CID 15343026, archived from the original on 23 July 2008.
External links[edit]
Tofu  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsRecipes from WikibooksData from Wikidata
The Oxford companion to food Alan Davidson, Tom Jaine
vteJapanese food and drinkMain dishes
Bento
Ekiben
J bako
Kyaraben
Makunouchi
Wappameshi
Chahan
Curry
Katsu curry
Donburi
Ch kadon
Katsudon
Oyakodon
Tekkadon
Tenshindon
Unadon
Gy za
Gy don
Hayashi rice
Hirayachi
Hiyamugi
Kakuni
Karaage
Kushikatsu
Monjayaki
Nabemono
Nikujaga
Noodles
Harusame saifun
Ramen
Champon
Hiyashi ch ka
Kagoshima
Muroran curry
Tonkotsu
Tsukemen
Soba
Okinawa soba
Yakisoba
S men
Salad
Udon
H t 
Yakiudon
Oden
Okonomiyaki
Okowa
Omurice
Onigiri
Tenmusu
Onsen tamago
Osechi
Rice
Glutinous
Hatsuga genmai
Kayu
Sekihan
Takikomi
Zosui
Sashimi
Fugu
Shabu-shabu
Shirataki
Soki
Sukiyaki
Sushi
History
Sustainable
Takoyaki
Tamagoyaki
Tempura
Tokoroten
Tonkatsu
Tsukudani
Tsukune
Yakiniku
Yakitori
Side dishes
Agedashi d fu
Bread
Anpan
Curry
Melonpan
Yudane
Gari
Korokke
Miso soup
Namasu
Natt 
Nukazuke
Okazu
Satsuma-age
Shiokara
Takuan
Tsukemono
Beverages
Aquarius
Calpis
Canned coffee
Boss
Georgia
Genmaicha
Mugicha
Lipovitan
Oronamin C
Pocari Sweat
Ramune
Sake
Amazake
Nigori
Toso
Sh ch 
Awamori
Habushu
Tea
History
Bancha
Green
Gyokuro
H jicha
Kabuse
Kukicha
Matcha
Sencha
Yakult
Snacks /desserts
Amanatt 
Botan Rice Candy
Daifuku
Dango
Chichi
Kibi
Dorayaki
Karukan
Konpeit 
Kuzumochi
Manj 
Mochi
Agemochi
Goheimochi
Uir 
Senbei
Arare
Shiruko
Taiyaki
Wagashi
Warabimochi
Y kan
Ingredients /condiments
Anko
Aonori
Bamboo shoot
Beni sh ga
Burdock
Daikon
Sakurajima
Dashi
Fish
Kamaboko
Mentaiko / tarako
Surimi
Tobiko
Hijiki
Kanzuri
Karashi
Katsuobushi
Kombu
Konnyaku
Kuromitsu
Kuzuko
Mayonnaise
Menma
Mirin
Miso
MSG
Mushrooms
Enokitake
Matsutake
Shiitake
Myoga
Nori
Sake kasu
Panko
Sansy 
Sauce
Ponzu
Soy
Tare
Tonkatsu
Worcestershire
Sesame oil
Shichimi
Tenkasu
Tofu
Umeboshi
Wasabi
Yuzu
Yuzu kosh 
Utensils
Rice cooker
Knives
Deba b ch 
Gyuto
Kitchen
Maguro b ch 
Nakiri b ch 
Santoku
Sashimi b ch 
Usuba b ch 
Yanagi ba
Shamoji
Suribachi
Zaru
Lists
Condiments
Desserts and sweets
Dishes
Ramen
Soups and stews
Snacks
Sushi and sashimi ingredients
Related
Chinmi
Kaiseki
Omakase
Teppanyaki
Tokusanhin
Teriyaki
Umami
Customs and etiquette
Okinawan cuisine
 Category
vteHuman nutrition and healthy diets
Main articles
Diet
Cuisine
Dietitian
Hunger
Leptin
Meal
Nutrition
Obesity
Staple food
DietingBasic types
Omnivore
Plant-based
Regional diets
Western
Mediterranean
Sustainable diets
Low carbon
Planetary health
Religious diets
Buddhist
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jain
Jewish
Rastafari
Sikh
Vegetarianismand veganism
Fruitarianism
Meat analogue
Milk substitute
Raw vegan
Tofu
Semi-vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Pescetarian
Pollotarian
Supplement diets
Bodybuilding supplements
Meal replacement
Therapeutic food
Non-solid diets
Liquid diets
Very-low-calorie diet
Specific restrictions
Calorie restriction
Cardiac diet
Diabetic diet
Fluid restriction diet
Gluten-free
Gluten-free and casein-free
Intermittent fasting
Low-sodium
Low-FODMAP
Low-carbohydrate
Low-fat
Low-fiber/low-residue diet
Monotrophic diet
NPO
Renal diet
Soft diet
Specific carbohydrate
Other diets
Entomophagy
Cotton ball
Pica
DASH
Inuit
MIND
Time-restricted feeding
Raw foodism
U.S. military
Fad diets
Cambridge
Macrobiotic
Master Cleanse
Junk food
Superfood
Slow-Carb
List of diets
Diet food
NutritionAmino acids
Alanine
Arginine
Asparagine
Aspartic acid
Cysteine
Glutamic acid
Glutamine
Glycine
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Proline
Selenocysteine
Serine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Valine
Vitamins
Vitamin A
Vitamin B1
Vitamin B2
Vitamin B3
Vitamin B5
Vitamin B6
Vitamin B7
Vitamin B9
Vitamin B12
Vitamin C
Vitamin D
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Minerals
Calcium
Chlorine
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Iodine
Iron
Magnesium
Manganese
Molybdenum
Nickel
Phosphorus
Potassium
Selenium
Sodium
Vanadium
Zinc
Nutritional advice
5 A Day
Dairy Council of California
Food pyramid
Fruits & Veggies   More Matters
Healthy eating pyramid
Latin American Diet Pyramid
French paradox
Mediterranean Diet Pyramid
MyPlate
MyPyramid
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 Food portal, Health and fitness portal
vteSoy (Glycine max)General
Soy allergy
Soy candle
Soy ink
Soy molasses
Soy paint
Soy protein
Soybean
Diseases
Soybean meal
Soybean oil
Soy-baseddishes
List of soy-based foods
Aburaage
Agedashi tofu
Bai ye
Douhua
Dubu kimchi
Edamame
Hiyayakko
Kongguksu
Kongnamul
Mapo doufu
Miso soup
Sundubu jjigae
Tahu goreng
Tofu skin roll
Yong tau foo
Plant milk
Soy milk
Soy yogurt
Vegan cheese
Meat analogues
Beanfeast
Tempeh
Textured vegetable protein
Tofu
Tofurkey
Vegetarian hot dog
Veggie burger
Sauces andcondimentsSoy sauce based
Ganjang
Ponzu
Sweet soy sauce
Tamari
Teriyaki
Tsuyu
Y n y u
Pastes
Doenjang
Doubanjiang
Miso
Sweet bean sauce
Yellow soybean paste
T ng
Fermented bean
Akhuni
Fermented bean curd
Douchi
Kinema
Tauco
Natt 
Other foods
Mamenori
Oncom
Soy flour
Soy milk based infant formula
Soy nut
Soy pulp
Stinky tofu
Tofu skin
List of fermented soy products
BiochemicalsPhytoestrogens
Genistein
Genistin
Glycitein
Glycitin
Ononin
Daidzein
Equol (metabolite)
O-DMA (metabolite)
Daidzin (leaves)
Globulins (proteins)
Beta-conglycinin
Glycinin
PHAs (Lectins)
Soybean agglutinin (lectin)
Enzymes
Beta-amylase
Lipoxygenase
Cysteine proteases
Trypsin inhibitors
Kunitz inhibitor
Bowman-Birk inhibitor
Other
Soy lecithin (mix of Phospholipids)
Lunasin
Unsaponifiables
Tocopherols
Sterols
Antinutrients
Phytates
Protease Inhibitors
Cystatins
Companies
8th Continent
Alpro
Boca Burger
Gardenburger
Kikkoman
Morningstar Farms
Mr Bean
Plamil Foods
Silk
So Good
Tofutti
Vitasoy
Yamasa
Yeo Hiap Seng
Other
Diet for a Small Planet
Kikkoman Soy Sauce Museum
William Shurtleff and Akiko Aoyagi
Yuasa, artisan town of historic soy sauce distilleries
 Category: Soybeans
vteVeganism and vegetarianismPerspectivesVeganism
Animal-free agriculture
Black veganism
Fruitarianism
History
Raw veganism
Straight edge
Hardline
Nutrition
Vegan organic agriculture
Vegan school meal
Vegan studies
Vegetarianism
Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Orthopathy
Lacto vegetarianism
Lacto-ovo vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country
Lists
Vegetarians
Vegans
Fictional characters
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants
List of vegan media
EthicsSecular
Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Replaceability argument
Sentientism
Speciesism
Tirukku a 
Religious
Buddhism
Christianity (Seventh-day Adventist Church)
Hinduism
Sattvic
Ahimsa
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagoreanism
Rastafari
Sikhism
Taoism
Foodand drink
Agave nectar
Chicken fillet roll
Coconut burger
Coconut milk
Fruits
Grains
cereals
legumes
Gelatin substitutes
Agar
Carrageenan
Gulaman
Konjac jelly
Microbial cellulose
Jambon
Meat analogue
List of meat substitutes
Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Vegepet
Vegetables
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Sausage roll
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger
Groupsand eventsVegan
American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme
Our Hen House
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganmania
Veganuary
Veganz
World Vegan Day
Vegetarian
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
French Vegetarian Society
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Meat-free days
Meatless Monday
Friday Fast
North American Vegetarian Society
Order of the Golden Age
ProVeg Deutschland
ProVeg International
ProVeg Nederland
Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Federal Union
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day
Companies
List of vegetarian and vegan companies
Books,reports, journals
An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802)
Vegetable Cookery (1812)
A Vindication of Natural Diet (1813)
Reasons for not Eating Animal Food (1814)
Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824)
Nature's Own Book (1835)
Fruits and Farinacea (1845)
The Pleasure Boat (1845)
The Ethics of Diet (1883)
What is Vegetarianism? (1886)
Shelley's Vegetarianism (1891)
Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses (1892)
Why I Am a Vegetarian (1895)
Figs or Pigs? (1896)
Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Meat Fetish (1904)
The New Ethics (1907)
A Fleshless Diet (1910)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Ten Talents (1968)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
The Vegetarian Epicure (1972)
Moosewood Collective Cookbooks (1973)
The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook (1975)
Laurel's Kitchen (1976)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The Sexual Politics of Meat (1990)
Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone (1997)
The China Study (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
The Bloodless Revolution (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
The Vegan Studies Project (2015)
Animal (De)liberation (2016)
The End of Animal Farming (2018)
Vegetable Kingdom (2020)
Meat Atlas (annual)
Films
The Animals Film (1981)
A Cow at My Table (1998)
Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)
Dominion (2018)
Eating You Alive (2018)
The Game Changers (2018)
Magazines
Naked Food
Satya
Vegetarian Times
VegNews
The Animals' Agenda
Academics, authors, physiciansContemporary
Elisa Aaltola
Carol J. Adams
Suzanne M. Babich
Martin Balluch
Neal D. Barnard
Geoffrey Barstow
David Benatar
Steven Best
Yves Bonnardel
Will Bonsall
Will Bulsiewicz
T. Colin Campbell
Garth Davis
Jan Deckers
Alan Desmond
Daniel Dombrowski
Sue Donaldson
Mylan Engel
Gidon Eshel
Caldwell Esselstyn
Michael Allen Fox
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Kristi Funk
Greta Gaard
Val ry Giroux
Michael Greger
A. Breeze Harper
Oscar Horta
Michael Huemer
Melanie Joy
Joel Kahn
Michael Klaper
Aph Ko
Renan Larue
Thomas Lepeltier
Andrew Linzey
Clair Linzey
Howard Lyman
Reed Mangels
John A. McDougall
James E. McWilliams
Vesanto Melina
Gemma Newman
David Nibert
Jack Norris
David Olivier
Dean Ornish
David Pearce
Tom Regan
Richard H. Schwartz
J r me Segal
Peter Singer
William O. Stephens
David Sztybel
Ian Theasby
Kim A. Williams
Corey Lee Wrenn
Laura Wright
Tzachi Zamir
Historical
William Alcott
Bertrand P. Allinson
Thomas Allinson
Charles R. Attwood
William Axon
Eduard Baltzer
Horace A. Barrows
Sidney H. Beard
George Bedborough
Ernest Bell
Robert Bell
Ragnar Berg
Rynn Berry
Maximilian Bircher-Benner
George Black
Ernest Bonnejoy
Lucius Duncan Bulkley
J. L. Buttner
Paul Carton
Job Caudwell
George Cheyne
Henry S. Clubb
Antonio Cocchi
Lenna F. Cooper
Charles W. Forward
Mahatma Gandhi
Narasinh Narayan Godbole
Lewis Gompertz
Jeremiah Hacker
John Haddon
Walter Hadwen
Alexander Haig
Edward Hare
Philippe Hecquet
Martin Luther Holbrook
Isaac Jennings
John Harvey Kellogg
Norman Kerr
Daniel H. Kress
William Lambe
W. R. C. Latson
Elmer Lee
Susan M. Levin
Al-Ma'arri
Elmer McCollum
Eli Peck Miller
Harry Willis Miller
J. Howard Moore
Reuben D. Mussey
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Francis William Newman
Josiah Oldfield
Cyril V. Pink
Rod Preece
James Rachels
Ulma Doyle Register
Rollo Russell
Henry Stephens Salt
Russell Thacher Trall
Ellen G. White
Severin Wielobycki
Howard Williams
Frank Wokes
Jon Wynne-Tyson
Kathleen Keen Zolber
Chefs andcookbook authors
Nava Atlas
Mayim Bialik
BOSH!
Edward Espe Brown
Suzy Amis Cameron
Chloe Coscarelli
Yamuna Devi
Rose Elliot
Rip Esselstyn
Carol Lee Flinders
Dick Gregory
Madhur Jaffrey
Mollie Katzen
Frances Moore Lapp 
Deborah Madison
Linda McCartney
Mary McCartney
Tracye McQuirter
Joanne Lee Molinaro
Moosewood Collective
Isa Chandra Moskowitz
Bawa Muhaiyaddeen
Colleen Patrick-Goudreau
Satchidananda Saraswati
Derek Sarno
Miyoko Schinner
Alicia Silverstone
Bryant Terry
Anna Thomas
Haile Thomas
Umberto Veronesi
Related
Vegetarian and vegan symbolism
List of vegan media
Juice fasting
Vegetarian and vegan dog diet
Vegaphobia
Plant-based diet
Sustainable diet
Low-carbon
Planetary health
Flexitarianism
Pescetarianism
Pollotarianism
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tofu&oldid=1147303249"