Head of the Catholic Church from 2005 to 2013
PopeBenedict XVIBishop of RomeBenedict XVI in 2010ChurchCatholic ChurchPapacy began19 April 2005Papacy ended28 February 2013PredecessorJohn Paul IISuccessorFrancisOrdersOrdination29 June 1951by Michael von FaulhaberConsecration28 May 1977by Josef StanglCreated cardinal27 June 1977by Paul VIPersonal detailsBornJoseph Aloisius Ratzinger(1927-04-16)16 April 1927Marktl, Bavaria, German ReichDied31 December 2022(2022-12-31) (aged 95)Mater Ecclesiae Monastery, Vatican CityNationalityGerman (with Vatican citizenship)Previous post(s)
Dean of the College of Cardinals (2002 2005)
Cardinal Bishop of Ostia (2002 2005)
Cardinal Bishop of Velletri Segni (1993 2005)
Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (1982 2005)
President of the International Theological Commission (1982 2005)
President of the Pontifical Biblical Commission (1982 2005)
Cardinal Priest of Santa Maria Consolatrice al Tiburtino (1977 1993)
Archbishop of Munich and Freising (1977 1982)
MottoCooperatores veritatis(Latin for 'Cooperators of the truth')SignatureCoat of armsPhilosophy careerNotable work
Jesus of Nazareth
Introduction to Christianity
Eschatology: Death and Eternal Life
Deus caritas est
EraContemporary philosophyRegionWestern philosophySchool
Augustinism
Main interests
Christian theology
ecclesiology
Notable ideas
Rejection of dehellenization
Hermeneutic of continuity
Influences
Aristotle
St. Paul
Plato
John Paul II
Boethius[1]
Bonaventure
Justin Martyr
Clement of Alexandria[2]
Aquinas
Albertus Magnus
Augustine
Pseudo-Dionysius[3]
John of Damascus
John of Patmos[4]
Marcus Aurelius
Proclus of Constantinople[5]
Teresa of  vila[6]
Origen[7]
Solovyov[8]
Socrates
Spaemann
Ordination historyHistoryDiaconal ordinationOrdained byJohannes Neuh usler [de]Date29 October 1950PlaceFreising Cathedral, FreisingPriestly ordinationOrdained byMichael von FaulhaberDate29 June 1951PlaceFreising Cathedral, FreisingEpiscopal consecrationPrincipal consecratorJosef StanglCo-consecratorsRudolf Graber [de]Ernst Tewes [de]Date28 May 1977PlaceFrauenkirche, MunichCardinalateElevated byPope Paul VIDate27 June 1977Episcopal successionBishops consecrated by Pope Benedict XVI as principal consecratorAlberto Bovone12 May 1984Zygmunt Zimowski25 May 2002Josef Clemens6 January 2004Bruno Forte8 September 2004Mieczys aw Mokrzycki29 September 2007Francesco Giovanni Brugnaro29 September 2007Gianfranco Ravasi29 September 2007Tommaso Caputo29 September 2007Sergio Pagano29 September 2007Vincenzo Di Mauro29 September 2007Gabriele Giordano Caccia12 September 2009Franco Coppola12 September 2009Pietro Parolin12 September 2009Raffaello Martinelli12 September 2009Giorgio Corbellini12 September 2009Savio Hon5 February 2011Marcello Bartolucci5 February 2011Celso Morga Iruzubieta5 February 2011Antonio Guido Filipazzi5 February 2011Edgar Pe a Parra5 February 2011Charles John Brown6 January 2012Marek Solczy ski6 January 2012Angelo Vincenzo Zani6 January 2013Fortunatus Nwachukwu6 January 2013Georg G nswein6 January 2013Nicolas Th venin6 January 2013
Other popes  named Benedict
Papal styles ofPope Benedict XVIReference styleHis HolinessSpoken styleYour HolinessReligious styleHoly Father
Pope Benedict XVI (Latin: Benedictus PP. XVI; Italian: Benedetto XVI; German: Benedikt XVI; born Joseph Aloisius Ratzinger; 16 April 1927   31 December 2022) was the head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City State from 19 April 2005 until his resignation on 28 February 2013. Benedict's election as pope occurred in the 2005 papal conclave that followed the death of Pope John Paul II. Benedict chose to be known as "Pope emeritus" upon his resignation, and he retained this title until his death in December 2022.[9][10]
Ordained as a priest in 1951 in his native Bavaria, Ratzinger embarked on an academic career and established himself as a highly regarded theologian by the late 1950s. He was appointed a full professor in 1958 at the age of 31. After a long career as a professor of theology at several German universities, he was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising and created a cardinal by Pope Paul VI in 1977, an unusual promotion for someone with little pastoral experience. In 1981, he was appointed Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, one of the most important dicasteries of the Roman Curia. From 2002 until he was elected pope, he was also Dean of the College of Cardinals. Before becoming pope, he was "a major figure on the Vatican stage for a quarter of a century"; he had an influence "second to none when it came to setting church priorities and directions" as one of John Paul II's closest confidants.[11]
Benedict's writings were prolific and generally defended traditional Catholic doctrine, values, and liturgy.[12] He was originally a liberal theologian but adopted conservative views after 1968.[13] During his papacy, Benedict advocated a return to fundamental Christian values to counter the increased secularisation of many Western countries. He viewed relativism's denial of objective truth, and the denial of moral truths in particular, as the central problem of the 21st century. Benedict also revived several traditions, including the Tridentine Mass.[14] He strengthened the relationship between the Catholic Church and art, promoted the use of Latin,[15] and reintroduced traditional papal vestments, for which reason he was called "the pope of aesthetics".[16] He was described as "the main intellectual force in the Church" since the mid-1980s.[17]
On 11 February 2013, Benedict announced his resignation, citing a "lack of strength of mind and body" due to his advanced age. His resignation was the first by a pope since Gregory XII in 1415, and the first on a pope's initiative since Celestine V in 1294. He was succeeded by Francis on 13 March 2013 and moved into the newly renovated Mater Ecclesiae Monastery in Vatican City for his retirement. In addition to his native German language, Benedict had some level of proficiency in French, Italian, English, and Spanish. He also knew Portuguese, Latin, Biblical Hebrew, and Biblical Greek.[18][19][20] He was a member of several social science academies, such as the French Acad mie des Sciences Morales et Politiques. He played the piano and had a preference for Mozart and Bach.[21]
Benedict's handling of sexual abuse cases within the Catholic Church and opposition to usage of condoms in areas of high HIV transmission led to substantial criticism from public health officials, anti-AIDS activists, and victim's rights organizations.[22][23]
Early life: 1927 1951
Main article: Early life of Pope Benedict XVI
 The birth house of Joseph Aloisius Ratzinger in Marktl, Bavaria
Joseph Aloisius Ratzinger (German: [ jo z f  a l zi s  ats ]) was born on 16 April, Holy Saturday, 1927 at Schulstra e 11 at 8:30 in the morning in his parents' home in Marktl, Bavaria, Germany. He was baptised the same day. He was the third and youngest child of Joseph Ratzinger Sr., a police officer, and Maria Ratzinger (n e Peintner); his grand-uncle was the German priest-politician Georg Ratzinger. His mother's family was originally from South Tyrol (now in Italy).[24] Benedict's elder brother, Georg, became a Catholic priest and was the former director of the Regensburger Domspatzen choir.[25] His sister, Maria, who never married, managed her brother Joseph's household until she died in 1991.[26]
At the age of five, Ratzinger was in a group of children who welcomed the visiting Cardinal Archbishop of Munich, Michael von Faulhaber, with flowers. Struck by the cardinal's distinctive garb, he announced later that day that he wanted to be a cardinal. He attended the elementary school in Aschau am Inn, which was renamed in his honour in 2009.[27] In 1939, aged 12, he enrolled in a minor seminary in Traunstein.[28] This period lasted until the seminary was closed for military use in 1942, and the students were all sent home. Ratzinger returned to Traunstein.[29]
Wartime and ordination
Ratzinger's family, especially his father, bitterly resented the Nazis, and his father's opposition to Nazism resulted in demotions and harassment of the family.[30] Following his 14th birthday in 1941, Ratzinger was conscripted into the Hitler Youth as membership was required by law for all 14-year-old German boys after March 1939[31] but was an unenthusiastic member who refused to attend meetings, according to his brother.[32] In 1941, one of Ratzinger's cousins, a 14-year-old boy with Down syndrome, was taken away by the Nazi regime and murdered during the Aktion T4 campaign of Nazi eugenics.[33] In 1943, while still in seminary, he was drafted into the German anti-aircraft corps as Luftwaffenhelfer.[32] Ratzinger then trained in the German infantry.[34] As the Allied front drew closer to his post in 1945, he deserted back to his family's home in Traunstein after his unit had ceased to exist, just as American troops established a headquarters in the Ratzinger household.[35] As a German soldier, he was interned in US prisoner of war camps, first in Neu-Ulm, then at Fliegerhorst Bad Aibling (shortly to be repurposed as Bad Aibling Station) where he was at the time of Victory in Europe Day, and released on 19 June 1945.[36][35]
Ratzinger and his brother Georg entered Saint Michael Seminary in Traunstein in November 1945, later studying at the Ducal Georgianum (Herzogliches Georgianum) of the Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich. They were both ordained in Freising on 29 June 1951 by Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber of Munich the same man Ratzinger had met as a child. He recalled: "at the moment the elderly Archbishop laid his hands on me, a little bird perhaps a lark flew up from the altar in the high cathedral and trilled a little joyful song".[37]
Ratzinger's 1953 dissertation was on Augustine of Hippo and was titled The People and the House of God in Augustine's Doctrine of the Church. His habilitation (which qualified him for a professorship) was on Bonaventure. It was completed in 1957 and he became a professor at Freising College in 1958.[38]
Encounter with Romano Guardini
In his early twenties, Ratzinger was deeply influenced by the thought of Italian German Romano Guardini,[39] who taught in Munich from 1946 to 1951 when Ratzinger was studying in Freising and later at the University of Munich. The intellectual affinity between these two thinkers, who would later become decisive figures for the twentieth-century Catholic Church, was preoccupied with rediscovering the essentials of Christianity: Guardini wrote his 1938 The Essence of Christianity, while Ratzinger penned Introduction to Christianity, three decades later in 1968. Guardini inspired many in the Catholic social-democratic tradition, particularly the Communion and Liberation movement in the New Evangelization encouraged under the papacy of the Polish Pope John Paul II. Ratzinger wrote an introduction to a 1996 reissue of Guardini's 1954 The Lord.[40]
Pre-papal career: 1951 2005
Academic career: 1951 1977
Part of a series on theTheology ofPope Benedict XVI
Private works
Introduction to Christianity
Eschatology: Death and Eternal Life
Truth and Tolerance
The Ratzinger Report
Regensburg lecture
Jesus of Nazareth series:
Jesus of Nazareth
Holy Week
The Infancy Narratives
The Spirit of the Liturgy
Movements
Communio
Second Vatican Council
Peritus
Magisterial works
Prefect of the CDF
Dominus Iesus
Papacy (as Benedict XVI)
Caritas in veritate
Spe salvi
Deus caritas est
Lumen fidei
 Catholicism portalvte
Part of a series onCatholic philosophy Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham
Ethics
Cardinal virtues
Just price
Just war
Principle of Double Effect
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Social teaching
Virtue ethics
Metaphysics
Conceptualism
Realism
Moderate realism
Nominalism
Quiddity (essence / nature)
Haecceity
Quinque Viae
Predestination
Free Will
Divine Attributes
Schools
Augustinianism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Ressourcement
Occamism
Scholasticism
Neo
Scotism
Thomism
Analytic
Salamanca
Philosophers
Ancient
Ambrose
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Benedict of Nursia
Boethius
Clement of Alexandria
Cyprian
Cyril of Alexandria
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Irenaeus
Jerome
John Cassian
John Chrysostom
John Climacus
John of Damascus
Justin Martyr
Maximus the Confessor
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Origen
Paul the Apostle
Tertullian
Postclassical
Peter Abelard
Albertus Magnus
Anselm of Canterbury
Roger Bacon
Bede
Bernard of Clairvaux
Berengar of Tours
Bonaventure
Catherine of Siena
Duns Scotus
John Scotus Eriugena
Pope Gregory I
Gregory of Rimini
Giles of Rome
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Isidore of Seville
James of Viterbo
Jean Buridan
Meister Eckhart
Nicholas of Cusa
Nicole Oresme
Paul of Venice
Paschasius Radbertus
Peter Lombard
Roscellinus
Symeon the New Theologian
Thierry of Chartres
Thomas Aquinas
William of Ockham
Modern
Arnauld
Azpilcueta
Bellarmine
Bonald
Bossuet
Brentano
Vico
Botero
Cajetan
Cort s
Sales
Soto
Descartes
Erasmus
F nelon
Graci n
Ko taj
Krasicki
La Mennais
Liguori
Malebranche
Maistre
Meinong
Mercado
Molina
More
Newman
Pascal
Chateaubriand
Rosmini
 vila
Su rez
Vitoria
Contemporary
Adler
Anscombe
Balthasar
Barron
Benedict XVI
Blondel
Chesterton
Congar
Copleston
Finnis
Garrigou-Lagrange
Geach
Gilson
Girard
Guti rrez
D vila
Guardini
Haldane
Hildebrand
John Paul II
Lonergan
Lubac
MacIntyre
Marcel
Marion
Maritain
McLuhan
Mounier
Pieper
Rahner
Stein
Taylor
 Catholicism portal Philosophy portalvte
Ratzinger began as assistant pastor (curate) at the parish St. Martin, Moosach, in Munich in 1951.[41] Ratzinger became a professor at the University of Bonn in 1959, with his inaugural lecture on "The God of Faith and the God of Philosophy". In 1963, he moved to the University of M nster. During this period, he participated in the Second Vatican Council (1962 1965) and served as a peritus (theological consultant) to Cardinal Frings of Cologne. He was viewed during the time of the council as a reformer, cooperating with theologians like Hans K ng[42] and Edward Schillebeeckx.[43] Ratzinger became an admirer of Karl Rahner, a well-known academic theologian of the Nouvelle th ologie and a proponent of Church reform.[44]
In 1966, Ratzinger was appointed to a chair in dogmatic theology at the University of T bingen, where he was a colleague of Hans K ng. In his 1968 book Introduction to Christianity, he wrote that the pope has a duty to hear differing voices within the Church before making a decision, and he downplayed the centrality of the papacy. During this time, he distanced himself from the atmosphere of T bingen and the Marxist leanings of the student movement of the 1960s that quickly radicalized, in the years 1967 and 1968, culminating in a series of disturbances and riots in April and May 1968. Ratzinger came increasingly to see these and associated developments (such as decreasing respect for authority among his students) as connected to a departure from traditional Catholic teachings.[45] Despite his reformist bent, his views increasingly came to contrast with the liberal ideas gaining currency in theological circles.[46] He was invited by Rev. Theodore Hesburgh to join the theology faculty at the University of Notre Dame, but declined on grounds that his English was not good enough.[47]
Some voices, among them K ng, deemed this period in Ratzinger's life a turn towards conservatism, while Ratzinger himself said in a 1993 interview, "I see no break in my views as a theologian [over the years]".[48] Ratzinger continued to defend the work of the Second Vatican Council, including Nostra aetate, the document on respect of other religions, ecumenism, and the declaration of the right to freedom of religion. Later, as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger most clearly spelled out the Catholic Church's position on other religions in the 2000 document Dominus Iesus which also talks about the Catholic way to engage in "ecumenical dialogue". During his time at T bingen University, Ratzinger published articles in the reformist theological journal Concilium, though he increasingly chose less reformist themes than other contributors to the magazine such as K ng and Schillebeeckx.[49]
In 1969, Ratzinger returned to Bavaria, to the University of Regensburg and co-founded the theological journal Communio, with Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, Walter Kasper, and others, in 1972. Communio, now published in seventeen languages, including German, English, and Spanish, has become a prominent journal of contemporary Catholic theological thought. Until he was elected pope, he remained one of the journal's most prolific contributors. In 1976, he suggested that the Augsburg Confession might be recognised as a Catholic statement of faith.[50][51] Several of Benedict's former students became his confidantes, notably Christoph Sch nborn, and a number of his former students sometimes meet for discussions.[52][53] He served as vice-president of the University of Regensburg from 1976 to 1977.[54] On 26 May 1976, he was appointed a Prelate of Honour of His Holiness.[55]
Archbishop of Munich and Freising: 1977 1982
 Palais Holnstein in Munich, the residence of Benedict as Archbishop of Munich and Freising
On 24 March 1977, Ratzinger was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising, and was ordained a bishop on 28 May. He took as his episcopal motto Cooperatores veritatis (Latin for 'cooperators of the truth'),[56] from the Third Epistle of John,[57] a choice on which he commented in his autobiographical work Milestones.[58]
In the consistory of 27 June 1977, he was named Cardinal Priest of Santa Maria Consolatrice al Tiburtino by Pope Paul VI. By the time of the 2005 conclave, he was one of only fourteen remaining cardinals appointed by Paul VI, and one of only three of those under the age of 80. Of these, only he and William Wakefield Baum took part in the conclave.[59]
Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith: 1981 2005
Main article: Joseph Ratzinger as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
On 25 November 1981, Pope John Paul II, upon the retirement of Franjo  eper, named Ratzinger as the Prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, formerly known as the "Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office", the historical Roman Inquisition. Consequently, he resigned from his post in Munich in early 1982. He was promoted within the College of Cardinals to become Cardinal Bishop of Velletri-Segni in 1993 and was made the college's vice-dean in 1998 and dean in 2002. Just a year after its foundation in 1990, Ratzinger joined the European Academy of Sciences and Arts in Salzburg.[60][61]
 Cardinal Ratzinger in Rome, 1988
Ratzinger defended and reaffirmed Catholic doctrine, including teaching on topics such as birth control, homosexuality, and inter-religious dialogue. The theologian Leonardo Boff, for example, was suspended, while others such as Matthew Fox were censured. Other issues also prompted condemnations or revocations of rights to teach: for instance, some posthumous writings of Jesuit priest Anthony de Mello were the subject of a notification. Ratzinger and the congregation viewed many of them, particularly the later works, as having an element of religious indifferentism (in other words, that Christ was "one master alongside others"). In particular, Dominus Iesus, published by the congregation in the jubilee year 2000, reaffirmed many recently "unpopular" ideas, including the Catholic Church's position that "salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved." The document angered many Protestant churches by claiming that they are not churches, but "ecclesial communities".[62]
Ratzinger's 2001 letter De delictis gravioribus clarified the confidentiality of internal church investigations, as defined in the 1962 document Crimen sollicitationis, into accusations made against priests of certain crimes, including sexual abuse. This became a subject of controversy during the sex abuse cases.[63] For 20 years, Ratzinger had been the man in charge of enforcing the document.[64]
While bishops hold the secrecy pertained only internally, and did not preclude investigation by civil law enforcement, the letter was often seen as promoting a coverup.[65] Later, as pope, he was accused in a lawsuit of conspiring to cover up the molestation of three boys in Texas, but sought and obtained diplomatic immunity from liability.[66]
On 12 March 1983, Ratzinger, as prefect, notified the lay faithful and the clergy that Archbishop Pierre Martin Ng   nh Th c had incurred excommunication latae sententiae for illicit episcopal consecrations without the apostolic mandate. In 1997, when he turned 70, Ratzinger asked Pope John Paul II for permission to leave the Congregation of the Doctrine of Faith and to become an archivist in the Vatican Secret Archives and a librarian in the Vatican Library, but John Paul refused his assent.[67][68]
Ratzinger engaged in a dialogue with critical theorist J rgen Habermas in 2004, published three years later by Ignatius Press.[69][non-primary source needed]
Papacy: 2005 2013
 Benedict in St. Peter's Basilica, 15 May 2005
 Benedict in St. Peter's Square, 2007
 Benedict reciting the weekly Angelus prayer while overlooking St. Peter's Square, 2012
Election to the papacy
Main article: 2005 papal conclave
In April 2005, before his election as pope, Ratzinger was identified as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time.[70] While Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger repeatedly stated he would like to retire to his house in the Bavarian village of Pentling near Regensburg and dedicate himself to writing books.[71]
At the papal conclave, "it was, if not Ratzinger, who? And as they came to know him, the question became, why not Ratzinger?"[72][73] On 19 April 2005, he was elected on the second day after four ballots.[72] Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor described the final vote, "It's very solemn when you go up one by one to put your vote in the urn and you're looking up at the Last Judgement of Michelangelo. And I still remember vividly the then Cardinal Ratzinger sitting on the edge of his chair."[74] Ratzinger had hoped to retire peacefully and said that "At a certain point, I prayed to God 'please don't do this to me'...Evidently, this time He didn't listen to me."[75]
At the balcony, Benedict's first words to the crowd, given in Italian before he gave the traditional Urbi et Orbi blessing in Latin, were:
Dear brothers and sisters, after the great Pope John Paul II, the Cardinals have elected me, a simple, humble labourer in the vineyard of the Lord. The fact that the Lord knows how to work and to act even with insufficient instruments comforts me, and above all I entrust myself to your prayers. In the joy of the Risen Lord, confident of his unfailing help, let us move forward. The Lord will help us, and Mary, His Most Holy Mother, will be on our side. Thank you.[76]
On 24 April, Benedict celebrated the Papal Inauguration Mass in St. Peter's Square, during which he was invested with the Pallium and the Ring of the Fisherman.[77] On 7 May, he took possession of his cathedral church, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran.[78]
Choice of name
Benedict XVI chose his papal name, which comes from the Latin word meaning "the blessed", in honour of both Benedict XV and Benedict of Nursia.[79] Benedict XV was pope during the First World War, during which time he passionately pursued peace between the warring nations. St. Benedict of Nursia was the founder of the Benedictine monasteries (most monasteries of the Middle Ages were of the Benedictine order) and the author of the Rule of Saint Benedict, which is still the most influential writing regarding the monastic life of Western Christianity. The Pope explained his choice of name during his first general audience in St. Peter's Square, on 27 April 2005:
Filled with sentiments of awe and thanksgiving, I wish to speak of why I chose the name Benedict. Firstly, I remember Pope Benedict XV, that courageous prophet of peace, who guided the Church through turbulent times of war. In his footsteps, I place my ministry in the service of reconciliation and harmony between peoples. Additionally, I recall Saint Benedict of Nursia, co-patron of Europe, whose life evokes the Christian roots of Europe. I ask him to help us all to hold firm to the centrality of Christ in our Christian life: May Christ always take first place in our thoughts and actions![80]
Tone of papacy
 Benedict's first trip in a popemobile, 2005
During Benedict's inaugural Mass, the previous custom of every cardinal submitting to the pope was replaced by being greeted by twelve people, including cardinals, clergy, religious, a married couple and their child, and some who were newly confirmed people; the cardinals had formally sworn their obedience upon the election of the new pontiff. He began using an open-topped papal car, saying that he wanted to be closer to the people. Benedict continued the tradition of his predecessor John Paul II and baptised several infants in the Sistine Chapel at the beginning of each year, on the Feast of the Baptism of the Lord, in his pastoral role as Bishop of Rome.[81]
Beatifications
On 9 May 2005, Benedict XVI began the beatification process for his predecessor, Pope John Paul II. Normally, five years must pass after a person's death before the beatification process can begin. However, in an audience with Benedict, Camillo Ruini, vicar general of the Diocese of Rome and the official responsible for promoting the cause for canonization of any person who dies within that diocese, cited "exceptional circumstances" which suggested that the waiting period could be waived. This happened before, when Pope Paul VI waived the five-year rule and announced beatification processes for two of his predecessors, Pope Pius XII and Pope John XXIII. Benedict XVI followed this precedent when he waived the five-year rule for John Paul II.[82] The decision was announced on 13 May 2005, the Feast of Our Lady of F tima and the 24th anniversary of the attempt on John Paul II's life.[83] John Paul II often credited Our Lady of F tima for preserving him on that day. Cardinal Ruini inaugurated the diocesan phase of the cause for beatification in the Lateran Basilica on 28 June 2005.[84]
The first beatification under the new pope was celebrated on 14 May 2005, by Jos  Cardinal Saraiva Martins, Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints. The new Blesseds were Marianne Cope and Ascensi n Nicol Go i. Cardinal Clemens August Graf von Galen was beatified on 9 October 2005. Mariano de la Mata was beatified in November 2006 and Rosa Eluvathingal was beatified on 3 December of that year, and Basil Moreau was beatified in September 2007.[85] In October 2008, the following beatifications took place: Celestine of the Mother of God, Giuseppina Nicoli, Hendrina Stenmanns, Maria Rosa Flesch, Marta Anna Wiecka, Michael Sopocko, Petrus Kibe Kasui and 187 Companions, Susana Paz-Castillo Ram rez, and Maria Isbael Salvat Romero.
On 19 September 2010, during his visit to the United Kingdom, Benedict personally proclaimed the beatification of John Henry Newman.[86]
Unlike his predecessor, Benedict delegated the beatification liturgical service to a cardinal. On 29 September 2005, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints issued a communiqu  announcing that henceforth beatifications would be celebrated by a representative of the pope, usually the prefect of that Congregation.[87]
Canonizations
 Benedict at the canonization of the Brazilian friar Frei Galv o, 2007
During his pontificate, Benedict XVI canonized 45 people.[88] He celebrated his first canonizations on 23 October 2005 in St. Peter's Square when he canonized Josef Bilczewski, Alberto Hurtado, Zygmunt Gorazdowski, Gaetano Catanoso, and Felice da Nicosia. The canonizations were part of a mass that marked the conclusion of the General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops and the Year of the Eucharist.[89] Benedict canonized Bishop Rafael Guizar y Valencia, Theodore Guerin, Filippo Smaldone, and Rosa Venerini on 15 October 2006.
During his visit to Brazil in 2007, Benedict presided over the canonization of Frei Galv o on 11 May, while George Preca, founder of the Malta-based MUSEUM, Szymon of Lipnica, Charles of Mount Argus, and Marie-Eug nie de J sus were canonized in a ceremony held at the Vatican on 3 June 2007.[90] Preca is the first Maltese saint since the country's conversion to Christianity in A.D. 60 when St. Paul converted the inhabitants.[91] In October 2008, the following canonizations took place: Alphonsa of the Immaculate Conception of India,[92] Gaetano Errico, Narcisa de Jesus Martillo Moran, and Maria Bernarda B tler. In April 2009, the Pope canonized Arcangelo Tadini, Bernardo Tolomei, Nuno  lvares Pereira, Geltrude Comensoli, and Caterina Volpicelli.[93] In October of the same year he canonized Jeanne Jugan, Damien de Veuster, Zygmunt Szcz sny Feli ski, Francisco Coll Guitart, and Rafael Arn iz Bar n.[94][95]
On 17 October 2010, Benedict canonized Andr  Bessette, a French-Canadian; Stanis aw So tys, a 15th-century Polish priest; Italian nuns Giulia Salzano and Camilla Battista da Varano; Spanish nun Candida Maria de Jesus Cipitria y Barriola; and the first Australian saint, Mary MacKillop.[96] On 23 October 2011, he canonized three saints: a Spanish nun Bonifacia Rodr guez y Castro, Italian archbishop Guido Maria Conforti, and Italian priest Luigi Guanella.[97] In December 2011, the Pope formally recognized the validity of the miracles necessary to proceed with the canonizations of Kateri Tekakwitha, who would be the first Native American saint; Marianne Cope, a nun working with lepers in what is now the state of Hawaii; Giovanni Battista Piamarta, an Italian priest; Jacques Berthieu, a French Jesuit priest and African martyr; Carmen Salles y Barangueras, a Spanish nun and founder of the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception; Peter Calungsod, a lay catechist and martyr from the Philippines; and Anna Sch ffer, whose desire to be a missionary was unfulfilled on account of her illness.[98] They were canonized on 21 October 2012.[99]
Doctors of the Church
On 7 October 2012, Benedict named Hildegard of Bingen and John of  vila as Doctors of the Church, the 34th and 35th individuals so recognized in the history of Christianity.[100]
Curia reform
Benedict made only modest changes to the structure of the Roman Curia. In March 2006, he placed both the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant Peoples and the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace under a single president, Cardinal Renato Martino. When Martino retired in 2009, each council received its own president once again. Also in March 2006, the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue was briefly merged into the Pontifical Council for Culture under Cardinal Paul Poupard. Those Councils maintained their separate officials and staffs while their status and competencies continued unchanged, and in May 2007, Interreligious Dialogue was restored to its separate status again with its own president.[101] In June 2010, Benedict created the Pontifical Council for the Promotion of the New Evangelization, appointing Archbishop Rino Fisichella its first president.[102] On 16 January 2013, the Pope transferred responsibility for catechesis from the Congregation for the Clergy to the Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization.[103]
Teachings
See also: Theology of Pope Benedict XVI
As pope, one of Benedict's main roles was to teach about the Catholic faith and the solutions to the problems of discerning and living the faith,[104] a role that he could play well as a former head of the Church's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. The main points of emphasis of his teachings are stated in more detail in the Theology of Pope Benedict XVI.
"Friendship with Jesus Christ"
After his first homily as pope, Benedict referred to both Jesus Christ and John Paul II. Citing John Paul II's well-known words, "Do not be afraid! Open wide the doors for Christ!", Benedict said:
Are we not perhaps all afraid in some way? If we let Christ enter fully into our lives, if we open ourselves totally to Him, are we not afraid that He might take something away from us? ... And once again the Pope said: No! If we let Christ into our lives, we lose nothing, nothing, absolutely nothing of what makes life free, beautiful, and great. No! Only in this friendship do we experience beauty and liberation. ... When we give ourselves to Him, we receive a hundredfold in return. Yes, open, open wide the doors to Christ  and you will find true life.[105]
"Friendship with Jesus Christ" was a frequent theme of Benedict's preaching.[106][107] He stressed that on this intimate friendship, "everything depends".[108] He also said: "We are all called to open ourselves to this friendship with God ... speaking to Him as to a friend, the only One who can make the world both good and happy ... That is all we have to do is put ourselves at His disposal ... is an extremely important message. It is a message that helps to overcome what can be considered the great temptation of our time: the claim, that after the Big Bang, God withdrew from history."[109] Thus, in his book Jesus of Nazareth, his main purpose was "to help foster [in the reader] the growth of a living relationship" with Jesus Christ.[108] He took up this theme in his first encyclical Deus caritas est. In his explanation and summary of the encyclical, he stated: "If friendship with God becomes for us something ever more important and decisive, then we will begin to love those whom God loves and who are in need of us. God wants us to be friends of His friends and we can be so, if we are interiorly close to them."[110] Thus, he said that prayer is "urgently needed ... It is time to reaffirm the importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work."[111]
"Dictatorship of relativism"
Continuing what he said in the pre-conclave Mass about what he often referred to as the "central problem of our faith today",[112] on 6 June 2005, Benedict also said:
Today, a particularly insidious obstacle to the task of education is the massive presence in our society and culture of that relativism which, recognising nothing as definitive, leaves as the ultimate criterion only the self with its desires. And under the semblance of freedom it becomes a prison for each one, for it separates people from one another, locking each person into his or her own ego.[113]
Benedict said that "a dictatorship of relativism"[114] was the core challenge facing the Church and humanity. At the root of this problem, he said, is Immanuel Kant's "self-limitation of reason". This, he said, is contradictory to the modern acclamation of science whose excellence is based on the power of reason to know the truth. He said that this self-amputation of reason leads to pathologies of religion such as terrorism and pathologies of science such as ecological disasters.[115] Benedict traced the failed revolutions and violent ideologies of the 20th century to a conversion of partial points of view into absolute guides. He said "Absolutizing what is not absolute but relative is called totalitarianism."[116]
Christianity as religion according to reason
In the discussion with secularism and rationalism, one of Benedict's basic ideas can be found in his address on the "Crisis of Culture" in the West, a day before Pope John Paul II died, when he referred to Christianity as the "religion of the Logos" (the Greek for "word", "reason", "meaning", or "intelligence"). He said:
From the beginning, Christianity has understood itself as the religion of the Logos, as the religion according to reason ... It has always defined men, all men without distinction, as creatures and images of God, proclaiming for them ... the same dignity. In this connection, the Enlightenment is of Christian origin and it is no accident that it was born precisely and exclusively in the realm of the Christian faith. ... It was and is the merit of the Enlightenment to have again proposed these original values of Christianity and of having given back to reason its own voice ... Today, this should be precisely [Christianity's] philosophical strength, in so far as the problem is whether the world comes from the irrational, and reason is not other than a 'sub-product,' on occasion even harmful of its development or whether the world comes from reason, and is, as a consequence, its criterion and goal ... In the so necessary dialogue between secularists and Catholics, we Christians must be very careful to remain faithful to this fundamental line: to live a faith that comes from the Logos, from creative reason, and that, because of this, is also open to all that is truly rational.[117]
Benedict also emphasised that "Only creative reason, which in the crucified God is manifested as love, can really show us the way."[117]
Encyclicals
Benedict wrote three encyclicals: Deus caritas est (Latin for "God is Love"), Spe salvi ("Saved by Hope"), and Caritas in veritate ("Love in Truth"). In his first encyclical, Deus caritas est, he said that a human being, created in the image of God who is love, can practice love: to give himself to God and others (agape) by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation. This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them in Jesus Christ.[118]
The encyclical contains almost 16,000 words in 42 paragraphs. The first half is said to have been written by Benedict in German, his first language, in the summer of 2005; the second half is derived from uncompleted writings left by his predecessor, Pope John Paul II.[119] The document was signed by Benedict on Christmas Day, 25 December 2005.[120] The encyclical was promulgated a month later in Latin and was translated into English, French, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. It is the first encyclical to be published since the Vatican decided to assert copyright in the official writings of the pope.[121]
Benedict's second encyclical titled Spe Salvi ("Saved by Hope"), about the virtue of hope, was released on 30 November 2007.[122][123] His third encyclical titled Caritas in veritate ("Love in Truth" or "Charity in Truth"), was signed on 29 June 2009 (the Feast of Sts. Peter and Paul) and released on 7 July 2009.[124] In it, the Pope continued the Church's teachings on social justice. He condemned the prevalent economic system "where the pernicious effects of sin are evident," and called on people to rediscover ethics in business and economic relations.[124]
At the time of his resignation, Benedict had completed a draft of a fourth encyclical entitled Lumen fidei ("The Light of Faith"),[125] intended to accompany his first two encyclicals to complete a trilogy on the three theological virtues of faith, hope, and love. Benedict's successor, Francis, completed and published Lumen Fidei in June 2013, four months after Benedict's retirement and Francis's succession. Although the encyclical is officially the work of Francis, paragraph 7 of the encyclical explicitly expresses Francis's debt to Benedict: "These considerations on faith   in continuity with all that the Church's magisterium has pronounced on this theological virtue   are meant to supplement what Benedict XVI had written in his encyclical letters on charity and hope. He himself had almost completed a first draft of an encyclical on faith. For this I am deeply grateful to him, and as his brother in Christ I have taken up his fine work and added a few contributions of my own."[126]
Post-synodal apostolic exhortation
Sacramentum caritatis (The Sacrament of Charity), signed 22 February 2007, was released in Latin, Italian, English, French, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Polish. It was made available in various languages on 13 March 2007 in Rome. The English edition of Libera Editrice Vaticana is 158 pages. This apostolic exhortation "seeks to take up the richness and variety of the reflections and proposals which emerged from the Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops" which was held in 2006.[127]
Motu proprio on Tridentine Mass
Main article: Summorum Pontificum
 A pre-1969 Traditional Latin Mass altar with reredos
On 7 July 2007, Benedict issued the motu proprio Summorum Pontificum, declaring that upon "the request of the faithful", the celebration of Mass according to the Missal of 1962 (of the Tridentine Mass), was to be more easily permitted. Stable groups who previously had to petition their bishop to have a Tridentine Mass may now merely request permission from their local priest.[128] While Summorum Pontificum directs that pastors should provide the Tridentine Mass upon the requests of the faithful, it also allows for any qualified priest to offer private celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, to which the faithful may be admitted if they wish.[129] For regularly scheduled public celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, the permission of the priest in charge of the church is required.[130]
In an accompanying letter, the Pope outlined his position concerning questions about the new guidelines.[129] As there were fears that the move would entail a reversal of the Second Vatican Council,[131] Benedict emphasised that the Tridentine Mass would not detract from the council and that the Mass of Paul VI would still be the norm and priests were not permitted to refuse to say the Mass in that form. He pointed out that the use of Tridentine Mass "was never juridically abrogated and, consequently, in principle, was always permitted."[129] The letter also decried "deformations of the liturgy ... because in many places celebrations were not faithful to the prescriptions of the new Missal" as the Second Vatican Council was wrongly seen "as authorising or even requiring creativity", mentioning his own experience.[129]
The Pope considered that allowing the Tridentine Mass to those who request it was a means to prevent or heal schism, stating that, on occasions in history, "not enough was done by the Church's leaders to maintain or regain reconciliation and unity" and that this "imposes an obligation on us today: to make every effort to enable for all those who truly desire unity to remain in that unity or to attain it anew."[129] Cardinal Dar o Castrill n Hoyos, the president of the Pontifical Commission established to facilitate full ecclesial communion of those associated with that Society,[132] stated that the decree "opened the door for their return". Bishop Bernard Fellay, superior general of the SSPX, expressed "deep gratitude to the Sovereign Pontiff for this great spiritual benefit".[128]
In July 2021, Pope Francis issued the apostolic letter titled Traditionis custodes, which substantially reversed the decision of Benedict XVI in Summorum Pontificum and imposed new and broad restrictions on the use of the Traditional Latin Mass. The decision was controversial and widely criticized by conservative and traditionalist Catholics as lacking in charity and an attack on those attached to the liturgical patrimony of the Church.[133][134]
Unicity and salvific universality of the Catholic Church
Near the end of June 2007, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document approved by Benedict XVI "because some contemporary theological interpretations of Vatican II's ecumenical intent had been 'erroneous or ambiguous' and had prompted confusion and doubt." The document has been seen as restating "key sections of a 2000 text the pope wrote when he was prefect of the congregation, Dominus Iesus."[135]
Consumerism
Benedict condemned excessive consumerism, especially among youth. He stated in December 2007 that "[A]dolescents, youths and even children are easy victims of the corruption of love, deceived by unscrupulous adults who, lying to themselves and to them, draw them into the dead-end streets of consumerism."[136] In June 2009, he blamed outsourcing for the greater availability of consumer goods which lead to the downsizing of social security systems.[137]
Ecumenism
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI and ecumenism
 Benedict on a throne in the Apostolic Palace in the Vatican, 2011
Speaking at his weekly audience in St. Peter's Square on 7 June 2006, Benedict asserted that Jesus himself had entrusted the leadership of the Church to his apostle Peter. "Peter's responsibility thus consists of guaranteeing the communion with Christ. Let us pray so that the primacy of Peter, entrusted to poor human beings, may always be exercised in this original sense desired by the Lord, so that it will be increasingly recognised in its true meaning by brothers who are still not in communion with us."[138]
Also in 2006, Benedict met the Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams. In their Common Declaration, they highlighted the previous 40 years of dialogue between Catholics and Anglicans while also acknowledging "serious obstacles to our ecumenical progress".[139]
On 4 November 2009, in response to a 2007 petition by the Traditional Anglican Church, Benedict issued the apostolic constitution Anglicanorum coetibus, which authorized the creation of "Personal Ordinariates for Anglicans entering into full communion."[140][141] Between 2011 and 2012, three ordinariates were erected, currently totalling 9090 members, 194 priests, and 94 parishes.[142][143][144]
Interfaith dialogue
Judaism
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI and Judaism
When Benedict ascended to the papacy, his election was welcomed by the Anti-Defamation League who noted "his great sensitivity to Jewish history and the Holocaust".[145] However, his election received a more reserved response from British Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, who hoped that Benedict would "continue along the path of Pope John XXIII and Pope John Paul II in working to enhance relations with the Jewish people and the State of Israel."[146] Israeli foreign minister Silvan Shalom also offered tentative praise, though Shalom believed that "this Pope, considering his historical experience, will be especially committed to an uncompromising fight against anti-Semitism."[146]
Critics have accused Benedict's papacy of insensitivity towards Judaism. The two most prominent instances were the expansion of the use of the Tridentine Mass and the lifting of the excommunication on four bishops from the Society of St. Pius X (SSPX). In the Good Friday service, the Tridentine Mass rubrics include a prayer that asks God to lift the veil so they [Jews] may be delivered from their darkness. This prayer has historically been contentious in Judaic-Catholic relations and several groups saw the restoration of the Tridentine Mass as problematic.[147][148][149][150][151] Among those whose excommunications were lifted was Bishop Richard Williamson, an outspoken historical revisionist sometimes interpreted as a Holocaust denier.[152][153][154][155] The lifting of his excommunication led critics to charge that the Pope was condoning his historical revisionist views.[156]
Islam
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI and Islam
Benedict's relations with Islam were strained at times. On 12 September 2006, he delivered a lecture which touched on Islam at the University of Regensburg in Germany. He had served there as a professor of theology before becoming Pope, and his lecture was entitled "Faith, Reason and the University Memories and Reflections". The lecture received much attention from political and religious authorities. Many Islamic politicians and religious leaders registered their protest against what they labelled an insulting mischaracterization of Islam, although his focus was aimed towards the rationality of religious violence, and its effect on the religion.[157][158] Muslims were particularly offended by a passage that the Pope quoted in his speech: "Show me just what Muhammad brought that was new and there you will find things only evil and inhuman, such as his command to spread by the sword the faith he preached."[158]
The passage originally appeared in the Dialogue Held with a Certain Persian, the Worthy Mouterizes, in Anakara of Galatia[159] written in 1391 as an expression of the views of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Paleologus, one of the last Christian rulers before the Fall of Constantinople to the Muslim Ottoman Empire, on such issues as forced conversion, holy war, and the relationship between faith and reason. According to the German text, the Pope's original comment was that the emperor "addresses his interlocutor in an astoundingly harsh to us surprisingly harsh way" (wendet er sich in erstaunlich schroffer, uns  berraschend schroffer Form).[160] Benedict apologized for any offence he had caused and made a point of visiting Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country, and praying in its Blue Mosque. Benedict planned on 5 March 2008, to meet with Muslim scholars and religious leaders autumn 2008 at a Catholic-Muslim seminar in Rome.[161] That meeting, the "First Meeting of the Catholic-Muslim Forum," was held from 4 6 November 2008.[162] On 9 May 2009, Benedict visited the King Hussein Mosque in Amman, Jordan where he was addressed by Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad.[163]
Buddhism
The Dalai Lama congratulated Benedict XVI upon his election,[164] and visited him in October 2006 in Vatican City. In 2007, the People's Republic of China was accused of using its political influence to stop a meeting between the Pope and the Dalai Lama.[165]
Indigenous American beliefs
While visiting Brazil in May 2007, "the pope sparked controversy by saying that native populations had been 'silently longing' for the Christian faith brought to South America by colonizers."[166] The Pope continued, stating that "the proclamation of Jesus and of his Gospel did not at any point involve an alienation of the pre-Columbus cultures, nor was it the imposition of a foreign culture."[166] Venezuelan president Hugo Ch vez demanded an apology, and an indigenous organization in Ecuador issued a response which stated that "representatives of the Catholic Church of those times, with honourable exceptions, were accomplices, deceivers and beneficiaries of one of the most horrific genocides of all humanity."[166] Later, the Pope, speaking Italian, said at a weekly audience that it was "not possible to forget the suffering and the injustices inflicted by colonizers against the indigenous population, whose fundamental human rights were often trampled" but made no apology.[167]
Hinduism
While visiting the United States on 17 April 2008, Benedict met with International Society for Krishna Consciousness representative Radhika Ramana Dasa,[168] a noted Hindu scholar[169] and disciple of Hanumatpreshaka Swami.[170] On behalf of the Hindu American community, Radhika Ramana Dasa presented a gift of an Om symbol to Benedict.[171][172]
Apostolic ministry
Main article: List of pastoral visits of Pope Benedict XVI
 Benedict in a Mercedes-Benz popemobile, S o Paulo, Brazil, 2007
As pontiff, Benedict carried out numerous Apostolic activities including journeys across the world and in the Vatican.
Benedict travelled extensively during the first three years of his papacy. In addition to his travels within Italy, he made two visits to his homeland, Germany, one for World Youth Day and another to visit the towns of his childhood. He also visited Poland and Spain, where he was enthusiastically received.[173] His visit to Turkey, an overwhelmingly Muslim nation, was initially overshadowed by the controversy about a lecture he had given at Regensburg. His visit was met by nationalist and Islamic protesters[174] and was placed under unprecedented security measures.[175] Benedict made a joint declaration with Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I in an attempt to begin to heal the rift between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.[176]
In 2007, Benedict visited Brazil to address the Bishops' Conference there and canonize Friar Ant nio Galv o, an 18th-century Franciscan. In June 2007, Benedict made a personal pilgrimage and pastoral visit to Assisi, the birthplace of St. Francis. In September, Benedict undertook a three-day visit to Austria,[177] during which he joined Vienna's chief rabbi, Paul Chaim Eisenberg, in a memorial to the 65,000 Viennese Jews who perished in Nazi death camps.[178] During his stay in Austria, he also celebrated Mass at the Marian shrine Mariazell and visited Heiligenkreuz Abbey.[179]
 Benedict celebrates his 81st birthday with US president George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush at the White House in Washington, D.C., 2008
In April 2008, Benedict made his first visit to the United States since becoming pope.[180] He arrived in Washington, D.C., where he was formally received at the White House and met privately with US president George W. Bush.[181] While in Washington, the pope addressed representatives of US Catholic universities, met with leaders of other world religions, and celebrated Mass at the Washington Nationals' baseball stadium with 47,000 people.[182] The Pope also met privately with victims of sexual abuse by priests. The Pope travelled to New York City where he addressed the United Nations General Assembly.[183] Also while in New York, the Pope celebrated Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral, met with disabled children and their families, and attended an event for Catholic youth, where he addressed some 25,000 young people in attendance.[184] On the final day of the Pope's visit, he visited the World Trade Center site and later celebrated Mass at Yankee Stadium.[185]
In July 2008, the Pope travelled to Australia to attend World Youth Day 2008 in Sydney. On 19 July, in St. Mary's Cathedral, he made an apology for child sex abuse perpetrated by the clergy in Australia.[186][187] On 13 September 2008, at an outdoor Paris Mass attended by 250,000 people, Benedict condemned the modern materialism  the world's love of power, possessions, and money as a modern-day plague, comparing it to paganism.[188][189] In 2009, he visited Africa (Cameroon and Angola) for the first time as pope. During his visit, he suggested that altering sexual behaviour was the answer to Africa's AIDS crisis and urged Catholics to reach out and convert believers in sorcery.[190] He visited the Middle East (Jordan, Israel, and Palestine) in May 2009.
Benedict's main arena for pastoral activity was the Vatican itself, his Christmas and Easter homilies and Urbi et Orbi were delivered from St. Peter's Basilica. The Vatican is also the only regular place where Benedict travelled via motor without the protective bulletproof case common to most popemobiles. Despite the more secure setting, Benedict was victim to security risks several times inside Vatican City. On Wednesday, 6 June 2007, during his General Audience, a man leapt across a barrier, evaded guards, and nearly mounted the Pope's vehicle, although he was stopped and Benedict seemed to be unaware of the event. On Thursday, 24 December 2009, while Benedict was proceeding to the altar to celebrate Christmas Eve Mass at St. Peter's Basilica, a woman later identified as 25-year-old Susanna Maiolo, who holds Italian and Swiss citizenship, jumped the barrier and grabbed the Pope by his vestments and pulled him to the ground. The 82-year-old Benedict fell but was assisted to his feet and he continued to proceed toward the altar to celebrate Mass. Roger Etchegaray, the vice-dean of the College of Cardinals, fell as well and suffered a hip fracture. Italian police reported that Maiolo had in a prior action attempted to accost Benedict at the previous Christmas Eve Mass, but was prevented from doing so.[191][192]
 Benedict in Balzan, Malta, 2010
In his homily, Benedict forgave Susanna Maiolo[193] and urged the world to "wake up" from selfishness and petty affairs, and find time for God and spiritual matters.[191]
 Benedict in Zagreb, Croatia, 2011
Between 17 and 18 April 2010, Benedict made an Apostolic Journey to the Republic of Malta. Following meetings with various dignitaries on his first day on the island, 50,000 people gathered in a drizzle for Papal Mass on the granaries in Floriana. The Pope also met with the Maltese youth at the Valletta Waterfront, where an estimated 10,000 young people turned up to greet him.[194]
Sexual abuse in the Catholic Church
See also: Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Prior to 2001, the primary responsibility for investigating allegations of sexual abuse and disciplining perpetrators rested with the individual dioceses. In 2001, Ratzinger convinced John Paul II to put the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith in charge of all sexual abuse investigations.[195][196] According to John L. Allen Jr., Ratzinger in the following years "acquired a familiarity with the contours of the problem that virtually no other figure in the Catholic Church can claim. Driven by that encounter with what he would later refer to as 'filth' in the Church, Ratzinger seems to have undergone something of a 'conversion experience' throughout 2003 04. From that point forward, he and his staff seemed driven by a convert's zeal to clean up the mess."[197]
Cardinal Vincent Nichols wrote that in his role as head of the CDF "[Ratzinger] led important changes made in church law: the inclusion in canon law of internet offences against children, the extension of child abuse offences to include the sexual abuse of all under 18, the case by case waiving of the statute of limitation and the establishment of a fast-track dismissal from the clerical state for offenders."[198] According to Charles J. Scicluna, a former prosecutor handling sexual abuse cases, "Cardinal Ratzinger displayed great wisdom and firmness in handling those cases, also demonstrating great courage in facing some of the most difficult and thorny cases, sine acceptione personarum [without respect of persons]".[199] According to Cardinal Christoph Sch nborn, Ratzinger "made entirely clear efforts not to cover things up but to tackle and investigate them. This was not always met with approval in the Vatican".[195][200] Ratzinger had pressed John Paul II to investigate Hans Hermann Gro r, an Austrian cardinal and friend of John Paul accused of sexual abuse, which resulted in Gro r's resignation.[201]
In March 2010, Benedict sent a pastoral letter to the Catholic Church in Ireland addressing cases of sexual abuse by priests of minors, expressing sorrow and promising changes in the way in which accusations of abuse were addressed.[202] Victims' groups claimed the letter failed to clarify if secular law enforcement had priority over canon law confidentiality regarding internal investigation of abuse allegations.[203][204][205] The Pope then promised to introduce measures that would "safeguard young people in the future" and "bring to justice" priests who were responsible for abuse and the next month the Vatican issued guidelines on how existing church law should be implemented. The guidelines asserted that "Civil law concerning reporting of crimes ... should always be followed."[206][207]
As Archbishop of Munich and Freising
Despite being more proactive than his predecessor in addressing sexual abuse, Benedict was nonetheless cited as failing to do so on more than one occasion. In January 2022, a report written by German law firm Westpfahl Spilker Wastl and commissioned by the Catholic Church concluded that Cardinal Ratzinger failed to adequately take action against clerics in four cases of alleged abuse while he was Archbishop of Munich and Freising from 1977 to 1982. The pope emeritus denied the accusations.[208][209][210] Benedict corrected his former statement that he had not been at a meeting of the ordinariate of the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising in January 1980, saying he mistakenly told German investigators he was not there. However, the error was "not done out of bad faith", but "the result of an error in the editorial processing" of his statement. According to Reuters, lawyer Martin Pusch said that "in a total of four cases, we have come to the conclusion that the then Archbishop Cardinal Ratzinger can be accused of misconduct in cases of sexual abuse."[211][212]
In February 2022, Benedict admitted that errors were made in the treating of sexual abuse cases when he was Archbishop of Munich. According to the letter released by the Vatican, he asked forgiveness for any "grievous fault" but denied personal wrongdoing. Benedict stated: "I have had great responsibilities in the Catholic Church. All the greater is my pain for the abuses and the errors that occurred in those different places during the time of my mandate."[213] Public prosecutor's office in Munich had begun investigations as a result of the 2022 report against both Benedict and Cardinal Friedrich Wetter. The investigation was "discontinued" in March 2023 after it "did not reveal sufficient suspicion of criminal activity". The case of the investigation "was not acts of abuse committed by the Church personnel managers themselves, but possible acts of aiding and abetting by active action or omission".[214]
Legion of Christ founder Marcial Maciel
One of the cases Ratzinger pursued involved Marcial Maciel, a Mexican priest and founder of the Legionaries of Christ who had been accused repeatedly of sexual abuse. Biographer Andrea Tornielli suggested that Cardinal Ratzinger had wanted to take action against Maciel but that John Paul II and other high-ranking officials, including several cardinals and the Pope's influential secretary Stanis aw Dziwisz, prevented him from doing so.[196][201]
According to Jason Berry, Cardinal Angelo Sodano "pressured" Ratzinger, who was "operating on the assumption that the charges were not justified", to halt the proceedings against Maciel in 1999.[215] When Maciel was honoured by the Pope in 2004, new accusers came forward[215] and Cardinal Ratzinger "took it on himself to authorize an investigation of Maciel".[196] After Ratzinger became pope, he began proceedings against Maciel and the Legion of Christ that forced Maciel out of active service in the Church.[195] On 1 May 2010, the Vatican issued a statement denouncing "the most serious and objectively immoral behavior of Father Maciel, confirmed by incontrovertible witnesses, which amount to true crimes and show a life deprived of scruples and authentic religious feeling."[216]
Theodore McCarrick controversy
In November 2020, the Vatican published a report blaming Popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI for allowing defrocked former cardinal Theodore McCarrick to rise in power despite the fact that they both knew of sex abuse allegations against him.[217][218] Despite the fact that Benedict pressured McCarrick to resign as Archbishop of Washington D.C. in 2006, McCarrick remained very active in ministry throughout Benedict's papacy and even made a very public appearance when he presided over US senator Ted Kennedy's burial service at Arlington National Cemetery in 2009.[217][218][219]
Post-papacy
In 2019, Benedict released a 6,000-word letter that attributed the Church's sexual abuse crisis to an erosion of morality driven by secularization and the sexual revolution of the 1960s.[220] The letter was in sharp contrast to the viewpoint of his successor, Francis, who saw the issue as a byproduct of abuses of power within the Church's hierarchical structure.[220] The New York Times later reported that "given his frail health at the time, however, many church watchers questioned whether Benedict had indeed written the letter or had been manipulated to issue it as a way to undercut Francis."[221]
Upon Benedict's death, his efforts to combat sexual abuse in the Church were remembered with mixed reactions, in particular by victims' groups. Francesco Zanardi, founder of the Italian victims' group Rete l'Abuso stated that "Ratzinger was less communicative than Francis but he moved" in the right direction, and that he was the first pontiff to effectively do so.[222] Anne Barrett Doyle, a co-director of BishopAccountability.org, an advocacy and research group, said that Benedict would be "remembered chiefly for his failure to achieve what should have been his job one: to rectify the incalculable harm done to the hundreds of thousands of children sexually abused by Catholic priests."[222] She stated that his tenure had "left hundreds of culpable bishops in power and a culture of secrecy intact," while the Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests said in a statement that "Benedict was more concerned about the church's deteriorating image and financial flow to the hierarchy versus grasping the concept of true apologies followed by true amends to victims of abuse".[222]
Attire
Main article: Ceremonial of Benedict XVI
 Benedict wearing a red Cappello romano during an open-air Mass in front of St. Peter's Basilica, 2007
Benedict re-introduced several papal garments which had fallen into disuse. He resumed the use of the traditional red papal shoes, which had been used since Roman times by popes but which had fallen into disuse during the pontificate of John Paul II. Contrary to the initial speculation of the press that the shoes had been made by the Italian fashion house Prada, the Vatican announced that the shoes were provided by the Pope's personal shoemaker.[223]
The journalist Charlotte Allen described Benedict as "the pope of aesthetics": "He has reminded a world that looks increasingly ugly and debased that there is such a thing as the beautiful whether it's embodied in a sonata or an altarpiece or an embroidered cope or the cut of a cassock and that earthly beauty ultimately communicates a beauty that is beyond earthly things."[16]
Health
Prior to his election as pope in 2005, Ratzinger had hoped to retire on account of age-related health problems, a long-held desire to have free time to write, and the retirement age for bishops (75) and submitted his resignation as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith three times, but continued at his post in obedience to the wishes of John Paul II. In September 1991, Ratzinger suffered a haemorrhagic stroke, which slightly impaired his eyesight temporarily but which he recovered completely.[224] This was never officially made public the official news was that he had fallen and struck his head against a radiator but was an open secret known to the conclave that elected him pope.[225]
 Benedict in choir dress with the red summer papal mozzetta, embroidered red stole, and the red papal shoes
Following his election in April 2005 there were several rumours about the Pope's health, but none of them were confirmed. Early in his pontificate Benedict predicted a short reign, which led to concerns about his health.[226] In May 2005 the Vatican announced that he had suffered another mild stroke. French cardinal Philippe Barbarin said that since the first stroke Ratzinger had been suffering from an age-related heart condition, for which he was on medication. In late November 2006 Vatican insiders told the international press that the Pope had had a routine examination of the heart.[225] A few days later an unconfirmed rumour emerged that Benedict had undergone an operation in preparation for an eventual bypass operation, but this rumour was only published by a small left-wing Italian newspaper and was never confirmed by any Vatican insider.[227]
On 17 July 2009, Benedict was hospitalized after falling and breaking his right wrist while on vacation in the Alps; his injuries were reported to be minor.[228]
Following the announcement of his resignation, the Vatican revealed that Benedict had been fitted with a pacemaker while he was still a cardinal, before his election as pope in 2005. The battery in the pacemaker had been replaced three months earlier, a routine procedure, but that did not influence his decision.[229]
Resignation
Main article: Resignation of Pope Benedict XVI
 Benedict in a popemobile at his final Wednesday General Audience in St. Peter's Square, 27 February 2013
On 11 February 2013, the Vatican confirmed that Benedict would resign the papacy on 28 February 2013, as a result of his advanced age,[230] becoming the first pope to resign since Gregory XII in 1415.[231] At the age of 85 years and 318 days on the effective date of his retirement, he was the fourth-oldest person to hold the office of pope. The move was unexpected,[232] as all popes in modern times had held office until death. Benedict was the first pope to resign without external pressure since Celestine V in 1294.[233][234]
In his declaration of 10 February 2013, Benedict resigned as "Bishop of Rome, Successor of Saint Peter".[235] In a statement, he cited his deteriorating strength and the physical and mental demands of the papacy;[236] addressing his cardinals in Latin, he gave a brief statement announcing his resignation. He also declared that he would continue to serve the Church "through a life dedicated to prayer".[236]
According to a statement from the Vatican, the timing of the resignation was not caused by any specific illness but was to "avoid that exhausting rush of Easter engagements".[237] After two weeks of ceremonial farewells, the Pope left office at the appointed time and sede vacante was declared. Benedict was succeeded by Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio, who took the papal name of Francis on 13 March 2013.
On the eve of the first anniversary of Benedict's resignation he wrote to La Stampa to deny speculation he had been forced to step down. "There isn't the slightest doubt about the validity of my resignation from the Petrine ministry," he wrote in a letter to the newspaper. "The only condition for the validity is the full freedom of the decision. Speculation about its invalidity is simply absurd," he wrote.[238] In an interview on 28 February 2021, Benedict again repeated the legitimacy of his resignation.[239][240][241]
Pope emeritus: 2013 2022
On the morning of 28 February 2013, Benedict met with the full College of Cardinals and in the early afternoon flew by helicopter to the papal summer residence of Castel Gandolfo. He stayed there until refurbishment was completed on his retirement home, the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery in the Vatican Gardens near St. Peter's, former home of twelve nuns, where he moved on 2 May 2013.[242][243]
 Pope emeritus Benedict XVI with Pope Francis (left) in the Vatican Gardens, July 2013
After his resignation, Benedict retained his papal name rather than reverting to his birth name.[9] He continued to wear the white cassock but without the pellegrina or the fascia. He ceased wearing red papal shoes.[244][245] Benedict returned his official Fisherman's Ring, which was rendered unusable by making two large cuts across its face.[246]
According to a Vatican spokesman, Benedict spent his first day as Pope emeritus with Archbishop Georg G nswein, Prefect of the Papal Household.[247] In the monastery, the pope emeritus did not live a cloistered life, but studied and wrote.[243] He joined Pope Francis several months later at the unveiling of a new statue of Saint Michael the Archangel. The inscription on the statue, according to Cardinal Giovanni Lajolo, has the coat of arms of the two popes to symbolize the fact that the statue was commissioned by Benedict and consecrated by Francis.[248]
In 2013 it was reported that Benedict had multiple health problems including high blood pressure and fallen out of bed more than once, but the Holy See denied any specific illnesses.[249] The former pope made his first public appearance after his resignation at St. Peter's Basilica on 22 February 2014 to attend the first papal consistory of his successor Francis. Benedict entered the basilica through a discreet entrance and was seated in a row with several other cardinals. He doffed his zucchetto when Francis came down the nave of St. Peter's Basilica to greet him.[250] He then made an appearance at the canonization mass of Popes John XXIII and John Paul II, greeting the cardinals and Francis.
 Benedict in 2014
In August 2014, Benedict celebrated Mass at the Vatican and met with his former doctoral students, an annual tradition he had kept since the 1970s.[251] He attended the beatification of Pope Paul VI in October 2014.[252] Weeks before this, he joined Francis in Saint Peter's Square for an audience with grandparents to honour their importance in society.[253]
Benedict wrote the text of a speech, delivered by Archbishop Georg G nswein, on the occasion of the dedication of the Aula Magna at the Pontifical Urbaniana University to the pope emeritus, "a gesture of gratitude for what he has done for the Church as a conciliar expert, with his teaching as professor, as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and, finally, the Magisterium." The ceremony took place on Tuesday, 21 October 2014, during the opening of the academic year.[254]
Benedict attended the consistory for new cardinals in February 2015, greeting Francis at the beginning of the celebration.[255] In the summer of 2015, Benedict spent two weeks at Castel Gandolfo, at the invitation of Pope Francis. While at Castel Gandolfo, Benedict participated in two public events. He received two honorary doctorates given to him by Cardinal Stanislaw Dziwisz, Pope John Paul II's longtime aide, from the Pontifical University of John Paul II and the Krak w Academy of Music.[256] In his reception address, Benedict paid homage to his predecessor, John Paul II.[256]
The Joseph Ratzinger Benedict XVI Roman Library at the Pontifical Teutonic College was announced in April 2015 and was scheduled to open to scholars in November 2015.[257] The library section dedicated to his life and thought is being catalogued. It includes books by or about him and his studies, many donated by Benedict himself.[258][259]
Benedict, in August 2015, submitted a handwritten card to act as a testimony to the cause of canonization of Pope John Paul I.[260][261]
In March 2016, Benedict gave an interview expressing his views on mercy and endorsing Francis's stress on mercy in his pastoral practice.[262] Also that month, a Vatican spokesman stated that Benedict was "slowly, serenely fading" in his physical health, although his mental capacity remained "perfectly lucid".[263]
The pope emeritus was honoured by the Roman Curia and Francis in 2016 at a special audience, honouring the 65th anniversary of his ordination to the priesthood. That November, he did not attend the consistory for new cardinals, rather meeting with them and Francis at his residence afterward.[264] Following the death of Cardinal Paulo Evaristo Arns in December 2016, Benedict became the last living person appointed cardinal by Pope Paul VI.[265]
 Benedict in 2019
In June 2017, Benedict received newly created cardinals in his chapel and spoke with each of them in their native language.[266] In July 2017, he sent a message through his private secretary for the funeral of Cardinal Joachim Meisner, who had suddenly died while on vacation in Germany.[267]
In November 2017, images emerged on the Facebook page of the Bishop of Passau, Stefan Oster, of Benedict with a black eye; the bishop and author Peter Seewald visited the former pope on 26 October since the pair were presenting Benedict with the new book Benedict XVI   The German Pope which the Passau diocese created. The former pope suffered the hematoma earlier after having slipped.[268]
In late 2019, Benedict collaborated on a book expressing that the Catholic Church must maintain its discipline of clerical celibacy, in light of ongoing debate on the issue, though later requested his name to be removed from the book as co-author.[269][270][271]
In June 2020, Benedict visited his dying brother Georg in Germany for the last time.[272][273] Georg died on 1 July, aged 96.[274]
On 3 August 2020, Benedict's aides disclosed that he had an inflammation of the trigeminal nerve.[275] On 2 December of the same year, Maltese cardinal Mario Grech announced to Vatican News that Benedict had difficulty speaking and that he had told the new cardinals after the consistory that "the Lord has taken away my speech in order to let me appreciate silence".[276]
Benedict became the longest-lived pope on 4 September 2020 at 93 years, 4 months, 16 days, surpassing the age of Pope Leo XIII.[277][278] In January 2021, Benedict and Francis each received doses of a COVID-19 vaccine.[279] On 29 June 2021, the pope emeritus celebrated his platinum jubilee (70th anniversary) as a priest.[280]
Following the consistory of 27 August 2022, Francis and the newly created cardinals paid a brief visit to Benedict at Mater Ecclesiae Monastery.[281]
Death and funeral
Main article: Death and funeral of Pope Benedict XVI
Worsening health and death
Wikinews has related news:
 Pope Benedict XVI dies at age 95
 Italian president Sergio Mattarella paying respects to the body of Benedict XVI at St. Peter's Basilica
On 28 December 2022, Pope Francis said at the end of his audience that Benedict was "very sick" and asked God to "comfort him and support him in this testimony of love for the Church until the end".[282] The same day, Matteo Bruni, the director of the Holy See Press Office, stated that "in the last few hours there has been an aggravation of [Benedict's] health due to advancing age" and that he was under medical care. Bruni also stated that Francis visited Benedict at the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery after the audience.[283][284]
Benedict died on 31 December 2022 at 9:34 am Central European Time at the Mater Ecclesiae Monastery. He was 95 years old. His long-time secretary, Georg G nswein, reported that his last words were "Signore ti amo" (Italian for 'Lord, I love you')).[285][286][287]
Funeral
From 2 to 4 January 2023, Benedict's body lay in state in St. Peter's Basilica, during which around 195,000 people paid their respects.[288] His funeral took place on 5 January 2023 in St. Peter's Square at 9:30 am, presided over by Pope Francis and celebrated by Cardinal Giovanni Battista Re.[289] This was the first time since 1802 that a pope had attended a funeral for his predecessor.[290] The funeral was attended by an estimated 50,000 people.[291] Some attendees held signs reading or shouted "Santo subito", calling for his elevation to sainthood, a cry heard previously at the funeral of John Paul II.[292] Benedict was interred in the crypt beneath St. Peter's Basilica, in the same tomb originally occupied by John Paul II before his beatification in 2011.[291] The tomb was opened to the public on 8 January 2023.[293]
Titles and styles
As Pope, Benedict's rarely-used full title was:His Holiness Benedict XVI, Bishop of Rome, Vicar of Jesus Christ, Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church, Primate of Italy, Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province, Sovereign of the Vatican City State, Servant of the servants of God.[294]The best-known title, that of "Pope", did not appear in the official list of titles, but is commonly used in the titles of documents, and appears, in abbreviated form, in their signatures as "PP." standing for "Papa" ("Pope").[295][296][297][298][299]
Before 1 March 2006, the list of titles also used to contain that of a "Patriarch of the West", which traditionally appeared in that list of titles before "Primate of Italy". The title of "Patriarch of the West" was removed in the 2006 edition of Annuario Pontificio. According to Achille Silvestrini, Benedict chose to remove the title at a time as a "sign of ecumenical sensitivity" on the issue of papal primacy.[300]
After his resignation, the official style of the former pope in English was His Holiness Benedict XVI, Supreme Pontiff emeritus or Pope emeritus.[301] Less formally he was referred to as Emeritus Pope or Roman Pontifex Emeritus.[302] Moreover, according to the 1983 Code of Canon Law, he was also bishop emeritus of Rome, retaining the sacred character received at his ordination as a bishop and receiving the title of emeritus of his diocese; although he did not use this style.[303] The pope emeritus had personally preferred to be simply known as "Father".[304]
Positions on morality and politics
Contraception and HIV/AIDS
In 2005, the Pope listed several ways to combat the spread of HIV, including chastity, fidelity in marriage, and anti-poverty efforts; he also rejected the use of condoms.[305] The alleged Vatican investigation of whether there are any cases when married persons may use condoms to protect against the spread of infections surprised many Catholics in the wake of John Paul II's consistent refusal to consider condom use in response to AIDS.[306] However, the Vatican has since stated that no such change in the Church's teaching can occur.[307] TIME also reported in its edition of 30 April 2006 that the Vatican's position remains what it always has been with Vatican officials "flatly dismiss[ing] reports that the Vatican is about to release a document that will condone any condom use."[307]
In March 2009, the Pope stated:
I would say that this problem of AIDS cannot be overcome merely with money, necessary though it is. If there is no human dimension, if Africans do not help, the problem cannot be overcome by the distribution of prophylactics: on the contrary, they increase it. The solution must have two elements: firstly, bringing out the human dimension of sexuality, that is to say a spiritual and human renewal that would bring with it a new way of behaving towards others, and secondly, true friendship offered above all to those who are suffering, a willingness to make sacrifices and to practise self-denial, to be alongside the suffering.[308]
In November 2010, in a book-length interview, Benedict, using the example of male prostitutes, stated that the use of condoms, with the intention of reducing the risk of HIV infection, may be an indication that the prostitute is intending to reduce the evil connected with his immoral activity.[309] In the same interview, the Pope also reiterated the traditional teaching of the Church that condoms are not seen as a "real or moral solution" to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Further, in December 2010, the Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith explained that Benedict's statement did not constitute a legitimization of either contraception or prostitution, which remains gravely immoral.[309]
Homosexuality
See also: Catholic Church and homosexuality
During his time as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (CDF), Cardinal Ratzinger made several efforts to tackle the issue of homosexuality within the Catholic Church and the wider world. In 1986 the CDF sent a letter to all bishops entitled: On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons. The letter condemned a liberal interpretation of the earlier CDF document Declaration on Certain Questions Concerning Sexual Ethics, which had led to a "benign" attitude "to the homosexual condition itself". On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons clarified that the Church's position on homosexuality was that "although the particular inclination of the homosexual person is not a sin, it is a more or less strong tendency ordered toward an intrinsic moral evil; and thus the inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder."[310] However, the document also condemned homophobic attacks and violence, stating that "It is deplorable that homosexual persons have been and are the object of violent malice in speech or in action. Such treatment deserves condemnation from the Church's pastors wherever it occurs."[310]
In 1992, Ratzinger again approved CDF documents declaring that homosexual "inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder" and extended this principle to civil law. "Sexual orientation", the document said, was not equivalent to race or ethnicity, and it declared that it was "not unjust discrimination to take sexual orientation into account."[311]
On 22 December 2008, Benedict gave an end-of-year message to the Roman Curia in which he talked about gender and the important distinction between men and women. He said that the Church viewed the distinction as central to human nature, and "asks that this order of creation be respected". In his words, the Church must "protect man from self-destruction". He said "something like a human ecology" was needed, and added: "Rain forests deserve indeed to be protected, but no less so does man." He attacked "gender theories", which he described as "man's attempt at self-emancipation from creation and the Creator."[312][313][314]
LGBT groups, such as the Italian Arcigay and German LSVD, announced that they found Benedict's comments homophobic.[315] Aurelio Mancuso, head of Arcigay, said "A divine programme for men and women is out of line with nature, where the roles are not so clear."[313] Canadian author Daniel Gawthrop, in a critical biography, The Trial of Pope Benedict, said that the Pope blamed homosexuality "for a problem the church had willingly enabled for hundreds of years".[316]
Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi claimed the Pope had not wished specifically to attack people with homosexual inclinations, and had not mentioned gays or lesbians in his text. Lombardi insisted that there had been an overreaction to the pope's remarks, saying: "He was speaking more generally about gender theories which overlook the fundamental difference in creation between men and women and focus instead on cultural conditioning." Nevertheless, the remarks were interpreted as a call to save mankind from homosexuals and transsexuals.[313]
Same-sex marriage
In an address to a conference of the Diocese of Rome held at the basilica of St. John Lateran 6 June 2005, Benedict remarked on the issues of same-sex marriage and abortion:[317]
The various forms of the dissolution of matrimony today, like free unions, trial marriages and going up to pseudo-matrimonies by people of the same sex, are rather expressions of an anarchic freedom that wrongly passes for true freedom of man...from here it becomes all the more clear how contrary it is to human love, to the profound vocation of man and woman, to systematically close their union to the gift of life, and even worse to suppress or tamper with the life that is born.
During a 2012 Christmas speech,[318] Benedict made remarks about the present-day interpretation of the notion of gender. He stated that a new philosophy of sexuality, which he rejects, suggests that "sex is no longer a given element of nature, that man has to accept and personally make sense of: it is a social role that we choose for ourselves", and "The words of the creation account: 'male and female he created them' (Gen 1:27) no longer apply". Although he did not mention the topic, his words were interpreted by news media as denunciations of same-sex marriage,[319] with some outlets adding that Benedict would have called it a threat to world peace similar to abortion and euthanasia.[320] In March 2012, he stated that heterosexual marriages should be defended from "every possible misrepresentation of their true nature".[321]
International relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the Holy See
Migrants and refugees
In a message released 14 November 2006, during a Vatican press conference for the 2007 annual observance of World Day for Migrants and Refugees, the Pope urged the ratification of international conventions and policies that defend all migrants, including refugees, exiles, evacuees and internally displaced persons. "The church encourages the ratification of the international legal instruments that aim to defend the rights of migrants, refugees and their families," the Pope said. "Much is already being done for the integration of the families of immigrants, although much still remains to be done."[322]
Benedict also promoted various UN events, such as World Refugee Day, on which he offered up special prayers for refugees and called for the international community to do more to secure refugees' human rights. He also called on Catholic communities and organizations to offer them concrete help.[323]
In 2015, it was reported that Benedict was "praying for migrants and refugees" from Syria.[324]
China
Main article: China Holy See relations
In 2007, Benedict sent a letter at Easter to Catholics in China that could have wide-ranging implications for the Church's relationship with China's leadership. The letter provides long-requested guidance to Chinese bishops on how to respond to illicitly ordained bishops, as well as how to strengthen ties with the Patriotic Association and the Communist government.[325]
Korea
On 13 November 2006, Benedict said that the dispute over the North Korea nuclear weapons program should be resolved through negotiations, in his first public comment on the security issue, a news report said. "The Holy See encourages bilateral or multilateral negotiations, convinced that the solution must be sought through peaceful means and in respect for agreements taken by all sides to obtain the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula." Benedict was talking to the new Japanese ambassador to the Vatican.[326]
Turkey
Main article: Holy See Turkey relations
In a 2004 Le Figaro interview, Ratzinger said that Turkey, which is demographically Muslim but governmentally secular by virtue of its state constitution, should seek its future in an association of Muslim nations rather than the European Union, which Ratzinger stated has Christian roots. He said Turkey had always been "in permanent contrast to Europe and that linking it to Europe would be a mistake".[327]
Later visiting the country to "reiterate the solidarity between the cultures," it was reported that Benedict made a counter-statement backing Turkey's bid to join the EU. Turkish prime mimister Recep Tayyip Erdo an said that the Pope told him in their meeting that while the Vatican seeks to stay out of politics, it desires Turkey's membership in the EU.[328][329] However, the Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople implied that support for Turkey's membership in the European Union would be contingent on the establishment of religious freedom in Turkey:[330] "In every step towards unification, minorities must be protected, with their cultural traditions and the distinguishing features of their religion."[176]
Israel
Main article: Holy See Israel relations
In May 2009, Benedict visited Israel.[331][332] This was the third Papal visit to the Holy Land, the previous ones being made by Paul VI in 1964 and John Paul II in 2000.
Vietnam
Main article: Holy See Vietnam relations
Vietnamese prime minister Nguy n T n D ng met with Benedict at the Vatican on 25 January 2007 in a "new and important step towards establishing diplomatic ties".[333] The Pope met with Vietnamese president Nguy n Minh Tri t on 11 December 2009. Vatican officials called the meeting "a significant stage in the progress of bilateral relations with Vietnam."[334]
Global economy
In July 2009, Benedict published his third encyclical, Caritas in veritate[335] (Charity in truth), setting out the philosophical and moral foundations for human development, individually and collectively, in striving for the common good. This was the last encyclical of Benedict XVI's papacy.
Caritas in veritate makes a case for the charitable distribution of wealth in considerable detail and discusses the environment, migration, terrorism, sexual tourism, bioethics, energy and population. The Financial Times reported that Benedict's advocacy for a fairer redistribution of wealth helped set the agenda for the 2009 July G8 summit.[336][337]
Also included in Charity in Truth is advocacy for tax choice:
One possible approach to development aid would be to apply effectively what is known as fiscal subsidiarity, allowing citizens to decide how to allocate a portion of the taxes they pay to the State. Provided it does not degenerate into the promotion of special interests, this can help to stimulate forms of welfare solidarity from below, with obvious benefits in the area of solidarity for development as well.[335]
Nuclear energy
Benedict called for nuclear disarmament. At the same time, he supported the peaceful use of nuclear energy as a tool for development and the fight against poverty. In his message for the 50th anniversary of the founding of the International Atomic Energy Agency, he confirmed: "The Holy See, fully approving of the IAEA's goal, has been a member from the organisation's foundation and continues to support its activity."[338]
Personal life
 Benedict at the Synod of Bishops in Rome, 2008
Benedict was known to be deeply interested in classical music,[21] and was an accomplished pianist.[339] His favourite composer was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, of whose music he said: "His music is by no means just entertainment; it contains the whole tragedy of human existence."[340] Benedict also stated that Mozart's music affected him greatly as a young man and "deeply penetrated his soul".[340] Benedict's favourite works of music were Mozart's Clarinet Concerto and Clarinet Quintet.[341] He recorded an album of contemporary classical music in which he sings and recites prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary.[342] The album was set for release on 30 November 2009. Benedict was also known to be fond of cats.[21] As Cardinal Ratzinger, he was known (according to former neighbours) to look after stray cats in his neighbourhood, Borgo. A book called Joseph and Chico: A Cat Recounts the Life of Pope Benedict XVI was published in 2007 which told the story of the Pope's life from the feline Chico's perspective. This story was inspired by an orange tabby Pentling cat, which belonged to the family next door.[343] During his trip to Australia for World Youth Day in 2008, the media reported that festival organizers lent the Pope a grey cat called Bella[344] to keep him company during his stay.[345]
Social networking
In December 2012, the Vatican announced that Benedict XVI had joined social networking website Twitter, under the handle @Pontifex.[346] His first tweet was made on 12 December and was "Dear friends, I am pleased to get in touch with you through Twitter. Thank you for your generous response. I bless all of you from my heart."[347] On 28 February 2013, the day he retired, the tweets were archived, and @Pontifex read "Sede Vacante".[348] Pope Francis took control of the @Pontifex account upon his election.[349]
Honours and awards
 In 2013, one of Notre-Dame de Paris' new bells was named Beno t-Joseph after Benedict.
A variety of awards and honours were given to Benedict including the following:
1999 Bailiff Grand Cross of Honour and Devotion of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta[350]
2010 honorary citizen of Romano Canavese, in Piedmont[351]
2010 honorary citizen of Lisbon, honouring his visit to the city on 11 12 May 2010[352]
The asteroid 8661 Ratzinger was named in his honour for the role he played in supervising the opening of the Vatican Apostolic Archive in 1998 to researchers investigating judicial errors against Galileo and other scientists. The name was proposed by the asteroid's discoverers, L. D. Schmadel and F. Borngen at Tautenburg.[353]
Arms
Main article: Coat of arms of Pope Benedict XVI
Coat of arms of Pope Benedict XVI
Notes
The coat of arms of Pope Benedict XVI was designed by then Archbishop Andrea Cordero Lanza di Montezemolo (who later was created a Cardinal) soon after the papal election. Benedict's coat of arms omitted the papal tiara, which traditionally appears in the background to designate the pope's position as a worldly ruler such as a king, replacing it with a simple mitre, emphasising his spiritual authority.[354]
Escutcheon
Gules, chape in or, with the scallop shell of the second; the dexter chape with a Moor's head in natural colour, crowned and collared of the first, the sinister chape a bear trippant in natural colour, carrying a pack gules belted sable
Symbolism
Scallop shell: The symbolism of the scallop shell is multiple; one reference is to Saint Augustine. While a doctoral candidate in 1953, Ratzinger wrote his thesis The People and the House of God in St Augustine's Doctrine of the Church,[355] and therefore has a personal connection with the thought of this Doctor of the Church.Moor of Freising: The Moor's head is an heraldic charge associated with Freising, Germany.Corbinian's bear: A legend states that while travelling to Rome, Saint Corbinian's pack horse was killed by a bear. He commanded the bear to carry the load. Once he arrived, he released it from his service, and it returned to Bavaria. The implication is that "Christianity tamed and domesticated the ferocity of paganism and thus laid the foundations for a great civilisation in the Duchy of Bavaria." At the same time, Corbinian's bear, as God's beast of burden, symbolizes the weight of office that Benedict carried.
Writings
Main article: Pope Benedict XVI bibliography
Benedict XVI wrote 66 books, three encyclicals, and four apostolic exhortations.[356]
Legacy
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (January 2023)
At his death, prior criticism of Benedict XVI received renewed attention, particularly that from public health officials, anti-AIDS activists, and victim's rights organizations over his handling of sexual abuse cases within the Catholic Church and position on usage of condoms in areas of high HIV transmission.[221][222][357]
Both Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby and Patriarch Kirill of Moscow expressed their condolences at Benedict's death. Welby referred to the former pope as "one of the greatest theologians of his age", while Kirill praised conciliatory efforts undertaken between the Catholic and Russian Orthodox churches during Benedict's pontificate.[358]
Some Catholics have called for Benedict's recognition as a Doctor of the Church,[292][359] with Cardinal Gerhard M ller describing him as a "true doctor of the Church for today."[360]
See also
Cardinals created by Benedict XVI
List of German universities affiliated with Pope Benedict XVI
Papal regalia and insignia   papal attire
Three Secrets of F tima   document on the release of the Third Secret of F tima
References
^ Pope Benedict XVI (12 March 2008), Boethius and Cassiodorus, archived from the original on 28 December 2008, retrieved 4 November 2009
^ "Udienza Generale del 18 aprile 2007: Clemente Alessandrino | Benedetto XVI". w2.vatican.va.
^ "General Audience of 14 May 2008: Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite | BENEDICT XVI". w2.vatican.va.
^ "General Audience, 23 August 2006: John, "the Seer of Patmos" | BENEDICT XVI". w2.vatican.va.
^ "General Audience of 4 May 2011: Man in Prayer (1) | BENEDICT XVI". w2.vatican.va.
^ "Benedict XVI, General Audience: Saint Teresa of Avila". Vatican.va. Vatican Publishing House. 2 February 2011.
^ Pope Benedict XVI 2007, pp. 24 27.
^ "Vladimir Soloviev, the Mystic Admired by Popes". NCR.
^ a b "Benedict XVI will be 'Pope emeritus'". The Vatican Today. Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2013. Benedict XVI will be "Pontiff emeritus" or "Pope emeritus", as Fr. Federico Lombardi, S.J., director of the Holy See Press Office, reported in a press conference on the final days of the current pontificate. He will keep the name of "His Holiness, Benedict XVI" and will dress in a simple white cassock without the mozzetta (elbow-length cape).
^ Petin, Edward (26 February 2013). "Benedict's New Name: Pope Emeritus, His Holiness Benedict XVI, Roman Pontiff Emeritus". Retrieved 23 June 2018.
^ Walsh, Mary Ann (2005). From Pope John Paul II to Benedict XVI: an inside look at the end of an era, the beginning of a new one, and the future of the church. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 135. ISBN 1-58051-202-X.
^ Owen, Richard (6 June 2008). "Vatican to publish entire work by bestselling author Pope Benedict XVI". The Times. London. Retrieved 10 February 2019.
^ "Disillusioned German Catholics: From Liberal to Conservative". Der Spiegel. 20 September 2011. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ Gledhill, Ruth "Pope set to bring back Latin Mass that divided the Church", The Times, 11 October 2006. Retrieved 21 November 2010 WebCitation archive
^ Tom Kington in Rome (31 August 2012). "Pope Benedict to open new Latin academy in the Vatican". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ a b Allen, Charlotte (17 February 2013). "Pope Benedict XVI, the pontiff of aesthetics". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "Men in White: Pope to meet Benedict XVI". The Sydney Morning Herald. 21 March 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "In 6 Languages, Benedict XVI Gets Comfortable With His Audience". The New York Times. 27 April 2005. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 4 September 2022.
^ Babbel.com; GmbH, Lesson Nine. "The Tale of the Polyglot Pope". Babbel Magazine. Retrieved 4 September 2022.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI: Quick Facts". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. Retrieved 4 November 2007.
^ a b c Willey, David (13 May 2005). "Pope Benedict's creature comforts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 March 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Parker, Claire (31 December 2022). "The significant   and controversial   statements that shaped Pope Benedict XVI's legacy". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Winfield, Nicole (31 December 2022). "Benedict XVI, pope who resigned to spend final years in quiet, dies at 95". PBS NewsHour. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Vatican Radio   Pope Benedict: proud to be part of Tyrol a "land made by Angels"". En.radiovaticana.va. 9 November 2011. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ Georg Ratzinger
^ "Benedict XVI's last remaining sibling, Georg Ratzinger, has died". America Magazine. 1 July 2020. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Mrugala, Anette (10 July 2009). ""Papst-Schule" eingeweiht" ["Pope school" opened] (in German). Innsalzach24.de. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2011.
^ Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's enforcer of the faith. John L. Allen, 2000. p. 14
^ Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's enforcer of the faith. John L. Allen, 2000. p. 15
^ Landler, Mark; Bernstein, Richard (22 April 2005). "A Future Pope Is Recalled: A Lover of Cats and Mozart, Dazzled by Church as a Boy". The New York Times.
^ Zweite Durchf hrungsverordnung zum Gesetz  ber die Hitler-Jugend (Jugenddienstverordnung) vom 25. M rz 1939 Archived 23 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine (  1)
^ a b "New Pope Defied Nazis As Teen During WWII". USA Today. Associated Press. 23 April 2005. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2009.
^ Allen, John (14 October 2005). "Anti-Nazi Prelate Beatified". The Word from Rome. National Catholic Reporter. Retrieved 15 April 2008.
^ Pope Benedict XVI; Thornton, John F.; Varenne, Susan B. (2007). The Essential Pope Benedict XVI: His Central Writings and Speeches. HarperCollins. pp. xxxix xl. ISBN 978-0-06-112883-7.
^ a b "Pope Recalls Being German POW". Fox News. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2018.
^ Ratzinger, Josef Kardinal;  et al. (Seewald, Peter) (2004). Salz der Erde (in German) (2nd ed.). Munich, Germany: Wilhelm Heyne Verlag. p. 61. ISBN 3-453-87942-2.
^ Ratzinger, Joseph Cardinal (1998). Milestones: Memoirs 1927 1977. Translated by Leiva-Merikakis, Erasmo. Ignatius Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-89870-702-1.
^ "Biographical notes of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI | BENEDICT XVI". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "The Intellectual Relationship between Joseph Ratzinger and Romano Guardini | EWTN". EWTN Global Catholic Television Network. Retrieved 27 January 2023.
^ "The Lord by Roman Guardini, 1996, reprint of 1954 first English translation". Regnery Publishing.
^ Esteves, Junno Arocho (29 June 2021). "The Turning Point". Catholic Review. Retrieved 27 January 2022.
^ "Hans K ng and Pope Benedict". noisiamochiesa.org. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Between Context and Christology: The Role of History in the Reconstruction of Christological Images". Theology Research News. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Retrieving Rahner for Orthodox Catholicism". EWTN. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Van Biema, David (24 April 2005). "The Turning Point". Time. Archived from the original on 15 December 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2011.
^ Wakin, Daniel J.; Bernstein, Richard; Landler, Mark (24 April 2005). "Turbulence on Campus in 60's Hardened Views of Future Pope". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 8 June 2005.
^ "Hesburgh sought Ratzinger for spot on ND faculty". Notre Dame News. Retrieved 15 March 2021.
^ Ostling, Richard N.; Moody, John; Morris, Nomi (6 December 1993). "Keeper of the Straight and Narrow". Time. Archived from the original on 23 August 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2009.
^ "Really?". Commonweal. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Dulles, s.j., Avery (October 1983). "The Catholicity of the Augsburg Confession". The Journal of Religion. 63 (4): 337 354. doi:10.1086/487060. JSTOR 1203403. S2CID 170148693.
^ Fahlbusch, Erwin; Bromiley, Geoffrey William; Barrett, David B. (1999). "Evangelical Catholicity". The Encyclopedia of Christianity. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 90-04-11695-8.
^ "Cardinal Sch nborn Explains What Ratzinger Students Will Discuss | ZENIT   The World Seen From Rome". ZENIT. 30 August 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ Alexander, Fr (31 August 2012). "Ecumenism is of 'primary importance' to the Pope, says Cardinal Sch nborn". Catholic Herald. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ CNS. "Pope Benedict One of Most Respected Theologians". Georgiabulletin.org. Archived from the original on 4 September 2011. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "SEGRETARIA DI STATO" [SECRETARIAT OF STATE] (PDF). Diarium Romanae Curiae. Acta Apostolicae Sedis   Commentarium Officiale (in Italian). LXVIII (9): 589. 30 September 1976. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2022.
^ "Biography of His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI". The Holy See. Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 19 April 2005. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019.
^ "To be 'cooperatores veritatis'". L'Osservatore Romano. 19 November 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2022.
^ Ratzinger, Joseph Cardinal (1998). Milestones: Memoirs 1927 1977. Translated by Leiva-Merikakis, Erasmo. Ignatius Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-89870-702-1.
^ Thavis, John; Wooden, Cindy (19 April 2005). "Cardinal Ratzinger, guardian of church doctrine, elected 265th pope". Catholic News Service. Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2009.
^ theology   Biography Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger / Pope Benedict XVI   Mitgliedschaften   EuropAcad   1991
^ Biography of Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger / Pope Benedict XVI Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine   Mitgliedschaften   EuropAcad   1991
^ "Dominus Iesus". vatican.va.
^ Doward, Jamie (24 April 2005). "Pope 'obstructed' sex abuse inquiry". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 31 October 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2007.
^ Sex Crimes and the Vatican (Quotation from an October 2006 BBC documentary):
"The man in charge of enforcing it for 20 years was Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, the man made Pope last year. In 2001 he created the successor to the decree."
^ "UK Bishops Angered by BBC Attack on Pope". Eternal Word Television Network. Catholic News Agency. 2 October 2006. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2008.
^ "Pope seeks immunity in Texas abuse case", The Sydney Morning Herald 17 August 2005. Retrieved 8 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Caldwell, Simon "Pope Benedict wanted to be a librarian" The Daily Telegraph, 5 August 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "Cardinal Ratzinger asked to resign in 1997, become Vatican librarian | News Headlines". catholicculture.org.
^ Benedict XVI; Habermas, J rgen (2006). Dialectics of Secularization: On Reason and Religion. Ignatius Press. ISBN 978-1-58617-166-7.
^ Sullivan, Andrew (18 April 2005). "Time 100 2005". Time. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 3 April 2013.
^ Wittl, Wolfgang. "Blau-wei  gekachelte Bescheidenheit". S ddeutsche.de (in German). Retrieved 2 January 2023.
^ a b Goodstein, Laurie and Elisabetta Povoledo (11 March 2013). "Before Smoke Rises at Vatican, It's Romans vs. the Reformers". The New York Times.
^ Ivereigh, Austen (11 March 2013). "Does cardinal confusion spell a long conclave?". Our Sunday Visitor. Archived from the original on 16 March 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013.
^ Cormac Murphy-O'Connor speaking on BBC Radio 4's Midweek, 13 May 2015
^ Pizzey, Allen "Benedict: I Prayed Not To Be Pope", CBS News, 11 February 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "First greeting of His Holiness Benedict XVI". The Holy See. 19 April 2005. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Mass, Imposition of the Pallium and Conferral of the Fisherman's ring for the beginning of the Petrine ministry of the Bishop of Rome". vatican.va. 24 April 2005. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Mass of possession of the chair of the Bishop of Rome". vatican.va. 7 May 2005. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Horowitz, Jason; Povoledo, Elisabetta (31 December 2022). "Pope Benedict XVI DiesUpdates: Pope Francis Will Preside Over Benedict's Funeral on Thursday". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "General Audience of 27 April 2005 | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ Aldern, Natalie. "16 Babies Baptized by Benedict in Sistine Chapel". Italy Magazine. Retrieved 11 August 2021.
^ "Response of His Holiness Benedict XVI for the examination of the cause for beatification and canonization of the Servant of God John Paul II". Vatican.va. 9 May 2005. Archived from the original on 10 November 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Drummer, Alexander (13 May 2005). "Waiting Period Waived for John Paul II". Zenit News Agency. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 24 September 2011.
^ Drummer, Alexander (28 June 2005). "John Paul II's Cause for Beatification Opens". Zenit News Agency. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2011.
^ "Our Founder". Congregation of Holy Cross. 24 August 2011. Archived from the original on 16 October 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ "Pope beatifies Cardinal Newman as his UK tour ends (with video clip)". BBC News. 19 September 2010.
^ "Communiqu  on beatification process". Vatican.va. 29 September 2005. Archived from the original on 3 November 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "How Do You Become a Saint? What to Know About Canonization". NBC News. Retrieved 11 August 2021.
^ "Canonization of the Blesseds". Vatican.va. 23 October 2005. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope Schedules Five Canonizations for May June". EWTN. 23 February 2007. Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Malta to get its first saint". CathNews. 2 March 2007. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ "Pope Announces Canonisation of India's First Native Woman Saint". Vatican Radio. 1 March 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2013.
^ "26 April 2009: Holy Mass for the Canonization of Arcangelo Tadini, Bernardo Tolomei, Nuno de Santa Maria Alvares Pereira, Gertrude Comensoli and Caterina Volpicelli | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ "Pope canonises 'lepers' apostle' and four others". Archived from the original on 25 September 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
^ "11 October 2009: Canonization of five new Saints: Zygmunt Szcz sny Feli ski, Francisco Coll y Guitart, Josef Daamian de Veuster, Rafael Arn iz Bar n, Marie de la Croix (Jeanne) Jugan | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ Winfield, Nicole "Pope Creates First Australian Saint, 5 Others" AOL News 17 October 2010. Retrieved 26 January 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Kerr, David "Pope Benedict canonizes three new saints"
^ Glatz, Carol "Pope advances sainthood causes of Kateri Tekakwitha, others" Archived 30 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine The Tidings Online 23 December 2011. Retrieved 13 January 2012
^ Donadio, Rachel "Pope Canonizes 7 Saints, Including 2 Women With New York Ties" The New York Times, 21 October 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012
^ "Pope names 2 church doctors: preacher St. John of Avila and mystic St. Hildegard of Bingen". Fox News. 26 June 2012. Retrieved 9 October 2012.
^ Allen, John L. Jr. (30 May 2006). "Council for Interreligious Dialogue to be restored, Vatican says". National Catholic Reporter. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
^ "Pope appoints Archbishop Fisichella to lead Council for New Evangelization". Catholic News Agency. 30 June 2010. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
^ "Pope transfers responsibility for catechesis, seminaries". Catholic News Agency. 25 January 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
^ Beach, Kevin "What is the role of the Pope?" Catholic Mission Leaflets WebCitation archive
^ "Mass for the Inauguration of the Pontificate of Pope Benedict XVI  Homily of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI". Vatican.va. 24 April 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "To the Clergy of Rome, with Response to Interventions by Roman Clergy". EWTN. 13 May 2005. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "For Electing the Supreme Pontiff". EWTN. 18 April 2005. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ a b Drummer, Alexander (15 April 2007). "Benedict XVI's Book a Pastoral Work". Zenit News Agency. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 24 September 2011.
^ "ST JOSEMAR A". Archived from the original on 28 January 2012. Retrieved 5 November 2005.
^ Drummer, Alexander (7 February 2006). "The Secret of Love, According to Benedict XVI  Pope Explains Encyclical to Readers of Italian Magazine". Zenit News Agency. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
^ "Practicing Catholic Social Teaching is Personal and Spiritual". Catholic Social Teaching in Action. 21 December 2021. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Ratzinger, Joseph Relativism: The Central Problem for Faith Today EWTN May 1996. Retrieved 8 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI to the participants in the Ecclesial Diocesan Convention of Rome" 6 June 2005
 Retrieved 8 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Allen, John L. Jr. (21 August 2005). "Coverage of World Youth Day exclusively by NCR Report #4: Do-it-yourself religion 'cannot ultimately help us,' pope tells youth". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Ratzinger, Joseph (2003). Truth And Tolerance: Christian Belief And World Religions. Ignatius Press. ISBN 1-58617-035-X.
^ "Apostolic Journey to Cologne: Vigil with youth at Marienfeld area (August 20, 2005) | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ a b Drummer, Alexander (29 July 2005). "Cardinal Ratzinger on Europe's Crisis of Culture (Part 4)". Zenit News Agency. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 24 September 2011.
^ "Deus caritas est". Vatican.va. 25 December 2005. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Fisher, Ian "Benedict's First Encyclical Shuns Strictures of Orthodoxy" The New York Times, 26 January 2006. Retrieved 5 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Thavis, John
"The pope needs a theologian? Former papal adviser reveals why" Catholic News Service 30 December 2005. Retrieved 5 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ McMahon, Barbara "Vatican invokes papal copyright" The Guardian 22 January 2006. Retrieved 5 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Thavis, John (30 November 2007). "People need God to have hope, pope in new encyclical". Catholic News Service. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Spe salvi (November 30, 2007) | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ a b Donadio, Rachel (7 July 2009). "Pope Urges Forming New World Economic Order to Work for the 'Common Good'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 December 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ Speciale, Alessandro (4 July 2013). "The light of faith: origin, history and horizon of the christianism". La Stampa. Turin. Archived from the original on 8 July 2013. Retrieved 19 October 2013.
^ Lumen Fidei, 7
^ "Sacramentum Caritatis: Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation on the Eucharist as the Source and Summit of the Church's Life and Mission (22 February 2007) | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ a b "Pope Allows Worldwide Use of Old Latin Mass". Catholic Information Service for Africa. 10 July 2007.
^ a b c d e Pope Benedict XVI. "Letter of His Holiness Benedict XVI to the Bishops on the Occasion of the Publication of the Apostolic Letter Motu Proprio Data Summorum Pontificum, On the Use of the Roman Liturgy Prior to the Reform of 1970". Archived from the original on 10 October 2011.
^ Article 5  4 of the motu proprio
^ Burke, Jason (9 July 2007). "Criticism over return of Latin Mass". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2011.
^ "Pontifical Commission 'Ecclesia Dei'". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ "Pope Francis renews restrictions on old Latin Mass, reversing Benedict XVI". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 19 July 2021.
^ Horowitz, Jason (16 July 2021). "Pope Francis Restricts Use of Old Latin Mass, in a Blow to Conservatives". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021.
^ Winfield, Nicole (10 July 2007). "Pope: Other Christians not true churches". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 November 2009. Retrieved 18 September 2011.
^ "Children in consumerist societies "risk losing hope," says Pope Benedict". Catholic News Agency. 10 December 2007. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2011.
^ "Caritas in veritate Encyclical Letter of 29 June 2009". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope speaks on the Primacy of Peter". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and the Archbishop of Canterbury His Grace Rowan Williams". Vatican.va. 23 November 2006. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "Anglicanorum coetibus Providing for Personal Ordinariates for Anglicans Entering into Full Communion with the Catholic Church (November 4, 2009) | BENEDICT XVI". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Traditionalist Anglicans prepare response to Holy See | VirtueOnline   The Voice for Global Orthodox Anglicanism". virtueonline.org. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "The Chair of Saint Peter (Personal Ordinariate) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Our Lady of Walsingham (Personal Ordinariate) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Our Lady of the Southern Cross (Personal Ordinariate) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "ADL Welcomes Election of Cardinal Ratzinger as New Pope". Archived from the original on 15 January 2013.
^ a b "In quotes: Reaction to Pope election". BBC News. 20 April 2005. Archived from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2009.
^ "Vatican to release Benedict XVI's letter on the use of the Tridentine Mass tomorrow". Catholicnewsagency.com. 6 July 2007. Archived from the original on 15 April 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "Mikulanis says ADL jumped gun, got its facts wrong" San Diego Jewish World. Vol. 1, Number 67. 6 July 2007. Retrieved 2 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Paulson, Michael (24 February 2009). "O'Malley meets Jews over Holocaust flap". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009.
^ "What Is Not True About the Good Friday Prayer for Jews". Zenit News Agency. 27 January 2009. Archived from the original on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2009.
^ Cernera, Anthony J. and Eugene Korn (26 November 1986). "The Latin Liturgy and the Jews". America. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Seminary sacks 'Holocaust bishop'". BBC. 9 February 2009.
^ Willan, Philip.
"Pope readmits Holocaust-denying priest to the church" The Independent 25 January 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2009 WebCitation archive
^ Wensierski, Peter "Williamson's Colleagues Under Fire: SSPX in Germany Criticized over Anti-Semitic Statements" Der Spiegel. 10 February 2009. Retrieved 29 May 2009. WebCitation archive The latest issue of the SSPX's newsletter for German-speaking countries ... contains several anti-Semitic statements. 'The Jewish people were once the chosen people. But the majority of the people denied the Messiah on his first coming,' reads the February issue's cover story .... According to the newsletter article, this is why the Bible's Gospel of Matthew states, 'His blood be upon us and upon our children,' a phrase historically used by some Christians to justify anti-Semitism.
^ "The Society of St. Pius X: Mired in Antisemitism" Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine The Anti-Defamation League 26 January 2009. Retrieved 29 May 2009 "SSPX has promoted theological and conspiratorial anti-Semitism among its adherents."
^ Liphshiz, Cnaan "Report: Vatican readmits society that propagates anti-Semitism". Haaretz. 19 February 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2011. Haaretz 19 February 2009. Retrieved 2 October 2011 "The [web]site from Germany ... clarifies that 'contemporary Jews are for sure guilty of the murder of God, as long as they don't recognise Christ as God.'"
^ "In quotes: Muslim reaction to Pope". BBC. 16 September 2006.
^ a b "Pope sorry for offending Muslims". BBC News. 17 September 2006. Archived from the original on 20 August 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Apostolic Journey to M nchen, Alt tting and Regensburg: Meeting with the representatives of science in the Aula Magna of the University of Regensburg (September 12, 2006) | BENEDICT XVI". vatican.va.
^ "Apostolische Reise nach M nchen, Alt tting und Regensburg: Treffen mit den Vertretern der Wissenschaft in der Aula Magna der Universit t Regensburg (12. September 2006) | BENEDIKT XVI". vatican.va.
^ "Pope to hold seminar with Muslims". CNN. 5 March 2008. Retrieved 8 January 2023.
^ "Final Statement of Catholic-Muslim Forum". Zenit. 6 November 2008. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 2 October 2011.
^ Saleh, Fakhri "Arab Reactions to the Pope's Visit Signs of Hope" Qantara.de 18 May 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "His Holiness the Dalai Lama Greets New Pope". Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017.
^ "Italy: China blamed for absence of Papal audience for Dalai Lama", Adnkronos, 27 November 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009
^ a b c Fisher, Ian (23 May 2007). "Pope Softens Remarks on Conversion of Natives". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 June 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2011.
^ Fisher, Ian "Pope tries to quell anger over speech he gave in Brazil", The New York Times, 23 May 2007. Retrieved 2 October 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Smith, Peter (31 March 2008). "ISKCON Scholar To Meet with the Pope". ISKCON News. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2011.
^ "Young Vaisnava Scholar to Bring a Gift to the Pope". ISKCON News. Washington D.C. 16 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008.
^ "Bhaktivedanta College". Bhaktivedanta College. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013.
^ "ISKCON Scholar Greets Pope on Behalf Of US Hindus". ISKCON News. 19 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013.
^ Alexander, David (15 April 2008). "Despite missteps, pope reaching out to other faiths". Reuters. Archived from the original on 26 July 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2011.
^ Israely, Jeff "The Pope Squares Off With Spain's Secular Champion" "No doubt Benedict was buoyed by the enthusiastic welcome he received in Valencia." Time 9 July 2006. Retrieved 20 November 2010 WebCitation archive
^ Moore, Molly. "Turks Protest Pope's Coming Visit", The Washington Post, 27 November 2006. Retrieved 13 May 2008. WebCitation archive
^ "Massive security for Pope's Turkey visit". Breaking News. 28 November 2006.
^ a b "Common Declaration by His Holiness Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I". Vatican.va. 30 November 2006. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ Vatican Radio "Pope Benedict XVI Going to Vienna" 7 September 2007. Retrieved 26 January 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "Pope honours Austrian Jewish dead". BBC. 7 September 2007.
^ "bundespraesident.de: Der Bundespr sident / Reden / Begr ung Seiner Heiligkeit Papst Benedikt XVI. zum offiziellen Besuch in Deutschland". bundespraesident.de.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI begins first U.S. tour". CNN.
^ "Bush, Thousands of Fans Welcome Pope at White House on His Birthday". Fox News. Associated Press. 16 April 2008. Archived from the original on 7 February 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2008.
^ Elsibai, Nadine (17 April 2008). "Pope Benedict Says Mass Before 47,000 in New Washington Stadium". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012.
^ "UNdemocracy   General Assembly Session 62 meeting 95". 13 August 2011. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011.
^ Duin, Julia. "Youths revel in pope's message", The Washington Times, 20 April 2008. Retrieved 13 May 2008. WebCitation archive
^ Vitello, Paul Vitello, Paul (21 April 2008). "After Ground Zero Prayer, Pope Ministers to 60,000 in Stadium". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 September 2011.
^ "Pope apologises for 'evil' of child sex abuse". Agence France-Presse. 18 July 2008. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Pullella, Philip (19 July 2008). "Pope apologises for Church sex abuse". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope Condemns Materialism as "Pagan"". Huliq.com. 14 September 2008. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope drinks water from Lourdes spring". USA Today. Lourdes, France. Associated Press. 15 September 2008. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
^ Bearak, Barry (21 March 2009). "Pope Tells Clergy in Angola to Work Against Belief in Witchcraft". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ a b "Pope OK after woman knocks him down at Mass". USA Today. 25 December 2009. Archived from the original on 7 February 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Winfield, Nicole (25 December 2009). "Pope delivers Christmas blessing after fall". The Blade. Vatican City. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
^ Goldsmith, Samuel (25 December 2009). "Pope Benedict forgives Susanna Maiolo one day after she knocked him down during Christmas Eve Mass". Daily News. Archived from the original on 29 December 2009. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Wrap-up: Pope Benedict's historic Malta visit ends". The Times of Malta. 18 April 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2010.
^ a b c Pancevski, Bojan; Follain, John (4 April 2010). "John Paul 'ignored abuse of 2,000 boys'". The Sunday Times. London. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2022.
^ a b c Berry, Jason (6 April 2010). "Money paved way for Maciel's influence in the Vatican". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on 21 October 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ Allen, John L (17 March 2010). "Will Ratzinger's past trump Benedict's present?". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 12 September 2010.
^ Nichols, Vincent (26 March 2010). "The Church is not trying to cover anything up". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 31 May 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2010.
^ "Promoter of Justice at Doctrine of Faith on Paedophilia". Catholic News. 13 March 2010. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ "Pope John Paul ignored abuse of 2,000 boys: Report". The Times of India. 4 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2010.
^ a b Owen, Richard (3 April 2010). "Vatican tries to shift blame for abuse on to John Paul  Europe, World News". Irish Independent. Retrieved 15 December 2015.
^ "Pastoral Letter of the Holy Father Benedict XVI to the Catholics of Ireland". Vatican.va. 19 March 2010. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ "Pope's letter fails to calm anger over abuse". The Washington Times. 20 March 2010. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2010.
^ "Pope finalizes letter on abuse". CNN World. 19 March 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2010. Retrieved 26 January 2011.
^ Moskowitz, Eric (21 March 2010). "Pope's letter strikes a mixed chord". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ "Guide to Understanding Basic CDF Procedures concerning Sexual Abuse Allegations". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
^ Winfield, Nicole (12 April 2010). "Vatican to bishops: Follow law, report sex abuse". Newsday. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011. Retrieved 18 September 2010.
^ "Former Pope Benedict failed to act over abuse, new report finds". BBC News. 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
^ Horowitz, Jason; Povoledo, Elisabetta; Pianigiani, Gaia (20 January 2022). "Benedict Faulted for Handling of Abuse Cases When He Was an Archbishop". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 22 January 2022.
^ Moody, Oliver (20 January 2022). "Pope Benedict failed to act on child abuse, report finds". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 22 January 2022.
^ Pullella, Philip (24 January 2022). "Ex-Pope Benedict acknowledges faulty testimony in German abuse case". Reuters.
^ "Benedikt gibt Falschaussage zu". Der Tagesspiegel Online.
^ "Ex-Pope admits errors in handling of abuse cases". BBC News. 8 February 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022.
^ CNA. "Prosecutors drop case of alleged 'cover up' against Benedict XVI". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 24 March 2023.
^ a b Allen, John L. Jr. (18 May 2006). "Vatican restricts ministry of Legionaries priest founder". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ Donadio, Rachel "Pope Reins In Catholic Order Tied to Abuse", The New York Times, 2 May 2010 WebCitation archive
^ a b Sherwood, Harriet (10 November 2020). "Popes knew of allegations against ex-Cardinal McCarrick years ago, report finds". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 November 2020.
^ a b "Popes knew of allegations against ex-Cardinal McCarrick years ago, report finds". NBC News. 10 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020.
^ McElwee, Joshua J. (9 November 2020). "The Vatican's McCarrick report: a timeline of events". National Catholic Reporter. Retrieved 10 November 2020.
^ a b Horowitz, Jason (11 April 2019). "With Letter on Sexual Abuse, Pope Benedict Returns to Public Eye". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 February 2023.
^ a b Fisher, Ian; Donadio, Rachel (31 December 2022). "Benedict XVI, First Modern Pope to Resign, Dies at 95". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ a b c d Povoledo, Elisabetta (31 December 2022). "Pope Benedict XVI Leaves a Spotty Legacy With Sexual Abuse Scandal". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Meichtry, Stacy "Does the Pope Wear Prada?" The Wall Street Journal. 25 April 2006. Retrieved 19 January 2007. WebCitation archive
^ "Vor Jahren Ratzinger erlitt Hirnblutung" (in German). Focus Online. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ a b "Wie gesund ist Papst Benedikt XVI.?" (in German). Op-online.de. 17 July 2009. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 12 September 2010.
^ "Pope predicted 'short reign' in remarks just after election" The Baltimore Sun 21 April 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "Vatican: Pope Benedict's gaffes result of high tension". H rriyet Daily News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI Leaves Hospital After Breaking Wrist in Fall". Fox News. 17 July 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "A Statement Rocks Rome, Then Sends Shockwaves Around the World". The New York Times, 12 February 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2012.
^ "Pope Renounces Papal Throne". Vatican Information Service, 2 November 2013 Bulletin   English Edition.
^ Messia, Hada (11 February 2013). "Pope Benedict to resign at the end of the month, Vatican says". CNN. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI in shock resignation". BBC. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
^ Guy Dinmore, Giulia Segreti and Ferdinando Giugliano (11 February 2013). "Pope Benedict XVI to step down". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2013.(registration required)
^ Alpert, Emily (11 February 2013). "Scandal, speculation surround past popes who resigned". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 1 April 2019.
^ "Declaration (resignation) of Benedict XVI". 10 February 2013. Retrieved 23 June 2018.
^ a b "Pope Benedict XVI announces his resignation at end of month". Vatican Radio. 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI to Resign due to Parkinson's Disease". The Descrier. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
^ "Benedict dismisses speculation about his resignation". Europe News.Net. 26 February 2014. Archived from the original on 27 February 2014. Retrieved 27 February 2014.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI defends resignation to 'fanatic' doubters". AP NEWS. 20 April 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI: 'There are not two Popes'   Vatican News". vaticannews.va. 1 March 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Pope Benedict's 'Conscience Is Clear' Regarding His 2013 Resignation". NCR. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Dopo le dimissioni il Papa si ritirer  presso il monastero Mater Ecclesiae fondato nel '94 per volont  di Wojtyla" (in Italian). Il Messagero. 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2013.
^ a b Francesco Oggiano (11 February 2013). "Il Papa? Andr  nel monastero fatto costruire da Giovanni Paolo II". Vanity Fair (Italian) (in Italian). Retrieved 14 February 2013.
^ Vatican Press Office: Father Federico Lombardi   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9S-O104E4o
^ "Nun describes simplicity of Pope's retirement monastery". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ "CNS STORY: Ring of retired Pope Benedict no longer can be used as seal". Catholicnews.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013.
^ "David Uebbing, "Benedict XVI's first night as Pope emeritus" Catholic News Agency, March 1, 2013". Catholicnewsagency.com. 1 March 2013. Retrieved 23 June 2013.
^ "Pope Francis consecrates Vatican City with Benedict XVI by his side". Catholic Herald. 9 July 2013. Archived from the original on 22 April 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2017.
^ "Vatican Denies Rumours That Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI Is in Serious Ill Health". HuffPost. 12 April 2013. Retrieved 23 June 2013.
^ Tornielli, Andrea (24 February 2014). "The "hidden" Pope's first step towards normality". Vatican Insider. Archived from the original on 20 June 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2014.
^ "CNS STORY: Retired Pope Benedict XVI celebrates Mass with former doctoral students". Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014.
^ "News from the Vatican   News about the Church   Vatican News". vaticannews.va.
^ "Pope hails Benedict, other elderly at Vatican fest". Fox News. 28 September 2014. Retrieved 22 April 2017.
^ "Benedict XVI: Truth is Not Given Up in the Name of a Desire for Peace". Vatican City. ZENIT. 23 October 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2015.
^ "Benedict XVI attends Consistory in St. Peter's Basilica". Rome Reports. 14 February 2015. Retrieved 22 April 2017.
^ a b Harris, Elise (4 July 2015). "Receiving awards, Benedict XVI credits witness of John Paul II". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
^ "Benedict XVI celebrates Mass with former students". Catholic Herald. 1 September 2015. Archived from the original on 27 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
^ Holdren, Alan (16 June 2015). "Benedict XVI's summer plans   rare public events and a visit to Castel Gandolfo". Catholic News Agency.
^ Harris, Elise (30 June 2015). "Francis wishes Benedict XVI a good summer in Castel Gandolfo". Catholic News Agency.
^ Giansoldati, Franca (27 August 2015). "Rome: Pope Luciani soon beatified, also Ratzinger has testified in his favor, but he lacks miracles". Messagiero.
^ "Benedetto XVI testimone per la beatificazione di Albino Luciani" [Benedict XVI to witness the beatification of Albino Luciani]. Telebelluno (in Italian). 26 August 2015.
^ "Letter No. 16, 2016: Emeritus Pope Benedict Grants an Interview   Inside The Vatican". 17 March 2016.
^ Arocho Esteves, Junno (25 March 2016). "Benedict XVI is frail but 'perfectly lucid', says Vatican spokesman". Catholic Herald. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016.
^ "Pope, new Cardinals visit Pope-Emeritus Benedict XVI". Vatican Radio. 19 November 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2017.
^ "Last cardinal named by Paul VI, Brazil's Paulo Evaristo Arns, dies at age 95". romereports.co. Rome Reports. Retrieved 23 August 2021.
^ "Benedict XVI receives the new cardinals, and speaks with them in various languages". romereports.com.
^ "Benedict XVI: Cardinal Meisner was a 'passionate shepherd' who found it 'difficult to leave his post'". Catholic Herald. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2017.
^ Andrea Tornielli (27 October 2017). "The photo with Ratzinger's "black eye"". La Stampa. Retrieved 10 November 2017.
^ Neuman, Scott (13 January 2020). "In New Book, Retired Pope Benedict Breaks Silence To Speak Out On Priestly Celibacy". npr.org. National Public Radio (NPR). Retrieved 26 January 2020.
^ Service, Cindy Wooden, Catholic News. "Publisher won't remove Benedict XVI as co-author of book on priestly celibacy". catholicregister.org. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Request made to remove Benedict's name from controversial book   G nswein   English". ANSA.it. 14 January 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2021.
^ "Ex-pope Benedict XVI goes home to Bavaria to visit ailing brother". Deutsche Welle. 18 June 2020.
^ AP (18 June 2020). "Former pope Benedict in Germany to visit ailing brother". France24.
^ "Georg Ratzinger ist gestorben". katholisch.de (in German). Retrieved 1 July 2020.
^ Elise Ann Allen (4 August 2020). "Vatican Confirms Pope Benedict Is Ill, But Says Condition 'Not Serious'". The Tablet. Retrieved 25 December 2020.
^ "Benedict XVI 'having trouble speaking'   new cardinal". ANSA. 2 December 2020. Retrieved 25 December 2020.
^ Hattrup, Kathleen N. (4 September 2020). "Benedict XVI passes Leo XIII in age". aleteia.org. Aleteia. Retrieved 4 September 2020.
^ "Benedict XVI becomes oldest pope in history". France 24. 4 September 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2021.
^ "Pope Francis and the Pope emeritus receive Covid-19 vaccine   Vatican News". vaticannews.va. 14 January 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2021.
^ Allen, Elise Ann. "Benedict XVI to mark 70 years as priest with brother's choir". cruxnow.com. Crux Catholic Media Inc. Retrieved 25 July 2021.
^ "Pope Francis and new cardinals visit Benedict XVI". Vatican News. 27 August 2022.
^ Giuffrida, Angela (28 December 2022). "Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI 'very sick', says Pope Francis". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 December 2022.
^ Brockhaus, Hannah (28 December 2022). "Vatican: Benedict XVI under medical care as health takes sudden turn". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 28 December 2022.
^ Bordoni, Linda (28 December 2022). "Pope Francis asks for prayers for Benedict XVI". Vatican News. Retrieved 28 December 2022.
^ "Farewell to Benedict XVI: 'Humble worker in vineyard of the Lord'". Vatican News. 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ "Former Pope Benedict XVI dies at 95". BBC. 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ D'EMILIO, FRANCES. "'Lord, I love you': Pope Benedict XVI's last words recounted by aide". USA Today. Retrieved 1 January 2023.
^ Nanu, Maighna (5 January 2023). "Thousands of mourners gather for Pope Benedict's funeral   watch live". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023.
^ "Pope Benedict latest: PM Sunak leads tributes to 'great theologian' former pontiff". sky news. 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Tornielli, Andrea (4 January 2023). "The last time a Pope celebrated the funeral of his predecessor was in 1802". Vatican News. Archived from the original on 4 January 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2023.
^ a b "Benedict XVI funeral draws estimated 100,000 Catholics to St Peter's Square". The Guardian. 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023.
^ a b ""Santo Subito": Pilgrims weep at Benedict XVI's funeral". Newsbook. Beacon Media Group. 5 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023.
^ "Public now can see Benedict's tomb at St. Peter's Basilica". AP NEWS. 8 January 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2023.
^ Annuario Pontificio, published annually by Libreria Editrice Vaticana, p. 23*. ISBN of the 2012 edition: 978-88-209-8722-0.
^ Shahan, Thomas Joseph (1907). "Ecclesiastical Abbreviations" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
^ "Pope". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2013. Retrieved 14 April 2013.
^ Adriano Cappelli. "Lexicon Abbreviaturarum". p. 283. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013.
^ "Contractions and Abbreviations". Ndl.go.jp. 4 August 2005. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011. Retrieved 21 November 2011.
^ "What Does PP Stand For?". Acronyms.thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 21 November 2011.
^ Wooden, Cindy. "Vatican removes title 'patriarch of the West' after pope's name". Catholic News Service. U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. Archived from the original on 8 March 2006. Retrieved 29 March 2013.
^ Annuario Pontificio 2013, p. 1, cited in Vatican Diary / The identity cards of the last two popes
^ "Vatican reveals Pope Benedict's new title". CNN. 22 February 2013.
^ There's nothing wrong with calling Benedict XVI 'Pope Emeritus' Archived 5 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine   website of the newspaper Catholic Herald
^ Ratzinger's Request: Simply call me 'Father Benedict', TektonMinistries.org. Retrieved 4 August 2015
^ "Pope rejects condoms for Africa". BBC. 10 June 2005.
^ "Catholic Church to Ease Ban on Condom Use". Deutsche Welle. 24 April 2006. Archived from the original on 19 August 2011. Retrieved 28 September 2011.
^ a b Israely, Jeff 30 April 2006 (30 April 2006). "Condom Fight: The Vatican Strikes Back". Time. Archived from the original on 28 May 2006. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Interview of the Holy Father Benedict XVI during the flight to Africa". 17 March 2009. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2009.
^ a b Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith "Note on the banalization of sexuality Regarding certain interpretations of 'Light of the World'" WebCitation archive
^ a b Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith "Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons" 1 October 1986. Retrieved 28 September 2011 WebCitation archive
^ Saletan, William (29 November 2005). "Gland Inquisitor: Pope Benedict's antigay tendencies". Slate. Archived from the original on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2008.
^ "Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI to the Members of the Roman Curia for the Traditional Exchange of Christmas Greetings". Vatican.va. 22 December 2008. Retrieved 23 June 2013.
^ a b c Kington, Tom; Riazat Butt (24 December 2008). "Pope angers campaigners with speech seen as attack on homosexuality". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 October 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2008.
^ Donadio, Rachel (22 December 2008). "The Vatican: In Speech, Pope Calls Homosexual Behavior a Violation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 28 December 2008.
^ "LSVD:Warum hetzt der Papst immer wieder gegen Homosexuelle?". Lsvd.de. 22 June 2008. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ The Trial of Pope Benedict: Joseph Ratzinger and the Vatican's Assault on Reason, Compassion, and Human Dignity (2013, Arsenal Pulp Press)
^ "Pope Slams Gay 'Pseudo-Matrimony'". CBS News. 6 June 2005. Retrieved 8 February 2021.
^ Benedict XVI (21 December 2012). "Address of his Holiness Benedict XVI on the occasion of Christmas greetings". Vatican. Retrieved 26 December 2012.
^ Taylor, Jerome (21 December 2012). "Pope denounces gay marriage as 'people manipulating their God-given gender to suit sexual choices'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 December 2012. Retrieved 21 December 2012.
^ "Pope makes new anti-gay marriage stance". The Australian. Australian Associated Press (AAP). Archived from the original on 21 December 2012. Retrieved 21 December 2012.
^ Gray, Stephen (9 March 2012). "Pope: Straight marriage must be 'defended from misrepresentation'". Pink News. Retrieved 21 December 2012.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI message for 93rd World Day of Migrants and Refugees". Catholic Online. 14 November 2006. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2010.and
^ Wooden, Cindy "Pope offers prayers to refugees for United Nations' World Refugee Day". Catholicnews.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "The Pope Emeritus is praying for migrants and refugees". Vatican Radio. 7 September 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2015.
^ "Letter of Pope Benedict XVI to Chinese Catholics, 27 May 2007". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope urges talks to make Korean Peninsula nuclear free"[dead link] YON   Yonhap News Agency of Korea 14 November 2006. Retrieved 26 January 2011
^ "News Features". catholicculture.org.
^ Krause-Jackson, Flavia and Mark Bentley "Pope Benedict Backs Turkey's European Union Bid". Bloomberg L.P. 28 November 2006. Archived from the original on 26 June 2009. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ "Pope calls for religious exchange". BBC News. 28 November 2006. Archived from the original on 25 October 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
^ Donohue, William "Pope did not change stance on Turkey and EU", Spero News, 30 November 2006 WebCitation archive
^ Cashman, Greer Fay (12 May 2009). "Grapevine: The eyes have it". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2009.
^ "David D'Or and Dudu Fisher Sing for the Pope". Consulate General of Israel in New York. 2009. Archived from the original on 22 June 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2009.
^ "Vietnamese leader meets pontiff". BBC. 25 January 2007.
^ "Relations progress as Vietnamese president meets with Pope". Catholicnewsagency.com. 11 December 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
^ a b 
Benedict XVI (7 July 2009). "Caritas in Veritate 'Charity in Truth'". Vatican Publishing House. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ 
Dinmore, Guy (7 July 2009). "Pope condemns capitalism's 'failures'". Financial Times. Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ Gledhill, Ruth (7 July 2009). "Pope Benedict XVI calls for new economic system based on love in G8 message". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 22 June 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2009.and
^ "Pope calls for disarmament, backs nuke energy". 13 July 2011. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011.
^ "Benedict XVI". Infoplease.com. Archived from the original on 20 August 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
^ a b Allen, John L. (2006). "Mozart: Catholic, Master Mason, favorite of the pope, National Catholic Reporter". Archived from the original on 28 June 2009. Retrieved 6 May 2009   via Find Articles.
^ Freer, Mark Pope Benedict XVI, Mozart and the Quest of Beauty, Catholic Education Research Center. Retrieved 19 October 2010. WebCitation archive
^ "Pope rock: Benedict sings on album   World news   Europe   The Vatican". NBC News.
^ Simpson, Victor L. "Did the Aussies give the pope a cat for company?" The Seattle Times 15 July 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2011 WebCitation archive
^ "Angelqueen.org :: View topic   Pope's smitten with a kitten". 20 July 2011. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011.
^ "Pope rests with piano and cat ahead of World Youth Day". 13 July 2008. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011. Retrieved 6 May 2009.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI joins Twitter". 3 News NZ. 4 December 2012. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2012.
^ "Pope tweets a blessing from his new personal account". USA Today. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2012.
^ "Pope Benedict XVI's final day: Live Report". Jakarta Globe. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2013.
^ Ngak, Chenda. Vatican sends first tweet under Pope Francis CBS News. 13 March 2013. Web. Retrieved 8 March 2016.
^ "Benedict XVI return to the Father's House". Order of Malta. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Benedict XVI (17 March 2010). "Conferral of Honorary Citizenship of the Italian City of Romano Canavese". The Vatican. Retrieved 8 March 2013.
^ Benedict XVI. "Homily of His Holiness Benedict XVI, Terreiro do Pa o of Lisbon Tuesday, 11 May 2010". Holy See. Retrieved 12 March 2014. I warmly thank (...) the Mayor of Lisbon, who has been good enough to confer upon me the keys of the city.
^ "8661 Ratzinger (1990 TA13)". NASA. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2013.
^ Cordero Lanza di Montezemolo, Andrea. "Coat of Arms of His Holiness Benedict XVI". The Vatican. Archived from the original on 23 September 2011.
^ "Joseph Ratzinger". Fondazione Ratzinger. Retrieved 28 December 2022.
^ "How many books has Benedict XVI written and which are the most famous?". Diario AS. 29 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Burke, Daniel; Messia, Hada (31 December 2022). "'God's Rottweiler': Benedict shaped Catholic doctrine but faced criticism for handling of sexual abuse crisis". CNN. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
^ Guy, Jack; Di Donato, Valentina; Pokharel, Sugam; Braithwaite, Sharon; Frater, James; Goodwin, Allegra (1 January 2023). "Former Pope Benedict XVI dies in Vatican monastery aged 95". CNN. Retrieved 2 January 2023.
^ Bunson, Matthew (8 January 2023). "Pope Benedict XVI: Doctor of the Church?". National Catholic Register. EWTN News. Retrieved 29 January 2023.
^ Pentin, Edward (31 December 2022). "Cardinal M ller: Benedict XVI Will Be Remembered as a 'True Doctor of the Church for Today'". National Catholic Register. EWTN News. Retrieved 29 January 2023.
Further reading
Literature about Benedict
Allen, John L.: Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's enforcer of the faith.  New York: Continuum, 2000.
Cavadini, John C. Explorations in the Theology of Benedict XVI. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 2012.
Benedetti, Amedeo: Il linguaggio di Benedetto XVI, al secolo Joseph Ratzinger.  Genova, Erga, 2012
Herrmann, Horst: Benedikt XVI. Der neue Papst aus Deutschland.  Berlin 2005
Nichols OP, Aidan: The Theology of Joseph Ratzinger: An Introductory Study.  Edinburgh; T&T Clark, 1988
Pater Prior Maximilian Heim: Joseph Ratzinger  Kirchliche Existenz und existenzielle Theologie unter dem Anspruch von Lumen gentium (diss.).
Twomey, D. Vincent, S.V.D.: Pope Benedict XVI: The Conscience of Our Age (A Theological Portrait).  San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2007
Wagner, Karl: Kardinal Ratzinger: der Erzbischof in M nchen und Freising in Wort und Bild.  M nchen: Pfeiffer, 1977
Bibliography
Pope Benedict XVI (25 April 2007), "Origen of Alexandria: Life and Work", Church Fathers: From Clement of Rome to Augustine, Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, pp. 24 27, ISBN 978-1-68149-472-2
Biographies
Peter Seewald: Benedict XVI: A Life, in two volumes: Volume One: Youth in Nazi Germany to the Second Vatican Council 1927 1965, Volume Two: Professor and Prefect to Pope and Pope Emeritus, 1966   The Present, translated from the German by Dinah Livingstone, London: Bloomsbury, 2020.
Joseph Ratzinger (= Benedikt XVI.   autobiographical): Aus meinem Leben. (1927 1977). Stuttgart 1998, ISBN 3-453-16509-8.
Alexander Kissler: Papst im Widerspruch: Benedikt XVI. und seine Kirche 2005 2013. Pattloch 2013, ISBN 978-3629022158.
Campbell, Paul-Henri: Pope Benedikt XVI. Audio Book. Monarda Publishing House, 2012, ISBN 3-939513-80-6.
Pursell, Brennan, Benedict of Bavaria: An Intimate Portrait of the Pope and His Homeland (Circle Press, 2008). ISBN 1-933271-17-5.
Allen, John L. The Rise of Benedict XVI: The Inside Story of How the Pope Was Elected and Where He Will Take the Catholic Church. NY: Doubleday, 2005. ISBN 0-385-51320-8.
Allen, John L. Pope Benedict XVI: A Biography of Joseph Ratzinger. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005. ISBN 0-8264-1786-8. This is a reprint of Allen's 2000 book Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's Enforcer of the Faith.
Bardazzi, Marco. In the Vineyard of the Lord: The Life, Faith, and Teachings of Joseph Ratzinger, Pope Benedict XVI. New York: Rizzoli International, 2005. ISBN 0-8478-2801-8
Tobin, Greg. Holy Father: Pope Benedict XVI: Pontiff for a New Era. Sterling, 2005. ISBN 1-4027-3172-8.
Weigel, George. God's Choice: Pope Benedict XVI and the Future of the Catholic Church, Harper Collins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-621331-2.
Jeanne Perego. Joseph e Chico: Un gatto racconta la vita di Papa Benedetto XVI (in Italian), EMP, 2007. ISBN 978-8825018820.
"Death of Pope Emeritus Benedict: his official biography". Vatican News. 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022.
Documentaries
The Keys of the Kingdom, from John Paul II to Benedict XVI, produced by Vatican Television Center, distributed by HDH Communications, 2006.
External links
Profile at the Vatican website
"Pope Benedict XVI". Catholic-Hierarchy.org. David M. Cheney.
Papal Transition 2005 Web Archive from the US Library of Congress
Spiritual Testament of Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI, 31.12.2022, Vatican.va
Catholic Church titles
Preceded byJulius D pfner
 Archbishop of Munich and Freising 1977 1982
Succeeded byFriedrich Wetter
Preceded byFranjo  eper
 Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith 1981 2005
Succeeded byWilliam Levada
Preceded byAgostino Casaroli
 Vice-Dean of the College of Cardinals 1998 2002
Succeeded byAngelo Sodano
Preceded byBernardin Gantin
 Dean of the College of Cardinals 2002 2005
Preceded byJohn Paul II
 Pope 2005 2013
Succeeded byFrancis
vtePope Benedict XVIBorn Joseph Aloisius Ratzinger, 16 April 1927   31 December 2022Biography
Early life
Georg Ratzinger (brother)
Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
2005 papal conclave
Resignation
Death and funeral
Acts as Pope
Cardinals created
People declared venerable
People beatified
Saints canonized
Theology
Theology
Dominus Iesus (The Lord Jesus)
Summorum Pontificum (The Supreme Pontiffs)
Introduction to Christianity
Ecumenism
Judaism
Islam
Encyclicals
Deus caritas est (God Is Love)
Spe salvi (In Hope We Are Saved)
Caritas in veritate (Charity in Truth)
Exhortations
Sacramentum caritatis (On the Eucharist)
Verbum Domini (On the Word of the Lord)
Africae munus (On the Church in Africa)
Ecclesia in Medio Oriente (On the Church in the Middle East)
Books
Introduction to Christianity
The Ratzinger Report
Eschatology: Death and Eternal Life
The Spirit of the Liturgy
Truth and Tolerance
Jesus of Nazareth
From the Baptism in the Jordan to the Transfiguration
Holy Week
The Infancy Narratives
Travels
Pastoral visits
United States
United Kingdom state visit
Related articles
Bibliography
Ceremonial
Coat of arms
Ratzinger Foundation
Vatican leaks scandal
His Holiness: The Secret Papers of Benedict XVI
Alma Mater (2009 album)
Secrets of the Vatican (2014 television film)
The Two Popes (2019 film)
 Catholicism Portal
Links to related articles
vtePopes of the Catholic Church
List of popes
graphical
canonised
Papal names
Tombs
extant
non-extant
Antipope
Pope emeritus
papal resignation
Pope-elect
1st 4th centuries
Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleutherius
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Callixtus I
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Caius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades
Sylvester I
Mark
Julius I
Liberius
Damasus I
Siricius
Anastasius I
5th 8th centuries
Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilarius
Simplicius
Felix III
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
Sabinian
Boniface III
Boniface IV
Adeodatus I
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugene I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zachary
Stephen II
Paul I
Stephen III
Adrian I
Leo III
9th 12th centuries
Stephen IV
Paschal I
Eugene II
Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
Benedict V
Leo VIII
John XIII
Benedict VI
Benedict VII
John XIV
John XV
Gregory V
Sylvester II
John XVII
John XVIII
Sergius IV
Benedict VIII
John XIX
Benedict IX
Sylvester III
Gregory VI
Clement II
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Gregory VII
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Gelasius II
Callixtus II
Honorius II
Innocent II
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugene III
Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III
13th 16th centuries
Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI
Nicholas III
Martin IV
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V
John XXII
Benedict XII
Clement VI
Innocent VI
Urban V
Gregory XI
Urban VI
Boniface IX
Innocent VII
Gregory XII
Martin V
Eugene IV
Nicholas V
Callixtus III
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII
17th 21st centuries
Leo XI
Paul V
Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
Pius VIII
Gregory XVI
Pius IX
Leo XIII
Pius X
Benedict XV
Pius XI
Pius XII
John XXIII
Paul VI
John Paul I
John Paul II
Benedict XVI
Francis
History of the papacyAntiquity and Early Middle Ages
During the Roman Empire (until 493)
Under Constantine (312 337)
Ostrogothic Papacy (493 537)
Byzantine Papacy (537 752)
Frankish Papacy (756 857)
Saeculum obscurum (904 964)
Crescentii era (974 1012)
High and LateMiddle Ages
Tusculan Papacy (1012 1044 / 1048)
Conflicts with the HRE (1048 1257)
Wandering Papacy
Viterbo, 1257 1281
Orvieto, 1262 1297
Perugia, 1228 1304
Avignon Papacy (1309 1378)
Western Schism (1378 1417)
Early Modern and Modern Era
Renaissance Papacy (1417 1534)
Reformation Papacy (1534 1585)
Baroque Papacy (1585 1689)
Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640 1740)
Revolutionary Papacy (1775 1848)
Roman Question (1870 1929)
Vatican City (1929 present)
World War II (1939 1945)
Cold War (1945 1992)
 Category
 Catholic Church Portal
vteCatholic Church
Index
Outline
Glossary
Lists of Catholics
History(TimelineEcclesiasticalLegal)Early Church
Jesus
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Apostles
Succession
Petrine primacy
Church fathers
Apostolic fathers
History of the papacy
Primacy
Great Church
Ante-Nicene Period
Constantine
First seven ecumenical councils
Nicaea I
Chalcedon
Late antiquity
Biblical canon
Monasticism
Middle Ages
Islamic conquests
Pope Gregory I
Papal States
Schism (1054)
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Schism (1378)
Inquisition
Universities
Scholasticism
Age of Discovery
Modern era
Protestantism
Protestant Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Trent
Thirty Years' War
Enlightenment
French Revolution
Nazism
Vatican II
Communism
Sexual abuse scandal
Islam
COVID-19 pandemic
Theology(BibleTradition;Catechism)General
God
Trinity
Kingdom
Body and soul
Divine grace
Dogma
Nicene Creed
Original sin
Saints
Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Vulgate
Official Bible
Sixtine Vulgate
Sixto-Clementine Vulgate
Nova Vulgata
Worship
Ecclesiology
Communitas perfecta
Councils
Ecumenism
Four marks
One true church
Catholic
Infallibility
Mystici Corporis Christi
People of God
Three states
Subsistit in
In canon law
Sacraments
Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick
Last rites
Holy orders
Matrimony
Mariology
Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration
See also:
Josephology
Philosophy
Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers
Philosophy of canon law
See also:
Science
Evolution
Separation of church and state
Relations
Politics
Saints
Holy Family
Mary
Joseph
Patriarchs
Prophets
Archangels
Martyrs
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Confessors
Disciples
Virgins
Organisation(HierarchyCanon lawLaityPrecedenceBy country)Holy See(List of popes)
Pope Francis
Ecumenical councils
College of Cardinals
List
Advisers
Roman Curia
Dicasteries
Synod of Bishops
Properties
Vatican City
Index
Outline
Apostolic Palace
Lateran Treaty
Roman Rota
St. Peter's Basilica
Swiss Guard
Vatican Museums
Polity (Holy orders)
Diocese
Episcopal conference
Eparchy
Bishop
Patriarch
Major
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan
Coadjutor
Auxiliary
Titular
Emeritus
Parish
Priest
Deacon
Consecrated life
Religious:
Superior
Abbot, Abbess
General
Provincial
Prior, Prioress
Grand Master
Brother
Friar
Monk
Sister
Nun
Hermit
Novice
Master
Oblate
Postulant
Particular churchessui iuris
Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian
Catholic liturgy
Eastern Catholic liturgy
Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syriac
West Syriac
Malankara
Latin
Ambrosian
Braga
Mozarabic
Roman
Paul VI
Tridentine
Anglican
Zaire
Culture
Art
Marian
Artists
Authors
Church buildings
Altarpieces
Folk
Library
Museums
Music
Distinctions
Role in civilisation
See also:
Criticism of the Catholic Church
Anti-Catholicism
Media
Holy See Press Office
Vatican Media
Vatican News
Vatican Television Center
Vatican Radio
Vatican Polyglot Press
L'Osservatore Romano
Acta Apostolicae Sedis
Annuario Pontificio
Religious orders,institutes, societies
Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Legionaries
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines
Associationsof the faithful
Confraternities
Lay
Marian
Youth
Workers
Third orders
Saint Dominic
Lay Carmelites
Discalced
Saint Francis
Secular
Military orders
Fimcap
Catholic Action
Charismatic Renewal
Communion and Liberation
Sant'Egidio
Focolare
International Alliance of Catholic Knights
Scouting
Legion of Mary
Neocatechumenal Way
Opus Dei
Schoenstatt
Charities
Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas
Catholic Charities USA
Home Missions
Relief Services
CIDSE
Pax Christi
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul
See also:
Health care
Schools
Universities
 Catholic Church portal
 Category
vteHistory of the Catholic ChurchGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
By country or region
Ecclesiastical history
Timeline
Papacy
Papal primacy
Catholic ecumenical councils
First seven
Catholic Bible
Biblical canon
Vulgate
Crusading movement
History of the Roman Curia
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Catholic culture
Art
Role in civilization
Vatican City
Papal States
Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Early Church(30 325/476)Origins andApostolic Age (30 100)
Jesus
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Holy Spirit
Mary
John the Baptist
Apostles in the New Testament
Commissioning
Peter
John
Paul
Stephen
Council of Jerusalem
Split with Judaism
New Testament
Background
Gospels
Acts
Pauline epistles
General epistles
Revelation
Ante-Nicene period (100 325)
Persecution
Church Fathers
Apostolic Fathers
Pope Clement I
Polycarp
Ignatius
Irenaeus
Justin Martyr
Canon
Tertullian
Origen
Late antiquity(313 476)Great Church(180 451)Romanstate church(380-451)
Constantine the Great
Christianity
Arian controversy
Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran
Old St. Peter's Basilica
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Early Middle Ages
Benedict of Nursia
Monasticism
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant
Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East West Schism
High Middle Ages
Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Universities
Scholasticism
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Late Middle Ages
Thomas Aquinas
Pope Boniface VIII
Western Schism
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI
Age of Discovery
ReformationCatholic Reformation
Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of  vila
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine
Thirty Years' War
Baroque period to theFrench Revolution
Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Age of Enlightenment
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution
19th century
Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum
20th century
Pope Pius X
Our Lady of F tima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Nazism
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI (coronation)
Pope John Paul I
Mother Teresa
Communism
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day
1995
21st century
Sexual abuse scandal
Islam
World Youth Day
2000
2002
2005
2008
2011
2013
2016
2019
Pope Benedict XVI
Pope Francis
COVID-19 pandemic
 Vatican City portal
 Catholicism portal
vteHistory of Catholic theologyKey figuresGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
Timeline
History of the papacy
Papal primacy
Ecumenical councils
Catholic Bible
Vulgate
Biblical canon
History of Christian theology
Early Church
Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian
Constantine toPope Gregory I
Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I
Early Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena
High Middle Ages
Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzm n
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon
Mysticism and reforms
Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Bridget of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas   Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
ReformationCounter-Reformation
Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of  vila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of  vila
Luis de Le n
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Su rez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales
Baroque period toFrench Revolution
Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de B rulle
Pierre Gassendi
Ren  Descartes
Mary of Jesus of  greda
Ant nio Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-B nigne Bossuet
Fran ois F nelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri
19th century
Joseph G rres
F licit  de La Mennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von D llinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenr ther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben
 mile Boutroux
Modernism
Neo-scholasticism
L on Bloy
D sir -Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von H gel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Th r se of Lisieux
20th century
G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Mar chal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
 tienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Georges Bernanos
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Dorothy Day
Daniel-Rops
Jean Guitton
Josemar a Escriv 
Nouvelle th ologie
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Dani lou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Marcel Lefebvre
Frederick Copleston
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
Ren  Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen
21st century
Pope John Paul II
Alice von Hildebrand
Carlo Maria Martini
Pope Benedict XVI
Gustavo Guti rrez
Alasdair MacIntyre
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Micha  Heller
Peter Kreeft
Jean-Luc Marion
Tom  Hal k
Aidan Nichols
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron
 Catholicism portal
vteModernism in the Catholic ChurchIssues
Biblical exegesis
Historical-critical exegesis of the Bible
Biblical inerrancy
Synoptic problem
Quest for the historical Jesus
Thomism
Social doctrine
People
Prosper Alfaric
Pierre Batiffol
Maurice Blondel
Joseph Bonsirven
Henri Br mond
Ernesto Buonaiuti
Louis Duchesne
Antonio Fogazzaro
Marcel H bert
Albert Houtin
Friedrich von H gel
Lucien Laberthonni re
Lucien Lacroix
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
Alfred Loisy
Eudoxe Ir n e Mignot
Romolo Murri
Maude Petre
Fernand Portal
Dalmace Sertillanges
Joseph Turmel
George Tyrrell
Anti-modernist reaction
Pope Pius IX
Quanta cura
Syllabus of Errors
Pope Leo XIII
Pontifical Biblical Commission
Pope Pius X
Lamentabili sane exitu
Pascendi Dominici gregis
Oath Against Modernism
Sodalitium Pianum
Twenty-four Thomistic theses
Louis Billot
Umberto Benigni
Rafael Merry del Val
Jos  de Calasanz Vives y Tut 
R ginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Publications
Annales de philosophie chr tienne
La Justice sociale
La Quinzaine
Revue du clerg  fran ais
Temps pr sent
Le Sillon (Marc Sangnier)
Protestantequivalents
Fundamentalist Modernist controversy
Historians
Giuseppe Alberigo
Pierre Colin
Avery Dulles
 tienne Fouilloux
Maurilio Guasco
Fran ois Laplanche
Ren  Marl 
Jean-Marie Mayeur
 mile Poulat
Christoph Theobald
 Catholicism portal
 Vatican City portal
Name
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject
Portals: Biography Germany Catholic Church Vatican City Modern historyPope Benedict XVI at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
2
VIAF
2
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
2
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Finland
2
Belgium
2
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
2
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
2
3
Korea
Croatia
2
Netherlands
Poland
2
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
RISM
2
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Benedict_XVI&oldid=1149795977"