Recreational activity and sport using snow skis
This article is about snow skiing. For water skiing, see Water skiing. For other uses, see Skiing (disambiguation).
 Alpine skiers
Skiing is the use of skis to glide on snow. Variations of purpose include basic transport, a recreational activity, or a competitive winter sport. Many types of competitive skiing events are recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), and the International Ski Federation (FIS).
History
Main article: History of skiing
 Video demonstration of a variety of ski techniques used in the 1940s.
Skiing has a history of almost five millennia.[1] Although modern skiing has evolved from beginnings in Scandinavia, it may have been practiced more than 100 centuries ago in what is now China, according to an interpretation of ancient paintings.[2][3] However, this continues to be debated.[4][5]
The word "ski" comes from the Old Norse word "sk " which means to "split piece of wood or firewood".[6]
Asymmetrical skis were used in northern Finland and Sweden until at least the late 19th century. On one foot, the skier wore a long straight non-arching ski for sliding, and a shorter ski was worn on the other foot for kicking. The underside of the short ski was either plain or covered with animal skin to aid this use, while the long ski supporting the weight of the skier was treated with animal fat in a similar manner to modern ski waxing.
Early skiers used one long pole or spear. The first description of a skier with two ski poles dates to 1741.[7]
Troops in continental Europe were equipped with skis by 1747.[8]
Skiing was primarily used for transport until the mid-19th century but, since then, it has also become a recreation and sport.[9] Military ski races were held in Norway during the 18th century,[10] and ski warfare was studied in the late 18th century.[11] As equipment evolved and ski lifts were developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, two main genres of skiing emerged Alpine (downhill) skiing and Nordic skiing. The main difference between the two is the type of ski binding (the way in which the ski boots are attached to the skis).
Types
Alpine
Main article: Alpine skiing
Also called "downhill skiing", Alpine skiing typically takes place on a piste at a ski resort. It is characterized by fixed-heel bindings that attach at both the toe and the heel of the skier's boot. Ski lifts, including chairlifts, bring skiers up the slope. Backcountry skiing can be accessed by helicopter, snowcat, hiking and snowmobile. Facilities at resorts can include night skiing, apr s-ski, and glade skiing under the supervision of the ski patrol and the ski school. Alpine skiing branched off from the older Nordic type of skiing around the 1920s when the advent of ski lifts meant that it was no longer necessary to climb back uphill. Alpine equipment has specialized to the point where it can now only be used with the help of lifts. Alpine Touring setups use specialized bindings which are switchable between locked and free-heel modes. Climbing skins are temporarily attached to the bottom of alpine skis to give them traction on snow. This permits Nordic style uphill and back-country travel on alpine skis. For downhill, travel the heels are locked and the skins are removed.
Nordic
 Spring ski touring on Hardangervidda, Norway
Main article: Nordic skiing
The Nordic disciplines include cross-country skiing and ski jumping, which both use bindings that attach at the toes of the skier's boots but not at the heels. Cross-country skiing may be practiced on groomed trails or in undeveloped backcountry areas. Ski jumping is practiced in certain areas that are reserved exclusively for ski jumping.
Telemark
Main article: Telemark skiing
Telemark skiing is a ski turning technique and FIS-sanctioned discipline, which is named after the Telemark region of Norway. It uses equipment similar to Nordic skiing, where the ski bindings are attached only at the toes of the ski boots, allowing the skier's heel to be raised throughout the turn. However, the skis themselves are often the same width as Alpine skis.
Competition
The following disciplines are sanctioned by the FIS. Many have their own world cups and are included in the Winter Olympic Games.
Cross-country   Encompasses a variety of formats for cross-country skiing races over courses of varying lengths. Races occur on homologated, groomed courses designed to support classic (in-track) and free-style events, where skate skiing may be employed. The main competitions are the FIS Cross-Country World Cup and the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (held only in odd-numbered years), and various cross-country skiing events have been incorporated into the Winter Olympics since its inception in 1924. The discipline also incorporates: cross-country ski marathon events, sanctioned by the Worldloppet Ski Federation; cross-country ski-orienteering events, sanctioned by the International Orienteering Federation; and biathlon, a combination of cross-country skiing and rifle shooting. Paralympic cross-country skiing and paralympic biathlon are both included in the Winter Paralympic Games.
Ski jumping   Contested at the FIS Ski Jumping World Cup, the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (odd-numbered years only), the FIS Ski Jumping Grand Prix, and the FIS Ski Flying World Championships. Ski jumping has also been a regular Olympic discipline at every Winter Games since 1924.
Freeriding skiing   This category of skiing includes any practice of the sport on non-groomed terrain.
Nordic combined   A combination of cross-country skiing and ski jumping, this discipline is contested at the FIS Nordic Combined World Cup, the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships (odd-numbered years only), and at the Winter Olympics.
Alpine skiing   Includes downhill, slalom, giant slalom, super giant slalom (super-G), and para-alpine events. There are also combined events where the competitors must complete one run of each event, for example; the Super Combined event consists of one run of super-G and one run of slalom skiing. The dual slalom event, where racers ski head-to-head, was invented in 1941 and has been a competitive event since 1960.[12] Alpine skiing is contested at the FIS Alpine Ski World Cup, the FIS Alpine World Ski Championships (held only in odd-numbered years), and the Winter Olympics. Para-alpine skiing is contested at the World Para Alpine Skiing Championships (odd-numbered years) and the Winter Paralympics.
Speed skiing   Dating from 1898, with official records beginning in 1932 with an 89-mile-per-hour (143 km/h) run by Leo Gasperi, this became an FIS discipline in the 1960s. It is contested at the FIS Speed Ski World Cup, and was demonstrated at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville.[13]
Freestyle skiing   Includes mogul skiing, aerials, ski cross, half-pipe, and slopestyle. The main freestyle competitions are the FIS Freestyle Skiing World Cup and the FIS Freestyle World Ski Championships (held in odd-numbered years). The discipline was first demonstrated at the 1988 Winter Olympics and was added to the Olympic programme in 1992. It became an Olympic sport in the 2014 Sochi Olympic games when the Slope-style and Half pipe events were introduced.[14]
Snowboarding   Disciplines include slopestyle, cross, half-pipe, alpine, parallel slalom, and parallel giant slalom. The main competitions are the annual FIS Snowboard World Cup and the FIS Snowboard World Championships (held in odd-numbered years). Snowboarding debuted as an Olympic discipline in 1998 (as part of the Alpine skiing programme) and was contested as a separate discipline at the 2018 Winter Olympics.
Skiboarding   Using a snowboard in conjunction with standard ski boots, this discipline is essentially a combination of skiing and snowboarding. Various skiboarding competitions have been tried over recent years, including the Skiboard Triple Challenge, United Skiboard Series, European Skiboard Cup, Skiboard World Cup, and the US Skiboard Open.
Telemark   Named after the Telemark region of Norway, this discipline combines elements of Alpine and Nordic skiing. A relatively new competitive sport, Telemark racing is contested at the FIS Telemark World Cup and the FIS Telemark World Championships.
Grass skiing   Originally developed as an alpine skiing training method, skiing on grass has become established as a skiing discipline in its own right. It is contested at the FIS Grass Skiing World Cup and the FIS Grass Ski World Championships.
Equipment
 Four groups of different ski types, from left to right:1. Non-sidecut: cross-country, telemark and mountaineering 2. Parabolic3. Twin-tip4. Powder
Equipment used in skiing includes:
Skis, which may have skins applied or be textured for uphill traction or wax applied for minimizing sliding friction. Twin-tip skis are also designed to move forwards or backwards.
Boots and bindings
Poles
Helmets
Ski suits
Ski goggles
Skiing gloves
Ski masks
Technique
Technique has evolved along with ski technology and ski geometry. Early techniques included the telemark turn, the stem, the stem Christie, snowplough, and parallel turn.
New parabolic designs like the Elan SCX have enabled the more modern carve turn.
On other surfaces
Originally and primarily a winter sport, skiing can also be practiced indoors without snow, outdoors on grass, on dry ski slopes, with ski simulators, or with roller skis. A treadmill-like surface can also be used, to enable skiing while staying in the same place. Sand skiing involves sliding on sand instead of snow, but the skier uses conventional skis, ski poles, bindings and boots for the surface.[15]
Gallery
Giant Slalom Ski Racer
Freestyle switch 720 mute grab
A ski jumper using the V-style
Cross country skiing free-style or skate-skiing
Dry slope racing
A skier with a disability on a sit-ski, using two outriggers.
See also
Glossary of skiing and snowboarding terms
References
^ Formenti;  et al. (2005). "Human locomotion on snow: determinants of economy and speed of skiing across the ages". Proceedings. Biological Sciences. 272 (1572): 1561 1569. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3121. PMC 1559840. PMID 16048771.
^ "Ancient paintings suggest China invented skiing". China View. Xinhua News Agency. 25 January 2006. Archived from the original on 29 March 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2015.
^ 
Marquand, Edward (15 March 2006). "Before Scandinavia: These could be the first skiers". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 8 March 2015.
^ Krichko, Kade (19 April 2017). "China's Stone Age Skiers and History's Harsh Lessons". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 May 2020.
^ Larsen, Nils (12 June 2017). "Origin Story: Where did skiing begin?". International Skiing History Association. Retrieved 9 May 2020.
^ Caprona, Yann de: Norsk etymologisk ordbok. Oslo: Kagge forlag, 2014. ISBN 9788248910541.
^ Hergstrom, P (1748). Beschreibung von dem unter schwedischer Krone geh rigen Lappland. Leipzig: von Rother.
^ "Newcastle Courant". Retrieved 29 September 2019. via The British Newspaper Archive (subscription required)
^ Saur, Lasse (1999): Norske ski - til glede og besv r. Research report, H gskolen i Finnmark.
^ Bergsland, Einar (1946): P  ski. Oslo: Aschehoug.
^ E. John B. Allen (30 January 2014). "How concern for the national health and military preparedness led France to build the infrastructure for Chamonix, 1924". International Skiing History Association. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
^ Lizza, Chris I. (1997). "The first dual slalom duel". Skiing Heritage Journal. International Skiing History Association. 10 (3): 42. ISSN 1082-2895.
^ Lipsyte, Robert (2009).  Vizard, Frank (ed.). Why a Curveball Curves: The Incredible Science of Sports. Popular mechanics. Sterling Publishing Company, Inc. p. 224. ISBN 9781588167941.
^ "Freestyle Skiing - Winter Olympic Sport". International Olympic Committee. 26 November 2019. Retrieved 5 December 2019.
^ "Fastest sand skiing". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 26 March 2018.
External links
 Media related to Skiing at Wikimedia Commons
vte Winter Olympic sports
Biathlon
Bobsleigh
skeleton
Curling
Ice hockey
Luge
Skating
figure skating
short-track
long-track
Skiing
alpine
cross-country
freestyle
Nordic combined
ski jumping
snowboarding
Ski mountaineering
See also: Paralympic sports and Summer Olympic sports
vteSkiing and snowboarding
History of skiing
Glossary of skiing and snowboarding terms
Nordic skiingCompetitive
Cross-country skiing
Paralympic
Ski jumping
Ski flying
Nordic combined
Endurance
Ski marathon
Ski orienteering
Ski touring
Recreational
Cross-country skiing
Backcountry skiing
Roller skiing
Skijoring
Alpine skiingOlympic disciplines
Slalom
Giant slalom
Super-G
Downhill
Combined
Other disciplines
Extreme skiing
Glade skiing
Heliskiing
Para-alpine skiing
Speed skiing
Other skiing
Biathlon
Indoor skiing
Night skiing
Ski archery
Ski mountaineering
Telemark skiing
Freestyle skiing
Aerial skiing
Big air
Freeriding
Freeskiing
Half-pipe skiing
Mogul
Ski ballet
Ski cross
Slopestyle
Snowboarding
Alpine
Backcountry
Big air
Freeriding
Freestyle
Half-pipe
Slopestyle
Snowboard cross
Snowboard racing
Technique / learning
Carved turn
Jump turn
Parallel turn
Pivot turn
Snowplough
Stem christie
Ski school
Ski simulator
Equipment
Bindings
Boots
Helmet
Monoski
Poles
Skins
Skis
List of ski brands
Snowboard
Suit
Wax
Resort amenities
Dry ski slope
Half-pipe
Superpipe
Piste
Ski area
Ski tunnel
Snow grooming
Snowmaking
Trail
Ski lifts
Aerial tramway
Chairlift
detachable
Funicular
Funifor
Funitel
Gondola lift
bicable
tricable
Hybrid lift
Surface lift
 Category:Skiing
 Category:Snowboarding
vteOrienteering
History of orienteering
List of orienteering events
Sport disciplinesIOF-governed
Foot orienteering
Mountain bike orienteering
Ski orienteering
Trail orienteering
IARU-governed
Amateur radio direction finding
Fox Oring
Radio Orienteering in a Compact Area
Other sports
Canoe orienteering
Car orienteering
Mountain marathon
Mounted orienteering
Rogaining
Related
Adventure racing
Alleycat race
Fell running
Relay race
Transmitter hunting
EquipmentEvent
Control point
Course
Map
Personal
Compass
hand
protractor
thumb
Eye protectors
Gaiters
Headlamp
Exceptions
Backpacking
Satellite navigation
Whistle
Fundamentals
Map
orienteering map
Navigation
cardinal direction
resection
route choice
wayfinding
waypoint
Racing
hiking
running
walking
skiing
mountain biking
Organisations / lists
International Orienteering Federation
members
List of clubs
List of orienteers
by country
innovators
List of events
Non-sport related
Adventure travel
Bicycle touring
Climbing
Hiking
Hunting
Location-based game
geocaching
poker run
Scoutcraft orienteering
wilderness
CompetitionsFoot orienteering
World Championships
Junior
Masters
University
World Cup
World Games
European Championships
Youth
University
North American Championships
Open events
O-Ringen
Jukola
Tiomila
Kainuu Orienteering Week
Jan Kjellstr m Festival
Ski orienteering
World Championships
Junior
World Cup
Mountain bike orienteering
World Championships
Trail orienteering
World Championships
 Category
 WikiProject
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skiing&oldid=1141534344"