Private university in New Haven, Connecticut
"Yale" redirects here. For other uses, see Yale (disambiguation).
Yale UniversityCoat of armsLatin: Universitas YalensisFormer namesCollegiate School (1701 1718)Yale College (1718 1887)MottoLux et veritas (Latin)    (Hebrew)Motto in EnglishLight and truthTypePrivate research universityEstablishedOctober 9, 1701; 321 years ago (1701-10-09)AccreditationNECHEAcademic affiliationsAAUIARUNAICUURASpace-grantEndowment$42.3 billion (2021)[1]PresidentPeter Salovey[2]ProvostScott Strobel[3]Academic staff5,118 (Fall 2021)[4]Students12,060 (Fall 2020)[5]Undergraduates4,703 (Fall 2020)[5]Postgraduates7,357 (Fall 2020)[5]LocationNew Haven, Connecticut, United States41 18 59 N 72 55 20 W  /  41.31639 N 72.92222 W  / 41.31639; -72.92222Coordinates: 41 18 59 N 72 55 20 W  /  41.31639 N 72.92222 W  / 41.31639; -72.92222CampusMidsize City, 1,015 acres (411 ha)NewspaperYale Daily NewsColors  Yale Blue[6]NicknameBulldogsSporting affiliationsNCAA Division I FCS   Ivy LeagueECAC HockeyNEISAMascotHandsome DanWebsiteyale.edu 
 Official seal used by the college and the university
Yale University is a private Ivy League research university in New Haven, Connecticut. Founded in 1701, Yale is the third-oldest institution of higher education in the United States and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution.[7]
The Collegiate School was established in 1701 by Congregationalist clergy of the Connecticut Colony. At first restricted to instructing ministers in theology and sacred languages, the curriculum began to incorporate humanities and sciences by the time of the American Revolution. In the 19th century, the college expanded into graduate and professional instruction, awarding the first PhD in the United States in 1861 and organizing as a university in 1887. Yale's faculty and student populations grew rapidly after 1890 with expansion of the physical campus and of scientific research programs.
Yale is organized into fourteen constituent schools: the original undergraduate college, the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and twelve professional schools.[8] While the university is governed by the Yale Corporation, each school's faculty oversees its curriculum and degree programs. In addition to a central campus in downtown New Haven, the university owns athletic facilities in western New Haven, a campus in West Haven, and forests and nature preserves throughout New England. As of 2021[update], the university's endowment was valued at $42.3 billion, the second largest of any educational institution.[1] The Yale University Library, serving all constituent schools, holds more than 15 million volumes and is the third-largest academic library in the United States.[9][10] Student athletes compete in intercollegiate sports as the Yale Bulldogs in the NCAA Division I Ivy League conference.
As of October 2020[update], 65 Nobel laureates, five Fields Medalists, four Abel Prize laureates, and three Turing Award winners have been affiliated with Yale University. In addition, Yale has graduated many notable alumni, including five U.S. presidents, 10 Founding Fathers, 19 U.S. Supreme Court Justices, 31 living billionaires,[11] 54 College founders and presidents, many heads of state, cabinet members and governors. Hundreds of members of Congress and many U.S. diplomats, 78 MacArthur Fellows, 263 Rhodes Scholars, 123 Marshall Scholars, 102 Guggenheim Fellows and nine Mitchell Scholars have been affiliated with the university. Yale is a member of the Big Three, along with Harvard and Princeton. Yale's current faculty include 67 members of the National Academy of Sciences,[12] 55 members of the National Academy of Medicine,[13] 8 members of the National Academy of Engineering,[14] and 187 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.[15]
After normalization for institution size, Yale University is the tenth-largest baccalaureate source of doctoral degree recipients in the United States, and the largest such source within the Ivy League.[16] It also is a top 10 (ranked seventh), after normalization for the number of graduates, baccalaureate source of some of the most notable scientists (Nobel, Fields, Turing prizes, or membership in National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Medicine, or National Academy of Engineering).[17]
History[edit]
This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (July 2021)
Early history of Yale College[edit]
Origins[edit]
 Charter creating the Collegiate School, which became Yale College, October 9, 1701
Yale traces its beginnings to "An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School", a would-be charter passed during a meeting in New Haven by the General Court of the Colony of Connecticut on October 9, 1701. The Act was an effort to create an institution to train ministers and lay leadership for Connecticut. Soon after, a group of ten Congregational ministers, Samuel Andrew, Thomas Buckingham, Israel Chauncy, Samuel Mather (nephew of Increase Mather), Rev. James Noyes II (son of James Noyes), James Pierpont, Abraham Pierson, Noadiah Russell, Joseph Webb, and Timothy Woodbridge, all alumni of Harvard, met in the study of Reverend Samuel Russell, located in Branford, Connecticut, to donate their books to form the school's library.[18] The group, led by James Pierpont, is now known as "The Founders".[19]
 A Front View of Yale-College and the College Chapel, printed by Daniel Bowen in 1786
Known from its origin as the "Collegiate School", the institution opened in the home of its first rector, Abraham Pierson, who is today considered the first president of Yale. Pierson lived in Killingworth (now Clinton). The school moved to Saybrook in 1703 when the first treasurer of Yale, Nathaniel Lynde, donated land and a building. In 1716, it moved to New Haven, Connecticut.
Meanwhile, there was a rift forming at Harvard between its sixth president, Increase Mather, and the rest of the Harvard clergy, whom Mather viewed as increasingly liberal, ecclesiastically lax, and overly broad in Church polity. The feud caused the Mathers to champion the success of the Collegiate School in the hope that it would maintain the Puritan religious orthodoxy in a way that Harvard had not.[20] Rev. Jason Haven, the minister at the First Church and Parish in Dedham, Massachusetts had been considered for the presidency on account of his orthodox theology and for "Neatness dignity and purity of Style [which] surpass those of all that have been mentioned," but was passed over due to his "very Valetudinary and infirm State of Health."[21]
Naming and development[edit]
 Coat of arms of the family of Elihu Yale, after whom the university was named in 1718
In 1718, at the behest of either Rector Samuel Andrew or the colony's Governor Gurdon Saltonstall, Cotton Mather contacted the successful Boston-born businessman Elihu Yale to ask him for financial help in constructing a new building for the college. Through the persuasion of Jeremiah Dummer, Yale, who had made a fortune in Madras while working for the East India Company as the first president of Fort St. George (largely through secret contracts with Madras merchants that were illegal under Company policy[22]), donated nine bales of goods, which were sold for more than  560, a substantial sum of money at the time. Cotton Mather suggested that the school change its name to "Yale College."[23] The Welsh name Yale is the Anglicized spelling of the I l, which the family estate at Plas yn I l, near the village of Llandegla, was called.
Meanwhile, a Harvard graduate working in England convinced some 180 prominent intellectuals to donate books to Yale. The 1714 shipment of 500 books represented the best of modern English literature, science, philosophy and theology at the time.[24] It had a profound effect on intellectuals at Yale. Undergraduate Jonathan Edwards discovered John Locke's works and developed his original theology known as the "new divinity." In 1722 the rector and six of his friends, who had a study group to discuss the new ideas, announced that they had given up Calvinism, become Arminians, and joined the Church of England. They were ordained in England and returned to the colonies as missionaries for the Anglican faith. Thomas Clapp became president in 1745 and while he attempted to return the college to Calvinist orthodoxy, he did not close the library. Other students found Deist books in the library.[25]
Curriculum[edit]
 Connecticut Hall, oldest building on the Yale campus, built between 1750 and 1753
 First diploma awarded by Yale College, granted to Nathaniel Chauncey in 1702
Yale College undergraduates follow a liberal arts curriculum with departmental majors and is organized into a social system of residential colleges.
Yale was swept up by the great intellectual movements of the period the Great Awakening and the Enlightenment due to the religious and scientific interests of presidents Thomas Clap and Ezra Stiles. They were both instrumental in developing the scientific curriculum at Yale while dealing with wars, student tumults, graffiti, "irrelevance" of curricula, desperate need for endowment and disagreements with the Connecticut legislature.[26][27][page needed]
Serious American students of theology and divinity, particularly in New England, regarded Hebrew as a classical language, along with Greek and Latin, and essential for the study of the Old Testament in the original words. The Reverend Ezra Stiles, president of the college from 1778 to 1795, brought with him his interest in the Hebrew language as a vehicle for studying ancient Biblical texts in their original language (as was common in other schools), requiring all freshmen to study Hebrew (in contrast to Harvard, where only upperclassmen were required to study the language) and is responsible for the Hebrew phrase     (Urim and Thummim) on the Yale seal. A 1746 graduate of Yale, Stiles came to the college with experience in education, having played an integral role in the founding of Brown University, in addition to having been a minister.[28] Stiles' greatest challenge occurred in July 1779 when British forces occupied New Haven and threatened to raze the college. However, Yale graduate Edmund Fanning, secretary to the British general in command of the occupation, intervened and the college was saved. In 1803, Fanning was granted an honorary degree LL.D. for his efforts.[29]
Students[edit]
As the only college in Connecticut from 1701 to 1823, Yale educated the sons of the elite.[30] Punishable offenses for students included cardplaying, tavern-going, destruction of college property, and acts of disobedience to college authorities. During this period, Harvard was distinctive for the stability and maturity of its tutor corps, while Yale had youth and zeal on its side.[31]
The emphasis on classics gave rise to a number of private student societies, open only by invitation, which arose primarily as forums for discussions of modern scholarship, literature and politics. The first such organizations were debating societies: Crotonia in 1738, Linonia in 1753 and Brothers in Unity in 1768. Linonia and Brothers in Unity continue to exist today with commemorations to them can be found with names given to campus structures, like Brothers in Unity Courtyard in Branford College.
19th century[edit]
 Old Brick Row in 1807
The Yale Report of 1828 was a dogmatic defense of the Latin and Greek curriculum against critics who wanted more courses in modern languages, mathematics, and science. Unlike higher education in Europe, there was no national curriculum for colleges and universities in the United States. In the competition for students and financial support, college leaders strove to keep current with demands for innovation. At the same time, they realized that a significant portion of their students and prospective students demanded a classical background. The Yale report meant the classics would not be abandoned. During this period, all institutions experimented with changes in the curriculum, often resulting in a dual-track curriculum. In the decentralized environment of higher education in the United States, balancing change with tradition was a common challenge because it was difficult for an institution to be completely modern or completely classical.[32][33] A group of professors at Yale and New Haven Congregationalist ministers articulated a conservative response to the changes brought about by the Victorian culture. They concentrated on developing a person possessed of religious values strong enough to sufficiently resist temptations from within, yet flexible enough to adjust to the 'isms' (professionalism, materialism, individualism, and consumerism) tempting him from without.[34][page needed] William Graham Sumner, professor from 1872 to 1909, taught in the emerging disciplines of economics and sociology to overflowing classrooms of students. Sumner bested President Noah Porter, who disliked the social sciences and wanted Yale to lock into its traditions of classical education. Porter objected to Sumner's use of a textbook by Herbert Spencer that espoused agnostic materialism because it might harm students.[35]
Until 1887, the legal name of the university was "The President and Fellows of Yale College, in New Haven." In 1887, under an act passed by the Connecticut General Assembly, Yale was renamed to the present "Yale University."[36]
Sports and debate[edit]
The Revolutionary War soldier Nathan Hale (Yale 1773) was the archetype of the Yale ideal in the early 19th century: a manly yet aristocratic scholar, equally well-versed in knowledge and sports, and a patriot who "regretted" that he "had but one life to lose" for his country. Western painter Frederic Remington (Yale 1900) was an artist whose heroes gloried in the combat and tests of strength in the Wild West. The fictional, turn-of-the-20th-century Yale man Frank Merriwell embodied this same heroic ideal without racial prejudice, and his fictional successor Frank Stover in the novel Stover at Yale (1911) questioned the business mentality that had become prevalent at the school. Increasingly the students turned to athletic stars as their heroes, especially since winning the big game became the goal of the student body, the alumni, and the team itself.[37]
 Yale's four-oared crew team posing with the 1876 Centennial Regatta trophy, won in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Along with Harvard and Princeton, Yale students rejected British concepts about 'amateurism' in sports and constructed athletic programs that were uniquely American, such as football.[38][page needed] The Harvard Yale football rivalry began in 1875. Between 1892, when Harvard and Yale met in one of the first intercollegiate debates,[39][page needed] and in 1909 (the year of the first Triangular Debate of Harvard, Yale and Princeton) the rhetoric, symbolism, and metaphors used in athletics were used to frame these early debates. Debates were covered on front pages of college newspapers and emphasized in yearbooks, and team members even received the equivalent of athletic letters for their jackets. There were also rallies to send off the debating teams to matches, but the debates never attained the broad appeal that athletics enjoyed. One reason may be that debates do not have a clear winner, as is the case in sports, and that scoring is subjective. In addition, with late 19th-century concerns about the impact of modern life on the human body, athletics offered hope that neither the individual nor the society was coming apart.[40]
In 1909 10, football faced a crisis resulting from the failure of the previous reforms of 1905 06, which sought to solve the problem of serious injuries. There was a mood of alarm and mistrust, and, while the crisis was developing, the presidents of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton developed a project to reform the sport and forestall possible radical changes forced by government upon the sport. Presidents Arthur Hadley of Yale, A. Lawrence Lowell of Harvard, and Woodrow Wilson of Princeton worked to develop moderate reforms to reduce injuries. Their attempts, however, were reduced by rebellion against the rules committee and the formation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association. While the big three had attempted to operate independently of the majority, the changes pushed did reduce injuries.[41]
Expansion[edit]
Starting with the addition of the Yale School of Medicine in 1810, the college expanded gradually from then on, establishing the Yale Divinity School in 1822, Yale Law School in 1822, the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences in 1847, the now-defunct Sheffield Scientific School in 1847,[a] and the Yale School of Fine Arts in 1869. In 1887, under the presidency of Timothy Dwight V, Yale College was renamed to Yale University, and the former name was subsequently applied only to the undergraduate college. The university would continue to expand greatly into the 20th and 21st century, adding the Yale School of Music in 1894, the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies in 1900, the Yale School of Public Health in 1915, the Yale School of Architecture in 1916, the Yale School of Nursing 1923, the Yale School of Drama in 1955, the Yale School of Management in 1976, and the Jackson School of Global Affairs which is planned to open in 2022.[42] The Sheffield Scientific School would also reorganize its relationship with the university to teach only undergraduate courses.
Expansion caused controversy about Yale's new roles. Noah Porter, a moral philosopher, was president from 1871 to 1886. During an age of tremendous expansion in higher education, Porter resisted the rise of the new research university, claiming that an eager embrace of its ideals would corrupt undergraduate education. Many of Porter's contemporaries criticized his administration, and historians since have disparaged his leadership.[citation needed] Historian George Levesque argues Porter was not a simple-minded reactionary, uncritically committed to tradition, but a principled and selective conservative.[43][page needed] Levesque continues, saying he did not endorse everything old or reject everything new; rather, he sought to apply long-established ethical and pedagogical principles to a rapidly changing culture. Levesque concludes, noting he may have misunderstood some of the challenges of his time, but he correctly anticipated the enduring tensions that have accompanied the emergence and growth of the modern university.
20th century[edit]
Medicine[edit]
 Woolsey Hall c. 1905
Milton Winternitz led the Yale School of Medicine as its dean from 1920 to 1935. Dedicated to the new scientific medicine established in Germany, he was equally fervent about "social medicine" and the study of humans in their culture and environment. He established the "Yale System" of teaching, with few lectures and fewer exams, and strengthened the full-time faculty system; he also created the graduate-level Yale School of Nursing and the psychiatry department and built numerous new buildings. Progress toward his plans for an Institute of Human Relations, envisioned as a refuge where social scientists would collaborate with biological scientists in a holistic study of humankind, unfortunately, lasted for only a few years before the opposition of resentful anti-Semitic colleagues drove him to resign.[44]
Faculty[edit]
 Richard Rummell's 1906 watercolor of the Yale campus facing northBefore World War II, most elite university faculties counted among their numbers few, if any, Jews, blacks, women, or other minorities; Yale was no exception. By 1980, this condition had been altered dramatically, as numerous members of those groups held faculty positions.[45] Almost all members of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and some members of other faculties teach undergraduate courses, more than 2,000 of which are offered annually.[46]
Women[edit]
In 1793, Lucinda Foote passed the entrance exams for Yale College, but was rejected by the president on the basis of her gender.[47] Women studied at Yale University as early as 1892, in graduate-level programs at the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.[48] The first seven women to earn PhDs at Yale received their degrees in 1894: Elizabeth Deering Hanscom, Cornelia H. B. Rogers, Sara Bulkley Rogers, Margaretta Palmer, Mary Augusta Scott, Laura Johnson Wylie, and Charlotte Fitch Roberts. There is a portrait of these seven women in Sterling Memorial Library, painted by Brenda Zlamany.[49]
In 1966, Yale began discussions with its sister school Vassar College about merging to foster coeducation at the undergraduate level. Vassar, then all-female and part of the Seven Sisters elite higher education schools that historically served as sister institutions to the Ivy League when most Ivy League institutions still only admitted men tentatively accepted, but then declined the invitation. Both schools introduced coeducation independently in 1969.[50] Amy Solomon was the first woman to register as a Yale undergraduate;[51] she was also the first woman at Yale to join an undergraduate society, St. Anthony Hall. The undergraduate class of 1973 was the first class to have women starting from freshman year;[52] at the time, all undergraduate women were housed in Vanderbilt Hall at the south end of Old Campus.[53]
A decade into co-education, student assault and harassment by faculty became the impetus for the trailblazing lawsuit Alexander v. Yale. In the late 1970s, a group of students and one faculty member sued Yale for its failure to curtail campus sexual harassment by especially male faculty. The case was partly built from a 1977 report authored by plaintiff Ann Olivarius, now a feminist attorney known for fighting sexual harassment, "A report to the Yale Corporation from the Yale Undergraduate Women's Caucus."[54] This case was the first to use Title IX to argue and establish that the sexual harassment of female students can be considered illegal sex discrimination. The plaintiffs in the case were Olivarius, Ronni Alexander (now a professor at Kobe University, Japan), Margery Reifler (works in the Los Angeles film industry), Pamela Price (civil rights attorney in California), and Lisa E. Stone (works at Anti-Defamation League). They were joined by Yale classics professor John  Jack  J. Winkler, who died in 1990. The lawsuit, brought partly by Catharine MacKinnon, alleged rape, fondling, and offers of higher grades for sex by several Yale faculty, including Keith Brion, professor of flute and director of bands, political Science professor Raymond Duvall (now at the University of Minnesota), English professor Michael Cooke, and coach of the field hockey team, Richard Kentwell. While unsuccessful in the courts, the legal reasoning behind the case changed the landscape of sex discrimination law and resulted in the establishment of Yale's Grievance Board and the Yale Women's Center.[55] In March 2011 a Title IX complaint was filed against Yale by students and recent graduates, including editors of Yale's feminist magazine Broad Recognition, alleging that the university had a hostile sexual climate.[56] In response, the university formed a Title IX steering committee to address complaints of sexual misconduct.[57] Afterwards, universities and colleges throughout the US also established sexual harassment grievance procedures.
Class[edit]
Yale instituted policies in the early 20th century designed to maintain the proportion of white Protestants from notable families in the student body (see numerus clausus) and eliminated such preferences, beginning with the class of 1970.[58]
21st century[edit]
In 2006, Yale and Peking University (PKU) established a Joint Undergraduate Program in Beijing, an exchange program allowing Yale students to spend a semester living and studying with PKU honor students.[59] In July 2012, the Yale University-PKU Program ended due to weak participation.[59]
In 2007 outgoing Yale President Rick Levin characterized Yale's institutional priorities: "First, among the nation's finest research universities, Yale is distinctively committed to excellence in undergraduate education. Second, in our graduate and professional schools, as well as in Yale College, we are committed to the education of leaders."[60]
In 2009, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair picked Yale as one location   the others being Britain's Durham University and Universiti Teknologi Mara   for the Tony Blair Faith Foundation's United States Faith and Globalization Initiative.[61] As of 2009, former Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo is the director of the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization and teaches an undergraduate seminar, "Debating Globalization".[62] As of 2009, former presidential candidate and DNC chair Howard Dean teaches a residential college seminar, "Understanding Politics and Politicians".[63] Also in 2009, an alliance was formed among Yale, University College London, and both schools' affiliated hospital complexes to conduct research focused on the direct improvement of patient care a growing field known as translational medicine. President Richard Levin noted that Yale has hundreds of other partnerships across the world, but "no existing collaboration matches the scale of the new partnership with UCL".[64]
In August 2013, a new partnership with the National University of Singapore led to the opening of Yale-NUS College in Singapore, a joint effort to create a new liberal arts college in Asia featuring a curriculum including both Western and Asian traditions.[65]
In 2017, having been suggested for decades,[66] Yale University renamed Calhoun College, named for slave owner, anti-abolitionist, and white supremacist Vice President John C. Calhoun (it is now Hopper College, after Grace Hopper).[67][68]
In 2020, in the wake of protests around the world focused on racial relations and criminal justice reform, the #CancelYale tag was used on social media to demand that Elihu Yale's name be removed from Yale University. Most support for the change stemmed from politically conservative pundits, such as Mike Cernovich and Ann Coulter, satirizing perceived excesses of online cancel culture.[69] Yale was president of Fort. St George in Madras, a fort of the East India Company in India, which was one of the biggest corporation in the world at the time. The company traded textiles, goods, diamonds, cotton, spices, among others, and was involved in the slave trade in India, with a private army of 260,000 soldiers, twice the size of Britain.[70]
His singularly large donation of paintings and books to the college led some critics to argue that Yale relied on money related to the slave-trade for its first scholarships and endowments.[71][72][73][74]
In August 2020, the US Justice Department sued Yale for alleged discrimination against Asian and white candidates on the basis of their race through affirmative action admission policies.[75] In early February 2021, under the new Biden administration, the Justice Department withdrew the lawsuit. The group, Students for Fair Admissions, known for a similar lawsuit against Harvard alleging the same issue, plans to refile the lawsuit.[76]
Yale alumni in politics[edit]
The Boston Globe wrote that "if there's one school that can lay claim to educating the nation's top national leaders over the past three decades, it's Yale".[77][verification needed] Yale alumni were represented on the Democratic or Republican ticket in every U.S. presidential election between 1972 and 2004.[78] Yale-educated presidents since the end of the Vietnam War include Gerald Ford, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush, and major-party nominees during this period include Hillary Clinton (2016), John Kerry (2004), Joseph Lieberman (vice president, 2000), and Sargent Shriver (vice president, 1972). Other Yale alumni who have made serious bids for the presidency during this period include Amy Klobuchar (2020), Tom Steyer (2020), Ben Carson (2016), Howard Dean (2004), Gary Hart (1984 and 1988), Paul Tsongas (1992), Pat Robertson (1988) and Jerry Brown (1976, 1980, 1992).
Several explanations have been offered for Yale's representation in national elections since the end of the Vietnam War. Various sources note the spirit of campus activism that has existed at Yale since the 1960s, and the intellectual influence of Reverend William Sloane Coffin on many of the future candidates.[79][verification needed] Yale President Richard Levin attributes the run to Yale's focus on creating "a laboratory for future leaders," an institutional priority that began during the tenure of Yale Presidents Alfred Whitney Griswold and Kingman Brewster.[79] Richard H. Brodhead, former dean of Yale College and now president of Duke University, stated: "We do give very significant attention to orientation to the community in our admissions, and there is a very strong tradition of volunteerism at Yale."[77] Yale historian Gaddis Smith notes "an ethos of organized activity" at Yale during the 20th century that led John Kerry to lead the Yale Political Union's Liberal Party, George Pataki the Conservative Party, and Joseph Lieberman to manage the Yale Daily News.[80] Camille Paglia points to a history of networking and elitism: "It has to do with a web of friendships and affiliations built up in school."[81] CNN suggests that George W. Bush benefited from preferential admissions policies for the "son and grandson of alumni", and for a "member of a politically influential family".[82] New York Times correspondent Elisabeth Bumiller and The Atlantic Monthly correspondent James Fallows credit the culture of community and cooperation that exists between students, faculty, and administration, which downplays self-interest and reinforces commitment to others.[83]
During the 1988 presidential election, George H. W. Bush (Yale '48) derided Michael Dukakis for having "foreign-policy views born in Harvard Yard's boutique". When challenged on the distinction between Dukakis' Harvard connection and his own Yale background, he said that, unlike Harvard, Yale's reputation was "so diffuse, there isn't a symbol, I don't think, in the Yale situation, any symbolism in it" and said Yale did not share Harvard's reputation for "liberalism and elitism".[84] In 2004 Howard Dean stated, "In some ways, I consider myself separate from the other three (Yale) candidates of 2004. Yale changed so much between the class of '68 and the class of '71. My class was the first class to have women in it; it was the first class to have a significant effort to recruit African Americans. It was an extraordinary time, and in that span of time is the change of an entire generation".[83]
Administration and organization[edit]
Leadership[edit]
School founding
School
Year founded
Yale College
1701
Yale School of Medicine
1810
Yale Divinity School
1822
Yale Law School
1824
Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
1847
Sheffield Scientific School[a]
1847
Yale School of Engineering & Applied Science
1852
Yale School of Fine Arts
1869
Yale School of Music
1894
Yale School of the Environment
1900
Yale School of Public Health
1915
Yale School of Architecture
1916
Yale School of Nursing
1923
David Geffen School of Drama at Yale University
1955
Yale School of Management
1976
Jackson School of Global Affairs
2022[42]
The President and Fellows of Yale College, also known as the Yale Corporation, or board of trustees, is the governing body of the university and consists of thirteen standing committees with separate responsibilities outlined in the by-laws. The corporation has 19 members: three ex officio members, ten successor trustees, and six elected alumni fellows.[85] The university has three major academic components: Yale College (the undergraduate program), the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, and the twelve professional schools.[86]
Yale's former president Richard C. Levin was, at the time, one of the highest paid university presidents in the United States with a 2008 salary of $1.5 million.[87] Yale's succeeding president Peter Salovey ranks 40th with a 2020 salary of $1.16 million.[88]
The Yale Provost's Office and similar executive positions have launched several women into prominent university executive positions. In 1977, Provost Hanna Holborn Gray was appointed interim president of Yale and later went on to become president of the University of Chicago, being the first woman to hold either position at each respective school.[89][90] In 1994, Provost Judith Rodin became the first permanent female president of an Ivy League institution at the University of Pennsylvania.[91] In 2002, Provost Alison Richard became the vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge.[92] In 2003, the dean of the Divinity School, Rebecca Chopp, was appointed president of Colgate University and later went on to serve as the president of the Swarthmore College in 2009, and then the first female chancellor of the University of Denver in 2014.[93] In 2004, Provost Dr. Susan Hockfield became the president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.[94] In 2004, Dean of the Nursing school, Catherine Gilliss, was appointed the dean of Duke University's School of Nursing and vice chancellor for nursing affairs.[95] In 2007, Deputy Provost H. Kim Bottomly was named president of Wellesley College.[96]
Similar examples for men who have served in Yale leadership positions can also be found. In 2004, Dean of Yale College Richard H. Brodhead was appointed as the president of Duke University.[97] In 2008, Provost Andrew Hamilton was confirmed to be the vice chancellor of the University of Oxford.[98]
Staff and labor unions[edit]
See also: Federation of Hospital and University Employees
Yale University staff are represented by several different unions. Clerical and technical workers are represented by Local 34, and service and maintenance workers are represented by Local 35, both of the same union affiliate UNITE HERE.[99] Unlike similar institutions, Yale has consistently refused to recognize its graduate student union, Local 33 (another affiliate of UNITE HERE), citing claims that the union's elections were undemocratic and how graduate students are not employees;[100][101] the move to not recognize the union has been criticized by the American Federation of Teachers.[102] In addition, officers of the Yale University Police Department are represented by the Yale Police Benevolent Association, which affiliated in 2005 with the Connecticut Organization for Public Safety Employees.[99][103] Yale security officers joined the International Union of Security, Police and Fire Professionals of America in late 2010,[104] even though the Yale administration contested the election.[105] In October 2014, after deliberation,[106] Yale security decided to form a new union, the Yale University Security Officers Association, which has since represented the campus security officers.[99][107]
Yale has a history of difficult and prolonged labor negotiations, often culminating in strikes.[108][page needed] There have been at least eight strikes since 1968, and The New York Times wrote that Yale has a reputation as having the worst record of labor tension of any university in the U.S.[109] Moreover, Yale has been accused by the AFL CIO of failing to treat workers with respect,[110] as well as not renewing contracts with professors over involvement in campus labor issues.[111] Yale has responded to strikes with claims over mediocre union participation and the benefits of their contracts.[112]
Campus[edit]
 Yale Law School, located in the Sterling Law Building Interior of Beinecke Library
Yale's central campus in downtown New Haven covers 260 acres (1.1 km2) and comprises its main, historic campus and a medical campus adjacent to the Yale New Haven Hospital. In western New Haven, the university holds 500 acres (2.0 km2) of athletic facilities, including the Yale Golf Course.[113] In 2008, Yale purchased the 17-building, 136-acre (0.55 km2) former Bayer HealthCare complex in West Haven, Connecticut,[114] the buildings of which are now used as laboratory and research space.[115] Yale also owns seven forests in Connecticut, Vermont, and New Hampshire the largest of which is the 7,840-acre (31.7 km2) Yale-Myers Forest in Connecticut's Quiet Corner and nature preserves including Horse Island.[116]
Yale is noted for its largely Collegiate Gothic campus[117] as well as several iconic modern buildings commonly discussed in architectural history survey courses: Louis Kahn's Yale Art Gallery[118] and Center for British Art, Eero Saarinen's Ingalls Rink and Ezra Stiles and Morse Colleges, and Paul Rudolph's Art & Architecture Building. Yale also owns and has restored many noteworthy 19th-century mansions along Hillhouse Avenue, which was considered the most beautiful street in America by Charles Dickens when he visited the United States in the 1840s.[119] In 2011, Travel+Leisure listed the Yale campus as one of the most beautiful in the United States.[120]
Many of Yale's buildings were constructed in the Collegiate Gothic architecture style from 1917 to 1931, financed largely by Edward S. Harkness, including the Yale Drama School.[121][122] Stone sculpture built into the walls of the buildings portray contemporary college personalities, such as a writer, an athlete, a tea-drinking socialite, and a student who has fallen asleep while reading. Similarly, the decorative friezes on the buildings depict contemporary scenes, like a policemen chasing a robber and arresting a prostitute (on the wall of the Law School), or a student relaxing with a mug of beer and a cigarette. The architect, James Gamble Rogers, faux-aged these buildings by splashing the walls with acid,[123] deliberately breaking their leaded glass windows and repairing them in the style of the Middle Ages, and creating niches for decorative statuary but leaving them empty to simulate loss or theft over the ages. In fact, the buildings merely simulate Middle Ages architecture, for though they appear to be constructed of solid stone blocks in the authentic manner, most actually have steel framing as was commonly used in 1930. One exception is Harkness Tower, 216 feet (66 m) tall, which was originally a free-standing stone structure. It was reinforced in 1964 to allow the installation of the Yale Memorial Carillon.
 Statue of Nathan Hale in front of Connecticut Hall
 Vanderbilt Hall
Other examples of the Gothic style are on the Old Campus by architects like Henry Austin, Charles C. Haight and Russell Sturgis. Several are associated with members of the Vanderbilt family, including Vanderbilt Hall,[124] Phelps Hall,[125] St. Anthony Hall (a commission for member Frederick William Vanderbilt), the Mason, Sloane and Osborn laboratories, dormitories for the Sheffield Scientific School (the engineering and sciences school at Yale until 1956) and elements of Silliman College, the largest residential college.[126]
The oldest building on campus, Connecticut Hall (built in 1750), is in the Georgian style. Georgian-style buildings erected from 1929 to 1933 include Timothy Dwight College, Pierson College, and Davenport College, except the latter's east, York Street fa ade, which was constructed in the Gothic style to coordinate with adjacent structures.
The Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, designed by Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, is one of the largest buildings in the world reserved exclusively for the preservation of rare books and manuscripts. The library includes a six-story above-ground tower of book stacks, filled with 180,000 volumes, that is surrounded by large translucent Vermont marble panels and a steel and granite truss. The panels act as windows and subdue direct sunlight while also diffusing the light in warm hues throughout the interior.[127] Near the library is a sunken courtyard, with sculptures by Isamu Noguchi that are said to represent time (the pyramid), the sun (the circle), and chance (the cube).[128] The library is located near the center of the university in Hewitt Quadrangle, which is now more commonly referred to as "Beinecke Plaza."
Alumnus Eero Saarinen, Finnish-American architect of such notable structures as the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Washington Dulles International Airport main terminal, Bell Labs Holmdel Complex and the CBS Building in Manhattan, designed Ingalls Rink, dedicated in 1959,[129] as well as the residential colleges Ezra Stiles and Morse.[130] These latter were modeled after the medieval Italian hill town of San Gimignano   a prototype chosen for the town's pedestrian-friendly milieu and fortress-like stone towers.[131] These tower forms at Yale act in counterpoint to the college's many Gothic spires and Georgian cupolas.[132]
 Yale's Old Campus at dusk, April 2013
Notable nonresidential campus buildings[edit]
 Harkness Tower
Notable nonresidential campus buildings and landmarks include Battell Chapel, Beinecke Rare Book Library, Harkness Tower, Ingalls Rink, Kline Biology Tower, Osborne Memorial Laboratories, Payne Whitney Gymnasium, Peabody Museum of Natural History, Sterling Hall of Medicine, Sterling Law Buildings, Sterling Memorial Library, Woolsey Hall, Yale Center for British Art, Yale University Art Gallery, Yale Art & Architecture Building, and the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art in London.
Yale's secret society buildings (some of which are called "tombs") were built both to be private yet unmistakable. A diversity of architectural styles is represented: Berzelius, Donn Barber in an austere cube with classical detailing (erected in 1908 or 1910); Book and Snake, Louis R. Metcalfe in a Greek Ionic style (erected in 1901); Elihu, architect unknown but built in a Colonial style (constructed on an early 17th-century foundation although the building is from the 18th century); Mace and Chain, in a late colonial, early Victorian style (built in 1823). (Interior moulding is said to have belonged to Benedict Arnold);Manuscript Society, King-lui Wu with Dan Kiley responsible for landscaping and Josef Albers for the brickwork intaglio mural. Building constructed in a mid-century modern style; Scroll and Key, Richard Morris Hunt in a Moorish- or Islamic-inspired Beaux-Arts style (erected 1869 70); Skull and Bones, possibly Alexander Jackson Davis or Henry Austin in an Egypto-Doric style utilizing Brownstone (in 1856 the first wing was completed, in 1903 the second wing, 1911 the Neo-Gothic towers in rear garden were completed); St. Elmo, (former tomb) Kenneth M. Murchison, 1912, designs inspired by Elizabethan manor. Current location, brick colonial; and Wolf's Head, Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, erected 1923 1924, Collegiate Gothic.
Sustainability[edit]
Yale's Office of Sustainability develops and implements sustainability practices at Yale.[133] Yale is committed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 10% below 1990 levels by 2020. As part of this commitment, the university allocates renewable energy credits to offset some of the energy used by residential colleges.[134] Eleven campus buildings are candidates for LEED design and certification.[135] Yale Sustainable Food Project initiated the introduction of local, organic vegetables, fruits, and beef to all residential college dining halls.[136] Yale was listed as a Campus Sustainability Leader on the Sustainable Endowments Institute's College Sustainability Report Card 2008, and received a "B+" grade overall.[137]
Grove Street Cemetery, New Haven
Marsh Botanical Garden
Yale Sustainable Food Program Farm
Relationship with New Haven[edit]
Yale is the largest taxpayer and employer in the City of New Haven,[138] and has often buoyed the city's economy and communities. Yale, however, has consistently opposed paying a tax on its academic property.[139] Yale's Art Galleries, along with many other university resources, are free and openly accessible. Yale also funds the New Haven Promise program, paying full tuition for eligible students from New Haven public schools.[140]
Town gown relations[edit]
Yale has a complicated relationship with its home city; for example, thousands of students volunteer every year in myriad community organizations, but city officials, who decry Yale's exemption from local property taxes, have long pressed the university to do more to help. Under President Levin, Yale has financially supported many of New Haven's efforts to reinvigorate the city. Evidence suggests that the town and gown relationships are mutually beneficial. Still, the economic power of the university increased dramatically with its financial success amid a decline in the local economy.[141]
Campus safety[edit]
Several campus safety strategies have been pioneered at Yale. The first campus police force was founded at Yale in 1894, when the university contracted city police officers to exclusively cover the campus.[142][143] Later hired by the university, the officers were originally brought in to quell unrest between students and city residents and curb destructive student behavior.[144][145] In addition to the Yale Police Department, a variety of safety services are available including blue phones, a safety escort, and 24-hour shuttle service.
In the 1970s and 1980s, poverty and violent crime rose in New Haven, dampening Yale's student and faculty recruiting efforts.[146] Between 1990 and 2006, New Haven's crime rate fell by half, helped by a community policing strategy by the New Haven Police and Yale's campus became the safest among peer schools.[147]
In 2004, the national non-profit watchdog group Security on Campus filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education, accusing Yale of under-reporting rape and sexual assaults.[148][149]
In April 2021, Yale announced that it will require students to receive a COVID-19 vaccine as a condition of being on campus during the fall 2021 term.[150]
Academics[edit]
Admissions[edit]
Undergraduate admission to Yale College is considered "most selective" by U.S. News.[151][152] In 2022, Yale accepted 2,234 students to the Class of 2026 out of 50,015 applicants, for an acceptance rate of 4.46%.[153] 98% of students graduate within six years.[154]
Through its program of need-based financial aid, Yale commits to meet the full demonstrated financial need of all applicants. Most financial aid is in the form of grants and scholarships that do not need to be paid back to the university, and the average need-based aid grant for the Class of 2017 was $46,395.[155] 15% of Yale College students are expected to have no parental contribution, and about 50% receive some form of financial aid.[154][156][157] About 16% of the Class of 2013 had some form of student loan debt at graduation, with an average debt of $13,000 among borrowers.[154] For 2019, Yale ranked second in enrollment of recipients of the National Merit $2,500 Scholarship (140 scholars).[158]
Half of all Yale undergraduates are women, more than 39% are ethnic minority U.S. citizens (19% are underrepresented minorities), and 10.5% are international students.[155] 55% attended public schools and 45% attended private, religious, or international schools, and 97% of students were in the top 10% of their high school class.[154] Every year, Yale College also admits a small group of non-traditional students through the Eli Whitney Students Program.
Collections[edit]
 Yale University's Sterling Memorial Library, as seen from Maya Lin's sculpture, Women's Table. The sculpture records the number of women enrolled at Yale over its history; female undergraduates were not admitted until 1969.
Yale University Library, which holds over 15 million volumes, is the third-largest university collection in the United States.[9][159] The main library, Sterling Memorial Library, contains about 4 million volumes, and other holdings are dispersed at subject and location libraries.
Rare books are found in several Yale collections. The Beinecke Rare Book Library has a large collection of rare books and manuscripts. The Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library includes important historical medical texts, including an impressive collection of rare books, as well as historical medical instruments. The Lewis Walpole Library contains the largest collection of 18th century British literary works. The Elizabethan Club, technically a private organization, makes its Elizabethan folios and first editions available to qualified researchers through Yale.
 The Night Caf , Vincent van Gogh, 1888, Yale Art Gallery
Yale's museum collections are also of international stature. The Yale University Art Gallery, the country's first university-affiliated art museum, contains more than 200,000 works, including Old Masters and important collections of modern art, in the Swartwout and Kahn buildings. The latter, Louis Kahn's first large-scale American work (1953), was renovated and reopened in December 2006. The Yale Center for British Art, the largest collection of British art outside of the UK, grew from a gift of Paul Mellon and is housed in another Kahn-designed building.
The Peabody Museum of Natural History in New Haven is used by school children and contains research collections in anthropology, archaeology, and the natural environment. The Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments, affiliated with the Yale School of Music, is perhaps the least-known of Yale's collections because its hours of opening are restricted.
The museums once housed the artifacts brought to the United States from Peru by Yale history professor Hiram Bingham in his Yale-financed expedition to Machu Picchu in 1912   when the removal of such artifacts was legal. The artifacts were restored to Peru in 2012.[160]
Academic rankingsNationalARWU[161]9Forbes[162]8THE / WSJ[163]4U.S. News & World Report[164]3Washington Monthly[165]7GlobalARWU[166]11QS[167]18THE[168]9U.S. News & World Report[169]12
USNWR graduate school rankings[170]
Business
7
Engineering
38
Law
1
Medicine: Primary Care
59
Medicine: Research
10
Nursing: doctorate
21
Nursing: Master's
20
Rankings[edit]
USNWR departmental rankings[170]
Biological Sciences
6
Chemistry
12
Clinical Psychology
18
Computer Science
20
Earth Sciences
19
Economics
4
English
1
Fine Arts
2
History
2
Mathematics
12
Nursing Midwifery
2
Physician Assistant
26
Physics
11
Political Science
6
Psychology
6
Public Health
11
Sociology
18
Statistics
13
The U.S. News & World Report ranked Yale third among U.S. national universities for 2016,[151] as it had for each of the previous sixteen years. Yale University is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education.[171]
Internationally, Yale was ranked 11th in the 2016 Academic Ranking of World Universities, tenth in the 2016 17 Nature Index[172] for quality of scientific research output, and tenth in the 2016 CWUR World University Rankings.[173] The university was also ranked sixth in the 2016 Times Higher Education (THE) Global University Employability Rankings[174] and eighth in the Academic World Reputation Rankings.[175] In 2019, it ranked 27th among the universities around the world by SCImago Institutions Rankings.[176]
Faculty, research, and intellectual traditions[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Yale is a member of the Association of American Universities (AAU) and is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities   Very high research activity".[177] According to the National Science Foundation, Yale spent $990 million on research and development in 2018, ranking it 15th in the nation.[178]
Yale's current faculty include 67 members of the National Academy of Sciences,[12] 55 members of the National Academy of Medicine,[13] 8 members of the National Academy of Engineering,[14] and 187 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.[15] The college is, after normalization for institution size, the tenth-largest baccalaureate source of doctoral degree recipients in the United States, and the largest such source within the Ivy League.[16] It also is a top 10 (ranked seventh) baccalaureate source (after normalization for the number of graduates) of some of the most notable scientists (Nobel, Fields, Turing prizes, or membership in National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, or National Academy of Medicine).[17]
Yale's English and Comparative Literature departments were part of the New Criticism movement. Of the New Critics, Robert Penn Warren, W.K. Wimsatt, and Cleanth Brooks were all Yale faculty. Later, the Yale Comparative literature department became a center of American deconstruction. Jacques Derrida, the father of deconstruction, taught at the department of comparative literature from the late 1970s to mid-1980s. Several other Yale faculty members were also associated with deconstruction, forming the so-called "Yale School". These included Paul de Man who taught in the Departments of Comparative Literature and French, J. Hillis Miller, Geoffrey Hartman (both taught in the Departments of English and Comparative Literature), and Harold Bloom (English), whose theoretical position was always somewhat specific, and who ultimately took a very different path from the rest of this group. Yale's history department has also originated important intellectual trends. Historians C. Vann Woodward and David Brion Davis are credited with beginning in the 1960s and 1970s an important stream of southern historians; likewise, David Montgomery, a labor historian, advised many of the current generation of labor historians in the country. Yale's Music School and department fostered the growth of Music Theory in the latter half of the 20th century. The Journal of Music Theory was founded there in 1957; Allen Forte and David Lewin were influential teachers and scholars.
Since the late 1960s, Yale produces social sciences and policy research through its Institution for Social and Policy Studies (ISPS).
In addition to eminent faculty members, Yale research relies heavily on the presence of roughly 1200 Postdocs from various national and international origin working in the multiple laboratories in the sciences, social sciences, humanities, and professional schools of the university. The university progressively recognized this working force with the recent creation of the Office for Postdoctoral Affairs and the Yale Postdoctoral Association.
Campus life[edit]
Student body composition as of May 2, 2022
Race and ethnicity[179]
Total
White
35%
35 
Asian
24%
24 
Hispanic
15%
15 
Foreign national
10%
10 
Black
9%
9 
Other[b]
6%
6 
Economic diversity
Low-income[c]
20%
20 
Affluent[d]
80%
80 
Yale is a research university, with the majority of its students in the graduate and professional schools. Undergraduates, or Yale College students, come from a variety of ethnic, national, socioeconomic, and personal backgrounds. Of the 2010 2011 freshman class, 10% are non U.S. citizens, while 54% went to public high schools.[180] The median family income of Yale students is $192,600, with 57% of students coming from the top 10% highest-earning families and 16% from the bottom 60%.[181]
Residential colleges[edit]
Main article: Residential colleges of Yale University
Yale's residential college system was established in 1933 by Edward S. Harkness, who admired the social intimacy of Oxford and Cambridge and donated significant funds to found similar colleges at Yale and Harvard. Though Yale's colleges resemble their English precursors organizationally and architecturally, they are dependent entities of Yale College and have limited autonomy. The colleges are led by a head and an academic dean, who reside in the college, and university faculty and affiliates constitute each college's fellowship. Colleges offer their own seminars, social events, and speaking engagements known as "Master's Teas," but do not contain programs of study or academic departments. All other undergraduate courses are taught by the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and are open to members of any college.
All undergraduates are members of a college, to which they are assigned before their freshman year, and 85 percent live in the college quadrangle or a college-affiliated dormitory.[182] While the majority of upperclassman live in the colleges, most on-campus freshmen live on the Old Campus, the university's oldest precinct.
While Harkness' original colleges were Georgian Revival or Collegiate Gothic in style, two colleges constructed in the 1960s, Morse and Ezra Stiles Colleges, have modernist designs. All twelve college quadrangles are organized around a courtyard, and each has a dining hall, courtyard, library, common room, and a range of student facilities. The twelve colleges are named for important alumni or significant places in university history. In 2017, the university opened two new colleges near Science Hill.[183]
Jonathan Edwards College courtyard
Branford College courtyard
Saybrook College's Killingworth Courtyard
Hopper College courtyard
Berkeley College buildings
Trumbull College courtyard
Davenport College courtyard
Pierson College courtyard
Silliman College courtyard
Timothy Dwight College courtyard
Morse College courtyard
Ezra Stiles College courtyard
Benjamin Franklin College courtyard
Pauli Murray College courtyard
Calhoun College[edit]
Since the 1960s, John C. Calhoun's white supremacist beliefs and pro-slavery leadership[184][185][186][187] had prompted calls to rename the college or remove its tributes to Calhoun. The racially motivated church shooting in Charleston, South Carolina, led to renewed calls in the summer of 2015 for Calhoun College, one of 12 residential colleges, to be renamed. In July 2015 students signed a petition calling for the name change.[185] They argued in the petition that while Calhoun was respected in the 19th century as an "extraordinary American statesman" he was "one of the most prolific defenders of slavery and white supremacy" in the history of the United States.[185][186] In August 2015, Yale President Peter Salovey addressed the Freshman Class of 2019 in which he responded to the racial tensions but explained why the college would not be renamed.[187] He described Calhoun as "a notable political theorist, a vice president to two different U.S. presidents, a secretary of war and of state, and a congressman and senator representing South Carolina".[187] He acknowledged that Calhoun also "believed that the highest forms of civilization depend on involuntary servitude. Not only that, but he also believed that the races he thought to be inferior, black people in particular, ought to be subjected to it for the sake of their own best interests."[184] Student activism about this issue increased in the fall of 2015, and included further protests sparked by controversy surrounding an administrator's comments on the potential positive and negative implications of students who wear Halloween costumes that are culturally sensitive.[188] Campus-wide discussions expanded to include critical discussion of the experiences of women of color on campus, and the realities of racism in undergraduate life.[189] The protests were sensationalized by the media and led to the labelling of some students as being members of Generation Snowflake.[190]
In April 2016, Salovey announced that "despite decades of vigorous alumni and student protests," Calhoun's name will remain on the Yale residential college[191] explaining that it is preferable for Yale students to live in Calhoun's "shadow" so they will be "better prepared to rise to the challenges of the present and the future". He claimed that if they removed Calhoun's name, it would "obscure" his "legacy of slavery rather than addressing it".[191] "Yale is part of that history" and "We cannot erase American history, but we can confront it, teach it and learn from it." One change that will be issued is the title of "master" for faculty members who serve as residential college leaders will be renamed to "head of college" due to its connotation of slavery.[192]
Despite this apparently conclusive reasoning, Salovey announced that Calhoun College would be renamed for groundbreaking computer scientist Grace Murray Hopper in February 2017.[193] This renaming decision received a range of responses from Yale students and alumni.[194][195][196] In his 2019 book Assault on American Excellence, former Dean of Yale Law School, Anthony T. Kronman, criticized the title and name changes and the lack of support from Salovey for the Christakises, who were targeted by the student activists. Other members of the university community disagreed with Kronman's positions.[197]
Student organizations[edit]
In 2014, Yale had 385 registered student organizations, plus an additional one hundred groups in the process of registration.[198]
The university hosts a variety of student journals, magazines, and newspapers. The Yale Literary Magazine, founded in February 1836, is the oldest student literary magazine in the United States.[199] Established in 1872, The Yale Record is the world's oldest humor magazine. Newspapers include the Yale Daily News, which was first published in 1878, and the weekly Yale Herald, which was first published in 1986. The Yale Journal of Medicine & Law is a biannual magazine that explores the intersection of law and medicine.
Dwight Hall, an independent, non-profit community service organization, oversees more than 2,000 Yale undergraduates working on more than 70 community service initiatives in New Haven. The Yale College Council runs several agencies that oversee campus wide activities and student services. The Yale Dramatic Association and Bulldog Productions cater to the theater and film communities, respectively. In addition, the Yale Drama Coalition[200] serves to coordinate between and provide resources for the various Sudler Fund sponsored theater productions which run each weekend. WYBC Yale Radio[201] is the campus's radio station, owned and operated by students. While students used to broadcast on AM and FM frequencies, they now have an Internet-only stream.
The Yale College Council (YCC) serves as the campus's undergraduate student government. All registered student organizations are regulated and funded by a subsidiary organization of the YCC, known as the Undergraduate Organizations Funding Committee (UOFC).[202] The Graduate and Professional Student Senate (GPSS) serves as Yale's graduate and professional student government.
The Yale Political Union (YPU) is a debate society founded in 1934 to host student discussions on a wide variety of topics. It is advised by alumni political leaders such as John Kerry and George Pataki.
The Yale International Relations Association (YIRA) functions as the umbrella organization for the university's top-ranked Model UN team. YIRA also has a Europe-based offshoot, Yale Model Government Europe, other Model UN conferences such as YMUN, YMUN Korea, YMUN Taiwan and Yale Model African Union (YMAU), and educational programs such as the Yale Review of International Studies (YRIS), Yale International Relations Leadership Institute, and Hemispheres.
The campus includes several fraternities and sororities. The campus features at least 18 a cappella groups, the most famous of which is The Whiffenpoofs, which from its founding in 1909 until 2018 was made up solely of senior men.
Yale's secret societies include Skull and Bones, Scroll and Key, Wolf's Head, Book and Snake, Elihu, Berzelius, St. Elmo, Manuscript, Brothers in Unity, Linonia, St. Anthony Hall, Shabtai, Myth and Sword, Daughters of Sovereign Government (DSG), Mace and Chain, ISO, Spade and Grave and Sage and Chalice, among others. The two oldest existing honor societies are the Aurelian (1910) and the Torch Honor Society (1916).[203]
The Elizabethan Club, a social club, has a membership of undergraduates, graduates, faculty and staff with literary or artistic interests. Membership is by invitation. Members and their guests may enter the "Lizzie's" premises for conversation and tea. The club owns first editions of a Shakespeare Folio, several Shakespeare Quartos, and a first edition of Milton's Paradise Lost, among other important literary texts.
Traditions[edit]
See also: Bladderball
Yale seniors at graduation smash clay pipes underfoot to symbolize passage from their "bright college years," though in recent history the pipes have been replaced with "bubble pipes".[204][205] ("Bright College Years," the university's alma mater, was penned in 1881 by Henry Durand, Class of 1881, to the tune of Die Wacht am Rhein.) Yale's student tour guides tell visitors that students consider it good luck to rub the toe of the statue of Theodore Dwight Woolsey on Old Campus; however, actual students rarely do so.[206] In the second half of the 20th century Bladderball, a campus-wide game played with a large inflatable ball, became a popular tradition but was banned by administration due to safety concerns. In spite of administration opposition, students revived the game in 2009, 2011, and 2014.[207][208][209]
Athletic[edit]
Main article: Yale Bulldogs
 The Yale Bowl, the college football stadium
Yale supports 35 varsity athletic teams that compete in the Ivy League Conference, the Eastern College Athletic Conference, and the New England Intercollegiate Sailing Association. Yale athletic teams compete intercollegiately at the NCAA Division I level. Like other members of the Ivy League, Yale does not offer athletic scholarships.
Yale has numerous athletic facilities, including the Yale Bowl (the nation's first natural "bowl" stadium, and prototype for such stadiums as the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and the Rose Bowl), located at The Walter Camp Field athletic complex, and the Payne Whitney Gymnasium, the second-largest indoor athletic complex in the world.[210]
In May 2018, the men's lacrosse team defeated the Duke Blue Devils to claim their first ever NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship,[211] and are the first Ivy League school to win the title since the Princeton Tigers in 2001.[212]
In 2016, the men's basketball team won the Ivy League Championship title for the first time in 54 years, earning a spot in the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament. In the first round of the tournament, the Bulldogs beat the Baylor Bears 79 75 in the school's first-ever tournament win.[213] The Walter Camp Gate at the Yale Athletic Complex
October 21, 2000, marked the dedication of Yale's fourth new boathouse in 157 years of collegiate rowing. The Gilder Boathouse is named to honor former Olympic rower Virginia Gilder '79 and her father Richard Gilder '54, who gave $4 million towards the $7.5 million project. Yale also maintains the Gales Ferry site where the heavyweight men's team trains for the Yale-Harvard Boat Race.
Yale crew is the oldest collegiate athletic team in America, and won Olympic Games Gold Medal for men's eights in 1924 and 1956. The Yale Corinthian Yacht Club, founded in 1881, is the oldest collegiate sailing club in the world.
In 1896, Yale and Johns Hopkins played the first known ice hockey game in the United States. Since 2006, the school's ice hockey clubs have played a commemorative game.[214]
Yale students claim to have invented Frisbee, by tossing empty Frisbie Pie Company tins.[215][216]
Yale athletics are supported by the Yale Precision Marching Band. "Precision" is used here ironically; the band is a scatter-style band that runs wildly between formations rather than actually marching.[217] The band attends every home football game and many away, as well as most hockey and basketball games throughout the winter.
Yale intramural sports are also a significant aspect of student life. Students compete for their respective residential colleges, fostering a friendly rivalry. The year is divided into fall, winter, and spring seasons, each of which includes about ten different sports. About half the sports are coeducational. At the end of the year, the residential college with the most points (not all sports count equally) wins the Tyng Cup.
Song[edit]
Notable among the songs commonly played and sung at events such as commencement, convocation, alumni gatherings, and athletic games are the alma mater, "Bright College Years". Despite its popularity, "Boola Boola" is not the official fight song, albeit being the origin of the university's unofficial motto. The official Yale fight song, "Bulldog" was written by Cole Porter during his undergraduate days and is sung after touchdowns during a football game.[218] Additionally, two other songs, "Down the Field" by C.W. O'Conner, and "Bingo Eli Yale", also by Cole Porter, are still sung at football games. According to College Fight Songs: An Annotated Anthology published in 1998, "Down the Field" ranks as the fourth-greatest fight song of all time.[219]
Mascot[edit]
The school mascot is "Handsome Dan", the Yale bulldog, and the Yale fight song contains the refrain, "Bulldog, bulldog, bow wow wow." The school color, since 1894, is Yale Blue.[220] Yale's Handsome Dan is believed to be the first college mascot in America, having been established in 1889.[221]
Notable people[edit]
Benefactors[edit]
Yale has had many financial supporters, but some stand out by the magnitude or timeliness of their contributions. Among those who have made large donations commemorated at the university are: Elihu Yale; Jeremiah Dummer; the Harkness family (Edward, Anna, and William); the Beinecke family (Edwin, Frederick, and Walter); John William Sterling; Payne Whitney; Joseph Earl Sheffield, Paul Mellon, Charles B. G. Murphy, Joseph Tsai, and William K. Lanman. The Yale Class of 1954, led by Richard Gilder, donated $70 million in commemoration of their 50th reunion.[222] Charles B. Johnson, a 1954 graduate of Yale College, pledged a $250 million gift in 2013 to support the construction of two new residential colleges.[223] The colleges have been named respectively in honor of Pauli Murray and Benjamin Franklin. A $100 million contribution[224] by Stephen Adams enabled the Yale School of Music to become tuition-free and the Adams Center for Musical Arts to be built.
Notable alumni[edit]
Further information: List of Yale University people, List of Yale Law School alumni, and List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Yale UniversityThis section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (July 2021)
Over its history, Yale has produced many distinguished alumni in a variety of fields, ranging from the public to private sector. According to 2020 data, around 71% of undergraduates join the workforce, while the next largest majority of 16.6% go on to attend graduate or professional schools.[225] Yale graduates have been recipients of 263 Rhodes Scholarships,[226] 123 Marshall Scholarships,[227] 67 Truman Scholarships,[228] 21 Churchill Scholarships,[229] and 9 Mitchell Scholarships.[230] The university is also the second largest producer of Fulbright Scholars, with a total of 1,244 in its history[231] and has produced 89 MacArthur Fellows.[232] The U.S. Department of State Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs ranked Yale fifth among research institutions producing the most 2020 2021 Fulbright Scholars.[233] Additionally, 31 living billionaires are Yale alumni.[11]
At Yale, one of the most popular undergraduate majors among juniors and seniors is political science, with many students going on to serve careers in government and politics.[234] Former presidents who attended Yale for undergrad include William Howard Taft, George H. W. Bush, and George W. Bush while former presidents Gerald Ford and Bill Clinton attended Yale Law School.[235] Former vice-president and influential antebellum era politician John C. Calhoun[236] also graduated from Yale. Former world leaders include Italian prime minister Mario Monti,[237] Turkish prime minister Tansu  iller,[238] Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo,[239] German president Karl Carstens,[240] Philippine president Jos  Paciano Laurel,[241] Latvian president Valdis Zatlers,[242] Taiwanese premier Jiang Yi-huah,[243] and Malawian president Peter Mutharika,[244] among others. Prominent royals who graduated are Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden,[245] and Olympia Bonaparte, Princess Napol on.[246]
Yale alumni have had considerable presence in U.S. government in all three branches. On the U.S. Supreme Court, 19 justices have been Yale alumni, including current Associate Justices Sonia Sotomayor,[247] Samuel Alito,[248] Clarence Thomas,[248] and Brett Kavanaugh.[249] Numerous Yale alumni have been U.S. Senators, including current senators Michael Bennet,[250] Richard Blumenthal,[251] Cory Booker,[252] Sherrod Brown,[253] Chris Coons,[254] Amy Klobuchar,[255] Ben Sasse,[256] and Sheldon Whitehouse.[257] Current and former cabinet members include Secretaries of State John Kerry,[258] Hillary Clinton,[259] Cyrus Vance,[260] and Dean Acheson;[261] U.S. Secretaries of the Treasury Oliver Wolcott,[262] Robert Rubin,[263] Nicholas F. Brady,[264] Steven Mnuchin,[265] and Janet Yellen;[266] U.S. Attorneys General Nicholas Katzenbach,[267] John Ashcroft,[268] and Edward H. Levi;[269] and many others. Peace Corps founder and American diplomat Sargent Shriver[270] and public official and urban planner Robert Moses[271] are Yale alumni.
Yale has produced numerous award-winning authors and influential writers,[272] like Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Sinclair Lewis[273] and Pulitzer Prize winners Stephen Vincent Ben t,[274] Thornton Wilder,[275] Doug Wright,[276] and David McCullough.[277] Academy Award winning actors, actresses, and directors include Jodie Foster,[278] Paul Newman,[279] Meryl Streep,[280] Elia Kazan,[281] George Roy Hill,[282] Lupita Nyong'o,[283] Oliver Stone,[284] and Frances McDormand.[285] Alumni from Yale have also made notable contributions to both music and the arts. Leading American composer from the 20th century Charles Ives,[286] Broadway composer Cole Porter,[287] Grammy award winner David Lang,[288] multi-Tony Award winner Composer and Musicologist Maury Yeston,[289] and award-winning jazz pianist and composer Vijay Iyer[290] all hail from Yale. Hugo Boss Prize winner Matthew Barney,[291] famed American sculptor Richard Serra,[292] President Barack Obama presidential portrait painter Kehinde Wiley,[293] MacArthur Fellows and contemporary artists Titus Kaphar and  Sarah Sze,[294] Pulitzer Prize winning cartoonist Garry Trudeau,[295] and National Medal of Arts photorealist painter Chuck Close[296] all graduated from Yale. Additional alumni include architect and Presidential Medal of Freedom winner Maya Lin,[297] Pritzker Prize winner Norman Foster,[298] and Gateway Arch designer Eero Saarinen.[299] Journalists and pundits include Dick Cavett,[300] Chris Cuomo,[301] Anderson Cooper,[302] William F. Buckley Jr.,[303] Blake Hounshell,[304] and Fareed Zakaria.[305]
In business, Yale has had numerous alumni and former students go on to become founders of influential business, like William Boeing[306] (Boeing, United Airlines), Briton Hadden[307] and Henry Luce[308] (Time Magazine), Stephen A. Schwarzman[309] (Blackstone Group), Frederick W. Smith[310] (FedEx), Juan Trippe[311] (Pan Am), Harold Stanley[312] (Morgan Stanley), Bing Gordon[313] (Electronic Arts), and Ben Silbermann[314] (Pinterest). Other business people from Yale include former chairman and CEO of Sears Holdings Edward Lampert,[315] former Time Warner president Jeffrey Bewkes,[316] former PepsiCo chairperson and CEO Indra Nooyi,[317] sports agent Donald Dell,[318] and investor/philanthropist Sir John Templeton,[319]
Yale alumni distinguished in academia include literary critic and historian Henry Louis Gates,[320] economists Irving Fischer,[321] Mahbub ul Haq,[322] and Nobel Prize laureate Paul Krugman;[323] Nobel Prize in Physics laureates Ernest Lawrence[324] and Murray Gell-Mann;[325] Fields Medalist John G. Thompson;[326] Human Genome Project leader and National Institutes of Health director Francis S. Collins;[327] brain surgery pioneer Harvey Cushing;[328] pioneering computer scientist Grace Hopper;[329] influential mathematician and chemist Josiah Willard Gibbs;[330] National Women's Hall of Fame inductee and biochemist Florence B. Seibert;[331] Turing Award recipient Ron Rivest;[332] inventors Samuel F.B. Morse[333] and Eli Whitney;[334] Nobel Prize in Chemistry laureate John B. Goodenough;[335] lexicographer Noah Webster;[336] and theologians Jonathan Edwards[337] and Reinhold Niebuhr.[338]
In the sporting arena, Yale alumni include baseball players Ron Darling[339] and Craig Breslow[340] and baseball executives Theo Epstein[341] and George Weiss;[342] football players Calvin Hill,[343] Gary Fenick,[344] Amos Alonzo Stagg,[345] and "the Father of American Football" Walter Camp;[346] ice hockey players Chris Higgins[347] and Olympian Helen Resor;[348] Olympic figure skaters Sarah Hughes[349] and Nathan Chen;[350] nine-time U.S. Squash men's champion Julian Illingworth;[351] Olympic swimmer Don Schollander;[352] Olympic rowers Josh West[353] and Rusty Wailes;[354] Olympic sailor Stuart McNay;[355] Olympic runner Frank Shorter;[356] and others.
Notable Yale alumni include:
7th Vice President of the United States John C. Calhoun (College, 1806)
27th President of the United States and Chief Justice William Howard Taft (BA, 1878)
38th President of the United States Gerald Ford (LLB, 1941)
41st President of the United States George H. W. Bush (BA, 1948)
43rd President of the United States George W. Bush (BA, 1968)
42nd President of the United States Bill Clinton (JD, 1973)
Literary critic and historian Henry Louis Gates Jr. (BA, 1973)
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Clarence Thomas (JD, 1974)
Economist and Nobel Prize laureate Paul Krugman (AB, 1974)
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Samuel Alito (JD, 1975)
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Sonia Sotomayor (JD, 1979)
Actress Jodie Foster (BA, 1985)
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Brett Kavanaugh (BA, 1987; JD, 1990)
In fiction and popular culture[edit]
Further information: List of Yale University people
Yale University is a cultural referent as an institution that produces some of the most elite members of society[357] and its grounds, alumni, and students have been prominently portrayed in fiction and U.S. popular culture. For example, Owen Johnson's novel Stover at Yale follows the college career of Dink Stover,[358] and Frank Merriwell, the model for all later juvenile sports fiction, plays football, baseball, crew, and track at Yale while solving mysteries and righting wrongs.[359][360] Yale University also is mentioned in F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel The Great Gatsby. The narrator, Nick Carraway, wrote a series of editorials for the Yale News, and Tom Buchanan was "one of the most powerful ends that ever played football" for Yale.
Notes[edit]
^ a b Sheffield was originally named Yale Scientific School; it was renamed in 1861 after a major donation from Joseph E. Sheffield.
^ Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say.
^ The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students.
^ The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum.
References[edit]
^ a b Shao, Zhemin (October 14, 2021). "Yale's endowment reaches $42.3 billion, posting highest rate of return since 2000". Yale Daily News. Retrieved October 14, 2021.
^ Shelton, Jim (July 1, 2013). "Peter Salovey takes the helm as Yale's 23rd president". New Haven Register. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2013.
^ "Scott Strobel named Yale provost". YaleNews. Yale University. November 6, 2019. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2020.
^ "Yale Facts". yale.edu. Yale University. August 3, 2015. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021.
^ a b c Acevedo, Gabriel (2021). "2020-2021 Common Data Set" (PDF). Retrieved March 4, 2021.[permanent dead link]
^ "Web". yaleidentity.yale.edu. Yale University. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2017.
^ "COLLEGES IN THE COLONIAL TIMES". The Harvard Crimson. Retrieved February 5, 2023.
^ "Graduate & Professional Schools | Yale 2021". yale2021.yale.edu. Retrieved February 14, 2023.
^ a b Gibbons, Susan (2013). Yale University Library Annual Report 2012 2013 (Report). Yale University Library. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2014.
^ "ALA Library Fact Sheet 22   The Nation's Largest Libraries: A Listing by Volumes Held". www.ala.org. American Library Association. July 2010. Archived from the original on June 19, 2010. Retrieved July 15, 2014.
^ a b Elkins, Kathleen (May 18, 2018). "More billionaires went to Harvard than to Stanford, MIT and Yale combined". CNBC.com. CNBC. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2017.
^ a b "Member Profiles". National Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
^ a b "Directory Search Form". National Academy of Medicine. Retrieved November 15, 2021.
^ a b "Members Directory". NAE Website. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
^ a b "Member Directory". American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved November 15, 2021.
^ a b "Baccalaureate Origins Peer Analysis 2000" (PDF). Center College. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2007.
^ a b Wai, Steve Hsu, Jonathan (September 10, 2015). "These 25 schools are responsible for the greatest advances in science". Quartz. Retrieved November 15, 2021.
^ Hallett, Vicky C. (March 11, 1999). "I'm Gonna Git YOU Sukka: Classic Stories of Revenge at Harvard". The Harvard Crimson. Archived from the original on February 15, 2006. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Yale: A Short History - The Beginnings". www.library.yale.edu. Yale University. Archived from the original on June 7, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016.
^ "Increase Mather". Archived from the original on February 11, 2006. Retrieved April 17, 2005., Encyclop dia Britannica Eleventh Edition, Encyclop dia Britannica
^ Hanson, Robert Brand (1976). Dedham, Massachusetts, 1635-1890. Dedham Historical Society. p. 164.
^ Gandhi, Ajay (May 4, 2005). "Yale, India, and the failure of the 'global university'". The Hindu. Archived from the original on May 7, 2005.
^ Love, Henry Davison (1913). Indian Records Series Vestiges of Old Madras 1640-1800. Indian records series. Vol. 1. London: John Murray. p. 491.
^ Oviatt, Edwin (1916). The Beginnings of Yale (1701 1726). New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 298 302. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2015.
^ Morgan, Edmund S. (2009). American Heroes: Profiles of Men and Women Who Shaped Early America. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 26 32. ISBN 978-0-393-07010-1.
^ Morgan, Edmunds S. (1974). The Gentle Puritan: A Life of Ezra Stiles, 1727-1795. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-1231-0.
^ Tucker, Louis Leonard (1962). Puritan Protagonist: President Thomas Clap of Yale College. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-0841-2.
^ Morgan, Edmund S. (1974). The Gentle Puritan: A Life of Ezra Stiles, 1727-1795. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 205. ISBN 978-0-8078-1231-0.
^ "Honorary Degrees Since 1702". Yale Office of the Secretary and Vice President for University Life. Yale University. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2021.
^ See Daniels, Bruce C. (1982). "College Students and Puritan Society: A Quantitative Profile of Yale Graduates in Colonial America". Connecticut History Review (23): 1 23. doi:10.2307/44369191. JSTOR 44369191. S2CID 254492748   via JSTOR.
^ Moore, Kathryn McDaniel (1978). "The War with the Tutors: Student-Faculty Conflict at Harvard and Yale, 1745-1771". History of Education Quarterly. Cambridge University Press. 18 (2): 115 127. doi:10.2307/367795. JSTOR 367795. S2CID 144759290   via JSTOR.
^ Pak, Michael S. (2008). "The Yale Report of 1828: A New Reading and New Implications". History of Education Quarterly. Cambridge University Press. 48 (1): 30 57. doi:10.1111/j.1748-5959.2008.00125.x. JSTOR 20462205. S2CID 146523521   via JSTOR.
^ Urofsky, Melvin I. (1965). "Reforms and Response: The Yale Report of 1828". History of Education Quarterly. Cambridge University Press. 5 (1): 53 67. doi:10.2307/366937. JSTOR 366937. S2CID 147192155   via JSTOR.
^ Stevenson, Louise L. (1986). Scholarly Means to Evangelical Ends: The New Haven Scholars and the Transformation of Higher Learning in America, 1830-1890. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-2695-5.
^ Lee, Alfred McClung (1980). "The Forgotten Sumner". The Journal of the History of Sociology. 3 (1): 87 106.
^ "The Yale Corporation: Charter and Legislation" (PDF). www.yale.edu. New Haven: Yale University. 1976. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 3, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ Higgs, Robert J. (1987). "Yale and the heroic ideal, G tterd mmerung and palingenesis, 1865-1914".  In Mangan, J. A.; Walvin, James (eds.). Manliness and morality: Middle-class masculinity in Britain and America, 1800-1940. Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 160 176. ISBN 978-0-7190-2240-1.
^ Smith, Ronald A. (December 27, 1990). Sports and Freedom: The Rise of Big-Time College Athletics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-028172-4.
^ Lamb, Mary (2013). Contest(ed) Writing: Re-Conceptualizing Literacy Competitions. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 9781443845472. Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2015.
^ Park, Roberta J. (1987). "Muscle, Mind and "Agon": Intercollegiate Debating and Athletics at Harvard and Yale, 1892-1909". Journal of Sport History. University of Illinois Press. 14 (3): 263 285. JSTOR 43611556   via JSTOR.
^ Watterson, III, John S. (1981). "The Football Crisis of 1909-1910: The Response of the Eastern "Big Three"". Journal of Sport History. University of Illinois Press. 8 (1): 33 49. JSTOR 43611449   via JSTOR.
^ a b "The Future of Jackson". Yale Jackson Institute for Global Affairs. Yale University. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019.
^ Levesque, George (2017). "Noah Porter Revisited".  In Geiger, Roger L. (ed.). Perspectives on the History of Higher Education. Vol. 26. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-4128-0732-6. ISSN 0737-2698.
^ Spiro, Howard M.; Norton, Priscilla Waters (2003). "Dean Milton C. Winternitz at Yale". Perspectives in Biology and Medicine. Johns Hopkins University Press. 46 (3): 403 412. doi:10.1353/pbm.2003.0046. PMID 12878810. S2CID 19222204   via Project MUSE.
^ Palmer, William (August 6, 2007). "On or About 1950 or 1955 History Departments Changed: A Step in the Creation of the Modern History Department". Journal of the Historical Society. 7 (3): 385 405. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5923.2007.00222.x   via Wiley Online Library.
^ Lu, Carmen; Seager, Ilana (October 15, 2009). "Undergraduate Teaching Requirement A Myth". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ Griffin, Lynne; McCann, Kelly (1995). The Book of Women : 300 Notable Women History Passed By. Holbrook: Adams Media. p. 103. ISBN 978-1-55850-516-2.
^ Schiff, Judith (February 24, 2005). "A Brief History of Yale :: Resources on Yale History". library.yale.edu. Yale University Library. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ Castellanos-Monfil, Rom n (April 6, 2016). "Portrait of Yale's first seven women Ph.D.s unveiled". YaleNews. Retrieved September 19, 2022.
^ "A History of the Curriculum 1865-1970s". Vassar Encyclopedia. Vassar College. 2005. Archived from the original on December 31, 2008. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ "Transformations brought about by Yale women". Yale Bulletin & Calendar. Vol. 29, no. 23. Yale Office of Public Affairs & Communications. March 23, 2001. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ "On the advisability and feasibility of women at Yale". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXIII, no. 1. Yale Alumni Publications. 2009. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ "Women at Yale: A Tour" (PDF). visitorcenter.yale.edu. Yale University. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ A Report to the Yale Corporation from the Yale Undergraduate Women's Caucus (PDF) (Report). March 1977. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 17, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ Allan, Nicole. "To Break the Silence" (PDF). mcolaw.com. McAllister Olivarius Law. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 14, 2011. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ Huffington, Christina (March 31, 2011). "BREAKING NEWS: Yale Students File Title IX Suit Against University". The Yale Herald. Archived from the original on April 3, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ "Yale Forms Committee To Address Sexual Misconduct". HuffPost. Associated Press. April 7, 2011. Archived from the original on June 5, 2014.
^ Kabaservice, Geoffrey (December 1999). "The Birth of a New Institution". Yale Alumni Magazine. Archived from the original on March 14, 2010. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ a b Gideon, Gavan; Sisgoreo, Daniel; Stephenson, Tapley (July 27, 2012). "With end of Yale-PKU, admins' hopes unfulfilled". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Levin, Richard (December 1996). "Preparing for Yale's Fourth Century". Yale Alumni Magazine. Yale Alumni Publications, Inc. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ "Seeking to Understand Faith and Globalisation". The Tony Blair Faith Foundation. Archived from the original on September 2, 2009. Retrieved September 16, 2009.
^ 
"Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Le n Biography". Yale Center for the Study of Globalization. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Shim, Eileen (January 26, 2009). "Howard Dean, professor?". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Henderson, Drew (October 9, 2009). "Yale joins research alliance". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Gooch, Liz (August 27, 2012). "With Opening Near, Yale Defends Singapore Venture (Published 2012)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
^ Remnick, Noah (September 11, 2015). "Yale Grapples With Ties to Slavery in Debate Over a College's Name". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
^ Hamid, Zainab; Treisman, Rachel; Yaffe-Bellany, David (February 11, 2017). "Calhoun College to be renamed for Grace Hopper". Yale Daily News.
^ Newman, Andy; Wang, Vivian (September 3, 2017). "Calhoun Who? Yale Drops Name of Slavery Advocate for Computer Pioneer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
^ "#CancelYale: University Founder Called Out for Being a Racist Slave Trader in East India Company". News18. June 21, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Goyal, Yugank (February 17, 2017). "The Ivy League's dark history shows it is not easy to reject charity that involves dirty money". Quartz India. Quartz Media, Inc. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ "Yale University's The History of Elihu". doyouelihu.yale.edu. Yale University. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020.
^ Joseph, Yannielli (November 1, 2014). "Elihu Yale Was a Slave Trader". Digital Histories At Yale. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2020.
^ Zernike, Kate (August 13, 2001). "Slave Traders In Yale's Past Fuel Debate On Restitution". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ "An astounding tale of slavery and deceit: Yale University's Madras connection". The News Minute. February 13, 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Shortell, David; Romine, Taylor (August 13, 2020). "Justice Department accuses Yale of discriminating against Asian American and White applicants". CNN. Warner Media Company. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Hartocollis, Anemona (February 3, 2021). "Justice Department Drops Suit Claiming Yale Discriminated in Admissions". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ a b Boston Globe November 17, 2002, Magazine, p. 6 
^ "Bulldogs part of presidential ticket for 32 years now". Yale Bulletin & Calendar. Vol. 33, no. 9. October 29, 2004. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ a b Los Angeles Times October 4, 2000, p. E1
^ Weisman, Steven R. (August 13, 2000). "Opinion | Editorial Observer; On Being Young, Idealistic and Politically Ambitious at Yale in the 60's". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 26, 2021.
^ Lehigh, Scot (August 13, 2000). "An (Ivy) League of Their Own: Never Before Have Yale and Harvard So Clearly Dominated a Presidential Campaign". The Boston Globe. Boston, Massachusetts: Boston Globe Media Partners. p. F.1. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2015.
^ Kinsley, Michael (January 20, 2003). "How affirmative action helped George W." CNN. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on June 3, 2007. Retrieved May 28, 2007.
^ a b Goldstein, Warren (2004). "For Country: The (Second) Great All-Blue Presidential Race". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. 67, no. 5. Yale Alumni Publications. Retrieved February 25, 2021.
^ Dowd, Maureen (June 11, 1988). "Bush Traces How Yale Differs From Harvard". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 26, 2021.
^ "Board of Trustees". yale.edu. Yale University. August 5, 2015. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Academics". yale.edu. Yale University. July 31, 2015. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021.
"Undergraduate Study". yale.edu. Yale University. August 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021.
"Graduate & Professional Study". Yale University. August 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021.
^ de Vise, Daniel (November 15, 2010). "Million-dollar college presidents on the rise". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 26, 2021.
^ Bauman, Dan; Davis, Tyler; O'Leary, Brian (July 17, 2020). "Executive Compensation at Public and Private Colleges". The Chronicle of Higher Education. The Chronicle of Higher Education Inc. Retrieved February 26, 2021.
^ Jaschik, Scott (March 20, 2018). "'An Academic Life'". Inside Higher Ed. The University of Chicago. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Abowd, Mary (Spring 2018). "The long view" (PDF). The University of Chicago Magazine. Vol. 110, no. 3. pp. 20 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Jordan, Mary (December 7, 1993). "FIRST WOMAN PRESIDENT NAMED IN IVY LEAGUE". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Professor Alison Richard nominated as Vice-Chancellor". cam.ac.uk. University of Cambridge. December 4, 2002. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "University of Denver Chancellor Rebecca Chopp Named to the Board of Trustees at Olin College". Olin College of Engineering. August 17, 2018. Archived from the original on April 9, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Dr. Susan Hockfield selected 16th president". MIT News. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. August 26, 2004. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Dean Catherine L. Gilliss". UCSF School of Nursing. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Yale scientist is new president of Wellesley College". Yale School of Medicine. August 1, 2007. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "President Richard Brodhead to Step Down in 2017". Duke Today. Duke University. April 28, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Balakrishna, Kanya; Siegel, Steven (May 11, 2007). "Bottomly to leave for Wellesley presidency". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007. Retrieved March 1, 2021.
^ a b c "Labor Unions at Yale University". It's Your Yale. Yale University. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Arvanitis, Lorenzo; Cho, Serena (November 26, 2018). "Breaking with peers, Yale reaffirms opposition to Local 33". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Noguchi, Yuki (June 16, 2017). "At Yale, Protests Mark A Fight To Recognize Union For Grad Students". NPR. National Public Radio, Inc. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ "Union Leaders on Failure of Yale University to Negotiate with its Graduate Employees". aftct.org. AFT Connecticut, AFL-CIO. May 23, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Kahn, Sam (April 1, 2005). "Yale Police union to join COPS". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Archived from the original on September 21, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Rosenfeld, Everett (October 14, 2010). "Yale Security votes to unionize Thursday". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Archived from the original on October 16, 2010.
^ Rosenfeld, Everett (October 15, 2010). "Union vote contested by Yale". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Lloyd-Thomas, Matthew; Ramilo, Marek (September 25, 2014). "Yale Security considers union switch". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ Bruley, Sarah; Siegel, Rachel (December 2, 2014). "Three firings in Yale Security put labor relations in focus". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing Company. Retrieved December 2, 2014.
^ Gilpin, Toni; Issac, Gary; Letwin, Dan; McKivigan, Jack (1994). On Strike for Respect: The Clerical and Technical Workers' Strike at Yale University, 1984-85. Champaign: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-06454-8.
^ Greenhouse, Steven (March 4, 2003). "Yale's Labor Troubles Deepen as Thousands Go on Strike". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ "Solidarity Strong as Yale Strike Ends". aflcio.org. AFL CIO. March 6, 2003. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ Arenson, Karen W. (December 28, 2005). "When Scholarship and Politics Collided at Yale". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 7, 2021.
^ "Office of Public Affairs at Yale   News Release". yale.edu. Yale University. September 12, 2003. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ "A Framework for Campus Planning" (PDF). Yale.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 15, 2007. Retrieved April 9, 2007.
^ "Yale announces purchase of 136-acre Bayer campus". Yale School of Medicine. Yale University. 2007. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ W. Arenson, Karen (July 4, 2007). "At Yale, a New Campus Just for Research". The New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "The School Forests: Locations". Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies. Yale University. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015.
^ Assorted pictures of Yale's campus Archived October 3, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 10, 2007.
^ About the Yale Art Gallery., Retrieved April 10, 2007. Archived April 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ Dickinson, Duo (January 24, 2015). "A Classic Street Ages, But Retains Its Beautiful Bones". Hartford Courant. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ ""America's most beautiful college campuses", Travel+Leisure (September, 2011)". Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
^ Synnott, Marcia Graham. The Half-Opened Door: Discrimination and admissions at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, 1900 1970, Greenwood Press, 1979. Westport, Connecticut, London, England
^ Sacks, Benjamin (June 2011). "Harvard's "Constructed Utopia" and the Culture of Deception: The Expansion toward the Charles River, 1902 1932". The New England Quarterly. 84 (2): 286 317. doi:10.1162/TNEQ_a_00090. S2CID 57564446.
^ Yale Herald: "Donor steps up to fund CCL renovations." Archived February 16, 2005, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 10, 2007.
^ "hsnparch.com". www.hsnparch.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2007.
^ "Phelps Hall". Archived from the original on August 28, 2006.
^ "Facilities Services Building Contacts | Office of Facilities". facilities.yale.edu.
^ "History and Architecture". Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library. Yale University. December 20, 2018. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Public art at Yale". Yale University. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012.
^ "Ingalls Rink". Yale University. Archived from the original on November 5, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Cooper, Henry S. F. (December 15, 1962). "Morse and Stiles". The New Yorker. p. 26. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Stephens, Suzanne (November 15, 2011). "Morse and Ezra Stiles Colleges". Architectural Record. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ Assorted pictures of Ezra Stiles College Archived April 15, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved April 10, 2007.
^ "Yale Sustainability Strategy". Yale University. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved June 3, 2008.
^ "Yale commits to long-term Greenhouse Gas Reduction and Renewable Energy Strategy". Yale University. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved June 3, 2008.
^ "Yale's Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategy" (PDF). Yale University. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 7, 2008. Retrieved June 3, 2008.
^ "Yale Sustainable Food Program". Yale University. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2008.
^ "College Sustainability Report Card 2008". Sustainable Endowments Institute. Archived from the original on July 17, 2008. Retrieved June 3, 2008.
^ "Yale University > Office of New Haven and State Affairs > About Yale and New Haven". September 7, 2011. Archived from the original on September 7, 2011. Retrieved January 25, 2018.
^ "FAQs on state legislation to tax Yale's academic property > Yale News". April 21, 2016. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 5, 2020.
^ "College Affordability Resource Center". New Haven Promise. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2018.
^ Lafer, Gordon (2003). "Land and labor in the post-industrial university town: remaking social geography" (PDF). Political Geography. Pergamon Press. 22 (1): 89 117. doi:10.1016/S0962-6298(02)00065-3   via Google Scholar.
^ Sloan, John J. (1991). "Modern Campus Police: An Analysis of Their Evolution, Structure, and Function". American Journal of Police. 11 (2): 85 104.
^ Powell. "The Beginning Yale Campus Police Department 1894". Campus Law Enforcement Journal. 24: 2 5.
^ Gehrand, Keith A. (2008). "Higher Education Policing: The New Millennium" (PDF). IACLEA 50th Anniversary Commemorative Publication. International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators. pp. 67 68. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
^ Kurtz-Phelan, Daniel (April 1, 2002). "Crossing Enemy Lines". The New Journal. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015.
^ AJ Giannini. Life, love, death and prestige in New Haven. Neon. 27:113 116, 1984.
^ Office of Post-Secondary Education: "Security search." Archived April 2, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved April 9, 2007.
^ Anand, Easha (February 14, 2005). "Panel questions way University handles sex crimes". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2005.
^ Sullivan, Will (September 6, 2004). "Yale may not report all crimes". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015.
^ Porterfield, Carlie; Brewster, Jack (April 19, 2021). "Yale Is The Latest University To Require Students To Get A Coronavirus Vaccine". Forbes. Retrieved April 26, 2021.
^ a b "National University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved November 7, 2015.
^ P rez-Pe a, Richard (April 8, 2014). "Best, Brightest and Rejected: Elite Colleges Turn Away Up to 95%". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ Fitzgerald, Jordan (March 31, 2022). "Yale admits 2,234 students, acceptance rate shrinks to 4.46 percent". Yale Daily News. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2022.
^ a b c d "Yale College by the Numbers" (PDF). Yale University Office of Institutional Research. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ a b "2013 14 Common Data Set" (PDF). Yale University Office of Institutional Research. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ Zax, David (January February 2014). "Wanted: smart students from poor families". Yale Alumni Magazine. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
^ Anonymous. "Financial Aid". Yale College Admissions. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2013.
^ "NMSC 2018 2019 Annual Report" (PDF). National Merit Scholarship Corporation.
^ ARL Statistics 2011 2012 (Report). Association of Research Libraries. 2012. p. 53. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2014.
^ Zorthian, Julia (November 12, 2012), Yale returns final Machu Picchu artifacts, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Daily News, archived from the original on July 12, 2018, retrieved August 31, 2018
^ "ShanghaiRanking's Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2022". Forbes. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education College Rankings 2022". The Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education. Retrieved July 26, 2022.
^ "2022-2023 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "2022 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ "ShanghaiRanking's Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "QS World University Rankings 2023: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "World University Rankings 2023". Times Higher Education. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023.
^ a b "Yale University - U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved April 26, 2020.
^ Connecticut Institutions   NECHE, New England Commission of Higher Education, retrieved May 26, 2021
^ "Global universities ranked by a different measure". Nature Index. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2017.
^ "CWUR 2016 - World University Rankings". CWUR. Center For World University Rankings. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2017.
^ "Best universities for graduate jobs: Global University Employability Ranking 2016". THE. Times Higher Education. November 16, 2016. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2017.
^ "World Reputation Rankings 2016". timeshighereducation.com. Times Higher Education. April 21, 2016. Archived from the original on March 5, 2018. Retrieved June 11, 2017.
^ "SCImago Institutions Rankings - Higher Education - All Regions and Countries - 2020 - Overall Rank". www.scimagoir.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2019.
^ "Carnegie Classifications Institution Lookup". carnegieclassifications.iu.edu. Center for Postsecondary Education. Retrieved July 26, 2020.
^ "Table 20. Higher education R&D expenditures, ranked by FY 2018 R&D expenditures: FYs 2009 18". ncsesdata.nsf.gov. National Science Foundation. Retrieved July 26, 2020.
^ "College Scorecard: Yale University". United States Department of Education. Retrieved May 8, 2022.
^ "Yale Factsheet". Yale.edu. Archived from the original on April 3, 2007. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ Aisch, Gregor; Buchanan, Larry; Cox, Amanda; Quealy, Kevin (January 18, 2017). "Economic diversity and student outcomes at Yale". The New York Times. Retrieved August 9, 2020.
^ Lloyd-Thomas, Matthew; Rodrigues, Adrian (April 15, 2014). "New colleges to help reduce overcrowding". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved September 6, 2014.
^ Yale University Office of Public Affairs: "Yale to Establish Two New Residential Colleges." Archived June 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 7, 2008.
^ a b Calhoun, John C. (February 6, 1837), Slavery a Positive Good, archived from the original on May 6, 2016, retrieved April 30, 2016
^ a b c "To the Yale Administration", Yale students, 2015, archived from the original on October 11, 2017, retrieved April 30, 2016
^ a b Caplan, Lincoln (October 5, 2015), "The White-Supremacist Lineage of a Yale College: The elite university still honors the South Carolina senator best known for praising the morality of slavery", The Atlantic, archived from the original on May 2, 2016, retrieved April 30, 2016
^ a b c "Freshman Address, Yale College Class of 2019: Launching a Difficult Conversation". president.yale.edu. August 29, 2015. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016.
^ Friedersdorf, Conor (November 9, 2015). "The New Intolerance of Student Activism". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2016.
^ Lewis, Aaron (June 18, 2016). "What's Really Going On at Yale". Medium. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017.
^ Fox, Claire (May 5, 2016). I Find That Offensive!. London: Biteback. ISBN 9781849549813. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017.
^ a b Glenmore, Glenda Elizabeth (April 30, 2016), "At Yale, a Right That Doesn't Outweigh a Wrong", The New York Times, New Haven, archived from the original on May 1, 2016, retrieved April 30, 2016
^ "Yale University will keep college named for John C. Calhoun despite protests". Fox News. April 28, 2016. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016.
^ Remnick, Noah (February 11, 2017). "Yale Will Drop John Calhoun's Name From Building". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017.
^ Holden, Tobias (February 10, 2017). "The Right Call: Yale Removes My Racist Ancestor's Name From Campus". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
^ Prince, Erich (February 15, 2017). "The Dangers Of Yale Renaming Its History". The Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
^ Kimball, Roger (February 12, 2017). "Yale's Inconsistent Name-Dropping". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018.
^ Turner, Samuel (September 5, 2019). "Former YLS dean reignites Calhoun conversation". Yale Daily News.
^ Wesley Yiin, Up Close: How many is too many? Archived March 8, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Yale Daily News (April 9, 2014).
^ Mott, Frank L. (1930). A History of American Magazines, 1741-1850. Vol. 1. Harvard University Press. p. 803. ISBN 9780674395503.
^ "Yale Drama Coalition". Archived from the original on March 29, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2020.
^ "WYBC   Yale Radio". wybc.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2020.
^ "About UOFC". Yale College Council. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved May 17, 2018.
^ "In Focus | Yale University Library" (PDF). Library.yale.edu. May 19, 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2014.
^ Toch, Thomas (June 8, 1992). "Singing the Blues at Yale". U.S. News & World Report.
^ Abrahamson, Zachary (February 12, 2008). "Class Day speaker may not be announced until March". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014.
^ Branch, Mark Alden (March 1998). "Yale's Tallest Tales". Yale Alumni Magazine. Archived from the original on October 20, 2006.
^ Muller, Eli (February 28, 2001). "Bladderball: 30 years of zany antics, dangerous fun". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on February 5, 2010. Retrieved December 4, 2011.
^ Gideon, Gavan; Prawdzik, Ben (October 10, 2011). "THE NEWS WINS BLADDERBALL". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2011.
^ Liu, Michelle; Schick, Finnegan (November 3, 2014). "THE NEWS WINS BLADDERBALL 2". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on August 23, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015.
^ Yale Herald: "House of Payne gets ready for the new millennium." Retrieved April 9, 2007. Archived September 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Yale takes down Duke for program's first national title". NCAA.com. May 28, 2018. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018.
^ "Yale gets past Duke for first lacrosse title". ESPN. May 28, 2018. Archived from the original on June 4, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018.
^ "Yale stuns Baylor in NCAA Tournament". March 17, 2016. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
^ "Yale Club Ice Hockey". Yale.edu. October 19, 2007. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved September 16, 2009.
^ "Local pie tin first Frisbee, legend holds". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. Retrieved September 1, 2010.
^ "About Connecticut: General Description and Facts". Connecticut State Government. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved September 1, 2010.
^ "Yale Precision Marching Band Frequently Asked Questions". Archived from the original on December 25, 2009. Retrieved December 14, 2009. "The YPMB is one of twelve scatter-style marching bands in the country....Between formations we run around wildly.
^ "Yale Fight Songs". bands.yalecollege.yale.edu. Retrieved December 8, 2020.
^ "Victory March rated No. 1 college fight song". University of Notre Dame News. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved September 1, 2010.
^ (prior to 1894, Yale's color was green) (see: Thompson, Ellen (October 1, 2002). "True Blue". The New Journal. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2012.)
^ "History of the Yale Bulldog "Handsome Dan"". Yale Bulldogs. Archived from the original on June 5, 2007. Retrieved June 8, 2007.
^ Strom, Stephanie (June 1, 2004). "$75,000 a Record Gift for Yale? Here's How". The New York Times. New York. Retrieved November 22, 2008.
^ Conroy, Tom (September 29, 2013). "Historic $250 million gift to Yale from alumnus is largest ever". YaleNews. Yale University. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved March 29, 2014.
^ Fears, Danika (February 18, 2009). "The $100 million couple". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017.
^ First Destination Report: Class of 2020 (PDF) (Report). Yale College. 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 21, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Rhodes Scholarship Winner Count By Institutions" (PDF). Rhodes Trust. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Statistics and Resources - Marshall Scholarships". www.marshallscholarship.org. Marshall Scholarships. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Search Our Scholars". The Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Churchill Scholarship". churchillscholarship.org. The Winston Churchill Foundation of the United States. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "US-Ireland Alliance". us-irelandalliance.org. US-Ireland Alliance. Retrieved February 20, 2021.
^ "Fulbright Student Program". us.fulbrightonline.org. Institute of International Education. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "All Fellows - MacArthur Foundation". www.macfound.org. MacArthur Foundation. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Morris, Zach (March 19, 2021). "Yale was a top producer of Fulbright awardees during 2020-2021 cycle". yaledailynews.com. Retrieved March 21, 2021.
^ Factsheet 2020-21 (PDF) (Report). Yale Office of Institutional Research. January 13, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.[permanent dead link]
^ "Colleges and Universities Attended by the Presidents". www.presidentsusa.net. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. Retrieved November 3, 2016.
^ "John C. Calhoun | Clemson University, South Carolina". www.clemson.edu. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2016.
^ "Profile: Mario Monti". BBC News. February 18, 2013. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Tansu  iller | Turkish prime minister and economist". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Interview with Ernesto Zedillo". Yale School of Management. December 5, 2013. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Karl Carstens, Former President of West Germany, Is Dead at 77". The New York Times. May 31, 1992. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 1, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Jos  P. Laurel | president of the Philippines". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ Blair, Jenny (2010). "From the operating room to Parliament". Yale Medicine Magazine. Vol. 45, no. 1. Yale School of Medicine Office of Communications. p. 28. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Yi-Huah Jiang - People - Berggruen Institute". www.berggruen.org. Berggruen Institute. June 15, 2018. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Cambria, Nancy (June 2, 2014). "New president of Malawi taught at Washington University law school for nearly 40 years". stltoday.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Biography of Crown Princess Victoria". Swedish Royal Court. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017.
^ Vanderhoof, Erin (October 21, 2019). "This Weekend's Royal Wedding Had Some Surprising Historical Significance". Vanity Fair. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Sonia Sotomayor '79 Nominated to U.S. Supreme Court". law.yale.edu. May 26, 2009. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ a b Liptak, Adam (October 25, 2014). "Three Supreme Court Justices Return to Yale". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 1, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ "Kavanaugh, Brett M." Federal Judicial Center. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Michael Bennet". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Richard Blumenthal". Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Cory Booker". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Sherrod Brown". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Chris Coons". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Amy Klobuchar". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Ben Sasse". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Sheldon Whitehouse". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Secretary John Kerry '66 joins Yale as Distinguished Fellow for Global Affairs". YaleNews. February 16, 2017. Archived from the original on November 18, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ Darrah, Nicole (February 26, 2018). "Hillary Clinton to speak at Yale graduation event". Fox News. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ Eligon, John (December 27, 2009). "Cyrus R. Vance Jr. Found Own Way to Manhattan District Attorney's Office". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 1, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ Edwards, Sebastian (May 24, 2018). "The Gamble: If Gold Won't Go Up, Push the Dollar Down". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018.
^ "Oliver Wolcott Sr". www.nga.org. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2018.
^ Cohan, William D. (November 19, 2014). "A First-Person History Lesson From Robert Rubin". DealBook. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ "Nicholas Frederick Brady". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ "Mnuchin is Trump's pick for Treasury". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ "Janet Yellen". U.S. Department of the Treasury. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Martin, Douglas (May 9, 2012). "Nicholas Katzenbach, 1960s Political Shaper, Dies at 90". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ Austin, Shelbi (June 8, 2017). "10 Things You Didn't Know About John Ashcroft". Archived from the original on September 15, 2017.
^ Weil, Martin (March 8, 2000). "Edward Levi Dies at 88". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018.
^ Balakrishna, Anjali; Wanger, Emily (January 19, 2011). "SHRIVER DIES AT 95". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Goldberger, Paul (July 30, 1981). "ROBERT MOSES, MASTER BUILDER, IS DEAD AT 92 (Published 1981)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Swansburg, John (April 29, 2001). "At Yale, Lessons in Writing and in Life (Published 2001)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Sinclair Lewis: Biographical". NobelPrize.org. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "About Stephen Vincent Ben t". Academy of American Poets. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Chronology". Thornton Wilder Society. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Pulitzer Prize-Winning Playwright Doug Wright to Join Yale School of Drama Faculty". YaleNews. Yale University. April 5, 2010. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Mattingly, Dan (February 25, 2002). "Noted historian McCullough '55 returns to Yale". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Wald, Matthew L. (April 5, 1981). "JODIE FOSTER SEEKS 'NORMAL LIFE' AT YALE". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
^ Zuckerman, Esther (September 29, 2008). "Paul Newman, legend from Yale Drama, dies at 83". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ "Meryl Streep". Biography. Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
^ "Elia Kazan". The Kennedy Center. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Butch Cassidy director George Roy Hill dies". The Irish Times. December 28, 2002. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Romano, Tricia (March 13, 2014). "What Did Lupita Nyong'o's Classmates at Yale Think of Her?". The Daily Beast. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
^ The Associated Press (May 8, 2016). "Oliver Stone tells UConn graduates he flunked out of Yale". New Haven Register. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ "'I'd love to play a psycho killer'". The Guardian. January 26, 2001. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Burkholder, J. Peter (1999). "Ives and Yale: The Enduring Influence of a College Experience". College Music Symposium. College Music Society. 39: 27 42. JSTOR 40374568   via JSTOR.
^ "Cole Porter Gets a Yale Doctorate". The New York Times. June 10, 1960. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "David Lang". music.yale.edu. Yale School of Music. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ * Yeston, Maury. 1976 The Stratification of Musical Rhythm New Haven and London: Yale University Press ISBN 0-300-01884-3\
^ "Vijay Iyer '92: Mathematician, Physicist, World-Class Jazz Pianist". Yale Daily News. September 17, 2010. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Farago, Jason (March 21, 2019). "A Lighter Matthew Barney Goes Back to School, and Back Home (Published 2019)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Richard Serra". The Guggenheim Museums and Foundation. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Fadulu, Lola (November 4, 2018). "Kehinde Wiley on Self-Doubt and How He Made It as a Painter". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019.
^ Pogrebin, Robin (2017). "Art as kaleidoscope". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXXI, no. 2. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Colangelo, Gabrielle (July 13, 2020). "Garry Trudeau: Creativity in Isolation". Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library. Yale University. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Chuck Close". walkerart.org. Walker Art Center. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Women's Table". visitorcenter.yale.edu. Yale University. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Foster, Norman (January 29, 2010). "Foster: A design inspired by my time at Yale". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Schiff, Judith Ann (February 1999). "Yale Alumni Magazine: Eero Saarinen '34BFA (Feb 99)". archives.yalealumnimagazine.com. Yale Alumni Publications, Inc. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Faust, Rebecca (September 23, 2016). "Dick Cavett '58: Bringing Yale to America". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Chris Cuomo '92 | Newsmaker". Yale Alumni Magazine. February 22, 2008. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Anderson Cooper '89 returns to campus". YaleNews. Yale Office of Public Affairs & Communications. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Bundy, McGeorge (November 1951). "The Attack on Yale". The Atlantic. The Atlantic Monthly Group. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Roberts, Sam (January 10, 2023). "Blake Hounshell, 'On Politics' Editor at The Times, Dies at 44". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 10, 2023. Retrieved January 10, 2023.
^ "A Conversation with Fareed Zakaria YC '86, Marking the Third Anniversary of the Global Network for Advanced Management". Yale School of Management. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Boeing, William Edward : National Aviation Hall of Fame". National Aviation Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Mangino, Andrew (October 20, 2006). "Briton Hadden put in the spotlight". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Whitman, Alden (March 1, 1967). "Henry R. Luce, Creator of Time-Life Magazine Empire, Dies in Phoenix at 68". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved January 30, 2017.
^ "Stephen Schwarzman". www.blackstone.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 30, 2017.
^ "Frederick W. Smith - Center for Strategic and International Studies". Center for Strategic and International Studies. Archived from the original on December 23, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "JUAN TRIPPE, 81, DIES; U.S. AVIATION PIONEER". The New York Times. April 4, 1981. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Bachrach, Fabian (May 15, 1963). "Harold Stanley, 77, Is Dead; Led Investment-Banking Firm; Head of Morgan Stanley for 20 Years Till '55--Helped 17 Houses Win Trust Suit 'Will Enter Business' Headed Securities Unit Led Charity Drive". The New York Times. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Bing Gordon hosts University Tea". Office of the Secretary and Vice President for University Life. Yale University. October 19, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Ben Silbermann '03: A tech CEO moves out of Silicon Valley. | Newsmaker". Yale Alumni Magazine. July 17, 2012. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Channick, Robert (April 18, 2019). "Who is Edward Lampert? The hedge fund billionaire survived kidnapping and Kmart. Then came Sears". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Fuchs, Hailey (April 12, 2018). "Bewkes brings business expertise to Corp". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ Sellers, Patricia (October 2, 2006). "It's good to be the boss". CNN Money. Retrieved February 17, 2021.
^ "Donald Dell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ McFadden, Robert D. (July 9, 2008). "Sir John M. Templeton, Philanthropist, Dies at 95 (Published 2008)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Siegel, Rachel (January 27, 2014). "Henry Louis Gates Jr. discusses documentary". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Barber, William J. (January 2005). "Irving Fisher of Yale". American Journal of Economics and Sociology. 64 (1): 43 55. doi:10.1111/j.1536-7150.2005.00348.x. JSTOR 3488116   via JSTOR.
^ Crossette, Barbara (July 17, 1998). "Mahbub ul Haq, 64, Analyst And Critic of Global Poverty (Published 1998)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ "Nobel Laureate and NY Times Columnist Paul Krugman to Receive Yale Award". YaleNews. Yale University. November 8, 2010. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1939". The Nobel Prize. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Lester, Caroline (2019). "Murray Gell-Mann, 1929 2019". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXXII, no. 6. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ Holden, Helge; Piene, Ragni, eds. (2014). "Curriculum Vitae for John Griggs Thompson". The Abel Prize 2008-2012. The Abel Prize. Springer-Verlag. p. 123. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39449-2_8. ISBN 978-3-642-39448-5. LCCN 2013955612.
^ "Francis S. Collins, M.D., Ph.D." National Human Genome Research Institute. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2021.
^ Bliss, Michael (2007). Harvey Cushing: A Life in Surgery. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-19-532961-2.
^ Beyer, Kurt (2012). Grace Hopper and the Invention of the Information Age. MIT Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-262-51726-3.
^ Panek, Richard (2017). "The greatest mind in American history". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXX, no. 5. Retrieved February 20, 2021.
^ Lambert, Bruce (August 31, 1991). "Dr. Florence B. Seibert, Inventor Of Standard TB Test, Dies at 93". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 20, 2021.
^ "Ronald Rivest | RSA Conference". www.rsaconference.com. RSA Security LLC. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "1791-1839 | Timeline | Articles and Essays | Samuel F. B. Morse Papers at the Library of Congress, 1793-1919". Library of Congress. United States Congress. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Eli Whitney papers, 1716-1959, bulk 1785-1881 - CAO: Powered by ArcLight at Western CT State University". Connecticut Archives Online. Western Connecticut State University. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ Gregg, Helen (December 3, 2019). "From UChicago to Nobel: How John Goodenough sparked the wireless revolution". UChicago News. University of Chicago Office of Communications. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Noah Webster F ted for 250th Birthday". YaleNews. Yale University Office of Public Affairs & Communications. October 2, 2008. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "History | Jonathan Edwards College". je.yalecollege.yale.edu. Yale University. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "Niebuhr, Reinhold | The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute". kinginstitute.stanford.edu. Stanford University. May 31, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2021.
^ "An Uncommon Journey for Ron Darling". The New York Times. July 15, 1984. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Conn, Jordan (2011). "Smart guy". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXV, no. 1. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Class Day speech by baseball's Theo Epstein". YaleNews. Yale Office of Public Affairs & Communications. May 21, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Durso, Joseph (August 14, 1972). "George Weiss Dies at 78; Guided Yankees and Mets". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Guardado, Maria (March 1, 2012). "Hill leaves legacy at Yale, in NFL". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Larkin, Will (July 29, 2019). "Ranking the 100 best Bears players ever: No. 39, Gary Fencik". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Amos Alonzo Stagg - The University of Chicago Athletics Athletics". athletics.uchicago.edu. The University of Chicago. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Walter Camp (1951) - Hall of Fame - National Football Foundation". footballfoundation.org. National Football Foundation & College Hall of Fame, Inc. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Johnston, Patrick (July 30, 2019). "Report: Canucks to add ex-player Chris Higgins in player development role". The Province. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Baumann, Nick (February 20, 2006). "Well-backed Resor strong in loss". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Yu, Zizi (October 12, 2012). "Olympic skater returns to campus". Yale Daily News. Yale Daily News Publishing. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Crouse, Karen (March 17, 2019). "Nathan Chen's Yale Juggling Act". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Phillips, Stephen (2017). "The Country's Most Illustrious Squash Player Lives in Portland". Portland Monthly. Sagacity Media. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Don Schollander | Swimming | Olympic Hall of Fame". usopm.org. U.S. Olympic & Paralympic Museum. July 21, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ "Two of the Six Yale Athletes in the Olympics Return Home With Medals". YaleNews. Yale Office of Public Affairs & Communications. August 29, 2008. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Mallory, Peter (2006). "The '56 Olympians Look Back". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. 70, no. 1. Yale Alumni Publications, Inc. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Besemer, Ayla (April 21, 2016). "SAILING: Yale's Olympic legacy continues". Yale Daily News. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Fellman, Bruce (2017). "Still in the running". Yale Alumni Magazine. Vol. LXXX, no. 6. Yale Alumni Publications, Inc. Retrieved February 22, 2021.
^ Thalmann, William G. (1998). The swineherd and the bow: representations of class in the Odyssey. Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-3479-3.
^ Baddeley, Jenna. "Memoir demonstrates Yalies have always been crazy". New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Herald. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2012.
^ University of Georgia: "The Rise of Intercollegiate Football and Its Portrayal in American Popular Literature." Archived November 22, 2005, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 9, 2007.
^ The text of Frank Merriwell at Yale is published online by Project Gutenberg, Gutenberg.org Archived February 23, 2006, at the Wayback Machine
Further reading[edit]
Buckley, William F. Jr. God and Man at Yale, 1951.
Dana, Arnold G. Yale Old and New, 78 vols. personal scrapbook, 1942.
Deming, Clarence. Yale Yesterdays, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1915.
Dexter, Franklin Bowditch. Biographical Sketches of Graduates of Yale: Yale College with Annals of the College History, 6 vols. New York, 1885 1912.
Dexter, Franklin Bowditch. Documentary History of Yale University: Under the Original Charter of the Collegiate School of Connecticut, 1701 1745. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1901.
French, Robert Dudley. The Memorial Quadrangle, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1929.
Furniss, Edgar S. The Graduate School of Yale, New Haven, 1965.
Holden, Reuben A. Yale: A Pictorial History, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1967.
Kelley, Brooks Mather. Yale: A History. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999. ISBN 978-0-300-07843-5; OCLC 810552
Kingsley, William L. Yale College. A Sketch of its History, 2 vols. New York, 1879.
Mendenhall, Thomas C. The Harvard-Yale Boat Race, 1852 1924, and the Coming of Sport to the American College. (1993). 371 pp.
Nissenbaum, Stephen, ed. The Great Awakening at Yale College (1972). 263 pp.
Oren, Dan A. Joining the Club: A History of Jews and Yale, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1985.* Oviatt, Edwin. The Beginnings of Yale (1701 1726), New Haven, Yale University Press, 1916.
Oviatt, Edwin (1916). The Beginnings of Yale (1701 1726). Yale UP. pp. 298 302.
Pierson, George Wilson. Yale College, An Educational History (1871 1921), (Yale University Press, 1952); Yale, The University College (1921 1937), (Yale University Press, 1955)
Pierson, George Wilson. The Founding of Yale: The Legend of the Forty Folios, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1988.
Stevenson, Louise L. Scholarly Means to Evangelical Ends: The New Haven Scholars and the Transformation of Higher Learning in America, 1830 1890 (1986). 221 pp.
Scully, Vincent et al., eds. Yale in New Haven: Architecture and Urbanism. New Haven: Yale University, 2004.
Tucker, Louis Leonard. Connecticut's Seminary of Sedition: Yale College. Chester, Conn.: Pequot, 1973. 78 pp.
Warch, Richard. School of the Prophets: Yale College, 1701 1740. (1973). 339 pp.
Welch, Lewis Sheldon, and Walter Camp. Yale, her campus, class-rooms, and athletics (1900). online
"Yale University" . Encyclop dia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
"Yale University" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
Secret societies[edit]
Main article: Yale secret societies
Sutton, Antony C. (2003). America's Secret Establishment: An Introduction to the Order of Skull & Bones. Trine Day. ISBN 978-0-9720207-0-1.
Robbins, Alexandra (2002). Secrets of the Tomb: Skull and Bones, the Ivy League, and the Hidden Paths of Power. Back Bay Books. ISBN 978-0-316-73561-2.
Millegan, Kris, ed. (2004). Fleshing Out Skull & Bones: Investigations into America's Most Powerful Secret Society. Trine Day. ISBN 978-0-9752906-0-6.
Richards, David Alan (2017). Skulls and Keys: The Hidden History of Yale's Secret Societies. Pegasus Books. ISBN 978-1-68177-517-3.
External links[edit]
Yale University  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteData from Wikidata
Official website
Yale Athletics website
Yale University from the Library of Congress at Flickr Commons
vteYale UniversityPeople
Namesake: Elihu Yale
President: Peter Salovey (predecessors)
Provost: Scott Strobel
Dean of Yale Law School
Faculty
Sterling Professors
People list
Schools
Faculty of Arts and Sciences
Undergraduate: Yale College
Graduate: Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
Professional: Architecture
Art
Divinity
Andover Newton
Berkeley
Drama
Engineering & Applied Science
Environment
Global Affairs
Law
Management
Medicine
Music
Nursing
Public Health
Institute of Sacred Music
Defunct: Sheffield Scientific School
Campus
Connecticut Hall
Old Campus
Memorial Quadrangle
Harkness Tower
Hewitt Quadrangle
Hillhouse Avenue
Sterling Law Building
Science Hill
Yale-Myers Forest
Horchow Hall
Rudolph Hall
Steinbach Hall
Edward P. Evans Hall
Residential colleges
Benjamin Franklin
Berkeley
Branford
Davenport
Ezra Stiles
Grace Hopper (formerly Calhoun)
Jonathan Edwards
Morse
Pauli Murray
Pierson
Saybrook
Silliman
Timothy Dwight
Trumbull
Library and museums
Yale University Library
Sterling Memorial Library
Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library
Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library
Lillian Goldman Law Library
Bass Library
Lewis Walpole Library
Peabody Museum of Natural History
Yale University Art Gallery
Yale Center for British Art
Collection of Musical Instruments
Research centers
Child Study Center
Cowles Foundation
Haskins Laboratories
Human Relations Area Files
MacMillan Center
Rudd Center
Yale Cancer Center
Athletics
Team: Yale Bulldogs
Mascot: Handsome Dan
Sports: Baseball
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Football
Men's ice hockey
Women's ice hockey
Men's lacrosse
Rugby
Men's soccer
Women's soccer
Men's squash
Swimming and diving
Arenas: Yale Bowl (football)
Ingalls Rink (hockey)
Yale Golf Course
Bush Field (baseball)
Reese Stadium (soccer and lacrosse)
Payne Whitney Gymnasium
Rivalries: Harvard Yale Regatta
Harvard Yale football rivalry
International
Gruber Foundation
Yale World Fellows
Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art
Yale-NUS College
Artistic
A Cappella:
The Whiffenpoofs
The Spizzwinks
The Yale Alley Cats
Yale Precision Marching Band
Yale Dramatic Association
Related
Publications:
Rumpus Magazine
Yale Alumni Magazine
Yale Daily News
The Yale Herald
Yale Law Journal
Yale Literary Magazine
The Yale Record
Open Yale Courses
Coat of arms of Yale University
Manuscript Society
Russell Trust Association
Skull and Bones
Untitled [Senior Thesis], 2008
Bladderball
 Category
 Commons
 Wikinews
Links to related articles
vteIvy LeagueTeams
Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Harvard Crimson
Penn Quakers
Princeton Tigers
Yale Bulldogs
Competitions
Baseball
Basketball (men's)
Basketball (women's)
Fencing
Rugby
Related topics
Big Three
Digital Network
Ivy Council
Medical schools
Nude posture photos
Public Ivy
Public policy schools
Take Ivy
Y Tu Tambien
vteColonial colleges
Brown
Columbia
Dartmouth
Harvard
Penn
Princeton
Rutgers
William & Mary
Yale
vteECAC HockeyTeams
Brown Bears
men
women
Clarkson Golden Knights
men
women
Colgate Raiders
men
women
Cornell Big Red
men
women
Dartmouth Big Green
men
women
Harvard Crimson
men
women
Princeton Tigers
men
women
Quinnipiac Bobcats
men
women
Rensselaer Engineers
men
women
St. Lawrence Saints
men
women
Union Dutchmen
men
women
Yale Bulldogs
men
women
Venues
Meehan Auditorium (Brown)
Cheel Arena (Clarkson)
Class of 1965 Arena (Colgate)
Lynah Rink (Cornell)
Thompson Arena (Dartmouth)
Bright Hockey Center (Harvard)
Hobey Baker Memorial Rink (Princeton)
People's United Center (Quinnipiac)
Houston Field House (Rensselaer)
Appleton Arena (St. Lawrence)
Achilles Rink (Union)
Ingalls Rink (Yale)
Herb Brooks Arena (Men's tournament)
Men's awards
All-ECAC Hockey Team
Player of the Year
Rookie of the Year
Tim Taylor Award (Coach of the Year)
Best Defensive Defenseman
Best Defensive Forward
Ken Dryden Award (Best Goaltender)
Student-Athlete of the Year
Most Outstanding Player in Tournament
All-Tournament Team
Women's awards
Women's champions
Men's seasons
1961 62
1962 63
1963 64
1964 65
1965 66
1966 67
1967 68
1968 69
1969 70
1970 71
1971 72
1972 73
1973 74
1974 75
1975 76
1976 77
1977 78
1978 79
1979 80
1980 81
1981 82
1982 83
1983 84
1984 85
1985 86
1986 87
1987 88
1988 89
1989 90
1990 91
1991 92
1992 93
1993 94
1994 95
1995 96
1996 97
1997 98
1998 99
1999 00
2000 01
2001 02
2002 03
2003 04
2004 05
2005 06
2006 07
2007 08
2008 09
2009 10
2010 11
2011 12
2012 13
2013 14
2014 15
2015 16
2016 17
2017 18
2018 19
2019 20
2020 21
2021 22
2022 23
vteQuestBridge partner institutions
Amherst College
Barnard College
Boston College
Boston University
Bowdoin College
Brown University
California Institute of Technology
Carleton College
Case Western Reserve University
Claremont McKenna College
Colby College
Colgate University
College of the Holy Cross
Colorado College
Columbia University
Dartmouth College
Davidson College
Denison University
Duke University
Emory University
Grinnell College
Hamilton College
Haverford College
Johns Hopkins University
Macalester College
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Middlebury College
Northwestern University
Oberlin College
Pomona College
Princeton University
Rice University
Scripps College
Smith College
Stanford University
Swarthmore College
Tufts University
University of Chicago
University of Notre Dame
University of Pennsylvania
University of Southern California
University of Virginia
Vanderbilt University
Vassar College
Washington and Lee University
Washington University in St. Louis
Wellesley College
Wesleyan University
Williams College
Yale University
vteColleges and universities in ConnecticutPublic institutions
Central Connecticut State University
Charter Oak State College
Eastern Connecticut State University
Southern Connecticut State University
University of Connecticut
Western Connecticut State University
Private institutions
Albertus Magnus
Connecticut College
Fairfield
Goodwin
Holy Apostles
Lincoln College of New England
Lyme Academy
Mitchell
Paier
Post
Quinnipiac
Rensselaer at Hartford
Sacred Heart
Saint Joseph
Trinity
Bridgeport
Hartford
New Haven
Wesleyan
Yale
Federal institutions
United States Coast Guard Academy
Community Colleges
Asnuntuck
Capital
Gateway
Housatonic
Manchester
Middlesex
Naugatuck Valley
Northwestern Connecticut
Norwalk
Quinebaug Valley
Three Rivers
Tunxis
Graduate, professional, andresearch institutions
Berkeley Divinity School
Hartford Seminary
Quinnipiac School of Law
Quinnipiac School of Medicine
University of Connecticut Health Center
University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine
University of Connecticut School of Law
Yale Law School
Yale School of Drama
Yale School of Medicine
vteAssociation of American UniversitiesPublic
Arizona
California
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara
Santa Cruz
Colorado
Florida
Georgia Tech
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
Kansas
Maryland
McGill
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Missouri
New York
Buffalo
Stony Brook
North Carolina
Ohio State
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
Texas
Texas A&M
Toronto
Utah
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin
Private
Boston U
Brandeis
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Dartmouth
Duke
Emory
Harvard
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northwestern
NYU
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
USC
Stanford
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Wash U
Yale
vteInternational Alliance of Research Universities (IARU)
ANU
UC Berkeley
Cambridge
Cape Town
Copenhagen
ETH Zurich
Oxford
Peking
NUS
Tokyo
Yale
vteFaith and Globalisation Network of Universities (FGNU)
American University in Kosovo
Universiteti i Prishtin s
Ateneo de Manila University
Ateneo de Zamboanga University
Mindanao State University
Banaras Hindu University
Fourah Bay College
University of Hong Kong
National University of Singapore
McGill University
National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy
Peking University
Tecnol gico de Monterrey
University of Western Australia
Yale University
vteSports teams based in ConnecticutBaseball
EL
Hartford Yard Goats
FCBL
New Britain Bees
Norwich Sea Unicorns
NECBL
Bristol Blues
Danbury Westerners
Mystic Schooners
Basketball
WNBA
Connecticut Sun
Football
WFA
Connecticut Hawks
NEFL
Connecticut Reapers
Hartford Colts
Gaelic games
USGAA: Northeast Division
Hartford
Ice hockey
AHL
Bridgeport Islanders
Hartford Wolf Pack
PHF
Connecticut Whale
FPHL
Danbury Hat Tricks
Soccer
USLC
Hartford Athletic
USL2
AC Connecticut
NPSL
Hartford City FC
USASA
Newtown Pride FC
Roller derby
WFTDA
Connecticut Roller Derby
Hartford Area Roller Derby
MRDA
Connecticut Death Quads
Rugby union
NERFU
Fairfield Yankees RFC
Hartford Wanderers RFC
New Haven Old Black RFC
New London County RFC
Softball
ASA
Connecticut Brakettes
College athleticsNCAADivision I
Bridgeport Purple Knights (women's gymnastics)
Central Connecticut Blue Devils
Fairfield Stags
Hartford Hawks (leaving Division I in 2022-23)
Quinnipiac Bobcats
Post Eagles (women's bowling and women's ice hockey)
Sacred Heart Pioneers
Southern Connecticut Owls (women's gymnastics)
UConn Huskies
Yale Bulldogs
NCAADivision II
Bridgeport Purple Knights
New Haven Chargers
Post Eagles
Southern Connecticut Owls
NCAADivision III
Albertus Magnus Falcons
Coast Guard Bears
Connecticut College Camels
Eastern Connecticut Warriors
Hartford Hawks (joining Division III in 2023-24)
Mitchell Mariners
Saint Joseph Blue Jays
Trinity Bantams
Wesleyan Cardinals
Western Connecticut Colonials
NJCAA Division III
Gateway Lions
Lincoln Wildcats
UConn-Avery Point Pointers
Authority control International
ISNI
2
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Portugal
Vatican
Geographic
MusicBrainz place
Academics
CiNii
Artists
Te Papa (New Zealand)
ULAN
People
ISIL
2
Other
SNAC
IdRef
2
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yale_University&oldid=1148679598"