Country in South America
This article is about the country in South America. For other uses, see Ecuador (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Equator.
Coordinates: 2 00 S 77 30 W  /  2.000 S 77.500 W  / -2.000; -77.500
Republic of EcuadorRep blica del Ecuador (Spanish)
Flag
Coat of arms
Motto: Dios, patria y libertad (Spanish)Pro Deo, Patria et Libertate (Latin)"God, homeland and freedom"Anthem: Salve, Oh Patria (Spanish)(English: "Hail, Oh Homeland")Location of Ecuador (dark green)Capitaland largest cityQuito[1]00 13 12 S 78 30 43 W  /  0.22000 S 78.51194 W  / -0.22000; -78.51194Official languagesSpanish[2]Recognized regional languagesKichwa (Quechua), Shuar and others "are in official use for indigenous peoples"[3]Ethnic groups  (2010[4])71.9% Mestizo (mixed White and Indigenous)7.4% Montubio (coastal Mestizo)7.2% Black7.0% Indigenous6.1% White0.4% OtherReligion  (2020)[5]86.7% Christianity 68.8% Roman Catholic 16.8% Protestant 1.1% Other Christian12.9% No religion0.4% OtherDemonym(s)EcuadorianGovernmentUnitary presidential republic President Guillermo Lasso Vice President Alfredo Borrero
LegislatureNational AssemblyIndependence Declared 10 August 1809 from Spain 24 May 1822 from Gran Colombia 13 May 1830 Recognized by Spain 16 February 1840[6] Liberal Revolution 5 June 1895 Current constitution 28 September 2008
Area Total283,561 km2 (109,484 sq mi)[7] (73rd) Water (%)5Population 2022 estimate17,289,554[8] (71st) 2022 census18,048,628[9] Density69/km2 (178.7/sq mi) (148th)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate Total$229.815
 billion[10] (68th) Per capita $12,763 
[10] (109th)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate Total $115.479 billion
[10] (63rd) Per capita$6,413[10] (95th)Gini (2020) 47.3[11]highHDI (2021) 0.740[12]high 95thCurrencyUnited States dollarb (USD)Time zoneUTC 5 /  6 (ECT / GALT)Date formatdd/mm/yyyyDriving siderightCalling code+593ISO 3166 codeECInternet TLD.ec
Including Gal pagos Islands.Sucre until 2000, replaced by the US$ and Ecuadorian centavo coins.
Ecuador (/ kw d r/ (listen) EK-w -dor; Spanish pronunciation: [ekwa o ] (listen); Quechua: Ikwayur; Shuar: Ecuador or Ekuatur),[13][14] officially the Republic of Ecuador (Spanish: Rep blica del Ecuador,  which literally translates as "Republic of the Equator"; Quechua: Ikwadur Ripuwlika; Shuar: Ekuatur Nunka),[15][16] is a country in northwestern South America, bordered by Colombia on the north, Peru on the east and south, and the Pacific Ocean on the west. Ecuador also includes the Gal pagos Islands in the Pacific, about 1,000 kilometers (621 mi) west of the mainland. The country's capital and largest city is Quito.
The territories of modern-day Ecuador were once home to a variety of Indigenous groups that were gradually incorporated into the Inca Empire during the 15th century. The territory was colonized by Spain during the 16th century, achieving independence in 1820 as part of Gran Colombia, from which it emerged as its own sovereign state in 1830. The legacy of both empires is reflected in Ecuador's ethnically diverse population, with most of its 17.8 million people being mestizos, followed by large minorities of Europeans, Native American, African, and Asian descendants. Spanish is the official language and is spoken by a majority of the population, though 13 Native languages are also recognized, including Quechua and Shuar.
The sovereign state of Ecuador is a representative democratic republic and a developing country[17] whose economy is highly dependent on exports of commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products. It is governed as a democratic presidential republic. The country is a founding member of the United Nations, Organization of American States, Mercosur, PROSUR, and the Non-Aligned Movement.
One of 17 megadiverse countries in the world,[18][19] Ecuador hosts many endemic plants and animals, such as those of the Gal pagos Islands. In recognition of its unique ecological heritage, the new constitution of 2008 is the first in the world to recognize legally enforceable Rights of Nature, or ecosystem rights.[20]
According to the Center for Economic and Policy Research, between 2006 and 2016, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 22.5% and annual per capita GDP growth was 1.5 percent (as compared to 0.6 percent over the prior two decades). At the same time, the country's Gini index of economic inequality decreased from 0.55 to 0.47.[21]
Etymology[edit]
The country's name means "Equator" in Spanish, truncated from the Spanish official name, Rep blica del Ecuador (lit. "Republic of the Equator"), derived from the former Ecuador Department of Gran Colombia established in 1824 as a division of the former territory of the Royal Audience of Quito. Quito, which remained the capital of the department and republic, is located only about 40 kilometers (25 mi), 1 4 of a degree, south of the equator.
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Ecuador and Indigenous peoples in Ecuador
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Ecuador" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Pre-Inca era[edit]
 Tumaco-La Tolita mythological figure in feathered costume. Between 100 BC and 100 AD. Found in Esmeraldas
Various peoples had settled in the area of future Ecuador before the arrival of the Incas. The archeological evidence suggests that the Paleo-Indians' first dispersal into the Americas occurred near the end of the last glacial period, around 16,500 13,000 years ago. The first people who reached Ecuador may have journeyed by land from North and Central America or by boat down the Pacific Ocean coastline.
Even though their languages were unrelated, these groups developed similar groups of cultures, each based in different environments. The people of the coast combined agriculture with fishing, hunting, and gathering; the people of the highland Andes developed a sedentary agricultural way of life; and peoples of the Amazon basin relied on hunting and gathering, in some cases combined with agriculture and arboriculture.
Over time these groups began to interact and intermingle with each other so that groups of families in one area became one community or tribe, with a similar language and culture. Many civilizations[22] arose in Ecuador, such as the Valdivia Culture and Machalilla Culture on the coast,[23][24] the Quitus (near present-day Quito),[25] and the Ca ari (near present-day Cuenca).[26]   Each civilization developed its own distinctive architecture, pottery, and religious interests.[citation needed]
In the highland Andes mountains, where life was more sedentary, groups of tribes cooperated and formed villages; thus the first nations based on agricultural resources and the domestication of animals formed. Eventually, through wars and marriage alliances of their leaders, groups of nations formed confederations. The region around the country's modern capital, Quito, consolidated under a confederation called the Shyris, which exercised organized trading and bartering between the different regions.
Inca era[edit]
 Ruins of Ingapirca, this site served as an outpost and provisioning of the Incan troops, but mainly it was a place of worship and veneration to the sun, the supreme Inca God, thus constituting a Coricancha, dedicated to the Inca ritual.
 Pre-Columbian shrunken head of the Shuars (Jivaroan peoples).
When the Incas arrived, they found that these confederations were so developed that it took the Incas two generations of rulers Topa Inca Yupanqui and Huayna Capac to absorb them into the Inca Empire. People belonging to the confederations that gave them the most problems were deported to distant areas of Peru, Bolivia, and north Argentina. Similarly, a number of loyal Inca subjects from Peru and Bolivia were brought to Ecuador to prevent rebellion. Thus, the region of highland Ecuador became part of the Inca Empire in 1463 sharing the same language.
In contrast, when the Incas made incursions into coastal Ecuador and the eastern Amazon jungles of Ecuador, they found both the environment and indigenous people more hostile. Moreover, when the Incas tried to subdue them, these indigenous people withdrew to the interior and resorted to guerrilla tactics. As a result, Inca expansion into the Amazon Basin and the Pacific coast of Ecuador was hampered. The indigenous people of the Amazon jungle and coastal Ecuador remained relatively autonomous until the Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived in force. The Amazonian people and the Cayapas of Coastal Ecuador were the only groups to resist both Inca and Spanish domination, maintaining their languages and cultures well into the 21st century.
Before the arrival of the Spaniards, the Inca Empire was involved in a civil war. The untimely death of both the heir Ninan Cuchi and the Emperor Huayna Capac, from a European disease that spread into Ecuador, created a power vacuum between two factions. The northern faction headed by Atahualpa claimed that Huayna Capac gave a verbal decree before his death about how the empire should be divided. He gave the territories pertaining to present-day Ecuador and northern Peru to his favorite son Atahualpa, who was to rule from Quito; and he gave the rest to Hu scar, who was to rule from Cuzco. He willed that his heart be buried in Quito, his favorite city, and the rest of his body be buried with his ancestors in Cuzco.
Hu scar did not recognize his father's will, since it did not follow Inca traditions of naming an Inca through the priests. Hu scar ordered Atahualpa to attend their father's burial in Cuzco and pay homage to him as the new Inca ruler. Atahualpa, with a large number of his father's veteran soldiers, decided to ignore Hu scar, and a civil war ensued. A number of bloody battles took place until finally Hu scar was captured. Atahualpa marched south to Cuzco and massacred the royal family associated with his brother.
In 1532, a small band of Spaniards headed by Francisco Pizarro landed in Tumbez and marched over the Andes Mountains until they reached Cajamarca, where the new Inca Atahualpa was to hold an interview with them. Valverde, the priest, tried to convince Atahualpa that he should join the Catholic Church and declare himself a vassal of Spain. This infuriated Atahualpa so much that he threw the Bible to the ground. At this point the enraged Spaniards, with orders from Valverde, attacked and massacred unarmed escorts of the Inca and captured Atahualpa. Pizarro promised to release Atahualpa if he made good his promise of filling a room full of gold. But, after a mock trial, the Spaniards executed Atahualpa by strangulation.
Spanish colonization[edit]
 Major square of Quito. Painting of 18th century. Quito Painting Colonial School.
New infectious diseases such as smallpox, endemic to the Europeans, caused high fatalities among the Amerindian population during the first decades of Spanish rule, as they had no immunity. At the same time, the natives were forced into the encomienda labor system for the Spanish. In 1563, Quito became the seat of a real audiencia (administrative district) of Spain and part of the Viceroyalty of Peru and later the Viceroyalty of New Granada.
The 1797 Riobamba earthquake, which caused up to 40,000 casualties, was studied by Alexander von Humboldt, when he visited the area in 1801 1802.[27]
After nearly 300 years of Spanish rule, Quito still remained small with a population of 10,000 people. On 10 August 1809, the city's criollos called for independence from Spain (first among the peoples of Latin America). They were led by Juan P o Mont far, Quiroga, Salinas, and Bishop Cuero y Caicedo. Quito's nickname, "Luz de Am rica" ("Light of America"), is based on its leading role in trying to secure an independent, local government. Although the new government lasted no more than two months, it had important repercussions and was an inspiration for the independence movement of the rest of Spanish America. Today, 10 August is celebrated as Independence Day, a national holiday.[28]
Independence[edit]
Main article: Ecuadorian War of Independence
 Venezuelan independence leader Antonio Jos  de Sucre
 The "Guayaquil Conference" was the meeting between the two main Spanish South American independence leaders. In it the form of government of the nascent countries was discussed, San Mart n opted for a unified South America in the form of a monarchy, while Bol var opted for the same but into a republic. 1843 painting.
On 9 October 1820, the Department of Guayaquil became the first territory in Ecuador to gain its independence from Spain, and it spawned most of the Ecuadorian coastal provinces, establishing itself as an independent state. Its inhabitants celebrated what is now Ecuador's official Independence Day on 24 May 1822. The rest of Ecuador gained its independence after Antonio Jos  de Sucre defeated the Spanish Royalist forces at the Battle of Pichincha, near Quito. Following the battle, Ecuador joined Sim n Bol var's Republic of Gran Colombia, also including modern-day Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama. In 1830, Ecuador separated from Gran Colombia and became an independent republic. Two years later, it annexed the Galapagos Islands.[29]
The 19th century was marked by instability for Ecuador with a rapid succession of rulers. The first president of Ecuador was the Venezuelan-born Juan Jos  Flores, who was ultimately deposed. Leaders who followed him included Vicente Rocafuerte; Jos  Joaqu n de Olmedo; Jos  Mar a Urbina; Diego Noboa; Pedro Jos  de Arteta; Manuel de Asc subi; and Flores's own son, Antonio Flores Jij n, among others. The conservative Gabriel Garc a Moreno unified the country in the 1860s with the support of the Roman Catholic Church. In the late 19th century, world demand for cocoa tied the economy to commodity exports and led to migrations from the highlands to the agricultural frontier on the coast.
Ecuador abolished slavery in 1851.[30] The descendants of enslaved Ecuadorians are among today's Afro-Ecuadorian population.
Liberal Revolution[edit]
 Antique dug out canoes in the courtyard of the Old Military Hospital in the Historic Center of Quito
Main article: Liberal Revolution of 1895
The Liberal Revolution of 1895 under Eloy Alfaro reduced the power of the clergy and the conservative land owners. This liberal wing retained power until the military "Julian Revolution" of 1925. The 1930s and 1940s were marked by instability and emergence of populist politicians, such as five-time President Jos  Mar a Velasco Ibarra.
Loss of claimed territories since 1830[edit]
Main article: History of the Ecuadorian Peruvian territorial dispute
vteEcuadorian Peruvian territorial dispute
Gran Colombia Peru War (1828 1829)
Ecuadorian Peruvian War (1857 1860)
Ecuadorian Peruvian War (1941)
Paquisha War (1981)
Cenepa War (1995)
Brasilia Presidential Act
President Juan Jos  Flores de jure territorial claims[edit]
After Ecuador's separation from Colombia on 13 May 1830, its first President, General Juan Jos  Flores, laid claim to the territory that had belonged to the Real Audiencia of Quito, also referred to as the Presidencia of Quito. He supported his claims with Spanish Royal decrees, or real cedulas, that delineated the borders of Spain's former overseas colonies. In the case of Ecuador, Flores based Ecuador's de jure claims on the Real Cedulas of 1563, 1739, and 1740; with modifications in the Amazon Basin and Andes Mountains that were introduced through the Treaty of Guayaquil (1829) which Peru reluctantly signed, after the overwhelmingly outnumbered Gran Colombian force led by Antonio Jos  de Sucre defeated President and General La Mar's Peruvian invasion force in the Battle of Tarqui. In addition, Ecuador's eastern border with the Portuguese colony of Brazil in the Amazon Basin was modified before the Wars of Independence by the First Treaty of San Ildefonso (1777) between the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire. Moreover, to add legitimacy to his claims, on 16 February 1840, Flores signed a treaty with Spain, whereby Flores convinced Spain to officially recognize Ecuadorian independence and its sole rights to colonial titles over Spain's former colonial territory known anciently to Spain as the Kingdom and Presidency of Quito.
Ecuador during its long and turbulent history has lost most of its contested territories to each of its more powerful neighbors, such as Colombia in 1832 and 1916, Brazil in 1904 through a series of peaceful treaties, and Peru after a short war in which the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro was signed in 1942.
Struggle for independence[edit]
During the struggle for independence, before Peru or Ecuador became independent nations, a few areas of the former Vice Royalty of New Granada   Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Ja n   declared themselves independent from Spain. A few months later, a part of the Peruvian liberation army of San Martin decided to occupy the independent cities of Tumbez and Ja n with the intention of using these towns as springboards to occupy the independent city of Guayaquil and then to liberate the rest of the Audiencia de Quito (Ecuador). It was common knowledge among the top officers of the liberation army from the south that their leader San Martin wished to liberate present-day Ecuador and add it to the future republic of Peru, since it had been part of the Inca Empire before the Spaniards conquered it.
However, Bol var's intention was to form a new republic known as the Gran Colombia, out of the liberated Spanish territory of New Granada which consisted of Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador. San Martin's plans were thwarted when Bol var, with the help of Marshal Antonio Jos  de Sucre and the Gran Colombian liberation force, descended from the Andes mountains and occupied Guayaquil; they also annexed the newly liberated Audiencia de Quito to the Republic of Gran Colombia. This happened a few days before San Martin's Peruvian forces could arrive and occupy Guayaquil, with the intention of annexing Guayaquil to the rest of Audiencia of Quito (Ecuador) and to the future republic of Peru. Historic documents repeatedly stated that San Martin told Bolivar he came to Guayaquil to liberate the land of the Incas from Spain. Bolivar countered by sending a message from Guayaquil welcoming San Martin and his troops to Colombian soil.
Peruvian occupation of Ja n, Tumbes, and Guayaquil[edit]
In the south, Ecuador had de jure claims to a small piece of land beside the Pacific Ocean known as Tumbes which lay between the Zarumilla and Tumbes rivers. In Ecuador's southern Andes Mountain region where the Mara on cuts across, Ecuador had de jure claims to an area it called Ja n de Bracamoros. These areas were included as part of the territory of Gran Colombia by Bolivar on 17 December 1819, during the Congress of Angostura when the Republic of Gran Colombia was created. Tumbes declared itself independent from Spain on 17 January 1821, and Jaen de Bracamoros on 17 June 1821, without any outside help from revolutionary armies. However, that same year, 1821, Peruvian forces participating in the Trujillo revolution occupied both Jaen and Tumbes. Some Peruvian generals, without any legal titles backing them up and with Ecuador still federated with the Gran Colombia, had the desire to annex Ecuador to the Republic of Peru at the expense of the Gran Colombia, feeling that Ecuador was once part of the Inca Empire.
On 28 July 1821, Peruvian independence was proclaimed in Lima by the Liberator San Martin, and Tumbes and Jaen, which were included as part of the revolution of Trujillo by the Peruvian occupying force, had the whole region swear allegiance to the new Peruvian flag and incorporated itself into Peru, even though Peru was not completely liberated from Spain. After Peru was completely liberated from Spain by the patriot armies led by Bolivar and Antonio Jose de Sucre at the Battle of Ayacucho dated 9 December 1824, there was a strong desire by some Peruvians to resurrect the Inca Empire and to include Bolivia and Ecuador. One of these Peruvian Generals was the Ecuadorian-born Jos  de La Mar, who became one of Peru's presidents after Bolivar resigned as dictator of Peru and returned to Colombia. Gran Colombia had always protested Peru for the return of Jaen and Tumbes for almost a decade, then finally Bolivar after long and futile discussion over the return of Jaen, Tumbes, and part of Mainas, declared war. President and General Jos  de La Mar, who was born in Ecuador, believing his opportunity had come to annex the District of Ecuador to Peru, personally, with a Peruvian force, invaded and occupied Guayaquil and a few cities in the Loja region of southern Ecuador on 28 November 1828.
The war ended when a triumphant heavily outnumbered southern Gran Colombian army at Battle of Tarqui dated 27 February 1829, led by Antonio Jos  de Sucre, defeated the Peruvian invasion force led by President La Mar. This defeat led to the signing of the Treaty of Guayaquil dated 22 September 1829, whereby Peru and its Congress recognized Gran Colombian rights over Tumbes, Jaen, and Maynas. Through protocolized meetings between representatives of Peru and Gran Colombia, the border was set as Tumbes river in the west and in the east the Maranon and Amazon rivers were to be followed toward Brazil as the most natural borders between them. However, what was pending was whether the new border around the Jaen region should follow the Chinchipe River or the Huancabamba River. According to the peace negotiations Peru agreed to return Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Ja n; despite this, Peru returned Guayaquil, but failed to return Tumbes and Ja n, alleging that it was not obligated to follow the agreements, since the Gran Colombia ceased to exist when it divided itself into three different nations   Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.
The dissolution of Gran Colombia[edit]
 Map of the former Gran Colombia in 1824 (named in its time as Colombia), the Gran Colombia covered all the colored region.
 Ecuador in 1832
The Central District of the Gran Colombia, known as Cundinamarca or New Granada (modern Colombia) with its capital in Bogota, did not recognize the separation of the Southern District of the Gran Colombia, with its capital in Quito, from the Gran Colombian federation on 13 May 1830. After Ecuador's separation, the Department of Cauca voluntarily decided to unite itself with Ecuador due to instability in the central government of Bogota. The Venezuelan born President of Ecuador, the general Juan Jos  Flores, with the approval of the Ecuadorian congress annexed the Department of Cauca on 20 December 1830, since the government of Cauca had called for union with the District of the South as far back as April 1830. Moreover, the Cauca region, throughout its long history, had very strong economic and cultural ties with the people of Ecuador. Also, the Cauca region, which included such cities as Pasto, Popay n, and Buenaventura, had always been dependent on the Presidencia or Audiencia of Quito.
Fruitless negotiations continued between the governments of Bogot  and Quito, where the government of Bogot  did not recognize the separation of Ecuador or that of Cauca from the Gran Colombia until war broke out in May 1832. In five months, New Granada defeated Ecuador due to the fact that the majority of the Ecuadorian Armed Forces were composed of rebellious angry unpaid veterans from Venezuela and Colombia that did not want to fight against their fellow countrymen. Seeing that his officers were rebelling, mutinying, and changing sides, President Flores had no option but to reluctantly make peace with New Granada. The Treaty of Pasto of 1832 was signed by which the Department of Cauca was turned over to New Granada (modern Colombia), the government of Bogot  recognized Ecuador as an independent country and the border was to follow the Ley de Divisi n Territorial de la Rep blica de Colombia (Law of the Division of Territory of the Gran Colombia) passed on 25 June 1824. This law set the border at the river Carchi and the eastern border that stretched to Brazil at the Caquet  river. Later, Ecuador contended that the Republic of Colombia, while reorganizing its government, unlawfully made its eastern border provisional and that Colombia extended its claims south to the Napo River because it said that the Government of Popay n extended its control all the way to the Napo River.
Struggle for possession of the Amazon Basin[edit]
 South America (1879): All land claims by Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Bolivia in 1879
When Ecuador seceded from the Gran Colombia, Peru decided not to follow the treaty of Guayaquil of 1829 or the protocoled agreements made. Peru contested Ecuador's claims with the newly discovered Real Cedula of 1802, by which Peru claims the King of Spain had transferred these lands from the Viceroyalty of New Granada to the Viceroyalty of Peru. During colonial times this was to halt the ever-expanding Portuguese settlements into Spanish domains, which were left vacant and in disorder after the expulsion of Jesuit missionaries from their bases along the Amazon Basin. Ecuador countered by labeling the Cedula of 1802 an ecclesiastical instrument, which had nothing to do with political borders. Peru began its de facto occupation of disputed Amazonian territories, after it signed a secret 1851 peace treaty in favor of Brazil. This treaty disregarded Spanish rights that were confirmed during colonial times by a Spanish-Portuguese treaty over the Amazon regarding territories held by illegal Portuguese settlers.
Peru began occupying the missionary villages in the Mainas or Maynas region, which it began calling Loreto, with its capital in Iquitos. During its negotiations with Brazil, Peru claimed Amazonian Basin territories up to Caqueta River in the north and toward the Andes Mountain range. Colombia protested stating that its claims extended south toward the Napo and Amazon Rivers. Ecuador protested that it claimed the Amazon Basin between the Caqueta river and the Mara on-Amazon river. Peru ignored these protests and created the Department of Loreto in 1853 with its capital in Iquitos. Peru briefly occupied Guayaquil again in 1860, since Peru thought that Ecuador was selling some of the disputed land for development to British bond holders, but returned Guayaquil after a few months. The border dispute was then submitted to Spain for arbitration from 1880 to 1910, but to no avail.[31]
In the early part of the 20th century, Ecuador made an effort to peacefully define its eastern Amazonian borders with its neighbours through negotiation. On 6 May 1904, Ecuador signed the Tobar-Rio Branco Treaty recognizing Brazil's claims to the Amazon in recognition of Ecuador's claim to be an Amazonian country to counter Peru's earlier Treaty with Brazil back on 23 October 1851. Then after a few meetings with the Colombian government's representatives an agreement was reached and the Mu oz Vernaza-Suarez Treaty was signed 15 July 1916, in which Colombian rights to the Putumayo river were recognized as well as Ecuador's rights to the Napo river and the new border was a line that ran midpoint between those two rivers. In this way, Ecuador gave up the claims it had to the Amazonian territories between the Caquet  River and Napo River to Colombia, thus cutting itself off from Brazil. Later, a brief war erupted between Colombia and Peru, over Peru's claims to the Caquet  region, which ended with Peru reluctantly signing the Salomon-Lozano Treaty on 24 March 1922. Ecuador protested this secret treaty, since Colombia gave away Ecuadorian claimed land to Peru that Ecuador had given to Colombia in 1916.
On 21 July 1924, the Ponce-Castro Oyanguren Protocol was signed between Ecuador and Peru where both agreed to hold direct negotiations and to resolve the dispute in an equitable manner and to submit the differing points of the dispute to the United States for arbitration. Negotiations between the Ecuadorian and Peruvian representatives began in Washington on 30 September 1935. These negotiations were long and tiresome. Both sides logically presented their cases, but no one seemed to give up their claims. Then on 6 February 1937, Ecuador presented a transactional line which Peru rejected the next day. The negotiations turned into intense arguments during the next 7 months and finally on 29 September 1937, the Peruvian representatives decided to break off the negotiations without submitting the dispute to arbitration because the direct negotiations were going nowhere.[citation needed]
Four years later in 1941, amid fast-growing tensions within disputed territories around the Zarumilla River, war broke out with Peru. Peru claimed that Ecuador's military presence in Peruvian-claimed territory was an invasion; Ecuador, for its part, claimed that Peru had recently invaded Ecuador around the Zarumilla River and that Peru since Ecuador's independence from Spain has systematically occupied Tumbez, Jaen, and most of the disputed territories in the Amazonian Basin between the Putomayo and Mara on Rivers. In July 1941, troops were mobilized in both countries. Peru had an army of 11,681 troops who faced a poorly supplied and inadequately armed Ecuadorian force of 2,300, of which only 1,300 were deployed in the southern provinces. Hostilities erupted on 5 July 1941, when Peruvian forces crossed the Zarumilla river at several locations, testing the strength and resolve of the Ecuadorian border troops. Finally, on 23 July 1941, the Peruvians launched a major invasion, crossing the Zarumilla river in force and advancing into the Ecuadorian province of El Oro.
 Map of Ecuadorian land claims after 1916
During the course of the Ecuadorian Peruvian War, Peru gained control over part of the disputed territory and some parts of the province of El Oro, and some parts of the province of Loja, demanding that the Ecuadorian government give up its territorial claims. The Peruvian Navy blocked the port of Guayaquil, almost cutting all supplies to the Ecuadorian troops. After a few weeks of war and under pressure by the United States and several Latin American nations, all fighting came to a stop. Ecuador and Peru came to an accord formalized in the Rio Protocol, signed on 29 January 1942, in favor of hemispheric unity against the Axis Powers in World War II favoring Peru with the territory they occupied at the time the war came to an end.
The 1944 Glorious May Revolution followed a military-civilian rebellion and a subsequent civic strike which successfully removed Carlos Arroyo del R o as a dictator from Ecuador's government. However, a post-Second World War recession and popular unrest led to a return to populist politics and domestic military interventions in the 1960s, while foreign companies developed oil resources in the Ecuadorian Amazon. In 1972, construction of the Andean pipeline was completed. The pipeline brought oil from the east side of the Andes to the coast, making Ecuador South America's second largest oil exporter. The pipeline in southern Ecuador did nothing to resolve tensions between Ecuador and Peru, however.
In 1978, the city of Quito and the Gal pagos Islands were inscribed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites, making the first two properties in the world to become listed sites.
 Ecuadorian troops during the Cenepa War
 The Mirage F.1JA (FAE-806) was one aircraft involved in the claimed shooting down of two Peruvian Sukhoi Su-22 on 10 February 1995.
The Rio Protocol failed to precisely resolve the border along a little river in the remote Cordillera del C ndor region in southern Ecuador. This caused a long-simmering dispute between Ecuador and Peru, which ultimately led to fighting between the two countries; first a border skirmish in January February 1981 known as the Paquisha Incident, and ultimately full-scale warfare in January 1995 where the Ecuadorian military shot down Peruvian aircraft and helicopters and Peruvian infantry marched into southern Ecuador. Each country blamed the other for the onset of hostilities, known as the Cenepa War. Sixto Dur n Ball n, the Ecuadorian president, famously declared that he would not give up a single centimeter of Ecuador. Popular sentiment in Ecuador became strongly nationalistic against Peru: graffiti could be seen on the walls of Quito referring to Peru as the "Cain de Latinoam rica", a reference to the murder of Abel by his brother Cain in the Book of Genesis.[32]
Ecuador and Peru signed the Brasilia Presidential Act peace agreement on 26 October 1998, which ended hostilities, and effectively put an end to the Western Hemisphere's longest running territorial dispute.[33] The Guarantors of the Rio Protocol (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States of America) ruled that the border of the undelineated zone was to be set at the line of the Cordillera del C ndor. While Ecuador had to give up its decades-old territorial claims to the eastern slopes of the Cordillera, as well as to the entire western area of Cenepa headwaters, Peru was compelled to give to Ecuador, in perpetual lease but without sovereignty, 1 km2 (0.39 sq mi) of its territory, in the area where the Ecuadorian base of Tiwinza   focal point of the war   had been located within Peruvian soil and which the Ecuadorian Army held during the conflict. The final border demarcation came into effect on 13 May 1999, and the multi-national MOMEP (Military Observer Mission for Ecuador and Peru) troop deployment withdrew on 17 June 1999.[33]
Military governments (1972 79)[edit]
In 1972, a "revolutionary and nationalist" military junta overthrew the government of Velasco Ibarra. The coup d' tat was led by General Guillermo Rodr guez and executed by navy commander Jorge Queirolo G. The new president exiled Jos  Mar a Velasco to Argentina. He remained in power until 1976, when he was removed by another military government. That military junta was led by Admiral Alfredo Poveda, who was declared chairman of the Supreme Council. The Supreme Council included two other members: General Guillermo Dur n Arcentales and General Luis Pintado. The civil society more and more insistently called for democratic elections. Colonel Richelieu Levoyer, Government Minister, proposed and implemented a Plan to return to the constitutional system through universal elections. This plan enabled the new democratically elected president to assume the duties of the executive office.
Return to democracy[edit]
See also: History of Ecuador (1990 present)
Elections were held on 29 April 1979, under a new constitution. Jaime Rold s Aguilera was elected president, garnering over one million votes, the most in Ecuadorian history. He took office on 10 August, as the first constitutionally elected president after nearly a decade of civilian and military dictatorships. In 1980, he founded the Partido Pueblo, Cambio y Democracia (People, Change, and Democracy Party) after withdrawing from the Concentraci n de Fuerzas Populares (Popular Forces Concentration) and governed until 24 May 1981, when he died along with his wife and the minister of defense, Marco Subia Martinez, when his Air Force plane crashed in heavy rain near the Peruvian border. Many people believe that he was assassinated by the CIA,[34] given the multiple death threats leveled against him because of his reformist agenda, deaths in automobile crashes of two key witnesses before they could testify during the investigation, and the sometimes contradictory accounts of the incident.
Roldos was immediately succeeded by Vice President Osvaldo Hurtado, who was followed in 1984 by Le n Febres Cordero from the Social Christian Party. Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Democratic Left (Izquierda Democr tica, or ID) party won the presidency in 1988, running in the runoff election against Abdal  Bucaram (brother in law of Jaime Roldos and founder of the Ecuadorian Roldosist Party). His government was committed to improving human rights protection and carried out some reforms, notably an opening of Ecuador to foreign trade. The Borja government concluded an accord leading to the disbanding of the small terrorist group, " Alfaro Vive, Carajo!" ("Alfaro Lives, Dammit!"), named after Eloy Alfaro. However, continuing economic problems undermined the popularity of the ID, and opposition parties gained control of Congress in 1999.
 President Len n Moreno, first lady Roc o Gonz lez Navas and his predecessor Rafael Correa, 3 April 2017
A notable event was the Cenepa War fought between Ecuador and Peru in 1995.
Ecuador adopted the United States dollar on 13 April 2000 as its national currency and on 11 September, the country eliminated the Ecuadorian sucre, in order to stabilize the country's economy.[35] The US Dollar has been the only official currency of Ecuador since the year 2000.[36]
The emergence of the Amerindian population as an active constituency has added to the democratic volatility of the country in recent years. The population has been motivated by government failures to deliver on promises of land reform, lower unemployment and provision of social services, and historical exploitation by the land-holding elite. Their movement, along with the continuing destabilizing efforts by both the elite and leftist movements, has led to a deterioration of the executive office. The populace and the other branches of government give the president very little political capital, as illustrated by the most recent removal of President Lucio Guti rrez from office by Congress in April 2005.[37] Vice President Alfredo Palacio took his place[38] and remained in office until the presidential election of 2006, in which Rafael Correa gained the presidency.[39] On 15 January 2007, Rafael Correa was sworn in as the President of Ecuador. Several left-wing political leaders of Latin America, his future allies, attended the ceremony.[40]
The new socialist constitution, endorsed in 2008 referendum (2008 Constitution of Ecuador), implemented leftist reforms.[41] In December 2008, president Correa declared Ecuador's national debt illegitimate, based on the argument that it was odious debt contracted by corrupt and despotic prior regimes. He announced that the country would default on over $3 billion worth of bonds; he then pledged to fight creditors in international courts and succeeded in reducing the price of outstanding bonds by more than 60%.[42] He brought Ecuador into the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas in June 2009. Correa's administration  succeeded in reducing the high levels of poverty and unemployment in Ecuador.[43][44][45][46][47]
After Correa era[edit]
Rafael Correa's three consecutive terms (from 2007 to 2017) were followed by his former Vice President Len n Moreno s four years as president (2017 21). After being elected in 2017, President Lenin Moreno's government adopted economically liberal policies: reduction of public spending, trade liberalization, flexibility of the labour code, etc. Ecuador also left the left-wing Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (Alba) in August 2018.[48] The Productive Development Act enshrines an austerity policy, and reduces the development and redistribution policies of the previous mandate. In the area of taxes, the authorities aim to "encourage the return of investors" by granting amnesty to fraudsters and proposing measures to reduce tax rates for large companies. In addition, the government waives the right to tax increases in raw material prices and foreign exchange repatriations.[49] In October 2018, the government of President Lenin Moreno cut diplomatic relations with the Maduro administration of Venezuela, a close ally of Rafael Correa.[50] The relations with the United States improved significantly during the presidency of Lenin Moreno. In February 2020, his visit to Washington was the first meeting between an Ecuadorian and U.S. president in 17 years.[51] In June 2019, Ecuador had agreed to allow US military planes to operate from an airport on the Galapagos Islands.[52]
2019 state of emergency[edit]
Main article: 2019 Ecuadorian protests
A series of protests began on 3 October 2019 against the end of fuel subsidies and austerity measures adopted by President of Ecuador Len n Moreno and his administration. On 10 October, protesters overran the capital Quito causing the Government of Ecuador to relocate to Guayaquil,[53] but the government had plans to return to Quito.[54] On 14 October 2019, the government restored fuel subsidies and withdrew an austerity package, meaning the end of nearly two weeks of protests.[55]
Presidency of Guillermo Lasso since 2021[edit]
The 11 April 2021 election run-off vote ended in a win for conservative former banker, Guillermo Lasso, taking 52.4% of the vote compared to 47.6% of left-wing economist Andr s Arauz, supported by exiled former president, Rafael Correa. Previously, President-elect Lasso finished second in the 2013 and 2017 presidential elections.[56] On 24 May 2021, Guillermo Lasso was sworn in as the new President of Ecuador, becoming the country's first right-wing leader in 14 years.[57] However, President Lasso's party CREO Movement, and its ally the Social Christian Party (PSC) secured only 31 parliamentary seats out of 137, while the Union for Hope (UNES) of Andr s Arauz was the strongest parliamentary group with 49 seats, meaning the new president needs support from Izquierda Democr tica (18 seats) and the indigenist Pachakutik (27 seats) to push through his legislative agenda.[58]
In October 2021, President Lasso declared a 60-day state of emergency with the intention to combat crime and drug-related violence.[59] In October 2022, bloody riot among inmates at a prison  in central Ecuador caused 16 deaths, among them was the drug lord Leonardo Norero, alias "El Patron." In Ecuador's state prisons there been numerous bloody clashes between rival groups of prisoners.[60]
Lasso proposed a series of constitutional changes to enhance his government's ability to respond to rising, largely drug-related crime. In a referendum in February 2023, voters overwhelmingly rejected his proposed changes. This result weakened Lasso's political standing.[61]
Government and politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Ecuador
The Ecuadorian State consists of five branches of government: the Executive Branch, the Legislative Branch, the Judicial Branch, the Electoral Branch, and Transparency and Social Control.
Ecuador is governed by a democratically elected president, for a four-year term. The current president of Ecuador, Guillermo Lasso, exercises his power from the presidential Palacio de Carondelet in Quito. The current constitution was written by the Ecuadorian Constituent Assembly elected in 2007, and was approved by referendum in 2008. Since 1936, voting is compulsory for all literate persons aged 18 65, optional for all other citizens.[62]
The executive branch includes 23 ministries. Provincial governors and councilors (mayors, aldermen, and parish boards) are directly elected. The National Assembly of Ecuador meets throughout the year except for recesses in July and December. There are thirteen permanent committees. Members of the National Court of Justice are appointed by the National Judicial Council for nine-year terms.
Executive branch[edit]
Main article: List of heads of state of Ecuador
 Palacio de Carondelet, the executive branch of the Ecuadorian Government
The executive branch is led by the president, an office currently held by Guillermo Lasso. He is accompanied by the vice-president, elected for four years (with the ability to be re-elected only once). As head of state and chief government official, he is responsible for public administration including the appointing of national coordinators, ministers, ministers of State and public servants. The executive branch defines foreign policy, appoints the Chancellor of the Republic, as well as ambassadors and consuls, being the ultimate authority over the Armed Forces of Ecuador, National Police of Ecuador, and appointing authorities. The acting president's wife receives the title of First Lady of Ecuador.
Legislative branch[edit]
Main article: National Assembly (Ecuador)
The legislative branch is embodied by the National Assembly, which is headquartered in the city of Quito in the Legislative Palace, and consists of 137 assemblymen, divided into ten committees and elected for a four-year term. Fifteen national constituency elected assembly, two Assembly members elected from each province and one for every 100,000 inhabitants or fraction exceeding 150,000, according to the latest national population census. In addition, statute determines the election of assembly of regions and metropolitan districts.
Judicial branch[edit]
Ecuador's judiciary has as its main body the Judicial Council, and also includes the National Court of Justice, provincial courts, and lower courts. Legal representation is made by the Judicial Council.
The National Court of Justice is composed of 21 judges elected for a term of nine years. Judges are renewed by thirds every three years pursuant to the Judicial Code. These are elected by the Judicial Council on the basis of opposition proceedings and merits.
The justice system is buttressed by the independent offices of public prosecutor and the public defender. Auxiliary organs are as follows: notaries, court auctioneers, and court receivers. Also there is a special legal regime for Amerindians.
Electoral branch[edit]
The electoral system functions by authorities which enter only every four years or when elections or referendums occur. Its main functions are to organize, control elections, and punish the infringement of electoral rules. Its main body is the National Electoral Council, which is based in the city of Quito, and consists of seven members of the political parties most voted, enjoying complete financial and administrative autonomy. This body, along with the electoral court, forms the Electoral Branch which is one of Ecuador's five branches of government.
Transparency and social control branch[edit]
The Transparency and Social Control consists of the Council of Citizen Participation and Social Control, an ombudsman, the Comptroller General of the State, and the superintendents. Branch members hold office for five years. This branch is responsible for promoting transparency and control plans publicly, as well as plans to design mechanisms to combat corruption, as also designate certain authorities, and be the regulatory mechanism of accountability in the country.
Human rights[edit]
A 2003 Amnesty International report was critical that there were scarce few prosecutions for human rights violations committed by security forces, and those only in police courts, which are not considered impartial or independent. There are allegations that the security forces routinely torture prisoners. There are reports of prisoners having died while in police custody. Sometimes the legal process can be delayed until the suspect can be released after the time limit for detention without trial is exceeded. Prisons are overcrowded and conditions in detention centers are "abominable".[63]
UN's Human Rights Council's (HRC) Universal Periodic Review (UPR) has treated the restrictions on freedom of expression and efforts to control NGOs and recommended that Ecuador should stop the criminal sanctions for the expression of opinions, and delay in implementing judicial reforms. Ecuador rejected the recommendation on decriminalization of libel.[64]
According to Human Rights Watch (HRW) former president Correa intimidated journalists and subjected them to "public denunciation and retaliatory litigation". The sentences to journalists  were years of imprisonment and millions of dollars of compensation, even though defendants had been pardoned.[64] Correa stated he was only seeking a retraction for slanderous statements.[65]
According to HRW, Correa's government weakened the freedom of press and independence of the judicial system. In Ecuador's current judicial system, judges are selected in a contest of merits, rather than government appointments. However, the process of selection has been criticized as biased and subjective. In particular, the final interview is said to be given "excessive weighing". Judges and prosecutors that  made decisions in favor of Correa in his lawsuits had received permanent posts, while others with better assessment grades had been rejected.[64][66]
 Adult Gal pagos sea lion resting on a park bench in Puerto Baquerizo Moreno.
The laws also forbid articles and media messages that could favor or disfavor some political message or candidate. In the first half of 2012, twenty private TV or radio stations were closed down.[64]
In July 2012, the officials warned the judges that they would be sanctioned and possibly dismissed if they allowed the citizens to appeal to the protection of their constitutional rights against the state.[64]
People engaging in public protests against environmental and other issues are prosecuted for "terrorism and sabotage", which may lead to an eight-year prison sentence.[64]
According to Freedom House, restrictions on the media and civil society have decreased since 2017.[67]
In October 2022, the United Nations expressed concerns about the dire situation in various detention centers and prisons, and the human rights of those deprived of liberty in Ecuador.[68]
Foreign affairs[edit]
Main article: Foreign relations of Ecuador
 Ecuadorian President Len n Moreno with U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, 20 July 2019
Ecuador joined the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in 1973 and suspended its membership in 1992. Under President Rafael Correa, the country returned to OPEC before leaving again in 2020 under the instruction of President Moreno, citing its desire to increase crude oil importation to gain more revenue.[69][70]
In Antarctica, Ecuador has maintained a research station for peaceful scientific study as a member nation of the Antarctica Treaty. Ecuador has often placed great emphasis on multilateral approaches to international issues. Ecuador is a member of the United Nations (and most of its specialized agencies) and a member of many regional groups, including the Rio Group, the Latin American Economic System, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Latin American Integration Association, the Andean Community of Nations, and the Bank of the South (Spanish: Banco del Sur or BancoSur).
In 2017, the Ecuadorian parliament adopted a law on human mobility.[71]
The International Organization for Migration lauded Ecuador as the first state to have established the promotion of the concept of universal citizenship in its constitution, aiming to promote the universal recognition and protection of the human rights of migrants.[72] In 2017, Ecuador signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.[73]
In March 2019, Ecuador withdrew from the Union of South American Nations. Ecuador was an original member of the bloc, founded by left-wing governments in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2008. Ecuador also asked UNASUR to return the headquarters building of the organization, based in its capital city, Quito.[74]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Provinces of Ecuador and Cantons of Ecuador
Ecuador is divided into 24 provinces (Spanish: provincias), each with its own administrative capital:
 Map of Ecuador
Administrative divisions of Ecuador
Province
Area (km2)
Population (2021)[75]
Capital
1
 Azuay
8,189
895,503
Cuenca
2
 Bol var
4,148
211,413
Guaranda
3
 Ca ar
3,669
285,960
Azogues
4
 Carchi
3,790
188,167
Tulc n
5
 Chimborazo
5,999
528,104
Riobamba
6
 Cotopaxi
6,085
494,716
Latacunga
7
 El Oro
5,879
724,123
Machala
8
 Esmeraldas
14,893
651,917
Esmeraldas
9
 Gal pagos
8,010
33,769
Puerto Baquerizo Moreno
10
 Guayas
15,927
4,446,641
Guayaquil
11
 Imbabura
4,611
482,326
Ibarra
12
 Loja
11,100
525,984
Loja
13
 Los R os
7,100
932,593
Babahoyo
14
 Manab 
19,427
1,573,950
Portoviejo
15
 Morona Santiago
23,875
200,737
Macas
16
 Napo
12,476
136,434
Tena
17
 Orellana
21,691
163,095
Puerto Francisco de Orellana
18
 Pastaza
29,068
117,155
Puyo
19
 Pichincha
9,692
3,284,186
Quito
20
 Santa Elena
3,696
409,810
Santa Elena
21
 Santo Domingo de los Ts chilas
4,180
466,423
Santo Domingo
22
 Sucumb os
18,612
235,537
Nueva Loja
23
 Tungurahua
3,222
597,011
Ambato
24
 Zamora Chinchipe
10,556
122,921
Zamora
The provinces are divided into cantons and further subdivided into parishes (parroquias).
Regions and planning areas[edit]
Regionalization, or zoning, is the union of two or more adjoining provinces in order to decentralize the administrative functions of the capital, Quito.
In Ecuador, there are seven regions, or zones, each shaped by the following provinces:
Region 1 (42,126 km2, or 16,265 mi2): Esmeraldas, Carchi, Imbabura, and Sucumbios. Administrative city: Ibarra
Region 2 (43,498 km2, or 16,795 mi2): Pichincha, Napo, and Orellana. Administrative city: Tena
Region 3 (44,710 km2, or 17,263 mi2): Chimborazo, Tungurahua, Pastaza, and Cotopaxi. Administrative city: Riobamba
Region 4 (22,257 km2, or 8,594 mi2): Manab  and Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas. Administrative city: Ciudad Alfaro
Region 5 (38,420 km2, or 14,834 mi2): Santa Elena, Guayas, Los R os, Gal pagos, and Bol var. Administrative city: Milagro
Region 6 (38,237 km2, or 14,763 mi2): Ca ar, Azuay, and Morona Santiago. Administrative city: Cuenca
Region 7 (27,571 km2, or 10,645 mi2): El Oro, Loja, and Zamora Chinchipe. Administrative city: Loja
Quito and Guayaquil are Metropolitan Districts. Gal pagos, despite being included within Region 5,[76] is also under a special unit.[77]
Military[edit]
Main article: Military of Ecuador
 Ecuadorian Air Force (FAE)
The Ecuadorian Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas de la Republica de Ecuador), consists of the Army, Air Force, and Navy and have the stated responsibility for the preservation of the integrity and national sovereignty of the national territory.
The military tradition starts in Gran Colombia, where a sizable army was stationed in Ecuador due to border disputes with Peru, which claimed territories under its political control when it was a Spanish vice-royalty. Once Gran Colombia was dissolved after the death of Sim n Bol var in 1830, Ecuador inherited the same border disputes and had the need of creating its own professional military force. So influential was the military in Ecuador in the early republican period that its first decade was under the control of General Juan Jos  Flores, first president of Ecuador of Venezuelan origin. General Jose Ma. Urbina and General Robles are examples of military figures who became presidents of the country in the early republican period.
Due to the continuous border disputes with Peru, finally settled in the early 2000s, and due to the ongoing problem with the Colombian guerrilla insurgency infiltrating Amazonian provinces, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has gone through a series of changes. In 2009, the new administration at the Defense Ministry launched a deep restructuring within the forces, increasing spending budget to $1,691,776,803, an increase of 25%.[78]
The Military Academy General Eloy Alfaro (c. 1838) located in Quito is in charge of graduating army officers.[79] The Ecuadorian Navy Academy (c. 1837), located in Salinas graduates navy officers.[80] The Air Academy "Cosme Rennella (c. 1920), also located in Salinas, graduates air force officers.[81]
The IWIAS is a special force trained to perform exploration and military activities. This army branch is considered the best elite force in Ecuador and is staffed by indigenous natives of the Amazon who combine their inherited experience for jungle living with modern army tactics.
Other training academies for different military specialties are found across the country.
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Ecuador
 Ecuadorian topography
 A view of the Cotopaxi volcano, in Cotopaxi Province
 Birds in the Yasuni National Park
Ecuador has a total area of 283,561 km2 (109,484 sq mi), including the Gal pagos Islands. Of this, 276,841 km2 (106,889 sq mi) is land and 6,720 km2 (2,595 sq mi) water.[2] The Gal pagos Islands are sometimes considered part of Oceania,[82][83][84][85][86][87][88] which would thus make Ecuador a transcontinental country under certain definitions. Ecuador is bigger than Uruguay, Suriname, Guyana and French Guiana in South America.
Ecuador lies between latitudes 2 N and 5 S,
bounded on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and has 2,337 km (1,452 mi) of coastline. It has 2,010 km (1,250 mi) of land boundaries, with Colombia in the north (with a 590 km (367 mi) border) and Peru in the east and south (with a 1,420 km (882 mi) border). It is the westernmost country that lies on the equator.[89]
The country has four main geographic regions:
La Costa, or "the coast": The coastal region consists of the provinces to the west of the Andean range  Esmeraldas, Guayas, Los R os, Manab , El Oro, Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas and Santa Elena. It is the country's most fertile and productive land, and is the seat of the large banana exportation plantations of the companies Dole and Chiquita. This region is also where most of Ecuador's rice crop is grown. The truly coastal provinces have active fisheries. The largest coastal city is Guayaquil.
La Sierra, or "the highlands": The sierra consists of the Andean and Interandean highland provinces  Azuay, Ca ar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Imbabura, Loja, Pichincha, Bol var,Cotopaxi and Tungurahua. This land contains most of Ecuador's volcanoes and all of its snow-capped peaks. Agriculture is focused on the traditional crops of potato, maize, and quinua and the population is predominantly Amerindian Kichua. The largest Sierran city is Quito.
La Amazon a, also known as El Oriente, or "the east": The oriente consists of the Amazon jungle provinces  Morona Santiago, Napo, Orellana, Pastaza, Sucumb os, and Zamora-Chinchipe. This region is primarily made up of the huge Amazon national parks and Amerindian untouchable zones, which are vast stretches of land set aside for the Amazon Amerindian tribes to continue living traditionally. It is also the area with the largest reserves of petroleum in Ecuador, and parts of the upper Amazon here have been extensively exploited by petroleum companies. The population is primarily mixed Amerindian Shuar, Huaorani and Kichua, although there are numerous tribes in the deep jungle which are little-contacted. The largest city in the Oriente is probably Lago Agrio in Sucumb os, although Macas in Morona Santiago runs a close second.
La Regi n Insular is the region comprising the Gal pagos Islands, some 1,000 kilometers (620 mi) west of the mainland in the Pacific Ocean.
Ecuador's capital and largest city is Quito,[90] which is in the province of Pichincha in the Sierra region. Its second largest city is Guayaquil,[91] in the Guayas Province. Cotopaxi, just south of Quito, is one of the world's highest active volcanoes. The top of Mount Chimborazo (6,268 m, or 20,560 ft, above sea level), Ecuador's tallest mountain, is the most distant point from the center of the Earth on the Earth's surface because of the ellipsoid shape of the planet.[2]
Climate[edit]
Main article: Climate of Ecuador
There is great variety in the climate, largely determined by altitude. It is mild year-round in the mountain valleys, with a humid subtropical climate in coastal areas and rainforest in lowlands. The Pacific coastal area has a tropical climate with a severe rainy season. The climate in the Andean highlands is temperate and relatively dry, and the Amazon basin on the eastern side of the mountains shares the climate of other rainforest zones.
Because of its location at the equator, Ecuador experiences little variation in daylight hours during the course of a year. Both sunrise and sunset occur each day at the two six o'clock hours.[2]
The country has seen its seven glaciers lose 54.4% of their surface in forty years. Research predicts their disappearance by 2100. The cause is climate change, which threatens both the fauna and flora and the population.[92]
Hydrology[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: Rivers of Ecuador
 Ba os de Agua Santa is an important tourist site
The Andes is the watershed divisor between the Amazon watershed, which runs to the east, and the Pacific, including the north south rivers Mataje, Santiago, Esmeraldas, Chone, Guayas, Jubones, and Puyango-Tumbes.
Almost all of the rivers in Ecuador form in the Sierra region and flow east toward the Amazon River or west toward the Pacific Ocean. The rivers rise from snowmelt at the edges of the snowcapped peaks or from the abundant precipitation that falls at higher elevations. In the Sierra region, the streams and rivers are narrow and flow rapidly over precipitous slopes. Rivers may slow and widen as they cross the hoyas yet become rapid again as they flow from the heights of the Andes to the lower elevations of the other regions. The highland rivers broaden as they enter the more level areas of the Costa and the Oriente.
In the Costa, the external coast has mostly intermittent rivers that are fed by constant rains from December through May and become empty riverbeds during the dry season. The few exceptions are the longer, perennial rivers that flow throughout the external coast from the internal coast and La Sierra on their way to the Pacific Ocean. The internal coast, by contrast, is crossed by perennial rivers that may flood during the rainy season, sometimes forming swamps.
Major rivers in the Oriente include the Pastaza, Napo, and Putumayo. The Pastaza is formed by the confluence of the Chambo and the Patate rivers, both of which rise in the Sierra. The Pastaza includes the Agoyan waterfall, which at sixty-one meters (200 feet) is the highest waterfall in Ecuador. The Napo rises near Mount Cotopaxi and is the major river used for transport in the eastern lowlands. The Napo ranges in width from 500 to 1,800 m (1,640 to 5,906 ft). In its upper reaches, the Napo flows rapidly until the confluence with one of its major tributaries, the Coca River, where it slows and levels off. The Putumayo forms part of the border with Colombia. All of these rivers flow into the Amazon River. The Gal pagos Islands have no significant rivers. Several of the larger islands, however, have freshwater springs, although they are surrounded by the Pacific Ocean.
Biodiversity[edit]
 Ecuador is one of the most megadiverse countries in the world, it also has the most biodiversity per square kilometer of any nation, and is one of the highest endemism worldwide. In the image, the spectacled bear of the Andes.
Ecuador is one of seventeen megadiverse countries in the world according to Conservation International,[18] and it has the most biodiversity per square kilometer of any nation.[93][94]
Ecuador has 1,600 bird species (15% of the world's known bird species) in the continental area and 38 more endemic in the Gal pagos. In addition to more than 16,000 species of plants, the country has 106 endemic reptiles, 138 endemic amphibians, and 6,000 species of butterfly. The Gal pagos Islands are well known as a region of distinct fauna, as the famous place of birth to Darwin's Theory of Evolution, and as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[95]
Ecuador has the first constitution to recognize the rights of nature.[96] The protection of the nation's biodiversity is an explicit national priority as stated in the National Plan of "Buen Vivir", or good living, Objective 4, "Guarantee the rights of nature", Policy 1: "Sustainably conserve and manage the natural heritage, including its land and marine biodiversity, which is considered a strategic sector".[93]
 Amazon rainforest in Ecuador
As of the writing of the plan in 2008, 19% of Ecuador's land area was in a protected area; however, the plan also states that 32% of the land must be protected in order to truly preserve the nation's biodiversity.[93] Current protected areas include 11 national parks, 10 wildlife refuges, 9 ecological reserves, and other areas.[97] A program begun in 2008, Sociobosque, is preserving another 2.3% of total land area (6,295 km2, or 629,500 ha) by paying private landowners or community landowners (such as Amerindian tribes) incentives to maintain their land as native ecosystems such as native forests or grasslands. Eligibility and subsidy rates for this program are determined based on the poverty in the region, the number of hectares that will be protected, and the type of ecosystem of the land to be protected, among other factors.[98] Ecuador had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.66/10, ranking it 35th globally out of 172 countries.[99]
Despite being on the UNESCO list, the Gal pagos are endangered by a range of negative environmental effects, threatening the existence of this exotic ecosystem.[100] Additionally, oil exploitation of the Amazon rainforest has led to the release of billions of gallons of untreated wastes, gas, and crude oil into the environment,[101] contaminating ecosystems and causing detrimental health effects to Amerindian peoples.[102][103] One of the best known examples is the Texaco-Chevron case.[104] This American oil company operated in the Ecuadorian Amazon region between 1964 and 1992. During this period, Texaco drilled 339 wells in 15 petroleum fields and abandoned 627 toxic wastewater pits, as well as other elements of the oil infrastructure. It is now known that these highly polluting and now obsolete technologies were used as a way to reduce expenses.[105]
In 2022 the supreme court of Ecuador decided that ""under no circumstances can a project be carried out that generates excessive sacrifices to the collective rights of communities and nature." It also required the government to respect the opinion of Indigenous peoples of the Americas about different industrial projects on their land. Advocates of the decision argue that it will have consequences far beyond Ecuador. In general, ecosystems are in better shape when indigenous peoples own or manage the land.[106]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Ecuador
 A proportional representation of Ecuador exports, 2019
 GDP per capita development of Ecuador
Ecuador has a developing economy that is highly dependent on commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products. The country is classified as an upper-middle-income country. Ecuador's economy is the eighth largest in Latin America and experienced an average growth of 4.6% between 2000 and 2006.[107][failed verification] From 2007 to 2012, Ecuador's GDP grew at an annual average of 4.3 percent, above the average for Latin America and the Caribbean, which was 3.5%, according to the United Nations' Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean (ECLAC).[108] Ecuador was able to maintain relatively superior growth during the crisis. In January 2009, the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) put the 2010 growth forecast at 6.88%.[109] In 2011, its GDP grew at 8% and ranked third highest in Latin America, behind Argentina (2nd) and Panama (1st).[110] Between 1999 and 2007, GDP doubled, reaching $65,490 million according to BCE.[111]
The inflation rate until January 2008, was about 1.14%, the highest in the past year, according to the government.[112][113] The monthly unemployment rate remained at about 6 and 8 percent from December 2007 until September 2008; however, it went up to about 9 percent in October and dropped again in November 2008 to 8 percent.[114] Unemployment mean annual rate for 2009 in Ecuador was 8.5% because the global economic crisis continued to affect the Latin American economies. From this point, unemployment rates started a downward trend: 7.6% in 2010, 6.0% in 2011, and 4.8% in 2012.[115]
The extreme poverty rate declined significantly between 1999 and 2010.[116] In 2001, it was estimated at 40% of the population, while by 2011 the figure dropped to 17.4% of the total population.[117] This is explained to an extent by emigration and the economic stability achieved after adopting the U.S. dollar as official means of transaction (before 2000, the Ecuadorian sucre was prone to rampant inflation). However, starting in 2008, with the bad economic performance of the nations where most Ecuadorian emigrants work, the reduction of poverty has been realized through social spending, mainly in education and health.[118]
 The United States dollar is the common currency circulation in Ecuador
Oil accounts for 40% of exports and contributes to maintaining a positive trade balance.[119] Since the late 1960s, the exploitation of oil increased production, and proven reserves are estimated at 6.51 billion barrels as of 2011[update].[120] In late 2021, Ecuador had to declare a Force majeure for oil exports due to erosion near key pipelines (privately owned OCP pipeline and state-owned SOTE pipeline) in the Amazon.[121] It lasted about three weeks, totalling just over $500 million economic losses, before their production returned to its normal level of 435,000 barrels per day (69,200 m3/d) in early 2022.[122]
The overall trade balance for August 2012 was a surplus of almost $390 million for the first six months of 2012, a huge figure compared with that of 2007, which reached only $5.7 million; the surplus had risen by about $425 million compared to 2006.[117] The oil trade balance positive had revenues of $3.295 million in 2008, while non-oil was negative, amounting to $2.842 million. The trade balance with the United States, Chile, the European Union, Bolivia, Peru, Brazil, and Mexico is positive. The trade balance with Argentina, Colombia, and Asia is negative.[123]
In the agricultural sector, Ecuador is a major exporter of bananas (first place worldwide in export[124]), flowers, and the seventh largest producer of cocoa.[125] Ecuador also produces coffee, rice, potatoes, cassava (manioc, tapioca), plantains and sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef, pork and dairy products; fish, and shrimp; and balsa wood.[126] The country's vast resources include large amounts of timber across the country, like eucalyptus and mangroves.[127] Pines and cedars are planted in the region of La Sierra and walnuts, rosemary, and balsa wood in the Guayas River Basin.[128]
The industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably. This city is also the largest business center of the country.[129] Industrial production is directed primarily to the domestic market.[citation needed] Despite this, there is limited export of products produced or processed industrially.[citation needed] These include canned foods, liquor, jewelry, furniture, and more.[citation needed] A minor industrial activity is also concentrated in Cuenca.[130] Incomes from tourism has been increasing during the last few years because of the Government showing the variety of climates and the biodiversity of Ecuador.
 World Trade Center headquarters in Guayaquil
Ecuador has negotiated bilateral treaties with other countries, besides belonging to the Andean Community of Nations,[131] and an associate member of Mercosur.[132] It also serves on the World Trade Organization (WTO), in addition to the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Corporaci n Andina de Fomento (CAF) and other multilateral agencies.[133][134][135] In April 2007, Ecuador paid off its debt to the IMF, thus ending an era of interventionism of the Agency in the country.[136][137]
The public finance of Ecuador consists of the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE), the National Development Bank (BNF), the State Bank.
Sciences and research[edit]
 EXA's first satellite, NEE-01 Pegasus
Ecuador was placed in 96th position of innovation in technology in a 2013 World Economic Forum study.[138] Ecuador was ranked 91st in the Global Innovation Index in 2021 up from 99th in 2020.[139][140][141][142][143] The most notable icons in Ecuadorian sciences are the mathematician and cartographer Pedro Vicente Maldonado, born in Riobamba in 1707, and the printer, independence precursor, and medical pioneer Eugenio Espejo, born in 1747 in Quito. Among other notable Ecuadorian scientists and engineers are Lieutenant Jose Rodriguez Labandera,[144] a pioneer who built the first submarine in Latin America in 1837; Reinaldo Espinosa Aguilar (1898 1950), a botanist and biologist of Andean flora; and Jos  Aurelio Due as (1880 1961), a chemist and inventor of a method of textile serigraphy.
The major areas of scientific research in Ecuador have been in the medical fields, tropical and infectious diseases treatments, agricultural engineering, pharmaceutical research, and bioengineering. Being a small country and a consumer of foreign technology, Ecuador has favored research supported by entrepreneurship in information technology. The antivirus program Checkprogram, banking protection system MdLock, and Core Banking Software Cobis are products of Ecuadorian development.[145]
The scientific production in hard sciences has been limited due to lack of funding but focused around physics, statistics, and partial differential equations in mathematics.[citation needed] In the case of engineering fields, the majority of scientific production comes from the top three polytechnic institutions: Escuela Superior Polit cnica del Litoral   ESPOL, Universidad de Las Fuerzas Armadas   ESPE, and Escuela Polit cnica Nacional EPN. The Center for Research and Technology Development in Ecuador is an autonomous center for research and technology development funded by Senecyt.
However, according to Nature, the multidisciplinary scientific journal, the top 10 institutions that carry the most outstanding scientific contributions are: Yachay Tech University (Yachay Tech), Escuela Polit cnica Nacional (EPN), and Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ).[146]
Tourism[edit]
Main article: Tourism in Ecuador
 The historic center of Quito has one of the largest and best-preserved historic centers in the Americas.[147]
The Ministry of Information and Tourism was created on 10 August 1992, at the beginning of the government of Sixto Dur n Ball n, who viewed tourism as a fundamental activity for the economic and social development of the peoples. Faced with the growth of the tourism sector, in June 1994, the decision was taken to separate tourism from information, so that it is exclusively dedicated to promoting and strengthening this activity.
Ecuador is a country with vast natural wealth. The diversity of its four regions has given rise to thousands of species of flora and fauna. It has approximately 1640 kinds of birds. The species of butterflies border 4,500, the reptiles 345, the amphibians 358, and the mammals 258, among others. Not in vain, Ecuador is considered one of the 17 countries where the planet's highest biodiversity is concentrated, being also the largest country with diversity per km2 in the world. Most of its fauna and flora lives in 26 protected areas by the state.
Also, it has a huge culture spectrum. Since 2007, with the government of Rafael Correa, the tourism brand "Ecuador Ama la Vida" has been transformed, with which the nation's tourism promotion would be sold. Focused on considering it as a country friendly and respectful of nature, natural biodiversity, and cultural diversity of the peoples. And for this, means of exploiting them are developed along with the private economy.
The country has two cities with UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Quito and Cuenca, as well as two natural UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Galapagos Islands and Sangay National Park in addition to one World Biosphere Reserve, such as the Cajas Massif. Culturally, the Toquilla straw hat and the culture of the Zapara indigenous people are recognized. The most popular sites for national and foreign tourists have different nuances due to the various tourist activities offered by the country.
Among the main tourist destinations are:
Nature attractions: Gal pagos Islands, Yasuni National Park, El Cajas National Park, Sangay National Park, Podocarpus National Park, Vilcabamba, Ba os de Agua Santa.
Cultural attractions: Historic center of Quito, Ciudad Mitad del Mundo, Ingapirca, Historic center of Cuenca, Latacunga and its Mama Negra festival.
Snowy mountains: Antisana volcano, Cayambe volcano, Chimborazo volcano, Cotopaxi volcano, Illinizas volcanoes.
Beaches: Atacames, Bah a de Car quez, Crucita, Esmeraldas, Manta, Monta ita, Playas, Salinas
Transport[edit]
 The Troleb s bus rapid transit system that runs through Quito. It is the principal BRT in Ecuador.
 Railways in Ecuador (interactive map)
Main article: Transport in Ecuador
The rehabilitation and reopening of the Ecuadorian railroad and use of it as a tourist attraction is one of the recent developments in transportation matters.[148]
The roads of Ecuador in recent years have undergone important improvement. The major routes are Pan American (under enhancement from four to six lanes from Rumichaca to Ambato, the conclusion of 4 lanes on the entire stretch of Ambato and Riobamba and running via Riobamba to Loja). In the absence of the section between Loja and the border with Peru, there are the Route Espondilus and/or Ruta del Sol (oriented to travel along the Ecuadorian coastline) and the Amazon backbone (which crosses from north to south along the Ecuadorian Amazon, linking most and more major cities of it).
Another major project is developing the road Manta   Tena, the highway Guayaquil   Salinas Highway Aloag Santo Domingo, Riobamba   Macas (which crosses Sangay National Park). Other new developments include the National Unity bridge complex in Guayaquil, the bridge over the Napo river in Francisco de Orellana, the Esmeraldas River Bridge in the city of the same name, and, perhaps the most remarkable of all, the Bahia   San Vincente Bridge, being the largest on the Latin American Pacific coast.
Cuenca's tramway is the largest public transport system in the city and the first modern tramway in Ecuador. It was inaugurated on 8 March 2019. It has 20.4 kilometers (12.7 mi) and 27 stations. It will transport 120,000 passagers daily. Its route starts in the south of Cuenca and ends in the north at the Parque Industrial neighbourhood.
The Mariscal Sucre International Airport in Quito and the Jos  Joaqu n de Olmedo International Airport in Guayaquil have experienced a high increase in demand and have required modernization. In the case of Guayaquil it involved a new air terminal, once considered the best in South America and the best in Latin America[149] and in Quito where an entire new airport has been built in Tababela and was inaugurated in February 2013, with Canadian assistance. However, the main road leading from Quito city center to the new airport will only be finished in late 2014, making current travelling from the airport to downtown Quito as long as two hours during rush hour.[150] Quito's old city-center airport is being turned into parkland, with some light industrial use.
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Ecuadorian people
 Population pyramid in 2020
Ecuador's population is ethnically diverse and the 2021 estimates put Ecuador's population at 17,797,737.[151][152] The largest ethnic group (as of 2010[update]) is the Mestizos, who are mixed race people of Amerindian and European descent, typically from Spanish colonists, in some cases this term can also include Amerindians that are culturally more Spanish influenced, and constitute about 71% of the population (although including the Montubio, a term used for coastal Mestizo population, brings this up to about 79%).
The White Ecuadorians (White Latin American) are a minority accounting for 6.1% of the population of Ecuador and can be found throughout all of Ecuador, primarily around the urban areas. Even though Ecuador's white population during its colonial era were mainly descendants from Spain, today Ecuador's white population is a result of a mixture of European immigrants, predominantly from Spain with people from Italy, Germany, France, and Switzerland who have settled in the early 20th century. In addition, there is a small European Jewish (Ecuadorian Jews) population, which is based mainly in Quito and to a lesser extent in Guayaquil.[4]
Ecuador also has a small population of Asian origins, mainly those from West Asia, like the economically well off descendants of Lebanese and Palestinian immigrants, who are either Christian or Muslim (see Islam in Ecuador), and an East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.[2]
Amerindians account for 7% of the current population. The mostly rural Montubio population of the coastal provinces of Ecuador, who might be classified as Pardo account for 7.4% of the population.
The Afro-Ecuadorians are a minority population (7%) in Ecuador, that includes the Mulattos and zambos, and are largely based in the Esmeraldas province and to a lesser degree in the predominantly Mestizo provinces of Coastal Ecuador   Guayas and Manabi. In the Highland Andes where a predominantly Mestizo, white and Amerindian population exist, the African presence is almost non-existent except for a small community in the province of Imbabura called Chota Valley. 5,000 Romani people live in Ecuador.[153]
Religion[edit]
Main article: Religion in Ecuador
Religion in Ecuador (2014)[154]
Religion
percent
Roman Catholic
 
79%
Protestant
 
13%
Irreligious
 
5%
Other
 
3%
According to the Ecuadorian National Institute of Statistics and Census, 91.95% of the country's population have a religion, 7.94% are atheists and 0.11% are agnostics. Among the people who have a religion, 80.44% are Roman Catholic Latin Rite (see List of Roman Catholic dioceses in Ecuador), 11.30% are Evangelical Protestants, 1.29% are Jehovah's Witnesses and 6.97% other (mainly Jewish, Buddhists and Latter-day Saints).[155][156]
In the rural parts of Ecuador, Amerindian beliefs and Catholicism are sometimes syncretized. Most festivals and annual parades are based on religious celebrations, many incorporating a mixture of rites and icons.[citation needed]
There is a small number of Eastern Orthodox Christians, Amerindian religions, Muslims (see Islam in Ecuador), Buddhists and Bah . According to their own estimates, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accounts for about 1.4% of the population, or 211,165 members at the end of 2012.[157] According to their own sources, in 2017 there were 92,752 Jehovah's Witnesses in the country.[158]
The first Jews arrived in Ecuador in the 16th and 17th centuries. Many of them are Sephardic Anusim (Crypto-Jews) and many still speak Judaeo-Spanish (Ladino) language.[159][citation needed] Today the Jewish Community of Ecuador (Comunidad Jud a del Ecuador) has its seat in Quito and has approximately 200 members. Nevertheless, this number is declining because young people leave the country for the United States or Israel. The Community has a Jewish Center with a synagogue, a country club, and a cemetery. It supports the "Albert Einstein School", where Jewish history, religion, and Hebrew classes are offered. There are very small communities in Cuenca. The "Comunidad de Culto Israelita" reunites the Jews of Guayaquil. This community works independently from the "Jewish Community of Ecuador" and is composed of only 30 people.[160]
Health[edit]
Main article: Health in Ecuador
 IESS Hospital in Latacunga
The current structure of the Ecuadorian public health care system dates back to 1967.[161][162] The Ministry of the Public Health (Ministerio de Salud P blica del Ecuador) is the responsible entity of the regulation and creation of the public health policies and health care plans. The Minister of Public Health is appointed directly by the President of the Republic. The current minister, or Ecuadorian general surgeon, is Ximena Garz n.
The philosophy of the Ministry of Public Health is the social support and service to the most vulnerable population,[163] and its main plan of action lies around communitarian health and preventive medicine.[163] Many USA medical groups often visit regions away from the big cities to provide medical health to poor communities at their own expenses. It is known as medical missions some are Christian Organizations.
The public healthcare system allows patients to be treated without an appointment in public general hospitals by general practitioners and specialists in the outpatient clinic (Consulta Externa) at no cost. This is done in the four basic specialties of pediatric, gynecology, clinic medicine, and surgery.[164] There are also public hospitals specialized to treat chronic diseases, target a particular group of the population, or provide better treatment in some medical specialties. Some examples in this group are the Gynecologic Hospitals, or Maternities, Children Hospitals, Geriatric Hospitals, and Oncology Institutes.
Although well-equipped general hospitals are found in the major cities or capitals of provinces, there are basic hospitals in the smaller towns and canton cities for family care consultation and treatments in pediatrics, gynecology, clinical medicine, and surgery.[164]
Community health care centers (Centros de Salud) are found inside metropolitan areas of cities and in rural areas. These are day hospitals that provide treatment to patients whose hospitalization is under 24 hours.[164]
The doctors assigned to rural communities, where the Amerindian population can be substantial, have small clinics under their responsibility for the treatment of patients in the same fashion as the day hospitals in the major cities. The treatment in this case respects the culture of the community.[164]
The public healthcare system should not be confused with the Ecuadorian Social Security healthcare service, which is dedicated to individuals with formal employment and who are affiliated obligatorily through their employers. Citizens with no formal employment may still contribute to the social security system voluntarily and have access to the medical services rendered by the social security system. The Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security (IESS) has several major hospitals and medical sub-centers under its administration across the nation.[165]
Ecuador currently ranks 20, in most efficient health care countries, compared to 111 back in the year 2000.[166]  Ecuadorians have a life expectancy of 77.1 years.[167] The infant mortality rate is 13 per 1,000 live births,[168] a major improvement from approximately 76 in the early 1980s and 140 in 1950.[169] 23% of children under five are chronically malnourished.[168] Population in some rural areas have no access to potable water, and its supply is provided by mean of water tankers. There are 686 malaria cases per 100,000 people.[170] Basic health care, including doctor's visits, basic surgeries, and basic medications, has been provided free since 2008.[168] However, some public hospitals are in poor condition and often lack necessary supplies to attend the high demand of patients. Private hospitals and clinics are well equipped but still expensive for the majority of the population.
Between 2008 and 2016, new public hospitals have been built, the number of civil servants has increased significantly and salaries have been increased. In 2008, the government introduced universal and compulsory social security coverage. In 2015, corruption remains a problem. Overbilling is recorded in 20% of public establishments and in 80% of private establishments.[171]
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Ecuador
 The oldest observatory in South America is the Quito Astronomical Observatory, founded in 1873 and located in Quito, Ecuador. The Quito Astronomical Observatory is managed by the National Polytechnic School.[172]
The Ecuadorian Constitution requires that all children attend school until they achieve a "basic level of education", which is estimated at nine school years.[173] In 1996, the net primary enrollment rate was 96.9%, and 71.8% of children stayed in school until the fifth grade / age 10.[173] The cost of primary and secondary education is borne by the government, but families often face significant additional expenses such as fees and transportation costs.[173]
Provision of public schools falls far below the levels needed, and class sizes are often very large, and families of limited means often find it necessary to pay for education.[174] In rural areas, only 10% of the children go on to high school.[175] In a 2015 report, The Ministry of Education states that in 2014 the mean number of school years completed in rural areas is 7.39 as compared to 10.86 in urban areas.[176]
Nations[edit]
Main article: Indigenous peoples in Ecuador
Ethnic groups in Ecuador[177]
Ethnic group
percent
Mestizo  (mixed Amerindian and White)
 
 71.9%
Montubio (coastal Mestizos) 
 
7.4%
Amerindian
 
7%
White 
 
6.1%
Afro Ecuadorian 
 
4.3%
Mulato 
 
1.9%
Black 
 
1%
Other 
 
0.4%
The Ecuadorian constitution recognizes the pluri-nationality of those who want to exercise their affiliation with their native ethnic groups. Thus, in addition to criollos, mestizos, and Afro-Ecuadorians, some people belong to the Amerindian nations scattered in a few places in the coast, Quechua Andean villages, and the Amazonian jungle.
Population genetics[edit]
According to genealogical DNA testing done in 2015, the average Ecuadorian is estimated to be 52.96% Amerindian, 41.77% European, and 5.26% Sub-Saharan African overall.[178] Prior to this, a genetic study done in 2008 by the University of Brasilia, estimated that Ecuadorian genetic admixture was 64.6% Amerindian, 31.0% European, and 4.4% African.[179]
Largest cities[edit]
The five largest cities in the country are Quito (2.78 million inhabitants), Guayaquil (2.72 million inhabitants), Cuenca (636,996 inhabitants), Santo Domingo (458,580 inhabitants), and Ambato (387,309 inhabitants). The most populated metropolitan areas of the country are those of Guayaquil, Quito, Cuenca, Manab  Centro (Portoviejo-Manta) and Ambato.[180]
  Largest cities or towns in EcuadorAccording to the 2020 population projections[1]
Rank
Name
Province
Pop.
Rank
Name
Province
Pop.
QuitoGuayaquil
1
Quito
Pichincha
2,781,641
11
Riobamba
Chimborazo
264,048
CuencaSanto Domingo
2
Guayaquil
Guayas
2,723,665
12
Ibarra
Imbabura
221,149
3
Cuenca
Azuay
636,996
13
Esmeraldas
Esmeraldas
218,727
4
Santo Domingo
Santo Domingo
458,580
14
Quevedo
Los R os
213,842
5
Ambato
Tungurahua
387,309
15
Latacunga
Cotopaxi
205,624
6
Portoviejo
Manab 
321,800
16
Milagro
Guayas
199,835
7
Dur n
Guayas
315,724
17
Santa Elena
Santa Elena
188,821
8
Machala
El Oro
289,141
18
Babahoyo
Los R os
175,281
9
Loja
Loja
274,112
19
Daule
Guayas
173,684
10
Manta
Manab 
264,281
20
Quinind 
Esmeraldas
145,879
Immigration and emigration[edit]
See also: Emigration from Ecuador
Ecuador houses a small East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.[2]
In the early years of World War II, Ecuador still admitted a certain number of immigrants, and in 1939, when several South American countries refused to accept 165 Jewish refugees from Germany aboard the ship Koenigstein, Ecuador granted them entry permits.[181]
Migration from Lebanon to Ecuador started as early as 1875.[182] Early impoverished migrants tended to work as independent sidewalk vendors, rather than as wage workers in agriculture or others' businesses.[183] Though they emigrated to escape Ottoman Turkish religious oppression, they were called "Turks" by Ecuadorians because they carried Ottoman passports.[184] There were further waves of immigration in the first half of the 20th century; by 1930, there were 577 Lebanese immigrants and 489 of their descendants residing in the country. A 1986 estimate from Lebanon's Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated 100,000 Lebanese descendants.[185] They reside mostly in Quito and Guayaquil. They are predominantly of the Christian Catholic faith.
In the early 1900s there was immigration from Italians, Germans, Portuguese, French, Britons, Irish and Greeks. The town of Anc n experienced of wave of immigration from the UK starting in 1911, when the Government of Ecuador conceded 98 mines, occupying an area of 38,842 hectares, to the British oil company Anglo Ecuadorian Oilfields. Today, the Anglo American Oilfields or Anglo American plc is the world's largest producer of platinum, with around 40% of world output, as well as being a major producer of diamonds, copper, nickel, iron ore and steelmaking coal. Alberto Spencer is one famed Briton that hailed from Ancon. The town has now become an attraction due to the austere British homes in "El Barrio Ingles" situated in a contrasting tropical setting.[186][187]
In the 1950s the Italians were the third largest national group in terms of numbers of immigrants. It can be noted that, after World War I, people from Liguria, still constituted the majority of the flow, even though they then represented only one third of the total number of immigrants in Ecuador. This situation came from the improvement of the economic situation in Liguria. The classic paradigm of the Italian immigrant today was not that of the small trader from Liguria as it had been before; those who emigrated to Ecuador were professionals and technicians, employees and religious people from South-Central Italy. It must be remembered that many immigrants, a remarkable number of Italians among them, moved to the Ecuadorian port from Peru to escape from the Peruvian war with Chile. The Italian government came to be more interested in the emigration phenomenon in Ecuador because of the necessity of finding an outlet for the large number of immigrants who traditionally went to the United States but who could no longer enter this country because of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 that restricted immigration of Southern and Eastern Europeans as well as other "undesirables."
Most of these communities and their descendants are located in the Guayas region of the country.[188]
Throughout the 20th century, immigration also came from other Latin American countries due to civil wars, economic crises, and dictatorships. The most notable are those coming from Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay.
Starting from 2002, there has been an exponential and significant growth in Colombian and Venezuelan refugees. Colombians have historically found refuge in its neighboring country during times of civil unrest. Recently, Venezuelans have become a notable presence in Ecuadorian cities as many flee the economic and political Venezuelan crisis. Authorities argue that an estimated 350,000 to 400,000 Colombians live in Ecuador, porous borders and lack of formal registration disallow concrete numbers.[189]
From 2007, the Ecuador government created multiple initiatives to attract Ecuadorians abroad mostly from the United States, Italy, and Spain to return after many left during the 90s economic crisis or La Decada Perdida. These policies resulted in the a rapid and significant rise in the flow of returning nationals, most notably during the 2008 economic crisis that affected Europe and North America.[190][191]
In recent years, Ecuador has grown in popularity among North American expatriates.[192]
Perks that draws many expats to Ecuador is its low cost of living, the low crime rate, and the unique culture of the highlands. Everything from gas to groceries costs far less than in North America, making it a popular choice for those who are looking to make the most of their retirement budget. Swiss style chalets and Spanish colonial homes can be found peering over the meandering green valleys of the Andes.[193]
Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of Ecuador
 Ca ari children with the typical Andean indigenous clothes
Ecuador's mainstream culture is defined by its mestizo majority, and, like their ancestry, it is traditionally of Spanish heritage, influenced in different degrees by Amerindian traditions and in some cases by African elements. The first and most substantial wave of modern immigration to Ecuador consisted of Spanish colonists, following the arrival of Europeans in 1499. A lower number of other Europeans and North Americans migrated to the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and, in smaller numbers, Poles, Lithuanians, English, Irish, and Croats during and after the Second World War.
 Huaorani man with the typical Amazonian indigenous clothes
Since African slavery was not the workforce of the Spanish colonies in the Andes Mountains, given the subjugation of the Amerindian people through proselytization and encomiendas, the minority population of African descent is mostly found in the coastal northern province of Esmeraldas. This is largely owing to the 17th-century shipwreck of a slave-trading galleon off the northern coast of Ecuador. The few African survivors swam to the shore and penetrated the then-thick jungle under the leadership of Anton, the chief of the group, where they remained as free men maintaining their original culture, not influenced by the typical elements found in other provinces of the coast or in the Andean region. A little later, freed slaves from Colombia known as cimarrones joined them. In the small Chota Valley of the province of Imbabura exists a small community of Africans among the province's predominantly mestizo population. These blacks are descendants of Africans, who were brought over from Colombia by Jesuits to work their colonial sugar plantations as slaves. As a general rule, small elements of zambos and mulattoes coexisted among the overwhelming mestizo population of coastal Ecuador throughout its history as gold miners in Loja, Zaruma, and Zamora and as shipbuilders and plantation workers around the city of Guayaquil. Today you can find a small community of Africans in the Catamayo valley of the predominantly mestizo population of Loja.
Ecuador's Amerindian communities are integrated into the mainstream culture to varying degrees,[194] but some may also practice their own native cultures, particularly the more remote Amerindian communities of the Amazon basin. Spanish is spoken as the first language by more than 90% of the population and as a first or second language by more than 98%. Part of Ecuador's population can speak Amerindian languages, in some cases as a second language. Two percent of the population speak only Amerindian languages.
Language[edit]
Main article: Languages of Ecuador
Languages in Ecuador[177]
Language
percent
Spanish (Castilian) 
 
 93%
Kichwa 
 
4.1%
Foreign  
 
 2.2%
Other Indigenous 
 
0.7%
Spanish is the official and most commonly spoken language in Ecuador. Northern Kichwa and other pre-colonial American languages are spoken by 2,500,000. Ethnologues estimate that the country has about 24 living indigenous languages. Among the 24 are Awapit (spoken by the Aw ), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Shuar Chicham (spoken by the Shuar), Achuar-Shiwiar (spoken by the Achuar and the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsa'fiki (spoken by the Ts chila), Paicoca (spoken by the Siona and Secoya), and Wao Tededeo (spoken by the Waorani). Use of these Amerindian languages is, however, gradually diminishing due to Spanish's widespread use in education. 
Most Ecuadorians speak Spanish as their first language, with its ubiquity permeating and dominating most of the country. Despite its small size the country has a marked diversity in Spanish accents that vary widely among regions. Ecuadorian Spanish idiosyncrasies reflect the ethnic and racial populations that originated and settled the distinct areas of the country. 
The three main regional variants are:
Equatorial Pacific Spanish or Equatorial Coastal Spanish
Andean Spanish
Amazonic Spanish
Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Ecuador
The music of Ecuador has a long history. Pasillo is a genre of indigenous Latin music. In Ecuador it is the "national genre of music". Through the years, many cultures have brought their influences together to create new types of music. There are also different kinds of traditional music like albazo, pasacalle, fox incaico, tonada, capishca, Bomba (highly established in Afro-Ecuadorian societies), and so on. Tecnocumbia and Rockola are clear examples of the influence of foreign cultures. One of the most traditional forms of dancing in Ecuador is Sanjuanito. It is originally from northern Ecuador (Otavalo-Imbabura). Sanjuanito is a type of dance music played during festivities by the mestizo and Amerindian communities. According to the Ecuadorian musicologist Segundo Luis Moreno, Sanjuanito was danced by Amerindian people during San Juan Bautista's birthday. This important date was established by the Spaniards on 24 June, coincidentally the same date when Amerindian people celebrated their rituals of Inti Raymi.
Cuisine[edit]
See also: List of Ecuadorian dishes and foods
Ceviche ecuatoriano (Ecuadorian-style ceviche) and Cuy asado (grilled guinea pig) are some of the typical dishes.
Ecuadorian cuisine is diverse, varying with the altitude, associated agricultural conditions, and ethnic / racial communities. Most regions in Ecuador follow the traditional three-course meal of soup, a course that includes rice and a protein, and then dessert and coffee to finish.
In the coastal region, seafood is very popular, with fish, shrimp, and ceviche being an integral part of the diet. Beef is also notably consumed in the coastal region, traditional dishes are churrasco and arroz con menestra y carne asada (rice with beans and grilled beef) served with fried plantain. The latter is an emblematic dish of the city of Guayaquil. Meat based dishes have their origins in the cattle ranching culture of the Montubio people.
Ceviche is an indispensable coastal dish with pre-incan origins. It is often served with fried plantain (chifles or patacones), popcorn, or tostado. Plantain- and peanut-based dishes are quite frequent in the coastal region reflecting the West African roots of many of its citizens. Encocados (dishes that contain a coconut sauce) are also very popular in the northern coast centering around the city of Esmeraldas. The coast is also a leading producer of bananas, cocoa beans (to make chocolate), shrimp, tilapia, mango, and passion fruit, among other products.[citation needed]
Pan de yuca analogous with the Brazilian p o de queijo is served with "yogur persa" is often eaten as a snack in many coastal cities. Its origin comes from the Persian and Middle Eastern populations that settled the coast. [195]
In the highland region, various dishes of pork, chicken, and cuy (guinea pig)[196] are popular and are served with a variety of grains (especially rice and mote) or potatoes.[197] The consumption of "Cuy" or Guinea Pig, de rigueur in mostly indigenous communities, reflects the predominately native character of the highlands. Considered a delicacy it is often characterized as having a mild pork flavor. 
In the Amazon region, a dietary staple is the yuca, elsewhere called cassava. Many fruits are available in this region, including bananas, tree grapes, and peach palms.[198]
Literature[edit]
 Juan Montalvo
Early literature in colonial Ecuador, as in the rest of Spanish America, was influenced by the Spanish Golden Age. One of the earliest examples is Jacinto Collahuazo,[199] an Amerindian chief of a northern village in today's Ibarra, born in the late 1600s. Despite the early repression and discrimination of the native people by the Spanish, Collahuazo learned to read and write in Castilian, but his work was written in Quechua. The use of Quipu was banned by the Spanish,[200] and in order to preserve their work, many Inca poets had to resort to the use of the Latin alphabet to write in their native Quechua language. The history behind the Inca drama "Ollantay", the oldest literary piece in existence for any Amerindian language in America,[201] shares some similarities with the work of Collahuazo. Collahuazo was imprisoned and all of his work burned. The existence of his literary work came to light many centuries later, when a crew of masons was restoring the walls of a colonial church in Quito and found a hidden manuscript. The salvaged fragment is a Spanish translation from Quechua of the "Elegy to the Dead of Atahualpa",[199] a poem written by Collahuazo, which describes the sadness and impotence of the Inca people of having lost their king Atahualpa.
Other early Ecuadorian writers include the Jesuits Juan Bautista Aguirre, born in Daule in 1725, and Father Juan de Velasco, born in Riobamba in 1727. De Velasco wrote about the nations and chiefdoms that had existed in the Kingdom of Quito (today Ecuador) before the arrival of the Spanish. His historical accounts are nationalistic, featuring a romantic perspective of precolonial history.
Famous authors from the late colonial and early republic period include Eugenio Espejo, a printer and main author of the first newspaper in Ecuadorian colonial times; Jose Joaquin de Olmedo (born in Guayaquil), famous for his ode to Sim n Bol var titled Victoria de Junin; Juan Montalvo, a prominent essayist and novelist; Juan Leon Mera, famous for his work "Cumanda" or "Tragedy among Savages" and the Ecuadorian National Anthem; Juan A. Martinez with A la Costa; Dolores Veintimilla;[202] and others.
Contemporary Ecuadorian writers include the novelist Jorge Enrique Adoum; the poet Jorge Carrera Andrade; the essayist Benjam n Carri n; the poets Medardo Angel Silva, Jorge Carrera Andrade, and Luis Alberto Costales; the novelist Enrique Gil Gilbert; the novelist Jorge Icaza (author of the novel Huasipungo, translated to many languages); the short story author Pablo Palacio; and the novelist Alicia Yanez Cossio.
In spite of Ecuador's considerable mystique, it is rarely featured as a setting in contemporary western literature. One exception is "The Ecuadorian Deception", a murder mystery/thriller authored by American Bear Mills. In it, George d'Hout, a website designer from the United States is lured under false pretenses to Guayaquil. A corrupt American archaeologist is behind the plot, believing d'Hout holds the keys to locating a treasure hidden by a buccaneer ancestor. The story is based on a real pirate by the name of George d'Hout who terrorized Guayaquil in the 16th Century.
Art[edit]
 Ecuador has a wide repertoire of colonial art in its churches and museums, like this: "Yapanga from Quito in a suit worn by this class of women who try to please" (1783) by Vicente Alb n.[203]
The best known art styles from Ecuador belonged to the Escuela Quite a (Quito School), which developed from the 16th to 18th centuries, examples of which are on display in various old churches in Quito. Ecuadorian painters include Eduardo Kingman, Oswaldo Guayasam n, and Camilo Egas from the Indiginist Movement; Manuel Rendon, Jaime Zapata, Enrique T bara, An bal Villac s, Theo Constant , Luis Molinari, Araceli Gilbert, Judith Gutierrez, F lix Arauz, and Estuardo Maldonado from the Informalist Movement; Teddy Cobe a from expressionism and figurative style[204][205][206] and Luis Burgos Flor with his abstract, futuristic style. The Amerindian people of Tigua, Ecuador, are also world-renowned for their traditional paintings.[207]
Sports[edit]
Main article: Sport in Ecuador
 Estadio Monumental Isidro Romero Carbo of Guayaquil
The most popular sport in Ecuador, as in most South American countries, is football. Its best known professional teams include; Emelec from Guayaquil, Liga De Quito from Quito; Barcelona S.C. from Guayaquil, the most popular team in Ecuador, also the team with most local championships; Deportivo Quito, and El Nacional from Quito; Olmedo from Riobamba; and Deportivo Cuenca from Cuenca. Currently the most successful football team in Ecuador is LDU Quito, and it is the only Ecuadorian team that has won the Copa Libertadores, the Copa Sudamericana, and the Recopa Sudamericana; they were also runners-up in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup. The matches of the Ecuador national team are the most-watched sporting events in the country.[citation needed] The Estadio Monumental Isidro Romero Carbo is the tenth largest football stadium in South America.
The Ecuador national football team has appeared at four FIFA World Cups, the world's premier football tournament for national football teams. Ecuador's first participation in the World Cup was in 2002. Their best performance was in 2006, where they were eliminated in the round of 16. Ecuador has qualified for the final rounds of the 2002, the 2006, the 2014, & the 2022 FIFA World Cups. The 2002 FIFA World Cup qualifying campaign was considered a huge success for the country and its inhabitants.[citation needed] Ecuador finished in second place in the CONMEBOL qualifiers behind Argentina and above the team that would become World Champions, Brazil. In the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Ecuador finished ahead of Poland and Costa Rica finishing second behind Germany in Group A in the 2006 World Cup. They were defeated by England in the second round.
Jefferson P rez, former 20-km (12 mi) racewalker Jefferson P rez, won a gold medal at the 1996 games, and a silver medal at the 12 years later. P rez also set a world best in the 2003 World Championships of 1:17:21 for the 20-km (12 mi) distance.[208]
Richard Carapaz became the first Ecuadorian to win a Grand Tour, as well as the first Ecuadorian cyclist to win an Olympic medal. He won the 2019 Giro d'Italia, and a gold medal at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics in the men's individual road race.[209] as well as the road race at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo (postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic).[210]
See also[edit]
Ecuador portalLatin America portal
Index of Ecuador-related articles
Outline of Ecuador
References[edit]
^ a b "Proyecciones Poblacionales". (in Spanish). National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INEC). Archived from the original on 18 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2020.
^ a b c d e f "Ecuador". The World Factbook. Retrieved 18 August 2011.
^ "Constituci n Pol tica de la Rep blica del Ecuador". Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ a b EL UNIVERSO (2 September 2011). "Poblaci n del pa s es joven y mestiza, dice censo del INEC   Data from the national census 2010 (2011-09-02)". El Universo. Archived from the original on 24 September 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Religion affiliations in Ecuador 2020".
^ Espa a (1 January 1841). "Tratado de paz y amistad celebrado entre Espa a y la Rep blica del Ecuador: en 16 de febrero de 1840". en la Imprenta Nacional. Archived from the original on 16 November 2016. Retrieved 25 July 2016   via Google Books.
^ "Ecuador". Central Intelligence Agency. 27 February 2023   via CIA.gov.
^ "Ecuador". The World Factbook (2023 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 24 September 2022.
^ "Inicio". www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec.
^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, 30 November 2022". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022.
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 14 September 2022.
^ "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022.
^ "Constituci n de la Rep blica del Ecuador en Shuar". Issuu. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 21 February 2019.
^ " Iniuri seamkur!, Ayamrumamu nuy  Iniankasrik Ayamruma Papi" (PDF). INREDH. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2019. Retrieved 21 February 2019.
^ "Chicham atiakur metek atin turakur, p nke takakainiachu tuke enentaimtusartiniaitji" (PDF). (in Shuar). Secretar a Nacional de Planificaci n y Desarrollo. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2019.
^ Pellizzaro, Siro M.; N wech, F usto Oswaldo (2003). Chicham: Dictionario Enciclop dico Shuar-Castellano. Wea Nekaptai.
^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 29 September 2019.
^ a b "South America Banks on Regional Strategy to Safeguard Quarter of Earth's Biodiversity". Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 26 July 2012.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link), Conservation.org (16 September 2003).
^ "Oficialmente Ecuador es el pa s de las orqu deas- Noticias de Cuenca   Azuay   Ecuador   Eltiempo de Cuenca". Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Ecuador Adopts New Constitution   With CELDF RIGHTS of NATURE Language". Archived from the original on 3 October 2008. Retrieved 30 September 2008.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link), Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ "Decade of Reform: Ecuador's Macroeconomic Policies, Institutional Changes, and Results" (PDF). Retrieved 17 January 2020.
^ Ferdon, Edwin N. (24 June 1966). "The Prehistoric Culture of Ecuador: Early Formative Period of Coastal Ecuador: The Valdivia and Machalilla Phases . Betty J. Meggers, Clifford Evans, and Emilio Estrada. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., 1965. 452 pp., $6.75". Science. 152 (3730): 1731 1732. doi:10.1126/science.152.3730.1731. ISSN 0036-8075.
^ "Valdivia Figurines". Metropolitan Museum of Art. October 2004. Retrieved 29 June 2022.
^ Meggers, Betty J.; Evans, Clifford; Estrada, Emilio (1965). "Early Formative Period of Coastal Ecuador: The Valdivia and Machalilla Phases". Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology: 1 234. doi:10.5479/si.00810223.1.1. hdl:10088/19154. Retrieved 29 June 2022.
^ "Quito History - Culture, Religion and Lifestyle in Quito". www.quito.com. Retrieved 25 July 2022.
^ Sandoval, Jos  R.; Lacerda, Daniela R.; Jota, Marilza M. S.; Robles-Ruiz, Paulo; Danos, Pierina; Paz-y-Mi o, C sar; Wells, Spencer; Santos, Fabr cio R.; Fujita, Ricardo (10 September 2020). "Tracing the genetic history of the 'Ca aris' from Ecuador and Peru using uniparental DNA markers". BMC Genomics. 21 (Suppl 7): 413. doi:10.1186/s12864-020-06834-1. PMC 7488242. PMID 32912150.
^ Lavilla, E.O. (2004). "Under the Southern Cross: Stories around Humboldt and Bonpland's trip to the New Continent" (PDF). Latin American Applied Research. 34: 203 208. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 22 August 2010.
^ "Ecuador en el d a de la Independencia nacional". El Tel grafo (in European Spanish). 10 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2018. Retrieved 8 August 2018.
^ "Gal pagos celebra un a o m s de provincializaci n" (in Spanish). Presidencia de la Rep blica del Ecuador. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2021.
^ "Assessment for Blacks in Ecuador". CIDCM. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012.
^ Zook, David H. (1964). Zarumilla-Mara n: the Ecuador-Peru dispute (First ed.). New York: New York, Bookman Associates. pp. 15 36.
^ Roos, Wilma and van Renterghem, Omer Ecuador, New York, 2000, p.5.
^ a b "Uppsala Conflict Data Program   Conflict Encyclopedia, General Conflict Information, Conflict name: Ecuador   Peru, In depth, Background to the 1995 fighting and Ecuador and Peru engage in armed conflict". Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 15 July 2013.
^ Apology Of An Economic Hitman (2010), retrieved 21 September 2021
^ "Outsourcing the Money Supply".
^ "Ecuador's one and only official currency is the US Dollar". People Places and Thoughts.
^ "Ecuador Congress ousts president". www.aljazeera.com.
^ Forero, Juan (22 April 2005). "Ecuador's New Chief Picks Cabinet; Leftist in Economic Post". The New York Times.
^ "Leftist rolling to victory in Ecuador's presidential race". Los Angeles Times. 27 November 2006.
^ "Ecuador's new president sworn in". www.aljazeera.com.
^ "Ecuador referendum endorses new socialist constitution". The Guardian. 29 September 2008.
^ "Avenger against oligarchy" wins in Ecuador The Real News, 27 April 2009.
^ Romero, Simon (April 27, 2009). "Ecuador Re-elects President, Preliminary Results Show". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 27, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
^ "Most Popular E-mail Newsletter". USA Today. May 7, 2011. Archived from the original on September 22, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2017.
^ "Public spending fuels Ecuador leader's popularity". Voxxi.com. 25 January 2012. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2012.
^ "Correa's and Ecuador's Success drive The Economist Nuts" Archived 16 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. New Economic Perspectives.
^ 
Correa wins re-election and says banks and mass media don't rule anymore Archived 18 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Real News. 19 February 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014. 
"Unemployment hit a record low of 4.1 percent at the end of last year. Poverty's down about 27 percent since he took office".   Mark Weisbrot, co-director of Center for Economic and Policy Research
^ In August 2018, Ecuador withdrew from Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (Alba), a regional bloc of leftwing governments led by Venezuela.
^ " quateur : Len n Moreno et le n olib ralisme par surprise   Europe Solidaire Sans Fronti res". www.europe-solidaire.org.
^ "Ecuador, Venezuela sever diplomatic ties due to improper accusations".
^ "Trump Receives Ecuadorian President Len n Moreno". 13 February 2020.
^ "Outcry as Ecuador allows US military to use Galapagos airstrip". 18 June 2019.
^ "Protesters move into Ecuador's capital; president moves out". ABC News. Retrieved 10 October 2019.
^ Kueffner, tephan (10 October 2019). "Ecuador Government Returns to Capital Amid National Strike". Bloomberg. Retrieved 10 October 2019.
^ "Ecuador repeals law ending fuel subsidies in deal to stop protests". BBC News. 14 October 2019.
^ "Guillermo Lasso: Conservative ex-banker elected Ecuador president". BBC News. 12 April 2021.
^ "Lasso inaugurated as first right-wing Ecuador president in 14 years". France24. Agence France Presse. 24 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2021.
^ Garc a, Alberto (16 April 2021). "Len n Moreno's legacy to Guillermo Lasso in Ecuador". Atalayar.com. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2021.
^ "Ecuador president declares state of emergency over drug violence". www.aljazeera.com.
^ "Drug capo among 16 dead in bloody Ecuador prison riot". Washington Post.
^ ""El partido del presidente Lasso ha tenido un desempe o muy deficiente", dice analista". CNN Espa ol. Archived from the original on 3 March 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2023.
^ "Compulsory Voting". Archived from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2012.
^ Horvitz, Leslie Ann; Catherwood, Christopher (2006). Encyclopedia of War Crimes and Genocide. Infobase. p. 137.
^ a b c d e f "World Report 2013: Ecuador". Ecuador. WORLD REPORT 2013, Human Rights Watch. 10 January 2013. pp. 1 3. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Democracy in Ecuador". The New York Times. 5 February 2012. Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
^ Reforma judicial en Ecuador debe hacerse hasta el 2015, diariodigitalcentro.com
^ "Ecuador". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2021.
^ "Ecuador: UN torture prevention body remains seriously concerned by prison crisis after second visit". OHCHR. Retrieved 6 October 2022.
^ Stephan Kueffner & Peter Millard, OPEC Suffers Another Departure With Ecuador Seeking More Cash, Bloomberg News (2 October 2019).
^ Alexandra Valencia, Ecuador to quit OPEC in 2020 in search of bigger export revenue, Reuters (1 October 2019).
^ "Ley Org nica de Movilidad Humana" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
^ "Ecuador Launches New Human Mobility National Plan". 8 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 August 2018. Retrieved 28 August 2018.
^ "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament  No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons". United Nations Treaty Collection. 7 July 2017.
^ "Uruguayan government withdraws from UNASUR and returns to TIAR". 11 March 2020.
^ La poblaci n corresponde al [1].
^ "Niveles administrativos de planificaci n". Secretar a Nacional de Planificaci n y Desarrollo. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
^ "Regi n 4   Santo Domingo, Manab  y Gal pagos". Ministry of Production, Employment and Competitiveness Coordination. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 20 February 2012.
^ "Ecuador: A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America / 2008 Edition". ccmr.org. Archived from the original on 6 May 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2010.
^ History of the "Escuela Superior Militar Eloy Alfaro" Archived 19 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Armada del Ecuador". Armada del Ecuador. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017.
^ "History of the 'Escuela Superior Militar de Aviacion Cosme Rennella'". Esmafae.mil.ec. Archived from the original on 20 December 2011. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ Todd, Ian (1974). Island Realm: A Pacific Panorama. Angus & Robertson. p. 190. ISBN 9780207127618. Retrieved 2 February 2022. [we] can further define the word culture to mean language. Thus we have the French language part of Oceania, the Spanish part and the Japanese part. The Japanese culture groups of Oceania are the Bonin Islands, the Marcus Islands and the Volcano Islands. These three clusters, lying south and south-east of Japan, are inhabited either by Japanese or by people who have now completely fused with the Japanese race. Therefore they will not be taken into account in the proposed comparison of the policies of non   Oceanic cultures towards Oceanic peoples. On the eastern side of the Pacific are a number of Spanish language culture groups of islands. Two of them, the Galapagos and Easter Island, have been dealt with as separate chapters in this volume. Only one of the dozen or so Spanish culture island groups of Oceania has an Oceanic population   the Polynesians of Easter Island. The rest are either uninhabited or have a Spanish   Latin   American population consisting of people who migrated from the mainland. Therefore, the comparisons which follow refer almost exclusively to the English and French language cultures.
^ Review of the Protected Areas System in Oceania (PDF). International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. 1986. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Easter Island on the east has been included on the basis of its Polynesian and biogeographic affinities even though it is politically apart. The other islands of the eastern Pacific (Galapagos, Juan Fernandez, etc.) have sometimes been included in Oceania.
^ Hull, Frank M. (1937). A Check List of the Syrphidae of Oceania (PDF). Department of Biology, University of Missouri. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Oceania is primarily considered as the restricted region treated in this paper, but for comparative purposes, in the table only, it is also considered in a broad sense as including New Guinea, Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, the Antipodes, and Galapagos.
^ Eckert, Scott A.; Alvarado, Javier; Balazs, George H.; Byles, Richard; C. Craig, Peter; Dutton, Peter Howard; L. Eckert, Karen; Engbring, John; Maragos, James E.; Pultz, Susan; Richardson, James Ingram (1998). Recovery Plan for U.S. Pacific Populations of the Hawksbill Turtle (Eretmochelys Imbricata). U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service. p. 7. Foraging hawksbills have been reported from virtually all of the island groups of Oceania, from the Galapagos Islands in the eastern Pacific to the Republic of Palau in the western Pacific.
^ Bequaert, Joseph C. (1941). The Hippoboscidae of Oceania (PDF). Harvard Medical School. Retrieved 24 January 2022. In the present taxonomic study of the Hippoboscidae, Oceania covers, rather arbitrarily, the many archipelagos and isolated islands scattered throughout the Pacific Ocean, from the Marianas and Caroline Islands, the Bismarck Archipelago, the Solomon Islands and New Caledonia to the Hawaiian islands and the Galapagos.
^ King, Frank P. (1976). Oceania and Beyond: Essays on the Pacific Since 1945. Greenwood Press. pp. 20 21. ISBN 9780837189048. Retrieved 7 February 2022. It is clear that since World War II, Britain, in contrast to France and the United States (and one might say Chile and Ecuador, which hold, respectively, Easter Island and the Galapagos Islands), conceived of Oceania as a region of sovereign nations living in a spirit of commonwealth.
^ Aldrich, Robert (1993). France and the South Pacific Since 1940. University of Hawaii Press. p. 347. ISBN 9780824815585. Retrieved 18 February 2022. Britain's high commissioner in New Zealand continues to administer Pitcairn, and the other former British colonies remain members of the Commonwealth of Nations, recognizing the British Queen as their titular head of state and vesting certain residual powers  in the British government or the Queen's representative in the islands. Australia did not cede control of the Torres Strait Islands, inhabited by a Melanesian population, or Lord Howe and Norfolk Island, whose residents are of European ancestry. New Zealand retains indirect rule over Niue and Tokelau and has kept close relations with another former possession, the Cook Islands, through a compact of free association. Chile rules Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and Ecuador rules the Galapagos Islands. The Aboriginals of Australia, the Maoris of New Zealand and the native Polynesians of Hawaii, despite movements demanding more cultural recognition, greater economic and political considerations or even outright sovereignty, have remained minorities in countries where massive waves of migration have completely changed society. In short, Oceania has remained one of the least completely decolonized regions on the globe.
^ Dowl, Aimee (2010). Ecuador and the Gal pagos Islands. p. 53.
^ Carvajal, Ana Mar a (10 de enero de 2019).  Quito se convirti  en la ciudad m s poblada del Ecuador con m s de 3 millones de habitantes en el 2018 . El Comercio. Consultado el 11 de enero de 2019.
^  Quito es ahora la ciudad m s poblada de Ecuador . El Tel grafo. 12 de enero de 2019. Archivado desde el original el 27 de marzo de 2019. Consultado el 12 de enero de 2019.
^ "En Equateur, "s'habituer   vivre sans glacier"".
^ a b c Plan Nacional del Buen Vivir[dead link], Objective 4, Diagnostic, Section "La Biodiversidad y Patrimonio Natural", 2008 (Spanish)
^ "Ecuador  Biodiversity Conservation" (PDF). USAID. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 March 2006.
^ "Unesco World Heritage". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 1 September 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2010.
^ "Ecuador's Constitution". Pdba.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on 17 February 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ Ministry of the environment of Ecuador, Protected Areas Archived 25 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine
^ Ministry of the environment, Sociobosque Program
^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity   Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.
^ Lemonick, Michael D. (30 October 1995). "Can the Galapagos Survive?". Time. Archived from the original on 4 February 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2010.
^ "European banks urged to stop funding oil trade in Amazon". The Guardian. 12 August 2020.
^ "Exclusive: European banks face indigenous calls to end Amazon oil trade". Reuters. 12 August 2020.
^ San Sebastian, M.; Hurtig, A. K. (2004). "Oil Exploitation in the Amazon Basin of Ecuador: A Public Health Emergency". Pan American Journal of Public Health. 15 (3): 205 11. doi:10.1590/S1020-49892004000300014. PMID 15096294.
^ "How the Environmental Lawyer Who Won a Massive Judgment Against Chevron Lost Everything". The Intercept. 29 January 2020.
^ Pigrau, Antoni (27 July 2014). "Revista Catalana de Dret Ambiental". The Texaco-Chevron Case in Ecuador: Law and Justice in the Age of Globalization.
^ Einhorn, Catrin (4 February 2022). "Ecuador Court Gives Indigenous Groups a Boost in Mining and Drilling Disputes". The New York Times. The New York Times. Retrieved 6 February 2022.
^ "Yahoo! Noticias Espa a   Los titulares de hoy". Yahoo Noticias Espa a. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Ecuador GDP Grew 4.3 Percent Average Per Year From 2007 to 2012 Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine. NAM News Network (NNN) (14 February 2013). Retrieved 24 April 2013.
^ "El Banco Central de Ecuador sit a el crecimiento del 2008 en m s del 6%". soitu.es. Archived from the original on 15 December 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Producto Interno Bruto (PIB)   Tasa de Crecimiento Real (%) Archived 24 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Indexmundi.com. Retrieved 28 January 2013.
^ Banco Central del Ecuador   Resumen de pib Archived 29 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Bce.fin.ec (11 July 2012). Retrieved 26 July 2012.
^ "Ecuador Inflation rate (consumer prices)   Economy". Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Gill, Nathan. (6 January 2012) Ecuadorian Inflation Accelerated to Three-Year High in 2011 Archived 2 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Bloomberg. Retrieved 21 August 2012.
^ "Ecuador en Cifras". Archived from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Comisi n Econ mica para Am rica Latina y el Caribe, CEPAL, Bases de Datos y Publicaciones Estad sticas "Tasa de desempleo". Archived 18 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 28 January 2013.
^ "New Paper Examines Ecuador's Success in Emerging from Economic Recession; Reducing Poverty and Unemployment   Press Releases". Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ a b Rebeca, Ray and Sara, Kozameh. (May 2012) Ecuador's Economy Since 2007 Archived 2 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. p. 15.
^ "Ecuador". Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Ecuador first-half trade surplus rises to $390 mln   Energy & Oil-Reuters". Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Oil Reserves". Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Valencia, Alexandra (13 December 2021). "Ecuador declares force majeure for oil exports, output due to erosion". Reuters. Retrieved 24 June 2022.
^ "Ecuador Resumes Oil Exports From Amazon as Fields Resume Pumping". Bloomberg.com. 6 January 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2022.
^ Ecuador: Evolucion de la Balanza Comercial Archived 17 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Banco Central del Ecuador (January February 2008).
^ "Bananas Exports by Country 2021". www.worldstopexports.com. Retrieved 24 June 2022.
^ "Downloads   Statistics   Production-Related Documents". Archived from the original on 20 September 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "The World Fact Book". Central Intelligence Agency [U.S.] Central Intelligence Agency [U.S.] Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017.
^ "Mapping for Results   Ecuador, Latin America & Caribbean". Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Ecuador Facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about Ecuador Archived 24 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 14 September 2012.
^ "Ranking 2010   Ranking completo". Archived from the original on 17 November 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ DUAL dmw. "Industrias en CUENCA". Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ South American Community Nations   Andean Community -CAN Archived 30 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Comunidadandina.org. Retrieved 21 August 2012.
^ "Profile: Mercosur   Common Market of the South". Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Which are its member countries? Archived 17 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine aladi.org
^ "UNASUR (South American organization)   Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Union of South American Nations". Archived from the original on 25 January 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Ecuador says pays off last debt with IMF". Reuters. 16 April 2007. Retrieved 3 February 2020.
^ "Chapter 1: Ecuador's Illegitimate Debt". www.cadtm.org. Retrieved 3 February 2020.
^ Ecuador ocupa el puesto 96 en innovaci n tecnol gica. elcomercio.com. 19 September 2013
^ "Global Innovation Index 2021". World Intellectual Property Organization. United Nations. Retrieved 5 March 2022.
^ "Release of the Global Innovation Index 2020: Who Will Finance Innovation?". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ "Global Innovation Index 2019". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ "RTD   Item". ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ Lavandera, J.R. (27 December 2009)."Jos  rodr guez lavandera, el inventor". Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2011.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) . expreso.ec
^ "Checkprogram press release". Eluniverso.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ "Nature Index   Top 10 institutions from Ecuador". 1 June 2019.
^ "City of Quito   UNESCO World Heritage". Whc.unesco.org. Archived from the original on 7 May 2009. Retrieved 30 April 2010.
^ David Grijalva. "News And Updates". Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Best airport in the world   2 5 million passengers   ASQ Awards". Archived from the original on 3 September 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Quito, Ecuador's New Airport   Gateway to the Gal pagos". Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "World Population Prospects 2022". population.un.org. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022.
^ "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX). population.un.org ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022.
^ "The Roma Gypsies of Colombia | Latino Life". Archived from the original on 9 April 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ "Religion in Latin America: Widespread Change in a Historically Catholic Region" (PDF). November 2014. Retrieved 17 December 2019.
^ (in Spanish) El 80% de ecuatorianos es cat lico Archived 11 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine. lahora.com.ec. 15 August 2012
^ (in Spanish) El 80% de los ecuatorianos afirma ser cat lico, seg n el INEC Archived 19 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine. eluniverso.com. 15 August 2012
^ "LDS Newsroom, Facts and Statistics, Ecuador". mormonnewsroom.org. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ 2017 Service Year Report of Jehovah's Witnesses
^ "The Lost Sephardic Tribes of Latin America". Greater Miami Jewish Federation Community Post. Archived from the original on 30 June 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ Poblaci n total 11,700,000 ~ Poblaci n jud a 1000. Congreso Jud o
^ Larrea, Julio. "25 A os de Vida Institucional", Imprenta del Ministerio de Salud Publica, Quito 2008.
^ "History of the Ministry of Public Health". Msp.gob.ec. Archived from the original on 17 March 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ a b "Program of the Ministry of Public Health   Ecuador". Msp.gob.ec. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ a b c d "Public health care network   Ministry of Public Health   Ecuador". Msp.gob.ec. Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ "Medical Services   Instituto Ecuatoriano de Seguridad Social". Iess.gob.ec. 19 February 2010. Archived from the original on 21 February 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012.
^ "Most Efficient Health Care: Countries   Bloomberg Best (and Worst)". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved March 6, 2017.
^ "Country Comparison: Life Expectancy at Birth". The World Factbook. CIA. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ a b c Olsont, David (19 September 2009). "Still in its infancy, Ecuador's free health care has growing pains | Special Reports". PE.com. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2010.
^  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Rex A. Hudson (1989). "Labor".  In Hanratty, Dennis M. (ed.). Ecuador: A country study. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. LCCN 91009494.
^ "Ecuador". Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 4 November 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). Fightingdiseases.org
^ Ramirez, Lo c. "La dif cil construcci n de la sanidad p blica en Ecuador". M moire des luttes (in French). Retrieved 28 June 2019.
^ "NASA Creating a Virtual Telescope with Two Small Spacecraft" Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. NASA.
^ a b c "Ecuador". The Department of Labor's 2001 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor. Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor. 2002. Archived from the original on 3 May 2010.
^ "The debate over private and public provisions of education | Capacity4dev". europa.eu. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
^ Ricardo, Gomez (31 July 2011). Libraries, Telecentres, Cybercafes and Public Access to ICT: International Comparisons: International Comparisons. IGI Global. ISBN 978-1-60960-772-2.
^ Ministerio de Educaci n del Ecuador (March 2015). "Estad stica Educativa, Reporte de indicadores" (PDF). 1 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2021. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ a b "Central America and Caribbean :: PAPUA NEW GUINEA". CIA The World Factbook. Retrieved August 9, 2016.
^ Montinaro, F.; Busby, G. B.; Pascali, V. L.; Myers, S.; Hellenthal, G.; Capelli, C. (24 March 2015). "Unravelling the hidden ancestry of American admixed populations". Nature Communications. 6. See Supplementary Data. Bibcode:2015NatCo...6.6596M. doi:10.1038/ncomms7596. PMC 4374169. PMID 25803618.
^ Godinho, Neide Maria de Oliveira (2008). O impacto das migra es na constitui o gen tica de popula es latino-americanas (Thesis).
^ "Proyecciones Poblacionales". (in Spanish). National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INEC). Archived from the original on 18 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2020.
^ 
"Ecuador: Virtual Jewish History Tour". American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. 2004. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved June 23, 2013.
^ "La libanesa, una colonia con historia desde 1875". La libanesa, una colonia con historia desde 1875. El Universo. 30 July 2006.
^ Almeida, M nica (1997). "Los Sirio-Libaneses En El Espacio Social Ecuatoriano". Journal de la Soci t  des Am ricanistes. 83 (1): 201 227. doi:10.3406/jsa.1997.1677.
^ "El Guayaquil que acogi  a los migrantes extranjeros". El Telegrafo. 16 October 2020.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 26 October 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ Ventimilla, Marcello (7 August 2019). "Anc n, la peque a Inglaterra olvidada". anconlapequenainglaterraolvidada. Retrieved 12 October 2022.
^ "Marcelo Veintimilla Macas on Instagram: "A 2 horas de Guayaquil se encuentra #Anc n, la tierra de Alberto Spencer. Entre 1911 y 1976 una compa a Inglesa se instal  en el lugar, dejando un legado de su cultura. Plasmado sobre todo en las casas del barrio ingles, que se ubica cerca de un acantilado."".
^ 
Pagnotta, Chiara (2011). "Italians in the Americas". Diasporas. Circulations, Migrations, Histoire. openjournal.com (19): 72 81. doi:10.4000/diasporas.1818. Retrieved September 7, 2020.
^ "Colombianos en Ecuador vuelven a casa tras terremoto "para empezar de nuevo". El Universo. 25 April 2016.
^ Guede, Araceli (24 October 2012). "M s del 70% de los ecuatorianos que viven en Espa a quieren volver a su pa s". El Pais.
^ "Entre l grimas, 14 ecuatorianos dejan Espa a por la crisis y vuelven a su pa s". Chicago Tribune.
^ 
"Cuenca Ecuador   How The American Dream Moved South". vivatropical.com. 2013. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015.
^ "Top 5 Reasons to Retire in Ecuador". NBC News. Archived from the original on 13 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019.
^ Elisabeth Hurtel. "Photos Indigenous people of Ecuador". South-images.com. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014.
^ "Yogurt Persa: De Ecuador a Argentina y Latinoam rica". August 2021.
^ (Perez, M. (2019) Eat Like a Local   Ecuador, CZYK Publishing, p. 24, ISBN 9798607903664)
^ Duarte-Casar, Rodrigo; Robalino-Vallejo, Jessica; Buzetta-Ricaurte, Mar a Fernanda; Rojas-Le-Fort, Marlene (12 May 2022). "Toward a characterization of Ecuadorian ceviche: much more than shrimp". Journal of Ethnic Foods. 9 (1): 16. doi:10.1186/s42779-022-00131-w. ISSN 2352-6181. S2CID 248725703.
^ "Ecuador's Exports   Fruit Galore". Ecuador.com. Retrieved 22 April 2021.
^ a b Borja, Piedad (1972). "Boceto de Poes a Ecuatoriana". Journal de la Academia de Literatura Hispanoamericana. Archived 3 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine
^ Robertson, W.S., History of the Latin-American Nations, 1952
^ Karnis, Surviving Pre-Columbian Drama, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1952
^ Dolores Veintimilla Brief biography Archived 25 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine
^ Vicente Alb n (1783). "Yapanga de Quito". Museo de Am rica.
^ "Las esculturas de Teddy Cobe a las favoritas del p blico". Europa Press. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017.
^ "Teddy Cobe a expondr  en Europa y Asia". Diario Expreso. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017.
^ "Madrid guarda arte manabita". El Diario de Ecuador. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017.
^ Colloredo-Mansfeld, Rudi (21 March 2011). "Space, line and story in the invention of an Andean aesthetic". Journal of Material Culture. 16 (1): 3 23. doi:10.1177/1359183510394945. S2CID 143580656.
^ "The pride of Ecuador". Synergos.org. 14 August 1996. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2010.
^ Gregor Brown (12 June 2019). "Carapaz asks for respect on the road as Ecuador celebrates Giro win". velonews.com. Retrieved 12 June 2019.
^ July 2021, Daniel Benson 24 (24 July 2021). "Olympics: Richard Carapaz claims men's road race title". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 24 July 2021.
Further reading[edit]
Ades, H. and Graham, M. (2010) The Rough Guide to Ecuador, Rough Guides
Becker, M. (2008) Indians and Leftists in the Making of Ecuador's Modern Indigenous Movements, Duke University Press Books
Becker, M. and Clark, A. K. (2007) Highland Indians and the State in Modern Ecuador, University of Pittsburgh Press
Blakenship, J. (2005) Ca ar: A Year in the Highlands of Ecuador, University of Texas Press
Brown, J. and Smith, J. (2009) Moon Guidebook: Ecuador and the Gal pagos Islands, Avalon Travel Publishing
Crowder, N. (2009) Culture Shock! Ecuador: A Survival Guide to Customs and Etiquette, Marshall Cavendish Corporation
Gerlach, A. (2003) Indians, Oil, and Politics: A Recent History of Ecuador, SR Books
Handelsman, M. H. (2008) Culture and Customs of Ecuador, Greenwood
Hurtado, O. (2010) Portrait of a Nation: Culture and Progress in Ecuador, Madison Books
O'Connor, E. (2007) Gender, Indian, Nation: The Contradictions of Making Ecuador, 1830 1925, University of Arizona Press
Pineo, R. (2007) Ecuador and the United States: Useful Strangers, University of Georgia Press
Roos, W. and Van Renterghem, O. (2000) Ecuador in Focus: A Guide to the People, Politics, and Culture, Latin America Bureau
Sawyer, S. (2004) Crude Chronicles: Indigenous Politics, Multinational Oil, and Neoliberalism in Ecuador, Duke University Press Books
Striffler, S. (2001) In the Shadows of State and Capital: The United Fruit Company, Popular Struggle, and Agrarian Restructuring in Ecuador   1900 1995, Duke University Press Books
Torre, C. de la and Striffler, S. (2008) The Ecuador Reader: History, Culture, Politics, Duke University Press Books
Various (2010) Insight Guidebook: Ecuador & Gal pagos, Insight Guides
Various (2009) Lonely Planet Guide: Ecuador & the Gal pagos Islands, Lonely Planet
Whitten, N. E. (2011) Histories of the Present: People and Power in Ecuador, University of Illinois Press
Whitten, N. E. (2003) Millennial Ecuador: Critical Essays on Cultural Transformations and Social Dynamics, University Of Iowa Press
External links[edit]
Ecuador  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage
President of Ecuador (in Spanish)
CIA Library Site: Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Ecuador. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Ecuador at Curlie
Ecuador at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Ecuador profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Ecuador
 Geographic data related to Ecuador at OpenStreetMap
vteEcuador articlesHistory
Pre-Columbian Ecuador
Real Audiencia of Quito
War of Independence
Gran Colombia (reunification)
Ecuadorian Peruvian territorial dispute
1830 1860
March Revolution
Ecuadorian Peruvian War (1857 1860)
1860 1895
Liberal Revolution of 1895
1895 1925
Concha Revolution
1922 general strike
1925 1944
Ecuadorian Peruvian War
1944 1960
1960 1990
Military Junta of 1963
El Carnavalazo
Supreme Council of Government
Paquisha War
1990 present
Cenepa War
2000 coup d' tat
2010 coup d' tat attempt and crisis
Geography
Birds
Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Environment
Islands
Mammals
Mountains
National parks
Provinces
Rivers
Volcanoes
Politics
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Military
National Assembly
National Congress (former)
Political parties
President
List
Vice President
Economy
Banking
Central Bank
Coffee production
Currency
Economic history
1998 1999 Ecuador economic crisis
Mining
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport
Water supply and sanitation
Society
Crime
Demographics
People
Education
Health
Religion
Social class
Culture
Cinema
Cuisine
Flag
Indigenous peoples
Newspapers
Music
Notable people
Public holidays
Sport
Smoking
Television
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Links to related articles
vteCountries and dependencies of South AmericaSovereignstatesEntire
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela
In part
France
French Guiana
Dependencies
Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
UK
vteAndean Community of NationsMembers
Bolivia
Colombia
Ecuador
Peru
Associate members
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Paraguay
Uruguay
Venezuela
Observers
Mexico
Panama
vteBolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America - Peoples  Trade Treaty (ALBA-TCP)Member states
Antigua and Barbuda
Bolivia
Cuba
Dominica
Grenada
Nicaragua
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Venezuela
vteMercosur   Mercosul(Southern Common Market)Politics
Treaty of Asunci n
Protocol of Ouro Preto
Visa policies
MembersFull Members
Argentina
Brazil
Paraguay
Uruguay
Venezuela (suspended)
Associated States
Bolivia (being transitioned into full membership)
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Peru
Suriname
Observers
Mexico
New Zealand
Institutions
Parliament
Currencies
Argentine peso
Brazilian real
Paraguayan guaran 
Uruguayan peso
Venezuelan bol var
Integration
Citizenship
Vehicle registration plates
RelationsEuropean Union
vteOrganization of American States (OAS)Members
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Barbados
Brazil
Belize
Bahamas
Bolivia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Organization
General Assembly
Secretariat for Political Affairs
Secretariat for Integral Development
Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
Inter-American Commission of Women
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Inter-American Telecommunication Commission
Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Pan American Union Building
Politics
Charter
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
American Convention on Human Rights
Pan-American Conference
Summit of the Americas
vteOrganization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
Algeria
Angola
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Nigeria
Republic of the Congo
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Venezuela
List of Secretaries General
OPEC Fund for International Development
OPEC Reference Basket
vteUnion of South American NationsMembersFull Members
Bolivia
Guyana
Suriname
Venezuela
Suspended Members
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Summits
2004
2008
2009 Ecuador
2009 Argentina
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Topics
Cusco Declaration
Constitutive Treaty
President Pro Tempore
Secretary General
Bank of the South
South American Parliament
Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America
Mercosur
Andean Community
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Spain
Germany
Israel
United States
Sweden
Japan
Czech Republic
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
Academics
CiNii
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecuador&oldid=1149807096"