Plains Native North American tribe
For other uses, see Comanche (disambiguation).
ComancheN m n Flag of the Comanche Nation[1]Total population17,000[2]Regions with significant populationsUnited States (Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico)LanguagesEnglish, ComancheReligionNative American Church, Christianity, traditional tribal religionRelated ethnic groupsShoshone and other Numic peoples
The Comanche /k m nt i/ or N m n  (Comanche: N m n , "the people"[3]) are a Native American tribe from the Southern Plains of the present-day United States. Comanche people today belong to the federally recognized Comanche Nation, headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma.[1]
The Comanche language is a Numic language of the Uto-Aztecan family. Originally, it was a Shoshoni dialect, but diverged and became a separate language.[4] The Comanche were once part of the Shoshone people of the Great Basin.[5]
In the 18th and 19th centuries, Comanche lived in most of present-day northwestern Texas and adjacent areas in eastern New Mexico, southeastern Colorado, southwestern Kansas, and western Oklahoma. Spanish colonists and later Mexicans called their historical territory Comancher a.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, Comanche practiced a nomadic horse culture and hunted, particularly bison. They traded with neighboring Native American peoples, and Spanish, French, and American colonists and settlers.
As European Americans encroached on their territory, the Comanche waged war on and raided their settlements, as well as those of neighboring Native American tribes.[6] They took captives from other tribes during warfare, using them as slaves, selling them to the Spanish and (later) Mexican settlers, or adopting them into their tribe.[5] Thousands of captives from raids on Spanish, Mexican, and American settlers assimilated into Comanche society.[7] At their peak, the Comanche language was the lingua franca of the Great Plains region.[8]
Decimated by European diseases, warfare, and encroachment by Europeans on Comancher a, most Comanche were forced to live on reservations in Indian Territory by the late 1870s.[5]
In the 21st century, the Comanche Nation has 17,000 members, around 7,000 of whom reside in tribal jurisdictional areas around Lawton, Fort Sill, and the surrounding areas of southwestern Oklahoma.[2] The Comanche Homecoming Annual Dance takes place in mid-July in Walters, Oklahoma.[9]
Name[edit]
The Comanche's autonym is n m n , meaning "the human beings" or "the people".[3] The earliest known use of the term "Comanche" dates to 1706, when the Comanche were reported by Spanish officials to be preparing to attack far-outlying Pueblo settlements in southern Colorado.[10] The Spanish adopted the Ute name for the people: k mantsi (enemy), and transliterated it into their own language phonetics.[11] Before 1740, French explorers from the east sometimes used the name Padouca for the Comanche; it was already used for the Plains Apache.
Government[edit]
The Comanche Nation is headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma. Their tribal jurisdictional area is located in Caddo, Comanche, Cotton, Greer, Jackson, Kiowa, Tillman and Harmon counties. Their current Tribal Chairman is Mark Woommavovah. The tribe requires enrolled members to have at least 1/8 blood quantum level (equivalent to one great-grandparent).[1]
Economic development[edit]
The tribe operates its own housing authority and issues tribal vehicle tags. They have their own Department of Higher Education, primarily awarding scholarships and financial aid for members' college educations. They own 10 tribal smoke shops and four casinos:[1]
Comanche Nation Casino in Lawton[12]
Red River Casino in Devol, Oklahoma[13]
Comanche Spur Casino in Elgin, Oklahoma[14]
Comanche Star Casino in Walters, Oklahoma.[15][16]
Cultural institutions[edit]
 LaDonna Harris, Comanche activist and founder of Americans for Indian Opportunity
The Comanche National Museum and Cultural Center in Lawton, Oklahoma, has permanent and changing exhibitions on Comanche history and culture. It opened to the public in 2007.[17]
In 2002, the tribe founded the Comanche Nation College, a two-year tribal college in Lawton.[18] It closed in 2017 because of problems with accreditation and funding.
Each July, Comanche gather from across the United States to celebrate their heritage and culture in Walters at the annual Comanche Homecoming powwow. The Comanche Nation Fair takes place every September. The Comanche Little Ponies host two annual dances one over New Year's Eve and one in May.[19]
History[edit]
Main article: Comanche history
Formation[edit]
 Pre-contact distribution of Uto-Aztecan languages
The Proto-Comanche movement to the Plains was part of the larger phenomenon known as the  Shoshonean Expansion  in which that language family spread across the Great Basin and across the mountains into Wyoming. The Kotsoteka ( Bison Eaters ) were probably among the first. Other groups followed. Contact with the Shoshones of Wyoming was maintained until the 1830s when it was broken by the advancing Cheyennes and Arapahoes.
After the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, various Plains peoples acquired horses, but it was probably some time before they were very numerous.
As late as 1725, Comanches were described as using large dogs rather than horses to carry their bison hide "campaign tents".[20]
The horse became a key element in the emergence of a distinctive Comanche culture. It was of such strategic importance that some scholars suggested that the Comanche broke away from the Shoshone and moved south to search for additional sources of horses among the settlers of New Spain to the south (rather than search for new herds of buffalo.) The Comanche have the longest documented existence as horse-mounted Plains peoples; they had horses when the Cheyennes still lived in earth lodges.[21]
The Comanche supplied horses and mules to all comers. As early as 1795, Comanche were selling horses to Anglo-American traders [22] and by the mid-19th century, Comanche-supplied horses were flowing into St. Louis via other Indian middlemen (Seminole, Osage, Shawnee).[23]
Their original migration took them to the southern Great Plains, into a sweep of territory extending from the Arkansas River to central Texas. The earliest references to them in the Spanish records date from 1706, when reports reached Santa Fe that Utes and Comanches were about to attack.[22] In the Comanche advance, the Apaches were driven off the Plains. By the end of the 18th century the struggle between Comanches and Apaches had assumed legendary proportions: in 1784, in recounting the history of the southern Plains, Texas governor Domingo Cabello y Robles recorded that some 60 years earlier (i.e., ca. 1724) the Apaches had been routed from the southern Plains in a nine-day battle at La Gran Sierra del Fierro  The Great Mountain of Iron , somewhere northwest of Texas. There is, however, no other record, documentary or legendary, of such a fight.[20]
They were formidable warriors who developed strategies for using traditional weapons for fighting on horseback. Warfare was a major part of Comanche life. Comanche raids into Mexico traditionally took place during the full moon, when the Comanche could see to ride at night. This led to the term "Comanche Moon", during which the Comanche raided for horses, captives, and weapons.[24] Comanche raids, especially in the 1840s, reached hundreds of miles deep into Mexico devastating northern parts of the country.[25] Main article: Comanche-Mexico War
Divisions[edit]
Kavanagh has defined four levels of social-political integration in traditional pre-reservation Comanche society:[26]
Patrilineal and patrilocal nuclear family
Extended family group (n m nahkahni   "the people who live together in a household", no size limits, but kinship recognition was limited to relatives two generations above or three below)
Residential local group or 'band', comprised one or more n m nahkahni, one of which formed its core. The band was the primary social unit of the Comanche. A typical band might number several hundred people. It was a family group, centered around a group of men, all of whom were relatives, sons, brothers or cousins. Since marriage with a known relative was forbidden, wives came from another group, and sisters left to join their husbands. The central man in that group was their grandfather, father, or uncle. He was called 'paraivo', 'chief'. After his death, one of the other men took his place; if none were available, the band members might drift apart to other groups where they might have relatives and/or establish new relations by marrying an existing member. There was no separate term for or status of 'peace chief' or 'war chief'; any man leading a war party was a 'war chief'.
Division (sometimes called tribe, Spanish naci n, rama   "branch", comprising several local groups linked by kinship, sodalities (political, medicine, and military) and common interest in hunting, gathering, war, peace, trade).
In contrast to the neighboring Cheyenne and Arapaho to the north, there was never a single Comanche political unit or "Nation" recognized by all Comanches. Rather the divisions; the most "tribe-like" units, acted independently, pursuing their own economic and political goals.
Before the 1750s, the Spanish identified three Comanche Naciones (divisions): H pen  (Jupe, Hoipi), Yapar hka (Yamparika), and K hts t hka (Kotsoteka).
After the Mescalero Apache, Jicarilla Apache and Lipan Apache had been largely displaced from the Southern Plains by the Comanche and allied tribes in the 1780s, the Spanish began to divide the now dominant Comanche into two geographical groups, which only partially corresponded to the former three Naci nes. The K hts t hka (Kotsoteka) ('Buffalo Eaters'), which had moved southeast in the 1750s and 1760s to the Southern Plains in Texas, were called Cuchanec Orientales ("Eastern Cuchanec/Kotsoteka") or Eastern Comanche, while those K hts t hka (Kotsoteka) that remained in the northwest and west, together with H pen  (Jupe, Hoipi - 'Timber/Forest People') (and sometimes Yapar hka (Yamparika)), which had moved southward to the North Canadian River, were called Cuchanec Occidentales ("Western Cuchanec/Kotsoteka") or Western Comanche. The "Western Comanche" lived in the region of the upper Arkansas, Canadian, and Red Rivers, and the Llano Estacado. The "Eastern Comanche" lived on the Edwards Plateau and the Texas plains of the upper Brazos and Colorado Rivers, and east to the Cross Timbers.
They were probably the ancestors of the Penat ka N  (Penateka - 'Honey Eaters').[27]
Over time, these divisions were altered in various ways, primarily due to changes in political resources.[28] As noted above, the K hts t hka (Kotsoteka) were probably the first proto-Comanche group to separate from the Eastern Shoshones.
 War on the plains: Comanche (right) trying to lance an Osage warrior. Painting by George Catlin, 1834
The name H pen  (Jupe, Hoipi) vanished from history in the early 19th century, probably merging into the other divisions, they are likely the forerunners of the Nokoni N  (Nokoni), Kwaar  N  (Kwahadi, Quohada), and the H pen  (Hois) local group of the Penat ka N  (Penateka). Due to pressure by southwards moving Kiowa and Plains Apache (Naishan) raiders, many Yapar hka (Yamparika) moved southeast, joining the "Eastern Comanche" and becoming known as the Tahnahwah (Tenawa, Tenahwit). Many Kiowa and Plains Apache moved to northern Comancheria and became later closely associated with the Yapar hka (Yamparika).
In the mid 19th century, other powerful divisions arose, such as the Nokoni N  (Nokoni) ('wanderers', literally 'go someplace and return'), and the Kwaar  N  (Kwahadi, Quohada) ('Antelope Eaters'). The latter originally some local groups of the K hts t hka (Kotsoteka) from the Cimarron River Valley as well as descendants of some H pen  (Jupe, Hoipi), which had pulled both southwards.
The northernmost Comanche division was the Yapar hka (Yapai N  or Yamparika    (Yap)Root-Eaters ). As the last band to move onto the Plains, they retained much of their Eastern Shoshone tradition.
The power and success of the Comanche attracted bands of neighboring peoples who joined them and became part of Comanche society; an Arapaho group became known as Saria T hka (Chariticas, Sata Teichas - 'Dog Eaters') band, an Eastern Shoshone group as Pohoi (Pohoee - 'wild sage') band, and a Plains Apache group as Tasipenan  band.
The Texans and Americans divided the Comanche into five large dominant bands - the Yapar hka (Yamparika), K hts t hka (Kotsoteka), Nokoni N  (Nokoni), Penat ka N  (Penateka) and Kwaar  N  (Kwahadi, Quohada), which in turn were divided by geographical terms into first three (later four) regional groupings: Northern Comanche, Middle Comanche, Southern Comanche, Eastern Comanche, and later Western Comanche. However, these terms generally do not correspond to the Native language terms.
The "Northern Comanche" label encompassed the Yapar hka (Yamparika) between the Arkansas River and Canadian River and the prominent and powerful K hts t hka (Kotsoteka) who roamed the high plains of Oklahoma and Texas Panhandles between Red and Canadian River, the famous Palo Duro Canyon offered them and their horse herds of protection from strong winter storms as well as from enemies, because the two bands dominated and ranged in the northern Comancheria.
The "Middle Comanche" label encompassed the aggressive Nokoni N  (Nokoni) ("wanderers", "those who turn back") between the headwaters of the Red River and the Colorado River in the south and the Western Cross Timbers in the east, their preferred range were on the Brazos River headwaters and its tributaries, the Pease River offered protection from storms and enemies. With them shared two smaller bands the same tribal areas: the Tahnahwah (Tenawa, Tenahwit) ("Those Living Downstream") and Tanim  (Tanima, Daha i, Tevawish) ("Liver Eaters"). All three bands together were known as "Middle Comanche" because they lived "in the middle" of the Comancheria.
The "Southern Comanche" label encompassed the Penat ka N  (Penateka) ("Honey Eaters"), the southernmost, largest, and best known band among whites as they lived near the first Spanish and Texan settlements; their tribal areas extended from the upper reaches of the rivers in central Texas and Colorado River southward, including much of the Edwards Plateau, and eastward to the Western Cross Timbers; because they dominated the southern Comancheria they were called "Southern Comanche".
The "Western Comanche" label encompassed the Kwaar  N  (Kwahadi, Quohada) ('Antelope Eaters'), which is the last to develop as an independent band in the 19th century. They lived on the hot, low-shadow desert plateaus of Llano Estacado in eastern New Mexico and found shelter in Tule Canyon and Palo Duro Canyon in northwestern Texas. They were the only band that never signed a contract with the Texans or Americans, and they were the last to give up the resistance. Because of their relative isolation from the other bands on the westernmost edge of the Comancheria, they were called the "Western Comanche".
There has been, and continues to be, much confusion in the presentation of Comanche group names. Groups on all levels of organization, families, n m nahkahni, bands, and divisions, were given names, but many 'band lists' do not distinguish these levels. In addition, there could be alternate names and nicknames. The spelling differences between Spanish and English add to the confusion.
Some of the Comanche group names[edit]
Yapar hka or Yamparika (also Yapai N     (Yap)Root-Eaters ; One of its local groups may have been called Widy  N  / Widy  / Widy  Yapa    Awl People ; after the death of a man named 'Awl' they changed their name to T tsahk nan  or Ditsahkanah    Sewing People  [Titchahkaynah]. Other Yapai local groups included:
Ketahtoh or Ketatore ( Don't Wear Shoes , also called Napwat T     Wearing No Shoes )
Motso ( Bearded Ones , derived from motso    Beard )
Pibianigwai ( Loud Talkers ,  Loud Askers )
S hm ht hka ( Eat Everything )
Wahkoh ( Shell Ornament )
Waw'ai or Wohoi (also Waaih    Lots of Maggots on the Penis , also called Nahmahe'enah    Somehow being (sexual) together ,  to have sex , called by other groups, because they preferred to marry endogamy and chose their partners from their own local group; this was viewed critically by other Comanche people)
H pen  or Jupe ( Timber People  because they lived in more wooded areas in the Central Plains north of the Arkansas River. Also spelled Hois.
K hts t ka or Kotsoteka ( Buffalo-Eaters , spelled in Spanish as Cuchanec)
Kwaar n  or Kwahadi/Quohada (Kwahare    Antelope-Eaters ; nicknamed Kwahih ki    Sunshades on Their Backs , because they lived on desert plains of the Llano Estacado in eastern New Mexico, westernmost Comanche Band). One of their local groups was nicknamed  Par h ya ('Elk', literally Water Horse ).
Nokonin  or Nokoni ( Movers ,  Returners ); allegedly, after the death of chief Peta Nocona they called themselves Noy hkan     Not Staying in one place , and/orT ts  Noy kan  / Detsanay ka    Bad Campers ,  Poor Wanderer .
Tahnahwah or Tenawa (also Tenahwit    Those Who Live Downstream ,
Tanim  or Tanima (also called Daha i or Tevawish    Liver-Eaters ,
Penat ka N  or Penateka (other variants: Pihnaat ka, Penan     Honey-Eaters ;
Some names given by others include: 
WahaToya (literally 'Two Mountains'); (given as Foothills in Cloud People - those who live near Walsenburg, CO)<Whatley: Jemez-Comanche-Kiowa repatriation, 1993-1999>
Toyan m n  ( Foothills People  - those who lived near Las Vegas, NM) <Whatley: Jemez-Comanche-Kiowa repatriation, 1993-1999>
Unassignable names include: 
Tay wit / Tey wit ( Hospitable Ones )
K vahrahtpaht ( Steep Climbers )
Taykahpwai / Tekapwai ( No Meat )
Pagats  (Pa'k h'tsa    Head of the Stream , also called Pahnaixte    Those Who Live Upstream )
M tsahne or Motsai ( Undercut Bank )
Old Shoshone names 
Pekwi T hka ( Fish-Eaters )
Pohoi / Pohoee ( Wild Sage )
Other names, which may or may not refer to Comanche groups include:
Hani N m  (Hai'ne'na' ne    Corn Eating People ) Wichitas.
It'chit'a'b d'ah (Utsu'it     Cold People , i.e.  Northern People , probably another name for the Yapar hka or one of their local groups - because they lived to the north)
Itehtah'o ( Burnt Meat , nicknamed by other Comanche, because they threw their surplus of meat out in the spring, where it dried and became black, looking like burnt meat)
Na 'niem (No'na' m    Ridge People 
Modern Local Groups
Ohnon  (also Ohn n n  or Onah n n , 'Salt People' or 'Salt Creek people') live in Caddo County in the vicinity of Cyril, Oklahoma; mostly descendants of the Nokoni Pianavowit.
Wian  (Wian , Wia'ne    Hill Wearing Away ), live east of Walters, Oklahoma, descendants of Waysee.
Comanche Wars[edit]
 Comancheria 1770-1850.
Main articles: Comanche Wars, Comanche-Mexico War, and Texas Indian Wars
The Comanche fought a number of conflicts against Spanish and later Mexican and American armies. These were both expeditionary, as with the raids into Mexico, and defensive. The Comanche were noted as fierce warriors who fought vigorously for their homeland of Comancheria. However, the massive population of the settlers from the east and the diseases they brought led to pressure and decline of Comanche power and the cessation of their major presence in the southern Great Plains.
Relationship with settlers[edit]
 Comanches watching an American caravan in West Texas, 1850, by the US Army officer, Arthur Lee
 Comanche warriors, c. 1867 1874
 Quanah Parker, prominent chief of the Comanche Indians with a feather fan. Photo by James Mooney, 1892.
The Comanche maintained an ambiguous relationship with Europeans and later settlers attempting to colonize their territory. The Comanche were valued as trading partners since 1786 via the Comancheros of New Mexico, but were feared for their raids against settlers in Texas.[29][30][31][32] Similarly, they were, at one time or another, at war with virtually every other Native American group living on the South Plains,[33][34] leaving opportunities for political maneuvering by European colonial powers and the United States. At one point, Sam Houston, president of the newly created Republic of Texas, almost succeeded in reaching a peace treaty with the Comanche in the 1844 Treaty of Tehuacana Creek. His efforts were thwarted in 1845 when the Texas legislature refused to create an official boundary between Texas and the Comancheria.
While the Comanche managed to maintain their independence and increase their territory, by the mid-19th century, they faced annihilation because of a wave of epidemics due to Eurasian diseases to which they had no immunity, such as smallpox and measles. Outbreaks of smallpox (1817, 1848) and cholera (1849) took a major toll on the Comanche, whose population dropped from an estimated 20,000 in the late 18th century to just a few thousand by the 1870s.
The US began efforts in the late 1860s to move the Comanche into reservations, with the Treaty of Medicine Lodge (1867), which offered churches, schools, and annuities in return for a vast tract of land totaling over 60,000 square miles (160,000 km2). The government promised to stop the buffalo hunters, who were decimating the great herds of the Plains, provided that the Comanche, along with the Apaches, Kiowas, Cheyenne, and Arapahos, move to a reservation totaling less than 5,000 square miles (13,000 km2) of land. However, the government did not prevent the slaughtering of the herds. The Comanche under Quenatosavit White Eagle (later called Isa-tai "Coyote's Vagina") retaliated by attacking a group of hunters in the Texas Panhandle in the Second Battle of Adobe Walls (1874). The attack was a disaster for the Comanche, and the US army was called in during the Red River War to drive the remaining Comanche in the area into the reservation, culminating in the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon. Within just 10 years, the buffalo were on the verge of extinction, effectively ending the Comanche way of life as hunters. In May 1875, the last free band of Comanches, led by the Quahada warrior Quanah Parker, surrendered and moved to the Fort Sill reservation in Oklahoma. The last independent Kiowa and Kiowa Apache had also surrendered.
The 1890 Census showed 1,598 Comanche at the Fort Sill reservation, which they shared with 1,140 Kiowa and 326 Kiowa Apache.[35]
Cherokee Commission[edit]
The Agreement with the Comanche, Kiowa and Apache signed with the Cherokee Commission October 6 21, 1892,[36] further reduced their reservation to 480,000 acres (1,900 km2) at a cost of $1.25 per acre ($308.88/km2), with an allotment of 160 acres (0.65 km2) per person per tribe to be held in trust. New allotments were made in 1906 to all children born after the agreement, and the remaining land was opened to white settlement. With this new arrangement, the era of the Comanche reservation came to an abrupt end.
Meusebach Comanche treaty[edit]
The Peneteka band agreed to a peace treaty with the German Immigration Company under John O. Meusebach. This treaty was not affiliated with any level of government. Meusebach brokered the treaty to settle the lands on the Fisher-Miller Land Grant, from which were formed the 10 counties of Concho, Kimble, Llano, Mason, McCulloch, Menard, Schleicher, San Saba, Sutton, and Tom Green.[37]Further information: Fisher Miller Land Grant In contrast to many treaties of its day, this treaty was very brief and simple, with all parties agreeing to a mutual cooperation and a sharing of the land. The treaty was agreed to at a meeting in San Saba County,[38] and signed by all parties on May 9, 1847 in Fredericksburg, Texas. The treaty was very specifically between the Peneteka band and the German Immigration Company. No other band or tribe was involved. The German Immigration Company was dissolved by Meusebach himself shortly after it had served its purpose. By 1875, the Comanches had been relocated to reservations.[39]Further information: Meusebach-Comanche Treaty Five years later, artist Friedrich Richard Petri and his family moved to the settlement of Pedernales, near Fredericksburg. Petri's sketches and watercolors gave witness to the friendly relationships between the Germans and various local Native American tribes.[40]
Fort Martin Scott treaty[edit]
In 1850, another treaty was signed in San Saba, between the United States government and a number of local tribes, among which were the Comanches. This treaty was named for the nearest military fort, which was Fort Martin Scott. The treaty was never officially ratified by any level of government and was binding only on the part of the Native Americans.[41][42]Further information: Fort Martin Scott Treaty
Captive Herman Lehmann[edit]
One of the most famous captives in Texas was a German boy named Herman Lehmann. He had been kidnapped by the Apaches, only to escape and be rescued by the Comanches. Lehmann became the adoptive son of Quanah Parker. On August 26, 1901, Quanah Parker provided a legal affidavit verifying Lehmann's life as his adopted son 1877 1878. On May 29, 1908, the United States Congress authorized the United States Secretary of the Interior to allot Lehmann, as an adopted member of the Comanche nation, 160 acres of Oklahoma land, near Grandfield.[43]
Recent history[edit]
 Mac Silverhorn (Comanche), grandson of Silver Horn, drumming with friend at Redstone Baptist Church
Entering the Western economy was a challenge for the Comanche in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Many tribal members were defrauded of whatever remained of their land and possessions. Appointed paramount chief by the United States government, Chief Quanah Parker campaigned vigorously for better deals for his people, meeting with Washington politicians frequently; and helped manage land for the tribe.
Parker became wealthy as a cattleman. He also campaigned for the Comanches' permission to practice the Native American Church religious rites, such as the usage of peyote, which was condemned by European Americans.[44]
Before the first Oklahoma legislature, Quanah testified:
I do not think this legislature should interfere with a man's religion, also these people should be allowed to retain this health restorer. These healthy gentleman before you use peyote and those that do not use it are not so healthy.[45]
During World War II, many Comanche left the traditional tribal lands in Oklahoma to seek jobs and more opportunities in the cities of California and the Southwest. About half of the Comanche population still lives in Oklahoma, centered on the town of Lawton.
Recently, an 80-minute 1920 silent film was "rediscovered", titled The Daughter of Dawn. It features a cast of more than 300 Comanche and Kiowa.[46]
Culture[edit]
 Uwat (Comanche), photograph by Edward Curtis, 1930
Childbirth[edit]
 Comanche mother and baby son in cradleboard, photo by Edward Curtis
 Comanche cradleboard held at the Birmingham Museum of Art
If a woman went into labor while the band was in camp, she was moved to a tipi, or a brush lodge if it was summer. One or more of the older women assisted as midwives. Men were not allowed inside the tipi during or immediately after the delivery.[47]
First, the midwives softened the earthen floor of the tipi and dug two holes. One of the holes was for heating water and the other for the afterbirth. One or two stakes were driven into the ground near the expectant mother's bedding for her to grip during the pain of labor. After the birth, the midwives hung the umbilical cord on a hackberry tree. The people believed that if the umbilical cord was not disturbed before it rotted, the baby would live a long and prosperous life.[48]
The newborn was swaddled and remained with its mother in the tipi for a few days. The baby was placed in a cradleboard, and the mother went back to work. She could easily carry the cradleboard on her back, or prop it against a tree where the baby could watch her while she collected seeds or roots. Cradleboards consisted of a flat board to which a basket was attached. The latter was made from rawhide straps, or a leather sheath that laced up the front. With soft, dry moss as a diaper, the young one was safely tucked into the leather pocket. During cold weather, the baby was wrapped in blankets, and then placed in the cradleboard. The baby remained in the cradleboard for about ten months; then it was allowed to crawl around.[49]
Both girls and boys were welcomed into the band, but boys were favored. If the baby was a boy, one of the midwives informed the father or grandfather, "It's your close friend". Families might paint a flap on the tipi to tell the rest of the tribe that they had been strengthened with another warrior. Sometimes a man named his child, but mostly the father asked a medicine man (or another man of distinction) to do so. He did this in the hope of his child living a long and productive life. During the public naming ceremony, the medicine man lit his pipe and offered smoke to the heavens, earth, and each of the four directions. He prayed that the child would remain happy and healthy. He then lifted the child to symbolize its growing up and announced the child's name four times. He held the child a little higher each time he said the name. It was believed that the child's name foretold its future; even a weak or sick child could grow up to be a great warrior, hunter, and raider if given a name suggesting courage and strength.[49] Boys were often named after their grandfather, uncle, or other relative. Girls were usually named after one of their father's relatives, but the name was selected by the mother. As children grew up they also acquired nicknames at different points in their lives, to express some aspect of their lives.[50]
Children[edit]
The Comanche looked on their children as their most precious gift. Children were rarely punished.[51] Sometimes, though, an older sister or other relative was called upon to discipline a child, or the parents arranged for a boogey man to scare the child. Occasionally, old people donned sheets and frightened disobedient boys and girls. Children were also told about Big Maneater Owl (Pia Mupitsi), who lived in a cave on the south side of the Wichita Mountains and ate bad children at night.[52]
Children learned from example, by observing and listening to their parents and others in the band. As soon as she was old enough to walk, a girl followed her mother about the camp and played at the daily tasks of cooking and making clothing. She was also very close to her mother's sisters, who were called not aunt but pia, meaning mother. She was given a little deerskin doll, which she took with her everywhere. She learned to make all the clothing for the doll.[53]
A boy identified not only with his father but with his father's family, as well as with the bravest warriors in the band. He learned to ride a horse before he could walk. By the time he was four or five, he was expected to be able to skillfully handle a horse. When he was five or six, he was given a small bow and arrows. Often, a boy was taught to ride and shoot by his grandfather, since his father and other warriors were on raids and hunts. His grandfather also taught him about his own boyhood and the history and legends of the Comanche.[54]
 A 19th-century Comanche child.
As the boy grew older, he joined the other boys to hunt birds. He eventually ranged farther from camp looking for better game to kill. Encouraged to be skillful hunters, boys learned the signs of the prairie as they learned to patiently and quietly stalk game. They became more self-reliant, yet, by playing together as a group, also formed the bonds and cooperative spirit that they would need when they hunted and raided.[54]
 Comanches of West Texas in war regalia, c. 1830.
Boys were highly respected because they would become warriors and might die young in battle. As he approached manhood, a boy went on his first buffalo hunt. If he made a kill, his father honored him with a feast. Only after he had proven himself on a buffalo hunt was a young man allowed to go to war.[54]
When he was ready to become a warrior, at about age 15 or 16, a young man first "made his medicine" by going on a vision quest (a rite of passage). Following this quest, his father gave him a good horse to ride into battle and another mount for the trail. If he had proved himself as a warrior, a Give Away Dance might be held in his honor. As drummers faced east, the honored boy and other young men danced. His parents, along with his other relatives and the people in the band, threw presents at his feet   especially blankets and horses symbolized by sticks. Anyone might snatch one of the gifts for themselves, although those with many possessions refrained; they did not want to appear greedy. People often gave away all their belongings during these dances, providing for others in the band, but leaving themselves with nothing.[54]
Girls learned to gather berries, nuts, and roots. They carried water and collected wood, and at about 12 years old learned to cook meals, make tipis, sew clothing, prepare hides, and perform other tasks essential to becoming a wife and mother. They were then considered ready to be married.[53]
Death[edit]
During the 19th century, the traditional Comanche burial custom was to wrap the deceased's body in a blanket and place it on a horse, behind a rider, who would then ride in search of an appropriate burial place, such as a secure cave. After entombment, the rider covered the body with stones and returned to camp, where the mourners burned all the deceased's possessions. The primary mourner slashed his arms to express his grief. The Quahada band followed this custom longer than other bands and buried their relatives in the Wichita Mountains. Christian missionaries persuaded Comanche people to bury their dead in coffins in graveyards,[55] which is the practice today.
Transportation and habitation[edit]
 Comanche Tipis painted by George Catlin.
 Comanche warrior Ako and horse. Photo by James Mooney, 1892.
 Three mounted Comanche warriors, left, Frank Moetah. Photo by James Mooney, 1892.
When they lived with the Shoshone, the Comanche mainly used dog-drawn travois for transportation. Later, they acquired horses from other tribes, such as the Pueblo, and from the Spaniards. Because horses are faster, easier to control and stronger, this helped with hunting, warfare and moving camp. Larger dwellings were made due to the ability to pull and carry more belongings. Being herbivores, horses were also easier to feed than dogs, since meat was a valuable resource.[56] The horse was of the utmost value to the Comanche. A Comanche man's wealth was measured by the size of his horse herd. Horses were prime targets to steal during raids; often raids were conducted specifically to capture horses. Often horse herds numbering in the hundreds were stolen by Comanche during raids against other Indian nations, Spanish, Mexicans, and later from the ranches of Texans. Horses were used for warfare with the Comanche being considered to be among the finest light cavalry and mounted warriors in history.[57]
 Comanche Feats of Horsemenship, George Catlin 1834.
The Comanche covered their tipis with buffalo hides sewn together. To prepare the hides, women spread them on the ground, scraped off the fat and flesh with blades of bone or antler, and dried them in the sun. Then the women scraped off the thick hair and soaked the hides in water. After several days, they vigorously rubbed them in a mixture of fat, brains and liver to soften them. They softened them further by rinsing and working back and forth over a rawhide thong. Finally, they were smoked over a fire, which gave them a tan color. To finish the tipi covering, women laid the tanned hides side by side and stitched them together. As many as 22 hides could be used, but 14 was the average. The sewn cover was tied to a pole and raised, wrapped around the cone-shaped frame, and pinned with pencil-sized wooden skewers. Two wing-shaped flaps at the top of the tipi were turned back to make an opening, which could be adjusted to keep out moisture and held pockets of insulating air. With a fire pit in the center of the earthen floor, the tipis stayed warm in winter. In summer, the bottom edges of the tipis could be rolled up to let in a breeze. Cooking was done outside during hot weather. Tipis were very practical homes for nomads. Working together, women could quickly set them up or take them down. An entire Comanche band could be packed and chasing a buffalo herd within about 20 minutes. The women did most food processing and preparation.[58]
Food[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Comanches chasing bison, painted by George Catlin. Bison were the primary food source for the Comanche.
The Comanche were initially hunter-gatherers. When they lived in the Rocky Mountains, during their migration to the Great Plains, both men and women shared responsibility for gathering and providing food. When the Comanche reached the plains, hunting predominated. Hunting was considered a male activity and was a principal source of prestige. For meat, the Comanche hunted buffalo, elk, black bear, pronghorn, and deer. When game was scarce, the men hunted wild mustangs, and sometimes ate their own ponies. In later years the Comanche raided Texas ranches and stole longhorn cattle. They did not eat fish or fowl, unless starving. 
Women prepared and cooked bison meat and other game. Women also gathered wild fruits, seeds, nuts, berries, roots and tubers, including plums, grapes, juniper berries, persimmons, mulberries, acorns, pecans, wild onions, radishes, and tuna, the fruit of the prickly pear cactus. The Comanche also acquired maize, dried pumpkin, and tobacco through trade and raids. They roasted meat over a fire or boiled it. To boil fresh or dried meat and vegetables, women dug a pit in the ground, which they lined with animal skins or buffalo stomach and filled with water to make a kind of cooking pot. They placed heated stones in the water until it boiled and had cooked their stew. After Spanish contact, Comanche traded for copper pots and iron kettles, which made cooking easier.
Women used berries and nuts, as well as honey and tallow, to flavor buffalo meat. They stored the tallow in intestine casings or rawhide pouches called oy ot . They especially liked to make a sweet mush of buffalo marrow mixed with crushed mesquite beans.
The Comanches sometimes ate raw meat, especially raw liver flavored with gall. They also drank the milk from the slashed udders of buffalo, deer, and elk.[59] Among their delicacies was the curdled milk from the stomachs of suckling buffalo calves. They also enjoyed buffalo tripe, or stomachs.
Comanche generally ate a light meal breakfast and a large dinner. They ate during the day when they were hungry or when it was convenient. Like other Plains Indians, the Comanche were very hospitable. They prepared meals whenever a visitor arrived in camp, which led to outsiders' belief that the Comanches ate at all hours of the day or night. Many families offered thanks as they sat down to eat their meals.
Comanche children ate pemmican, but this was primarily a tasty, high-energy food reserved for war parties. Carried in a parfleche pouch, pemmican was eaten only when the men did not have time to hunt. Similarly, in camp, people ate pemmican only when other food was scarce. Traders ate pemmican sliced and dipped in honey, which they called Indian bread.
Clothing[edit]
 Comanche headdress at the Ethnologisches Museum, Berlin.
 Chosequah, a Comanche warrior wearing full traditional regalia. Painted by E.A Burbank, 1897.
Comanche clothing was simple and easy to wear. Men wore a leather belt with a breechcloth   a long piece of buckskin brought up between the legs and looped over and under the belt at the front and back, and loose-fitting deerskin leggings. Moccasins had soles made from thick, tough buffalo hide with soft deerskin uppers. Men wore nothing on the upper body, except in winter when they wore heavy robes of buffalo hide (or occasionally, bear, wolf, or coyote skins) with knee-length buffalo-hide boots. Young boys usually went naked except in cold weather. By age 8 or 9, they wore adult clothing. In the 19th century, men had replaced the buckskin breechcloths by woven cloth, and wore loose-fitting buckskin shirts. Women wore long deerskin dresses with a flared skirt and wide, long sleeves, with buckskin fringes on the sleeves and hem. Beads and pieces of metal were attached in geometric patterns. Women wore buckskin moccasins with buffalo soles. Women decorated their shirts, leggings and moccasins with fringes of deer-skin, animal fur, and human hair. They also decorated their shirts and leggings with patterns and shapes of beads and scraps of material. In winter they, too, wore warm buffalo robes and tall, fur-lined buffalo-hide boots. Unlike boys, girls old enough to walk were dressed in breechcloths. By age 12 or 13, they wore women's clothing.[60]
Hair and headgear[edit]
Comanche people took pride in their hair, which was worn long. They arranged it with porcupine quill brushes, greased it and parted it in the center from the forehead to the back of the neck. They painted the scalp along the parting with yellow, red, or white clay (or other colors). They wore their hair in two long braids tied with leather thongs or colored cloth, and sometimes wrapped with beaver fur. They also braided a strand of hair from the top of their head. This slender braid, called a scalp lock, was decorated with colored scraps of cloth and beads, and a single feather. Comanche men rarely wore anything on their heads. Only after they moved onto a reservation late in the 19th century did men begin to wear the typical Plains headdress. In severe cold, they might wear a brimless, woolly buffalo hide hat. At war, some warriors wore a headdress of buffalo scalp. Warriors cut away most of the hide and flesh from a buffalo head, leaving only a portion of the woolly head and the horns. This type of hat was worn only by the Comanche. Women did not let their hair grow as long as the men did. Young women might wear their hair long and braided, but women parted their hair in the middle and kept it short. Like the men, they painted their scalp along the parting with bright paint.[61]
Body decoration[edit]
Comanche men usually had pierced ears with hanging earrings made of pieces of shell or loops of brass or silver wire. A female relative would pierce the outer edge of the ear with six or eight holes. The men also tattooed his face, arms, and chest with geometric designs, and painted his face and body. Traditionally they used paints made of berry juice and the colored clays of the Comancheria. Later, traders supplied them with vermilion (red pigment) and bright grease paints. Men wore bands of leather and strips of metal on their arms. Except for black, which was the color for war, there was no standard color or pattern for face and body painting: it was a matter of individual preference. For example, one man might paint one side of his face white and the other side red; another might paint one side of his body green and the other side with green and black stripes. One Comanche might always paint himself in a particular way, while another might change the colors and designs when so inclined. Some designs had special meaning to the individual, and special colors and designs might have been revealed in a dream. Women might also tattoo their face or arms. They were fond of painting their bodies and were free to do so as they pleased. It was popular for women to paint the insides of their ears a bright red and paint great orange and red circles on their cheeks. They usually painted red and yellow around their lips.[62]
 Comanche beaded ration bag, c. 1880, collection of the Oklahoma History Center
Art and material culture[edit]
Because of their frequent traveling, Comanche had to make sure that their household goods and other possessions were unbreakable. They did not use pottery that could easily be broken on long journeys. Weaving, wood carving, and metal working were unknown. Instead, they depended on buffalo for most of their tools, household goods, and weapons. They made nearly 200 different utilitarian items from the horns, hide, and bones.
Removing the lining of the inner stomach, women made the paunch into a water bag. The lining was stretched over four sticks and filled with water to make a pot for cooking soups and stews. With wood scarce on the plains, women relied on buffalo chips (dried dung) as fuel for cooking and heat.[63]
Stiff rawhide was fashioned into saddles, stirrups and cinches, knife cases, buckets, and moccasin soles. Rawhide was also made into rattles and drums. Strips of rawhide were twisted into sturdy ropes. Scraped to resemble white parchment, rawhide skins were folded to make parfleches in which food, clothing, and other personal belongings were kept. Women also tanned hides to make soft and supple buckskin, which was used for tipi covers, warm robes, blankets, cloths, and moccasins. They used buckskin for bedding, cradles, dolls, bags, pouches, quivers, and gun cases.
Sinew was used for bowstrings and sewing thread. Hooves were turned into glue and rattles. Horns were shaped into cups, spoons, and ladles, while the tail made a whip, fly-swatter, or a tipi decoration. Men made tools, scrapers, needles, pipes and children's toys from the bones. But men concentrated on making bows and arrows, lances, and shields. The thick neck skin of an old bull was ideal for war shields that deflected arrows as well as bullets. Since they spent most of each day on horseback, they also fashioned leather into saddles, stirrups, and other equipment for their mounts. Buffalo hair was used to fill saddle pads and was used in rope and halters.[64]
Language[edit]
Main article: Comanche language
 Charles Chibitty, Comanche code talker in World War II
The language spoken by the Comanche people, Comanche (Numu tekwapu), is a Numic language of the Uto-Aztecan language group. It is closely related to the language of the Shoshone, from which the Comanche diverged around 1700. The two languages remain closely related, but a few low-level sound changes inhibit mutual intelligibility. The earliest records of Comanche from 1786 clearly show a dialect of Shoshone, but by the beginning of the 20th century, these sound changes had modified the way Comanche sounded in subtle, but profound, ways.[65][66] Although efforts are now being made to ensure survival of the language, most of its speakers are elderly, and less than 1% of the Comanches can speak it.
In the late 19th century, many Comanche children were placed in boarding schools with children from different tribes. The children were taught English and discouraged from speaking their native language. Anecdotally, enforcement of speaking English was severe.
Quanah Parker learned and spoke English and was adamant that his own children do the same. The second generation then grew up speaking English, because it was believed[who?] that it was better for them not to know Comanche.[67]
Comanches were among the Native Americans who were first utilized as Code Talkers by the U.S. Army during World War I.[68]
During World War II, a group of 17 young men, referred to as "The Comanche Code Talkers", were trained and used by the U.S. Army to send messages conveying sensitive information that could not be deciphered by the Germans.[69][70]
Notable Comanches[edit]
Further information: Category:Comanche people
Historic Comanche people[edit]
These are notable Comanche people from the 18th and 19th centuries, prior to allotment. 
 Mo'o-wai ("Pushing aside" or "Pushing-in-the-middle"), aka "Shaking Hand", chief of the Kotsoteka
Amorous Man (Pahayoko) (late 1780s c. 1860), Penateka chief
Black Horse (died ca. 1900), second chief of the Quahadi band
Buffalo Hump (Pots nakwahip ) (c. 1800-c. 1865/1870), war chief and later head chief of the Penateka division
Carne Muerto, Tehcap (1832 1860s), Quahadi war chief
Tavibo Naritgant, Cuerno Verde (died 1779), war chief
Horseback (T h yakwahip ) (c. 1805/1810-c. 1888), chief of the Nokoni band
Iron Jacket (Puhihwikwasu'u) (c. 1790-1858), war chief and later head chief of the Quahadi band; father of Peta Nocona
Isatai (c. 1840 c. 1890), warrior and medicine man of the Quahadi
Mow-way (Shaking Hand, Pushing-in-the-Middle) (c. 1825-1886), Kotsoteka chief
Old Owl (Mupitsukup ) (late 1780s 1849), Penateka chief
Peta Nocona (Lone Wanderer) (c. 1820   c. 1864), chief of the Quahadi division; father of Quanah Parker
Quanah Parker (c. 1845 1911), Quahadi chief, a founder of Native American Church and rancher
White Parker (1887 1956), son of Quanah Parker and Methodist missionary
Piaru-ekaruhkapu (Big Red Meat) (ca. 1820/1825-1875), Nokoni chief
Sanapia (1895 1984), medicine woman
Santa Anna (c. 1800-c. 1849), war chief of the Penateka Band
Spirit Talker (Mukwooru) (c. 1780-1840), Penateka chief and medicine man
Ten Bears (Paw ras m nun ) (c. 1790 1872), chief of the Ketahto band and later of the entire Yamparika division
Tosawi (White Knife) (c. 1805/1810-c. 1878/1880), chief of the Penateka band
Yellow Wolf (Isa-viah) (c. 1800/1805 - 1854), war chief of the Penateka division
Comanche Nation citizens[edit]
 Karita Coffey, Comanche professor, ceramic artist, and sculptor at the Institute of American Indian Arts, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 2014
These are 20th- and 21st-century citizens of the Comanche Nation.
Charon Asetoyer (born 1951), activist and women's health advocate
Blackbear Bosin (1921 1980), Comanche/Kiowa sculptor and painter
Charles Chibitty (1921 2005), World War II Comanche code talker
Karita Coffey, Tsat-Tah Mo-oh Kahn (born 1947), ceramic artist, professor, sculptor
Marie C. Cox (1920-2005), founder of the North American Indian Women's Association and foster care reform advocate
Jesse Ed Davis (1944-1988), guitarist and recording artist
LaDonna Harris (born 1931), political activist and founder of Americans for Indian Opportunity
Dorothy Sunrise Lorentino (1909 2005), educator, activist, sister of Morris Tabbyyetchy.
Doc Tate Nevaquaya (1932 1996), Flatstyle painter, Native American flautist, NEA fellow
Sonny Nevaquaya (d. 2019), Native American flute-player
Diane O'Leary (1939 2013), artist, nurse
Lotsee Patterson (born 1931), librarian, educator, and founder of the American Indian Library Association
Paul Chaat Smith, Comanche/Choctaw author, curator
Morris Tabbyyetchy, WWII Comanche Code Talker.
George Tahdooahnippah (born 1978), professional boxer and NABC super middleweight champion
Emma Tenayuca (1916-1999), 1930s labor leader
Josephine Wapp (1912 2014), professor, regalia maker, textile artist
David Yeagley (1951 2014), classical composer, political writer
See also[edit]
Quanah Parker Star House
References[edit]
^ a b c d "2011 Oklahoma Indian Nations Pocket Pictorial Directory" (PDF). Oklahoma Indian Affairs Commission. November 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 24, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2012.
^ a b "About Us". Comanche Nation. Retrieved December 23, 2021.
^ a b "Home | Comanche Nation". comanchenation.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ Jean Ormsbee Charney. A Grammar of Comanche. (Nebraska, 1993). Pages 1-2.
^ a b c Kavanagh, Thomas W. "Comanche (tribe)". The Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture. Oklahoma Historical Society. Retrieved December 23, 2021.
^ Fowles, Severin, Arterberry, Lindsay Montgomery, Atherton, Heather (2017), "Comanche New Mexico: The Eighteenth Century," in New Mexico and the Pimeria Alta, Boulder: University Press of Colorado, pp. 158-160. Downloaded from JSTOR.
^ Marez, Curtis (June 2001). "Signifying Spain, Becoming Comanche, Making Mexicans: Indian Captivity and the History of Chicana/o Popular Performance". American Quarterly. 53 (2): 267 307. doi:10.1353/aq.2001.0018. S2CID 144608670.
^ H m l inen, Pekka. The Comanche Empire. NewHaven and London: Yale University Press. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-300-15117-6.
^ "The Homecoming Dance". Comanche Nation official website. Retrieved July 11, 2017.
^ Governor Cuervo y Valdez Report, 18 Aug 1706
^ William Bright, ed. Native American Placenames of the United States (Oklahoma, 2004)
^ "Comanche Nation Casinos | Lawton Oklahoma | Slots Table Games". www.comanchenationcasino.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ "Comanche Red River Hotel Casino | Oklahoma Casinos | $99 nightly". www.comancheredrivercasino.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ "Comanche Spur Casino | Elgin Oklahoma Indian Casino". www.comanchespurcasino.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ "Comanche Star Casino | Oklahoma Casinos | Walters, OK". www.comanchestarcasino.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ "Oklahoma Casino List by Tribe". 500nations.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ "Our Mission". Comanche National Museum and Cultural Center. Comanche Nation. Retrieved January 12, 2022.
^ "Comanche Nation College". Comanche Nation College. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ Comanche Nation Tourism Center. Archived 2008-11-04 at the Wayback Machine Comanche Nation. (16 February 2009)
^ a b Kavanagh 66
^ Kavanagh 7
^ a b Kavanagh 63
^ Kavanagh 380
^ Wallace and Hoebel
^ Kavanagh (1996)
^ Kavanagh 41 53
^ "Penateka Comanches ~ Marker Number: 16257". Texas Historic Sites Atlas. Camp Verde, Texas: Texas Historical Commission. 2009.
^ Kavanagh 478
^ Plummer, R., Narrative of the Capture and Subsequent Sufferings of Mrs. Rachel Plummer, 1839, in Parker's Narrative and History of Texas, Louisville: Morning Courier, 1844, pp. 88-118
^ Lee, N., Three Years Among the Comanches, in Captured by the Indians, Drimmer, F., editor, New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1961, ISBN 0486249018, pp. 277-313
^ Babb, T.A., In the Bosom of the Comanches, 1912, Dallas: John F. Worley Printing Co.
^ Bell, J.D., A true Story of My Capture by, and Life with the Comanche Indians, in "Every Day Seemed Like a Holiday", The Captivity of Bianca Babb, Gelo, D.J. and Zesch, S., editors, Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 107, No. 1, 2003, pp. 49-67
^ Lehmann, H., 1927, 9 Years Among the Indians, 1870-1879, Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press, ISBN 0826314171
^ Smith, C.L., 1927, The Boy Captives, San Saba: San Saba Printing & Office Supply, ISBN 0-943639-24-7
^ "Frontier Forts > The Passing of the Indian Era". www.texasbeyondhistory.net. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ Deloria, Vine J Jr.; DeMaille, Raymond J (1999). Documents of American Indian Diplomacy Treaties, Agreements, and Conventions, 1775 1979. University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 355, 356, 357, 358. ISBN 978-0-8061-3118-4.
^ "THC-Fisher-Miller Land Grant". Texas Historic Markers. Texas Historical Commission. Retrieved September 16, 2011.
^ "THC-Comanche Treaty". Texas Historical Association. Retrieved September 17, 2011.
^ Demallie, Raymond J; Deloria, Vine (1999). Documents of American Indian Diplomacy: Treaties, Agreements and Conventions 1775 1979, Vol 1. University of Oklahoma. pp. 1493 1494. ISBN 0-8061-3118-7.
^ Germunden, Gerd; Calloway, Colin G; Zantop, Suzanne (2002). Germans and Indians: Fantasies, Encounters, Projections. University of Nebraska Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-8032-6420-5.
^ Watson, Larry S (1994). INDIAN TREATIES 1835 to 1902 Vol. XXII   Kiowa, Comanche and Apache. Histree. pp. 15 19.
^ Webb, Walter Prescott (1965). The Texas Rangers: A Century of Frontier Defense. University of Texas Press. pp. 138 140. ISBN 978-0-292-78110-8.
^ Zesch, Scott (2005). The Captured: A True Story of Abduction by Indians on the Texas Frontier. St. Martin's. pp. 239 241. ISBN 978-0-312-31789-8.
^ Leahy, Todd; Wilson, Raymond (2009). The A to Z of Native American Movements. Scarecrow Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-8108-6892-2.
^ Swan 19
^ "The Daughter of Dawn | Oklahoma Historical Society". www.okhistory.org. Retrieved August 20, 2022.
^ Wallace and Hoebel (1952) p.142
^ Wallace and Hoebel (1952) pp.143, 144
^ a b Wallace and Hoebel (1952) p.120
^ Wallace and Hoebel (1952) pp.122, 123
^ Wallace and Hoebel (1952) p.124
^ De Capua, Sarah (2006). The Comanche. Benchmark Books. pp. 22, 23. ISBN 978-0-7614-2249-5.
^ a b Wallace and Hoebel (1952) pp.124, 125
^ a b c d Wallace and Hoebel (1952) pp.126 132
^ Kroeker
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) pp 20 24
^ "Indian Culture and the Horse" (PDF). Retrieved May 26, 2013.
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) pp. 29 30
^ Newcomb, W.W. Jr. (2002). The Indians of Texas: from prehistoric to modern times. University of Texas Press. pp. 164. ISBN 978-0-292-78425-3.
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) p. 31
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) pp. 31, 32
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) pp. 32, 33
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) p 28
^ Rollings, Deer (2004) pp 25, 26
^ McLaughlin (1992), 158-81
^ McLaughlin (2000), 293 304
^ H m l inen (2008), p.171
^ "Code Talkers - World War I Centennial". www.worldwar1centennial.org. Retrieved May 25, 2021.
^ Holm, Tom (2007). "The Comanche Code Talkers". Code Talkers and Warriors: Native Americans and World War II. Chelsea House Publications. pp. 108 120. ISBN 978-0-7910-9340-5.
^ "Comanche Indians Honor D-Day Code-Talkers". D-Day 70th Anniversary. NBC News. June 9, 2014.
Sources[edit]
Kavanagh, Thomas W. (1996). The Comanches: A History 1706 1875. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-7792-2.
Kroeker, Marvin E. (1997). Comanches and Mennonites on the Oklahoma Plains: A.J. and Magdalena Becker and the Post Oak Mission. Fresno, CA: Centers for Mennonite Brethren Studies. ISBN 0-921788-42-8.
McLaughlin, John E. (1992). "A Counter-Intuitive Solution in Central Numic Phonology". International Journal of American Linguistics. 58 (2): 158 181. doi:10.1086/ijal.58.2.3519754. JSTOR 3519754. S2CID 148250257.
McLaughlin, John E. (2000).  Casad, Gene; Willett, Thomas (eds.). "Language Boundaries and Phonological Borrowing in the Central Numic Languages". Uto-Aztecan: Structural, Temporal, and Geographic Perspectives. Sonora, Mexico: Friends of Uto-Aztecan Universidad de Sonora, Divisi n de Humanidades y Bellas Artes, Hermosillo. ISBN 970-689-030-0.
Meadows, William C (2003). Kiowa, Apache, and Comanche Military Societies: Enduring Veterans, 1800 to the Present. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-70518-0.
Rollings, William H.; Deer, Ada E (2004). The Comanche. Chelsea House Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7910-8349-9.
Swan, Daniel C. (1999). Peyote Religious Art: Symbols of Faith and Belief. Jackson, Mississippi: University of Mississippi Press. ISBN 1-57806-096-6.
Wallace, Ernest; Hoebel, E. Adamson (1952). The Comanche: Lords of the Southern Plains. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 9780806102498. OCLC 1175397.
Nye, Wilbur Sturtevant. Carbine and Lance: The Story of Old Fort Sill, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, 1983
Leckie, William H.. The Buffalo Soldiers: A Narrative of the Negro Cavalry in the West, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, 1967
Fowler, Arlen L.. The Black Infantry in the West, 1869-1891, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, 1996
Further reading[edit]
Fehrenbach, Theodore Reed (1974). The Comanches: The Destruction of a People. New York: Knopf. ISBN 0-394-48856-3. Republished as Fehrenbach, Theodore Reed (2003). The Comanches: The History of a People. New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 1-4000-3049-8.
Foster, Morris W. (1991). Being Comanche: A Social History of an American Indian Community. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. ISBN 0-8165-1367-8.
Hamalainen (H m l inen), Pekka (2008). The Comanche Empire. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300126549.
John, Elizabeth A. H. (1975). Storms Brewed in Other Men's Worlds: The Confrontation of the Indian, Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 1540 1795. College Station: Texas A&M Press. ISBN 0-89096-000-3.
Kavanagh, Thomas W. (2001).  DeMallie, Raymond J. (ed.). "High Plains: Comanche". Handbook of North American Indians. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. 13: 886 906.
Kavanagh, Thomas W. (2007). "Comanche". Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture. Oklahoma Historical Society. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013.
Kavanagh, Thomas W. (2008). Comanche Ethnography. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2764-4.
Kenner, Charles (1969). A History of New Mexican-Plains Indian Relations. University of Oklahoma Press. Norman. OCLC 2141.
Noyes, Stanley (1993). Los Comanches the horse people, 1751 1845. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico. ISBN 0-585-27380-4.
Spady, James O'Neil (2009). "Reconsidering Empire: Current Interpretations of Native American Agency during Colonization (review)". Journal of Colonialism and Colonial History. 10 (2).
Thomas, Alfred Barnaby (1940). The Plains Indians and New Mexico, 1751 1778: A collection of documents illustrative of the history of the eastern frontier of New Mexico. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. OCLC 3626655.
Wolff, Gerald W.; Cash, Joseph W. (1976). The Comanche People. Phoenix, Arizona: Indian Tribal Series.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Comanche.
Library resources about  Comanche 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Comanche Nation   official website
The Comanche Language and Cultural Preservation Committee
Comanche Lodge
"Comanche". History Channel. Archived from the original on March 8, 2010. Retrieved August 26, 2005.
"Comanche". Oklahoma Historical Society. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013.
"Comanche Indians" from the Handbook of Texas Online
"Photographs of Comanche Indians". Portal to Texas History. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007.
"The Texas Comanches". Texas Indians.
vteComancheCulture
Comanche language
Comanche Flute
Native American Church
History
Cherokee Commission
Comanche Campaign
Fort Martin Scott Treaty
Medicine Lodge Treaty
Meusebach Comanche Treaty
Treaty of Tehuacana Creek
Warfare
Battle of Blanco Canyon
Battle of Palo Duro Canyon
Battle of Pease River
Buffalo Hunters' War
Comanche Wars
Comanche Mexico Wars
Red River War
Second Battle of Adobe Walls
Comanche Code Talkers
Places
Comancheria
Blanco Canyon
Comanche Trail
Edwards Plateau
Fort Parker State Park
Palo Duro Canyon
Quanah Parker Star House
Red River
Wichita Mountains
Notable historicindividuals
Spirit Talker
Old Owl
Amorous Man
Ten Bears
Santa Anna
Buffalo Hump
Iron Jacket
Horseback
Tosahwi
Peta Nocona
Big Red Meat
Carne Muerto
Isatai
Quanah Parker
White Parker
Tribalinstitutions
Comanche Nation Casino
Comanche Nation College
vte Native American tribes in TexasFederally recognizedtribes
Alabama Coushatta
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe
Ysleta del Sur Pueblo
Indigenous languages
Araname 
Atacapan 
Borrado 
Caddoan
Coahuilteco
Comecrudan 
Cotoname 
Garzan 
Pakawan
Solano 
Tamaulipecan
Tanpachoan 
Tiwan
Tonkawan 
Wichita
Historical Indigenouspeoples of Texas(Several are inOklahoma today)
Adai 
Akokna (Han) 
Anxau 
Apache (Querecho >< )
Aranama 
Atakapa  (Akokisa, Bidai, Deadose)
Caddo* (Eyeish, Hasinai, Hainai, Kadohadacho, Nabedache, Nabiti, Nacogdoche, Nacono, Nadaco, Nanatsoho, Lower Nasoni, Neche, Nechaui)
Cherokees, Texas *
Coahuiltecan
Comanche*
Decose 
Emet 
Hierbipiame 
Jumanos 
Karankawas 
Kohani 
Kopano 
Lipan Apache
Mayeye 
Pachal 
Pacoa 
Paguame 
Pajalat 
Pampopa 
Papanac 
Pastia 
Pasxa 
Patiri 
Payaya 
Pulacuam 
Sana 
Saracuam 
Semonam 
Sijame 
Tamique 
Teyas 
Tilijae
Tomoacas
Tonkawa*
Wichita and Affiliated Tribes* (Kichai, Taovaya, Tawakoni, Waco, Wichita proper)
Xarames 
Yojuane 
Related topics
Sam Houston and Native American relations
  extinct language        /          extinct tribe        /          ><  early, obsolete name of indigenous tribe(s)          /            people absorbed into other tribe(s)         /          * headquartered in Oklahoma today
vte Native American tribes in OklahomaFederallyrecognizedtribes
Absentee Shawnee
Alabama-Quassarte
Apache
Caddo
Cherokee
Cheyenne and Arapaho
Chickasaw
Choctaw
Citizen Potawatomi
Comanche
Delaware Nation
Delaware Tribe
Eastern Shawnee
Fort Sill Apache
Iowa
Kaw
Kialegee
Kickapoo
Kiowa
Miami
Modoc
Muscogee (Creek)
Osage
Otoe-Missouria
Ottawa
Pawnee
Peoria
Ponca
Quapaw
Sac and Fox
Seminole
Seneca-Cayuga
Shawnee
Thlopthlocco
Tonkawa
United Keetoowah
Wichita
Wyandotte
Tribal languages(still spoken)
Alabama
Arapaho
Caddo
Cayuga
Cherokee
Cheyenne
Chickasaw
Chiwere (Iowa and Otoe)
Choctaw
Comanche
Delaware
Koasati
Hitchiti-Mikasuki
Mescalero-Chiricahua
Mesquakie (Fox, Kickapoo, and Sauk)
Muscogee
Osage
Ottawa
Pawnee
Ponca
Potawatomi
Quapaw
Seneca
Shawnee
Wichita
Wyandot
Yuchi
vte Indigenous peoples of ColoradoOverview
Outline of Colorado prehistory
Prehistory of Colorado
Contemporary peoples native to ColoradoPeople
Arapaho
Cheyenne
Comanche
Jicarilla Apache
Kiowa
Pawnee
Shoshone
Ute
Reservations
Southern Ute Indian Reservation
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe
Major events
Battle of Beecher Island
Colorado War
Comanche Campaign
Meeker Massacre
Sand Creek massacre
Prehistoric cultures in ColoradoPaleo-Indian
Clovis culture
Cody complex
Folsom tradition
Goshen complex
Hell Gap complex
Plainview complex
Plano cultures
Archaic
Apex complex
Basketmaker culture
Mount Albion complex
Oshara tradition
Picosa culture
Post-Archaic
Ancestral Puebloans
Apishapa culture
Dismal River culture
Fremont culture
Panhandle culture
Sopris phase
Tipi ring
Noted archaeologists
Cynthia Irwin-Williams
Paul Sidney Martin
Waldo Rudolph Wedel
Joe Ben Wheat
Related articles
List of ancient dwellings of Pueblo peoples in Colorado
List of prehistoric sites in Colorado
Trail of the Ancients
Authority control: National 
Spain
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comanche&oldid=1145909054"