Physician who specializes in psychiatry
For other uses, see Psychiatrist (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Psychologist.
PsychiatristOccupationNamesPsychiatristalienist (archaic)Occupation typeProfessionspecializationActivity sectorsMedicinepsychiatryDescriptionCompetenciesAnalytical mindpatienceEducation requiredDoctor of Medicine (M.D.) Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS/MBChB) Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.)Fields ofemploymentPsychiatric clinicsRelated jobsPsychologistpsychotherapistPsychiatric-mental health nurse practitioner
A psychiatrist is a physician who specializes in psychiatry, the branch of medicine devoted to the diagnosis, prevention, study, and treatment of mental disorders. Psychiatrists are physicians and evaluate patients to determine whether their symptoms are the result of a physical illness, a combination of physical and mental ailments or strictly mental issues. Sometimes a psychiatrist works within a multi-disciplinary team, which may comprise clinical psychologists, social workers, occupational therapists, and nursing staff. Psychiatrists have broad training in a biopsychosocial approach to the assessment and management of mental illness.
As part of the clinical assessment process, psychiatrists may employ a mental status examination; a physical examination; brain imaging such as a computerized tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or positron emission tomography scan; and blood testing. Psychiatrists use pharmacologic, psychotherapeutic, and/or interventional approaches to treat mental disorders.
Subspecialties[edit]
The field of psychiatry has many subspecialties that require additional (fellowship) training which are certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN) and require Maintenance of Certification Program to continue. These include the following:[1]
Clinical neurophysiology
Forensic psychiatry
Addiction psychiatry
Child and adolescent psychiatry
Geriatric psychiatry
Palliative care
Pain management
Consultation-liaison psychiatry
Sleep medicine
Brain injury medicine
Further, other specialties that exist include:[2]
Cross-cultural psychiatry
Emergency psychiatry
Learning disability
Neurodevelopmental disorder
Cognition diseases, as in various forms of dementia
Biological psychiatry
Community psychiatry
Global mental health
Military psychiatry
Social psychiatry
Sports psychiatry
The United Council for Neurologic Subspecialties in the United States offers certification and fellowship program accreditation in the subspecialties of behavioral neurology and neuropsychiatry, which is open to both neurologists and psychiatrists.
Some psychiatrists specialize in helping certain age groups. Pediatric psychiatry is the area of the profession working with children in addressing psychological problems.[2] Psychiatrists specializing in geriatric psychiatry work with the elderly and are called geriatric psychiatrists or geropsychiatrists.[2] Those who practice psychiatry in the workplace are called occupational psychiatrists in the United States and occupational psychology is the name used for the most similar discipline in the UK.[2] Psychiatrists working in the courtroom and reporting to the judge and jury, in both criminal and civil court cases, are called forensic psychiatrists, who also treat mentally disordered offenders and other patients whose condition is such that they have to be treated in secure units.[2][3]
Other psychiatrists may also specialize in psychopharmacology, psychotherapy, psychiatric genetics, neuroimaging, dementia-related disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, sleep medicine, pain medicine, palliative medicine, eating disorders, sexual disorders, women's health, global mental health, early psychosis intervention, mood disorders and anxiety disorders such as obsessive compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.[2][3]
Psychiatrists work in a wide variety of settings. Some are full-time medical researchers, many see patients in private medical practices, and consult liaison psychiatrists see patients in hospital settings where psychiatric and other medical conditions interact.
Professional requirements[edit]
While requirements to become a psychiatrist differ from country to country, all require a medical degree.[2][4]
India[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In India, a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) degree is the basic qualification needed to do psychiatry. After completing an MBBS (including an internship), they can attend various PG medical entrance exams and get a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) in psychiatry, which is a 3-year course. Diploma course in psychiatry or DNB psychiatry can also be taken to become a psychiatrist.
Netherlands[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In the Netherlands, one must complete medical school after which one is certified as a medical doctor. After a strict selection program, one can specialize for 4.5-years in psychiatry. During this specialization, the resident has to do a 6-month residency in the field of social psychiatry, a 12-month residency in a field of their own choice (which can be child psychiatry, forensic psychiatry, somatic medicine, or medical research).  To become an adolescent psychiatrist, one has to do an extra specialization period of 2 more years. In short, this means that it takes at least 10.5 years of study to become a psychiatrist which can go up to 12.5 years if one becomes a children's and adolescent psychiatrist.
Pakistan[edit]
In Pakistan, one must complete basic medical education, an MBBS, then get registered with the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council (PMDC) as a general practitioner after a one-year mandatory internship, house job. After registration with PMDC, one has to take the FCPS-I exam. After that, they pursue four additional years of training in psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan.[5] Training includes rotations in general medicine, neurology, and clinical psychology for 3 months each, during the first two years. There is a mid-exam intermediate module and a final exam after 4 years.
UK and the Republic of Ireland[edit]
In the United Kingdom, psychiatrists must hold a medical degree.[6] Following this, the individual will work as a foundation house officer for two additional years in the UK, or one year as an intern in the Republic of Ireland to achieve registration as a basic medical practitioner. Training in psychiatry can then begin and it is taken in two parts: three years of basic specialist training culminating in the MRCPsych exam, followed by three years of higher specialist training referred to as "ST4-6" in the UK and "Senior Registrar Training" in the Republic of Ireland. Candidates with MRCPsych degree and complete basic training must reinterview for higher specialist training. At this stage, the development of special interests such as forensic or child/adolescent takes place. At the end of 3 years of higher specialist training, candidates are awarded a Certificate of Completion of (Specialist) Training (CC(S)T). At this stage, the psychiatrist can register as a specialist, and the qualification of CC(S)T is recognized in all EU/EEA states. As such, training in the UK and Ireland is considerably longer than in the US or Canada and frequently takes around 8 9 years following graduation from medical school. Those with a CC(S)T will be able to apply for consultant posts. Those with training from outside the EU/EEA should consult local/native medical boards to review their qualifications and eligibility for equivalence recognition (for example, those with a US residency and ABPN qualification).
US and Canada[edit]
In the U.S. and Canada, one must first attain the degree of M.D. or Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine, followed by practice as a psychiatric resident for another four years (five years in Canada). This extended period involves comprehensive training in psychiatric diagnosis, psychopharmacology, medical care issues, and psychotherapies.  All accredited psychiatry residencies in the United States require proficiency in cognitive behavioral, brief, psychodynamic, and supportive psychotherapies.  Psychiatry residents are required to complete at least four post-graduate months of internal medicine or pediatrics, plus a minimum of two months of neurology during their first year of residency, referred to as an "internship".[4] After completing their training, psychiatrists are eligible to take a specialty board examination to become board-certified.[4]  The total amount of time required to complete educational and training requirements in the field of psychiatry in the United States is twelve years after high school. The average salary for psychiatrists in the U.S. is $220,000 per year.[7] Subspecialists in child and adolescent psychiatry are required to complete a two-year fellowship program, the first year of which can run concurrently with the fourth year of the general psychiatry residency program. This adds one to two years of training.
See also[edit]
List of psychiatrists
List of fictional psychiatrists
Antipsychiatry
References[edit]
^ "Taking a Subspecialty Exam - American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology". Archived from the original on 2015-09-05. Retrieved 2015-09-19.
^ a b c d e f g The Royal College of Psychiatrists. (2005). Careers info for School leavers.  Retrieved March 25, 2007, from "Your training | Royal College of Psychiatrists". Archived from the original on 2007-07-09. Retrieved 2007-03-25.
^ a b American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, Inc. (5 March 2007).  ABPN Certification - Subspecialties.  Retrieved March 25, 2007, from [1]
^ a b c Psychiatry.com (Unknown last update). Student Information.  Retrieved March 25, 2007, from "Psychiatry.com - Student Information". Archived from the original on 2010-10-23. Retrieved 2007-09-21.
^ Training Programs Archived 2015-09-12 at the Wayback Machine
^ Careers info for School leavers Archived 2008-02-07 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Top 12 Highest Paying Jobs and How to Land One - Job\Searcher". 19 August 2021. Archived from the original on 2021-09-07. Retrieved 2021-08-19.
Further reading[edit]
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89042-554-1. OCLC 830807378.
Frances, Allen; First, Michael B. (1999). Your Mental Health: A Layman's Guide to the Psychiatrist's Bible. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-83720-8. OCLC 605729701.
Hafner, H. (January 2002). "Psychiatrie als Beruf" [Psychiatry as a profession]. Der Nervenarzt (in German). 73 (1): 33 40. doi:10.1007/s115-002-8144-1. PMID 11975061. S2CID 42786753.
Stout, Chris E. (1993). From the Other Side of the Couch: Candid Conversations with Psychiatrists and Psychologists. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-27765-8. OCLC 27897880.
vtePsychiatrySubspecialties
Addiction psychiatry
Biological psychiatry
Child and adolescent psychiatry
Cognitive neuropsychiatry
Cross-cultural psychiatry
Developmental disability
Descriptive psychiatry
Eating disorder
Emergency psychiatry
Forensic psychiatry
Geriatric psychiatry
Immuno-psychiatry
Liaison psychiatry
Military psychiatry
Narcology
Neuropsychiatry
Palliative medicine
Pain medicine
Psychotherapy
Sleep medicine
Telepsychiatry
Organizations
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology
American Neuropsychiatric Association
American Psychiatric Association
Campaign Against Psychiatric Abuse
Chinese Society of Psychiatry
Democratic Psychiatry
European Psychiatric Association
Global Initiative on Psychiatry
Hong Kong College of Psychiatrists
Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia
Indian Psychiatric Society
National Institute of Mental Health
Philadelphia Association
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
Royal College of Psychiatrists
Taiwanese Society of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Working Commission to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political Purposes
World Psychiatric Association
Related topics
Behavioral medicine
Clinical neuroscience
Controversies about psychiatry
Anti-psychiatry
Biopsychiatry controversy
Electroconvulsive therapy
Insulin shock therapy
Political abuse of psychiatry
Psychiatric survivors movement
Imaging genetics
Neuroimaging
Neurophysiology
Pentylenetetrazol
Philosophy of psychiatry
Psychiatric epidemiology
Psychiatric genetics
Psychiatric hospital
Psychiatrist
Psychoanalysis
Psycho-oncology
Psychopharmacology
Psychosomatic medicine
Psychosurgery
Lists
Counseling topics
Neurological conditions and disorders
Psychiatric medications
by condition treated
Psychiatric survivors movement
Psychiatrists
Psychotherapies
 Portal
 Outline
Authority control National
France
BnF data
Germany
2
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
2
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychiatrist&oldid=1147461360"