Secret identity of the superhero Wonder Woman
Not to be confused with Diana, Princess of Wales.
Comics character
Diana PrinceDiana Prince pictured with Thomas Tresser on the cover of Wonder Woman #6 (May 2007) by Terry Dodson.Publication informationPublisherDC ComicsFirst appearanceSensation Comics #1 (January 1942)Created byCharles MoultonH. G. PeterIn-story informationAlter egoWonder WomanSpecies
Amazon
Amazon-Olympian Demigoddess (2011 present)
Place of originParadise IslandTeam affiliationsJustice LeagueNotable aliasesPrincess Diana of ThemysciraAbilities
Wonder woman s powers
Diana Prince is a fictional character appearing regularly in stories published by DC Comics, as the secret identity of the Amazonian superhero Wonder Woman, who bought the credentials and identity from a United States Army nurse named Diana Prince. The original Diana went to South America and married her fianc  to become Diana White. The character debuted in Sensation Comics #1 (January 1942) and was created by Charles Moulton and H. G. Peter.
The fictional career of Diana Prince evolved over the years, from the original Army nurse to becoming a military intelligence officer (promoted to higher ranks), then later a civilian employee, businesswoman, astronaut, or staff member at the United Nations, etc. In the TV series Wonder Woman she was a WAVES yeoman in the 1940s. Although originally possessing the powers of Wonder Woman at all times, Diana Prince later lost the powers when in her secret identity, and during the 1960s, Wonder Woman lost her powers and functioned only as a non-powered Diana Prince in other adventures.
Overview[edit]
Through the popularity of her Wonder Woman secret identity, the personality, concept, and name of Diana Prince have become ingrained in popular culture, becoming synonymous with secret identities and innocuous fronts for ulterior motives and activities.
First written in the earliest Wonder Woman comics, Diana Prince's role was multifaceted. Unlike the Superman secret identity of Clark Kent, who was originally little more than a front for Superman's activities, and who adopted a passive "mild-mannered" persona to conceal his underlying strength, Prince's identity functioned both to position Wonder Woman so that she could learn of situations requiring her intervention and to allow the character to embody feminist and other ideals espoused by Charles Moulton. For example, Diana Prince was originally a nurse and then an officer in military intelligence, starting in the typical woman's role of secretary but gradually earning more autonomy, including the authority to interrogate espionage suspects, eventually becoming an intelligence officer in her own right and, over the years, rising from Lieutenant to Major. Although Diana Prince was frequently told not to accompany Trevor at pivotal moments of adventures because it was "no place for a woman", Diana was actually the most competent person to tackle a crisis, whether by exercising her knowledge as Diana Prince or her power as Wonder Woman, riding with an all-girl cavalry of Etta Candy and the Beeta Lambda sorority. During the 1960s, Wonder Woman lost her powers and functioned exclusively as a non-powered Diana Prince who nonetheless experienced high adventure as a Modesty Blaise-type character.
Fictional character biography[edit]
Golden Age[edit]
Diana Prince was originally the name of a U.S. Army nurse during World War II who provided the primary alias for Princess Diana (Wonder Woman) of the Amazons.[1] In January 1942, Princess Diana met Diana Prince, who was sobbing. When Wonder Woman asked her what was wrong, Prince explained that her fianc , Dan White, was in South America and she lacked the funds to go to him. Noticing how similar they were in appearance, Wonder Woman gave Prince a large amount of money she had just earned from Al Kale's promotion of her bullets and bracelets routine; in exchange, Prince gave Wonder Woman her credentials and name. She later saved Steve from Axis forces.[2]
 Wonder Woman encounters Dr. Poison while caring for Maj. Steve Trevor as Nurse Diana Prince.
When Steve Trevor had fully recovered from injuries sustained in his crash landing on Paradise Island and returned to duty at the Office of Strategic Services, Wonder Woman followed him, pursuing a job as secretary. Maj. Trevor already had a secretary of his own, Lila Brown, but Diana Prince successfully obtained a job as Col. Phil Darnell's secretary. Darnell noted that Diana, as an Army nurse, had the rank of 2nd Lieutenant. For a while, Lila was suspicious of Lt. Diana Prince, who did not seem to use any known system of shorthand when taking dictation (because Diana was actually relying on her own superior Amazon-trained eidetic memory) and did not seem to operate as a normal secretary would. Diana learned, to her dismay, that although she was now working alongside Steve Trevor, he only had eyes for Wonder Woman.
The real Diana Prince later returned, seeking out Wonder Woman. She asked for her identity back so that she could find work to help out her inventor husband Daniel White and their infant child. Wonder Woman agreed, and even impersonated her, so her husband would not know she was getting a job, but soon after, Nazi spies kidnapped Diana and planned to ransom her for one of her husband's inventions, an Anti-Aircraft Disintegrator Shell. Wonder Woman discovered the mastermind behind it was Dr Cue, a developer of diseases and gases. Wonder Woman was tied up and placed in an oven, but escaped after pretending to be knocked out by gas. Diana Prince was taken to where the shells were being tested and fell from the plane bound hand and foot while Cue used a parachute as the shell had disintegrated the plane. Wonder Woman rescued Diana and unmasked Cue, revealing him as Colonel Togo Ku, Chief of Japanese spies in America. Wonder Woman rescued Dan White and apprehended the spies. When the invention proved successful, Diana Prince relinquished her legal name and began referring to herself by her married name Diana White, and Wonder Woman resumed using the Diana Prince identity.[3]
Diana Prince continued to work in military intelligence, eventually rising to the rank of Major.[4] She was forced later into the difficult situation of working alongside her true love, Steve Trevor, while Darnell fell for Diana Prince.
When the DC Universe adopted the convention that the Golden Age adventures took place on the parallel world of Earth-Two, it was learned that Wonder Woman eventually gave up her secret identity, married Steve Trevor, and became the mother of Hippolyta "Lyta" Trevor, who became the superheroine Fury. Although she had given up her immortality by marrying Trevor, this Wonder Woman was still aging at a much slower rate than her husband and sometimes met the Earth-1 Wonder Woman.[5]
Golden Age redux[edit]
When the Wonder Woman television series debuted, with its first season set in World War II, the comics followed suit, shifting adventures back to that time. Although the DCU multiverse conventions had been set, the parallel world in which the comic adventures took place deviated significantly from the Golden Age stories that had been retroactively set on Earth-Two, following instead the setting of the TV show. The Diana Prince identity, notably, was not an Army nurse-lieutenant but, instead, a WAVES yeoman, who was secretary for Maj. Trevor and not the commanding officer (Gen. Blankenship, replacing Col. Darnell).
Silver and Bronze Ages[edit]
Later retellings of the origins of Wonder Woman, of dubious continuity for the Earth-One Wonder Woman, excluded the story of Wonder Woman purchasing credentials from a real Diana Prince and, instead, showed her creating the identity from scratch. In some versions, the Diana Prince identity was created to become a military intelligence officer, winning the opportunity after competing against several women in a contest of skills, but in others Diana Prince was first a nurse who then followed Steve to military intelligence. In one version, the identity just appears without explanation.
Diana Prince, the New Wonder Woman[edit]
 Powerless Diana Prince trains with her mentor I Ching.
The change coincided with the switch from longtime editor Robert Kanigher (who had taken over writing for the character following the death of creator William Moulton Marston in 1947), to new editor Dennis O'Neil in Wonder Woman #178 (dated October 1968). According to the new writer/artist Mike Sekowsky, the reason for the change was: "[T]he sales on the old WW were so bad that the book was going to be dropped. The new Wonder Woman was given a chance -- (a last chance for the book) and it worked!" Diana Prince gave herself a "mod" makeover in order to go undercover when Trevor was accused of being a double-agent. The following issue, the Amazons claimed they needed to leave this world for another dimension in order to "renew their magic", and Diana renounced her powers and Wonder Woman identity in order to remain with Steve. Meanwhile, Steve Trevor was kidnapped by the evil Doctor Cyber, international terrorist. During this adventure, Diana Prince met and befriended blind martial arts expert I Ching, who trained her in Asian martial arts, which Diana as a trained Amazon quickly mastered. When one of Cyber's henchwomen killed Trevor (in issue 180), Diana transitioned into working with Ching to bring down Cyber. Other adventures included sword-and-sorcery missions, supernatural villains, fighting militia sects, and helping people in trouble.
Diana left the military, opening a "mod" boutique in New York City. After rescuing runaway Cathy Perkins, who had been captured by a weird dominatrix gang, she hired Cathy to be her assistant and run the boutique when Diana was called away for adventures. One such adventure saw her being forced back into military service for one case.
The non-powered Diana Prince era ended as abruptly as it had started when Kanigher returned as editor in Wonder Woman #204 (dated February 1973). A sniper terrorized New York City. He shot and killed a motorist, whose car crashed into a restaurant in which Diana and Ching were enjoying lunch. Ching was killed, and an enraged Diana set off to stop the sniper. Along the way, she suffered a head injury, and the dazed Diana started operating on subconscious urges that compelled her to steal a military aircraft and head for the Bermuda Triangle, where she crashed. When she woke up, she was suffering from amnesia, and she found herself on Paradise Island, where the Amazons restored as many of her memories as possible, although her time as a non-powered adventurer could not be restored completely.[6] The restoration of the superpowered Wonder Woman was inspired, at least in part, by complaints from feminist advocate Gloria Steinem about the de-powering of the character.[7]
Modernizing the classic concepts[edit]
Wonder Woman returned to man's world, adopting the Diana Prince identity again and finding work at the United Nations, first as a translator and guide[8] and then as an agent for the UN Crisis Bureau, under Morgan Tracy.[9] When Steve Trevor was restored to life mystically[10] (later revealed to be the infusion of the hardy life force of Eros, the love god), he found work at the UN-related Spy-on-Spy service under the alias Steve Howard.[11] Steve and Diana lived and worked together until Steve was kidnapped[12] and slain[13] by a man obsessed with reviving a demon.
In Wonder Woman #250, Diana lost the title of Wonder Woman to an amazon rival named Orana. In spite of her loss, Diana rebelled against the Gods of Olympus and left Paradise Island determined to live her life in her alter ego.  However her super heroine retirement was short lived.  In the following issue, Wonder Woman #251, Orana, called herself the "New Wonder Woman" and tried to pick up Diana's responsibilities as a heroine. In Orana's first major battle, the red-haired Wonder Woman was shot and killed by a terrorist named Warhead. Orana's death allowed Diana to reclaim her role as Wonder Woman once again.  Diana eventually left the UN Crisis Bureau and briefly served as a NASA astronaut in Houston,[14] where she dated fellow astronaut Mike Bailey (later revealed to be operating as Ace of the Royal Flush Gang,[15]) before returning to a different UN program.
Still grieving the second death of Steve Trevor, Diana returned to Paradise Island, where her memories of Steve Trevor were erased in a misguided attempt to heal her emotional distress.[16] When a Steve Trevor from a parallel world crashlanded off Paradise Island,[16] Aphrodite altered the memories of all the world to allow him to be accepted as the Steve Trevor of this world.[17] Wonder Woman erased all traces of her previous life as Diana Prince and established a new Diana Prince identity, becoming an Air Force captain,[18] (eventually major),[4] serving in the Pentagon as adjutant to Col. Trevor in the Special Assignments Bureau, a special military intelligence program designed to interdict global crises before they develop.[19]
For a while, Diana found herself torn between Steve and Maj. Keith Griggs, who was in love with Diana Prince.
This Diana Prince identity was ended during the Crisis on Infinite Earths, when an office meeting was interrupted by Hermes, demanding Diana's service to save Paradise Island and Olympus itself. Diana and Steve were married by Zeus himself, before all of history was rewritten by the events of the Crisis on Infinite Earths.
Post-Crisis[edit]
 Diana creates the persona Diane Prince. Art by Jill Thompson. Diana reveals to reporters that she uses the civilian identity of Diana Prince while working at a museum.Art by John Byrne. After the Crisis on Infinite Earths storyline, the history of all DC Comics' characters were erased and restarted anew. When the Wonder Woman comic book was rebooted "Post-Crisis", the Diana Prince identity was not revived, although references to it were occasionally made as a possible name to use for legal purposes.[20] Instead Wonder Woman was simply referred to as "Diana of Themyscira" when not in costume. Thus, she had no secret identity and lived openly as an Amazon in everyday life. There were a few times where Wonder Woman did adopt a secret identity but only for undercover operations, such as when she worked beside the assassin Deathstroke. During that adventure in the Balkan country of Pan Balgravia Diana created the false persona of Diane Prince to hide herself from the country's government spies while trying to rescue an abducted Barbara Minerva.[21] Later when Diana worked at the Gateway City Museum with Helena Sandsmark she did publicly use her well-known alias during an on-camera interview with a reporter.[22]
When Hippolyta assumed the role of Wonder Woman and traveled back to World War II, she stayed in the home of a Nurse Diana Prince.[23]
in 2005, during the Infinite Crisis storyline, Diana as Wonder Woman was forced to kill an unarmed civilian for the first time ever when deranged businessman/spymaster Maxwell Lord murdered Ted Kord (Blue Beetle II) and seized mental control of Superman, forcing him to brutally attack Batman. Under the influence of her lasso, Lord told her that the only way to stop him was to kill him; seeing no other alternative, she snapped his neck. The Brother Eye sentient computer satellite transmitted live video of Diana killing Lord to screens all over the world, destroying her reputation and even turning Superman and Batman against her. In the wake of the global hostility this act caused toward her, the Amazon went into a year's exile. This exile ended the viability of her initially intended mission of being an ambassador and teacher of Amazon principles. Once she returned to public life, Diana realized that her life as a full-time celebrity superhero and ambassador had kept her removed from humanity. Because of this she again donned the persona of Diana Prince and became an agent at the Department of Metahuman Affairs, where she was ordered to help capture Wonder Woman. During a later battle with Circe, the witch placed a spell on Diana leaving Wonder Woman powerless when in the role of Diana Prince.
In other media[edit]
 Stills from the pilot presentation 1967
The Diana Prince identity has been a feature of almost all significant appearances of Wonder Woman in other media.
The first effort at a pilot presentation for a television series was based on a comedic conceit that the homely Diana Prince saw herself as a gorgeous Amazon whenever she becomes Wonder Woman although no one else sees such a change in her looks.
 Cathy Lee Crosby as Diana Prince in the pilot movie 1974
The first TV pilot movie, starring Cathy Lee Crosby, was modeled primarily on the mod Diana Prince era and featured Crosby as Diana Prince, secretary to Office of Strategic Services (O.S.S) Major Steve Trevor, but secretly operating on her own as an agent known to some as "Wonder Woman".
The Super Friends animated series included at least one episode featuring Diana Prince spinning to become Wonder Woman.
The most significant appearance to date has been the Wonder Woman television series, starring Lynda Carter. Diana Prince was in the first season the bespectacled Yeoman Prince, WAVES secretary to Maj. Steve Trevor in the O.S.S. headquarters in Washington, DC. In the second and third seasons, set in the modern day, Diana Prince was an agent of the Inter-Agency Defense Command (IADC), operating at first from Washington and, in the final episode, from the Los Angeles field office.
The Lynda Carter TV series had a significant impact on the comic book. During the first season, DC Comics decided to set the comic book in World War II to match the series, using the parallel worlds conceit to explain that the Wonder Woman of Earth-One accidentally travelled both back in time and to a parallel world, where she encountered her multiversal counterpart. When the Earth-One Wonder Woman returned to the present day, the comic book remained behind in World War II to follow the adventures of that Wonder Woman.[24] This experiment lasted a year, until the May 1978 issue returned to the present day.[25] Once the comic returned to the present day, the comic art by Jos  Delbo continued to reflect aspects of the TV series, notably the fashion-forward Diana Prince with a long ponytail, but mostly without the Clark Kent-esque glasses which became a feature of the TV series starting in the middle of the second season. From that point on, Diana would wear her glasses if she is either in her office or driving a car. Other aspects of the TV series, most notably the "Wonder spin" transformation and the convention that Diana Prince is powerless until she transforms into Wonder Woman, became incorporated in the 2005 restart of the comic book.
This character is portrayed by Gal Gadot in the 2016 film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. It marks the first theatrical appearance of Diana as well as the first live action theatrical appearance of her Amazonian superhero counterpart, with a new image. She later received her own film in 2017, which depicts the Diana Prince identity as a curator of antiquities at the Louvre Museum in Paris. The name is referenced in the film as Steve Trevor forms it to cut off Diana from fully saying "Diana, Princess of Themyscira" in an effort to form a secret identity for her. This character also appears in Wonder Woman 1984 and most recently in Zack Snyder's Justice League.
Comic books based on the Super Friends cartoon continuity had the original Diana Prince and her husband Dan White as the parents of original kid sidekick Marvin, with his connection being the reason he was considered for the role. This was never brought up in the cartoon. His partner Wendy was the niece of one of Batman's earliest mentors as well.
Secret identity transformation[edit]
In the Golden Age, Diana eventually learned the benefits of keeping her Wonder Woman costume under her military uniform, instead of leaving it at her apartment or in a desk drawer. Her transformation often involved her running out of a room, changing clothes at superspeed, and returning to a room as Wonder Woman. Occasionally, panels would show her in mid-transformation, pulling off stockings and revealing her Wonder Woman costume under the uniform.
A Bronze Age tweak gave her a new method of transformation using the magic lasso. The explanation was that Amazon scientists treated Wonder Woman's clothes with a special chemical that would respond to the vibrations of the magic lasso; whenever Diana stepped into the lasso loop and brought it up and down, her Diana Prince clothes would transform into the Wonder Woman armor.[9]
The best known transformation sequence was created by Lynda Carter in behind-the-scenes decisions for the Wonder Woman television show: a twirling transformation, which was based on a dance maneuver. As the twirl was refined, it involved Diana Prince stretching her arms out and making a counter-clockwise quarter turn and then a series of clockwise turns, with a mystical explosion of light, leaving her as Wonder Woman. Eventually, it was revealed that Diana Prince was powerless, until she executed the twirl and became Wonder Woman. A couple of episodes would have Diana Prince attempting the twirl, only to be interrupted by muggers or having to stop the process due to fear of exposing her secret identity; in which she would not have turned herself into Wonder Woman, implying the process must be completed for her to do so. Also implied is that the process must be precise; the less experienced Wonder Girl attempted the twirl only to find herself still an ordinary woman. Only when she thought back to her training in a flashback with Hippolyta did she realize she must mentally focus and think of the transformation while twirling with ballet-like grace to be effective.
The twirl was featured infrequently on Super Friends, whenever Diana Prince needed to leave her civilian job and attend to the various crises which she and JLA teammates faced throughout the show.
The "Wonder twirl" was copied briefly into the pre-Crisis comics during the period in which the comic book returned to World War II in order to correspond with the first season of the TV series, but Wonder Woman never lost her strength as Diana Prince. The twirl returned a few times in the post-Crisis comic book, before the post-Infinite Crisis reboot of the series, which brought the twirl back as a primary feature, along with the TV show convention that Wonder Woman loses her powers in the Diana Prince identity.[26]
The "Wonder twirl" was also shown in the "To Another Shore" episode of Justice League Unlimited and in a scene of Reign of the Supermen.
Diana as successful businesswoman[edit]
Main article: Wonder Woman (2011 TV pilot)
In 2011, David E. Kelley wrote a Wonder Woman pilot for NBC that was never picked up to be on the air. The story takes place in modern-day Los Angeles, and the character, played by Adrianne Palicki, would have three identities: Wonder Woman (a superhero who fights crime), Diana Themyscira (Wonder Woman's public persona outside of costume, who is a successful businesswoman and owner of Themyscira Industries) and Diana Prince (an ordinary shy woman, the other assistant of Diana Themyscira).  The Diana Prince identity would have been used to allow Diana some escape from her more recognized role as Diana Themyscira and Wonder Woman.
See also[edit]
List of Wonder Woman enemies
List of Wonder Woman supporting characters
References[edit]
^ Jimenez, Phil; Wells, John (2010). The Essential Wonder Woman Encyclopedia. Del Rey. p. 333. ISBN 978-0345501073.
^ Sensation Comics #1 (January 1942)
^ Sensation Comics #9 (September 1942)
^ a b "The History of Wonder Woman's Secret Comic Book Identity". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2018-01-30.
^ Wonder Woman #300 (February 1983)
^ Wonder Woman #209 (January/February 1973)
^ Carol A. Strickland, "Truly, Modly, Deeply: The Diana Prince Era", Fanzing, issue #37
^ Wonder Woman #204 (January/February 1973)
^ a b Wonder Woman #212 (June July 1974)
^ Wonder Woman #223 (April May 1976)
^ Wonder Woman #225 (August September 1976)
^ Wonder Woman #247 (September 1978)
^ Wonder Woman #248 (October 1978)
^ Wonder Woman #251-256
^ Wonder Woman #256 (June 1979)
^ a b Wonder Woman #270 (August 1980)
^ Wonder Woman #271 (September 1980)
^ Wonder Woman Apparently Has An Official Job In Batman V Superman
^ Wonder Woman #272 (October 1980)
^ Wonder Woman (vol. 2) #7 (August 1987)
^ Wonder Woman Special #1 and Wonder Woman (vol. 2) #63 (June 1992)
^ Wonder Woman (vol. 2) #118 (February 1997)
^ Wonder Woman (vol. 2) #185 (November 2002)
^ Wonder Woman #228 (February 1977)
^ Wonder Woman #243 (May 1978)
^ Wonder Woman (vol. 3) Annual #1 (November 2007)
External links[edit]
YouTube video clip of spinning transformation from season one of TV series
vteWonder Woman
William Moulton Marston
Elizabeth Holloway Marston
Olive Byrne
H. G. Peter
Other contributors
CharactersWonder Women
Diana Prince
Orana
Artemis of Bana-Mighdall
Hippolyta
Nubia
Wonder Girls
Cassie Sandsmark
Donna Troy
Yara Flor
Supportingcharacters
Antiope
Etta Candy
Fury
Hephaestus
Heracles/Hercules
Hermes
I Ching
Julia and Vanessa Kapatelis
Justice League
Mala
Nemesis (Thomas Tresser)
The Olympian
Paula von Gunther
Philippus
Poseidon
Queen Desira
Helena Sandsmark
Sarge Steel
Steve Trevor
Wonder Man
Zeus
Zola
Enemies
Ares
Baron Blitzkrieg
Baroness Paula von Gunther
Blue Snowman
Veronica Cale
Cheetah
Circe
Dark Angel
Decay
Doctor Cyber
Doctor Poison
Doctor Psycho
Duke of Deception
Egg Fu
Eviless
First Born
Genocide
Giganta
Hades
Hypnota
Kung
Mask
Maxwell Lord
Medusa
Minister Blizzard
Osira
Queen Clea
Silver Swan
Superwoman
Tezcatlipoca
Zara
Factions
Amazons of Themyscira
Amazons of Bana-Mighdall
Children of Ares
Godwatch
Olympian Gods
THEM!
Titans of Myth
Villainy Inc.
Locations
Aeaea
Themyscira (The Paradise Islands)
Publications
All Star Comics
Wonder Woman
Amazonia
Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity
The Blue Amazon
Comic Cavalcade
The Legend of Wonder Woman
Sensation Comics
Superman and Wonder Woman: The Hidden Killer
Superman/Wonder Woman
Wonder Woman '77
The Wonder Woman Chronicles
Wonder Woman: Earth One
The World's Greatest Superheroes
Storylines
 Introducing Wonder Woman  (1941)
Gods and Mortals (1987)
Challenge of the Gods (1987 88)
War of the Gods (1991)
The Contest (1994)
The Challenge of Artemis (1995)
Paradise Island Lost (2001)
Our Worlds at War (2001)
The Hiketeia (2002)
Down to Earth (2003 04)
Who Is Wonder Woman? (2006 07)
Amazons Attack! (2007)
The Circle (2008)
Ends of the Earth (2008)
Rise of the Olympian (2009)
Flashpoint (2011)
The Lies (2016)
Year One (2016)
The Truth (2017)
Godwatch (2017)
Trial of the Amazons (2022)
Technology
Golden Girdle of Gaea
Invisible Plane
Lasso of Truth
Mental radio
Wonder Woman's bracelets
In other mediaFilm
1974 film
2009 film
Wonder Woman: Bloodlines
DC Extended Universe
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice
2017 film
soundtrack
Justice League
Zack Snyder's Justice League
Wonder Woman 1984
soundtrack
Shazam! Fury of the Gods
Television
Wonder Woman
episodes
2011 TV pilot
Video games
Wonder Woman
Miscellaneous
Alternative versions
Earth-Two
Bizarra
Superwoman
Cultural impact
Professor Marston and the Wonder Women
Literature
Wonder Women! The Untold Story of American Superheroines
 Category
vteGolden Age of Comic BooksAce Comics
Captain Courageous
Doctor Nemesis
The Flag
Lash Lightning
The Raven
Unknown Soldier
Vulcan
All-AmericanPublications
The Atom
Al Pratt
Black Canary
Dinah Drake
Doctor Mid-Nite
Charles McNider
Doiby Dickles
The Flash
Jay Garrick
The Gay Ghost
Green Lantern
Alan Scott
Hawkgirl
Shiera Sanders Hall
Hawkman
Carter Hall
Hop Harrigan
Johnny Thunder
Justice Society of America
The King
Mister Terrific
Terry Sloane
Neptune Perkins
Red Tornado
Sargon the Sorcerer
The Terrific Whatzit
Thunderbolt
Ultra-Man
The Whip
Wildcat
Ted Grant
Wonder Woman
Diana Prince
Centaur Comics
Airman
Amazing-Man
The Arrow
The Clock
The Eye
Fantom of the Fair
Magician from Mars
The Masked Marvel
Minimidget
Charlton Comics
Atomic Mouse
Captain Atom
Nightshade
Mr. Muscles
Nature Boy
Space Adventures
Yellowjacket
Dell Comics
Doctor Hormone
Flash Gordon
The Owl
Supermind's Son
Zorro
Fawcett Comics
Bulletgirl
Bulletman
Captain Marvel
Captain Marvel Jr.
Captain Midnight
Dan Dare
Hoppy the Marvel Bunny
Ibis the Invincible
Lieutenant Marvels
Marvel Family
Mary Marvel
Master Man
Minute-Man
Mr. Scarlet
Nyoka the Jungle Girl
Phantom Eagle
Pinky the Whiz Kid
Scoop Smith
Spy Smasher
Squadron of Justice
Sweethearts
Uncle Marvel
Fox Comics
Black Fury
Blue Beetle
Dan Garret
The Bouncer
Bronze Man
Dynamo
The Flame
Green Mask
The Moth
Samson
Stardust the Super Wizard
U.S. Jones
Wonder Man
Harvey Comics
Black Cat
Captain 3-D
Captain Freedom
Green Hornet
Invisible Scarlet O'Neil
Kato
Shock Gibson
Spirit of '76
Lev GleasonPublications
Captain Battle
Crimebuster
Daredevil
Little Wise Guys
Silver Streak
MLJ Comics
The Black Hood
Bob Phantom
Captain Flag
The Comet
The Firefly
The Fox
The Hangman
The Shield
Super Duck
The Web
The Wizard
National AlliedPublications
Ace the Bat-Hound
Air Wave
Aquaman
Batman
Batwoman
Black Pirate
Boy Commandos
Captain Comet
Chris KL-99
Congo Bill
Crimson Avenger
Lee Travis
Dan the Dyna-Mite
Dark Ranger
Detective Chimp
Doctor Fate
Kent Nelson
Doctor Occult
Genius Jones
Gimmick Girl
Green Arrow
Guardian
Hourman
Rex Tyler
Johnny Quick
Johnny Chambers
King Faraday
The Knight
Krypto
Liberty Belle
Manhunter
Paul Kirk
Martian Manhunter
Miss X
Mr. America
Newsboy Legion
Phantom Stranger
Rex the Wonder Dog
Robin
Dick Grayson
Robotman
Rose Psychic
Sandman
Wesley Dodds
Sandy the Golden Boy
Seven Soldiers of Victory
Shining Knight
Sir Justin
Slam Bradley
The Spectre
Jim Corrigan
Speedy
Roy Harper
Squire
Star-Spangled Kid
Sylvester Pemberton
Starman
Ted Knight
Stripesy
Stuff the Chinatown Kid
Superboy
Kal-El
Superman
Superwoman
Lois Lane
Tarantula
TNT
Tommy Tomorrow
Vigilante
Greg Saunders
Wing
Wonder Woman
Zatara
Nedor Comics
American Crusader
American Eagle
Black Terror
Captain Future
Doc Strange
Fighting Yank
The Ghost
Grim Reaper
Judy of the Jungle
Kara the Jungle Princess
Lance Lewis, Space Detective
Liberator
The Magnet
Miss Masque
Princess Pantha
Pyroman
The Scarab
The Woman in Red
Novelty Press
Blue Bolt
Dick Cole
The Target
The Targeteers
The Twister
PrizePublications
Atomic-Man
Black Owl
Fighting American
Green Lama
Yank & Doodle
Quality Comics
#711
The Black Condor
Blackhawk
Blue Tracer
Bozo the Iron Man
Captain Triumph
Doll Girl
Doll Man
Firebrand
The Human Bomb
Invisible Hood
The Jester
Kid Eternity
Lady Luck
Madame Fatal
Magno
Manhunter
Merlin the Magician
Midnight
Miss America
Miss Fear
Mouthpiece
Neon the Unknown
Phantom Lady
Plastic Man
Quicksilver
The Ray
Red Bee
Red Torpedo
The Spider
Spider Widow
Uncle Sam
Wildfire
Wonder Boy
Woozy Winks
Timely Comics
All-Winners Squad
American Ace
The Angel
Black Marvel
Black Widow
Claire Voyant
Blazing Skull
Blonde Phantom
Blue Blade
Blue Diamond
Breeze Barton
Bucky
Bucky Barnes
Captain America
Captain Wonder
The Challenger
Citizen V
The Destroyer
Dynamic Man
Father Time
The Ferret
Fiery Mask
The Fin
Golden Girl
The Human Torch
Jack Frost
Laughing Mask
Marvel Boy
Mercury
Miss America
Miss Fury
Mister E
Namor
Namora
The Patriot
Phantom Reporter
Red Raven
Rockman
Silver Scorpion
Sun Girl
Super Rabbit
Thin Man
Thunderer
Tim Mulrooney
Toro
Venus
The Vision
The Whizzer
Robert Frank
The Witness
Young Allies
Misc.
American Comics Group
Superkatt
Anglo-American Publishing
Commander Steel
Atlas Publications
Captain Atom
Bell Features
The Brain
Johnny Canuck
Nelvana of the Northern Lights
Cardal Publishing
Streamline
Columbia Comics
The Face
Skyman
David McKay Publications
Mandrake the Magician
The Phantom
DC Thomson
The Amazing Mr X
Jack Flash
Dynamic Publications
Dynamic Man
Yankee Girl
Eastern Color Printing
Buck Rogers
Hydroman
Phantom Magician
EC Comics
Moon Girl
Superduperman
Elliot Publishing Company
Kismet, Man of Fate
Fiction House
Fantomah
Hillman Periodicals
Airboy
The Heap
Holyoke Publishing
Cat-Man
Kitten
Miss Victory
L. Miller & Son, Ltd.
Kid Marvelman
Marvelman
Young Marvelman
Magazine Enterprises
Funnyman
Maple Leaf Publishing
Brok Windsor
Iron Man
Rural Home Publications
Green Turtle
Street & Smith
The Avenger
Doc Savage
The Shadow
Supersnipe
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diana_Prince&oldid=1147385506"