Intentional deception made for personal gain or to damage another individual
For other uses, see Fraud (disambiguation).
Criminal law
Elements
Actus reus
Mens rea
Causation
Concurrence
Scope of criminal liability
Accessory
Accomplice
Complicity
Corporate
Principal
Vicarious
Severity of offense
Felony
Infraction (also called violation)
Misdemeanor
Inchoate offenses
Attempt
Conspiracy
Incitement
Solicitation
Offences against the person
Assassination
Assault
Battery
Child abuse
Criminal negligence
Defamation
Domestic violence
False imprisonment
Harassment
Home invasion
Homicide
Human trafficking
Intimidation
Kidnapping
Castration
Menacing
Manslaughter (corporate)
Mayhem
Murder
felony
Negligent homicide
Regicide
Invasion of privacy
Robbery
Stalking
Torture
Sexual offenses
Adultery
Bigamy
Child sexual abuse
Cybersex trafficking
Fornication
Homosexuality
Incest
Indecent exposure
Masturbation
Obscenity
Prostitution
Rape
Sex trafficking
Sexual assault
Sexual slavery
Voyeurism
Crimes against property
Arson
Blackmail
Bribery
Burglary
Embezzlement
Extortion
False pretenses
Forgery
Fraud
Gambling
Intellectual property violation
Larceny
Payola
Pickpocketing
Possessing stolen property
Robbery
Smuggling
Tax evasion
Theft
Trespass to land
Vandalism, Mischief
Crimes against justice
Compounding
Malfeasance in office
Miscarriage of justice
Misprision
Obstruction
Perjury
Perverting the course of justice
Crimes against the public
Apostasy
Begging
Censorship violation
Dueling
Genocide
Miscegenation
Illegal consumption (such as prohibition of drugs, alcohol, and smoking)
Piracy
Suicide
Terrorism
Usurper
War Crimes
Crimes against animals
Cruelty to animals
Wildlife smuggling
Bestiality
Crimes against the state
L se-majest 
Treason
Espionage
Secession
Sedition
Subversion
Defences to liability
Automatism
Consent
Defence of property
Diminished responsibility
Duress
Entrapment
Ignorantia juris non excusat
Infancy
Insanity
Justification
Mistake (of law)
Necessity
Provocation
Self-defence
Other common-law areas
Contracts
Evidence
Property
Torts
Wills, trusts and estates
Portals
Law
vte
Part of the common law seriesTort law
(Outline)
Trespass to the person
Assault
Battery
False imprisonment
Intentional infliction of emotional distress
Property torts
Trespass
land
chattels
Conversion
Dignitary torts
Appropriation
Defamation
False light
Slander
Libel
Invasion of privacy
Intrusion on Seclusion
Breach of confidence
Abuse of process
Malicious prosecution
Sexual torts
Alienation of affections
Criminal conversation
Seduction
Breach of promise
Negligent torts
Negligent infliction of emotional distress
Employment-related
Entrustment
Malpractice
legal
medical
Principles of negligence
Duty of care
Trespassers
Licensees
Invitees
Standard of care
Reasonable person
Proximate cause
Res ipsa loquitur
Restitutio ad integrum
Rescue doctrine
Duty to rescue
Comparative responsibility
Contributory negligence
Attractive nuisance
Strict and absolute liability
Product liability
Ultrahazardous activity
M. C. Mehta v. Union of India
Deep pockets
Nuisance
Public nuisance
Rylands v Fletcher
Economic torts
Conspiracy
Restraint of trade
Insurance bad faith (American law)
Fraud
Tortious interference
Defences
Assumption of risk
Consent
Necessity
Statute of limitations
Self-defense
Defense of others
Defence of property
Shopkeeper's privilege
Neutral reportage
Liability
Intentional torts
Last clear chance
Eggshell skull
Vicarious liability
Respondeat superior
Volenti non fit injuria
Ex turpi causa non oritur actio
Joint and several liability
Market share liability
Transferred intent
Remedies
Damages
Punitive
Special
Incidental
Injunction
Tracing
Detinue
Replevin
Trover
Other topics in tort law
Tort reform
Non-economic damages caps
Quasi-tort
Delict (term used for torts in some civil and mixed legal systems)
Conflict of tort laws
Private attorney general
Class action
By jurisdiction
America
Australia
Canada
China
Mainland and historical
Republic of China
Europe
England and Wales
India
Japan
Other common law areas
Contracts
Criminal law
Evidence
Property
Wills, trusts, and estates
 Law portalvte
 A fake automated teller slot used to commit bank fraud upon bank patrons.
In law, fraud is intentional deception to secure unfair or unlawful gain, or to deprive a victim of a legal right. Fraud can violate civil law (e.g., a fraud victim may sue the fraud perpetrator to avoid the fraud or recover monetary compensation) or criminal law (e.g., a fraud perpetrator may be prosecuted and imprisoned by governmental authorities), or it may cause no loss of money, property, or legal right but still be an element of another civil or criminal wrong.[1] The purpose of fraud may be monetary gain or other benefits, for example by obtaining a passport, travel document, or driver's license, or mortgage fraud, where the perpetrator may attempt to qualify for a mortgage by way of false statements.[2]
Internal fraud, also known as "insider fraud", is fraud committed or attempted by someone within an organisation such as an employee.[3]
A hoax is a distinct concept that involves deliberate deception without the intention of gain or of materially damaging or depriving a victim.
As a civil wrong[edit]
In common law jurisdictions, as a civil wrong, fraud is a tort. While the precise definitions and requirements of proof vary among jurisdictions, the requisite elements of fraud as a tort generally are the intentional misrepresentation or concealment of an important fact upon which the victim is meant to rely, and in fact does rely, to the harm of the victim.[4] Proving fraud in a court of law is often said to be difficult as the intention to defraud is the key element in question.[5] As such, proving fraud comes with a "greater evidentiary burden than other civil claims". This difficulty is exacerbated by the fact that some jurisdictions require the victim to prove fraud by clear and convincing evidence.[6]
The remedies for fraud may include rescission (i.e., reversal) of a fraudulently obtained agreement or transaction, the recovery of a monetary award to compensate for the harm caused, punitive damages to punish or deter the misconduct, and possibly others.[7]
In cases of a fraudulently induced contract, fraud may serve as a defense in a civil action for breach of contract or specific performance of contract. Similarly, fraud may serve as a basis for a court to invoke its equitable jurisdiction.
As a criminal offense[edit]
In common law jurisdictions, as a criminal offense, fraud takes many different forms, some general (e.g., theft by false pretense) and some specific to particular categories of victims or misconduct (e.g., bank fraud, insurance fraud, forgery). The elements of fraud as a crime similarly vary. The requisite elements of perhaps the most general form of criminal fraud, theft by false pretense, are the intentional deception of a victim by false representation or pretense with the intent of persuading the victim to part with property and with the victim parting with property in reliance on the representation or pretense and with the perpetrator intending to keep the property from the victim.[8]
By region[edit]
North America[edit]
Canada[edit]
Section 380(1) of the Criminal Code provides the general definition for fraud in Canada:
380. (1) Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or
(b) is guilty
(i) of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or
(ii) of an offence punishable on summary conviction, where the value of the subject-matter of the offence does not exceed five thousand dollars.[9]
In addition to the penalties outlined above, the court can also issue a prohibition order under s. 380.2 (preventing a person from "seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or valuable security of another person"). It can also make a restitution order under s. 380.3.[10]
The Canadian courts have held that the offence consists of two distinct elements:
A prohibited act of deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means. In the absence of deceit or falsehood, the courts will look objectively for a "dishonest act"; and
The deprivation must be caused by the prohibited act, and deprivation must relate to property, money, valuable security, or any service.[11]
The Supreme Court of Canada has held that deprivation is satisfied on proof of detriment, prejudice or risk of prejudice; it is not essential that there be actual loss.[12] Deprivation of confidential information, in the nature of a trade secret or copyrighted material that has commercial value, has also been held to fall within the scope of the offence.[13]
United States[edit]
See also: United States free speech exceptions
Criminal fraud[edit]
The proof requirements for criminal fraud charges in the United States are essentially the same as the requirements for other crimes: guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Throughout the United States fraud charges can be misdemeanours or felonies depending on the amount of loss involved. High value fraud can also trigger additional penalties. For example, in California, losses of $500,000 or more will result in an extra two, three, or five years in prison in addition to the regular penalty for the fraud.[14]
The U.S. government's 2006 fraud review concluded that fraud is a significantly under-reported crime, and while various agencies and organizations were attempting to tackle the issue, greater co-operation was needed to achieve a real impact in the public sector.[15] The scale of the problem pointed to the need for a small but high-powered body to bring together the numerous counter-fraud initiatives that existed.
Civil fraud[edit]
Although elements may vary by jurisdiction and the specific allegations made by a plaintiff who files a lawsuit that alleged fraud, typical elements of a fraud case in the United States are that:
Somebody misrepresents a material fact in order to obtain action or forbearance by another person;
The other person relies upon the misrepresentation; and
The other person suffers injury as a result of the act or forbearance taken in reliance upon the misrepresentation.
To establish a civil claim of fraud, most jurisdictions in the United States require that each element of a fraud claim be pleaded with particularity and be proved by a preponderance of the evidence,[16] meaning that it is more likely than not that the fraud occurred. Some jurisdictions impose a higher evidentiary standard, such as Washington State's requirement that the elements of fraud be proved with clear, cogent, and convincing evidence (very probable evidence),[17] or Pennsylvania's requirement that common law fraud be proved by clear and convincing evidence.[18]
The measure of damages in fraud cases is normally computed using one of two rules:[19]
The "benefit of bargain" rule, which allows for recovery of damages in the amount of the difference between the value of the property had it been as represented and its actual value;
Out-of-pocket loss, which allows for the recovery of damages in the amount of the difference between the value of what was given and the value of what was received.
Special damages may be allowed if shown to have been proximately caused by defendant's fraud and the damage amounts are proved with specificity.
Many jurisdictions permit a plaintiff in a fraud case to seek punitive or exemplary damages.[20]
Asia[edit]
China[edit]
Zhang Yingyu's story collection The Book of Swindles (available here;[21] ca. 1617) testifies to rampant commercial fraud, especially involving itinerant businessmen, in late Ming China.[22] The Economist, CNN, and other media outlets regularly report on incidents of fraud or bad faith in Chinese business and trade practices.[23][24][25] Forbes cites cybercrime as a persistent and growing threat to Chinese consumers.[26]
India[edit]
In India the criminal laws are enshrined in the Indian Penal Code.[27] It is supplemented by the Criminal Procedure Code and Indian Evidence Act.
Europe[edit]
United Kingdom[edit]
In 2016 the estimated value lost through fraud in the UK was  193 billion a year.[28]
In January 2018 the Financial Times reported that the value of UK fraud hit a 15-year high of  2.11bn in 2017, according to a study. The article said that the accountancy firm BDO examined reported fraud cases worth more than  50,000 and found that the total number rose to 577 in 2017, compared with 212 in 2003. The study found that the average amount stolen in each incident rose to  3.66m, up from  1.5m in 2003.[29]
As at November 2017, fraud is the most common criminal offence in the UK according to a study by Crowe Clark Whitehill, Experian and the Centre for Counter Fraud Studies.[30] The study suggests the UK loses over  190 billion per year to fraud.  190 billion is more than 9% of the UK's projected GDP for 2017 ($2,496 ( 2,080) billion according to Statistics Times.[citation needed]) The estimate for fraud in the UK figure is more than the entire GDP of countries such as Romania, Qatar and Hungary.[31]
According to another review by the UK anti-fraud charity Fraud Advisory Panel (FAP), business fraud accounted for  144bn, while fraud against individuals was estimated at  9.7bn. The FAP has been particularly critical of the support available from the police to victims of fraud in the UK outside of London. Although victims of fraud are generally referred to the UK's national fraud and cyber crime reporting centre, Action Fraud, the FAP found that there was "little chance" that these crime reports would be followed up with any kind of substantive law enforcement action by UK authorities, according to the report.[32]
In July 2016, it was reported that fraudulent activity levels in the UK increased in the 10 years leading up to 2016 from  52 billion to  193 bn. This figure would be a conservative estimate, since as the former commissioner of the City of London Police, Adrian Leppard, has said, only 1 in 12 such crimes are actually reported.[33] Donald Toon, director of the NCA's economic crime command, stated in July 2016: "The annual losses to the UK from fraud are estimated to be more than  190bn". Figures released in October 2015 from the Crime Survey of England and Wales found that there had been 5.1 million incidents of fraud in England and Wales in the previous year, affecting an estimated one in 12 adults and making it the most common form of crime.[34]
Also in July 2016, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) stated "Almost six million fraud and cyber crimes were committed last year in England and Wales and estimated there were two million computer misuse offences and 3.8 million fraud offences in the 12 months to the end of March 2016." Fraud affects one in ten people in the UK. According to the ONS, most fraud relates to bank account fraud. These figures are separate from the headline estimate that another 6.3 million crimes (distinct from fraud) were perpetrated in the UK against adults in the year to March 2016.[35]
Fraud was not included in a "Crime Harm Index" published by the Office for National Statistics in 2016. Michael Levi, professor of criminology at Cardiff University, remarked in August 2016 that it was "deeply regrettable" that fraud was being left out of the first index despite being the most common crime reported to police in the UK. Levi said "If you've got some categories that are excluded, they are automatically left out of the police's priorities."[citation needed] The Chief of the National Audit Office (NAO), Sir Anyas Morse has also said "For too long, as a low-value but high-volume crime, online fraud has been overlooked by government, law enforcement and industry. It is now the most commonly experienced crime in England and Wales and demands an urgent response."[36]
HM Treasury issued guidance to central government departments in January 2011 concerned with "Tackling Internal Fraud", concerned that economic pressures and potential staff redundancies at the time might lead those staff who "might be tempted" to commit fraud to make more of any opportunity which might arise, noting a possible shift in the balance between "the reward from fraud" and the risk of detection.[37] An aspect of the guidance was to equip staff to look out for "fraud indicators": clues or hints that an individual member of staff, team or area of activity might need "a closer look".[37]: Section 4.16 
England, Wales, and Northern Ireland[edit]
Since 2007, fraud in England and Wales and Northern Ireland has been covered by the Fraud Act 2006. The Act was given Royal Assent on 8 November 2006, and came into effect on 15 January 2007.[38]
The Act gives a statutory definition of the criminal offence of fraud, defining it in three classes fraud by false representation, fraud by failing to disclose information, and fraud by abuse of position. It provides that a person found guilty of fraud is liable to a fine or imprisonment for up to twelve months on summary conviction (six months in Northern Ireland), or a fine or imprisonment for up to ten years on conviction on indictment. This Act largely replaces the laws relating to obtaining property by deception, obtaining a pecuniary advantage and other offences that were created under the Theft Act 1978.
Scotland[edit]
In Scots law, fraud is covered under the common law and a number of statutory offences. The main fraud offences are common law fraud, uttering, embezzlement, and statutory fraud. The Fraud Act 2006 does not apply in Scotland.
Governmental Organizations[edit]
Main articles: Serious Fraud Office (United Kingdom) and Cifas
The Serious Fraud Office is an arm of the Government of the United Kingdom, accountable to the Attorney-General.
The National Fraud Authority (NFA) was, until 2014, a government agency coordinating the counter-fraud response in the UK.
Cifas is a British fraud prevention service, a not-for-profit membership organization for all sectors that enables organizations to share and access fraud data using their databases. Cifas is dedicated to the prevention of fraud, including internal fraud by staff, and the identification of financial and related crime.
Cost[edit]
Participants of a 2010 survey by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimated that the typical organization loses five percent of its annual revenue to fraud, with a median loss of $160,000. Fraud committed by owners and executives were more than nine times as costly as employee fraud. The industries most commonly affected are banking, manufacturing, and government.[39]
Types of fraudulent acts[edit]
 The highly decorated fake uniform worn by a man impersonating a "Marine" caught by two gunnery sergeants at Times Square in New York City, New York
 An advertisement for possibly fraudulent "work-at-home scheme"
The falsification of documents, known as forgery, and counterfeiting are types of fraud involved in physical duplication or fabrication. The "theft" of one's personal information or identity, like one finding out another's social security number and then using it as identification, is a type of fraud. Fraud can be committed through and across many media including mail, wire, phone, and the Internet (computer crime and Internet fraud).
Given the international nature of the web and ease with which users can hide their location, obstacles to checking identity and legitimacy online, and the variety of hacker techniques available to gain access to PII have all contributed to the very rapid growth of Internet fraud.[40]  In some countries, tax fraud is also prosecuted under false billing or tax forgery.[41] There have also been fraudulent "discoveries", e.g., science, where the appetite is for prestige rather than immediate monetary gain.[42]
Commodities fraud[edit]
The illegal act of obtaining (or the attempt of obtaining) a certain amount of currency in accordance with a contract that promises the later exchange of equated assets, which ultimately never arrive, is a type of fraud, known as commodities fraud.[43] Alternatively, the term can relate to: the failure of registering in an exchange; the act of deliberately providing falsified information to clients; the action of executing transactions with the sole purpose of making a profit for the payee; the theft of client funds.[43][better source needed]
Detection[edit]
 A fraudulent manufacturer's suggested retail price on a speaker
Further information: Data analysis techniques for fraud detection
The detection of fraudulent activities on a large scale is possible with the harvesting of massive amounts of financial data paired with predictive analytics or forensic analytics, the use of electronic data to reconstruct or detect financial fraud.
Using computer-based analytic methods in particular allows for surfacing of errors, anomalies, inefficiencies, irregularities, and biases which often refer to fraudsters gravitating to certain dollar amounts to get past internal control thresholds.[44] These high-level tests include tests related to Benford's Law and possibly also those statistics known as descriptive statistics. High-level tests are always followed by more focused tests to look for small samples of highly irregular transactions. The familiar methods of correlation and time-series analysis can also be used to detect fraud and other irregularities.[45]
Anti-fraud provisioning[edit]
Beyond laws that aim at prevention of fraud, there are also governmental and non-governmental organizations that aim to fight fraud. Between 1911 and 1933, 47 states adopted the so-called Blue Sky Laws status.[46]
These laws were enacted and enforced at the state level and regulated the offering and sale of securities to protect the public from fraud. Though the specific provisions of these laws varied among states, they all required the registration of all securities offerings and sales, as well as of every U.S. stockbroker and brokerage firm.[47] However, these Blue Sky laws were generally found to be ineffective. To increase public trust in the capital markets the President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt, established the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).[48] The main reason for the creation of the SEC was to regulate the stock market and prevent corporate abuses relating to the offering and sale of securities and corporate reporting. The SEC was given the power to license and regulate stock exchanges, the companies whose securities traded on them, and the brokers and dealers who conducted the trading.[49]
Further reading[edit]
Further information: List of notable fraudsters
Apart from fraud, there are several related categories of intentional deceptions that may or may not include the elements of personal gain or damage to another individual:
Obstruction of justice
18 U.S.C. 704 which criminalizes false representation of having been awarded any decoration or medal authorized by Congress for the Armed Forces of the United States
See also[edit]
Bait-and-switch
Caper stories (such as The Sting)
Contract fraud
Corruption
Cramming (fraud)
Creative accounting
Crimestoppers
Deception
Electoral fraud
Embezzlement
False Claims Act
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
Financial crimes
Forgery
Fortune telling fraud
Fraud deterrence
Fraud in the factum
Fraud in parapsychology
Fraud Squad (UK)
Friendly fraud
Front running
Geneivat da'at
Great Stock Exchange Fraud of 1814
Guinness share-trading fraud, famous British business scandal of the 1980s
Hoax
Identity management
Impersonator
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Internet fraud
Interpol
Journalism fraud
Mail and wire fraud
Money laundering
Misappropriation
The National Council Against Health Fraud
Organized crime
Phishing, attempt to fraudulently acquire sensitive information
Placebo
Police impersonation
Political corruption
Push payment fraud
Quackery
Quatloos.com
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO)
SAS 99
Scam
Scientific misconduct
Secret profits
Shell company
Swampland in Florida
Tobashi scheme, concealing financial losses
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
United States Postal Inspection Service
United States Secret Service
White-collar crime
Wood laundering
References[edit]
^ "Legal Dictionary: fraud". Law.com. Retrieved 27 January 2016.
^ "Basic Legal Concepts". Journal of Accountancy. October 2004. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
^ Barclays Corporate, The growing threat of internal fraud, accessed 6 November 2022
^ "California Civil Jury Instructions: 1900. Intentional Misrepresentation". Judicial Council of California. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ Henning, Peter J. (13 December 2020). "The Difficulty of Proving Financial Crimes". DealBook. Retrieved 23 May 2020.
^ Long, Cameron, Louis C., Robert W. (1993). "Fraud Litigation in Pennsylvania" (PDF). Stradley. Retrieved 23 May 2020.
^ "The Equitable Remedy of Rescission: A Tool to Defeat Fraud - Insurance Law - Insurance Law - LexisNexis  Legal Newsroom". www.lexisnexis.com. Retrieved 23 May 2020.
^ "California Criminal Jury Instructions: 1804. Theft By False Pretense". Judicial Council of California. Retrieved 27 December 2013.
^ "Criminal Code, Section 380". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved 5 December 2013.
^ "Criminal Code, Sections 380.2 - 380.3". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved 5 December 2013.
^ Tony Wong. "The Law of Fraud and White Collar Crime in Canada" (PDF). Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2012.
^ R. v. Olan et al., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1175. Full text of Supreme Court of Canada decision at LexUM
^ R. v. Stewart, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 963. Full text of Supreme Court of Canada decision at LexUM
^ "California Code, Penal Code - PEN   186.11". California Legislative Information. California State Legislature. Retrieved 9 August 2017. If the pattern of related felony conduct involves the taking of, or results in the loss by another person or entity of, more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the additional term of punishment shall be two, three, or five years in the state prison.
^ "Financial Crimes Report 2006". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ See, e.g., "Halpert v. Rosenthal, 267 A. 2d 730 (R.I. 1970)". Google Scholar. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ "WPI 160.02 Fraud Burden of Proof". Washington Pattern Jury Instructions - Civil. West. Retrieved 24 May 2017.
^ "Boehm v. Riversource Life Insurance Co., 2015 PA Super 120, 117 A.3d 308 (Pa. Super. 2015)". Google Scholar. Retrieved 24 May 2017.
^ Chang, Stanley Y. (April 1994). "The CPA Journal Online". Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ Koerner, Theodore G. (January 1958). "Contracts: Damages: Punitive Damages Awarded for Breach Accompanied by Fraudulent Act". Michigan Law Journal. 56 (3): 448 450. doi:10.2307/1286082. JSTOR 1286082.
^ The Book of Swindles | Columbia University Press. Cup.columbia.edu. September 2017. ISBN 9780231545648. Retrieved 14 June 2019.
^ The Book of Swindles - Selections from a Late Ming Collection - Columbia University Press. Columbia University Press. September 2017. ISBN 9780231545648.
^ "How China is battling ever more intensely in world markets".
^ Yu, Peter Humphrey and Yingzeng. "Booming Fraud in China". www.fraud-magazine.com.
^ "Fraud in China is on the up". CNBC. 24 January 2017.
^ Cheng, Ron. "Cybercrime in China: Online Fraud". Forbes.
^ "Indian Penal Code". Indian Kanoon.
^ "UK fraud costing ' 193bn a year', new study suggests". BBC. 25 May 2016. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ "UK fraud hits 15-year high with value of  2bn". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022.
^ "Fraud costs the UK economy  190bn as incidents soar | City A.M." Archived from the original on 13 November 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2017.
^ Murphy, Ian (13 November 2017). "Experian claims fraud costs GB 190 billion per year". Enterprise Times.
^ The Fraud Review Ten Years On (PDF). Fraud Advisory Panel. 2016.
^ "Report highlights 'same failings' in fight against fraud 10 years on". www.out-law.com. Retrieved 18 September 2016.
^ "UK fraud police release wanted list". BBC News. 18 July 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016.
^ "Nearly six million fraud and cyber crimes last year, ONS says". BBC News. 21 July 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016.
^ "Online fraud costs public billions but is still not a police priority, says watchdog". The Guardian. Press Association. 30 June 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
^ a b  This article incorporates text published under the British Open Government Licence: HM Treasury, Tackling Internal Fraud, published January 2011, archived version accessed 9 November 2022
^ The Fraud Act 2006 (Commencement) Order 2006 - SI 2006 No. 3200 (C.112) ISBN 0-11-075407-7
^ Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse (Report). Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 2010. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011.
^ Richet, Jean-Loup (2022). "How cybercriminal communities grow and change: An investigation of ad-fraud communities". Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 174 (121282): 121282. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121282. ISSN 0040-1625. S2CID 239962449.
^ "Tax Fraud and the Problem of a Constitutionality Acceptable Definition of Religion". BJ Casino. American Criminal Law. Rev., 1987
^ M ller, M. J.; Landsberg, B.; Ried, J. (April 2014). "Fraud in science: a plea for a new culture in research". European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 68 (4): 411 415. doi:10.1038/ejcn.2014.17. ISSN 1476-5640. PMID 24690631.
^ a b "Commodities fraud | Definition, History, & Examples | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 17 December 2022.
^ "Forensic Analytics". analytics-magazine.org. July August 2013.
^ "Using Data Analysis to Detect Frauds" (PDF). Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2020.
^ "Speech by SEC Staff: remarks at the F. Hodge O'Neal Corporate and securities Law symposium". sec.gov. 21 February 2003.
^ "Blue Sky Laws". Seclaw.com. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 5 December 2013.
^ "Franklin Delano Roosevelt (1882 1945)". gwu.edu.
^ "Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC")". learn.advfn.com.
Further reading[edit]
Edward J. Balleisen Fraud: An American History from Barnum to Madoff. ISBN 978-0691164557 (2017). Princeton University Press.
Fred Cohen Frauds, Spies, and Lies   and How to Defeat Them. ISBN 1-878109-36-7 (2006). ASP Press.
Green, Stuart P. Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory of White Collar Crime. Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0199225804
Review Fraud   Alex Copola Podgor, Ellen S. Criminal Fraud, (1999) Vol, 48, No. 4 American Law Review 1.
The Nature, Extent and Economic Impact of Fraud in the UK. February, 2007.
The Fraudsters   How Con Artists Steal Your Money. ISBN 978-1-903582-82-4 by Eamon Dillon, published September 2008 by Merlin Publishing
Zhang, Yingyu. The Book of Swindles: Selections from a Late Ming Collection. Columbia University Press, 2017. ISBN 978-0231178631
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fraud.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Fraud.
 The dictionary definition of fraud at Wiktionary
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners
Immigration Marriage Fraud Amendments of 1986
FBI Home page for fraud
U.S. Department of Justice Fraud Section
vteCorruptionCorruption in different fields
Corporate crime
Corruption in local government
Interest group corruption
Police corruption
Political corruption
Measures of corruption
Corruption Perceptions Index
Economics of corruption
Forms or aspectsof corruptionGeneral
Baksheesh
Black market
Bribery
Collusion
Commercial bribery
Confidence trick
Embezzlement
Extortion
Fraud
Graft (politics)
Honest services fraud
Kickback
Match fixing
Money laundering
Cryptocurrency and crime
Hawala and crime
Noble cause corruption
Professional courtesy
Slush fund
Tax evasion
Tax haven
Offshore investment
Offshore financial centre
State
Clientelism
Coronelism
Crony capitalism
Cronyism
Elite capture
Failed state
Kleptocracy
Mafia state
Nepotism
Plutocracy
Political scandal
Regulatory capture
Rent-seeking
Rent-setting
State capture
State crime
Elections
Ballot stuffing
Electoral fraud
Election security
Gerrymandering
Vote pairing
Vote suppression
Institutions dealing with corruptionInternational
Global Financial Integrity
Global Witness
Group of States Against Corruption
International Anti-Corruption Academy
Mo Ibrahim Foundation
Transparency International
UNCAC Coalition of Civil Society Organisations
National
Oficina Anticorrupci n (Argentina)
Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission
Anti-Corruption Commission (Bangladesh) (Bangladesh)
Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (Burundi)
National Anti-Corruption Observatory (Cameroon)
National Supervisory Commission (China)
Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong)
Commission Against Corruption (Macau)
USKOK (Croatia)
Fiji Independent Commission Against Corruption
Central Vigilance Commission (India)
KPK (Indonesia)
Corruption Prevention and Combating Bureau (Latvia)
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (Liberia)
Special Investigation Service of the Republic of Lithuania
BIANCO (Madagascar)
Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission
Anti-Corruption Commission of Myanmar (Myanmar)
Independent Corrupt Practices Commission (Nigeria)
Investigation Task Force Sweep (Papua New Guinea)
Central Anticorruption Bureau (Poland)
Anti-Corruption General Directorate (Romania)
National Anticorruption Directorate (Romania)
Investigative Committee of Russia (Russia)
Sierra Leone Anti-corruption Commission
Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (Singapore)
Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia
Anti-Corruption and Civil Rights Commission (South Korea)
Servicio de Vigilancia Aduanera (Spain)
National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine (Ukraine)
Warioba Commission (Tanzania)
Central Steering Committee for Anti-Corruption (Vietnam)
Anti-corruptionLaws andenforcement
Citizen's Charter and Grievance Redressal Bill 2011 (pending)
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Freedom of information laws by country
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
UK Bribery Act of 2010
Whistleblower protection
Internationalinstrumentsand efforts
Inter-American Convention Against Corruption
International asset recovery
International Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities
OECD Anti-Bribery Convention
United Nations Convention against Corruption
Protestmovements
2011 Azerbaijani protests
2011 Indian anti-corruption movement
2012 Indian anti-corruption movement
Anti-austerity movement in Spain
Movement for Peace with Justice and Dignity
Russian anti-corruption campaign
Yo Soy 132
2017 2019 Romanian protests
2017 2018 Russian protests
vteTypes of fraudBusiness-related
Billing
Cramming
Disability
Drug / Pharmaceutical
Email
Employment
Fixing
Impersonation
Intellectual property
Internet
Job
Long firm
Odometer
Phone
Health care
fertility
quackery
Racketeering
Return
Tech support
Slamming
Telemarketing
Wine
Family-related
Fertility
Marriage
Paternity
Financial-related
Advance-fee
lottery scam
Bank
Bankruptcy
Chargeback
Cheque
Credit card and carding
Forex
Insurance
Lottery
Mismarking
Mortgage
Overpayment
Securities
Shill bidding
Tax
Government-related
Benefit
Electoral
Medicare
Visa
Welfare
Other types
Affinity
Charity
Confidence trick
Counterfeiting
Faked death
Forgery
Hoax
Impersonation
Mail and wire
honest services
Romance
Bride
Scientific
Spyware
Vomit
White-collar crime
list
 Category
vteScams and confidence tricksTerminology
Confidence trick
Error account
Shill
Shyster
Sucker list
Notable scams andconfidence tricks
1992 Indian stock market scam
2G spectrum case
Advance-fee scam
Art student scam
Badger game
Bait-and-switch
Black money scam
Blessing scam
Bogus escrow
Boiler room
Bride scam
Bullet-planting scheme
Charity fraud
Clip joint
Coin-matching game
Coin rolling scams
Drop swindle
Embarrassing cheque
Extraterrestrial real estate
Fiddle game
Fine print
Foreclosure rescue scheme
Foreign exchange fraud
Fortune telling fraud
Gem scam
Get-rich-quick scheme
Green goods scam
Hustling
Indian coal allocation scam
IRS impersonation scam
Intellectual property scams
Kansas City Shuffle
Kerala gold smuggling case
Locksmith scam
Long firm
Miracle cars scam
Mismarking
Mock auction
Moving scam
National Herald corruption case
Overpayment scam
Patent safe
Pig in a poke
Pigeon drop
Pork barrel
Pump and dump
Redemption/A4V schemes
Reloading scam
Rent-sangla scam
Return fraud
Salting
Shell game
Sick baby hoax
SIM swap scam
Slavery reparations scam
Spanish Prisoner
SSA impersonation scam
SSC Scam
Strip search phone call scam
Swampland in Florida
Technical support scam
Telemarketing fraud
Thai tailor scam
Thai zig zag scam
Three-card Monte
Trojan horse
West Bengal blood test kit scam
White van speaker scam
Work-at-home scheme
Internet scams andcountermeasures
Avalanche
Carding
Catfishing
Click fraud
Clickjacking
Cramming
Cryptocurrency scams
Cybercrime
CyberThrill
DarkMarket
Domain name scams
Email authentication
Email fraud
Internet vigilantism
Lenny anti-scam bot
Lottery scam
PayPai
Phishing
Referer spoofing
Ripoff Report
Rock Phish
Romance scam
Russian Business Network
SaferNet
Scam baiting
419eater.com
Jim Browning
Kitboga
Scammer Payback
ShadowCrew
Spoofed URL
Spoofing attack
Stock Generation
Voice phishing
Website reputation ratings
Whitemail
Pyramid andPonzi schemes
Aman Futures Group
Bernard Cornfeld
Caritas
Dona Branca
Earl Jones
Ezubao
Foundation for New Era Philanthropy
Franchise fraud
High-yield investment program (HYIP)
Investors Overseas Service
Kapa investment scam
Kubus scheme
Madoff investment scandal
Make Money Fast
Matrix scheme
MMM
Petters Group Worldwide
Pyramid schemes in Albania
Reed Slatkin
Saradha Group financial scandal
Secret Sister
Scott W. Rothstein
Stanford Financial Group
Welsh Thrasher faith scam
Lists
Con artists
Confidence tricks
Criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates
Impostors
In the media
Film and television
Literature
Ponzi schemes
vteLawCore subjects
Administrative law
Civil law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Private law
Procedure
Civil
Criminal
Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort
Disciplines
Agricultural law
Aviation law
Amnesty law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Drugs law
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Jurimetrics
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Nationality law
Probate
Estate
Will and testament
Product liability
Public international law
Reparations
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Unenforced law
Women in law
Sources of law
Charter
Legal code / Statutory law
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Divine law
Human rights
Natural law
Natural and legal rights
Case law
Precedent
Law reports
Legal treatise
Regulations
Law making
Ballot measure
Codification
Decree
Edict
Executive order
Proclamation
Legislation
Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking
Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Concordat
Statutory law
Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)
Basic structure doctrine
Legal systems
Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law
Canon law
Catholic canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Parsi law
Sharia
Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa
Legal theory
Anarchist
Contract theory
Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Expressive function
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Libertarian
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Principle of typicality
Pseudolaw
Rule of law
Sociology
Jurisprudence
Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge
Justice of the peace
Magistrate
Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law
Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor
Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict
Legal institutions
Barristers' chambers
Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Court of equity
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education
Law school
Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal
History
History of the legal profession
History of the American legal profession
 Law portal
Category
Index
Outline
vteTypes of crimeNote: Crimes vary by jurisdiction. Not all types are listed here.Classes
Infraction
Misdemeanor
Felony
Summary
Indictable
Hybrid
Law portalAgainst the person
Assault
Battery
Blackmail
Cybersex trafficking
Extortion
Discrimination
Harassment
Kidnapping
Identity theft
Manslaughter
Mayhem
Murder
Rape
Robbery
Sex trafficking
Sexual assault
Sexual slavery
Corporate manslaughter
Against property
Arson
Burglary
Deception
Embezzlement
False pretenses
Fraud
Larceny
pickpocketing
Possession of stolen goods
Theft
Vandalism
Against public order
Drug possession
Public order
Breach of the peace
Against the state
Tax noncompliance
Espionage
Treason
Secession
Sedition
Subversion
Against justice
Bribery
Misprision of felony
Obstruction
Perjury
Malfeasance in office
Inchoate offenses
Accessory
Attempt
Conspiracy
Incitement
Encouraging or assisting a crime
Solicitation
Common purpose
WikiSource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikinews
Authority control International
FAST
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fraud&oldid=1149561242"