1780s political movement against the creation of a strong U.S. federal government and Constitution
For the faction opposed to the policies of Secretary of State Alexander Hamilton, see Anti-Administration party.
Anti-Federalists The Articles of Confederation, predecessor to the U.S. Constitution and drafted from Anti-Federalist principlesLeaderPatrick HenryFounded1787; 236 years ago (1787)Dissolved1789; 234 years ago (1789)Split fromPatriotsSucceeded byAnti-Administration partyIdeologyConfederalismDecentralizationLiberalismRepublicanismPolitics of the United StatesPolitical partiesElections
Anti-Federalism was a late-18th-century political movement that opposed the creation of a stronger U.S. federal government and which later opposed the ratification of the 1787 Constitution. The previous constitution, called the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, gave state governments more authority. Led by Patrick Henry of Virginia, Anti-Federalists worried, among other things, that the position of president, then a novelty, might evolve into a monarchy. Though the Constitution was ratified and supplanted the Articles of Confederation, Anti-Federalist influence helped lead to the passage of the Bill of Rights.
Nomenclature[edit]
The name "Anti-Federalists" is a misnomer.[1] It was imposed upon the movement by their opponents, the Federalists and it was supposed to mark them as men who "stood against the very political ideas they embraced".[1] According to historian Carol Berkin:
Perhaps the nationalists' most brilliant tactic in the battle of ideas ahead of them, however, was their decision to call themselves "Federalists" and their cause, "Federalism." The men behind the Constitution were not, of course, federalists at all. They were advocates of a strong national government whose authority diminished the independence of the states. [...] By co-opting the name "Federalists," the pro-Constitution forces deprived their opponents of the ability to signal clearly and immediately what they stood for.[1]
Main beliefs[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
They believed the Constitution needed a Bill of Rights.
They believed the Constitution created a presidency so powerful that it would become a monarchy.
They believed the Constitution provided insufficient rights in the courts (e.g., no guarantee of juries in civil cases, nor that criminal case juries be local) and would create an out-of-control judiciary.
They believed that the national government would be too far away from the people and thus unresponsive to the needs of localities.
They believed the Constitution would abrogate, at least in part, the power of the states.[2][better source needed]
History[edit]
During the American Revolution and its immediate aftermath, the term federal was applied to any person who supported the colonial union and the government formed under the Articles of Confederation. After the war, the group that felt the national government under the Articles was too weak appropriated the name Federalist for themselves. Historian Jackson Turner Main wrote, "to them, the man of 'federal principles' approved of 'federal measures,' which meant those that increased the weight and authority or extended the influence of the Confederation Congress."[3]
As the Federalists moved to amend the Articles, eventually leading to the Constitutional Convention, they applied the term anti-federalist to their opposition. The term implied, correctly or not, both opposition to Congress and unpatriotic motives. The Anti-Federalists rejected the term, arguing that they were the true Federalists. In both their correspondence and their local groups, they tried to capture the term. For example, an unknown anti-federalist signed his public correspondence as "A Federal Farmer" and the New York committee opposing the Constitution was called the "Federal Republican Committee."  However the Federalists carried the day and the name Anti-Federalist forever stuck.[3]
The Anti-Federalists were composed of diverse elements, including those opposed to the Constitution because they thought that a stronger government threatened the sovereignty and prestige of the states, localities, or individuals; those that saw in the proposed government a new centralized, disguised "monarchic" power that would only replace the cast-off despotism of Great Britain;[4] and those who simply feared that the new government threatened their personal liberties. Some of the opposition believed that the central government under the Articles of Confederation was sufficient. Still others believed that while the national government under the Articles was too weak, the national government under the Constitution would be too strong. Another complaint of the Anti-Federalists was that the Constitution provided for a centralized rather than federal government (and in The Federalist Papers, James Madison admits that the new Constitution has the characteristics of both a centralized and federal form of the government) and that a truly federal form of government was a leaguing of states as under the Articles of Confederation.
During the period of debate over the ratification of the Constitution, numerous independent local speeches and articles were published all across the country. Initially, many of the articles in opposition were written under pseudonyms, such as "Brutus" (likely Melancton Smith),[5] "Centinel" (likely Samuel Bryan), and "Federal Farmer."  Eventually, famous revolutionary figures such as Patrick Henry came out publicly against the Constitution. They argued that the strong national government proposed by the Federalists was a threat to the rights of individuals and that the president would become a king. They objected to the federal court system created by the proposed constitution. Minority groups also contributed, such as Mercy Otis Warren who disguised herself as "A Colombian Patriot," thought to be Elbridge Gerry.[6] Warren's most notable pamphlet discussed the treatment of minorities and American natural rights; this pamphlet was titled "History of the Rise, Progress, and Termination of the American Revolution".[7] This produced a body of political writing; the best and most influential of these articles and speeches were gathered by historians into a collection known as the Anti-Federalist Papers in allusion to the Federalist Papers.
In many states the opposition to the Constitution was strong (although Delaware, Georgia, and New Jersey ratified quickly with little controversy), and in two states North Carolina and Rhode Island it prevented ratification until the definite establishment of the new government practically forced their adherence. Individualism was the strongest element of opposition; the necessity, or at least the desirability, of a bill of rights was almost universally felt.[4] In Rhode Island, resistance against the Constitution was so strong that civil war almost broke out on July 4, 1788, when anti-federalist members of the Country Party led by Judge William West marched into Providence with over 1,000 armed protesters.[8]
The Anti-Federalists played upon these feelings in the ratification convention in Massachusetts. By this point, five of the states had ratified the Constitution with relative ease, but the Massachusetts convention was far more disputed and contentious. After a long debate, a compromise (known as the "Massachusetts compromise") was reached. Massachusetts would ratify the Constitution with recommended provisions in the ratifying instrument that the Constitution be amended with a bill of rights. (The Federalists contended that a conditional ratification would be void, so the recommendation was the strongest support that the ratifying convention could give to a bill of rights short of rejecting the Constitution.)
Four of the next five states to ratify, including New Hampshire, Virginia, and New York, included similar language in their ratification instruments. As a result, once the Constitution became operative in 1789, Congress sent a set of twelve amendments to the states. Ten of these amendments were immediately ratified and became known as the Bill of Rights, with one of the other two becoming the 27th Amendment almost 200 years later. Thus, while the Anti-Federalists were unsuccessful in their quest to prevent the adoption of the Constitution, their efforts were not totally in vain. The Anti-Federalists thus became recognized as an influential group among the Founding Fathers of the United States.
With the passage of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, the Anti-Federalist movement was exhausted. Some activists joined the Anti-Administration Party that James Madison and Thomas Jefferson were forming about 1790 91 to oppose the policies of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton; this group soon became the Democratic-Republican Party.[9] When Jefferson took office as the third president in 1801, he replaced Federalist appointees with Democratic-Republicans and sought to focus on issues that allowed the states to make more of their own decisions in matters. He also repealed the whiskey excise and other federal taxes, shut down some federal offices and broadly sought to change the fiscal system that Hamilton had created.[10]
Notable Anti-Federalists[edit]
Patrick Henry, Virginia[11]
Samuel Adams, Massachusetts[12]
Joshua Atherton, New Hampshire[13][14]
George Mason, Virginia[11]
Richard Henry Lee, Virginia[15][16]
Robert Yates, New York[16]
James Monroe, Virginia[17]
Amos Singletary, Massachusetts[18]
John Hancock, Massachusetts[19]
Mercy Otis Warren, Massachusetts[20][16]
James Warren, Massachusetts[21]
George Clinton, New York[22]
Melancton Smith, New York[11]
James Winthrop, Massachusetts[11]
Luther Martin, Maryland[23]
Samuel Bryan, Pennsylvania[24]
See also[edit]
Albany Antifederal Committee
Anti-Federalist Papers
The Complete Anti-Federalist
Country Party (Rhode Island)
New Federalism
Subsidiarity
References[edit]
^ a b c Berkin, Carol (2003). A Brilliant Solution: Inventing the American Constitution. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-15-602872-1.
^ "Thomas Jefferson and the Anti-Federalists". HIS2011- Federalists verse Anit- Federalists. Suffern High School.
^ a b Main, Jackson Turner (1961). The Antifederalists: Critics of the Constitution, 1781-1788. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-5544-8.
^ a b  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Anti-Federalists". Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 124.
^ Zuckert and Webb. The Anti-Federalist Writings of the Melancton Smith Circle pp. 418 419
^ Amar, Akhil (1995-01-01). "Women and the Constitution". Faculty Scholarship Series.
^ "Mercy Otis Warren (1728-1814)". George Washington's Mount Vernon. Retrieved 2022-03-08.
^ Columbian Centinel, July 5, 12, 16, 23, 1788; Pennsylvania Packet, July 30, 1788. (reference to West's anti-Constitution 4th of July rally)
^ Kenneth F.Warren (2008). Encyclopedia of U.S. Campaigns, Elections, and Electoral Behavior. SAGE Publications. p. 176. ISBN 9781412954891.
^ "What Were Some Examples of Thomas Jefferson's Anti-Federalist Views?". Reference. Archived from the original on 2019-04-21.
^ a b c d "16b. Antifederalists". ushistory.org. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ LeRoy, Marcel (5 July 2002). "Sam Adams   Father of the American Revolution". The Voice news. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ Wakelyn, Jon L. (2004). Birth of the Bill of Rights: Biographies. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-313-33194-7.
^ "Letter to John Lamb from Joshua Atherton. Part of the John Lamb papers" (PDF).
^ "Lesson 1: Anti-federalist Arguments Against "A Complete Consolidation"". The National Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ a b c Willick, Jason (July 3, 2019). "The Founders Who Opposed the Constitution: The Anti-Federalists gave us the Bill of Rights. Judge Andrew Oldham says they can also give us insight on the modern administrative state". Wall Street Journal. In 1789, when Rep. Madison introduced the first 10 amendments in the First Congress, he was making a concession to the Anti-Federalists. Those writers and politicians including Robert Yates, Mercy Otis Warren and Richard Henry Lee opposed the original Constitution.
^ Ketcham, Ralph (1971). "James Madison: A Biography". American Political Biography Press. p. 259.
^ O'Connor, Thomas H.; Rogers, Alan (1987). This Momentous Affair: Massachusetts and the Ratification of the Constitution of the United States. Trustees of the Public Library of the City of Boston. p. 19. ISBN 9780890730799   via Internet Archive.
^ Ketcham, Ralph (1971). "James Madison: A Biography". American Political Biography Press. p. 234.
^ Amar, Akhil Reed (1995). "Women and the Constitution". Faculty Scholarship Series. Yale Law School. Retrieved 10 July 2013.
^ "The Anti-Federalist Papers". The Federalist Papers. Retrieved 22 February 2021.
^ Levine, David (25 June 2014). "Best Clinton Ever? Why New York's First Governor, George Clinton, Totally Rocks". Hudson Valley. Retrieved 8 May 2016.
^ Kauffman, Bill (2008). "Forgotten Founder, Drunken Prophet: The Life of Luther Martin". ISI Books. p. 225. ISBN 9781933859736.
^ Siemers, David J. (October 1, 1998). ""It is Natural to Care for the Crazy Machine": The Antifederalists' Post-Ratification Acquiescence"". Studies in American Political Development. 12 (2): 383 410. doi:10.1017/S0898588X98001576. S2CID 145259078. Retrieved 22 February 2021.
Further reading[edit]
Lim, Elvin (2014). The Lovers' Quarrel: The Two Foundings & American Political Development. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-1998-1218-9.
Amar, Akhil Reed (2005). "In the Beginning". America's Constitution: A Biography. New York: Random House. ISBN 1-4000-6262-4.
Cornell, Saul (1999). The Other Founders: Anti-Federalism and the Dissenting Tradition in America, 1788 1828. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-4786-0.
Harding, S. B. (1896). Contest over the Ratification of the Federal Constitution in   Massachusetts. Harvard University Studies.
Libby, O.G. (1894). Geographical Distribution of the Vote   on the Federal Constitution, 1787 1788. University of Wisconsin.
Rutland, Robert Allen (1966). The Ordeal of the Constitution: The Antifederalists and the Ratification Struggle of 1787-1788. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Storing, Herbert J. (1981). What the Anti-Federalists Were For: The Political Thought of the Opponents of the Constitution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-77574-7.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Federalism.
"Founders' Constitution". University of Chicago. 1987.
A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns, 1787 1825
vteConstitution of the United StatesArticles
Preamble
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
AmendmentsBill of Rights
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1795 1804
11
12
Reconstruction
13
14
15
20th century
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Unratified
Congressional Apportionment
Titles of Nobility
Corwin Amendment
Child Labor
Equal Rights
District of Columbia Voting Rights
Proposed
Balanced budget
Blaine amendment
Bricker amendment
Campaign finance reform
Christian amendment
Crittenden Compromise
Electoral College abolition
Equal Opportunity to Govern
Federal Marriage
Flag Desecration
Human Life
"Liberty" amendment
Ludlow amendment
Parental Rights amendment
School Prayer
Single subject
Victims' Rights
Convention to propose amendments
State ratifying conventions
Formation
History
Articles of Confederation
Mount Vernon Conference
Annapolis Convention
Philadelphia Convention
Virginia Plan
New Jersey Plan
Connecticut Compromise
Three-fifths Compromise
Committee of Detail
List of Framers
Signing
Printing
Independence Hall
Syng inkstand
The Federalist Papers
Anti-Federalist Papers
Massachusetts Compromise
Virginia Ratifying Convention
New York Circular Letter
Hillsborough Convention
Fayetteville Convention
Rhode Island ratification
Drafting and ratification timeline
Clauses
Appointments
Appropriations
Assistance of Counsel
Case or Controversy
Citizenship
Commerce
Compact
Compulsory Process
Confrontation
Congressional enforcement
Contract
Copyright and Patent
Double Jeopardy
Due Process
Elections
Engagements
Equal Protection
Establishment
Exceptions
Excessive Bail
Ex post facto
Extradition
Free Exercise
Free Speech
Fugitive Slave
Full Faith and Credit
General Welfare
Guarantee
Impeachment
Import-Export
Ineligibility
Militia
Natural-born citizen
Necessary and Proper
New States
No Religious Test
Oath or Affirmation
Origination
Pardon
Petition
Postal
Presentment
Presidential succession
Privileges and Immunities
Privileges or Immunities
Recess appointment
Recommendation
Self-Incrimination
Speech or Debate
Speedy Trial
State of the Union
Supremacy
Suspension
Take Care
Takings
Taxing and Spending
Territorial
Title of Nobility (Foreign Emoluments)
Treaty
Trial by Jury
Vesting
Vicinage
War Powers
Interpretation
Balance of powers
Concurrent powers
Constitutional law
Criminal procedure
Criminal sentencing
Dormant Commerce Clause
Enumerated powers
Equal footing
Executive privilege
Implied powers
Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
Judicial review
Nondelegation doctrine
Plenary power
Preemption
Reserved powers
Saxbe fix
Separation of church and state
Separation of powers
Symmetric federalism
Taxation power
Unitary executive theory
Related
Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787
Jacob Shallus
Displayand legacy
National Archives
Charters of Freedom Rotunda
Independence Mall
Constitution Day
Constitution Gardens
National Constitution Center
Scene at the Signing of the Constitution (painting)
A More Perfect Union (film)
USS Constitution
Bibliography
Worldwide influence
United States portal     Law portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Federalism&oldid=1140822222"