Musical
Sister ActA Divine Musical ComedyPoster for the West End productionMusicAlan MenkenLyricsGlenn SlaterBookCheri SteinkellnerBill SteinkellnerBasisSister Act  by Joseph HowardPremiereOctober 24, 2006 (2006-10-24): Pasadena PlayhouseProductions2006 Pasadena2007 Atlanta2009 West End2011 Broadway2011 UK tour2012 North American tour2014 US tour2016 UK tour2017 International tour2022 London revival
Sister Act is a musical based on the hit 1992 film of the same name with music by Alan Menken, lyrics by Glenn Slater, book by Bill and Cheri Steinkellner, and additional material by Douglas Carter Beane. After having a regional premiere in 2006 in Pasadena, California,[1] the original West End production opened on June 2, 2009, at the London Palladium, starring Patina Miller and produced by Stage Entertainment and Whoopi Goldberg.[2] Subsequent productions have been seen on Broadway and in many countries around the world.
Synopsis[edit]
West End[edit]
Act 1
Philadelphia, Mother Superior declares that the convent is in need (Prologue) before Deloris Van Cartier, crowned 'Lady Fabulous' of 1978, is seen performing in the night club run by her gangster boyfriend Curtis Shank ("Take Me to Heaven"). Deloris is overjoyed as she believes her boyfriend is going to introduce her to a record producer on that day (her birthday), although she soon learns that this is not to be. Hurt and frustrated, Deloris goes to her backup singers KT and LaRosa, about her dreams of stardom and fame ("Fabulous, Baby!"). She decides to break up with Shank and head out of Philadelphia to go fulfill her dreams on her own. However she gets to Shank just in time to see him and his crew made up of nephew TJ, Bones, and Dinero, shoot someone who they believe has "squealed" about them to the cops. Horrified, Deloris runs away and Shank orders his men to get her and bring her back. Deloris runs to a police station and tells the desk chief, Eddie, about what happened. The two recognize each other as old friends from school with Deloris calling him "Sweaty Eddie". Eddie decides that Deloris needs to go into the witness protection program and sends her to the place he believes Shank will never find her - a convent called The Holy Order of the Little Sisters of Our Mother of Perpetual Faith.
Deloris is disappointed by this idea as she learns from the Mother Superior that contact with the outside world is limited, and that she cannot smoke, drink, or wear any of her less than appropriate clothing ("Here Within These Walls"). Deloris joins the other nuns for dinner and after several comedic interactions with the overly perky Sister Mary Patrick, Deloris discovers how the other nuns got their "calling" from the Lord ("How I Got the Calling"). They then ask Deloris to share her story with them and she lies.
Meanwhile, back in his nightclub, Shank is frustrated that he cannot find Deloris anywhere. He tells his goons how he will not stop until he finds and kills Deloris ("When I Find My Baby"). Back at the convent Deloris is bored by the simple life of the nuns and decides to hit the town. She goes across the street to a slinky bar, and is followed by Sister Mary Lazarus, Sister Mary Patrick, and Sister Mary Robert. When the three nuns arrive they are shocked to find Sister Mary Clarence (Deloris' undercover name) drinking and dancing, however they assume that she is attempting to save the lost souls in the bar. Deloris goes along with this idea and gets the whole bar dancing ("Do the Sacred Mass"). However, the joyful mood is quickly destroyed when Deloris recognises Shank's boys entering the bar. She tries to hide herself as they ask people in the bar if they've seen Deloris. Suddenly there is a fight in the bar which has to be broken up by Eddie and the Mother Superior, who orders the nuns to go back to the convent. She then confronts Deloris telling her that she must conform to the life of the nuns.  Eddie agrees, telling Deloris that Shank has upped the price on her head, so she needs to be careful. Deloris storms back to the convent after being informed that she has to wake up at 5 a.m. and join the choir. Eddie, now alone with only the drunks and homeless on the street, sings of his desire to be cool, to let go, and impress Deloris ("I Could Be That Guy").
The following morning Deloris attends the choir practice and loudly admits that the choir sounds terrible. This prompts the Mother Superior to let Deloris lead the choir. Deloris does so and teaches the nuns how to sing on key and in time. She also manages to break the quiet and timid Sister Mary Robert out of her shell ("Raise Your Voice"). That Sunday, the choir perform an up-tempo hymn ("Take Me to Heaven (Reprise)") which to the struggling church's surprise brings in more people and more donations. The Mother Superior, however, is horrified how the simple traditional choir she knew has changed and become modern.  The news of the choir soon spreads with photographers and news reporters coming in to get the story behind the latest sensation - this wonderful nontraditional choir.
Act 2
Over the coming weeks, the choir has become incredibly successful and the money from donations has paid for the church to be remodelled and fixed ("Sunday Morning Fever"). However, the newfound fame comes at a price. Shank and his goons spot Deloris with the choir in the newspaper. Shank orders his boys to get into the convent and bring Deloris to him. TJ, Bones, and Dinero discuss how they will do this ("Lady in the Long Black Dress"). Meanwhile, back at the church, Monsignor Howard has some terrific news: the choir has been asked to perform a special concert in front of the Pope. The choir are overjoyed but nervous and that night they ask Deloris to pray for their success ("Bless Our Show"). Deloris is also looking forward to the occasion, although the Mother Superior calls her over and tells her that Shank's men have just come looking for her and she must leave quickly. The other nuns overhear and Deloris is forced to tell them the truth about who she really is and that she cannot perform with them. Deloris quickly runs off to get her things followed by Sister Mary Robert while the other nuns disappointedly go back to their rooms. Alone in Deloris' room, the Mother Superior expresses joy that life can go back to being as it was. However it is evident that she, along with the other nuns, have developed a love for Sister Mary Clarence and her modern if somewhat unorthodox ways ("Here Within These Walls (Reprise)").
As Deloris prepares to leave Sister Mary Robert begs to come with her, claiming that she has been inspired to become a stronger person and go after the things she wants ("The Life I Never Led"). Deloris tells her that she doesn't need her to do that, and that she can do it all herself if she really wants to. Deloris runs from the convent and stays at Eddie's house for the night. While there she initially is overjoyed that the following day she will testify against Shank and his boys and then go back to pursuing the career she's dreamed of ("Fabulous, Baby! (Reprise)"). Guilty for abandoning her sisters when they needed her, she reflects on her life and realises that the choices she is making will leave her with nothing but fame and money, and when the lights go out she will be alone. She decides to return to the convent and sing with her sisters ("Sister Act").
Meanwhile, Shank thinks up a new way to get into the convent ("When I Find My Baby (Reprise)"). Dressed as nuns, Shank and his boys sneak into the convent; they find and chase Deloris. Sister Mary Patrick, who has seen what has happened, informs the other nuns who insist they must go and help Deloris. The Mother Superior, however, is adamant that they stay and call the police, prompting an outburst from Sister Mary Robert who tells her that she won't be quiet and take orders blindly anymore; that she is going to help Deloris ("The Life I Never Led (Reprise)"). The other nuns agree and all of them go running through the convent looking for Deloris. It all comes down to a final confrontation in which Shank, armed and dangerous, tells Deloris to get on her knees and beg for her life. However, all the sisters and nuns stand in front of her telling Shank that they will have to go through them first ("Sister Act (Reprise)"). Shank is about to start firing at the nuns when Eddie comes in and fights Shank off. He arrests Shank and his boys and then asks Deloris out on a date which she accepts. Mother Superior and Deloris come to a truce and accept that perhaps they are not so different after all. The show ends with all the nuns and eventually the entire cast performing for the Pope ("Spread the Love Around").
Broadway[edit]
Act 1
On Christmas Eve, Deloris Van Cartier is performing for her gangster boyfriend Curtis Jackson in the night club he owns ("Take Me to Heaven"). Deloris is overjoyed as she believes her boyfriend is going to introduce her to a record producer on that day, although she soon learns that this is not to be. Jackson tells her he cannot join her for Christmas Day, but gives her a coat, which she discovers belonged to his wife. Hurt and frustrated, Deloris sings to her backup singers, Michelle and Tina, about her dreams of stardom and fame ("Fabulous, Baby!"). She decides to break up with Jackson to fulfill her dreams on her own, but gets to him just in time to see him and his crew shoot Ernie, who they believe has "squealed" about them to the cops.
Horrified, Deloris runs to a police station and tells the desk chief, Eddie, about what happened. Eddie decides that Deloris needs to go into the witness protection program and sends her to the place he believes Jackson will never find her - a convent. When she arrives, Deloris is horrified to learn from the Mother Superior that contact with the outside world is limited, and that she cannot smoke, drink, or wear any of her own clothing ("Here Within These Walls"). Deloris, introduced as "Sister Mary Clarence," joins the other nuns for dinner and discovers just how much is limited when she is a nun ("It s Good to Be A Nun"). Deloris asks them about what they are missing, and Mother Superior makes Deloris go on a fast.
Back in his nightclub, Jackson is frustrated that he cannot find Deloris anywhere. He tells his "crew," Joey, TJ, and Pablo, how he will not stop until he finds and kills Deloris ("When I Find My Baby"). Deloris, hungry from the fast, leaves the convent and goes to a bar across the street, where Joey, TJ, and Pablo are eating. She is followed by two nuns, Sister Mary Patrick and Sister Mary Robert, who realize what life is like outside the convent. Joey almost recognizes Deloris when he gives her money for the jukebox, but dismisses it. When a drag queen enters in a similar outfit to Deloris' opening costume, Joey, TJ, and Pablo try to stop her and get into a fight, giving Deloris, Sister Mary Patrick, and Sister Mary Robert a chance to escape.
At the convent, Eddie confronts Deloris, telling her that she needs to be more careful, and Mother Superior informs her that she join the choir the following day. Deloris storms off, and Eddie, now alone with only the drunks and homeless on the street, sings of his desire to be cool, to let go, and impress Deloris ("I Could Be That Guy").
The following morning Deloris attends the choir practice and, upon realizing how bad they are, offers to help them. She replaces Sister Mary Lazarus, an older and crankier nun, as their leader, and teaches the nuns how to sing in key and in time ("Raise Your Voice"). That Sunday, the choir perform an up-tempo hymn ("Take Me to Heaven (Reprise)") which brings in more people and more donations but leaves Mother Superior disgusted.
Act 2
Mother Superior wants to get rid of Deloris, but Monsignor O Hara tells her that the men who were planning to buy the church love the choir, and have given their money to improve and keep the church. Over the coming weeks, the choir has become incredibly successful and the money from donations has paid for the church to be remodeled and fixed ("Sunday Morning Fever"). Monsignor O Hara has some terrific news: the choir has been asked to perform a special concert in front of the Pope. However, Jackson and his goons spot Deloris with the choir on the television. Jackson orders his boys to get into the convent and bring Deloris to him. TJ, Joey, and Pablo discuss how they will do this ("Lady in the Long Black Dress").
That night, Mother Superior asks God why He has given her the challenge that is Deloris ( Haven t Got A Prayer"), and shortly after, receives a call from Eddie. Meanwhile, Deloris is approached by the Nuns before they go to sleep, asking her to lead them praying for their show for the Pope, which is the following day ( Bless the Show ). Mother Superior arrives and tells Deloris that the court date for Jackson has moved up to the next day and she must leave immediately. The other nuns overhear and Deloris is forced to tell them the truth about who she really is and that she cannot perform with them.
As Deloris prepares to leave, Sister Mary Robert begs to come with her, claiming that she has been inspired to become a stronger person and go after the things she wants ("The Life I Never Led"). Deloris, staying at Eddie's house for the night, is initially overjoyed that she will be able to go back to pursuing the career she's dreamed of after testifying against Jackson ("Fabulous, Baby! (Reprise)"). However, she realizes that her sisters are more important than any fame or money, and decides to return to the convent to sing with them ("Sister Act").
Meanwhile, Jackson thinks up a new way to get into the convent, giving Joey, TJ, and Pablo nun costumes ("When I Find My Baby (Reprise)"). Deloris interrupts a choir rehearsal and is told by Mother Superior that she is endangering the lives of the nuns and that she must leave. Sister Mary Robert stands with Deloris ("The Life I Never Led (Reprise)"), but is interrupted by Curtis and his men breaking into the church. The nuns scatter and are able to take down Joey, TJ, and Pablo, but Jackson enters and traps Sister Mary Robert at gunpoint.
Deloris begs Jackson to kill her instead, but Mother Superior and all the other nuns stand between them ("Sister Act (Reprise)"). Jackson is about to start firing at the nuns when Eddie enters and  arrests Jackson and his boys. He and Deloris share a kiss. Mother Superior and Deloris come to a truce and accept that perhaps they are not so different after all, and the entire company performs for the Pope ("Spread the Love Around").
Productions[edit]
Original productions in Pasadena and Atlanta[edit]
The musical premiered at the Pasadena Playhouse in Pasadena, California on October 24, 2006, and closed on December 23, 2006.[1] It broke records, grossing $1,085,929 to become the highest grossing show ever at the venue.[3] Patina Miller, who would later go on to play Deloris when the show opened in London, was in the ensemble and understudied the role of Deloris, which was originated in the musical by Dawnn Lewis.[4]
The musical was directed by Peter Schneider, developed by Schneider and Michael Reno,[5] choreographed by Marguerite Derricks, with set design by David Potts, costumes by Garry Lennon, lighting by Donald Holder, and sound by Carl Casella and Dominick Sack.[6]
Charles McNulty of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the musical has "Broadway blockbuster written all over it," and Laurence Vittes described it as "hugely entertaining... likely to become a classic" in The Hollywood Reporter. Jonas Schwartz of Theatremania.com was less enthusiastic, saying it "suffers from a bit of an identity crisis."[7]
The production then moved to the Alliance Theatre in Atlanta, Georgia, where it ran from January 17 to February 25, 2007. The cast included Dawnn Lewis as Deloris, Elizabeth Ward Land as the Mother Superior, Harrison White as Curtis, and Beth Malone as Sister Mary Robert.[8]
Curt Holman, writing for the Atlanta-based website CreativeLoafing.com, described it as "a whiplash-inducing experience of genuinely clever and exuberant flourishes alternating with cringe-inducing embarrassments....  The weakest parts of Sister Act tend to be the most faithful moments to the film, which makes you wonder what Menken, Slater and the production's delightful design team could have done with original material."[9]
Original London production[edit]
 Sister Act at the London Palladium
Sister Act opened in the West End at the London Palladium on June 2, 2009, following previews from May 7. The production was directed by Peter Schneider and choreographed by Anthony Van Laast, with set design by Klara Zieglerova, costumes by Lez Brotherston and lighting by Natasha Katz.[2][10] Following a year-long search, 24-year-old actress Patina Miller was cast as Deloris, alongside Sheila Hancock as the Mother Superior, Ian Lavender as Monsignor Howard, Chris Jarman as Shank, Ako Mitchell as Eddie, Katie Rowley Jones as Sister Mary Robert, Claire Greenway as Sister Mary Patrick and Julia Sutton (later replaced by Jacqueline Clarke) as Sister Mary Lazarus.[11] It was announced on April 29, 2010, that pop singer Simon Webbe of Blue fame would join the cast as Shank on May 31, 2010, and that the production would close on January 1, 2011.[12] It was then announced the show would close on October 30, 2010, to make way for Andrew Lloyd Webber's new musical production of The Wizard of Oz.[13] Chris Jarman took a planned break from the show from May, during which time Webbe played the role of Shank, and Sheila Hancock left on July 31 due to other contractual commitments. All cast members (with the exception of Simon Webbe, who left on August 28) stayed in the show until it closed. Whoopi Goldberg joined the cast as the Mother Superior for a limited engagement that was supposed to last from August 10 31, 2010, but she left the cast on August 27 due to her mother suffering a stroke.[14][15] Goldberg was then succeeded by Sally Dexter.[16] However, Goldberg returned to the cast for five performances on October 22, 23 and 25.[17] The show closed as announced on October 30, 2010.
Original Broadway production[edit]
A newly revised adaptation of the show opened on Broadway at the Broadway Theatre on April 20, 2011, after previews beginning March 24, 2011.[18] Jerry Zaks was the new director (Zaks had previously worked with composer Alan Menken on the 2003 Broadway production of Little Shop of Horrors) with Douglas Carter Beane rewriting the book.[19] Patina Miller, who originated the role of Deloris in the West End production, reprised the role on Broadway, making her Broadway debut. The original cast featured Victoria Clark (Mother Superior), Fred Applegate (Monsignor), Sarah Bolt (Sister Mary Patrick), Chester Gregory (Eddie), Kingsley Leggs (Curtis), Marla Mindelle (Sister Mary Robert) and Audrie Neenan (Sister Mary Lazarus).[20] On October 12, 2011, Clark left the production for unknown reasons. Her understudy, Jennifer Allen played the role after her departure.[21] Carolee Carmello took over the role of the Mother Superior on November 19, 2011.[22] Raven-Symon  replaced Miller as Deloris on March 27, 2012.[23] The show received multiple Tony Award nominations for the 2011 season, including for Best Musical, Best Actress in a Musical (Miller) and Best Featured Actress in a Musical (Clark). The production closed on August 26, 2012, after 28 previews and 561 performances.[24]
Subsequent productions[edit]
The first UK touring production opened on October 4, 2011, at the Manchester Opera House, with Cynthia Erivo as Deloris Van Cartier, Denise Black as Mother Superior, Julie Atherton as Sister Mary Robert, and Michael Starke as Monsignor O'Hara.[25] The tour played its final performance on October 20, 2012.[26]
A new non-replica UK tour officially opened on August 11, 2016, running to September 3, 2017.[27][28] Directed and choreographed by Craig Revel Horwood, the tour starred Alexandra Burke as Deloris Van Cartier Jon Robyns as Eddie and Rosemary Ashe as Sister Mary Lazarus.[29]
The first national North American tour debuted on October 2, 2012, at the Ed Mirvish Theatre in Toronto, Canada[30] and closed on June 29, 2014, at the Majestic Theatre in San Antonio, Texas.[31] The cast included Ta'Rea Campbell as Deloris Van Cartier, Hollis Resnik as Mother Superior (later replaced by Lynne Wintersteller).[32] A second national tour (non-equity) ran from 2014 to 2015.[33][34]
On May 9, 2017, an international tour started at the Marina Bay Sands in Singapore and visited Philippines, China, Japan, and South Korea, closing January 21, 2018 at the Blue Square Interpark Hall in Seoul. The cast was led by Den  Hill as Deloris Van Cartier.[35][36]
On October 23, 2019, it was announced that the musical would run from July 29, 2020, at the Hammersmith Apollo for 39 performances with Jennifer Saunders in the role of Mother Superior and Whoopi Goldberg as Deloris Van Cartier.[37] The production was delayed twice due to the COVID-19 pandemic and finally played from July 19 to August 28, 2022, with Goldberg no longer involved.[38] Full casting was announced on March 18, 2022 where it was confirmed that Beverly Knight would play the role of Van Cartier.[39]
A third UK and Ireland tour was expected to start on April 21, 2020, at the Leicester Curve Theatre but was also delayed and it started on June 27, 2022 at the Manchester Palace Theatre.[40][41]
Other adaptations[edit]
In 2010, the first international adaptation of the show premiered in Germany by Stage Entertainment, who then produced it in Austria, The Netherlands, Italy, France and Spain. 
A Brazilian tour, directed by Fernanda Chamma and produced by Stage Entertainment opened in 2015. [42] Whoopi Goldberg chose the actress who would play Delores, Karin Hils, and coached her in New York City.[43] The tour started on March 5, 2015 at Renault Theater, S o Paulo, and remained until 2016.[42]
Major casts[edit]
Character
West End(2009)
Broadway(2011)
1st UK tour(2011)
1st US tour(2012)
2nd US tour(2014)
2nd UK tour(2016)
Manchester(2022)
London(2022)
3rd UK tour(2022)
Deloris Van Cartier
Patina Miller
Cynthia Erivo
Ta'Rea Campbell
Kerissa Arrington
Alexandra Burke
Sandra Marvin
Beverley Knight
Sandra Marvin
Mother Superior
Sheila Hancock
Victoria Clark
Denise Black
Hollis Resnik
Maggie Clennon Reberg
Karen Mann
Jennifer Saunders
Lesley Joseph
Curtis Jackson/Shank
Chris Jarman
Kingsley Leggs
Cavin Cornwall
Kingsley Leggs
Kolby Kindle
Aaron Lee Lambert
Jeremy Secomb
Lt. Eddie Souther
Ako Mitchell
Chester Gregory
Edward Baruwa
E. Clayton Cornelious
Lamont O'Neal
Jon Robyns
Clive Rowe
Sister Mary Robert
Katie Rowley Jones
Marla Mindelle
Julie Atherton
Lael Van Keuren
Emily Kay Shrader
Sarah Goggin
Lizzie Bea
Sister Mary Patrick
Claire Greenway
Sarah Bolt
Laurie Scarth
Florrie Bagel
Sarah Michelle Cuc
Susannah Van Den Berg
Keala Settle
Catherine Millson
Sister Mary Lazarus
Julia Sutton
Audrie J. Neenan
Jacqueline Clarke
Diane J. Findlay
Nancy Evans
Rosemary Ashe
Lesley Joseph
Anne Smith
Monsignor O'Hara/Howard
Ian Lavender
Fred Applegate
Michael Starke
Richard Pruitt
Gordon Gray
Tim Maxwell-Clarke
Graham Mcduff
Joey/Bones
Nicolas Colicos
John Treacy Egan
Daniel Stockton
Todd A. Horman
F. Tyler Burnet
Samuel Morgan-Grahame
Tom Hopcroft
TJ
Thomas Goodridge
Demond Green
Tyrone Huntley
Charles Thomas
Lawrence Dandridge
Sandy Grigelis
Bradley Judge
Pablo/Dinero
Ivan De Freitas
Caesar Samayoa
Gavin Alex
Ernie Pruneda
Nicholas Alexander Rodr guez
Ricky Rojas
Damian Buhagiar
Notable replacements[edit]
West End[edit]
Mother Superior: Whoopi Goldberg, Sally Dexter
Curtis Shank: Simon Webbe
Broadway[edit]
Deloris van Cartier: Raven-Symon [23]
Mother Superior: Carolee Carmello
US Tour[edit]
Mother Superior: Lynne Wintersteller
Eddie Souther: Chester Gregory
Musical numbers[edit]
West End
Act I[44]
"Take Me to Heaven"   Deloris, KT, LaRosa & Backups
"Fabulous, Baby!"   Deloris, KT & LaRosa
"Here Within These Walls"   Mother Superior & Nuns
"How I Got the Calling"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert & Nuns
"When I Find My Baby"   Shank, TJ, Bones & Dinero
"Do The Sacred Mass"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert & Barflies
"I Could Be That Guy"   Eddie & Transients
"Raise Your Voice"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert & Nuns
"Take Me to Heaven" (Reprise)   Monsignor Howard, Deloris, Mother Superior, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert, Nuns & Photographers
Act II
"Sunday Morning Fever"   Monsignor Howard, Deloris, Mother Superior, Eddie, TJ, Bones, Dinero, Nuns & Barflies
"Lady in the Long Black Dress"   TJ, Bones & Dinero
"Bless Our Show"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert & Nuns
"Here Within These Walls" (Reprise)   Mother Superior
"The Life I Never Led"   Mary Robert
"Fabulous, Baby!" (Reprise)   Deloris, Backups & Nuns
"Sister Act"   Deloris
"When I Find My Baby" (Reprise)   Shank
"The Life I Never Led" (Reprise)   Mary Robert
"Sister Act" (Reprise)   Deloris, Mother Superior, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert & Nuns
"Spread the Love Around"   Mother Superior, Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Lazarus, Mary Robert, Nuns & Altar Boy
Broadway
Act I[45]
"Take Me to Heaven"   Deloris, Michelle & Tina
"Fabulous, Baby!"   Deloris, Michelle & Tina
"Here Within These Walls"   Mother Superior & Deloris
"It's Good to Be a Nun"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus & Nuns
"When I Find My Baby"   Curtis, Joey, Pablo & TJ
"I Could Be That Guy"   Eddie & Homeless
"Raise Your Voice"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus & Nuns
"Take Me to Heaven" (Reprise)   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus & Nuns
Act II
"Sunday Morning Fever"   Deloris, Mother Superior, Monsignor O'Hara, Eddie, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus, Nuns & Workers
"Lady in the Long Black Dress"   Joey, Pablo & TJ
"Haven't Got a Prayer"   Mother Superior
"Bless Our Show"   Deloris, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus & Nuns
"The Life I Never Led"   Mary Robert
"Fabulous, Baby!" (Reprise)   Deloris, Eddie, Nuns & Fantasy Dancers
"Sister Act"   Deloris
"When I Find My Baby" (Reprise)   Curtis
"The Life I Never Led" (Reprise)   Mary Robert
"Sister Act" (Reprise)   Deloris, Mother Superior, Mary Patrick, Mary Robert, Mary Lazarus & Nuns
"Spread the Love Around"   The Company
Critical response[edit]
West End[edit]
Critical opinion of the West End production has been mixed. Ian Shuttleworth of the Financial Times thought although the plot is filled with "great holes," "It's not a brainless show; Glenn Slater's lyrics are often enjoyably sharp. It's just that whenever the choice arises between creative and commercial, commercial wins out every time."[46]
Charles Spencer in The Telegraph wrote Sister Act "proves more enjoyable on stage than it did on film" and "the cheers and standing ovation at the end were both genuine and deserved." He added, "The book, by Cheers writers Cheri and Bill Steinkellner, is strong, funny and touching. And the disco-inspired score by Disney favourite Alan Menken, with neat lyrics by Glenn Slater, is a cracker. Frankly, what's not to like, especially when you've got a chorus line of jiving nuns singing their hearts out ecstatically?"[47]
While Michael Billington of The Guardian thought Alan Menken's music "has a pounding effectiveness," he rated the musical only two out of five stars, calling it "noisily aggressive" and "a show that feels less like a personally driven work of art than a commercial exploitation of an existing franchise." He continued, "What was originally a fairytale fantasy . . . makes little sense in its new, vulgarised incarnation. In the movie, the music arose naturally from the story: there was even a certain wit about seeing a group of wimpled warblers turned into a cohesive unit. But here, long before the heroine has got to work on their larynxes, they are leaping about the stage like showbiz pros telling us How I Got the Calling. In order to pad out a slight story, every key member of the cast also has to be given a number. As a result, the plot grinds to a halt while we hear about the macho fantasies of a sweaty cop, or the hoodlums weary us with their own wet dreams."[48]
In the Evening Standard, Fiona Mountford rated it four out of five stars and stated, "Whether or not divine intervention is involved, it's a wimple-wibbling, habit-forming triumph."[49]
The Times critic, Benedict Nightingale rated the show three out of five stars, observing that "a rather sweet, sentimental film has been hyped up, coarsened, given what   were the Palladium flown to Times Square   we'd call the big, brash Broadway treatment . . . There's less deft comedy, but much more music, most of it indebted to the 1970s, where the action is now set. That lets Alan Menken, the composer, have a lot of catchy fun with period rock and disco."[50]
David Benedict of Variety cited its "slow start" and "clunky storytelling" but thought "the cumulative effect is shamelessly and irresistibly entertaining."[51]
Broadway[edit]
The Broadway production received mostly positive reviews.[52]
Mark Kennedy of The Associated Press wrote in his review, "This is a musical that hits all the right spots, achieving something close to Broadway grace. It helps that the musical has great original tunes by songwriter Alan Menken and lyricist Glenn Slater that skitters from Motown, to soul and funk, to disco and even a little jokey Barry White. Menken and Slater, who also teamed up for The Little Mermaid, know perfectly how to switch up the mood and tempo.[53]
Elysa Gardner of USA Today gave the show three and a half out of four stars and said, "Sister Act: A Divine Musical Comedy may be less giddily profane, and thought-provoking, than The Book of Mormon, but it has its own distinct and surprising charms. Composer Alan Menken and lyricist Glenn Slater provide original tunes that nod cheekily, but with genuine affection, to that pop era while also propelling the story with a style and exuberance specific to well-crafted musical theater."[54]
Elisabeth Vincentelli of the New York Post also gave the show three and a half out of four stars and wrote, "Big, glitzy numbers are the toast of Broadway musicals. The only thing better? Big, glitzy numbers . . . with nuns! "Sister Act" has plenty of both and it's one of the season's happiest surprises. 
Menken evokes the lush, funky sound of Philly soul without falling into mere pastiche: "When I Find My Baby" starts off like bedroom R&B before the lyrics take a hilarious turn. "Take Me to Heaven" and "Spread the Love Around" bloom into full-throttle disco epics, the latter building up to an ecstatic finale.[55]
Thom Geier of Entertainment Weekly gave the show a "B+" and wrote, "It's been a season of ill-conceived or just plain disappointing stage musicals based on movies...Who'd have guessed that the latest iteration of Broadway's recycling trend, Sister Act...would be such a lark? It helps that the show boasts a genuine star turn by newcomer Patina Miller as aspiring singer Deloris Van Cartier. While Sister Act relies on all-new music, thankfully the score is by gifted tunesmith Alan Menken (Little Shop of Horrors, Beauty and the Beast) and his longtime lyricist, Glenn Slater. There are some real melodic standouts here, boosted by the decision to re-set the show in 1977 Philadelphia."[56]
Charles Isherwood of the New York Times gave the show a mixed review and wrote, "I wish I could report that the singing nuns from the Church of Philly Soul are giving those perky Mormons in Africa a run for their money in the unholy hilarity department. But when the jubilant choral numbers subside, as inevitably they must, "Sister Act" slumps back into bland musical-theater grooves and mostly lacks the light of invigorating inspiration. Mr. Menken, who wrote the lustrous period-pop score for "Little Shop of Horrors" (with the lyricist Howard Ashman), is a skillful interpreter of the Philadelphia sound." He did, however, praise Miller's performance, writing she "has a radiant presence and a strong voice with a tangy timbre. As Deloris Van Cartier, a would-be disco diva in 1970s Philly who goes on the lam when the bullets start flying, she truly comes into her own when Deloris sheds her purse full of wisecracks.[57]
Steven Suskin of Variety gave the show an unfavorable review: "New tuner has various assets that place it comfortably in the feel-good entertainment category, and might have launched it to the top last season or even three months ago. But timing is everything. "Sister Act" comes in on the heels of a handful of musicals, including another disco-beat film adaptation (Priscilla Queen of the Desert), and comparisons are not favorable. The Broadway version of 'Sister Act' is glossy, but seems like a worn set of tires repatched too often."[58]
Awards and nominations[edit]
Original London production[edit]
Year
Award Ceremony
Category
Nominee
Result
Ref
2010
Laurence Olivier Award
Best New Musical
Nominated
[59]
Best Actress in a Musical
Patina Miller
Nominated
Best Performance in a Supporting Role in a Musical
Sheila Hancock
Nominated
Best Theatre Choreographer
Anthony Van Laast
Nominated
Original Broadway production[edit]
Year
Award Ceremony
Category
Nominee
Result
Ref
2011
Tony Award
Best Musical
Nominated
[60]
Best Book of a Musical
Cheri Steinkellner, Bill Steinkellner, and Douglas Carter Beane
Nominated
Best Original Score
Alan Menken and Glenn Slater
Nominated
Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Musical
Patina Miller
Nominated
Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Musical
Victoria Clark
Nominated
Drama Desk Award
Outstanding Musical
Nominated
[61]
Outstanding Actress in a Musical
Patina Miller
Nominated
Outstanding Featured Actress in a Musical
Victoria Clark
Nominated
Outstanding Music
Alan Menken
Nominated
Outstanding Lyrics
Glenn Slater
Nominated
2022 London Revival[edit]
Year
Award Ceremony
Category
Nominee
Result
Ref
2023
Laurence Olivier Award
Best Musical Revival
Nominated
[62]
Best Actor in a Supporting Role in a Musical
Clive Rowe
Nominated
Sister Act Nun Run[edit]
The Sister Act Nuns Run was first held in May 2009, just before the opening of the West End musical. When the team from Sister Act got together with the team from Barnardos it was decided a Nun Run would be a great way to promote the new musical as well as raise money for a great cause.
Despite it being a brand new charity run, almost 1000 people got dressed up as nuns to run the streets of London, and altogether they raised over  30,000, and on the back of its success it was decided that this 4 mile run was to be an annual event.
In late 2009 it was announced that the 2010 run was again to take place in May, but this time taking a different route, passing some of London's greatest landmarks such as The Tower of London, Tate Modern, and St. Paul's Cathedral.
To link the run with Sister Act the Musical (other than the fact everyone is dressed as nuns), some of the cast as well as Barnardo's Children's Choir give performances at the start line. This not only helps to fuse the link between Barnardo's and the show, but makes it a fun event, as it is designed as a charity event rather than for competitive runners.
The 2010 run sets this as an annual event which the organizers hope will grow year after year.[63]
The 2011 run took place in September 2011 to coincide with the UK national tour.[64]
References[edit]
^ a b Hernandez, Ernio (November 3, 2006). "Sister Act opens world premiere run". Playbill.com. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ a b Shenton, Mark (June 2, 2009). "Sister Act opens at the London Palladium". Playbill.com. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ Sister Act Sets Pasadena Playhouse Record Broadwayworld.com, December 8, 2006
^ "Sister Act Makes World Premiere in Pasadena" simsscoop.com, November 9, 2006
^ Isherwood, Charles (April 20, 2011). "Different Church, More Sequins". The New York Times. Retrieved January 28, 2012.
^ Lipton, Brian Scott.  "Dawnn Lewis, Elizabeth Ward Land, Henry Polic II to Headline 'Sister Act'". Theatermania.com, September 9, 2006
^ Schwartz, Jonas.Theatermania.com "Sister Act the Musical review" Archived September 21, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Theatermania.com. November 6, 2006
^ "SISTER ACT the Musical listing"[permanent dead link], Alliancetheatre.org, accessed November 27, 2008
^ "CreativeLoafing.com review" Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Atlanta.creativeloafing.com
^ Official Website Archived September 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine sisteractthemusical.com
^ Sister Act, A Divine Musical Comedy."Sister Act Cast is announced" Archived July 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, sisteractthemusical.com, January 29, 2009
^ Sister Act Confirms Closure for 1 Jan, Webbe Joins Archived June 15, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Whatsonstage.com
^ "West End's 'Sister Act' to Vacate London Palladium Oct. 30; Future Plans Announced" Archived October 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine  Playbill
^ "Back in the Habit: Whoopi Goldberg to Join London Cast of 'Sister Act'" Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine  Playbill
^ "Whoopi Goldberg Withdraws From London's 'Sister Act' After Mother Suffers a Stroke" Archived August 30, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Playbill
^ "Sally Dexter to Replace Whoopi Goldberg in SISTER ACT, 8/31"  BroadwayWorld.com, August 17, 2010
^ "Whoopi Goldberg to Rejoin Cast of London's 'Sister Act'" Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine  Playbill
^ Hetrick, Adam. "'Sister Act The Musical' Will Open at the Broadway Theatre in April 2011" Archived December 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Playbill.com, October 5, 2010
^ "It's Official: Douglas Carter Beane Joins 'Sister Act' Team". Broadwayworld.com, February 28, 2011
^ Hetrick, Adam. "Victoria Clark, Fred Applegate, Chester Gregory Will Be Part of Broadway's 'Sister Act' " Archived February 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Playbill.com, February 1, 2011
^ Hetrick, Adam.  "Carolee Carmello Will Be Sister Act's Next Mother Superior" Archived November 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Playbill.com, November 1, 2011
^ "Raise Your Voice! Carolee Carmello Replaces Victoria Clark in SISTER ACT as 'Mother Superior' 11/19"  BroadwayWorld.com, November 1, 2011
^ a b It's Official: She's Fabulous! Raven-Symone Joins SISTER ACT Mar. 27; Patina Miller Departs Mar. 18 broadwayworld.com, March 7, 2012
^ Hetrick, Adam.  "Broadway's Sister Act Will Kick the Habit Aug. 26" Archived June 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine  Playbill, June 20, 2012
^ Shenton, Mark (June 22, 2011). "U.K. tour of Sister Act will be led by Denise Black, Michael Starke and Cynthia Erivo". Playbill.com. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ Johnson, Kieran (October 11, 2012). "Sister Act (Birmingham)". Whatsonstage.com. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ "Sister Act   l'Op ra Garnier de Monte-Carlo". Monacochannel.mc. August 16, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ Howell, Madeleine (November 17, 2016). "Craig Revel Horwood on choreographing Sister Act for Alexandra Burke". Theresident.co.uk. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ Bowie-Sell, Daisy (June 2, 2016). "Further casting announced for Sister Act". Whatsonstage.com. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ Hetrick, Adam (September 4, 2012). "Sister Act tour to star Ta'Rea Campbell, Hollis Resnik, Kingsley Leggs and Lael Van Keuren". Playbill.com. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ "Fabulous, baby! National Tour of Sister Act opens in San Antonio". Broadway.com. June 24, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ Gans, Andrew (October 2, 2013). "National tour of Sister Act announces cast changes". Broadway.com. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ "Kerissa Arrington, Maggie Clennon Reberg and more to star in Sister Act second national tour". Broadwayworld.com. September 9, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ Kopet, Jeri (May 6, 2015). "Sister Act brings nuns, mobsters and disco to Anchorage stage". Adn.com. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ "Sister Act: A divine comedy of scandalous proportions". Weekender.com.sg. May 15, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
^ "Sister Act". Musicalsisteract.com. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
^ "Sister Act". Londonboxoffice.co.uk. London Box Office. October 23, 2019. Retrieved October 23, 2019.
^ "Sister Act musical postpones London run to 2022 with Whoopi Goldberg dropping out of the run | WhatsOnStage". Whatsonstage.com. Retrieved February 16, 2021.
^ "Jennifer Saunders, Beverley Knight, Keala Settle, and More Will Lead SISTER ACT THE MUSICAL".
^ "Sister Act musical with Whoopi Goldberg and Jennifer Saunders and tour rescheduled to 2021 | WhatsOnStage". Whatsonstage.com. Retrieved April 24, 2020.
^ "Sister Act The Musical | UK Tour 2022". Sisteractthemusical.co.uk. Retrieved August 20, 2020.
^ a b "Conhe a o elenco brasileiro da com dia musical "Mudan a de H bito"". Abroadwayeaqui. February 16, 2015. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ "Karin Hils revela que foi elogiada por Whoopi Goldberg pessoalmente no Drag Me As a Queen". Eonline.com. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ Sister Act Programme
^ Sister Act Playbill
^ Shuttleworth, Ian. "Sister Act, London Palladium", Financial Times, June 3, 2009
^ Spencer, Charles."Sister Act at the London Palladium, review",The Daily Telegraph, June 3, 2009
^ Billington, Michael." 'Sister Act' review", The Guardian, June 3, 2009
^ "Nun fun is heavenly in Sister Act", Evening Standard, June 3, 2009
^ Nightingale, Benedict." 'Sister Act' at the London Palladium", The Times, June 3, 2009
^ Benedict, David." 'Sister Act'review", Variety, June 4, 2009
^ Broadway Review Roundup: SISTER ACT - All the Reviews!, Broadwayworld.com, April 20, 2011
^ Kennedy, Mark."Broadway Musical 'Sister Act' Will Convert You", Abcnews.go.com, April 21, 2011
^ Gardner, Elysa.'Sister Act': Most entertaining nuns, bar none USA Today, accessed April 26, 2011
^ Sisters have 'Act' together New York Post, April 21, 2011 (updated)
^ Geier, Thom." 'Sister Act' Entertainment Weekly Review" Entertainment Weekly, April 25, 2011
^ Isherwood, Charles.Different Church, More Sequins The New York Times, April 21, 2011
^ Suskin, Steven." 'Sister Act' Variety Review" Variety, April 20, 2011
^ "Spring Awakening, Enron and Red Score Big in Olivier Nominations". Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved March 5, 2022.
^ "2011 Tony Nominations Announced; Book of Mormon Earns 14 Nominations". Archived from the original on September 14, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022.
^ "56th Annual Drama Desk Nominations Announced; Book of Mormon Scores 12 Nominations". Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022.
^  "Olivier awards 2023: full list of winners". Retrieved April 4, 2023.
^ "Sister Act : Nun Run". January 13, 2010. Archived from the original on January 13, 2010. Retrieved March 5, 2022.
^ "Overseas Running Holidays and Events | 209 Events". 209events.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022.
External links[edit]
Internet Broadway Database
Sister Act Nun Run
New York Times, November 13, 2008
vteSister ActFilms
Sister Act (1992)
Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit (1993)
Musical
Sister Act
vteAlan MenkenAwards and nominationsMusicals
Dear Worthy Editor (1974)
God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater (1979)
Little Shop of Horrors (1982)
A Christmas Carol (1994)
Beauty and the Beast (1994)
King David (1997)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1999)
Sister Act (2006)
The Little Mermaid (2007)
Leap of Faith (2010)
Newsies (2011)
Aladdin (2014)
The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz (2015)
A Bronx Tale (2016)
Hercules (2019)
Musical films
Little Shop of Horrors (1986)
The Little Mermaid (1989)
Beauty and the Beast (1991)
Newsies (1992)
Aladdin (1992)
Pocahontas (1995)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996)
Hercules (1997)
Home on the Range (2004)
A Christmas Carol (2004)
Enchanted (2007)
Tangled (2010)
Beauty and the Beast (2017)
Aladdin (2019)
Disenchanted (2022)
The Little Mermaid (2023)
Spellbound (TBA)
Soundtracks
The Little Mermaid (1989)
Beauty and the Beast (1991)
Aladdin (1992)
Pocahontas (1995)
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996)
Hercules (1997)
Enchanted (2007)
Tangled (2010)
Beauty and the Beast (2017)
Aladdin (2019)
Disenchanted (2022)
Authority control 
MusicBrainz release group
2
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sister_Act_(musical)&oldid=1148734263"