Japanese word and pornographic genre
Part of a series onAnime and manga
Anime
History
Voice acting
Companies
Studios
Original video animation
Original net animation
Fansub
Fandub
Lists
Longest series
Longest franchises
Manga
History
Publishers
International market
Manga artist
Doujinshi
Alternative
Gekiga
Yonkoma
Iconography
Scanlation
Lists
Best-selling series
Longest series
Demographic groups
Children
Sh nen
Sh jo
Seinen
Josei
Genres
Bara
Cooking
Harem
Isekai
Lolicon
Magical girl
Mecha
Otomechikku
Ryona
Shotacon
Sports
Teens' love
Yaoi
Yuri
People
Manga artists
Anime directors
Fandom
Conventions (list)
Clubs
Cosplay
Anime music video
Otaku
Yaoi fandom
General
Glossary
Ecchi
Hentai
Moe
Anime-influenced animation
2.5D musical
Anime song
 Anime and manga portalvte
Futanari ( , seldom:  ,  , literally: dual form;  ,  , literally: "[to be of] two kinds") is the Japanese word for hermaphroditism, which is also used in a broader sense for androgyny.[1][2]: 79, 81 
Beyond Japan, the term has come to be used to describe a commonly pornographic genre of eroge, manga, and anime, which includes characters that show primary sexual characteristics from both females and males.[1] In today's language, it refers almost exclusively to characters who have an overall feminine body, but have both female and male primary genitalia (although testicles are not always present, while breasts, a penis, and a vagina are). The term is also often abbreviated as futa(s), which is also used as a generalized term for the works themselves.[2]
Historic origins[edit]
 Stones (with shimenawa) representing d sojincode: jpn promoted to code: ja  found near Karuizawa, Nagano
Japanese folk religion created diverse fantasies related to sexual characteristics. Traditional vocal pieces that date back hundreds of years deliver rough evidence that a change of gender was not ruled out,[2]: 78 79  and that the representation of the gender was used to worship deities such as d sojincode: jpn promoted to code: ja , which sometimes had ambiguous gender, being neither male nor female. Gary Leupp adds that the origins might even reach back to the origins of Buddhism, since the deities would not necessarily have a fixed or determinable gender.[1]
Likewise, the belief spread that some people could change their gender depending on the lunar phase. The term half-moon ( , hangetsu) was coined to describe such beings.[2]: 79  Japanese traditional clothing, which made distinguishing men from women more difficult, as in other cultures, presumably might have had an influence on this development.[2]: 80  To restrict women from accessing prohibited areas and to avoid smuggling by hiding items in the belt bag, guard posts were assigned to perform body checks. Historical records indicate that guards liked to joke about this matter quite frequently, resulting in various stories and even poems.[2]: 80  Whether anatomical anomalies, such as clitoromegaly or unusual physical development, led to these assumptions remains an open question.[2]
Until 1644, when onnagata actors were required to adopt male hairstyles regardless of the gender they were portraying, actors playing characters such as female warriors capitalized on the interest in the futanari quality, which was common in both samurai and commoner society.[1]
In anime and manga[edit]
 Example illustration of two futanari variants: one with testicles (right) and one without (left), both with breasts, a penis, and a vagina
Originally, the Japanese language referred to any character or real person that possessed masculine and feminine traits as futanari.[citation needed] This changed in the 1990s, as drawn futanari characters became more popular in anime and manga. Today, the term commonly refers to fictional (drawn) female or female-looking hermaphrodite characters. Futanari is also used as the term for a specific genre within hentai-related media (pornographic anime or manga) that depicts such characters.[3][4]
Origins[edit]
American transgender pornography that was introduced to Japan influenced the earliest futanari works, which were drawn by artists including Kitamimaki Kei.[5] In the late 1980s, editor Y ichi Terada collected futanari d jinshi in published anthologies such as Shemale Collection.[5] Futanari manga became popular in the 1990s and quickly became a part of the industry, cross-pollinating with multiple genres.[6] Toshiki Yui's Hot Tails has been described as the best-known example of the genre in the West.[6]
In anime aimed at a broad audience, the gender bender or cross-dressing storylines have always been popular. Popular examples include anime such as Ranma  , K mpfer, and Futaba-kun Change! (in which the main character changes from male to female),[7] and I My Me! Strawberry Eggs (which takes on a more cross-dressing theme).[citation needed] The light novel series and anime series Our Home's Fox Deity features a female fox deity who often appears as a male human.
See also[edit]
Agdistis
Ardhanarishvara
Hermaphroditus
Intersex
Pseudo-penis
True hermaphroditism
References[edit]
^ a b c d Leupp, Gary P. (1995). Male Colors: The Construction of Homosexuality in Tokugawa Japan. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. p. 174. ISBN 9780520919198. Retrieved 11 March 2016.
^ a b c d e f g (in German) Krauss, Friedrich Salomo et al. Japanisches Geschlechtsleben: Abhandlungen und Erhebungen  ber das Geschlechtsleben des japanischen Volkes ; folkloristische Studien, Schustek, 1965
^ Jacobs, Katrien (2007). Netporn: DIY Web Culture and Sexual Politics. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 103 104. ISBN 9780742554320. Retrieved 11 March 2016.
^ Leite, Jorge Jr. (June 2012). "Labirintos conceituais cient ficos, nativos e mercadol gicos: pornografia com pessoas que transitam entre os g neros". Cadernos Pagu (38): 99 128. doi:10.1590/S0104-83332012000100004. ISSN 0104-8333. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014.
^ a b Nagayama, Kaoru (2020). Erotic Comics in Japan: An Introduction to Eromanga. Translated by Galbraith, Patrick W.; Bauwens-Sugimoto, Jessica. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. p. 219. ISBN 978-94-6372-712-9. OCLC 1160012499.
^ a b Thompson, Jason (2007). Manga: The Complete Guide. New York: Del Rey Books. p. 452. ISBN 9780345485908.
^ Timothy Perper; Cornog, Martha. "Sex, Love, and Women in Japanese Comics". International Encyclopedia of Sexuality. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012.
Further reading[edit]
Jensen, Nate (2009). Japanese-English Guide to Sex, Kink and Naughtiness. ISBN 9781442108769.
External links[edit]
Look up futanari in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Futanari.
vteJapanese erotic cinemaFilms
List of Japanese sexploitation films
List of Nikkatsu Roman Porno films
Adult video (AV)studios
Alice Japan
Athena Eizou
Atlas21
Attackers
CineMagic
Cross
Crystal-Eizou
DAS
Dogma
Glory Quest
Hokuto Corporation
Hot Entertainment
IdeaPocket
Japan Home Video
KMP
Kuki
Madonna
Max-A
Maxing
Media Station
Million Film
Moodyz
Real Works
S1 No. 1 Style
Shuttle Japan
Soft On Demand
TMA
Try-Heart Corporation
V&R Planning
Waap Entertainment
Wanz Factory
h.m.p.
Pink film studios
Nikkatsu
OP Eiga
Toei Company
Awards
Adult Broadcasting Awards
Japanese Adult Video Awards
Pink Grand Prix
Pinky Ribbon Awards
Related articles
List of Japanese erotic computer games
List of Japanese gravure idols
AV Open
AV idol
Bukkake
Chronology of adult videos in Japan
Cosplay
Eroge
Wakamezake
Futanari
Ganari Takahashi
Gokkun
Hamedori
Hentai
Japanese bondage
Japan Contents Review Center
Junior idol
Lolicon
Lotion play
Net idol
Nihon Ethics of Video Association (NEVA)
Nyotaimori
Omorashi
Panchira
Pink film
Pornography in Japan
Shunga
Shungo Kaji
Tamakeri
Tarento
Ushiro Takatekote
vte  Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender topics in JapanMain article: Sexual minorities in JapanLaw
LGBT rights in Japan
Tokyo
Recognition of same-sex unions in Japan
Blue boy trial
History
Homosexuality in Japan
Kagema
Wakash 
CultureGeneral
LGBT culture in Japan
LGBT culture in Tokyo
Media
Badi 
Barazoku
Gay manga
D k 
Gay Japan News
G-men
Otoko-machi Map
Samson
Events
Aomori International LGBT Film Festival
Asian Queer Film Festival
Rainbow March
Rainbow Reel Tokyo
Gay villages
Tokyo   Shinjuku Ni-ch me
Nana-chome & Higashi-Ueno (Ueno)
Taito Ward (Asakusa)
Minato Ward (Shinbashi)
Toshima Ward (Ikebukuro)
Hokkaido   Susukino
Kanagawa   Nogecho (Yokohama)
Aichi   Sakae, Nagoya
Osaka   Doyama
Namba
Shinsekai
Hiroshima   Nagarekawa (Hiroshima City)
Fukuoka   Haruyoshi (Fukuoka City)
Okinawa   Sakurazaka (Naha City)
Related
LGBT themes in anime and manga
Yaoi
Yuri
Class S
Futanari
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Futanari&oldid=1149491497"