African-American social reformer, writer, and abolitionist (c. 1818 1895)
For other uses, see Frederick Douglass (disambiguation) and Frederick Douglas (disambiguation).
Frederick DouglassDouglass in 1879United States Minister Resident to HaitiIn officeNovember 14, 1889  July 30, 1891Appointed byBenjamin HarrisonPreceded byJohn E. W. ThompsonSucceeded byJohn S. Durham
Personal detailsBornFrederick Augustus Washington Baileyc. February 1817 or 1818[a]Cordova, Maryland, U.S.DiedFebruary 20, 1895(1895-02-20) (aged 77 78)Washington, D.C., U.S.Resting placeMount Hope CemeteryPolitical partyRepublicanSpousesAnna Murray
   (m. 1838; died 1882) Helen Pitts  (m. 1884) ParentsHarriet BaileyAaron Anthony (allegedly)[1]RelativesDouglass familyOccupationAbolitionist, suffragist, author, editor, diplomatSignature
Frederick Douglass (born Frederick Augustus Washington Bailey, c. February 1817 or 1818[a]  February 20, 1895) was an American social reformer, abolitionist, orator, writer, and statesman. After escaping from slavery in Maryland, he became a national leader of the abolitionist movement in Massachusetts and New York, becoming famous for his oratory[5] and incisive antislavery writings. Accordingly, he was described by abolitionists in his time as a living counterexample to enslavers' arguments that enslaved people lacked the intellectual capacity to function as independent American citizens.[6] Northerners at the time found it hard to believe that such a great orator had once been enslaved. It was in response to this disbelief that Douglass wrote his first autobiography.[7]
Douglass wrote three autobiographies, describing his experiences as an enslaved person in his Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845), which became a bestseller and was influential in promoting the cause of abolition, as was his second book, My Bondage and My Freedom (1855). Following the Civil War, Douglass was an active campaigner for the rights of freed slaves and wrote his last autobiography, Life and Times of Frederick Douglass. First published in 1881 and revised in 1892, three years before his death, the book covers his life up to those dates. Douglass also actively supported women's suffrage, and he held several public offices. Without his permission, Douglass became the first African American nominated for vice president of the United States, as the running mate of Victoria Woodhull on the Equal Rights Party ticket.[8]
Douglass believed in dialogue and in making alliances across racial and ideological divides, as well as in the liberal values of the U.S. Constitution.[9] When radical abolitionists, under the motto "No Union with Slaveholders", criticized Douglass's willingness to engage in dialogue with slave owners, he replied: "I would unite with anybody to do right and with nobody to do wrong."[10]
Life as an enslaved person
Frederick Augustus Washington Bailey was born enslaved on the Eastern Shore of the Chesapeake Bay in Talbot County, Maryland. The plantation was between Hillsboro and Cordova;[11] his birthplace was likely his grandmother's cabin[b] east of Tappers Corner, and west of Tuckahoe Creek.[12][13][14] In his first autobiography, Douglass stated: "I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record containing it."[15] In successive autobiographies, he gave more precise estimates of when he was born, his final estimate being 1817.[11] However, based on the extant records of Douglass's former owner, Aaron Anthony, historian Dickson J. Preston determined that Douglass was born in February 1818.[3] Though the exact date of his birth is unknown, he chose to celebrate February 14 as his birthday, remembering that his mother called him her "Little Valentine."[2][16]
Birth family
Douglass was of mixed race, which likely included Native American[17] and African on his mother's side, as well as European.[18] In contrast, his father was "almost certainly white", according to historian David W. Blight in his 2018 biography of Douglass.[19] Douglass said his mother Harriet Bailey gave him his name Frederick Augustus Washington Bailey and, after he escaped to the North in September 1838, he took the surname Douglass, having already dropped his two middle names.[20]
He later wrote of his earliest times with his mother:[21]
The opinion was...whispered that my master was my father; but of the correctness of this opinion I know nothing. ... My mother and I were separated when I was but an infant. ... It is a common custom, in the part of Maryland from which I ran away, to part children from their mothers at a very early age. ... I do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day. She was with me in the night. She would lie down with me, and get me to sleep, but long before I waked she was gone.
After separation from his mother during infancy, young Frederick lived with his maternal grandmother Betsy Bailey, who was also enslaved, and his maternal grandfather Isaac, who was free.[22] Betsy would live until 1849.[23] Frederick's mother remained on the plantation about 12 miles (19 km) away, only visiting Frederick a few times before her death when he was 7 years old.
Returning much later, about 1883, to purchase land in Talbot County that was meaningful to him, he was invited to address "a colored school":
I once knew a little colored boy whose mother and father died when he was six years old. He was a slave and had no one to care for him. He slept on a dirt floor in a hovel, and in cold weather would crawl into a meal bag head foremost and leave his feet in the ashes to keep them warm. Often he would roast an ear of corn and eat it to satisfy his hunger, and many times has he crawled under the barn or stable and secured eggs, which he would roast in the fire and eat. 
That boy did not wear pants like you do, but a tow linen shirt. Schools were unknown to him, and he learned to spell from an old Webster's spelling-book and to read and write from posters on cellar and barn doors, while boys and men would help him. He would then preach and speak, and soon became well known. He became Presidential Elector, United States Marshal, United States Recorder, United States diplomat, and accumulated some wealth. He wore broadcloth and didn't have to divide crumbs with the dogs under the table. That boy was Frederick Douglass.[24]
Early learning and experience
The Auld family
Part of a series onSlavery
Contemporary
Child labour
Child soldiers
Conscription
Debt
Forced marriage
Bride buying
Child marriage
Wife selling
Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Peonage
Penal labour
Contemporary Africa
21st-century jihadism
Sexual slavery
Wage slavery
Historical
Antiquity
Ancient Egypt
Babylonia
Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Contubernium
Ancillae
Medieval Europe
Byzantine Empire
Kholop
Serfs
History
In Russia
Emancipation
Thrall
Muslim world
Contract of manumission
Ottoman Empire
Avret Esir Pazarlar 
Barbary Coast
slave trade
pirates
Turkish Abductions
Concubinage
history
Ma malakat aymanukum
Avret Esir Pazarlar 
Harem
Abbasid harem
Ottoman Imperial Harem
Jarya/Cariye
Odalisque
Qiyan
Umm walad
21st century
Atlantic slave trade
Bristol
Brazil
Database
Dutch
Middle Passage
Nantes
New France
Panyarring
Spanish Empire
Slave Coast
Thirteen colonies
Topics and practice
Conscription
Ghilman
Mamluk
Devshirme
Blackbirding
Coolie
Corv e labor
Field slaves in the United States
Treatment
House slaves
Saqaliba
Slave market
Slave raiding
Child soldiers
White slavery
Naval
Galley slave
Impressment
Pirates
Shanghaiing
Slave ship
By country or region
Sub-Saharan Africa
Contemporary Africa
Trans-Saharan slave trade
Indian Ocean slave trade
Angola
Chad
Ethiopia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Seychelles
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
North and South America
Americas indigenous
U.S. Natives
Aztec
United States
Field slaves
female
Contemporary
maps
partus
prison labor
Slave codes
Treatment
interregional
Human trafficking
The Bahamas
Canada
Caribbean
Barbados
British Virgin Islands
Trinidad
Code Noir
Latin America
Brazil
Lei  urea
Colombia
Cuba
Haiti
revolt
Restavek
(Encomienda)
Puerto Rico
East, Southeast, and South Asia
Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
Bhutan
China
Booi Aha
Laogai
penal system
India
Debt bondage
Chukri System
Japan
comfort women
Korea
Kwalliso
Thailand
Yankee princess
Vietnam
Australia and Oceania
Australia
Human trafficking
Blackbirding
Slave raiding in Easter Island
Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
Blackbirding in Polynesia
Europe and North Asia
Sex trafficking in Europe
Britain
Denmark
Dutch Republic
Germany in World War II
Malta
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain
Sweden
North Africa and West Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Egypt
Human trafficking in the Middle East
Iran
Kuwait
Libya
Morocco
Oman
Saudi Arabia
Tunisia
Qatar
Yemen
United Arab Emirates
Religion
Bible
Christianity
Catholicism
Mormonism
Islam
Judaism
Bah  Faith
Opposition and resistance
1926 Slavery Convention
Abolitionism
U.K.
U.S.
Abolitionists
Anti-Slavery International
Blockade of Africa
U.K.
U.S.
Colonization
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Compensated emancipation
Freedman
manumission
Freedom suit
Slave Power
Underground Railroad
songs
Slave rebellion
Slave Trade Acts
International law
Third Servile War
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution
Timeline of abolition of slavery and serfdom
Abolition of slave trade in Persian gulf [fa]
Related
Common law
Indentured servitude
Unfree labour
Fugitive slaves
laws
Great Dismal Swamp maroons
List of slaves
owners
last surviving American enslaved people
Marriage of enslaved people (United States)
Slave narrative
films
songs
Slave name
Slave catcher
Slave patrol
Slave Route Project
breeding
court cases
Washington
Jefferson
Adams
Lincoln
40 acres
Freedmen's Bureau
Iron bit
Emancipation Day
vteAt the age of 6, Douglass was separated from his grandparents and moved to the Wye House plantation, where Aaron Anthony worked as overseer.[14] After Anthony died in 1826, Douglass was given to Lucretia Auld, wife of Thomas Auld, who sent him to serve Thomas' brother Hugh Auld and his wife Sophia Auld in Baltimore. From the day he arrived, Sophia saw to it that Douglass was properly fed and clothed, and that he slept in a bed with sheets and a blanket.[25] Douglass described her as a kind and tender-hearted woman, who treated him "as she supposed one human being ought to treat another."[26] Douglass felt that he was lucky to be in the city, where he said enslaved people were almost freemen, compared to those on plantations.
When Douglass was about 12, Sophia Auld began teaching him the alphabet. Hugh Auld disapproved of the tutoring, feeling that literacy would encourage enslaved people to desire freedom. Douglass later referred to this as the "first decidedly antislavery lecture" he had ever heard. "'Very well, thought I,'" wrote Douglass. "'Knowledge unfits a child to be a slave.' I instinctively assented to the proposition, and from that moment I understood the direct pathway from slavery to freedom."[27]
Under her husband's influence, Sophia came to believe that education and slavery were incompatible and one day snatched a newspaper away from Douglass.[28] She stopped teaching him altogether and hid all potential reading materials, including her Bible, from him.[25] In his autobiography, Douglass related how he learned to read from white children in the neighborhood, and by observing the writings of the men with whom he worked.[29]
Douglass continued, secretly, to teach himself to read and write. He later often said, "knowledge is the pathway from slavery to freedom."[30] As Douglass began to read newspapers, pamphlets, political materials, and books of every description, this new realm of thought led him to question and condemn the institution of slavery. In later years, Douglass credited The Columbian Orator, an anthology that he discovered at about age 12, with clarifying and defining his views on freedom and human rights. First published in 1797, the book is a classroom reader, containing essays, speeches, and dialogues, to assist students in learning reading and grammar. He later learned that his mother had also been literate, about which he would later declare:
I am quite willing, and even happy, to attribute any love of letters I possess, and for which I have got despite of prejudices only too much credit, not to my admitted Anglo-Saxon paternity, but to the native genius of my sable, unprotected, and uncultivated mother a woman, who belonged to a race whose mental endowments it is, at present, fashionable to hold in disparagement and contempt.[31]
William Freeland
When Douglass was hired out to William Freeland, he "gathered eventually more than thirty male slaves on Sundays, and sometimes even on weeknights, in a Sabbath literacy school."[32]
Edward Covey
In 1833, Thomas Auld took Douglass back from Hugh ("[a]s a means of punishing Hugh," Douglass later wrote). Thomas sent Douglass to work for Edward Covey, a poor farmer who had a reputation as a "slave-breaker". He whipped Douglass so frequently that his wounds had little time to heal. Douglass later said the frequent whippings broke his body, soul, and spirit.[33] The 16-year-old Douglass finally rebelled against the beatings, however, and fought back. After Douglass won a physical confrontation, Covey never tried to beat him again.[34][35]
Recounting his beatings at Covey's farm in Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, Douglass described himself as "a man transformed into a brute!"[36] Still, Douglass came to see his physical fight with Covey as life-transforming, and introduced the story in his autobiography as such: "You have seen how a man was made a slave; you shall see how a slave was made a man."[37]
From slavery to freedom
Douglass first tried to escape from Freeland, who had hired him from his owner, but was unsuccessful. In 1837, Douglass met and fell in love with Anna Murray, a free black woman in Baltimore about five years his senior. Her free status strengthened his belief in the possibility of gaining his own freedom. Murray encouraged him and supported his efforts by aid and money.[38]
 Anna Murray Douglass, Douglass's wife for 44 years, portrait c. 1860
On September 3, 1838, Douglass successfully escaped by boarding a northbound train of the Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad.[39] The area where he boarded was thought to be a short distance east of the train depot, in a recently developed neighborhood between the modern neighborhoods of Harbor East and Little Italy. This depot was at President and Fleet Streets, east of "The Basin" of the Baltimore harbor, on the northwest branch of the Patapsco River. Research cited in 2021, however, suggests that Douglass in fact boarded the train at the Canton Depot of the Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Baltimore Railroad on Boston Street, in the Canton neighborhood of Baltimore, further east.[40][41][42]
Douglass reached Havre de Grace, Maryland, in Harford County, in the northeast corner of the state, along the southwest shore of the Susquehanna River, which flowed into the Chesapeake Bay. Although this placed him only some 20 miles (32 km) from the Maryland Pennsylvania state line, it was easier to continue by rail through Delaware, another slave state. Dressed in a sailor's uniform provided to him by Murray, who also gave him part of her savings to cover his travel costs, he carried identification papers and protection papers that he had obtained from a free black seaman.[38][43][44]
Douglass crossed the wide Susquehanna River by the railroad's steam-ferry at Havre de Grace to Perryville on the opposite shore, in Cecil County, then continued by train across the state line to Wilmington, Delaware, a large port at the head of the Delaware Bay. From there, because the rail line was not yet completed, he went by steamboat along the Delaware River further northeast to the "Quaker City" of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, an anti-slavery stronghold. He continued to the safe house of abolitionist David Ruggles in New York City. His entire journey to freedom took less than 24 hours.[45] Douglass later wrote of his arrival in New York City:
I have often been asked, how I felt when first I found myself on free soil. And my readers may share the same curiosity. There is scarcely anything in my experience about which I could not give a more satisfactory answer. A new world had opened upon me. If life is more than breath, and the "quick round of blood," I lived more in one day than in a year of my slave life. It was a time of joyous excitement which words can but tamely describe. In a letter written to a friend soon after reaching New York, I said: "I felt as one might feel upon escape from a den of hungry lions." Anguish and grief, like darkness and rain, may be depicted; but gladness and joy, like the rainbow, defy the skill of pen or pencil.[46]
Once Douglass had arrived, he sent for Murray to follow him north to New York. She brought the basics for them to set up a home. They were married on September 15, 1838, by a black Presbyterian minister, just eleven days after Douglass had reached New York.[45] At first they adopted Johnson as their married name, to divert attention.[38]
Abolitionist and preacher
Further information: Abolitionism in New Bedford, Massachusetts
 Frederick Douglass, c. 1840s, in his 20s
The couple settled in New Bedford, Massachusetts (an abolitionist center, full of former enslaved people), in 1838, moving to Lynn, Massachusetts, in 1841.[47] After meeting and staying with Nathan and Mary Johnson, they adopted Douglass as their married name.[38] Douglass had grown up using his mother's surname of Bailey; after escaping slavery he had changed his surname first to Stanley and then to Johnson. In New Bedford, the latter was such a common name that he wanted one that was more distinctive, and asked Nathan Johnson to choose a suitable surname. Nathan suggested "Douglass", after having read the poem The Lady of the Lake by Walter Scott, in which two of the principal characters have the surname "Douglas".[48][49]
 The home and meetinghouse of the Johnsons, where Douglass and his wife lived in New Bedford, Massachusetts
Douglass thought of joining a white Methodist Church, but was disappointed, from the beginning, upon finding that it was segregated. Later, he joined the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, an independent black denomination first established in New York City, which counted among its members Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman.[50] He became a licensed preacher in 1839,[51] which helped him to hone his oratorical skills. He held various positions, including steward, Sunday-school superintendent, and sexton. In 1840, Douglass delivered a speech in Elmira, New York, then a station on the Underground Railroad, in which a black congregation would form years later, becoming the region's largest church by 1940.[52]
Douglass also joined several organizations in New Bedford and regularly attended abolitionist meetings. He subscribed to William Lloyd Garrison's weekly newspaper, The Liberator. He later said that "no face and form ever impressed me with such sentiments [of the hatred of slavery] as did those of William Lloyd Garrison." So deep was this influence that in his last autobiography, Douglass said "his paper took a place in my heart second only to The Bible."[53]
Garrison was likewise impressed with Douglass and had written about his anti-colonization stance in The Liberator as early as 1839. Douglass first heard Garrison speak in 1841, at a lecture that Garrison gave in Liberty Hall, New Bedford. At another meeting, Douglass was unexpectedly invited to speak. After telling his story, Douglass was encouraged to become an anti-slavery lecturer. A few days later, Douglass spoke at the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society's annual convention, in Nantucket. Then 23 years old, Douglass conquered his nervousness and gave an eloquent speech about his life as a slave.
 William Lloyd Garrison, abolitionist and one of Douglass's first friends in the North
While living in Lynn, Douglass engaged in an early protest against segregated transportation. In September 1841, at Lynn Central Square station, Douglass and his friend James N. Buffum were thrown off an Eastern Railroad train because Douglass refused to sit in the segregated railroad coach.[47][54][55][56]
In 1843, Douglass joined other speakers in the American Anti-Slavery Society's "Hundred Conventions" project, a six-month tour at meeting halls throughout the eastern and midwestern United States. During this tour, slavery supporters frequently accosted Douglass. At a lecture in Pendleton, Indiana, an angry mob chased and beat Douglass before a local Quaker family, the Hardys, rescued him. His hand was broken in the attack; it healed improperly and bothered him for the rest of his life.[57] A stone marker in Falls Park in the Pendleton Historic District commemorates this event.
In 1847, Douglass explained to Garrison, "I have no love for America, as such; I have no patriotism. I have no country. What country have I? The Institutions of this Country do not know me do not recognize me as a man."[58]
Autobiography
Douglass's best-known work is his first autobiography, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, written during his time in Lynn, Massachusetts[59] and published in 1845. At the time, some skeptics questioned whether a black man could have produced such an eloquent piece of literature. The book received generally positive reviews and became an immediate bestseller. Within three years, it had been reprinted nine times, with 11,000 copies circulating in the United States. It was also translated into French and Dutch and published in Europe.
Douglass published three autobiographies during his lifetime (and revised the third of these), each time expanding on the previous one. The 1845 Narrative was his biggest seller and probably allowed him to raise the funds to gain his legal freedom the following year, as discussed below. In 1855, Douglass published My Bondage and My Freedom. In 1881, in his sixties, Douglass published Life and Times of Frederick Douglass, which he revised in 1892.
Travels to Ireland and Great Britain
 Plaque to Frederick Douglass, West Bell St., Dundee, Scotland
 Douglass in 1847, around 29 years of ageDouglass's friends and mentors feared that the publicity would draw the attention of his ex-owner, Hugh Auld, who might try to get his "property" back. They encouraged Douglass to tour Ireland, as many former slaves had done. Douglass set sail on the Cambria for Liverpool, England, on August 16, 1845. He traveled in Ireland as the Great Famine was beginning.
The feeling of freedom from American racial discrimination amazed Douglass:[60]
Eleven days and a half gone, and I have crossed three thousand miles of the perilous deep. Instead of a democratic government, I am under a monarchical government. Instead of the bright, blue sky of America, I am covered with the soft, grey fog of the Emerald Isle [Ireland]. I breathe, and lo! the chattel [slave] becomes a man. I gaze around in vain for one who will question my equal humanity, claim me as his slave, or offer me an insult. I employ a cab I am seated beside white people I reach the hotel I enter the same door I am shown into the same parlor I dine at the same table and no one is offended.... I find myself regarded and treated at every turn with the kindness and deference paid to white people. When I go to church, I am met by no upturned nose and scornful lip to tell me, 'We don't allow niggers in here!'
Still, Douglass was astounded by the extreme levels of poverty he encountered, much of it reminding him of his experiences in slavery.  In a letter to William Lloyd Garrison, Douglass wrote "I see much here to remind me of my former condition, and I confess I should be ashamed to lift up my voice against American slavery, but that I know the cause of humanity is one the world over. He who really and truly feels for the American slave, cannot steel his heart to the woes of others; and he who thinks himself an abolitionist, yet cannot enter into the wrongs of others, has yet to find a true foundation for his anti-slavery faith."[61]
He also met and befriended the Irish nationalist and strident abolitionist Daniel O'Connell,[62][63] who was to be a great inspiration.[64][65]
Douglass spent two years in Ireland and Great Britain, lecturing in churches and chapels. His draw was such that some facilities were "crowded to suffocation". One example was his hugely popular London Reception Speech, which Douglass delivered in May 1846 at Alexander Fletcher's Finsbury Chapel. Douglass remarked that in England he was treated not "as a color, but as a man".[66]
In 1846, Douglass met with Thomas Clarkson, one of the last living British abolitionists, who had persuaded Parliament to abolish slavery in Great Britain's colonies.[67] During this trip Douglass became legally free, as British supporters led by Anna Richardson and her sister-in-law Ellen of Newcastle upon Tyne raised funds to buy his freedom from his American owner Thomas Auld.[66][68] Many supporters tried to encourage Douglass to remain in England but, with his wife still in Massachusetts and three million of his black brethren in bondage in the United States, he returned to America in the spring of 1847,[66] soon after the death of Daniel O'Connell.[69]
(In the 21st century, historical plaques were installed on buildings in Cork and Waterford, Ireland, and London to celebrate Douglass's visit: the first is on the Imperial Hotel in Cork and was unveiled on August 31, 2012; the second is on the fa ade of Waterford City Hall, unveiled on October 7, 2013. It commemorates his speech there on October 9, 1845.[70] The third plaque adorns Nell Gwynn House, South Kensington in London, at the site of an earlier house where Douglass stayed with the British abolitionist George Thompson.[71])
Douglass spent time in Scotland and was appointed "Scotland's Antislavery agent."[72] He made anti-slavery speeches and wrote letters back to the USA. He considered the city of Edinburgh to be elegant, grand and very welcoming. Maps of the places in the city that were important to his stay are held by the National Library of Scotland.[73][74] A plaque and a mural on Gilmore Place in Edinburgh mark his stay there in 1846.
"A variety of collaborative projects are currently [in 2021] underway to commemorate Frederick Douglass s journey and visit to Ireland in the 19th century."[75]
Return to the United States. The abolitionist movement
 Douglass circa 1847 52, around his early 30s
After returning to the U.S. in 1847, using  500 (equivalent to $48,612 in 2021) given to him by English supporters,[66] Douglass started publishing his first abolitionist newspaper, the North Star, from the basement of the Memorial AME Zion Church in Rochester, New York.[76] Originally, Pittsburgh journalist Martin Delany was co-editor but Douglass didn't feel he brought in enough subscriptions, and they parted ways.[77][page needed] The North Star's motto was "Right is of no Sex   Truth is of no Color   God is the Father of us all, and we are all brethren."[78] The AME Church and North Star joined in the freedmen community's vigorous opposition to the mostly white American Colonization Society and its proposal to send free black people to Africa.  Douglass also participated in the Underground Railroad. He and his wife provided lodging and resources in their home to more than four hundred fugitive slaves.[78]
Douglass also soon split with Garrison, who he found unwilling to support actions against American slavery.[79] Earlier Douglass had agreed with Garrison's position that the Constitution was pro-slavery, because of the Three-Fifths Clause, the compromise that provided that 60 percent of the number of enslaved people would be added to "the whole Number of free Persons"[80] for the purpose of apportioning congressional seats; and protection of the international slave trade through 1807. Garrison had burned copies of the Constitution to express his opinion. However, Lysander Spooner published The Unconstitutionality of Slavery (1846), which examined the United States Constitution as an antislavery document. Douglass's change of opinion about the Constitution and his splitting from Garrison around 1847 became one of the abolitionist movement's most notable divisions. Douglass angered Garrison by saying that the Constitution could and should be used as an instrument in the fight against slavery.[81]
Letter to his former owner
In September 1848, on the tenth anniversary of his escape, Douglass published an open letter addressed to his former master, Thomas Auld, berating him for his conduct, and inquiring after members of his family still held by Auld.[82][83] In the course of the letter, Douglass adeptly transitions from formal and restrained to familiar and then to impassioned. At one point he is the proud parent, describing his improved circumstances and the progress of his own four young children. But then he dramatically shifts tone: 
Oh! sir, a slaveholder never appears to me so completely an agent of hell, as when I think of and look upon my dear children. It is then that my feelings rise above my control. ... The grim horrors of slavery rise in all their ghastly terror before me, the wails of millions pierce my heart, and chill my blood. I remember the chain, the gag, the bloody whip, the deathlike gloom overshadowing the broken spirit of the fettered bondman, the appalling liability of his being torn away from wife and children, and sold like a beast in the market.[84]
In a graphic passage, Douglass asked Auld how he would feel if Douglass had come to take away his daughter Amanda into slavery, treating her the way he and members of his family had been treated by Auld.[82][83] Yet in his conclusion Douglass shows his focus and benevolence, stating that he has "no malice towards him personally," and asserts that, "there is no roof under which you would be more safe than mine, and there is nothing in my house which you might need for comfort, which I would not readily grant. Indeed, I should esteem it a privilege, to set you an example as to how mankind ought to treat each other."[84]
Women's rights
In 1848, Douglass was the only black person to attend the Seneca Falls Convention, the first women's rights convention, in upstate New York.[85][86] Elizabeth Cady Stanton asked the assembly to pass a resolution asking for women's suffrage.[87] Many of those present opposed the idea, including influential Quakers James and Lucretia Mott.[88] Douglass stood and spoke eloquently in favor of women's suffrage; he said that he could not accept the right to vote as a black man if women could also not claim that right. He suggested that the world would be a better place if women were involved in the political sphere.
In this denial of the right to participate in government, not merely the degradation of woman and the perpetuation of a great injustice happens, but the maiming and repudiation of one-half of the moral and intellectual power of the government of the world.[88]
After Douglass's powerful words, the attendees passed the resolution.[88][89]
In the wake of the Seneca Falls Convention, Douglass used an editorial in The North Star to press the case for women's rights. He recalled the "marked ability and dignity" of the proceedings, and briefly conveyed several arguments of the convention and feminist thought at the time.
On the first count, Douglass acknowledged the "decorum" of the participants in the face of disagreement. In the remainder, he discussed the primary document that emerged from the conference, a Declaration of Sentiments, and the "infant" feminist cause. Strikingly, he expressed the belief that "[a] discussion of the rights of animals would be regarded with far more complacency...than would be a discussion of the rights of women," and Douglass noted the link between abolitionism and feminism, the overlap between the communities.
His opinion as the editor of a prominent newspaper carried weight, and he stated the position of the North Star explicitly: "We hold woman to be justly entitled to all we claim for man." This letter, written a week after the convention, reaffirmed the first part of the paper's slogan, "right is of no sex."
 Memorial Rock at AME Zion, Newburgh, New York
After the Civil War, when the 15th Amendment giving black men the right to vote was being debated, Douglass split with the Stanton-led faction of the women's rights movement. Douglass supported the amendment, which would grant suffrage to black men. Stanton opposed the 15th Amendment because it limited the expansion of suffrage to black men; she predicted its passage would delay for decades the cause for women's right to vote. Stanton argued that American women and black men should band together to fight for universal suffrage, and opposed any bill that split the issues.[90] Douglass and Stanton both knew that there was not yet enough male support for women's right to vote, but that an amendment giving black men the vote could pass in the late 1860s. Stanton wanted to attach women's suffrage to that of black men so that her cause would be carried to success.[91]
Douglass thought such a strategy was too risky, that there was barely enough support for black men's suffrage. He feared that linking the cause of women's suffrage to that of black men would result in failure for both. Douglass argued that white women, already empowered by their social connections to fathers, husbands, and brothers, at least vicariously had the vote. Black women, he believed, would have the same degree of empowerment as white women once black men had the vote.[91] Douglass assured the American women that at no time had he ever argued against women's right to vote.[92]
Ideological refinement
 Frederick Douglass in 1856, around 38 years of age
Meanwhile, in 1851, Douglass merged the North Star with Gerrit Smith's Liberty Party Paper to form Frederick Douglass' Paper, which was published until 1860.
On July 5, 1852, Douglass delivered an address in  Corinthian Hall at a meeting organized by the Rochester Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society. This speech eventually became known as "What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?"; one biographer called it "perhaps the greatest antislavery oration ever given."[93] In 1853, he was a prominent attendee of the radical abolitionist National African American Convention in Rochester. Douglass was one of five people whose names were attached to the address of the convention to the people of the United States published under the title, The Claims of Our Common Cause. The other four were Amos No  Freeman, James Monroe Whitfield, Henry O. Wagoner, and George Boyer Vashon.[94]
Like many abolitionists, Douglass believed that education would be crucial for African Americans to improve their lives; he was an early advocate for school desegregation. In the 1850s, Douglass observed that New York's facilities and instruction for African-American children were vastly inferior to those for European Americans. Douglass called for court action to open all schools to all children. He said that full inclusion within the educational system was a more pressing need for African Americans than political issues such as suffrage.
John Brown
 Douglass argued against John Brown's plan to attack the arsenal at Harpers Ferry, painting by Jacob Lawrence
See also: Shields Green
On March 12, 1859, Douglass met with radical abolitionists John Brown, George DeBaptiste, and others at William Webb's house in Detroit to discuss emancipation.[95] Douglass met Brown again when Brown visited his home two months before leading the raid on Harpers Ferry. Brown penned his Provisional Constitution during his two-week stay with Douglass. Also staying with Douglass for over a year was Shields Green, a fugitive slave whom Douglass was helping, as he often did.
Shortly before the raid, Douglass, taking Green with him, travelled from Rochester, via New York City, to Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, Brown's communications headquarters. He was recognized there by black people, who asked him for a lecture. Douglass agreed, although he said his only topic was slavery. Green joined him on the stage; Brown, incognito, sat in the audience. A white reporter, referring to "Nigger Democracy", called it a "flaming address" by "the notorious Negro Orator".[96]
There, in an abandoned stone quarry for secrecy, Douglass and Green met with Brown and John Henri Kagi, to discuss the raid. After discussions lasting, as Douglass put it, "a day and a night", he disappointed Brown by declining to join him, considering the mission suicidal. To Douglass's surprise, Green went with Brown instead of returning to Rochester with Douglass. Anne Brown said that Green told her that Douglass promised to pay him on his return, but David Blight called this "much more ex post facto bitterness than reality".[97]
Almost all that is known about this incident comes from Douglass. It is clear that it was of immense importance to him, both as a turning point in his life not accompanying John Brown and its importance in his public image. The meeting was not revealed by Douglass for 20 years. He first disclosed it in his speech on John Brown at Storer College in 1881, trying unsuccessfully to raise money to support a John Brown professorship at Storer, to be held by a black man. He again referred to it stunningly in his last Autobiography.
After the raid, which took place between October 16 and 18, 1859, Douglass was accused both of supporting Brown and of not supporting him enough.[98] He was nearly arrested on a Virginia warrant,[99][100][101] and fled for a brief time to Canada before proceeding onward to England on a previously planned lecture tour, arriving near the end of November.[102] During his lecture tour of Great Britain, on March 26, 1860, Douglass delivered a speech before the Scottish Anti-Slavery Society in Glasgow, "The Constitution of the United States: is it pro-slavery or anti-slavery?", outlining his views on the American Constitution.[103] That month, on the 13th, Douglass's youngest daughter Annie died in Rochester, New York, just days shy of her 11th birthday. Douglass sailed back from England the following month, traveling through Canada to avoid detection.
Years later, in 1881, Douglass shared a stage at Storer College in Harpers Ferry with Andrew Hunter, the prosecutor who secured Brown's conviction and execution. Hunter congratulated Douglass.[104]
Photography
Douglass considered photography very important in ending slavery and racism, and believed that the camera would not lie, even in the hands of a racist white person, as photographs were an excellent counter to many racist caricatures, particularly in blackface minstrelsy. He was the most photographed American of the 19th century, consciously using photography to advance his political views.[105][106] He never smiled, specifically so as not to play into the racist caricature of a happy enslaved person. He tended to look directly into the camera and confront the viewer with a stern look.[107][108]
Religious views
As a child, Douglass was exposed to a number of religious sermons, and in his youth, he sometimes heard Sophia Auld reading the Bible. In time, he became interested in literacy; he began reading and copying bible verses, and he eventually converted to Christianity.[109][110] He described this approach in his last biography, Life and Times of Frederick Douglass:
I was not more than thirteen years old, when in my loneliness and destitution I longed for some one to whom I could go, as to a father and protector. The preaching of a white Methodist minister, named Hanson, was the means of causing me to feel that in God I had such a friend. He thought that all men, great and small, bond and free, were sinners in the sight of God: that they were by nature rebels against His government; and that they must repent of their sins, and be reconciled to God through Christ. I cannot say that I had a very distinct notion of what was required of me, but one thing I did know well: I was wretched and had no means of making myself otherwise.I consulted a good old colored man named Charles Lawson, and in tones of holy affection he told me to pray, and to "cast all my care upon God." This I sought to do; and though for weeks I was a poor, broken-hearted mourner, traveling through doubts and fears, I finally found my burden lightened, and my heart relieved. I loved all mankind, slaveholders not excepted, though I abhorred slavery more than ever. I saw the world in a new light, and my great concern was to have everybody converted. My desire to learn increased, and especially, did I want a thorough acquaintance with the contents of the Bible.[111]
Douglass was mentored by Rev. Charles Lawson, and, early in his activism, he often included biblical allusions and religious metaphors in his speeches. Although a believer, he strongly criticized religious hypocrisy,[112] and accused slaveholders of "wickedness", lack of morality, and failure to follow the Golden Rule. In this sense, Douglass distinguished between the "Christianity of Christ" and the "Christianity of America" and considered religious slaveholders and clergymen who defended slavery as the most brutal, sinful, and cynical of all who represented "wolves in sheep's clothing".[110][113]
In What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?, an oration Douglass gave in the Corinthian Hall of Rochester,[114] he sharply criticized the attitude of religious people who kept silent about slavery, and he charged that ministers committed a "blasphemy" when they taught it as sanctioned by religion. He considered that a law passed to support slavery was "one of the grossest infringements of Christian Liberty" and said that pro-slavery clergymen within the American Church "stripped the love of God of its beauty, and leave the throne of religion a huge, horrible, repulsive form", and "an abomination in the sight of God".[112]
Of ministers like John Chase Lord, Leonard Elijah Lathrop, Ichabod Spencer, and Orville Dewey, he said that they taught, against the Scriptures, that "we ought to obey man's law before the law of God". He further asserted, "in speaking of the American church, however, let it be distinctly understood that I mean the great mass of the religious organizations of our land. There are exceptions, and I thank God that there are. Noble men may be found, scattered all over these Northern States ... Henry Ward Beecher of Brooklyn, Samuel J. May of Syracuse, and my esteemed friend [Robert R. Raymonde]".[112]
He maintained that "upon these men lies the duty to inspire our ranks with high religious faith and zeal, and to cheer us on in the great mission of the slave's redemption from his chains". In addition, he called religious people to embrace abolitionism, stating, "let the religious press, the pulpit, the Sunday school, the conference meeting, the great ecclesiastical, missionary, Bible and tract associations of the land array their immense powers against slavery and slave-holding; and the whole system of crime and blood would be scattered to the winds."[112]
During his visits to the United Kingdom between 1846 and 1848, Douglass asked British Christians never to support American churches that permitted slavery,[115] and he expressed his happiness to know that a group of ministers in Belfast had refused to admit slaveholders as members of the Church.
On his return to the United States, Douglass founded the North Star, a weekly publication with the motto "Right is of no sex, Truth is of no color, God is the Father of us all, and we are all Brethren." Douglass later wrote a letter to his former slaveholder, in which he denounced him for leaving Douglass's family illiterate:
Your wickedness and cruelty committed in this respect on your fellow creatures, are greater than all the stripes you have laid upon my back or theirs. It is an outrage upon the soul, a war upon the immortal spirit, and one for which you must give account at the bar of our common Father and Creator. Letter to His Old Master. To my Old Master Thomas Auld.[60]
Sometimes considered a precursor of a non-denominational liberation theology,[116][117] Douglass was a deeply spiritual man, as his home continues to show. The fireplace mantle features busts of two of his favorite philosophers, David Friedrich Strauss, author of The Life of Jesus, and Ludwig Feuerbach, author of The Essence of Christianity. In addition to several Bibles and books about various religions in the library, images of angels and Jesus are displayed, as well as interior and exterior photographs of Washington's Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church.[52] Throughout his life, Douglass had linked that individual experience with social reform, and, according to John Stauffer, he, like other Christian abolitionists, followed practices such as abstaining from tobacco, alcohol and other substances that he believed corrupted body and soul.[118] According to David W. Blight, however, "Douglass loved cigars" and received them as gifts from Ottilie Assing.[119]
Civil War years
Before the Civil War
By the time of the Civil War, Douglass was one of the most famous black men in the country, known for his orations on the condition of the black race and on other issues such as women's rights. His eloquence gathered crowds at every location. His reception by leaders in England and Ireland added to his stature.
He had been seriously proposed for the congressional seat of his friend and supporter Gerrit Smith, who declined to run again after his term ended in 1854.[120][121] Smith recommended to him that he not run, because there were "strenuous objections" from members of Congress.[122] The possibility "afflicted some with convulsions, others with panic, more with an astonishing flow of exceedingly select and nervous language", "giving vent to all sorts of linguistic enormities."[123] If the House agreed to seat him, which was unlikely, all the Southern members would walk out, so the country would finally be split.[121][124] No black person would serve in Congress until 1870, just after the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment.
Fight for emancipation and suffrage
 1863 broadside Men of Color to Arms!, written by Douglass
Douglass and the abolitionists argued that because the aim of the Civil War was to end slavery, African Americans should be allowed to engage in the fight for their freedom. Douglass publicized this view in his newspapers and several speeches. After Lincoln had finally allowed black soldiers to serve in the Union army, Douglass helped the recruitment efforts, publishing his famous broadside Men of Color to Arms! on March 21, 1863.[125] His eldest son, Charles Douglass, joined the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, but was ill for much of his service.[51] Lewis Douglass fought at the Battle of Fort Wagner.[126] Another son, Frederick Douglass Jr., also served as a recruiter.
With the North no longer obliged to return slaves to their owners in the South, Douglass fought for equality for his people. Douglass conferred with President Abraham Lincoln in 1863 on the treatment of black soldiers[127] and on plans to move liberated slaves out of the South.
President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, which took effect on January 1, 1863, declared the freedom of all slaves in Confederate-held territory. (Slaves in Union-held areas were not covered because the proclamation was permissible under the Constitution only as a war measure; they were freed with the adoption of the 13th Amendment on December 6, 1865.) Douglass described the spirit of those awaiting the proclamation: "We were waiting and listening as for a bolt from the sky ... we were watching ... by the dim light of the stars for the dawn of a new day ... we were longing for the answer to the agonizing prayers of centuries."[128]
During the U.S. Presidential Election of 1864, Douglass supported John C. Fr mont, who was the candidate of the abolitionist Radical Democracy Party. Douglass was disappointed that President Lincoln did not publicly endorse suffrage for black freedmen. Douglass believed that since African-American men were fighting for the Union in the American Civil War, they deserved the right to vote.[129]
After Lincoln's death
The postwar ratification of the 13th Amendment, on December 6, 1865, outlawed slavery, "except as a punishment for crime." The 14th Amendment provided for birthright citizenship and prohibited the states from abridging the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States or denying any "person" due process of law or equal protection of the laws. The 15th Amendment protected all citizens from being discriminated against in voting because of race.[90]
After Lincoln had been assassinated, Douglass conferred with President Andrew Johnson on the subject of black suffrage.[130]
On April 14, 1876, Douglass delivered the keynote speech at the unveiling of the Emancipation Memorial in Washington's Lincoln Park. He spoke frankly about Lincoln, noting what he perceived as both positive and negative attributes of the late President. Calling Lincoln "the white man's President," Douglass criticized Lincoln's tardiness in joining the cause of emancipation, noting that Lincoln initially opposed the expansion of slavery but did not support its elimination. But Douglass also asked, "Can any colored man, or any white man friendly to the freedom of all men, ever forget the night which followed the first day of January 1863, when the world was to see if Abraham Lincoln would prove to be as good as his word?"[131] He also said: "Though Mr. Lincoln shared the prejudices of his white fellow-countrymen against the Negro, it is hardly necessary to say that in his heart of hearts he loathed and hated slavery...." Most famously, he added: "Viewed from the genuine abolition ground, Mr. Lincoln seemed tardy, cold, dull, and indifferent; but measuring him by the sentiment of his country, a sentiment he was bound as a statesman to consult, he was swift, zealous, radical, and determined."
The crowd, roused by his speech, gave Douglass a standing ovation. Lincoln's widow Mary Lincoln supposedly gave Lincoln's favorite walking-stick to Douglass in appreciation. That walking-stick still rests in his final residence, "Cedar Hill" in Washington, D.C., now preserved as the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.
After delivering the speech, Frederick Douglass immediately wrote to the National Republican newspaper in Washington (which published five days later, April 19), criticizing the statue's design and suggesting the park could be improved by more dignified monuments of free black people. "The negro here, though rising, is still on his knees and nude," Douglass wrote. "What I want to see before I die is a monument representing the negro, not couchant on his knees like a four-footed animal, but erect on his feet like a man."[132]
Reconstruction era
 Frederick Douglass in 1876, around 58 years of age
After the Civil War, Douglass continued to work for equality for African Americans and women. Due to his prominence and activism during the war, Douglass received several political appointments. He served as president of the Reconstruction-era Freedman's Savings Bank.[133]
Meanwhile, white insurgents had quickly arisen in the South after the war, organizing first as secret vigilante groups, including the Ku Klux Klan. Armed insurgency took different forms. Powerful paramilitary groups included the White League and the Red Shirts, both active during the 1870s in the Deep South. They operated as "the military arm of the Democratic Party", turning out Republican officeholders and disrupting elections.[134] Starting 10 years after the war, Democrats regained political power in every state of the former Confederacy and began to reassert white supremacy. They enforced this by a combination of violence, late 19th-century laws imposing segregation and a concerted effort to disfranchise African Americans. New labor and criminal laws also limited their freedom.[135]
To combat these efforts, Douglass supported the presidential campaign of Ulysses S. Grant in 1868. In 1870, Douglass started his last newspaper, the New National Era, attempting to hold his country to its commitment to equality.[51] President Grant sent a congressionally sponsored commission, accompanied by Douglass, on a mission to the West Indies to investigate whether the annexation of Santo Domingo would be good for the United States. Grant believed annexation would help relieve the violent situation in the South by allowing African Americans their own state. Douglass and the commission favored annexation, but Congress remained opposed to annexation. Douglass criticized Senator Charles Sumner, who opposed annexation, stating that if Sumner continued to oppose annexation he would "regard him as the worst foe the colored race has on this continent."[136]
 Douglass's former residence in the U Street Corridor of Washington, D.C. He built 2000 2004 17th Street, NW, in 1875.
After the midterm elections, Grant signed the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (also known as the Klan Act), and the second and third Enforcement Acts. Grant used their provisions vigorously, suspending habeas corpus in South Carolina and sending troops there and into other states. Under his leadership over 5,000 arrests were made. Grant's vigor in disrupting the Klan made him unpopular among many whites but earned praise from Douglass. A Douglass associate wrote that African Americans "will ever cherish a grateful remembrance of [Grant's] name, fame and great services."
In 1872, Douglass became the first African American nominated for Vice President of the United States, as Victoria Woodhull's running mate on the Equal Rights Party ticket. He was nominated without his knowledge. Douglass neither campaigned for the ticket nor acknowledged that he had been nominated.[8] In that year, he was presidential elector at large for the State of New York, and took that state's votes to Washington, D.C.[137]
However, in early June of that year, Douglass's third Rochester home, on South Avenue, burned down; arson was suspected. There was extensive damage to the house, its furnishings, and the grounds; in addition, sixteen volumes of the North Star and Frederick Douglass' Paper were lost. Douglass then moved to Washington, D.C.[138]
Throughout the Reconstruction era, Douglass continued speaking, emphasizing the importance of work, voting rights and actual exercise of suffrage. His speeches for the twenty-five years following the war emphasized work to counter the racism that was then prevalent in unions.[139] In a November 15, 1867, speech he said: ...rights rest in three boxes. The ballot box, jury box and the cartridge box. Let no man be kept from the ballot box because of his color. Let no woman be kept from the ballot box because of her sex.[140]Douglass spoke at many colleges around the country, including Bates College in Lewiston, Maine, in 1873.
In 1881, Douglass delivered at Storer College, in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, a speech praising John Brown and revealing unknown information about their relationship, including their meeting in an abandoned stone quarry near Chambersburg shortly before the raid.[141]
Family life
 Frederick Douglass after 1884 with his second wife Helen Pitts Douglass (sitting). The woman standing is her sister Eva Pitts.
Further information: Douglass family
Douglass and Anna Murray had five children: Rosetta Douglass, Lewis Henry Douglass, Frederick Douglass Jr., Charles Remond Douglass, and Annie Douglass (died at the age of ten). Charles and Rosetta helped produce his newspapers.
Anna Douglass remained a loyal supporter of her husband's public work. His relationships with Julia Griffiths and Ottilie Assing, two women with whom he was professionally involved, caused recurring speculation and scandals.[142] Assing was a journalist recently immigrated from Germany, who first visited Douglass in 1856 seeking permission to translate My Bondage and My Freedom into German. Until 1872, she often stayed at his house "for several months at a time" as his "intellectual and emotional companion."[143]
Assing held Anna Douglass "in utter contempt" and was vainly hoping that Douglass would separate from his wife. Douglass biographer David W. Blight concludes that Assing and Douglass "were probably lovers".[143] Though Douglass and Assing are widely believed to have had an intimate relationship, the surviving correspondence contains no proof of such a relationship.[144]
After Anna died in 1882, in 1884 Douglass married again, to Helen Pitts, a white suffragist and abolitionist from Honeoye, New York. Pitts was the daughter of Gideon Pitts Jr., an abolitionist colleague and friend of Douglass's. A graduate of Mount Holyoke College (then called Mount Holyoke Female Seminary), Pitts worked on a radical feminist publication named Alpha while living in Washington, D.C. She later worked as Douglass's secretary.[145]
Assing, who had depression and was diagnosed with incurable breast cancer, committed suicide in France in 1884 after hearing of the marriage.[146] Upon her death, Assing bequeathed Douglass a $13,000 trust fund, a "large album", and his choice of books from her library.[147]
The marriage of Douglass and Pitts provoked a storm of controversy, since Pitts was both white and nearly 20 years younger. Many in her family stopped speaking to her; his children considered the marriage a repudiation of their mother. But feminist Elizabeth Cady Stanton congratulated the couple.[148] Douglass responded to the criticisms by saying that his first marriage had been to someone the color of his mother, and his second to someone the color of his father.[149]
Final years in Washington, D.C.
The Freedman's Savings Bank went bankrupt on June 29, 1874, just a few months after Douglass became its president in late March.[150] During that same economic crisis, his final newspaper, The New National Era, failed in September.[151] When Republican Rutherford B. Hayes was elected president, he named Douglass as United States Marshal for the District of Columbia, the first person of color to be so named. The Senate voted to confirm him on March 17, 1877.[152] Douglass accepted the appointment, which helped assure his family's financial security.[51] During his tenure, Douglass was urged by his supporters to resign from his commission, since he was never asked to introduce visiting foreign dignitaries to the President, which is one of the usual duties of that post. However, Douglass believed that no covert racism was implied by the omission and stated that he was always warmly welcomed in presidential circles.[153][154]
 Cedar Hill, Douglass's house in the Anacostia neighborhood of Washington, D.C., is preserved as a National Historic Site.
In 1877, Douglass visited his former enslaver Thomas Auld on his deathbed, and the two men reconciled. Douglass had met Auld's daughter, Amanda Auld Sears, some years prior. She had requested the meeting and had subsequently attended and cheered one of Douglass's speeches. Her father complimented her for reaching out to Douglass. The visit also appears to have brought closure to Douglass, although some criticized his effort.[82]
That same year, Douglass bought the house that was to be the family's final home in Washington, D.C., on a hill above the Anacostia River. He and Anna named it Cedar Hill (also spelled CedarHill). They expanded the house from 14 to 21 rooms, and included a china closet. One year later, Douglass purchased adjoining lots and expanded the property to 15 acres (61,000 m2). The home is now preserved as the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.
In 1881, Douglass published the final edition of his autobiography, The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass, which he updated in 1892. In 1881, he was appointed Recorder of Deeds for the District of Columbia. His wife Anna Murray Douglass died in 1882, leaving the widower devastated. After a period of mourning, Douglass found new meaning from working with activist Ida B. Wells. He remarried in 1884, as mentioned above.
Douglass also continued his speaking engagements and travel, both in the United States and abroad. With new wife Helen, Douglass traveled to England, Ireland, France, Italy, Egypt, and Greece from 1886 to 1887. He became known for advocating Irish Home Rule and supported Charles Stewart Parnell in Ireland.
At the 1888 Republican National Convention, Douglass became the first African American to receive a vote for President of the United States in a major party's roll call vote.[155] That year, Douglass spoke at Claflin College, a historically black college in Orangeburg, South Carolina, and the state's oldest such institution.[156]
Many African Americans, called Exodusters, escaped the Klan and racially discriminatory laws in the South by moving to Kansas, where some formed all-black towns to have a greater level of freedom and autonomy. Douglass favored neither this nor the Back-to-Africa movement. He thought the latter resembled the American Colonization Society, which he had opposed in his youth. In 1892, at an Indianapolis conference convened by Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, Douglass spoke out against the separatist movements, urging blacks to stick it out.[51] He made similar speeches as early as 1879 and was criticized both by fellow leaders and some audiences, who even booed him for this position.[157] Speaking in Baltimore in 1894, Douglass said, "I hope and trust all will come out right in the end, but the immediate future looks dark and troubled. I cannot shut my eyes to the ugly facts before me."[158]
President Harrison appointed Douglass as the United States's minister resident and consul-general to the Republic of Haiti and Charg  d'affaires for Santo Domingo in 1889,[159] but Douglass resigned the commission in July 1891 when it became apparent that the American President was intent upon gaining permanent access to Haitian territory regardless of that country's desires.[160] In 1892, Haiti made Douglass a co-commissioner of its pavilion at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago.[161]
In 1892, Douglass constructed rental housing for blacks, now known as Douglass Place, in the Fells Point area of Baltimore. The complex still exists, and in 2003 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.[162][163]
Death
 The gravestone of Frederick Douglass, located in Mount Hope Cemetery, Rochester
On February 20, 1895, Douglass attended a meeting of the National Council of Women in Washington, D.C. During that meeting, he was brought to the platform and received a standing ovation. Shortly after he returned home, Douglass died of a massive heart attack.[164] He was 77.
His funeral was held at the Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church.   Although Douglass had attended several churches in the nation's capital, he had a pew here and had donated two standing candelabras when this church had moved to a new building in 1886. He also gave many lectures there, including his last major speech, "The Lesson of the Hour."[52]
Thousands of people passed by his coffin to show their respect. United States Senators and Supreme Court judges were pallbearers. Jeremiah Rankin, President of Howard University, delivered "a masterly address". A letter from Elizabeth Cady Stanton was read. The Secretary of the Haitian Legation "expressed the condolence of his country in melodious French."[165]
Douglass's coffin was transported to Rochester, New York, where he had lived for 25 years, longer than anywhere else in his life. His body was received in state at City Hall, flags were flown at half mast, and schools adjourned.[166] He was buried next to Anna in the Douglass family plot of Mount Hope Cemetery, Rochester's premier memorial park.[167] Helen was also buried there, in 1903. His grave is, with that of Susan B. Anthony, the most visited in the cemetery.[167] A marker, erected by the University of Rochester and other friends, describes him as "escaped slave, abolitionist, suffragist, journalist and statesman, founder of the Civil Rights Movement in America".[167]
Works
Writings
1845. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, Written by Himself (first autobiography).
1853. "The Heroic Slave." pp. 174 239 in Autographs for Freedom, edited by Julia Griffiths. Boston: Jewett and Company.
1855. My Bondage and My Freedom (second autobiography).
1881 (revised 1892). Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (third and final autobiography).
1847 1851. The North Star, an abolitionist newspaper founded and edited by Douglass. He merged the paper with another, creating the Frederick Douglass' Paper.
1886. Three Addresses on the Relations Subsisting between the White and Colored People of the United States, at Gutenberg.org
2012. In the Words of Frederick Douglass: Quotations from Liberty's Champion, edited by John R. McKivigan and Heather L. Kaufman. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0801447907.
Speeches
1841. "The Church and Prejudice"[168]
1852. "What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?"[169] In 2020, National Public Radio produced a video of descendants of Douglass reading excerpts from the speech.[170]
1859. Self-Made Men.[171]
1863, July 6. "Speech at National Hall, for the Promotion of Colored Enlistments."[172]
1881. John Brown. An address by Frederick Douglass, at the fourteenth anniversary of Storer College, Harper's Ferry, West Virginia, May 30, 1881. Dover, New Hampshire. 1881.
Legacy and honors
Further information: African American founding fathers of the United States and List of things named after Frederick Douglass
 A poster from the Office of War Information, Domestic Operations Branch, News Bureau, 1943
 A 1965 U.S. postage stamp, published during the upsurge of the civil rights movement
Biographer David Blight states that Douglass, "played a pivotal role in America s Second Founding out of the apocalypse of the Civil War, and he very much wished to see himself as a founder and a defender of the Second American Republic."[173]
Roy Finkenbine argues:[174]
The most influential African American of the nineteenth century, Douglass made a career of agitating the American conscience. He spoke and wrote on behalf of a variety of reform causes: women's rights, temperance, peace, land reform, free public education, and the abolition of capital punishment. But he devoted the bulk of his time, immense talent, and boundless energy to ending slavery and gaining equal rights for African Americans. These were the central concerns of his long reform career. Douglass understood that the struggle for emancipation and equality demanded forceful, persistent, and unyielding agitation. And he recognized that African Americans must play a conspicuous role in that struggle. Less than a month before his death, when a young black man solicited his advice to an African American just starting out in the world, Douglass replied without hesitation:  Agitate! Agitate! Agitate! 
The Episcopal Church remembers Douglass with a Lesser Feast[175][176] annually on its liturgical calendar for February 20,[177] the anniversary of his death. Many public schools have also been named in his honor. Douglass still has living descendants today, such as Ken Morris, who is also a descendant of Booker T. Washington.[178] Other honors and remembrances include:
In 1871, a bust of Douglass was unveiled at Sibley Hall, University of Rochester.[179]
In 1895, the first hospital for black people in Philadelphia, PA was named the Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital. Black medical professionals, excluded from other facilities, were trained and employed there. In 1948, it merged to form Mercy-Douglass Hospital.[180]
In 1899, a statue of Frederick Douglass was unveiled in Rochester, New York, making Douglass the first African-American to be so memorialized in the country.[181][182]
In 1921, members of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity (the first African-American intercollegiate fraternity) designated Frederick Douglass as an honorary member. Douglass thus became the only man to receive an honorary membership posthumously.[183]
The Frederick Douglass Memorial Bridge, sometimes referred to as the South Capitol Street Bridge, just south of the US Capitol in Washington, D.C., was built in 1950 and named in his honor.
In 1962, his home in Anacostia (Washington, D.C.) became part of the National Park System,[184] and in 1988 was designated the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.
In 1965, the United States Postal Service honored Douglass with a stamp in the Prominent Americans series.
In 1999, Yale University established the Frederick Douglass Book Prize for works in the history of slavery and abolition, in his honor. The annual $25,000 prize is administered by the Gilder Lehrman Institute for American History and the Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition at Yale.
In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante named Frederick Douglass to his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.[185]
In 2003, Douglass Place, the rental housing units that Douglass built in Baltimore in 1892 for blacks, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In 2007, the former Troup Howell bridge, which carried Interstate 490 over the Genesee River in Rochester, was redesigned and renamed the Frederick Douglass  Susan B. Anthony Memorial Bridge.
In 2010, the Frederick Douglass Memorial was unveiled at Frederick Douglass Circle at the northwest corner of Central Park in New York City.[186][187]
In 2010, the New York Writers Hall of Fame inducted Douglass in its inaugural class.
On June 12, 2011, Talbot County, Maryland, installed a seven-foot (2-meter) bronze statue of Douglass on the lawn of the county courthouse in Easton, Maryland.[188]
On June 19, 2013, a statue of Douglass by Maryland artist Steven Weitzman was unveiled[189] in the United States Capitol Visitor Center as part of the National Statuary Hall Collection, the first statue representing the District of Columbia.[190]
On September 15, 2014, under the leadership of Governor Martin O'Malley a portrait of Frederick Douglass was unveiled at his official residence in Annapolis, MD. This painting, by artist Simmie Knox, is the first African-American portrait to grace the walls of Government House. Commissioned by Eddie C. Brown, founder of Brown Capital Management, LLC,[191] the painting was presented at a reception by the Governor.
On January 7, 2015, as a parting gift in honor of Governor Martin O'Malley's last Board of Public Works a portrait of Frederick Douglass was gifted to him by Peter Franchot.[192] Two editions of this artwork, by artist Benjamin Jancewicz, were purchased from Galerie Myrtis by Peter Franchot and his wife Ann both as a gift for the Governor as well as to add to their own collection. The Governor's edition now hangs in his office.[193][non-primary source needed]
In November 2015, the University of Maryland dedicated Frederick Douglass Plaza, an outdoor space where visitors can read quotes and see a bronze statue of Douglass.[194]
On October 18, 2016, the Council of the District of Columbia voted that the city's new name as a State is to be "Washington, D.C.", and that "D.C." is to stand for "Douglass Commonwealth."[195]
On April 3, 2017, the United States Mint began issuing quarters with an image of Frederick Douglass on the reverse, with the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site in the background. The coin is part of the America the Beautiful Quarters series.[196]
On May 20, 2018, Douglass was awarded an honorary law degree from the University of Rochester. The degree, which was accepted by Douglass's great-great-great-grandson, was the first posthumous honorary degree that the university had granted.[197][198]
The final public lecture of Frederick Douglass was on February 1, 1895, at West Chester University, nineteen days before his death. Today, there is a statue of him on the university campus commemorating this event. The Frederick Douglass Institute has a West Chester University program for advancing multicultural studies across the curriculum and for deepening the intellectual heritage of Douglass.[199][200]
In New York State there is the "Let's Have Tea" sculpture of Douglass and Susan B. Anthony.[201]
On September 30, 2019, Newcastle University opened the 'Frederick Douglass Centre', a key teaching component for their School of Computing and Business School. Frederick Douglass stayed in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1846 on a street adjacent to the new university campus.[202]
A statue of Douglass located in Rochester, New York's Maplewood Park was vandalized and torn down over the weekend of July 4, 2020.[203][204]
In 2020, Douglas Park in Chicago, which was named for U.S. Senator Stephen A. Douglas, was renamed Douglass Park, in honor of Frederick and Anna Douglass. In the 1850s the senator had promoted "popular sovereignty" as a middle position on the slavery issue and made "blatant assertions of white superiority."[205] The name change was the result of a multi-year student-led campaign to rename the park.[206]
A plaque on Gilmore Place in Edinburgh, Scotland marks his stay there in 1846. In 2020 a mural of his image was added nearby.
On June 19, 2021, on Boston Street in the Canton neighborhood of Baltimore, Maryland, two panels were unveiled at the spot where, as it had shortly before been discovered, Douglass had boarded the train that took him to his freedom from enslavement.[40][41][42]
On August 18, 2021, the Frederick Douglass Park in Lynn, Massachusetts was dedicated, directly across the street from the site of the Central Square railroad depot where Douglass was forcibly removed from the train in 1841. The park features a bronze bas-relief sculpture of Douglass.[207]
In 2020, the Greater Rochester International Airport was renamed the Frederick Douglass Greater Rochester International Airport.
On January 18, 2023, Governor Wes Moore was sworn in as governor of Maryland on a Bible owned by Douglass.[208]
In popular culture
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Frederick Douglass" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Film and television
Robert Guillaume portrays Douglass during a speech about the American slave trade in the 1985 miniseries North and South (Season 1, episode 3).
Glory (1989) features Douglass, played by Raymond St. Jacques, as a friend of Francis George Shaw.
In Ken Burns' 1990 documentary The Civil War, Douglass is voiced by actor Morgan Freeman.
The 2004 mockumentary film C.S.A.: The Confederate States of America features the figure of Douglass in an alternative history.
In Akeelah and the Bee (2006), characters discuss Douglass near a bronze bust of him by sculptor Tina Allen.[209]
The 2008 documentary film Frederick Douglass and the White Negro tells the story of Douglass in Ireland and the relationship between African and Irish Americans during the American Civil War.
Douglass appears in Freedom.
In the 2015 documentary film The Gettysburg Address, the role of Frederick Douglass is voiced by actor Laurence Fishburne.
A miniseries based on James McBride's 2013 novel, The Good Lord Bird, was released in 2020, with Daveed Diggs as Douglass.[210] Douglass is portrayed negatively.
On February 23, 2022, HBO released a one-hour documentary titled Frederick Douglass: In Five Speeches, based on David W. Blight's Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom.[211]
Literature
The 1946 novel A Star Pointed North by Edmund Fuller presents an account of Douglass's life.[212]
Terry Bisson's Fire on the Mountain (1988) is an alternate-history novel in which John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry succeeded and, instead of the Civil War, the Black slaves emancipated themselves in a massive slave revolt. In this history, Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman are the revered founders of a Black state created in the Deep South.
Douglass is a major character in the novel How Few Remain (1997) by Harry Turtledove, depicted in an alternate history in which the Confederacy won the Civil War and Douglass must continue his anti-slavery campaign into the 1880s.
Douglass appears in Flashman and the Angel of the Lord (1994) by George MacDonald Fraser.
Douglass, his wife, and his alleged mistress, Ottilie Assing, are the main characters in Jewell Parker Rhodes' Douglass' Women (New York: Atria Books, 2002).
Douglass is the protagonist of Richard Bradbury's novel Riversmeet (Muswell Press, 2007), a fictionalized account of Douglass's 1845 speaking tour of the British Isles.[213]
Douglass's time in Ireland is fictionalized in Colum McCann's TransAtlantic (2013).[214]
A comedic representation of Douglass is made in James McBride's 2013 novel The Good Lord Bird.[215]
In 2019, author David W. Blight was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for History for Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom.[216]
Painting
In 1938 39, African-American artist Jacob Lawrence created The Frederick Douglass series of narrative paintings. They were part of the historical series started by Lawrence in 1937, which included painted panels about prominent Black historical figures such as Toussaint Louverture and Harriet Tubman. During his preparatory work, Lawrence conducted research at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, drawing primarily from the autobiographies of Frederick Douglass: Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845) and Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (1881).[217] For this series the artist used a multipanel-plus-caption format that allowed him to develop a serial narrative that was not possible to convey by means of traditional portrait or history painting.[218] Instead of reproducing Douglass's original narratives verbatim, Lawrence constructed his own visual and textual narrative in the form of 32 panels painted in tempera and accompanied with Lawrence's own captions. The structure of the painting series is linear and consists of three parts (the slave, the fugitive, the free man) which offer an epic chronicle of Douglass's transformation from slave to leader in the struggle for the liberation of black people.[219] The Frederick Douglass series is currently in the Hampton University Museum.
Other media
Frederick Douglass appears as a Great Humanitarian in the 2008 strategy video game Civilization Revolution.[220]
In 2019, Douglass was the focus of the exhibition Lessons of the Hour   Frederick Douglass by British artist Isaac Julien, at New York's Metro Pictures Gallery and Memorial Art Gallery.[221]
In August 2022, "American Prophet: Frederick Douglass in His Own Words," a musical starring Cornelius Smith Jr. as Douglass, was performed at Arena Stage in Washington, D.C.[222]
His life is retold in the two-part radio drama "The Making of a Man" and "The Key to Freedom", presented by Destination Freedom[223]
A drawing of Frederick Douglass appears on the cover of Ebony magazine, September 1963
See also
Biography portalMaryland portalPolitics portal
African-American literature
African American founding fathers of the United States
Civil rights movement (1865 1896)
Four boxes of liberty
List of African-American abolitionists
List of civil rights leaders
List of slaves
List of suffragists and suffragettes
Slave narrative
Timeline of Lynn, Massachusetts
Timeline of women's suffrage
Women's suffrage organizations
Explanatory notes
^ a b Douglass estimated that he was born in February 1817.[2] Modern scholars have estimated February 1818, based on records kept by his enslaver.[3] Douglass celebrated his birthday on February 14, a date now observed as Douglass Day.[4]
^ "The old cabin, with its rail floor and rail bedsteads up stairs, and its clay floor down stairs, and its dirt chimney, and windowless sides ...was MY HOME   the only home I ever had; and I loved it, and all connected with it. The old fences around it, and the stumps in the edge of the woods near it, and the squirrels that ran, skipped, and played upon them, were objects of interest and affection. There, too, right at the side of the hut, stood the old well...." Douglass, Frederick (1855). My Bondage and My Freedom. Retrieved November 3, 2017.
References
^ "Biography   Early Life". Frederick Douglass Heritage. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016.
^ a b Douglass, Frederick (1882). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: From 1817 1882. London: Christian Age Office. p. 2.
^ a b McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-393-02823-2.
^ Chambers, Veronica; Jamiel Law (ill.) (February 25, 2021). "How Negro History Week Became Black History Month and Why It Matters Now". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 14, 2022.
^ Gatewood, Willard B. Jr. 1981. "Frederick Douglass and the Building of a 'Wall of Anti-Slavery Fire' 1845 1846. An Essay Review." The Florida Historical Quarterly 59(3):340 344. JSTOR 30147499.
^ Stewart, Roderick M. 1999. "The Claims of Frederick Douglass Philosophically Considered." Frederick Douglass: A Critical Reader, B. E. Lawson and F. M. Kirkland, eds., pp. 155 156. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0631205784.
"Moreover, though he does not make the point explicitly, again the very fact that Douglass is ably disputing this argument on this occasion celebrating a select few's intellect and will (or moral character) this fact constitutes a living counterexample to the narrowness of the pro-slavery definition of humans."
^ Matlack, James. 1979. "The Autobiographies of Frederick Douglass." Phylon (1960 ) 40(1):15 28. doi:10.2307/274419. JSTOR 274419. p. 16: "He spoke too well. ... Since he did not talk, look, or act like a slave (in the eyes of Northern audiences), Douglass was denounced as an imposter."
^ a b Trotman, C. James (2011). Frederick Douglass: A Biography. Penguin Books. pp. 118 119. ISBN 978-0313350368.
^ Foner, Philip; Taylor, Yuval, eds. (1999). Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings. p. 629. ISBN 1-55652-349-1. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2020. let us have liberty, law, and justice first. Let us have the Constitution, with its thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth amendments, fairly interpreted, faithfully executed, and cheerfully obeyed in the fullness of their spirit and the completeness of their letter.
^ Frederick Douglass (1855). The Anti-Slavery Movement, A Lecture by Frederick Douglass before the Rochester Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society. Press of Lee, Mann & Company, Daily American Office. p. 33. Retrieved October 6, 2010. My point here is, first, the Constitution is, according to its reading, an anti-slavery document; and, secondly, to dissolve the Union, as a means to abolish slavery, is about as wise as it would be to burn up this city, in order to get the thieves out of it. But again, we hear the motto, 'no union with slave-holders;' and I answer it, as the noble champion of liberty, N. P. Rogers, answered it with a more sensible motto, namely 'No union with slave-holding.' I would unite with anybody to do right; and with nobody to do wrong.
^ a b Frederick Douglass (1845). Narrative of the Life of an American Slave. ISBN 978-1606209639. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2020."I was born in Tuckahoe, near Hillsborough, and about twelve miles from Easton, in Talbot County, Maryland." (Tuckahoe refers to the area west of Tuckahoe Creek in Talbot County.)
^ Barker, Amanda. [1996]. "The Search for Frederick Douglass' Birthplace Archived December 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Choptank River Heritage. Retrieved June 14, 2020.
Although Barker's website devoted to the Douglass birthplace states that it could not be found with tour books and guides, that is no longer the case.
^ Barker, Don. February 4, 2014. "The Search for Frederick Douglass s Birthplace Archived July 31, 2020, at the Wayback Machine." Choptank River Heritage. Retrieved June 14, 2020.
^ a b "Frederick Douglass | Museums and Gardens." Talbot Historic Society. 2016. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016.
^ Frederick Douglass (1845). Narrative of the Life of an American Slave. ISBN 978-1606209639. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2020.Frederick Douglass began his own story thusly: "I was born in Tuckahoe, near Hillsborough, and about twelve miles from Easton, in Talbot County, Maryland." (Tuckahoe is not a town; it refers to the area west of Tuckahoe Creek in Talbot County.) In successive autobiographies, Douglass gave more precise estimates of when he was born, his final estimate being 1817.
^ February 14: Frederick Douglass Archived June 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. The Florida Center for Instructional Technology. US: University of South Florida. 2020.
^ Dickson J. Preston (1980). Young Frederick Douglass: The Maryland Years. Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 9.
^ Davis, F. James (November 1, 2010). Who is Black? One Nation's Definition. Penn State Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0271044637. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2020.
^ Gopnik, Adam (October 15, 2018). "American Prophet". The New Yorker. p. 76.
^ Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, ch. XI.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1851). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Written by himself (6 ed.). London: H.G. Collins. p. 10. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 3 5. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ Sterngass, Jon. 2009. Frederick Douglass, (Leaders of the Civil War era). Chelsea House Publishers. ISBN 1604133066. pp. 16 Archived June 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, 132 Archived June 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine
^ Field, Kate (February 23, 1895). "Fred. Douglass dead". Kate Field's Washington. 11 (8): 119. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2022.
^ a b Koehn, Nancy (2017). Forged in Crisis: The Making of Five Courageous Leaders. NY: Scribner. ISBN 978-1501174445.
^ Douglass, Frederick. 1845. "Chapter VII."
^ Douglass, Frederick. [1881 82] 2003. The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: His Early Life as a Slave, His Escape from Bondage, and His Complete History (Dover Value Editions). p. 50. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 0486431703.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1851). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Written by himself (6th ed.). London: H.G. Collins. p. 39. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1851). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Written by himself (6 ed.). London: H.G. Collins. pp. 43 44. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony. [2000] 2004. "Introduction." In 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave' & 'Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl'. New York: Modern Library. pp. xiii, 4.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1855). My Bondage and My Freedom (1st ed.). New York and Auburn: Miller, Orton & Mulligan. p. 58.
^ Blight, David W., Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom, p. 68.
^ Koehn, Nancy (2018). Forged in crisis : the power of courageous leadership in turbulent times. p. 222. ISBN 978-1501174452.
^ Bowers, Jerome. "Frederick Douglass Archived August 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine." Teachinghistory.org. US: Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media. 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2020.
^ "Frederick Douglass's Vision of Manhood The Objective Standard". theobjectivestandard.com. February 21, 2018. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1845). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Boston: Anti-Slavery Office. p. 63.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1845). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Boston: Anti-Slavery Office. pp. 65 66.
^ a b c d Keita, Michelle Nzadi; Jones, James (2010). "Murray-Douglass, Anna (1813 1882)".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 124. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ "Today in African-American Transportation History   1818: Frederick Douglass Begins His Journey into History". Transportation History. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. February 14, 2018. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2020.
^ a b ""JUNETEENTH|Historic Panels Commemorating Frederick Douglass' Escape Unveiled In Canton"". June 19, 2021. Archived from the original on June 20, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ a b ""Panels honoring Frederick Douglass to be unveiled at Canton waterfront"". June 9, 2021. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ a b ""Historic Panels Commemorate Frederick Douglass' Escape From Slavery In Canton"". Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ Yee, Shirley (February 11, 2007). "Anna Murray Douglass (C. 1813-1882)". BlackPast.org. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2011.
^ Martin, Waldo E. Jr. (1984). The Mind of Frederick Douglass. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0807841488.
^ a b "Discovering Anna Murray Douglass". South Coast Today. February 17, 2008. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved February 27, 2011.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1882). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: From 1817 1882. London: Christian Age Office. p. 170.
^ a b "Frederick Douglass Chronology   Frederick Douglass National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)". nps.gov. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018.
^ Frederick; Douglass (2015). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass: An American Slave (Civil War Classics). Diversion Books. pp. 115 116. ISBN 978-1626816879. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2016.
^ Frederick Douglass (October 25, 2016). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave: Written by Himself, Critical Edition. Yale University Press. p. 177. ISBN 978-0300225297. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
^ Lee, Maurice S., ed. (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Frederick Douglass. Cambridge University Press. p. 63.
^ a b c d e "This Far by Faith. Frederick Douglass". PBS. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ a b c "Religious Facts You Might Not Know about Frederick Douglass" Archived February 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Religion News, June 19, 2013.
^ Douglass, Frederick. [1881] 2008. Life and Times of Frederick Douglass. Cosimo, Inc., p. 149 ISBN 978-1605203997.
^ "Transportation Protests: 1841 to 1992". civilrightsteaching.org. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018.
^ "Resistance to the Segregation of Public Transportation in the Early 1840s". primaryresearch.org. March 10, 2009. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018.
^  The full text of Page:My Bondage and My Freedom (1855).djvu/411 at Wikisource
^ Douglass, Frederick (1882). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: From 1817 1882. London: Christian Age Office. pp. 287 88.
^ Douglass, Frederick (May 13, 1847). "Country, Conscience, and the Anti-Slavery Cause: An Address Delivered in New York City, May 11, 1847". New York Daily Tribune. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Reprinted in Blassingame, John W.; McKivigan, John R., eds. (1979). The Frederick Douglass Papers: Series One Speeches, Debates, and Interviews. Vol. 2. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 57.
^ "Re-Examining Fredrick Douglass's Time in Lynn". Lynn Daily Item / itemlive.com. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2018.
^ a b Douglass, Frederick. [1885] 2003. My Bondage and My Freedom: Part I   Life as a Slave, Part II   Life as a Freeman, introduction by James McCune Smith, edited by J. Stauffer. New York: Random House. ISBN 0812970314. p. 371 Archived January 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
^ The Liberator, 27 March 1846 Archived May 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine; reprinted in Philip Foner, ed., Life and Writings of Frederick Douglass, vol. 1 (New York: International Publishers, 1950), p. 138.
^ O'Dowd, Naill. "Frederick Douglass was quickly captivated by Daniel O'Connell in 1845 Ireland". Irish Central. Irish Central. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1882). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: From 1817 1882. London: Christian Age Office. p. 205.
^ Chaffin, Tom (February 25, 2011). "Frederick Douglass's Irish Liberty". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved February 26, 2011.
^ Frederick Douglass letter to William Lloyd Garrison quoted in Christine Kinealy ed. (2018), Frederick Douglass and Ireland: In His Own Words, Volume II. Routledge, New York. ISBN 978-0429505058. pp. 67 72.
^ a b c d Ruuth, Marianne (1995). Frederick Douglass: Patriot and Activist. Holloway House Publishing. pp. 117 118. ISBN 978-0870677731. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022.
^ Simon Schama, Rough Crossings: Britain, the Slaves, and the American Revolution, New York: HarperCollins, 2006, pp. 415 21.
^ Frances E. Ruffin (2008). Frederick Douglass: Rising Up from Slavery. p. 59. ISBN 978-1402741180. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ Chaffin, Tom (February 26, 2011). "Frederick Douglass's Irish Liberty". Opinionator. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
^ Fenton, Laurence (2014). Frederick Douglass in Ireland : the 'Black O'Connell'. Cork: Collins Press. pp. 131, 151. ISBN 978-1848891968. OCLC 869789226.
^ Stephenson, Barbara J. (February 20, 2013). "Remarks at the Unveiling of the Frederick Douglass Plaque". Embassy of the United States, London. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013.
^ "Frederick Douglass". National Library of Scotland. Archived from the original on June 20, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ "Maps". National Library of Scotland. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ "Home". Our Bondage & Our Freedom. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ "Tracing Frederick Douglass's footsteps in Ireland". Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2021.
^ "5 religious facts you might not know about Frederick Douglass". Religion News Service. June 19, 2013. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1416590316.
^ a b Koehn, Nancy (2017). Forged in Crisis: The Power of Courageous Leadership in Turbulent Times. New York, NY: Scribner. pp. 249 250. ISBN 978-1501174445.
^ "Jerry Rescue Celebration". Anti-Slavery Bugle. Salem, Ohio. October 14, 1854. p. 2.
^ U.S. Constitution, Article I, section 2.
^ Robert Fanuzzi, "Frederick Douglass' 'Colored Newspaper': Identity Politics in Black and White," in The Black Press: New Literary and Historical Essays, Todd Vogel, ed. (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2001), pp. 65 69.
^ a b c Paul Finkelman (2006). Encyclopedia of African American History, 1619 1895: from the colonial period to the age of Frederick Douglass. Oxford University Press. pp. 104 105. ISBN 978-0195167771. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ a b "I am your fellow man, but not your slave". Archived from the original on February 27, 2012. Retrieved March 3, 2012.
^ a b Douglass, Fredrick (April 7, 2015). "Letter to Thomas Auld". glc.yale.edu. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2020.
^ "Seneca Falls Convention". Virginia Memory. August 18, 1920. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011.
^ Stanton, 1997, p. 85.
^ USConstitution.net. Text of the "Declaration of Sentiments", and the Resolutions Archived February 21, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 24, 2009.
^ a b c McMillen, 2008, pp. 93 94.
^ National Park Service. Women's Rights. Report of the Woman's Rights Convention, July 19 20, 1848 Archived May 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 24, 2009.
^ a b Frederick Douglass; Robert G. O'Meally (2003). Narrative of the life of Frederick Douglass, an American slave. Spark Educational Publishing. p. xi. ISBN 978-1593080419. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ a b Foner, p. 600.
^ Watkins, Valetha (2010). "National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA)".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 138. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 173. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1999).  Foner, Philip S.; Taylor, Yuval (eds.). Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. pp. 260 271. ISBN 978-1556523496.
^ Underground Railroad, US Department of Interior, National Park Service, Denver Service Center. Diane Publishing, February 1, 1995, p. 168.
^ "High Treason!". Franklin Repository. Chambersburg, Pennsylvania. August 24, 1859. p. 5. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021   via newspapers.com.
^ DeCaro, Louis A. Jr. (2020). The Untold Story of Shields Green: The Life and Death of a Harper's Ferry Raider. New York University Press. pp. 172 174. ISBN 978-1479802753.
^ Drescher, Seymour (1995). "Servile Insurrection and John Brown's Body in Europe".  In Finkelman, Paul (ed.). His Soul Goes Marching On. Responses to John Brown and the Harpers Ferry Raid. Charlottesville, Virginia: University Press of Virginia. p. 275. ISBN 978-0813915364.
^ Douglass, Frederick (November 11, 1859) [October 31, 1859]. "Letter from Frederick Douglass". The Liberator. Boston, Massachusetts. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021   via newspapers.com.
^ "Supposed Search for Fred. Douglass". The New York Times. October 27, 1859. p. 8. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021   via newspapers.com.
^ Douglass, Frederick (March 7, 1874). "John Brown". Shepherdstown Register. Shepherdstown, West Virginia. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021   via VirginiaChronicle.
^ "Frederick Douglass Papers at the Library of Congress, Timeline, 1847 to 1859. Archived February 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Library of Congress.  Retrieved August 29, 2020
^ Frederick Douglass (1860), "The Constitution of the United States: Is It Pro-Slavery or Anti-Slavery?"   via BlackPast, March 15, 2012. Retrieved August 29, 2020.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1881). John Brown. An address by Frederick Douglass, at the fourteenth anniversary of Storer College, Harper's Ferry, West Virginia, May 30, 1881. Dover, New Hampshire: Dover, N. H., Morning Star job printing house. pp. 3 4.
^ John Stauffer; Zoe Trodd; Celeste-Marie Bernier; Henry Louis Gates Jr.; Kenneth B. Morris Jr. (2015). Picturing Frederick Douglass: An Illustrated Biography of the Nineteenth Century's Most Photographed American (revised ed.). Liveright (imprint of Norton). p. 320. ISBN 978-0871404688. Archived from the original (hardcover) on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ David Brooks (August 2, 2016). "How Artists Change the World". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.
^ Gregory, Jennifer Beeson (March 15, 2016). "Who's the most photographed American man of the 19th Century? Hint: It's not Lincoln". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.
^ "Picture This: Frederick Douglass Was The Most Photographed Man Of His Time   interview by Michel Martin of John Stauffer, author of Picturing Frederick Douglass". NPR.org. NPR. December 13, 2015. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016.
^ Phillips, Ivory (2010). "Christianity".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. pp. 34 35. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ a b Finkelman, Paul (2006). Encyclopedia of African American History, 1619 1895: From the Colonial Period to the Age of Frederick Douglass Three-volume Set. Oxford University Press. p. 129.
^ Douglass, Frederick (1882). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass: From 1817 1882. London: Christian Age Office. p. 63.
^ a b c d "Frederick Douglass Project: "Fourth of July" Speech". February 4, 2011. Archived from the original on February 4, 2011. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
^ Love of God, Love of Man, Love of Country. Delivered at Market Hall, New York City, October 22, 1847.
^ "What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?". Teaching American History. Archived from the original on July 5, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
^ Prinsloo, Oleta (2010). "Abolitionists".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 2. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ Lee, Maurice S., ed. (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Frederick Douglass. Cambridge University Press. p. 69.
^ Davis, Reginald F. (2005). Frederick Douglass: A Precursor of Liberation Theology. Macon, Georgia: Mercer University Press. ISBN 978-0865549258.
^ Stauffer, John (January 8, 2013). "What Every American Should Know About Frederick Douglass, Abolitionist Prophet". HuffPost. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2014.
^ Blight, David (2020). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. Simon & Schuster. p. 514. ISBN 978-1-4165-9032-3. Retrieved January 6, 2023.
^ "Black man going to Congress". Weekly Raleigh Register. Raleigh, North Carolina. July 5, 1854. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022   via newspapers.com.
^ a b "Frederick Douglass in Congress". The Anti-Slavery Bugle. Salem, Ohio. August 26, 1854. p. 2. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022.
^ Smith, Gerrit (September 2, 1854). "Letter from Gerrit Smith   Mr, Smith's Review of Congress and Sketches of its Leading Members.   He objects to Frederick Douglass". The New York Times. p. 2. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved April 24, 2022.
^ "The Black and White Douglas". Wabash Courier. Terre Haute, Indiana. July 22, 1854   via Hoosier State Chronicles.
^ "F. Douglass in Congress". Anti-Slavery Bugle. Salem, Ohio. August 5, 1854. p. 1.
^ Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 385. ISBN 978-1416590316.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 226. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 229. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ "The Fight For Emancipation". Archived from the original on July 8, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2007.
^ Stauffer (2008), Giants, p. 280.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 247. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ "Oration in Memory of Abraham Lincoln by Frederick Douglass". Teaching American History. n.d. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved September 4, 2008.
^ Mann, Ted (July 4, 2020). "How a Lincoln-Douglass Debate Led to Historic Discovery: Texting exchange by two professors led to Frederick Douglass letter on Emancipation Memorial". wsj.com. Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 283. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ George C. Rable, But There Was No Peace: The Role of Violence in the Politics of Reconstruction, Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1984, p. 132.
^ Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon" Archived November 21, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Constitutional Commentary, Vol. 17, 2000, pp. 12 13. Retrieved March 10, 2008.
^ Brands (2012), The Man Who Saved the Union : Ulysses S Grant in War and Peace, p. 462.
^ "Douglass, Frederick". American Cyclopedia. Vol. 6. New York: D. Appleton and Company. 1879. p. 228. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
^ Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 471 474. ISBN 978-1416590316.
^ Olasky, Marvin. "History turned right side up". World magazine. February 13, 2010. p. 22.
^ Robin Van Auken; Louis E Hunsinger (2003). Williamsport: Boomtown on the Susquehanna. Arcadia Publishing. p. 57. ISBN 978-0738524382. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2015.
^ John Brown. An address by Frederick Douglass, at the fourteenth anniversary of Storer College, Harper's Ferry, West Virginia, May 30, 1881. Dover, New Hampshire: Dover, N. H., Morning Star job printing house. 1881.
^ Keita, Michelle Nzadi; Jones, James (2010). "Murray-Douglass, Anna (1813 1882)".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 125. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ a b Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 290 291, 387. ISBN 978-1416590316.
^ Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 521 522, 529, 570, 572 574. ISBN 978-1416590316.
^ Adam Gopnik, "American Prophet: The gifts of Frederick Douglass", The New Yorker, October 15, 2018, pp. 81 82
^ "Fatal Attraction". archive.nytimes.com. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2021.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 322. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ Frederick Douglass biography Archived February 11, 2006, at the Wayback Machine at winningthevote.org. Retrieved October 3, 2006.
^ Lovett Douglass, Marilyn D. (2010). "Helen Pitts (1838 1903)".  In Thompson, Julius E.; Conyers, James L. Jr.; Dawson, Nancy J. (eds.). The Frederick Douglass Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 46. ISBN 978-0313319884.
^ "The Freedman's Savings Bank: Good Intentions Were Not Enough; A Noble Experiment Goes Awry". occ.gov. March 3, 2015. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
^ "Frederick Douglass Chronology   Frederick Douglass National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)". nps.gov. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
^ "On this Day". Smithsonian magazine. March 18, 2021. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021.
^ Frederick S. Calhoun (June 15, 2020). "History   Loyal to their Communities". US Marshals Service. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021.
^ "Frederick Douglass". The White House Historical Association. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021.
^ "Think You Know Your Democratic Convention Trivia?". CNN Politics. August 26, 2008. Archived from the original on June 1, 2010. Retrieved May 2, 2010.
^ Richard Reid, "The Gloria Rackley-Blackwell story" Archived July 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine The Times and Democrat (February 22, 2011). Retrieved June 3, 2011.
^ McFeely, William S. (1991). Frederick Douglass. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 300. ISBN 978-0393028232.
^ Wilkerson, Isabel, The Warmth of Other Suns (2010), p. 40.
^ Louis Martin Sears (May 1941). "Frederick Douglass and the Mission to Haiti, 1889 1891". The Hispanic American Historical Review. 21 (2): 222 238. doi:10.2307/2507394. JSTOR 2507394.
^ Brandon Byrd (February 11, 2017). "Frederick Douglass, Haiti, and Diplomacy". Black Perspectives. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021.
^ David B. Chesebrough (1998). Frederick Douglass: Oratory from Slavery. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 78. ISBN 978-0313302879. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2020.
^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. April 15, 2008.
^ "Maryland Historical Trust". Douglass Place, Baltimore City. Maryland Historical Trust. November 21, 2008.
^ "Later Years and Death". Frederick Douglass Heritage. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
^ Field, Kate (March 2, 1895). "Frederick Douglass Still Lives". Kate Field's Washington. Vol. 11, no. 9. Archived from the original on March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2022.
^ Field, Kate (April 20, 1895). "A Life of Contrasts". Kate Field's Washington. 11 (16): 253 254. Archived from the original on March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 20, 2022.
^ a b c "Frederick Douglass Grave Site". The Freethought Trail. 2022. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2022.
^ "(1841) Frederick Douglass, "The Church and Prejudice"". blackpast.org. March 15, 2012. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019.
^ "Frederick Douglass Project: "Fourth of July" Speech   RBSCP". Lib.rochester.edu. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved November 27, 2010.
^ "'What To The Slave Is The Fourth Of July?': Descendants Read Frederick Douglass' Speech | NPR   YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020.
^ "Self-Made Men The Objective Standard". theobjectivestandard.com. February 21, 2018. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021.
^ "Addresses of the Hon. W. D. Kelley, Miss Anna E. Dickinson, and Mr. Frederick Douglass : at a mass meeting, held at National Hall, Philadelphia, July 6, 1863, for the promotion of colored enlistments". Archive.org. Philadelphia, Pa. : s.n. 1863. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ David W. Blight, Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom (Simon and Schuster, 2018) p. xv; winner of Pulitzer Prize; excerpt. 
^ Finkenbine, Roy E. 2000. "Douglass, Frederick Archived December 24, 2016, at archive.today." American National Biography. Retrieved on March 16, 2016.
^ "Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018". General Convention of the Episcopal Church. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021.
^ "Frederick Douglass". satucket.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021.
^ "Holy Women, Holy Men: Celebrating the Saints" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2021.
^ Axelrod, Jim (June 19, 2013). "Family of abolitionist Frederick Douglass continues his legacy". CBS News. Archived from the original on May 27, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017.
^ Letter reprinted in The New York Times, July 2, 1879 (June 28, 1879). "Frederick Douglass". Democrat and Chronicle. Rochester, New York. p. 2. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021   via newspapers.com.
^ Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital historical marker Archived September 24, 2021, at the Wayback Machine erected by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission in 1992.
^ Bernier, Celeste-Marie; Durkin, Hannah, eds. (2016). Visualising Slavery: Art Across the African Diaspora. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. p. 132. ISBN 978-1781384299.
^ Miller, Ryan; Craig, Gary (July 5, 2020). "Frederick Douglass statue vandalized on anniversary of his famous Fourth of July Rochester speech". Democrat and Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020.
^ "Prominent Alpha Men". Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved May 6, 2007.
^ "Frederick Douglass Bill is Approved by President: Bill making F Douglass home, Washington, D.C., part of natl pk system signed". The New York Times. September 6, 1962.
^ Asante, Molefi Kete (2002). 100 Greatest African Americans: A Biographical Encyclopedia. Amherst, New York. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1573929638.
^ Clines, Francis X. (November 3, 2006). "Summoning Frederick Douglass". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2017.
^ Dominus, Susan (May 21, 2010). "A Slow Tribute That Might Try the Subject's Patience". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved July 12, 2011.
^ Holt, Dustin (June 12, 2011). "Douglass statue arrives in Easton". The Star Democrat. Archived from the original on June 17, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2011.
^ "Frederick Douglass statue unveiled in the Capitol" Archived February 9, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, June 19, 2013.
^ "Frederick Douglass   Architect of the Capitol   United States Capitol". Aoc.gov. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ "Brown Capital Management Founder and Wife Help Make Maryland History   Brown Capital". Browncapital.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ "State of Maryland Board of Public Works : Governor's Reception Room, Second Floor, State House, Annapolis MD" (PDF). Bpw.maryland.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2015. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
^ "Peter Franchot   Timeline Photos   Facebook". Facebook.com. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
^ Brown, Crystal (November 18, 2015). "University of Maryland Dedicates Frederick Douglass Square to Honor Maryland's Native Son". UMD Right Now. University of Maryland. Archived from the original on March 13, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018.
^ Tom Sherwood (2016), "Washington, Douglass Commonwealth, as 51st State?" NBC Washington, 06:28 pm EDT, October 18, 2016.
^ Weil, Martin (April 5, 2017). "Quarter Issued Honoring Frederick Douglass Site". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
^ "NY College Giving Honorary Degree to Frederick Douglass". The New York Times. Associated Press. May 19, 2018. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2018.
^ Fisher, Janon (May 19, 2018). "Frederick Douglass to receive honorary degree from University of Rochester". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2018.
^ "About the Frederick Douglass Institute". Frederick Douglass Institute. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013.
^ "Frederick Douglass   West Chester University". wcupa.edu. Archived from the original on January 30, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020.
^ AaronNetsky. "1872 Monument: Rochester, New York: A bronze ballot box stands at the spot where Susan B. Anthony voted illegally". Atlas Obscura. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 17, 2019.
^ "The Frederick Douglass Centre | Our Vision". Newcastle Helix. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved September 30, 2019.
^ "Frederick Douglass Statue Torn Down and Vandalized in Rochester, N.Y." Time. July 5, 2020. Archived from the original on July 6, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020.
^ "Frederick Douglass statue vandalized in Rochester park". Archived from the original on July 6, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020.
^ Burlingame, Michael, Abraham Lincoln: A Life, vol. 1, p. 526, Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2008; Unedited manuscript, p. 1446. Archived September 1, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
^ Greene, Morgan (November 19, 2020). "After Years of Student Activism, Park District Officially Makes Name Change to Douglass Park". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020.
^ Kuzub, Alena (August 18, 2021). "Frederick Douglass Park Dedicated". Lynn Daily Item. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021.
^ Heim, Joe (January 14, 2023). "Wes Moore to be sworn in as Md. governor on Frederick Douglass's Bible". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
^ Rourke, Mary (September 12, 2008). "L.A. sculptor whose subject was African Americans". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2016.
^ Sippell, Margeaux (August 2, 2019). "Daveed Diggs to Play Frederick Douglass in Ethan Hawke's Showtime Limited Series 'The Good Lord Bird'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved December 3, 2019.
^ "Frederick Douglass: In Five Speeches | Official Website for the HBO Series". HBO.com. Retrieved August 26, 2022.
^ Carson, Saul. November 3, 1946. "Negro's Apotheosis." New York Times Book Review. pp. 7, 36.
^ Olende, Ken. December 1, 2007. "Frederick Douglass and 'Riversmeet': connecting 19th century struggles Archived August 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine." Socialist Worker.
^ Wagner, Erica (June 20, 2013). "Cross Over 'TransAtlantic,' by Colum McCann". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013.
^ Lyons, Joel (August 21, 2013). "James McBride on 'The Good Lord Bird'". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013.
^ "The Pulitzer Prizes". The Pulitzer Prizes. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
^ Herkins Wheat, Ellen (1991). Jacob Lawrence: The Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman Series of 1938 40. University of Washington Press. p. 20.
^ Dickerman, Leah; Smithgall, Elsa (2015). Jacob Lawrence: The Migration Series. The Museum of Modern Art. p. 18.
^ Dickerman, Leah; Smithgall, Elsa (2015). Jacob Lawrence: The Migration Series. The Museum of Modern Art. p. 20.
^ Civilization Revolution: Great People Archived March 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine "CivFanatics" Retrieved September 3, 2009.
^ Sayej, Nadja (March 15, 2019). "Isaac Julien on Frederick Douglass: 'It's an extraordinary story'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 15, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2019.
^ Isherwood, Charles (August 11, 2022). "Opinion   'American Prophet' Review: Frederick Douglass's Fiery Words". WSJ. Retrieved October 29, 2022.
^ "The Making of a Man" (mp3). Destination Freedom   via Internet Archive Digital Library. & "The Key to Freedom" (mp3). Destination Freedom   via Internet Archive Digital Library.
Further reading
Primary sources
Blight, David W., ed. (2022). Frederick Douglass: Speeches & Writings. New York: Library of America. Blight speaking about the book
Douglass, Frederick (1845). Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave. Boston: Anti-Slavery Office.
  (1855). My Bondage and My Freedom: Part I. Life as a Slave, Part II. Life as a Freeman. New York: Miller, Orton & Mulligan.
  (1881). Life and Times of Frederick Douglass, Written by Himself. Hartford, Conn.: Park Publishing Co.
  (1892). Life and Times of Frederick Douglass, Written by Himself. Boston: De Wolfe & Fiske Co. (updated edition of 1881 version).
Foner, Philip Sheldon (1945). Frederick Douglass: Selections from His Writings. New York: International Publishers.
  (1950). The Life and Writings of Frederick Douglass. New York: International Publishers.
Gates, Henry Louis Jr., ed. (1994). Frederick Douglass: Autobiographies. Library of America.
Gregory, James Monroe (1893). Frederick Douglass the Orator: Containing an Account of His Life; His Eminent Public Services; His Brilliant Career as Orator; Selections from His Speeches and Writings. Willey Book Company.
Stauffer, John, Zoe Trodd, and Celeste-Marie Bernier (2015). Picturing Frederick Douglass: An Illustrated Biography of the Nineteenth Century's Most Photographed American (revised ed.). Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Newspaper articles
"From Bondage to Power. The Marshal who was a Slave". The Leeds Mercury. Leeds, England. January 15, 1881. p. 13   via newspapers.com.
Scholarship
Baker, Houston A. Jr. (1986). "Introduction". Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass. New York: Penguin.
Barnes, L. Diane. Frederick Douglass: Reformer and Statesman (Routledge, 2012).
Bennett, Nolan. "To Narrate and Denounce: Frederick Douglass and the Politics of Personal Narrative." Political Theory 44.2 (2016): 240-264. online
Blight, David W. (2018). Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Blight, David W. (1989). Frederick Douglass' Civil War: Keeping Faith in Jubilee. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Bromell, Nick. The Powers of Dignity: The Black Political Philosophy of Frederick Douglass (Duke University Press, 2021).
Buccola, Nicholas. The Political Thought of Frederick Douglass: In Pursuit of American Liberty (NYU Press, 2013). online
Chaffin, Tom (2014). Giant's Causeway: Frederick Douglass's Irish Odyssey and the Making of an American Visionary. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press.
Chesebrough, David B. Frederick Douglass: Oratory from Slavery (Greenwood, 1998).
Child, Lydia Maria (1865). "Frederick Douglass" in The Freedmen's Book. Boston: Ticknor and Fields.
Colaiaco, James A. (2015). Frederick Douglass and the Fourth of July. New York: St Martin's Press.
Dilbeck, D. H. Frederick Douglass: America's Prophet (UNC Press Books, 2018) online
Douglas, Janet. "A Cherished Friendship: Julia Griffiths Crofts and Frederick Douglass." Slavery & Abolition 33.2 (2012): 265-274.
Fee Jr., Frank E. "To No One More Indebted: Frederick Douglass and Julia Griffiths, 1849 63." Journalism History 37.1 (2011): 12-26. online
Finkenbine, Roy E. (2000). "Douglass, Frederick." American National Biography. doi:10.1093/anb/9780198606697.article.1500186. Brief scholarly biography.
Foster, A. Kristen. "'We Are Men!' Frederick Douglass and the Fault Lines of Gendered Citizenship." Journal of the Civil War Era 1.2 (2011): 143-175. [1]
Golden, Timothy J. (2021). Frederick Douglass and the Philosophy of Religion: An Interpretation of Narrative, Art, and the Political. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gougeon, Len. "Militant Abolitionism: Douglass, Emerson, and the Rise of the Anti-Slave."  New England Quarterly 85.4 (2012): 622-657. online
Hawley, Michael C. "Light or Fire? Frederick Douglass and the Orator's Dilemma." American Journal of Political Science (2022).  https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12737
Henderson, Rodger C. (December 1, 2006). "Native Americans and Frederick Douglass". Oxford African American Studies Center.
Huggins, Nathan Irvin (1980. Slave and Citizen: The Life of Frederick Douglass (Library of American Biography). Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Kilbride, Daniel. "What did Africa Mean to Frederick Douglass?". Slavery & Abolition 36.1 (2015): 40-62. online
Lampe, Gregory P. (1998). Frederick Douglass: Freedom's Voice East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press.
Lee, Maurice S., ed. The Cambridge Companion to Frederick Douglass (2009), essays by experts, with emphasis on historiography.
Levine, Robert S. (1997). Martin Delany, Frederick Douglass, and the Politics of Representative Identity. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Levine, Robert S. (2016). The Lives of Frederick Douglass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Levine, Robert S. (2021). The Failed Promise: Reconstruction, Frederick Douglass, and the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
McClure, Kevin R. "Frederick Douglass  use of comparison in his Fourth of July oration: A textual criticism." Western Journal of Communication 64.4 (2000): 425-444. online
McMillen, Sally Gregory (2008). Seneca Falls and the Origins of the Women's Rights Movement. Oxford University Press.
Mieder, Wolfgang (2001). "No Struggle, No Progress": Frederick Douglass and His Proverbial Rhetoric for Civil Rights. Peter Lang Pub Incorporated.
Mindich, David T. Z. "Understanding Frederick Douglass: Toward a New Synthesis Approach to the Birth of Modern American Journalism." Journalism History 26.1 (2000): 15-22. online
Muller, John (2012). Frederick Douglass in Washington, D.C.: The Lion of Anacostia. Charleston, S.C.: The History Press. ISBN 978-1609495770.
Oakes, James (2007). The Radical and the Republican: Frederick Douglass, Abraham Lincoln, and the Triumph of Antislavery Politics. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Quarles, Benjamin (1948). Frederick Douglass. Washington: Associated Publishers.
Ramsey, William M. "Frederick Douglass, Southerner." Southern Literary Journal 40.1 (2007): 19-38. [2]
Ray, Angela G. "Frederick Douglass on the Lyceum Circuit: Social Assimilation, Social Transformation?" Rhetoric & Public Affairs 5.4 (2002): 625-647. summary
Ritchie, Daniel. "'The stone in the sling': Frederick Douglass and Belfast abolitionism." American Nineteenth Century History 18.3 (2017): 245-272. online
Root, Damon. (2020). A Glorious Liberty: Frederick Douglass and the Fight for an Antislavery Constitution. Potomac Books Inc. ISBN 978-1640122352.
Sandefur, Timothy. (2008). "Douglass, Frederick (1818 1895)".  In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 126 127. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n80. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Selby, Gary S. "The limits of accommodation: Frederick Douglass and the Garrisonian abolitionists." Southern Journal of Communication 66.1 (2000): 52-66.
Stauffer, John (2009). Giants: The Parallel Lives of Frederick Douglass and Abraham Lincoln. Twelve, Hachette Book Group.
Stephens, Gregory (1997). "Frederick Douglass' Multiracial Abolitionism Antagonistic Cooperation & Redeemable Ideals in the July 5 Speech". Communication Studies. 48 (3): 175 194. doi:10.1080/10510979709368500.
Stephens, Gregory. "Arguing with a Monument: Frederick Douglass' Resolution of the 'White Man Problem' in his 'Oration in Memory of Lincoln'" Comparative American Studies An International Journal 13.3 (2015): 129-145. online
Sundstrom, Ronald. (2017). "Frederick Douglass".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Sweeney, Fionnghuala. Frederick Douglass and the Atlantic World (Liverpool University Press, 2007) online.
Vogel, Todd, ed. (2001). The Black Press: New Literary and Historical Essays. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Washington, Booker T. (1906). Frederick Douglass. London, UK: Hodder & Stoughton. Online Historian John Hope Franklin wrote that Washington's biography of Douglass "has been attributed largely to Washington's friend, S. Laing Williams". Introduction to Three Negro Classics, New York: Avon Books (1965), p. 17.
Webber, Thomas L. (1978). Deep Like the Rivers: Education in the Slave Quarter Community, 1831 1865. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Woodson, C. G. (1915). The Education of the Negro Prior to 1861: A History of the Education of the Colored People of the United States from the Beginning of Slavery to the Civil War. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.
For young readers
Adler, David A. 1993. A Picture Book of Frederick Douglass, illustrated by S. Byrd. Holiday House.
Bolden, Tonya. 2017. Facing Frederick: The Life of Frederick Douglass, a Monumental American Man. Abrams Books for Young Readers.
Miller, William. 1995. Frederick Douglass: The Last Day of Slavery, illustrated by C. Lucas. Lee & Low Books.
Myers, Walter Dean. 2017. Frederick Douglass: The Lion Who Wrote History. HarperCollins.
Walker, David F.; Smyth, Damon; Louise, Marissa. 2018. The Life of Frederick Douglass: A graphic narrative of a slave's journey from bondage to freedom. Ten Speed Press.
Weidt, Maryann N. 2001. Voice of Freedom: A Story about Frederick Douglass, illustrated by J. Reeves. Lerner publications.
Documentary films and videos
External video Presentation by David Blight on Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom, October 1, 2018, C-SPAN
Becoming Fredrick Douglass a co-production of Firelight Films and Maryland Public Television (released Oct 2022)
Cornell University Press. January 27, 2012. "In the Words of Frederick Douglass". YouTube.
Doherty, John J., dir. 2008. Frederick Douglass and the White Negro, written by J. J. Doherty. Ireland: Camel Productions and Irish Film Board.
Haffner, Craig and Donna E. Lusitana, exec. prod. 1997. Frederick Douglass. US: Greystone Communications, Inc. (A&E Network).
Frederick Douglass: When the Lion Wrote History. US: ROJA Productions and WETA-TV.
Frederick Douglass, Abolitionist Editor. Schlessinger Video Productions.
Race to Freedom: The Story of the Underground Railroad
"Writings of Frederick Douglass." American Writers: A Journey Through History. US: C-SPAN. May 28, 2001.
Descendants of Frederick Douglass read his 4th July 1852 speech
External links
Frederick Douglass  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
Works by Frederick Douglass in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Frederick Douglass at Project Gutenberg
Celebrating Frederick Douglass through Transcription Smithsonian Digital Volunteers: Transcription Center. Selected Douglass letters, speeches, and newspaper articles
Works by or about Frederick Douglass at Internet Archive
Works by Frederick Douglass at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Diplomatic posts
Preceded byJohn E. W. Thompson
 United States Minister Resident to Haiti 1889 1891
Succeeded byJohn S. Durham
Party political offices
New political party
 United States Equal Rights Party Vice-Presidential Nominee 1872
Succeeded byMarietta Stow (National Equal Rights Party)
vteFrederick DouglassAutobiographies
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845)
My Bondage and My Freedom (1855)
Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (1881)
Newspapers
The North Star
Fiction
The Heroic Slave, a heartwarming Narrative of the Adventures of Madison Washington, in Pursuit of Liberty (1852)
Speeches
American Anti-Slavery Society 1843 lecture tour
"What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?" (1852)
"The Constitution of the United States: is it pro-slavery or anti-slavery?" (1860)
"Self-Made Men" (1885)
Life
Seneca Falls Convention
Fugitive Slave Convention
Equal Rights Party (1872 vice presidential nominee)
Douglass Place
Frederick Douglass National Historic Site (home and memorial)
Honors
List of things named after Frederick Douglass
U.S. Capitol statue
Frederick Douglass Memorial
Frederick Douglass Memorial Bridge
Douglass Anthony Memorial Bridge
Frederick Douglass Circle
Douglass Park
Frederick Douglass Memorial Park
University of Maryland statue
Rochester statue
Denver statue
Banneker-Douglass Museum
Washington, D.C. neighborhood
Family
Anna Murray Douglass (first wife)
Helen Pitts Douglass (second wife)
Rosetta Douglass (daughter)
Lewis Henry Douglass (son)
Charles Remond Douglass (son)
Joseph Douglass (grandson)
Fredericka Douglass Sprague Perry (granddaughter)
Related
African American founding fathers of the United States
Frederick Douglass (1985 opera)
Frederick Douglass (1991 opera)
Frederick Douglass and the White Negro (2008 documentary)
The Good Lord Bird (2020 miniseries)
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Nathan and Mary Johnson home
Shields Green
vteUnited States Ambassadors to Haiti
Whidden
Peck
Hollister
Bassett
Langston
Williams
Thompson
Douglass
Durham
Smythe
Powell
Furniss
Smith
Bailly-Blanchard
Dunn
Merrell
Gross
Grummon
Munro
Armour
Gordon
Mayer
White
Wilson
Tittman
DeCourcy
Travers
Davis
Drew
Newbegin
Thurston
Timmons
Ross
Knox
Isham
Jones
Kimelman
Preeg
McManaway
McKinley
Adams
Alexander
Huddleston
Swing
Carney
Curran
Foley
Sanderson
Merten
White
Mulrean
Sison
vteSlave narratives
Slave Narrative Collection
Individualsby continentof enslavementAfrica
Robert Adams (c. 1790 ?)
Marcus Berg (1714-1761)
Francis Bok (b. 1979)
James Leander Cathcart (1767 1843)
 lafur Egilsson (1564 1639)
Petro Kilekwa (late 19th c.)
Elizabeth Marsh (1735 1785)
Maria ter Meetelen (1704 ?)
Mende Nazer (b. 1982)
Hark Olufs (1708 1754)
Thomas Pellow (1705 ?)
Joseph Pitts (1663   c. 1735)
Gu r ur S monard ttir (1598 1682)
Asia
Brigitta Scherzenfeldt (1684 1736)
Europe
Lovisa von Burghausen (1698 1733)
Olaudah Equiano (c. 1745 Nigeria   31 March 1797 Eng)
Ukawsaw Gronniosaw (c. 1705 Bornu   1775 Eng)
Jean Marteilhe (1684-1777)
Roustam Raza (1783 1845)
Ottoman Empire
Johann Schiltberger
Konstantin Mihailovi 
George of Hungary
North America:Canada
Marie-Joseph Ang lique (c. 1710 Portugal   1734 Montreal)
John R. Jewitt (1783 England    1821 United States)
North America:Caribbean
Juan Francisco Manzano (1797 1854, Cuba)
Esteban Montejo (1860 1965, Cuba)
Mary Prince (c. 1788 Bermuda   after 1833)
Venerable Pierre Toussaint (1766 Saint-Dominque   June 30, 1853 NY)
Marcos Xiorro (c. 1819  ???, Puerto Rico)
North America:United States
Sam Aleckson
Jordan Anderson
William J. Anderson
Jared Maurice Arter
Solomon Bayley
Polly Berry
Henry Bibb
Leonard Black
James Bradley (1834)
Henry "Box" Brown
John Brown
William Wells Brown
Peter Bruner (1845 KY   1938 OH)
Ellen and William Craft
Hannah Crafts
Lucinda Davis
Noah Davis
Lucy Delaney
Ayuba Suleiman Diallo
Frederick Douglass
Kate Drumgoold
Jordan Winston Early (1814   after 1894)
Sarah Jane Woodson Early
Peter Fossett (1815 Monticello 1901)
David George
Moses Grandy
William Green (19th century MD)
William Grimes
Josiah Henson
Fountain Hughes (1848/1854 VA   1957)
John Andrew Jackson
Harriet Jacobs
Thomas James
John Jea
Paul Jennings (1799 1874)
Elizabeth Keckley
Boston King
Lunsford Lane
J. Vance Lewis
Jermain Wesley Loguen
James Mars (1790 1880)
Solomon Northup
Greensbury Washington Offley
John Parker (1827 VA   1900)
William Parker
James Robert
Moses Roper
Omar ibn Said
William Henry Singleton
James Lindsay Smith
Venture Smith
Austin Steward (1793 VA   1860)
Venerable Pierre Toussaint (1766 Saint-Dominque   1853 NY)
Harriet Tubman
Wallace Turnage
Bethany Veney
Booker T. Washington
Wallace Willis (19th century Indian Territory)
Harriet E. Wilson
Zamba Zembola (b. c. 1780 Congo)
South America
Mahommah Gardo Baquaqua (1845 1847, Brazil)
Miguel de Bur a (? Puerto Rico   1555 Venezuela)
Osifekunde (c. 1795 Nigeria  ? Brazil)
Non-fiction books
The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano (1789)
The Narrative of Robert Adams (1816)
American Slavery as It Is (1839)
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845)
The Life of Josiah Henson (1849)
Twelve Years a Slave (1853)
My Bondage and My Freedom (1855)
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (1861)
The Underground Railroad Records (1872)
Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (1881)
Up from Slavery (1901)
Slave Narratives: A Folk History of Slavery in the United States (1936 38)
The Peculiar Institution (1956)
The Slave Community (1972)
Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo" (2018)
Fiction/novels
Oroonoko (1688)
Sab (1841)
Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852)
The Heroic Slave (1852)
Clotel (1853)
The Bondwoman's Narrative (c. 1853   c. 1861)
Dred: A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp (1856)
Our Nig (1859)
Jubilee (1966)
The Confessions of Nat Turner (1967)
Roots: The Saga of an American Family (1976)
Underground to Canada (1977)
Kindred (1979)
Dessa Rose (1986)
Beloved (1987)
Middle Passage (1990)
Queen: The Story of an American Family (1993)
Hang a Thousand Trees with Ribbons (1996)
Ama: A Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade (2001)
Walk Through Darkness (2002)
The Known World (2003)
Unburnable (2006)
The Book of Negroes (2007)
The Underground Railroad (2016)
Young adult books
Amos Fortune, Free Man (1951)
I, Juan de Pareja (1965)
Copper Sun (2006)
Essays
"To a Southern Slaveholder" (1848)
A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin (1853)
Plays
The Escape; or, A Leap for Freedom (1858)
The Octoroon (1859)
Documentaries
Unchained Memories (2003)
Frederick Douglass and the White Negro (2008)
Related
Abolitionism in the United States
African-American literature
Anti-Tom novels
Atlantic slave trade
Captivity narrative
Caribbean literature
Films featuring slavery
Slavery in the United States
Songs of the Underground Railroad
Treatment of slaves in the United States
List of last surviving American enslaved people
Book of Negroes (1783)
Cotton Plantation Record and Account Book (1847)
Sarah Johnson's Mount Vernon (2008)
Slave Songs of the United States (1867)
Amazing Grace: An Anthology of Poems about Slavery (2002)
The Hemingses of Monticello (2008)
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
vteCivil rights movement (1954 1968)Events(timeline)Prior to 1954
Journey of Reconciliation
Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore
Sweatt v. Painter (1950)
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950)
Baton Rouge bus boycott
1954 1959
Brown v. Board of Education
Bolling v. Sharpe
Briggs v. Elliott
Davis v. Prince Edward County
Gebhart v. Belton
Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company
Emmett Till
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle
Tallahassee bus boycott
Mansfield school desegregation
1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
"Give Us the Ballot"
Royal Ice Cream sit-in
Little Rock Nine
Cooper v. Aaron
Civil Rights Act of 1957
Ministers' Manifesto
Katz Drug Store sit-in
Kissing Case
Biloxi wade-ins
1960 1963
New Year's Day March
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Atlanta sit-ins
Sit-in movement
Greenville Eight
Civil Rights Act of 1960
Ax Handle Saturday
Gomillion v. Lightfoot
Boynton v. Virginia
University of Georgia desegregation riot
Rock Hill sit-ins
Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address
Freedom Rides
Anniston bombing
Birmingham attack
Garner v. Louisiana
Albany Movement
Cambridge movement
University of Chicago sit-ins
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot
Atlanta's Berlin Wall
"Segregation now, segregation forever"
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door
1963 Birmingham campaign
Letter from Birmingham Jail
Children's Crusade
Birmingham riot
16th Street Baptist Church bombing
John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights
Detroit Walk to Freedom
March on Washington
"I Have a Dream"
Big Six
St. Augustine movement
1964 1968
Twenty-fourth Amendment
Chester school protests
Bloody Tuesday
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests
Freedom Summer
workers' murders
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States
Katzenbach v. McClung
1964 1965 Scripto strike
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches
"How Long, Not Long"
Voting Rights Act of 1965
Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections
March Against Fear
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement
Loving v. Virginia
Memphis sanitation strike
King assassination
funeral
riots
Civil Rights Act of 1968
Poor People's Campaign
Green v. County School Board of New Kent County
Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.
Activistgroups
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
Atlanta Student Movement
Black Panther Party
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Committee for Freedom Now
Committee on Appeal for Human Rights
An Appeal for Human Rights
Council for United Civil Rights Leadership
Council of Federated Organizations
Dallas County Voters League
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Georgia Council on Human Relations
Highlander Folk School
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights
Lowndes County Freedom Organization
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
Montgomery Improvement Association
NAACP
Youth Council
Nashville Student Movement
Nation of Islam
Northern Student Movement
National Council of Negro Women
National Urban League
Operation Breadbasket
Regional Council of Negro Leadership
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Southern Regional Council
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
The Freedom Singers
United Auto Workers (UAW)
Wednesdays in Mississippi
Women's Political Council
Activists
Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Zev Aelony
Mathew Ahmann
Muhammad Ali
William G. Anderson
Gwendolyn Armstrong
Arnold Aronson
Ella Baker
James Baldwin
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
James Bevel
Claude Black
Gloria Blackwell
Randolph Blackwell
Unita Blackwell
Ezell Blair Jr.
Joanne Bland
Julian Bond
Joseph E. Boone
William Holmes Borders
Amelia Boynton
Bruce Boynton
Raylawni Branch
Stanley Branche
Ruby Bridges
Aurelia Browder
H. Rap Brown
Ralph Bunche
Guy Carawan
Stokely Carmichael
Johnnie Carr
James Chaney
J. L. Chestnut
Shirley Chisholm
Colia Lafayette Clark
Ramsey Clark
Septima Clark
Xernona Clayton
Eldridge Cleaver
Kathleen Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Abraham Lincoln Davis
Angela Davis
Joseph DeLaine
Dave Dennis
Annie Devine
Patricia Stephens Due
Joseph Ellwanger
Charles Evers
Medgar Evers
Myrlie Evers-Williams
Chuck Fager
James Farmer
Walter Fauntroy
James Forman
Marie Foster
Golden Frinks
Andrew Goodman
Robert Graetz
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Lawrence Guyot
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
Fred Hampton
William E. Harbour
Vincent Harding
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Oliver Hill
Donald L. Hollowell
James Hood
Myles Horton
Zilphia Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Ruby Hurley
Cecil Ivory
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Richie Jean Jackson
T. J. Jemison
Esau Jenkins
Barbara Rose Johns
Vernon Johns
Frank Minis Johnson
Clarence Jones
J. Charles Jones
Matthew Jones
Vernon Jordan
Tom Kahn
Clyde Kennard
A. D. King
C.B. King
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Martin Luther King Sr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
Sanford R. Leigh
Jim Letherer
Stanley Levison
John Lewis
Viola Liuzzo
Z. Alexander Looby
Joseph Lowery
Clara Luper
Danny Lyon
Malcolm X
Mae Mallory
Vivian Malone
Bob Mants
Thurgood Marshall
Benjamin Mays
Franklin McCain
Charles McDew
Ralph McGill
Floyd McKissick
Joseph McNeil
James Meredith
William Ming
Jack Minnis
Amzie Moore
Cecil B. Moore
Douglas E. Moore
Harriette Moore
Harry T. Moore
Queen Mother Moore
William Lewis Moore
Irene Morgan
Bob Moses
William Moyer
Elijah Muhammad
Diane Nash
Charles Neblett
Huey P. Newton
Edgar Nixon
Jack O'Dell
James Orange
Rosa Parks
James Peck
Charles Person
Homer Plessy
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Fay Bellamy Powell
Rodney N. Powell
Al Raby
Lincoln Ragsdale
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond
George Raymond Jr.
Bernice Johnson Reagon
Cordell Reagon
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Walter Reuther
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Bernice Robinson
Jo Ann Robinson
Angela Russell
Bayard Rustin
Bernie Sanders
Michael Schwerner
Bobby Seale
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Alexander D. Shimkin
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
Glenn E. Smiley
A. Maceo Smith
Kelly Miller Smith
Mary Louise Smith
Maxine Smith
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Charles Kenzie Steele
Hank Thomas
Dorothy Tillman
A. P. Tureaud
Hartman Turnbow
Albert Turner
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Hollis Watkins
Walter Francis White
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Kale Williams
Robert F. Williams
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Sammy Younge Jr.
Bob Zellner
James Zwerg
By region
Omaha, Nebraska
South Carolina
Movementsongs
"Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round"
"If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus"
"Kumbaya"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
"Oh, Freedom"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"We Shall Not Be Moved"
"We Shall Overcome"
""Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)"
Influences
Nonviolence
Padayatra
Sermon on the Mount
Mahatma Gandhi
Ahimsa
Satyagraha
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Mary McLeod Bethune
Related
Jim Crow laws
Lynching in the United States
Plessy v. Ferguson
Separate but equal
Buchanan v. Warley
Hocutt v. Wilson
Sweatt v. Painter
Hernandez v. Texas
Loving v. Virginia
African-American women in the movement
Fifth Circuit Four
16th Street Baptist Church
Kelly Ingram Park
A.G. Gaston Motel
Brown Chapel
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
Holt Street Baptist Church
Edmund Pettus Bridge
March on Washington Movement
African-American churches attacked
List of lynching victims in the United States
Freedom Schools
Freedom songs
Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"
Voter Education Project
1960s counterculture
African American founding fathers of the United States
Eyes on the Prize
Legacy
In popular culture
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument
Civil Rights Memorial
Civil Rights Movement Archive
Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument
Freedom Rides Museum
Freedom Riders National Monument
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial
other King memorials
Mississippi Civil Rights Museum
National Civil Rights Museum
National Voting Rights Museum
St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument
Notedhistorians
Taylor Branch
Clayborne Carson
John Dittmer
Michael Eric Dyson
Chuck Fager
Adam Fairclough
David Garrow
David Halberstam
Vincent Harding
Steven F. Lawson
Doug McAdam
Diane McWhorter
Charles M. Payne
Thomas E. Ricks
Timothy Tyson
Akinyele Umoja
Movement photographers
 Civil rights movement portal
vte(  1868)   1872 United States presidential election   (1876  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Ulysses S. Grant (incumbent)
Vice President: Henry Wilson
Liberal Republican Party Democratic Party (Convention)Nominees
President: Horace Greeley
Vice President: Benjamin G. Brown
Othercandidates
Liberal Republican: Charles F. Adams
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin G. Brown
David Davis
Andrew Curtin
Salmon P. Chase
Democratic: Jeremiah S. Black
James A. Bayard
William S. Groesbeck
Third party and independent candidatesLabor Reform Party
Nominee: David Davis
VP nominee: Joel Parker
Other candidates: Charles O'Conor (declined nomination)
People's (Equal Rights) Party
Nominee: Victoria Woodhull
VP nominee: Frederick Douglass
Prohibition Party
Convention
Nominee: James Black
VP nominee: John Russell
Other 1872 elections: House
Senate
vteAfrican AmericansHistory
Timeline
Abolitionism
African American founding fathers
Afrocentrism
American Civil War
Atlantic slave trade
Black genocide
Black Lives Matter
Brown v. Board of Education (1954)
Children of the plantation
Civil Rights Acts
1964
Voting Rights Act of 1965
1968
Civil rights movement 1865 1896
Civil right movement 1896 1954
Civil rights movement 1954 1968
Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle (1956)
Sit-in movement
Freedom Riders
Birmingham movement
March on Washington
Selma to Montgomery marches
Chicago Freedom Movement
Post civil rights era
Cornerstone Speech
COVID-19 impact
Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857)
Free Negro
Free people of color
George Floyd protests
Great Migration
Second
New
Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013
Jim Crow laws
Lynching
Military history
Nadir of American race relations
The Negro Motorist Green Book
Partus sequitur ventrem
Plantations
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Reconstruction Amendments
Reconstruction era
Redlining
Separate but equal
Slavery
Treatment of slaves
Tulsa race massacre
Underground Railroad
Women's suffrage movement
Culture
Afrofuturism
Art
Black mecca
Businesses
Dance
Family structure
Film
Folktales
Hair
Harlem Renaissance
New Negro
Juneteenth
Kwanzaa
LGBT community
Literature
Music
Musical theater
Names
Negro National Anthem
Neighborhoods
Newspapers
Soul food
Stereotypes
Middle class
Upper class
Notable people
Ralph Abernathy
Maya Angelou
Crispus Attucks
James Baldwin
James Bevel
Julian Bond
Amelia Boynton
James Bradley
Carol Moseley Braun
Edward Brooke
Blanche Bruce
Ralph Bunche
George Washington Carver
Shirley Chisholm
Claudette Colvin
Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois
Medgar Evers
James Farmer
Henry Highland Garnet
Marcus Garvey
Fred Gray
Fannie Lou Hamer
Kamala Harris
Jimi Hendrix
Jesse Jackson
Ketanji Brown Jackson
Michael Jackson
Harriet Jacobs
Barbara Jordan
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King Jr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Huddie Ledbetter
John Lewis
Joseph Lowery
Malcolm X
Thurgood Marshall
Toni Morrison
Bob Moses
Diane Nash
Barack Obama
Michelle Obama
Rosa Parks
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Colin Powell
Gabriel Prosser
Joseph Rainey
A. Philip Randolph
Hiram Revels
Paul Robeson
Al Sharpton
Fred Shuttlesworth
Clarence Thomas
Emmett Till
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Denmark Vesey
C. T. Vivian
David Walker
Booker T. Washington
Ida B. Wells
Roy Wilkins
Oprah Winfrey
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Education, scienceand technology
Black studies
Black schools
Historically black colleges and universities
Inventors and scientists
Museums
Women
in computer science
in medicine
in STEM fields
Religion
African-American Jews
Islam
American Society of Muslims
Nation of Islam
Black church
Azusa Street Revival
Black Hebrew Israelites
Black theology
Doctrine of Father Divine
Political movements
Anarchism
Back-to-Africa movement
Black power
Movement
Capitalism
Conservatism
Leftism
Pan-Africanism
Populism
Raised fist
Self-determination
Nationalism
Socialism
Civic and economicgroups
Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)
Black Panther Party
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
Nashville Student Movement
National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC)
National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
National Urban League (NUL)
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Thurgood Marshall College Fund
United Negro College Fund (UNCF)
Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL)
Sports
Negro league baseball
Baseball color line
Black players in professional American football
Black NFL quarterbacks
Black players in ice hockey
Muhammad Ali
Arthur Ashe
Jack Johnson
Joe Louis
Jesse Owens
Jackie Robinson
Serena Williams
Athletic associationsand conferences
Central (CIAA)
Mid-Eastern (MEAC)
Southern (SIAC)
Southwestern (SWAC)
Ethnic subdivisions
By African descent
Fula
Gullah
Igbo
Yoruba
Black Indians
Black Seminoles
Cherokee freedmen controversy
Choctaw freedmen
Creek Freedmen
Black Southerners
Blaxicans
Louisiana Creole
of color
Melungeon
Demographics
Neighborhoods
list
U.S. cities with large populations
2000 majorities
2010 majorities
Metropolitan areas
States and territories
Languages
English
American English
African-American English
African-American Vernacular English
Gullah
Louisiana Creole
By state/city
Alabama
Arkansas
California
Los Angeles
San Francisco
Florida
Jacksonville
Tallahassee
Georgia
Atlanta
Hawaii
Illinois
Chicago
Iowa
Davenport
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Baltimore
Massachusetts
Boston
Michigan
Detroit
Mississippi
Nebraska
Omaha
New York
New York City
North Carolina
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Philadelphia
Puerto Rico
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Austin
Dallas Fort Worth
Houston
San Antonio
Utah
Virginia
Diaspora
Africa
Gambia
Ghana
Liberia
Sierra Leone
America
Canada
Dominican Republic
Haiti
Mexico
Trinidad and Tobago
Israel
Europe
France
Lists
African Americans
Activists
Actors
Astronauts
Billionaires
Jurists
Mathematicians
Republicans
Singers
Spingarn Medal winners
US cabinet members
US representatives
US senators
Visual artists
Writers
African-American firsts
Mayors
Sports firsts
US state firsts
Historic places
Index of related articles
Landmark African-American legislation
Lynching victims
Monuments
Neighborhoods
Topics related to the African diaspora
Category
 United States portal
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Academics
CiNii
Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frederick_Douglass&oldid=1147894815"