Component of a building's wall
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Wall stud" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (May 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 A typical wall section in platform framing CrippleWindow headerTop plate / upper wall plateWindow sillStudSill plate / sole plate / bottom plate
 Steel studs in a wall
A wall stud is a vertical repetitive framing member in a building's wall of smaller cross section than a post. It is a fundamental element in frame building.
Etymology[edit]
Stud is an ancient word related to similar words in Old English, Old Norse, Middle High German, and Old Teutonic generally meaning prop or support.[1] Other historical words with similar meaning are quarter[1] and scantling[2] (one sense meaning a smaller timber, not necessarily the same use). Stick is a colloquial term for both framing lumber (timber) and a "timber tree"[3] (a tree trunk good for using as lumber (timber)); thus, the names "stick and platform", "stick and frame", "stick and box", or simply stick framing. The stud height usually determines the ceiling height, thus sayings like: "...These rooms were usually high in stud..."[1]
Purpose[edit]
Studs form walls and may carry vertical structural loads or be non load-bearing, such as in partition walls, which only separate spaces. They hold in place the windows, doors, interior finish, exterior sheathing or siding, insulation and utilities and help give shape to a building. Studs run from sill plate to wall plate. In modern construction, studs are anchored to the plates in a way, such as using fasteners, to prevent the building from being lifted off the foundation by severe wind or earthquake.
Properties[edit]
Studs are usually slender, so more studs are needed than in post and beam framing. Sometimes studs are long, as in balloon framing, where the studs extend two stories and carry a ledger which carries joists. Balloon framing has been made illegal in new construction in many jurisdictions for fire safety reasons because the open wall cavities allow fire to quickly spread such as from a basement to an attic; the plates and platforms in platform framing provide a passive fire stop inside the walls, and so are deemed much safer by fire safety officials. Being thinner and lighter, stick construction techniques are easier to cut and carry and is speedier than the timber framing.
In the United States and Canada, studs are traditionally made of wood, usually 2 4 or 2 6 by name; however, these historical dimensions have been reduced but still carry the name of "two by four" and "two by six". Typical dimensions of today's "two by four" is 1.5 by 3.5 inches (38 mm  89 mm) dimensional lumber prior to sanding and are typically placed 16 inches (406 mm) from each other's center, but sometimes also at 12 inches (305 mm) or 24 inches (610 mm). The wood needs to be dry when used, or problems may occur as the studs shrink and twist as they dry out. Steel studs are gaining popularity as a non-combustible alternative, especially for non load-bearing walls, and are required in some firewalls.
In New Zealand, the required lumber size and spacing of wall studs are determined using NZS 3604 Timber-framed buildings table 8.2 for loadbearing walls and table 8.4 for non-loadbearing walls.[4]
Other terms[edit]
Studs are the vertical members of a timber or metal framed wall. The studs are spaced equally to suit the dimensions of the covering sheet materials, usually 600mm between the centers.
Studs are used to frame around window and door openings are given different names, including
king stud   stud to left or right of a window or door that is continuous from the bottom plate to the top plate
queen stud - stud used as a repetitive member that angled as such to be neither vertical or horizontal.
trimmer or jack   stud to the left or right of a window or door that runs from the bottom plate to the underside of a lintel or header
cripple stud   a stud located either above or below a framed opening, that does not run the full height of the wall
post or column   a doubled or other integral multiple of a group of studs nailed side by side. Posts in walls are used at point loads such as long spans near a wide window or sliding door, etc.
sleeper or nailer - a stud laid flat to other framing members to provide a point of attachment.
sill - a stud sized member forming the base of a window assembly or the base of wall.
mudsill - a stud sized member that form the base of a wall and have been treated against insects and decay.
top plate or double top plate - a stud sized member that forms the top of the wall.  In cases where other members must bear or brace on the top of the wall a double top plate is used with the member using offset laps so the top plate provides a continuous bearing surface.
A building technique mostly associated with Lincolnshire, England, and parts of Scotland gets part of its name from the studs: mud and stud (stud and mud). This building method uses studs in a framework which is then totally covered with mud which resembles the building material cob.[5] Another traditional building method is called stud and plaster where the plaster walls are held by lath on the studs. Studs are also the namesake of a type of timber framing called close studding.
Grades[edit]
Based on the American West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau (WCLIB) grading rules,[6] there is only one grade of stud: STUD. A stud is graded for vertical application and its stress requirements and allowable visual defects reflect that application. A stud is most similar to a #2 grade, which is held to a higher standard during grading. The biggest difference between the two is the frequency, placement and size of knots and overall allowable wane.
See also[edit]
Furring
Stud finder
References[edit]
^ a b c "Stud". def. 1. Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM (v. 4.0)   Oxford University Press 2009
^ "Scantling" def. 3.a. Oxford English Dictionary
^ Whitney, William Dwight, and Benjamin E. Smith. The Century dictionary and cyclopedia. New York: Century Co., 1901. Print. [1] accessed 1/9/2014
^ Timber-framed buildings: NZS 3604:2011. Wellington: Standards New Zealand. 2011. p. 8.9. ISBN 9781869751432.
^ Keefe, Laurence. Earth building: methods and materials, repair and conservation. London: Taylor & Francis, 2005. 14. Print.
^ "WCLIB Grading Rules for National Grades   Framing Lumber" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-01-09.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wall studs.
vteWood productsLumber/timber
Batten
Beam
Bressummer
Cruck
Flitch beam
Flooring
Joist
Lath
Molding
Panelling
Plank
Plate
Post
Purlin
Rafter
Railroad ties
Reclaimed
Shingle
Siding
Sill
Stud
Timber truss
Treenail
Truss
Utility pole
Engineeredwood
Cross-laminated timber
Glued laminated timber
veneer
LVL
parallel strand
I-joist
Fiberboard
hardboard
Masonite
MDF
Oriented strand board
Oriented structural straw board
Particle board
Plywood
Structural insulated panel
Wood-plastic composite
lumber
Fuelwood
Charcoal
biochar
Firelog
Firewood
Pellet fuel
Wood fuel
Fibers
Cardboard
Corrugated fiberboard
Paper
Paperboard
Pulp
Pulpwood
Rayon
Derivatives
Birch-tar
Cellulose
nano
Hemicellulose
Cellulosic ethanol
Dyes
Lignin
Liquid smoke
Lye
Methanol
Pyroligneous acid
Pine tar
Pitch
Sandalwood oil
Tannin
Wood gas
By-products
Barkdust
Black liquor
Ramial chipped wood
Sawdust
Tall oil
Wood flour
Wood wool
Woodchips
Historical
Axe ties
Bavin (wood)
Billet (wood)
Clapboard
Dugout canoe
Potash
Sawdust brandy
Split-rail fence
Tanbark
Timber framing
Wooden masts
See also
Biomass
Certified wood
Destructive distillation
Dry distillation
Engineered bamboo
Forestry
List of woods
Mulch
Non-timber forest products
Papermaking
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood processing
Woodworking
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wall_stud&oldid=1147137812"