Annual event held in Trinidad and Tobago
CarnivalMembers of a costume band parade on the streets of Port of SpainObserved byTrinidad and TobagoTypeCulturalSignificanceWeek before LentCelebrationsprocessions, music, dancing, and the use of masqueradeDateMonday and Tuesday before LentFrequencyAnnualRelated toCaribbean Carnival, Mardi Gras, Carnival, Shrove Monday, Ash Wednesday, Lent
The Trinidad and Tobago Carnival is an annual event held on the Monday and Tuesday before Ash Wednesday in Trinidad and Tobago. This event is well known for participants' colorful costumes and exuberant celebrations. There are numerous cultural events such as "band launch fetes" running in the lead up to the street parade on Carnival Monday and Tuesday. It is said that if the islanders are not celebrating it, then they are preparing for it, while reminiscing about the past year's festival. Traditionally, the festival is associated with soca music, with its origins formulated in the midst of hardship for enslaved West and Central Africans; however, recently Soca music has replaced calypso as the most celebrated type of music. Costumes (sometimes called "mas"), stick-fighting and limbo competitions are also important components of the festival.[1]
Carnival, as it is celebrated in Trinidad and Tobago, is also celebrated in several cities worldwide.  These celebrations include Toronto's Caribana, Miami's Miami Carnival, Houston Carifest, London's Notting Hill Carnival, as well as New York City's Labor Day Carnival.
Origin[edit]
The Mas tradition started in the late 18th century with French plantation owners organizing masquerades (mas) and balls before enduring the fasting of Lent. The slaves, who could not take part in Carnival, formed their own, parallel celebration called "Canboulay". Canboulay (from the French cannes brul s, meaning burnt cane) is a precursor to Trinidad and Tobago Carnival, and has played an important role in the development of the music of Trinidad and Tobago.
Calypso music was developed in Trinidad in the 17th century from the West African Kaiso and canboulay music brought by African slaves imported to that Caribbean island to work on sugar plantations. These slaves, brought to toil on sugar plantations, were stripped of all connections to their homeland and family and not allowed to talk to each other. They used calypso to mock the slave masters and to communicate with each other. Many early calypsos were sung in French Creole by an individual called a griot. As calypso developed, the role of the griot became known as a chantuelle and eventually, calypsonian.[2]
Steelpan
Stick fighting and African percussion music were banned in 1881, in response to the Canboulay Riots. They were replaced by bamboo "Bamboo-Tamboo" sticks beaten together, which were themselves banned in turn. In 1937 they reappeared, transformed as an orchestra of frying pans, dustbin lids and oil drums. These steelpans (or pans) are now a major part of the Trinidadian music scene and are a popular section of the Canboulay music contests. In 1941, the United States Navy arrived on Trinidad, and the panmen, who were associated with lawlessness and violence, helped to popularize steel pan music among soldiers, which began its international popularization.
J'Ouvert
 A Music Truck entertains the crowd on the streets. Trucks are an integral part of the street parade, featuring live performances or deejays
J'ouvert (translated from French as "break of day"), symbolizes the start of the official two days of Carnival. Beginning early Monday, revellers parade through town in the tradition of the Canboulay celebrations.  Jouvay, as it is commonly known, features a variety of homemade or satirical costumes.  This celebration involves participants dousing themselves in oil, mud and powder while they dance to calypso music through the streets. This is a stark contrast to the attractive and more formal costumes that are donned later in the day on Carnival Monday and on Tuesday.
Carnival dates[edit]
The table shows a list of Trinidad and Tobago Carnival dates from 2009 to 2026.[3]
Calendar Year
Carnival Monday
Carnival Tuesday
2009
February 23
February 24
2010
February 15
February 16
2011
March 7
March 8
2012
February 20
February 21
2013
February 11
February 12
2014
March 3
March 4
2015
February 16
February 17
2016
February 8
February 9
2017
February 27
February 28
2018
February 12
February 13
2019
March 4
March 5
2020
February 24
February 25
2021
Cancelled due to COVID-19 [4]
2022
Cancelled due to COVID-19
2023
February 20
February 21
2024
February 12
February 13
2025
March 3
March 4
2026
February 16
February 17
Characters[edit]
 Moko jumbie characters
Main article: List of Trinidad and Tobago Carnival character costumes
A few specific characters have evolved during the history of Trinidad and Tobago's Carnival.[1] Among these characters are:
Burrokeet   A "donkey-man" character constructed so as to give the illusion of a dancer riding a small burro or donkey. This masquerade was brought to Trinidad by Venezuelan settlers.
Dame Lorraine   An ample voluptuous woman. The costume parodies the dress of 18th-century French aristocratic women and is stuffed in the hips and bust.
Jab Jab   The name comes from the French Patois word for devil.
Midnight Robber   A character who brags about himself and whose costume is influenced by American Cowboy clothes.
Minstrels   A group of singers
Moko jumbie - A stilt dancer. The character is of African origin. Originally the character wore a hat made of dried wild cucumbers, and the stilts were striped.[5]
Pierrot   A well-dressed character that prides himself on his knowledge
References[edit]
^ a b "Traditional Carnival Characters". TNTIsland.com. Retrieved 2019-11-19.
^ French creole influence on calypso music. YouTube. 2010-12-17. ISBN 9780313357978. Retrieved March 6, 2014.
^ "Trinidad Carnival Dates". Archived from the original on 2015-10-18. Retrieved 2008-04-21.
^ "[Updated] Covid19 Kills Carnival". 28 September 2020.
^ John Mendes (2014). C t  ci C t  l . Port of Spain: Caribbean Print Technologies. p. 235. ISBN 978-976-8194-060.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carnivals of Trinidad and Tobago.
Official Trinidad and Tobago Tourism Site   www.gotrinidadandtobago.com
Calendar of Events at the Trinidad Tourism Site
National Carnival Commission Official Website
History and Carnival Information at the National Library
Trinidad and Tobago Carnival at Curlie
The Birth & Evolution of Trinidad Carnival
vteCarnival around the worldAsia
Indonesia
Solo
Jember
Jakarta
Europe
Austria
Belgium
Aalst
Binche
Denmark
England
Finland
France
Nice
Paris
Germany
Cologne
Mainz
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Venice
Viareggio
Ivrea
Lithuania
Malta
Netherlands
Portugal
Madeira
Ovar
Slavic
Belarus, Russia, Ukraine
Croatia
Slovenia
Spain
C diz
Las Palmas
Santa Cruz
Switzerland
Basel
Turkey
North America
Canada
Ottawa
Quebec City
Toronto
M xico
Vera Cruz
Mazatl n
United States
Mobile
New Orleans
New York City
Caribbean
Antigua
Bahamas
Barbados
Cayman Islands
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Haiti
Nevis
Puerto Rico (Ponce)
Trinidad and Tobago
South America
Argentina
Buenos Aires
Murga
Bolivia
Oruro
Brazil
Bahia
Rio
S o Paulo
Colombia
Barranquilla
Negros y Blancos
French Guiana
Cayenne
Guyana
Panama
Las Tablas
Peru
Cajamarca
Uruguay
Oceania
Australia
 Catholicism portal
 World portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trinidad_and_Tobago_Carnival&oldid=1148439114"