Type of sandal
For other uses, see Flip-flop.
 A pair of flip-flops
Flip-flops are a type of light sandal, typically worn as a form of casual footwear. They consist of a flat sole held loosely on the foot by a Y-shaped strap known as a toe thong that passes between the first and second toes and around both sides of the foot. This style of footwear has been worn by the people of many cultures throughout the world, originating as early as the ancient Egyptians in 1,500 B.C. In the United States the modern flip-flop may have had its design taken from the traditional Japanese z ri, after World War II as soldiers brought them back from Japan.
Flip-flops became a prominent unisex summer footwear starting in the 1960s.[1]
"Flip-flop" etymology and other names[edit]
The term flip-flop has been used in American and British English since the 1960s to describe inexpensive footwear consiting of a flat base, typically rubber, and a strap with three anchor points: between the big and second toes, then bifurcating to anchor on both sides of the foot. "Flip-flop" may be an onomatopoeia of the sound made by the sandals when walking in them.[2]
Flip-flops are also called thongs (sometimes pluggers[3]) in Australia,[4] jandals (originally a trademarked name derived from "Japanese sandals") in New Zealand,[5] and slops or plakkies in South Africa and Zimbabwe.[6]
In the Philippines, tsinelas.[7] In India, chappal, (which traditionally referred to a leather slipper).[8] In Latin America, La Chancla.[9] Throughout the world, they are also known by a variety of other names, including slippers in Bahamas, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.[citation needed]
History[edit]
 Pair of leather thong ancient sandals from the New Kingdom of Egypt (ca. 1550 1307 BC)
 Zori (straw sandals) and Geta (wooden clogs) belonging to interned Japanese in the United States (1946), direct antecedents of modern-day flip-flops.
Thong sandals have been worn for thousands of years, dating back to pictures of them in ancient Egyptian murals from 4,000 BC. A pair found in Europe was made of papyrus leaves and dated to be approximately 1,500 years old. These early versions of flip-flops were made from a wide variety of materials. Ancient Egyptian sandals were made from papyrus and palm leaves. The Maasai people of Africa made them out of rawhide. In India, they were made from wood. In China and Japan, rice straw was used. The leaves of the sisal plant were used to make twine for sandals in South America, while the natives of Mexico used the yucca plant.[10]
The Ancient Greeks and Romans wore versions of flip-flops as well. In Greek sandals, the toe strap was worn between the first and second toes, while Roman sandals had the strap between the second and third toes. These differ from the sandals worn by the Mesopotamians, with the strap between the third and fourth toes. In India, a related "toe knob" sandal was common, with no straps but instead a small knob located between the first and second toes. They are known as Padukas.[11]
The modern flip-flop became popular in the United States as soldiers returning from World War II brought Japanese z ri with them. It caught on in the 1950s during the postwar boom and after the end of hostilities of the Korean War. As they became adopted into American popular culture, the sandals were redesigned and changed into the bright colors that dominated 1950s design. They quickly became popular due to their convenience and comfort, and were popular in beach-themed stores and as summer shoes. During the 1960s, flip-flops became firmly associated with the beach lifestyle of California. As such, they were promoted as primarily a casual accessory, typically worn with shorts, bathing suits, or summer dresses. As they became more popular, some people started wearing them for dressier or more formal occasions.[11]
 Havaianas thong (flip-flop) vending machine in Sydney, Australia
In 1962, Alpargatas S.A. marketed a version of flip-flops known as Havaianas in Brazil. By 2010, more than 150 million pairs of Havaianas were produced each year.[12] By 2019, production tops 200 million pairs per year. Prices range from under $5 for basics to more than $50 for high-end fashion models.[13]
Flip-flops quickly became popular as casual footwear of young adults. Girls would often decorate their flip-flops with metallic finishes, charms, chains, beads, rhinestones, or other jewelry.[14] Modern flip-flops are available in leather, suede, and synthetic materials. Platform and high-heeled variants of the sandals began to appear in the 1990s,[15][16][17][18] and in the late 2010s, kitten heeled "kit-flops".[19][20]
In the U.S., flip-flops with college colors and logos became common, for fans to wear to intercollegiate games.[21] In 2011, while vacationing in his native Hawaii, Barack Obama became the first President of the United States to be photographed wearing a pair of flip-flops.[22][23] The Dalai Lama of Tibet is also a frequent wearer of flip-flops and has met with several U.S. presidents, including George W. Bush and Barack Obama, while wearing the sandals.[24][25]
While exact sales figures for flip-flops are difficult to obtain due to the large number of stores and manufacturers involved, the Atlanta-based company Flip Flop Shops claimed that the shoes were responsible for a $20 billion industry in 2009. Furthermore, sales of flip-flops exceeded those of sneakers for the first time in 2006. If these figures are accurate, it is remarkable considering the low cost of most flip-flops.[26]
Design and custom[edit]
 Parts of a flip-flop sandal
The modern flip-flop has a straightforward design, consisting of a thin sole with two straps running in a Y shape from the sides of the foot to the gap between the big toe and the one beside it. Flip-flops are made from a wide variety of materials, as were the ancient thong sandals. The modern sandals are made of more modern materials, such as rubber, foam, plastic, leather, suede, and even fabric.[11] Flip-flops made of polyurethane have caused some environmental concerns; because polyurethane is a number 7 resin, they can't be easily discarded, and they persist in landfills for a very long time.[27] In response to these concerns, some companies have begun selling flip-flops made from recycled rubber, such as that from used bicycle tires, or even hemp,[28] and some offer a recycling program for used flip flops.[29]
 Japanese tabi socks, traditionally white or black, to be worn with z ri sandals
Because of the strap between the toes, flip-flops are typically not worn with socks. In colder weather, however, some people wear flip-flops with toe socks or merely pull standard socks forward and bunch them up between the toes. The Japanese commonly wear tabi, a type of sock with a single slot for the thong, with their z ri.[30]
Flip-flop health issues[edit]
Flip-flops provide the wearer with some mild protection from hazards on the ground, such as sharp rocks, splintery wooden surfaces, hot sand at the beach, broken glass, or even fungi and wart-causing viruses in locker rooms or community pool surfaces.[31] However, walking for long periods in flip-flops can result in pain in the feet, ankles and lower legs[32] or tendonitis[33]
The flip-flop straps may cause frictional issues, such as rubbing during walking, resulting in blisters, [34] and the open-toed design may result in stubbed  or even broken toes.[34]
Particularly, individuals with flat feet or other foot issues are advised to wear a shoe or sandal with better support.[35]
The American Podiatric Medical Association strongly recommends that people not play sports in flip-flops, or do any type of yard work with or without power tools, including cutting the grass, when they wear these shoes.[35] There are reports of people who ran or jumped in flip-flops and suffered sprained ankles, fractures, and severe ligament injuries that required surgery.[32]
Because they provide almost no protection from the sun, on a part of the body more heavily exposed and where sunscreen can more easily be washed off, sunburn can be a risk for flip-flop wearers.[36]
Flip-flops in popular culture[edit]
For Latinos, "La Chancla" (the flip-flop), held or thrown, is a tool of child discipline. In public, sassing back to one's mother is well known to elicit being wacked on the head with a flip-flop. At home, thrown, to the same effect. Even the threat - mom reaching down to take off a flip-flop and hold it in her raised hand - is considered enough to improve behavior.[9] There is a popular humorous video The Secret of La Chancla[37] about why Hispanic children are "so well behaved," with the claims "The secret is Hispanic culture, which emphasizes boundaries, developmental growth, and a traditional technique known as ... 'La Chancla'."[38] Ending "chancla culture" is the subject of a serious essay "The Meaning of Chancla: Flip Flops and Discipline."[9]
In India, a chappal is traditionally a leather slipper, but the term has also come to include flip-flops. A mother's corporal punishment was often with a chappal, striking the child on the buttocks, hands or about the head and shoulders.[8] Throwing a chappal became a video trope, "flying chappal," and "Flying chappal received" an expression by an adult acknowledging that they had been verbally chastised by their parents or other adults.[8]
Flip-flops are "tsinelas" in the Philippines, derived from the Spanish "chinela" (for slipper), and are used to discipline children, but with no mention of throwing. And children play Tumbang preso, which involves trying to knock over a can with thrown flip-flops.[7]
See also[edit]
Hnyat-phanat (Burmese)
Sandal
Slipper
Slippering (corporal punishment)
Slide (footwear)
References[edit]
^ "How and When Flip Flops Become A Popular Unisex Summer Footwear". Free Earth. 15 March 2017. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
^ "Flip-Flop". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 18 July 2012.
^ "Australian Guys Out Drinking Accidentally Come Across Robbery, Stop Thieves". Complex.
^ "IT Pro - Information Technology News & Reviews". 29 October 2011.
^ "Morris Yock trademarks the jandal". New Zealand History. 4 October 1957. Retrieved 22 February 2017.
^ Key, A.J. "Jandals, Thongs, Flip Flops & G-strings". Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012.
^ a b de Jong, Ronald (3 September 2013). "Tsinelas!". ThinsAsian. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
^ a b c "'Chappal meaning in India'on Google search shows device used by Indian parents to reshape their kids". Mangalore Today. 8 August 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
^ a b c Dominguez, Luis F. (6 April 2021). "The Meaning of Chancla: Flip Flops and Discipline". Spanish Academy. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
^ Kippen, Cameron (1999). The History of Footwear. Perth, Australia: Department of Podiatry, Curtin University of Technology.
^ a b c DeMello, Margo (2009). Feet and Footwear: A Cultural Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, LLC. pp. 130 131. ISBN 978-0-313-35714-5.
^ Cain, Kathryn (30 July 2010). "The Timeline: Flip-flops". The Independent. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Koh, Joel (28 February 2019). "Am I paying too much for flip-flops?". Retrieved 21 February 2023.
^ Peterson, Amy T.; Kellogg, Ann T. (2008). The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Clothing Through American History 1900 to the Present. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 372. ISBN 978-0-313-35855-5.
^ Jessica Booth (28 August 2018). "What high heels looked like the year you were born". Insider.
^ Lauren Alexis Fisher (15 April 2019). "Steve Madden Is Trying to Make Its '90s Platform Flip Flops Happen Again". Harper's Bazaar.
^ Liana Satenstein (26 March 2018). "Thong Heels Spring's Sexiest Sandals Are Back". Vogue.
^ Emily Kirkpatrick (11 August 2019). "High-heeled flip-flops are back". New York Post.
^ Jessica Davis (1 July 2019). "Introducing the kit-flop: this summer's favourite sandal". Harper's Bazaar.
^ Hannah Rogers (22 August 2020). "Kitten heels give a stylish lift to the flip-flop". The Times.
^ Ward, Julie (13 September 2005). "Next big step in team spirit: Flip-flops". USA Today. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ "Appropriate? Obama Becomes First Flip-Flop President". Fox News. 5 January 2011. Archived from the original on 18 July 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Fermino, Jennifer; Hurt, Charles. (5 January 2011). "That's quite a feet! Bam first flip-flop president". New York Post. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Lister, Richard (19 February 2010). "Flip-flop diplomacy with the Dalai Lama". BBC News. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Weisman, Jonathan; Canaves, Skye (18 February 2010). "Dalai Lama Meets With Obama". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Bernhard, Blythe (18 June 2009). "Flips-flops are bad for your sole". Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 30 January 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Bloch, Michael (22 May 2008). "Recycling Flip-Flops". Green Living Tips. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Vasil, Adria (2007). Ecoholic: Your Guide to the Most Environmentally Friendly Information, Products and Services In Canada. Toronto: Random House Canada. ISBN 978-0-307-36613-9.
^ "Flip-Flop Brigade". terracycle.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2015.
^ Sosnoski, Daniel (2014). Introduction to Japanese Culture. Boston, Massachusetts: Charles E. Tuttle Publishing Company. ISBN 978-4805313138.
^ Csomor, Marina (18 July 2012). "Flip-flops present feet with a painful problem". CNN. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ a b Kam, Katherine. "Flip-Flops Fun but Beware of Foot Pain". WebMD. Retrieved 20 January 2017.
^ "Doctors Warn About Flip-Flops". Click2Houston.com. 10 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 November 2012. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ a b Watson, Nicole (18 July 2012). "Study: Comfortable flip-flops causing painful health risks". ABC Action News. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ a b Willingham, Val (6 August 2010). "Flip-flops aren't always easy on the feet". CNN. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
^ Are your thongs a health hazard?
^ Rios III, Antonio (5 March 2013). "The Secret of La Chancla". YouTube. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
^ Vidal, Juan (4 November 2014). "'La Chancla': Flip Flops As A Tool of Discipline". NPR. Retrieved 19 February 2023.
External links[edit]
Flip-flops  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
vteFootwearDress shoes
Blucher
Brogues
Brothel creepers
Derby
Monks
Oxfords
Spectator shoes (Co-respondent shoes)
Winklepickers
Wholecuts
Slip-on shoes
Court shoes
Prince Albert slippers
Loafers
Venetian-style shoes
Women's
Ballet flats
High-heeled footwear
Mary Janes
Mojari
Mules
Peep-toe shoes
Saddle shoes
Slingbacks
Winklepickers
Other shoes
Driving moccasins
Flip-flops
Galoshes
Platform shoes
Sandals
Self-tying shoes
Slides
Slippers (Uwabaki)
Veldskoens
Z ri
Wooden footwear
Bakya
British clogs
Cantabrian albarcas
Clogs
Geta
Klompen
Namaksin
Okobo
Padukas
Pattens
Sabot
Tr skor
BootsMilitary
Ammunition boots
Bunny boots
Combat boots
Jackboots
Jump boots
Jungle boots
Tanker boots
Trench boots
Munson Last
Work
Australian work boots
Cowboy boots
Engineer boots
Hip boots
Jika-tabi
Rigger boots
Steel-toe boots
Waders
Fashion boots
Chelsea boots (Beatle boots)
Chukka boots
Go-go boots
Knee-high boots
Over-the-knee boots
Platform boots
Sinatra boots
Thigh-high boots
Ugg boots
Other
Jodhpur boots
Wellington boots
Ballet boots
Sport-related footwear
Athletic shoes
Ballet shoes
Boat shoes
Climbing shoes
Cross country running shoes
Cycling shoes
Football boots
Ghillies
Hiking boots
Ice skates
Inline skates
Kung fu shoes
Minimalist shoes
Motorcycle boots
Mountaineering boots
Plimsolls
Racing flats
Racing shoes
Riding boots
Roller shoes
Roller skates
Safari boots
Skate shoes
Ski boots
Sneakers
Swimfins
Water shoes
Wrestling shoes
Folk footwear
Abacas
Abarkas
Alpargatas
Avarcas
Balghas
Bast shoes
Clogs
Espadrilles
Furlane
Galesh
Geta
Giveh
Haferlschuh
Hnyat-phanats
Huarache
Hwa
Jipsin
Jorabs
Kamiks
Kolhapuri chappals
Moccasins
Mojaris
Mukluks
Nalins
Okobo
Opanci
Peshawari chappals
Snowshoes
Tsarouchi
Takunya
Upanah
Valenkis
Waraji
Z ri
Historical footwear
Areni-1 shoes
Buskins
Caligae
Chopines
Crakow
Hessians
Pampooties
Pirate boots
Sabatons
Shoe construction
Bespoke shoes
Blake construction
Goodyear welt
Shoe buckle
Shoelaces
High heels
Clear heels
Kitten heels
Spool heels
Stiletto heels
Wedges
Hosiery
Anklets
Bobby socks
Dress socks
Footwraps
Knee highs
Pantyhose
Sock
Stocking
Tights
Toe socks
Tabi
 List of shoe styles
vteClothingHeadwear
Beret
Cap
Baseball
Flat
Knit
Hat
Boater
Bowler
Fedora
Homburg
Top
Helmet
Hood
Kerchief
Turban
Veil
Neckwear
Bands
Choker
Clerical collar
Lavalli re
Neckerchief
Neck warmer
Necktie
Ascot
Bolo
Bow
School
Stock
Scarf
Tippet
Tops
Blouse
Cache-c ur
Crop top
Halterneck
Tube top
Cycling
Mantle
Shirt
Dress
Henley
Polo
Sleeveless
T
Sweater
Cardigan
Guernsey
Hoodie
Jersey
Polo neck
Shrug
Sweater vest
Twinset
Waistcoat
Trousers
Bell-bottoms
Bondage
Capri
Cargo
Chaps
Formal
High water
Lowrise
Jeans
Jodhpurs
Overalls
Palazzo
Parachute
Pedal pushers
Phat
Shorts
Bermuda
Cycling
Dolphin
Gym
Hotpants
Running
Slim-fit
Sweatpants
Windpants
Yoga pants
Suits anduniforms
Ceremonial dress
Academic
Court
Diplomatic
Folk
Jumpsuit
Military
Full
Mess
Service
Sailor
Combat
Pantsuit
Religious
Cassock
Clerical
Vestment
School
Prison
Workwear
Boilersuit
Cleanroom
Hazmat
Space
Scrubs
Dressesand gownsFormal, semi-formal, informal
Backless
Bouffant gown
Coatdress
Cocktail
Little black
Evening
Ball gown
Debutante
Princess line
Strapless
Wedding
Wrap
Casual
House
Jumper
Romper suit
Sheath
Shirtdress
Slip
Sundress
Skirts
A-line
Ballerina
Denim
Men's
Miniskirt
Pencil
Prairie
Rah-rah
Sarong
Skort
Tutu
Wrap
Underwear and lingerieTop
Bra
Camisole
Undershirt
Bottom
Diaper
Training pants
Leggings
Panties
Plastic pants
Slip
Thong
Underpants
Boxer briefs
Boxer shorts
Briefs
Full
Bodysuit, adult
Bodysuit, infant
Long underwear
See-through
Teddy
CoatsandouterwearOvercoats
Car
Chesterfield
Covert
Duffel
Duster
Greatcoat
British Warm
Guards Coat
Greca
Over-frock
Riding
Shadbelly
Trench
Ulster
Cloak
Opera
Paletot
Pea
Polo
Raincoat
Mackintosh
Suit coats
Frock coat
Bekishe
Rekel
Mess jacket
Suit jacket
Blazer
Smoking
Sports
Teba
Tailcoat
Dress
Morning
Other
Apron
Pinafore
Blouson
Cagoule
Cape
Ferraiolo
Inverness
Mantle, Monastic
Mantle, Royal
Mozzetta
Pellegrina
Coatee
Cut-off
Gilet
Jacket
Down
Flight
Goggle
Harrington
Leather
Mackinaw
Norfolk
Safari
Jerkin
Lab coat
Parka
Poncho
Robe
Bathrobe
Dressing gown
Shawl
Ski suit
Sleeved blanket
Windbreaker
Nightwear
Babydoll
Babygrow
Blanket sleeper
Negligee
Nightgown
Nightshirt
Pajamas
Swimwear
Bikini
Burkini
Boardshorts
Dry suit
Monokini
One-piece
Rash guard
Sling
Square leg suit
Swim briefs
Swim diaper
Trunks
Wetsuit
Footwear
Boot
Court shoe
Dress boot
Dress shoe
Flip-flops
Sandal
Shoe
Slipper
Sneaker
Legwear
Sock
Hold-ups
Garter
Pantyhose
Stocking
Tights
Accessories
Belt
Boutonni re
Coin purse
Cufflink
Cummerbund
Gaiters
Glasses
Gloves
Headband
Handbag
Jewellery
Livery
Muff
Pocket protector
Pocket watch
Sash
Spats
Sunglasses
Suspenders
Umbrella
Wallet
Watch
Dress codesWestern
Formal
Morning dress
White tie
Semi-formal
Black lounge suit
Black tie
Informal
Casual
Related
Clothing fetish
Cross-dressing
Fashion
Haute couture
Made-to-measure
Ready-to-wear
Laws
List of individual dresses
Terminology
 Clothing portal
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flip-flops&oldid=1149018821"