This article is about the baked pie. For the fried pie or pastry, see Pastie. For other uses, see Pasty (disambiguation).
Baked pie filled with meat or vegetables
PastyA Cornish pastyCourseMain, snackPlace of originUnited KingdomRegion or stateEngland (Cornwall, Devon)Main ingredientsA pastry case traditionally filled with beef skirt, potato, swede and onion.VariationsN/AFood energy(per serving)Varies kcal Cookbook: Pasty  Media: Pasty
A pasty (/ p sti/[1]) is a British baked pastry, a traditional variety of which is particularly associated with Cornwall, South West England, but has spread all over the British Isles.[2][3] It is made by placing an uncooked filling, typically meat and vegetables, in the middle of a flat shortcrust pastry circle, bringing the edges together in the middle, and crimping over the top to form a seal before baking.
The traditional Cornish pasty, which since 2011 has had Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status in Europe,[4] is filled with beef, sliced or diced potato, swede (also known as yellow turnip or rutabaga   referred to in Cornwall and other parts of the West Country as turnip) and onion, seasoned with salt and pepper, and baked. Today, the pasty is the food most associated with Cornwall. It is a traditional dish and accounts for 6% of the Cornish food economy.[citation needed] Pasties with many different fillings are made, and some shops specialise in selling pasties.
The origins of the pasty are unclear, though there are many references to them throughout historical documents and fiction. The pasty is now popular worldwide because of the spread of Cornish miners and sailors from across Cornwall, and variations can be found in Australia, Mexico, the United States, Ulster and elsewhere.
Pasties resemble turnovers from many other cuisines and cultures, including the bridie in Scotland, empanada in Spanish-speaking countries, pirog in Eastern Europe, samsa in Central Asia, curry puff in Southeast Asia, and shaobing in China.
History[edit]
 An old postcard from Cornwall showing a partly eaten pasty
Despite the modern pasty's strong association with Cornwall, its origins are unclear. The English word "pasty" derives from Medieval French (O.Fr. paste from V.Lat pasta[5]) for a pie, filled with venison, salmon or other meat, vegetables or cheese, baked without a dish.[6] Pasties have been mentioned in cookbooks throughout the ages. For example, the earliest version of Le Viandier (Old French) has been dated to around 1300 and contains several pasty recipes.[7] In 1393, Le Menagier de Paris contains recipes for past  with venison, veal, beef, or mutton.[8]
Other early references to pasties include a 13th-century charter that was granted by King John of England (in 1208) to the town of Great Yarmouth. The town was bound to send to the sheriffs of Norwich every year one hundred herrings, baked in twenty four pasties, which the sheriffs delivered to the lord of the manor of East Carlton who then conveyed them to the king.[9] Around the same time, 13th-century chronicler Matthew Paris wrote of the monks of St Albans Abbey "according to their custom, lived upon pasties of flesh-meat".[10] In 1465, 5,500 venison pasties were served at the installation feast of George Neville, archbishop of York and chancellor of England.[11] The earliest reference for a pasty in Devon or Cornwall can be found in Plymouth city records of 1509/10, which describe "Itm for the cooke is labor to make the pasties 10d".[12] They were even eaten by royalty, as a letter from a baker to Henry VIII's third wife Jane Seymour confirms: "...hope this pasty reaches you in better condition than the last one ..."[13] In his diaries written in the mid-17th century, Samuel Pepys makes several references to his consumption of pasties, for instance "dined at Sir W. Pen's ... on a damned venison pasty, that stunk like a devil",[14] but after this period the use of the word outside Devon and Cornwall declined.[15]
In contrast to its earlier place amongst the wealthy, during the 17th and 18th centuries, the pasty became popular with working people in Cornwall, where tin miners and others adopted it because of its unique shape, forming a complete meal that could be carried easily and eaten without cutlery.[16][17][18] In a mine, the pasty's dense, folded pastry could stay warm for several hours, and if it did get cold, it could easily be warmed on a shovel over a candle.[19]
Side-crimped pasties gave rise to the suggestion that the miner might have eaten the pasty holding the thick edge of pastry, which was later discarded, thereby ensuring that dirty fingers (possibly including traces of arsenic) did not touch the food or mouth.[20] However, many old photographs show that pasties were wrapped in bags made of paper or muslin and were eaten from end to end;[21] according to the earliest Cornish recipe book, published in 1929, this is "the true Cornish way" to eat a pasty.[22] Another theory suggests that pasties were marked at one end with an initial and then eaten from the other end so that if not finished in one sitting, they could easily be reclaimed by their owners.[19]
Cornish pasty[edit]
 Cornish pasties at Cornish bakehouse in Bath
The pasty is regarded as the national dish of Cornwall,[23][24][25] and an early reference is from a New Zealand newspaper:In Cornwall, there is a common practice among those cottagers who bake at home of making little pasties for the dinners of those who may be working at a distance in the fields. They will last the whole week, and are made of any kind of meat or fruit, rolled up in a paste made of flour and suet or lard. A couple of ounces of bacon and half a-pound of raw potatoes, both thinly sliced and slightly seasoned, will be found sufficient for the meal. The pasty can be carried in the man's pocket. The Nelson Examiner and New Zealand Chronicle, 10 June 1843[26] The term "Cornish pasty" has been in use since at least the early 1860s:The Cornish pasty, which so admirably comprises a dinner in itself meat, potatoes, and other good things well cooked and made up into so portable a form was a subject of much admiration, and reminded me of the old coaching days, when I secured a pasty at Bodmin in order to take it home to my cook, that it might be dissected and serve as a pattern for Cornish pasties in quite another part of the country. Henry H. Vivian, account in the journal of the Cambrian Archaeological Association, 1862[27]
Cornish pasties are very popular with the working classes in this neighbourhood, and have lately been successfully introduced into some parts of Devonshire. They are made of small pieces of beef, and thin slices of potato, highly peppered, and enclosed in wrappers of paste. James Orchard Halliwell, Rambles in Western Cornwall by the Footsteps of the Giants, 1861[28]
By the late 19th century, national cookery schools began to teach their pupils to create their own version of a "Cornish pasty" that was smaller and was to be eaten as an "economical savoury nibble for polite middle-class Victorians".[29][30][31]
On 20 July 2011, after a nine-year campaign by the Cornish Pasty Association (CPA)   the trade organisation of about 50 pasty makers based in Cornwall   the name "Cornish pasty" was awarded Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status by the European Commission.[32] According to the PGI status, a Cornish pasty should be shaped like a 'D' and crimped on one side, not on the top. Its ingredients should include beef, swede (called turnip in Cornwall),[33] potato and onion, with a light seasoning of salt and pepper, keeping a chunky texture. The pastry should be golden and retain its shape when cooked and cooled.[20] The PGI status also means that Cornish pasties must be prepared in Cornwall. They do not have to be baked in Cornwall,[34] nor do the ingredients have to come from the county, though the CPA notes that there are strong links between pasty production and local suppliers of the ingredients.[35] Packaging for pasties that conform to the requirements includes an authentication stamp, the use of which is policed by the CPA.[20]
Producers outside Cornwall objected to the PGI award, with one saying "[EU bureaucrats could] go to hell",[36] and another that it was "protectionism for some big pasty companies to churn out a pastiche of the real iconic product". Major UK supermarkets Asda and Morrisons both stated they would be affected by the change,[36] as did nationwide bakery chain Greggs, though Greggs was one of seven companies allowed to continue to use the name "Cornish pasty" during a three-year transitional period.[4]
Members of the CPA made about 87 million pasties in 2008, amounting to sales of  60 million (about 6% of the food economy of Cornwall).[37] In 2011, over 1,800 permanent staff were employed by members of the CPA and some 13,000 other jobs benefited from the trade.[38] Surveys by the South West tourism board have shown that one of the top three reasons people visit Cornwall is the food and that the Cornish pasty is the food most associated with Cornwall.[20]
Definition and ingredients[edit]
 A traditional Cornish pasty filled with steak and vegetables
Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on
 Pasties
The recipe for a Cornish pasty, as defined by its protected status, includes diced or minced beef, onion, potato and swede in rough chunks along with some "light peppery" seasoning.[20] The cut of beef used is generally skirt steak.[39] Swede is sometimes called turnip in Cornwall,[40] but the recipe requires use of actual swede, not turnip.[33] Pasty ingredients are usually seasoned with salt and pepper, depending on individual taste.[41] The use of carrot in a traditional Cornish pasty is frowned upon, though it does appear regularly in recipes.[39]
The type of pastry used is not defined, as long as it is golden in colour and will not crack during the cooking or cooling,[20] although modern pasties almost always use a shortcrust pastry.[41] There is a humorous belief that the pastry on a good pasty should be strong enough to withstand a drop down a mine shaft,[42] and indeed the barley flour that was usually used does make hard dense pastry.[43]
Variations[edit]
Although the officially protected Cornish pasty has a specific ingredients list, old Cornish cookery books show that pasties were generally made from whatever food was available.[44] Indeed, the earliest recorded pasty recipes include venison, not beef.[45] "Pasty" has always been a generic name for the shape and can contain a variety of fillings, including stilton, vegetarian and even chicken tikka.[44] Pork and apple pasties are readily available in shops throughout Cornwall and Devon, with the ingredients including an apple flavoured sauce, mixed together throughout the pasty, as well as sweet pasties with ingredients such as apple and fig or chocolate and banana, which are common in some areas of Cornwall.[18]
A part-savoury, part-sweet pasty (similar to the Bedfordshire clanger) was eaten by miners in the 19th century, in the copper mines on Parys Mountain, Anglesey. The technician who did the research and discovered the recipe claimed that the recipe was probably taken to Anglesey by Cornish miners travelling to the area looking for work.[46] No two-course pasties are commercially produced in Cornwall today,[47] but are usually the product of amateur cooks.[41] They are, however, commercially available in the British supermarket chain Morrisons (under the name 'Tin Miner Pasty').[48] Other traditional fillings have included a wide variety of locally available meats including pork, bacon, egg, rabbit, chicken, mackerel and sweet fillings such as dates, apples, jam and sweetened rice - leading to the oft-quoted joke that 'the Devil hisself was afeared to cross over into Cornwall for fear that ee'd end up in a pasty'.[49]
A pasty is known as a "tiddy oggy" when steak is replaced with an extra potato, "tiddy" meaning potato and "oggy" meaning pasty and was eaten when times were hard and expensive meat could not be afforded.[50] Another traditional meatless recipe is 'herby pie' with parsley, freshly gathered wild green herbs and chives, ramsons or leeks and a spoonful of clotted cream.[49]
Shape[edit]
Whilst the PGI rules state that a Cornish pasty must be a "D" shape, with crimping along the curve (i.e., side-crimped),[36] crimping is variable within both Devon and Cornwall, with some advocating a side crimp while others maintain that a top crimp is more authentic.[18][47][51] Some sources state that the difference between a Devon and Cornish pasty is that a Devon pasty has a top-crimp and is oval in shape, whereas the Cornish pasty is semicircular and side-crimped along the curve.[41] However, pasties with a top crimp have been made in Cornwall for generations,[52] yet those Cornish bakers who favour this method now find that they cannot legally call their pasties "Cornish".[53] Paul Hollywood, writing for BBC Food, stated that a traditional Cornish pasty should have about 20 crimps.[54]
Legal aspects[edit]
In 2001, a small American grocery and caterer in Gaylord, Michigan,  Albie's Food, Inc., was sent a cease and desist letter from another US-based food company, The J.M. Smucker Company, accusing Albie's of violating their intellectual property rights to the "sealed crustless sandwich". Instead of capitulating, Albie's took the case to federal court, noting in their filings a pocket sandwich with crimped edges and no crust was called a "pasty" and had been a popular dish in northern Michigan since the nineteenth century.[citation needed] The Federal Court determined that Albie's Foods did not infringe on J.M. Smucker's intellectual property rights and was allowed to continue.[55]
In other regions[edit]
 A "Cousin Jack's" pasty shop in Grass Valley, California
Migrating Devonian and Cornish miners and their families (colloquially known as Cousin Jacks and Cousin Jennies) helped to spread pasties into the rest of the world during the 19th century. As tin mining in Devon and Cornwall began to decline, miners took their expertise and traditions to new mining regions around the world.[56] As a result, pasties can be found in many regions, including:
Many parts of Australia, including the Yorke Peninsula, which has been the site of an annual Cornish festival (claimed to be the world's largest) since 1973. A clarification of the Protected Geographical Status ruling has confirmed that pasties made in Australia are still allowed to be called "Cornish Pasties".[57]
A Lancashire pasty is a traditional variant originating in Lancashire, especially West Lancashire that is similar to its Cornish counterpart but uses carrot instead of swede.
Pasties can be found in California in many historical Gold Rush towns, such as Grass Valley and Nevada City.
In some areas of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, pasties are a significant tourist attraction,[58] including an annual Pasty Fest in Calumet, Michigan, in mid August. Many ethnic groups adopted the pasty for use in the Copper Country copper mines; the Finnish immigrants to the region mistook it for the traditional piiraat and kuuko pastries.[59][60] The pasty has become strongly associated with all cultures in this area and in the Iron Range in northern Minnesota.[61]
Mineral Point, Wisconsin, was the site of the first mineral rush in the United States during the 1830s. After lead was discovered in Mineral Point, many of the early miners migrated from Cornwall to this southwestern Wisconsin area. Pasties can be found in Wisconsin's largest cities, Madison[62] and Milwaukee, as well as in the far northern region along the border with Michigan's Upper Peninsula.[63]
A similar local history about the arrival of the pasty in the area with an influx of Welsh and Cornish miners to the area's copper mines, and its preservation as a local delicacy, is found in Butte, Montana, "The Richest Hill on Earth".[64]
The anthracite coal regions of northeastern Pennsylvania, including the cities of Wilkes-Barre, Scranton, and Hazleton, had an influx of miners to the area in the 19th century and brought the pasty with them. In 1981, a Pennsylvania entrepreneur started marketing pasties under the brand name Mr. Pastie.
The Mexican state of Hidalgo and the twin silver mining cities of Pachuca and Real del Monte (Mineral del Monte) have notable Cornish influences from the Cornish miners who settled there, with pasties being considered typical local cuisine. In Mexican Spanish, they are referred to as pastes.[65] A pasty museum is located in Real del Monte.[66] The annual International Pasty Festival is held in Real del Monte each October.[67]
They are also popular in South Africa, New Zealand[68] and Ulster.
Pasties were modified with different spices and fillings in Jamaica, giving rise to the Jamaican patty.
Similar dishes are found in many countries such as empanadas in Spanish speaking countries, coulibiac in Eastern Europe, tourti re in Canada, b nh pat  s /p t  chaud in Vietnam, and shaobing in China.
Culture[edit]
When I view my Country o'er:
Of goodly things the plenteous store:
The Sea and Fish that swim therein
And underground the Copper and Tin:
Let all the World say what it can
Still I hold by the Cornishman,
And that one most especially
That first found out the Cornish Pastie.
The Merry Ballad of the Cornish Pasty   Robert Morton Nance, 1898[42]
Literature[edit]
Pasties have been mentioned in multiple literary works since the 12th century Arthurian romance Erec and Enide, written by Chr tien de Troyes, in which they are eaten by characters from the area now known as Cornwall.[19][45] There is a mention in Havelok the Dane, another romance written at the end of the thirteenth century;[69] in the 14th century Robin Hood tales; in Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales;[19] and in three plays by William Shakespeare.[70][71][72]
Pasties appear in many novels, used to draw parallels or represent Cornwall. In American Gods by Neil Gaiman, main character Shadow discovers pasties at Mabel's restaurant in the fictional town of Lakeside. The food is mentioned as being popularised in America by Cornishmen, as a parallel to how gods are "brought over" to America in the rest of the story. Another literature reference takes place in The Cat Who ... series by Lilian Jackson Braun. Pasties are referred to as a cultural part of the north country, and Jim Qwilleran often eats at The Nasty Pasty, a popular restaurant in fictional Moose County, famous for its tradition of being a mining settlement. Reference to pasties is made in Brian Jacques' popular Redwall series of novels, where it is a staple favourite on the menu to the mice and creatures of Redwall Abbey. Pumpkin pasties are among the foods enjoyed by the young wizards of J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter series. Pasties also appear in the Poldark series of historical novels of Cornwall, by Winston Graham, as well as the BBC television series adapted from these works.
Superstitions, rhymes and chants[edit]
In the tin mines of Devon and Cornwall, pasties were associated with "knockers", spirits said to create a knocking sound that was either supposed to indicate the location of rich veins of ore,[73] or to warn of an impending tunnel collapse. To encourage the good will of the knockers, miners would leave a small part of the pasty within the mine for them to eat.[74] Sailors and fisherman would likewise discard a crust to appease the spirits of dead mariners, though fishermen believed that it was bad luck to take a pasty aboard ship.[74]
A Cornish proverb, recounted in 1861, emphasised the great variety of ingredients that were used in pasties by saying that the devil would not come into Cornwall for fear of ending up as a filling in one.[75] A West Country schoolboy playground-rhyme current in the 1940s concerning the pasty went: Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, ate a pasty five feet long,Bit it once, Bit it twice, Oh my Lord, it's full of mice.[42] In 1959 the English singer-songwriter Cyril Tawney wrote a nostalgic song called "The Oggie Man". The song tells of the pasty-seller with his characteristic vendor's call who was always outside Plymouth's Devonport Naval Dockyard gates late at night when the sailors were returning, and his replacement by hot dog sellers after World War II.[76]
The word "oggy" in the internationally popular chant "Oggy Oggy Oggy, Oi Oi Oi" is thought to stem from Cornish dialect "hoggan", deriving from "hogen" the Cornish word for pasty. When the pasties were ready for eating, the bal maidens at the mines would supposedly shout down the shaft "Oggy Oggy Oggy" and the miners would reply "Oi Oi Oi".[77][dubious    discuss]
Giant pasties[edit]
As the 'national dish' of Cornwall, several oversized versions of the pasty have been created in the county. For example, a giant pasty is paraded from Polruan to Fowey through the streets during regatta week.[78] Similarly, a giant pasty is paraded around the ground of the Cornish Pirates rugby team on St Piran's Day before it is passed over the goal posts.[79]
Gallery[edit]
Pasties
An uncooked pasty prior to crimping
A two-course pasty
Pasties in the oven
A Mexican "paste"
Cornish Pirates players display a giant pasty
Pasty varieties (Penzance)
Pasty varieties (Australia)
See also[edit]
Cornwall portalFood portal
List of pastries
List of pies, tarts and flans
List of potato dishes
Bridie   Scottish equivalent
Calzone   an Italian turnover or folded pizza
Chicken patty
Cholera (food) - a Swiss savoury pastry similar to a cheese pasty
Chiburekki   National dish of Crimean Tatars, also popular in the Balkans, Caucasus, and Central Asia
Coventry Godcakes   originated in the city of Coventry, England
Empanada   Spanish equivalent
Fleischkuekle   German-Russian meat pie
Hot Pockets    well-known American microwavable convenience brand
International Pasty Festival   Held annually in Mexico
Kibinai - similar pasties (though smaller) in Lithuania
Knish   an Eastern European and Ashkenazi Jewish pastry
Meat pie (Australia and New Zealand)
Natchitoches meat pie - Louisiana meat pie
Panzerotti   smaller version of a calzone
Pirozhki   Russian equivalent
Samsa - Central Asian equivalent
Samosa   similar dish from South Asia
World Pasty Championships   held annually in Cornwall
References[edit]
^ Oxford Learner's Dictionaries, s.v. "pasty".
^ Bamford 2019-04-09T00:00:00+01:00, Vince. "Cornish pasty is UK's most recognised PGI product". British Baker. Retrieved 19 July 2021.
^ "History of the Cornish Pasty". Historic UK. Retrieved 19 July 2021.
^ a b "Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 717/2011 of 20 July 2011 entering a name in the register of protected designations of origin and protected geographical indications (Cornish Pasty (PGI))". Official Journal of the European Union. 54 (L 193): 13 14. 23 July 2011. ISSN 1725-2555. Retrieved 1 September 2011.
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". www.etymonline.com.
^ Cambridge Dictionaries Online. "Pasty". Retrieved 14 June 2012.
^ Scully, Terence, ed. (1988). "Pasty mentions". The Viandier of Taillevent: an edition of all extant manuscripts. University of Ottawa Press. p. 361. ISBN 0-7766-0174-1.
^ The Goodman of Paris. c. 1393. Archived from the original on 16 February 2009.
^ Nuttall, P Austin (1840). A classical and arch ological dictionary of the manners, customs, laws, institutions, arts, etc. of the celebrated nations of antiquity, and of the middle ages. London: Whittaker and Company. p. 555.
^ Brayley, Edward Wedlake (1808). The Beauties of England and Wales, Or Delineations, Topographical, Historical and Descriptive. Vol. VII (Hertford, Huntingdon and Kent). London: Thomas Maiden. p. 40.
^ Encyclop dia Britannica 1823 vol VIII. Printed for Archibald Constable and Company. 1823. p. 585.
^ "Devon invented the Cornish pasty". BBC. 13 November 2006. Retrieved 21 February 2019.
^ Shackle, Eric (21 April 2001). "A short history of ... Cornish pasties | Life and style | The Observer". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 14 August 2009.
^ "Thursday 1 August 1667". The Diary of Samuel Pepys. Phil Gyford. Retrieved 1 September 2011.
^ Laura Mason & Catherine Brown (2007). From Bath Chaps to Bara Brith: The Taste of South West Britain. Harper Press. pp. 32 33. ISBN 978-0-7524-4742-1.
^ Harris, J Henry (2009). Cornish Saints & Sinners. Wildside Press LLC. p. 195. ISBN 9781434453679.
^ Devlin, Kate (25 July 2008). "The History of the Cornish Pasty". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ a b c Grigson, Jane (1993) English Food. Penguin Books, p. 226
^ a b c d Miller, Luke; Westergren, Marc. "History of the Pasty". The Cultural Context of the Pasty". Michigan Technological University. Retrieved 13 March 2006.
^ a b c d e f "Cornish Pasty (PGI)" (PDF). DEFRA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2013. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Mansfield, Emma (2011). The Little Book of the Pasty. Cornwall: Lovely Little Books. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-906771-28-7.
^ Martin, Edith (1929). Cornish Recipes: Ancient and Modern. Truro: A. W. Jordan.
^ Robert A. Georges and Michael Owen Jones, Folkloristics: an introduction, Indiana University Press, 1995, pp. 127 128
^ J. W. Lambert, Cornwall, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1945, p. 38
^ The West Briton, Commercial pasty companies are failing our Cornish national dish, 23 September 2010
^ "Hints to Labourers". The Nelson Examiner and New Zealand Chronicle. Vol. II, no. 66. 10 June 1843. p. 264. Retrieved 12 April 2020.
^ Vivian, H. Hussey (1862). "Thursday August 28th. Evening Meeting". Archaeologia Cambrensis. London: J. Russell Smith. VIII. Third series: 329. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
^ Halliwell, James Orchard (1861). Rambles in Western Cornwall by the Footsteps of the Giants: With Notes on the Celtic Remains of the Land's End District and the Islands of Scilly. London: John Russell Smith. p. 40 40. Retrieved 11 September 2015. potatoe.
^ "Food historian says the Cornish did not invent the 'Cornish pasty'", The Cornishman, 29 August 2015 Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
^ Browne, Phyllis (4 October 1890). "Chats with Housekeepers - Cornish Pasties". The Newcastle Weekly Courant. Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
^ "Cornish pasties: Historian questions origin". BBC News. 2 September 2015.
^ Poirier, Agn s (23 February 2011). "Putting the Cornish back into pasties". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ a b Beckford, Martin (20 August 2010). "Turnip or swede? Brussels rules on ingredients of Cornish pasty". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 510/2006 'CORNISH PASTY' EC No: UK-PGI-005-0727-11.11.2008". Official Journal of the European Union. 14 July 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2015. "Assembly of the pasties in preparation for baking must take place in the designated area. The actual baking does not have to be done within the geographical area, it is possible to send the finished but unbaked and/or frozen pasties to bakers or other outlets outside the area where they can be baked in ovens for consumption."
^ "The Cornish Pasty Association's application for PGI". Cornishpastyassociation.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 14 August 2009.
^ a b c Wallop, Harry (22 February 2011). "Cornish pasty given EU protected status". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Savill, Richard (25 July 2008). "Cornish pasty in European battle for protected status". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2011.
^ "About the Cornish Pasty Association". Cornish Pasty Association. Archived from the original on 24 September 2011. Retrieved 3 September 2011.
^ a b Clarke, Felicity (23 February 2011). "Ultimate Cornish Pasty Recipe". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 March 2011.
^ "Make your own Genuine Cornish Pasty - Genuine Cornish Pasty". Cornish Pasty Association. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2021.
^ a b c d Ann Pringle Harris (7 February 1988). "Fare of the Country; In Cornwall, a Meal in a Crust". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 March 2005.
^ a b c Hall, Stephen (2001). The Cornish Pasty. Nettlecombe, UK: Agre Books. ISBN 0-9538000-4-0.
^ Pascoe, Ann (1988). Cornish Recipes Old and New. Penryn: Tor Mark Press. p. 1. ISBN 0-85025-304-7.
^ a b Trewin, Carol; Woolfitt, Adam (2005). Gourmet Cornwall. Alison Hodge Publishers. pp. 125 129. ISBN 0-906720-39-7.
^ a b "Who invented the Cornish pasty?". The Independent. London. 13 November 2006. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2017.
^ "UK | Wales | North West Wales | Sweet-savoury pastie back on menu". BBC News. 26 March 2006. Retrieved 21 September 2009.
^ a b Merrick, Hettie (1995). The Pasty Book. Penryn: Tor Mark Press.
^ Ryan, Keith. "The Cornish Pasty presents: The Morrisons Tin Miner Pasty". www.cornishpasties.org.uk. Retrieved 15 January 2018.
^ a b Cornish Recipes, Ancient & Modern, Edith Martin, Truro, 1929
^ Bareham, Lindsey (21 November 2008). "The perfect pasty?". The Times. Retrieved 11 March 2011.
^ "How to Crimp a Pasty - a Chunk of Devon". Retrieved 4 January 2022.
^ "Cornish Pasty". Here and Now Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 2 April 2011.
^ Middleton, Kimberley (27 February 2011). "This is where the great pasty revolt begins". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2011.
^ "Crimping the edge of a pasty". BBC Food. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
^ "Albie's Foods, Inc. v. Menusaver, Inc., 170 F. Supp. 2d 736 (E.D. Mich. 2001)". Justia Law. Retrieved 23 April 2018.
^ "The scale of 19th century migration from Cornwall and Devon". Retrieved 4 January 2022.
^ Pearlman, Jonathan (4 March 2011). "Australian Cornish pasty region concerned about protected ruling". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2011.
^ Silver, Kate (7 March 2014). "Prowling for pasties in the U.P." Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 27 May 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2014.
^ Ojakangas, B. (1988). The Great Scandinavian Baking Book. Boston: Little, Brown, p. 308.
^ "History of the Pasty". Houghton, Michigan: Michigan Technological University. Retrieved 21 December 2012.
^ Shortridge, Barbara (1998). The taste of American place. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 21 36. ISBN 0-8476-8507-1.
^ "The new Teddywedgers revives the Cornish pasty". 5 February 2015.
^ "Wisconsin Pasties Archives".
^ Johanek, Durrae (2009). Montana Curiosities: Quirky Characters, Roadside Oddities & Other Offbeat Stuff. Globe Pequot. pp. 119 120. ISBN 978-0-7627-4302-5.
^ "Pastes (Spanish)". Turismo del Gobierno del Estado de Hidalgo. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007. Retrieved 3 May 2008.
^ i (newspaper) 19 October 2015; Cornwall's pride wrapped up in pastry; Adam Lusher (pp. 26-27)
^ "Festival Internacional del Paste Real del Monte 2015", Donde Hay Feria (in Spanish), retrieved 11 August 2016
^ "Who ate all the pies", The Press, Christchurch, New Zealand, 5 September 2009
^ "Havelok the Dane". University of Rochester Robbins Library. Retrieved 1 September 2011. (line 645)
^ In The Merry Wives of Windsor Act 1 Scene 1, Page says Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a hot venison pasty to dinner: come gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.
^ In All's Well That Ends Well, Act IV Scene III, Parrolles states: I will confess to what I know without constraint: if ye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more.
^ In Titus Andronicus, Titus bakes Chiron and Demetrius's bodies into a pasty, and forces their mother to eat them.
^ Froud, Brian (2002). Faeries. Pavilion. ISBN 1-86205-558-0.
^ a b National Trust (2007). Gentleman's Relish: And Other Culinary Oddities. Anova Books. pp. 78 9. ISBN 978-1-905400-55-3.
^ Halliwell, James Orchard (1861). Rambles in Western Cornwall by the Footsteps of the Giants. London: John Russell Smith. pp. 40 41. In fact so universal are the contents of Cornish pasties, a local proverb states that the devil will not venture into Cornwall, for if the inhabitants caught him, they would be sure to put him into a pie
^ "Tawney in Depth   The background to some of Cyril's classic songs". cyriltawney.co.uk. Archived from the original on 26 August 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2011.
^ Gibson, Rory (26 October 2010). "Time for Aussies to lose 'bogan' chant?". The Courier-Mail. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 11 March 2011.
^ Jago, M (26 August 2008). "Regatta beats the odds". This is Cornwall. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 4 March 2011.
^ Richards, N (5 March 2010). "Pirates ready for big cup test". This is Cornwall. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 4 March 2011.
Further reading[edit]
The Cornish Pasty by Stephen Hall, Agre Books, Nettlecombe, UK, 2001 ISBN 0-9538000-4-0
The Pasty Book by Hettie Merrick, Tor Mark, Redruth, UK, 1995 ISBN 978-0-85025-347-4
Pasties by Lindsey Bareham, Mabecron Books, Plymouth, UK, 2008 ISBN 978-0-9532156-6-9
English Food by Jane Grigson (revised by Sophie Grigson), Penguin Books, London, 1993, ISBN 0-14-027324-7
External links[edit]
Look up pasty in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
The Cornish Pasty Association   the trade association of the Cornish pasty industry
The Compleat Pastypaedia   a web pasty resource
vteCulture of CornwallCornish: Gonisogeth KernowSymbols
Celtic cross
Cornish chough
Cornish heath
Cornish kilts and tartans
Jonathan Trelawny
Michael An Gof
Saint Piran
Saint Piran's Flag
Scillonian Cross
Festivals
AberFest
Allantide
Chewidden Thursday
Furry Dance
Golowan
Guldize
Kernewek Lowender
Montol Festival
Mummer's Day
Nickanan Night
Nos Lowen
Noze looan
'Obby 'Oss
Picrous Day
St Piran's Day
Tom Bawcock's Eve
Sports
Cornish hurling
Cornish pilot-gig racing
Cornish wrestling
Rugby union in Cornwall
Cuisine
Cloam oven
Clotted cream
Cornish cheeses
Cornish cream tea
Cornish fairings
Cornish Gilliflower
Hevva cake
Hog's pudding
Pasty
Saffron bun
Stargazy pie
Cornish Yarg
Arts
List of Cornish writers
Tristan and Iseult
Cornwall Film Festival
Tate St Ives
St Ives School
W. J. Burley
Charles Causley
Newlyn School
Barbara Hepworth
Daphne du Maurier
William Golding
Alan Kent
H. C. McNeile
Rosamunde Pilcher
Derek Tangye
D. M. Thomas
Minack Theatre
The Pirates of Penzance
Music
Cornish bagpipes
Brenda Wootton
Dalla
Fisherman's Friends
Crowns
Folk songs
"Bro Goth agan Tasow"
"Camborne Hill"
"Come, all ye jolly tinner boys"
"Delkiow Sivy"
"Hail to the Homeland"
"The Song of the Western Men"
Language
Anglo-Cornish
Cornish literature
Ordinalia
Beunans Meriasek
Bewnans Ke
Prayer Book Rebellion
Radyo an Gernewegva
Mythology
Beast of Bodmin
Blunderbore
Bucca
Cormoran
Cruel Coppinger
Jack the Giant Killer
Knocker
King Arthur
Lyonesse
Mermaid of Zennor
Owlman
Piskie
Spriggan
Organisations
Federation of Old Cornwall Societies
Gorsedh Kernow
Institute of Cornish Studies
Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society
Royal Cornwall Show
Royal Institution of Cornwall (Royal Cornwall Museum)
Movyans Skolyow Meythrin
Akademi Kernewek
Cornwall portal
vte
Pastries
list
Types
Chinese flaky pastry
Choux pastry
Filo
Flaky pastry
Hot water crust pastry
Pan dulce
Puff pastry
Shortcrust pastry
Choux pastry
Beignet
Bossche bol
Chouquette
Croquembouche
 clair
Goug re
Karpatka
Lady's navel
Moorkop
Nun's puffs
Paris-Brest
Pommes dauphine
Profiterole
Religieuse
St. Honor  cake
Puff pastry
Beef Wellington
Cheese straw
Croline
Croissants
Galette des rois
Jambon
Miguelitos
Mille-feuille
Palmier
Pastel de nata
Pithivier
Sausage roll
Steak and kidney pie
Strudel
Tarte conversation
Tarte Tatin
Torpedo dessert
Turnovers
Poppy seed
Chatti pathiri
Hamantash
Kifli
Kolach
K iukai
Me imurska gibanica
Nunt
Nut roll
Poppy seed roll
Prekmurska gibanica
Rugelach
St. Martin's croissant
Other
Alexandertorte
Allerheiligenstriezel
Apple strudel
Azerbaijani pakhlava
Bakewell pudding
Banket
Baklava
B nh p a
Banitsa
Bear claw
Belokranjska povitica
Bethm nnchen
Bierock
Bizcocho
Boyoz
Briouat
Bruttiboni
Bundevara
Chorley cake
Coca
Coulibiac
Coussin de Lyon
Cream horn
Cremeschnitte
Croline
Cronut
Cruller
Cuban pastry
Curry beef turnover
Curry puff
Dabby-Doughs
Dutch letter
Eccles cake
Empanada
Ensa mada
Fa gao
Fazuelos
Fig roll
Fish-shaped pastry
Fla 
Flia
Flies' graveyard
Franzbr tchen
G teau Basque
Gibanica
G zleme
Gundain
Gustavus Adolphus pastry
Haddekuche
Haitian patty
Hellimli
Heong Peng
Huff paste
Hwangnam-ppang
Jachnun
Jambon
Khachapuri
Knafeh
Kitchener bun
Klob sn k
Kniek chle
Kolach
Kro tule
K rt skal cs
Lattice
Leipziger Lerche
London Cheesecake
Lukhmi
Ma'amoul
Makroudh
Malsouka
Mandelkubb
Mantecadas
Marillenkn del
Mekitsa
Miguelitos
Milhojas
Milk-cream strudel
Mille-feuille
Moorkop
Mouna
Napoleonka
Nokul
 po maq
Pain   la grecque
Pan dulce
Pastel
Pastizz
Pastry heart
Pasty
P t  chaud
Peremech
Pirog
Pirozhki
Pl cint 
Pop-Tarts
Prekmurska gibanica
Profiterole
Punsch-roll
Punschkrapfen
Quesito
Remonce
Roti tissue
Roze koek
Runeberg torte
Runza
Sad cake
Schaumrolle
Schnecken
Schneeball
Schuxen
 biyet
Sou
Spritzkuchen
Streusel
Strudel
Stutenkerl
Sweetheart cake
Tahini roll
Toast'em Pop Ups
Toaster pastry
Toaster Strudel
Tompouce
Torpedo dessert
Tortell
Tortita negra
Tu
Turnover
U tipci
Vatrushka
Veka
Vetkoek
Yurla
Zeeuwse bolus
 emlovka
By countryChinese
Chasan
Jiucai hezi
Masan
Sachima
Filipino
Biscocho
Buko pie
Caycay
Daral (food)
Dinamita
Egg pie
Empanada (Pastil)
Ensa mada
Hopia
Lumpia
Napoleones
Ngohiong
Ohaldre
Otap
Piaya
Pilipit
Shakoy
Turon
French
Angel wings
Beignet
Bichon au citron
Biscuit rose de Reims
Broy  poitevin
Canel 
Chouquette
Choux pastry
Conversation tart
Croissant
Croquembouche
Croustade
 clair
Financier
Goug re
J suite
Ladyfinger
Macaron
Madeleine
Nun's puffs
Pain au chocolat
Pain aux raisins
Palmier
Paris Brest
Puits d'amour
Religieuse
St. Honor  cake
Tuile
Viennoiserie
Vol-au-vent
Greek
Amygdalopita
Bougatsa
Fanouropita
Filo
Galaktoboureko
Karydopita
Koulourakia
Moustalevria
Pastafrola
Indonesian
Bahulu
Bakpia
Bakpia pathok
Curry puff
Makmur
Milk pie
Pie tee
Roti john
Roti tissue
Iranian
Gosh-e fil
Kolompeh
Koloocheh
Komaj sehen
Qottab
Sohan asali
Italian
Baicoli
Biscotti
Biscotti Regina
Bocconotto
Bombolone
Cannoli
Ciarduna
Cornetto
Crocetta of Caltanissetta
Frittole
Ladyfinger
Pandoro
Pasticciotto
Pevarini
Pignolata
Pignolo
Pizzelle
Sfogliatella
Struffoli
Torta caprese
Zeppole
Zippuli
Romanian
Cornule e
Gogo i
Papana i
Pl cint 
Sfin i ori
Scandinavian
Butterkaka
Danish pastry
Joulutorttu
Klen t
Kringle
Rosettes
Semla
Swiss
Birnbrot
Blue cake
B ndner Nusstorte
Carac
Cholera
Schenkele
Spanisch Br tli
Taiwanese
Pineapple cake
Naiyou subing
Suncake
Turkish
B lb l yuvas 
G lla 
Kalburabast 
Lady's navel
Qurabiya
Saray helva
 ekerpare
S tl  Nuriye
Torpedo dessert
Related topics
Confectionery
Crust
Custard
Doughnut
Konditorei
Kuo Yuan Ye Museum of Cake and Pastry
List of cakes
List of choux pastry dishes
List of desserts
List of fried dough foods
List of pies, tarts and flans
List of poppy seed pastries and dishes
Pastry bag
Pastry blender
Pastry brush
Pastry chef
Pastry fork
P tisserie
World Pastry Cup
 Food portal
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 WikiProject
vte British piesSweet
Apple pie
Bakewell tart
Banoffee pie
Bedfordshire clanger
Blackberry pie
Black bun
Cumberland rum nicky
Custard tart
Manchester tart
Mince pie
Rhubarb pie
Treacle tart
Savoury
Bacon and egg pie
Bedfordshire clanger
Bridie
Butter pie
Cheese and onion pie
Chicken and mushroom pie
Corned beef pie
Cornish pasty
Cottage pie
Cumberland pie
Curry pie
Devizes pie
Fish pie
Game pie
Homity pie
Killie pie
Lamprey pie
Meat and potato pie
Melton Mowbray pork pie
Pork pie
Scotch pie
Shepherd's pie
Squab pie
Stargazy pie
Steak pie
Steak and kidney pie
Steak and oyster pie
Woolton pie
Manufacturers
Clark's Pies
Dickinson & Morris
Fray Bentos
Ginsters
Higgidy
Holland's Pies
Mr Kipling
Peter's
Pieminister
Poole's
Pork Farms
Pukka Pies
Shire Foods
Square Pie
Wall's
Wrights Pies
vteEnglish cuisineRoman timesDishes
Sausages
Middle Agesto 15th centuryExemplars
Utilis Coquinario (c. 1300)
The Forme of Cury (c. 1390)
Dishes
Apple pie
Bacon
Banbury cake
Cheesecake
Custard
Game pie
Gingerbread
Kippers
Mince pie
Mortis
Pasty
Pease pudding
Pie
Pottage
16th centuryExemplars
Richard Pynson (The Boke of Cokery, 1500)
Thomas Dawson (The Good Huswifes Jewell, 1585)
Dishes
Black pudding
Fruit fool
Pancake
Scones
Syllabub
Trifle (without jelly)
17th centuryExemplars
Elinor Fettiplace (Receipt Book, 1604)
Gervase Markham (The English Huswife, 1615)
Robert May (The Accomplisht Cook, 1660)
Hannah Woolley (The Queen-like Closet or Rich Cabinet 1670)
Kenelm Digby (The Closet Opened 1699)
Dishes
Battalia pie
Currant bun
Queen of Puddings
Sponge cake
Sussex pond pudding
Sweet and sour
Tea
18th centuryExemplars
Mary Kettilby (A Collection of above Three Hundred Receipts in Cookery, Physick and Surgery 1714)
Mary Eales (Mrs Mary Eales's Receipts 1718)
John Nott (The Cooks and Confectioners Dictionary, 1723)
Eliza Smith (The Compleat Housewife 1727)
Hannah Glasse (The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy 1747)
Martha Bradley (The British Housewife 1758)
Elizabeth Raffald (The Experienced English Housekeeper 1769)
Richard Briggs (The English Art of Cookery 1788)
William Augustus Henderson (The Housekeeper's Instructor 1791)
Dishes
Bread and butter pudding
Christmas pudding
Chutney
Curry
Cottage or Shepherd's pie
Cumberland rum nicky
Eccles cake
Jellied eels
Jugged hare
Ketchup
Marmalade
Parkin
Piccalilli
Pork pie
Roast beef
Sandwich
Scouse
Suet pudding
Toad in the hole
Trifle (with jelly)
Welsh rabbit
Yorkshire pudding
19th centuryExemplars
Maria Rundell (A New System of Domestic Cookery 1806)
Eliza Acton (Modern Cookery for Private Families 1845)
Charles Elm  Francatelli (The Modern Cook 1846)
Isabella Beeton (Mrs. Beeton's Book of Household Management 1861)
Dishes
Bubble and squeak
Cauliflower cheese
Cobbler
Devilled kidneys
Faggots
Fish and chips
Full English breakfast
HP Sauce
Ice cream cone
Lancashire hotpot
Potted shrimps
Sausage roll
Steak and kidney pudding
Battenberg cake
Eton mess
Eve's pudding
Jam roly-poly
Lardy cake
Madeira cake
Summer pudding
Windsor soup
Worcestershire sauce
20th centuryExemplars
Florence Petty
Elizabeth David (A Book of Mediterranean Food 1950)
Constance Spry
Fanny Cradock
Marguerite Patten
Jane Grigson
Delia Smith
Rick Stein
Nigel Slater
Keith Floyd
Marco Pierre White
Nigella Lawson
Jamie Oliver
Fergus Henderson
Gordon Ramsay
Gary Rhodes
Mary Berry
Dishes
Bakewell tart
Beef Wellington
Carrot cake
Chicken tikka masala
Coronation chicken
Crumble
Knickerbocker glory
Ploughman's lunch
Salad cream
Sticky toffee pudding
21st centuryExemplars
Michel Roux Jr. (Le Gavroche)
Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall (River Cottage)
Antony Worrall Thompson
Heston Blumenthal (The Fat Duck)
Clarissa Dickson Wright (A History of English Food 2011)
Rachel Khoo
Dishes
Platinum Pudding
Related
Food in England (1954)
List of English dishes
List of English cheeses
List of savoury puddings
List of sweet puddings
Rationing in the United Kingdom
vteStreet foodStreet foods
Acaraj 
Aloo chaat
Aloo tikki
Anticucho
Apam balik
Arancini
Arepa
Asinan
Bagel
Bakpau
Bakso
Bal k ekmek
Banana cue
B nh h i
B nh m  sandwich
B nh x o
Batagor
Beef Pares
Beguni
Belgian waffle
Beondegi
Bhel puri
Binaki
Binatog
Biryani
Bourekas
Bratwurst
Brochette
Bublik
Bubur ayam
Bun cha
Bungeo-ppang
Bunny chow
Burrito
Breakfast burrito
Calzone
Calamares
Camote cue
Cart noodle
Chaat
Chebureki
Chiko Roll
Chimichanga
Chinese bhel
Cockle (bivalve)
C ng y u b ng
Covrigi
Coxinha
Cr pe
Crescia
Currywurst
Dahi puri
Dak-kkochi
Dim sum
Donkey burger
Dosa
Doubles
Douhua
Empanada
Enchilada
Esquites
Falafel
Farinata
Fish ball
Focaccia
French fries
French tacos
Fried chicken (Korean, Taiwanese)
Navajo frybread
Galette-saucisse
Ginanggang
Gorengan
Ghugni
Gukhwappang
Gyeranppang
Gyro
Haleem
Hot dog
Inihaw
Isaw
Idli
Jhalmuri
Jiaozi
Kaassouffl 
Kachori
Kapsalon
Kati roll
Kebab
Chapli kebab
Doner kebab
Kyinkyinga
Shami kebab
List of kebabs
Kerak telor
Ketoprak
Khachapuri
Khanom Tokyo
Kikiam
Knish
Kwek Kwek
Laksa
L ngos
Luchi
Malatang
Mami
Maruya
Masala puri
Meat pie
Mie ayam
Murtabak
Naan
Nem chua r n
Obwarzanek krakowski
Pad thai
Pajeon
Pakora
Paneer tikka
Pani c  meusa
Panini
Panipuri
Panzerotti
Papri chaat
Paratha
Pasty
Pav bhaji
Pempek
Pepito
Peremech
Pho
Piadina
Picarones
Pilaf
Pinasugbo
Pirozhki
Pizza al taglio / Pizza by the slice
Pizzetta
Pl cint 
Pljeskavica
Poha
Poutine
Pretzel
Punugulu
Puri
Quail eggs
Quesadilla
Rat-on-a-stick
Ra nji i
Rogan josh
Rojak
Roti
Roti bakar
Roti john
Roujiamo
Rumali roti
Rustico
Sabich
Samosa
Sandwich
Sardenara
Satay
Scaccia
Seblak
Sevpuri
Sfenj
Shao Kao
Shashlik
Shawarma
Sicilian pizza
Siomay
Soto
Souvlaki
Stigghiola
Stromboli
Taco
Korean taco
Tahri
Tahu gejrot
Tahu sumedang
Takoyaki
Tamale
Tandoori chicken
Tangbao
Taquito
Tauge goreng
Tornado potato
Turon
U' pastizz 'rtunnar
Vada
Vada pav
Vastedda
Vietnamese noodles
X i
Yakitori
Zapiekanka
By location
Hong Kong
India
Chennai
Mumbai
Indonesia
Mexico
Philippines
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Mobile catering
Field kitchen
Food booth
Food cart
Food truck
Food truck rally
Hot dog cart
Hot dog stand
Ice cream van
Sausage wagon
Taco stand
Yatai
Pojangmacha
W rstelstand
Lists
List of street foods
List of food trucks
See also
Food street
 Food portal
 Category: Street food
Authority control: National 
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pasty&oldid=1148219801"