American actor (1907 1979)
For other uses, see John Wayne (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with John Wain.
John WayneWayne, c. 1965BornMarion Robert Morrison(1907-05-26)May 26, 1907Winterset, Iowa, U.S.DiedJune 11, 1979(1979-06-11) (aged 72)Los Angeles, CaliforniaResting placePacific View Memorial Park, Newport Beach, California33 36 34 N 117 51 12 W  /  33.60953 N 117.85336 W  / 33.60953; -117.85336Other namesMarion Michael Morrison'Duke' WayneAlma materUniversity of Southern CaliforniaOccupationsActorproducerYears active1926 1976Political partyRepublicanSpouse(s)Josephine Saenz
   (m. 1933; div. 1945) 
Esperanza Baur
   (m. 1946; div. 1954) 
Pilar Pallete  (m. 1954) Children7, including  Michael, Patrick, and EthanWebsiteOfficial websiteSignature
Marion Robert Morrison[1][a] (May 26, 1907   June 11, 1979), professionally known as John Wayne and nicknamed The Duke or Duke Wayne, was an American actor who became a popular icon through his starring roles in films which were produced during Hollywood's Golden Age, especially through his starring roles in Western and war movies. His career flourished from the silent era of the 1920s through the American New Wave, as he appeared in a total of 179 film and television productions. He was among the top box-office draws for three decades,[3][4] and he appeared with many other important Hollywood stars of his era. In 1999, the American Film Institute selected Wayne as one of the greatest male stars of classic American cinema.[5]
Wayne was born in Winterset, Iowa, but he grew up in Southern California. After losing his football scholarship to the University of Southern California from a bodysurfing accident,[6] he began working for the Fox Film Corporation. He appeared mostly in small parts, but his first leading role came in Raoul Walsh's Western The Big Trail (1930), an early widescreen film epic that was a box-office failure. He played leading roles in numerous B movies during the 1930s, most of them also Westerns, without becoming a major name. John Ford's Stagecoach (1939) made Wayne a mainstream star, and he starred in 142 motion pictures altogether. According to one biographer, "John Wayne personified for millions the nation's frontier heritage."[7]
Wayne's other roles in Westerns include a cattleman driving his herd on the Chisholm Trail in Red River (1948), a Civil War veteran whose niece is abducted by a tribe of Comanches in The Searchers (1956), a troubled rancher competing with a lawyer (James Stewart) for a woman's hand in The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (1962), and a cantankerous one-eyed marshal in True Grit (1969), for which he received the Academy Award for Best Actor. He is also remembered for his roles in The Quiet Man (1952) with Maureen O'Hara, Rio Bravo (1959) with Dean Martin, and The Longest Day (1962). In his final screen performance, he starred as an aging gunfighter battling cancer in The Shootist (1976). He made his last public appearance at the Academy Awards ceremony on April 9, 1979,[8][9] and died of stomach cancer two months later.[10] In 1980, he was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor of the United States.[11][12]
Early life[edit]
 The house in Winterset, Iowa, where Wayne was born in 1907
Wayne was born Marion Robert Morrison on May 26, 1907, at 224 South Second Street in Winterset, Iowa.[13] The local paper, Winterset Madisonian, reported on page 4 of the edition of May 30, 1907, that Wayne weighed 13 lb (around 6 kg) at birth. Wayne claimed his middle name was soon changed from Robert to Michael when his parents decided to name their next son Robert, but extensive research has found no such legal change, although it might have been changed informally or the documention may have been lost. Wayne's legal name apparently remained Marion Robert Morrison his entire life[14][15] although to this day his original name is almost always referred to as Marion Michael Morrison. 
Wayne's father, Clyde Leonard Morrison (1884 1937), was the son of American Civil War veteran Marion Mitchell Morrison (1845 1915). Wayne's mother, the former Mary "Molly" Alberta Brown (1885 1970), was from Lancaster County, Nebraska. Wayne had Scottish,  Scotch-Irish, English, and Irish ancestry.[16] His great-great-grandfather Robert Morrison (b. 1782) left County Antrim, Ireland, with his mother, arriving in New York in 1799 and eventually settling in Adams County, Ohio. The Morrisons were originally from the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland.[17] He was raised Presbyterian.[18]
Wayne's family moved to Palmdale, California, and then in 1916 to Glendale at 404 Isabel Street, where his father worked as a pharmacist. He attended Glendale Union High School, where he performed well in both sports and academics. Wayne was part of his high school's football team and its debating team. He was also the president of the Latin Society and contributed to the school's newspaper sports column.[19]
A local fireman at the station on his route to school in Glendale started calling him "Little Duke" because he never went anywhere without his huge Airedale Terrier, Duke.[20][21] He preferred "Duke" to "Marion", and the nickname stuck. Wayne attended Wilson Middle School in Glendale. As a teen, he worked in an ice-cream shop for a man who shod horses for Hollywood studios. He was also active as a member of the Order of DeMolay. He played football for the 1924 league champion Glendale High School team.[22]
Wayne applied to the U.S. Naval Academy, but was not accepted due to poor grades. Instead, he attended the University of Southern California (USC), majoring in pre-law. He was a member of the Trojan Knights and Sigma Chi fraternities.[23]: 30  Wayne, who stood 6 feet 4+1 2 inches (1.94 metres) tall, also played on the USC football team under coach Howard Jones. A broken collarbone injury curtailed his athletic career; Wayne later noted that he was too terrified of Jones' reaction to reveal the actual cause of his injury, a bodysurfing accident.[24] He lost his athletic scholarship, and without funds, had to leave the university.[25][26]
Career[edit]
Early works and first lead role[edit]
As a favor to coach Jones, who had given silent Western film star Tom Mix tickets to USC games, director John Ford and Mix hired Wayne as a prop boy and extra.[27][28] Wayne later credited his walk, talk, and persona to his acquaintance with Wyatt Earp, who was good friends with Tom Mix.[27] Wayne soon moved to bit parts, establishing a longtime friendship with the director who provided most of those roles, John Ford. Early in this period, he had a minor, uncredited role as a guard in the 1926 film Bardelys the Magnificent. Wayne also appeared with his USC teammates playing football in Brown of Harvard (1926), The Dropkick (1927), and Salute (1929) and Columbia's Maker of Men (filmed in 1930, released in 1931).[29] With Marguerite Churchill in the widescreen The Big Trail (1930); John Wayne's first role as a leading manWhile working for Fox Film Corporation in bit roles, Wayne was given on-screen credit as "Duke Morrison" only once, in Words and Music (1929). Director Raoul Walsh saw him moving studio furniture while working as a prop boy and cast him in his first starring role in The Big Trail (1930). For his screen name, Walsh suggested "Anthony Wayne", after Revolutionary War General "Mad" Anthony Wayne. Fox Studios chief Winfield Sheehan rejected it as sounding "too Italian". Walsh then suggested "John Wayne". Sheehan agreed, and the name was set. Wayne was not even present for the discussion.[30] His pay was raised to $105 a week.[31]
The Big Trail was to be the first big-budget outdoor spectacle of the sound era, made at a then-staggering cost over $2 million (over $32.8 million equivalent in 2021),[32] using hundreds of extras and wide vistas of the American Southwest, still largely unpopulated at the time. To take advantage of the breathtaking scenery, it was filmed in two versions, a standard 35 mm version and another in the new 70 mm Grandeur film process, using an innovative camera and lenses. Many in the audience who saw it in Grandeur stood and cheered, but only a handful of theaters were equipped to show the film in its widescreen process, and the effort was largely wasted at the time. The film was considered a huge box-office flop at the time, but came to be highly regarded by modern critics.[33]
Subsequent films, breakthrough, and war years[edit]
 The Big Trail (1930) lobby card
 Lobby card for Girls Demand Excitement (1931)
 With Evalyn Knapp and Natalie Kingston in His Private Secretary (1933)
 Wayne as "Singin' Sandy" Saunders in Riders of Destiny (1933)
 The Star Packer (1934)
 With Jean Rogers and Ward Bond in Conflict (1936)
 With Marsha Hunt in Born to the West (1937)
 With Joan Blondell in Lady for a Night (1942)
After the commercial failure of The Big Trail, Wayne was relegated to small roles in A pictures, including Columbia's The Deceiver (1931), in which he played a corpse. He appeared in the serial The Three Musketeers (1933), an updated version of the Alexandre Dumas novel in which the protagonists were soldiers in the French Foreign Legion in then-contemporary North Africa. He played the lead, with his name over the title, in many low-budget Poverty Row Westerns, mostly at Monogram Pictures and serials for Mascot Pictures Corporation. By Wayne's own estimation, he appeared in about 80 of these horse operas from 1930 to 1939.[34] In Riders of Destiny (1933), he became one of the first singing cowboys of film, albeit via dubbing.[35] Wayne also appeared in some of the Three Mesquiteers Westerns, whose title was a play on the Dumas classic. He was mentored by stuntmen in riding and other Western skills.[29] Stuntman Yakima Canutt and Wayne developed and perfected stunts and onscreen fisticuffs techniques that are still in use.[36] One of the main innovations with which Wayne is credited in these early Poverty Row Westerns is allowing the good guys to fight as convincingly as the bad guys, by not always making them fight clean. Wayne claimed, "Before I came along, it was standard practice that the hero must always fight clean. The heavy was allowed to hit the hero in the head with a chair or throw a kerosene lamp at him or kick him in the stomach, but the hero could only knock the villain down politely and then wait until he rose. I changed all that. I threw chairs and lamps. I fought hard and I fought dirty. I fought to win."[37]
Wayne's second breakthrough role came with John Ford's Stagecoach (1939). Because of Wayne's B-movie status and track record in low-budget Westerns throughout the 1930s, Ford had difficulty getting financing for what was to be an A-budget film. After rejection by all the major studios, Ford struck a deal with independent producer Walter Wanger in which Claire Trevor a much bigger star at the time received top billing. Stagecoach was a huge critical and financial success, and Wayne became a mainstream star. Cast member Louise Platt credited Ford as saying at the time that Wayne would become the biggest star ever because of his appeal as the archetypal "everyman".[38]
America's entry into World War II resulted in a deluge of support for the war effort from all sectors of society, and Hollywood was no exception. Wayne was exempted from service due to his age (34 at the time of Pearl Harbor) and family status (classified as 3-A   family deferment). Wayne repeatedly wrote to John Ford saying he wanted to enlist, on one occasion inquiring whether he could get into Ford's military unit.[39] Wayne did not attempt to prevent his reclassification as 1-A (draft eligible), but Republic Studios was emphatically resistant to losing him, since he was their only A-list actor under contract. Herbert J. Yates, president of Republic, threatened Wayne with a lawsuit if he walked away from his contract,[40] and Republic Pictures intervened in the Selective Service process, requesting Wayne's further deferment.[41]
U.S. National Archives records indicate that Wayne, in fact, did make an application[42] to serve in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), precursor to the modern CIA, but his bid was ultimately unsuccessful. Wayne toured U.S. bases and hospitals in the South Pacific for three months in 1943 and 1944,[43] with the USO.[44][45][46] During this trip, he carried out a request from William J. Donovan, head of the OSS, to assess whether General Douglas MacArthur, commander of the South West Pacific Area, or his staff were hindering the work of the OSS.[21]: 88  Donovan later issued Wayne an OSS Certificate of Service to memorialize Wayne's contribution to the OSS mission.[21]: 88 [47]
By many accounts, his failure to serve in the military later became the most painful part of his life.[39] His widow later suggested that his patriotism in later decades sprang from guilt, writing: "He would become a 'superpatriot' for the rest of his life trying to atone for staying home."[48]
Wayne's first color film was Shepherd of the Hills (1941), in which he co-starred with his longtime friend Harry Carey. The following year, he appeared in his only film directed by Cecil B. DeMille, the Technicolor epic Reap the Wild Wind (1942), in which he co-starred with Ray Milland and Paulette Goddard; it was one of the rare times he played a character with questionable values.
Like most Hollywood stars of his era, Wayne appeared as a guest on radio programs, such as: The Hedda Hopper Show and The Louella Parsons Show. He made a number of appearances in dramatic roles, mainly recreations for radio of his own film roles, on such programs as Screen Directors Playhouse and Lux Radio Theatre. For six months in 1942, Wayne starred in his own radio adventure series, Three Sheets to the Wind, produced by film director Tay Garnett. In the series, an international spy/detective show, Wayne played Dan O'Brien, a detective who used alcoholism as a mask for his investigatory endeavors. The show was intended by Garnett to be a pilot of sorts for a film version, though the motion picture never came to fruition. No episodes of the series featuring Wayne seem to have survived, though a demonstration episode with Brian Donlevy in the leading role does exist. Wayne, not Donlevy, played the role throughout the series' run on NBC.[49] Wayne (right) acting in a short clip from Angel and the Badman (1947) (click to play)
Director Robert Rossen offered the starring role in All the King's Men (1949) to Wayne, but he refused, believing the script to be un-American in many ways.[50] Broderick Crawford, who was eventually cast in the role, won the 1949 Oscar for best male actor, ironically beating out Wayne, who had been nominated for Sands of Iwo Jima (1949).
1950s[edit]
He lost the leading role of Jimmy Ringo in The Gunfighter (1950) to Gregory Peck due to his refusal to work for Columbia Pictures because its chief, Harry Cohn, had mistreated him years before when he was a young contract player. Cohn had bought the project for Wayne, but Wayne's grudge was too deep, and Cohn sold the script to Twentieth Century Fox, which cast Peck in the role Wayne badly wanted, but for which he refused to bend.[50][51]
Batjac, the production company co-founded by Wayne in 1952, was named after the fictional shipping company Batjak in Wake of the Red Witch (1948), a film based on the novel by Garland Roark. (A spelling error by Wayne's secretary was allowed to stand, accounting for the variation.)[50] Batjac (and its predecessor, Wayne-Fellows Productions) was the arm through which Wayne produced many films for himself and other stars. Its best-known non-Wayne productions were Seven Men From Now (1956), which started the classic collaboration between director Budd Boetticher and star Randolph Scott, and Gun the Man Down (1956) with contract player James Arness as an outlaw.
One of Wayne's most popular roles was in The High and the Mighty (1954), directed by William Wellman, and based on a novel by Ernest K. Gann. His portrayal of a heroic copilot won widespread acclaim. Wayne also portrayed aviators in Flying Tigers (1942), Flying Leathernecks (1951), Island in the Sky (1953), The Wings of Eagles (1957), and Jet Pilot (1957).
He appeared in nearly two dozen of John Ford's films over 20 years, including She Wore a Yellow Ribbon (1949), The Quiet Man (1952), The Wings of Eagles (1957). The first movie in which he called someone "Pilgrim", Ford's The Searchers (1956), is often considered to contain Wayne's finest and most complex performance.[52]
 Wayne with Indonesian stars, from left to right: Turino Djunaedy, Indriati Iskak, Baby Huwae, Wayne, and Mimi Mariani.
On May 14, 1958, Hal Kanter's I Married a Woman starring George Gobel and Diana Dors had its Los Angeles opening. In it, Wayne had a cameo as himself.[53] On October 2, John Huston's The Barbarian and the Geisha, in which Wayne played the lead and clashed with his director all the way, had its New York opening.[54]
Howard Hawks's Rio Bravo premiered on March 18, 1959. In it, Wayne plays the lead with a supporting cast including Dean Martin, Ricky Nelson, Angie Dickinson, Walter Brennan and Ward Bond.[55] John Ford's The Horse Soldiers had its world premiere in Shreveport, Louisiana on June 18. Set during the Civil War, Wayne shares the lead with William Holden.[56]
Wayne notoriously portrayed Genghis Khan in The Conqueror (1956), which was panned by critics.
1960s[edit]
 Wayne and James Stewart in The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (1962)
In 1960, Wayne directed and produced The Alamo portraying Davy Crockett, with Richard Widmark as Jim Bowie. Wayne was nominated for an Oscar as the producer in the Best Picture category.[57] That year Wayne also played the lead in Henry Hathaway's North to Alaska also starring Stewart Granger and Ernie Kovacs.[58] In 1961, Wayne shared the lead with Stuart Whitman in Michael Curtiz's The Comancheros.[59]
On May 23, 1962, Wayne starred in John Ford's The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance with James Stewart.[60] May 29 marked the premiere of Howard Hawks's Hatari!, shot on location in Africa with Wayne playing the lead capturing wild animals from the beds of trucks; all the scenes with animals in the film are real.[61] On October 4, The Longest Day started its theatrical run, with Wayne memorably acting with an ensemble cast.[62] Although the other top-level actors in the film accepted a token payment of only $10,000 each to play their roles, making the all-star cast feasible for the budget, Wayne was paid a quarter of a million dollars due to an earlier dispute with producer Darryl F. Zanuck. During this time, the cast of the television drama, Combat!, were preparing for the inaugural season. The principal cast (including Vic Morrow) were to go through a week of basic training at the Army's Infantry Training Center at Fort Ord in northern California.[63] Morrow noted that the instructors who worked with the cast at Fort Ord had one common request: not to act like John Wayne. "Poor John," Morrow told a reporter. "I wonder if he knows he's almost a dirty word in the Army."[63]
On February 20, 1963, Wayne acted in a segment of How the West Was Won[64] directed by John Ford. On June 12, Wayne played the lead in his final John Ford film, Donovan's Reef, co-starring Lee Marvin.[65] On November 13, another film starring Wayne premiered, Andrew V. McLaglen's McLintock!,  once again opposite Maureen O'Hara.[66]
In 1964, Wayne played the leading role in Henry Hathaway's Circus World with Claudia Cardinale and Rita Hayworth.[67]
On February 15, 1965, Wayne played the brief cameo role of a centurion in George Stevens's The Greatest Story Ever Told.[68] On April 6, he shared the screen with Kirk Douglas and Patricia Neal in Otto Preminger's In Harm's Way.[69] On June 13, he acted in Henry Hathaway's The Sons of Katie Elder with Dean Martin.[70]
In 1966, Wayne appeared in a cameo role for Melville Shavelson's Cast a Giant Shadow starring Kirk Douglas.[71]
On May 24, 1967, Wayne played the lead in Burt Kennedy's The War Wagon with Kirk Douglas as the second lead.[72] His second movie that year, Howard Hawks's El Dorado, a highly successful partial remake of Rio Bravo with Robert Mitchum playing Dean Martin's original role, premiered on June 7.[73]
In 1968, Wayne co-directed with Ray Kellogg The Green Berets.[74] the only major film made during the Vietnam War in support of the war.[25] Wayne wanted to make this movie because at that time Hollywood had little interest in making movies about the Vietnam War.[75] During the filming of The Green Berets, the Degar or Montagnard people of Vietnam's Central Highlands, fierce fighters against communism, bestowed on Wayne a brass bracelet that he wore in the film and all subsequent films.[50] Also that year, Wayne played the lead in Andrew V. McLaglen's Hellfighters, a film about the crews who put out oil rig fires.[76] Katharine Ross played a supporting role.
On June 13, 1969, Henry Hathaway's True Grit premiered. For his role as Rooster Cogburn, Wayne won the Best Actor Oscar at the Academy Awards.[77] In November of that year another film starring Wayne was released, Andrew V. McLaglen's The Undefeated with Rock Hudson.[78]
1970s: later career[edit]
 Wayne and Richard Boone at Big Jake screening, 1971
On June 24, 1970, Andrew V. McLaglen's Chisum started to play in cinemas. Wayne took the role of the owner of a cattle ranch, who finds out that a businessman is trying to own neighboring land illegally.[79] On September 16, Howard Hawks' Rio Lobo premiered. Wayne played Col. Cord McNally, who confronts Confederate soldiers who stole a shipment of gold at the end of the Civil War.[80] This was another remake of Rio Bravo albeit without a second lead the box office calibre of Dean Martin or Robert Mitchum.
In June 1971, George Sherman's Big Jake made its debut. Wayne played the role of an estranged father who must track down a gang who kidnapped his grandson.[81] The film was a critically acclaimed hit.
In 1972, Wayne starred in Mark Rydell's The Cowboys. Vincent Canby of The New York Times, who did not particularly care for the film, wrote: "Wayne is, of course, marvelously indestructible, and he has become an almost perfect father figure".[82] The same year, he was selected in the last round of the NFL Draft by the Atlanta Falcons for his past football experience, though the pick was disallowed by league officials as he was 64 years old at the time.[83]
On February 7, 1973, Burt Kennedy's The Train Robbers opened; Wayne appeared alongside Ann-Margret, Rod Taylor and Ben Johnson.[84] On June 27, Andrew V. McLaglen's Cahill U.S. Marshal premiered, with Wayne, George Kennedy and Gary Grimes. It was a box office failure.[85]
In 1974, Wayne took on the role of the eponymous detective in John Sturges's crime drama McQ.[86]
On March 25, 1975, Douglas Hickox's Brannigan premiered. In it, Wayne played a Chicago police lieutenant named Jim Brannigan on the hunt in London for an organized-crime leader.[87] On October 17, Rooster Cogburn started its theatrical run; Wayne reprised his role as U.S. Marshal Reuben J. "Rooster" Cogburn[88] with strong elements of the plot of The African Queen along with Katharine Hepburn as his leading lady.
In 1976, Wayne starred in Don Siegel's The Shootist, also starring Lauren Bacall, Ron Howard and James Stewart. It was Wayne's final cinematic role, whose main character, J. B. Books, was dying of cancer, to which Wayne himself succumbed  three years later. It contains numerous plot similarities to The Gunfighter of nearly 30 years before, a role which Wayne had wanted, but turned down.[50] Upon its theatrical release, it grossed $13,406,138 domestically. About $6 million were earned as US theatrical rentals.[89] The film received positive reviews.[90]  It was named one of the Ten Best Films of 1976 by the National Board of Review. Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times ranked The Shootist number 10 on his list of the 10 best films of 1976.[91] The film was nominated for an Oscar, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA film award, and a Writers Guild of America award.
Death[edit]
Although he enrolled in a cancer vaccine study in an attempt to ward off the disease,[92] Wayne died of stomach cancer on June 11, 1979, at the UCLA Medical Center.[93] He was buried in the Pacific View Memorial Park Cemetery in Corona del Mar, Newport Beach. According to his son Patrick and his grandson Matthew Mu oz, who was a priest in the California Diocese of Orange, Wayne converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before his death.[94][95][96] He requested that his tombstone read "Feo, Fuerte y Formal", a Spanish epitaph Wayne described as meaning "ugly, strong, and dignified".[97] His grave, which was unmarked for 20 years, has been marked since 1999 with the quotation:
Tomorrow is the most important thing in life. Comes into us at midnight very clean. It's perfect when it arrives and it puts itself in our hands. It hopes we've learned something from yesterday.[98][99]
Political views[edit]
 Wayne in The Challenge of Ideas (1961)
 Wayne meets with President Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger in San Clemente, California, July 1972
 Wayne addressed the Republican Convention in Miami, 1968.
Throughout most of his life, Wayne was a vocally prominent conservative Republican in Hollywood, supporting anti-communist positions.[100] However, he voted for Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 presidential election and expressed admiration for Roosevelt's successor, fellow Democratic President Harry S. Truman, despite having supported Republican candidate Thomas E. Dewey in 1948.[101][102] He took part in creating the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals in February 1944 before being elected its president in 1949. An ardent anti-communist and vocal supporter of the House Un-American Activities Committee, he made Big Jim McLain (1952) with himself as a HUAC investigator to demonstrate his support for the cause of anti-communism. His personal views found expression as a proactive inside enforcer of the "Black List", denying employment and undermining careers of many actors and writers who had expressed their personal political beliefs earlier in life. Soviet leader Joseph Stalin is alleged to have said that Wayne should be assassinated for his frequently espoused anti-communist politics, despite being a fan of his movies.[103][104] Wayne was a supporter of Senator Joseph McCarthy.[105]
Wayne supported Vice President Richard Nixon in the presidential election of 1960, but expressed his vision of patriotism when John F. Kennedy won the election: "I didn't vote for him, but he's my president, and I hope he does a good job."[106] He used his star power to support conservative causes, including rallying support for the Vietnam War by producing, co-directing, and starring in the financially successful film The Green Berets (1968).[107] In 1960, he joined the anti-communist John Birch Society, but quit after the organization denounced fluoridation of water supplies as a communist plot.[108] In 1964, Wayne was a staunch supporter of Barry Goldwater, and actively campaigned for him.[109]
Due to his status as the highest-profile Republican star in Hollywood, wealthy Texas Republican Party backers asked Wayne to run for national office in 1968, like his friend and fellow actor Senator George Murphy. He declined, joking that he did not believe the public would seriously consider an actor in the White House. Instead, he supported his friend Ronald Reagan's campaigns for Governor of California in 1966 and 1970. He was asked to be the running mate for Democratic Alabama Governor George Wallace, who had been nominated for president by the American Independent Party, in his 1968 campaign, but he immediately rejected the offer[100] and actively campaigned for Richard Nixon;[110] Wayne addressed the 1968 Republican National Convention on its opening day.[108]
In 1971, Wayne wrote to President Richard Nixon, who was a friend, to oppose Nixon's planned trip to China. Wayne enclosed some hate literature on "that Jew, Kissinger," who had negotiated the historic meeting with Chinese leaders.[111]
Wayne openly differed with many conservatives over the issue of returning the Panama Canal, as he supported the Panama Canal Treaty in the mid-1970s;[112] while Republican leaders such as Reagan, Jesse Helms, and Strom Thurmond had wanted the U.S. to retain full control of the canal, Wayne and fellow conservative William F. Buckley believed that the Panamanians had the right to the canal and sided with President Jimmy Carter. Wayne was a close friend of Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos Herrera, and Wayne's first wife Josephine was a native of Panama. His support of the treaty brought him hate mail for the first time in his life.[113][114]
In 1973 actor Marlon Brando refused an Oscar he had won, due to "the treatment of American Indians today by the film industry"; Brando did not attend the award ceremony but asked Native American civil rights activist Sacheen Littlefeather to attend and deliver a refusal speech in the event that he won. Wayne, who has been described as "serial slaughterer of Native Americans on-screen and self-professed white supremacist off it", was in the wings, and was so angry about her presence there that Littlefeather said "he was coming towards me to forcibly take me off the stage, and he had to be restrained by six security men to prevent him from doing so."[115]  However, an investigation in 2022 found that this is unlikely to have happened, and Littlefeather had no way of witnessing this take place.[116]
Roger Ebert writes that Wayne had a sense of humor about his politics. He recalls Wayne giving him a tour of his house: "He pointed out autographed photos of Eisenhower, Nixon, Goldwater, and J. Edgar Hoover. I said I had to take a pee. On the wall of the bathroom opening off the den, he had a photo of Hubert Humphrey, inscribed 'with warm appreciation for your continued Support.'"[117] Colorado Congresswoman Pat Schroeder recalled that "John Wayne gave me a silver cigarette lighter during the Vietnam War that said 'Fuck Communism' on it. I didn't know how to do that. I still don't."[118]
Left-wing activist Abbie Hoffman paid tribute to Wayne's singularity, saying, "I like Wayne's wholeness, his style. As for his politics, well I suppose even cavemen felt a little admiration for the dinosaurs that were trying to gobble them up."[119]
1971 Playboy interview[edit]
 John Wayne signs the helmet of Pfc. Fonzell Wofford during a visit at Chu Lai, South Vietnam in June 1966
In May 1971, Playboy magazine published an interview with Wayne, in which he expressed his support for the Vietnam War,[120] and made headlines for his opinions about social issues and race relations in the United States:[121]
With a lot of blacks, there's quite a bit of resentment along with their dissent, and possibly rightfully so. But we can't all of a sudden get down on our knees and turn everything over to the leadership of the blacks. I believe in white supremacy until the blacks are educated to a point of responsibility.
 ... I don't feel we did wrong in taking this great country away from the Indians. Our so-called stealing of this country from them was just a matter of survival. There were great numbers of people who needed new land, and the Indians were selfishly trying to keep it for themselves.[23]: 289 [122][123]
In the same Playboy interview, Wayne calls the two lead characters in Midnight Cowboy "fags" for the alleged "love of those two men".[124] He also responded to questions about whether social programs were good for the country:
I know all about that. In the late '20s, when I was a sophomore at USC, I was a socialist myself but not when I left. The average college kid idealistically wishes everybody could have ice cream and cake for every meal, but as he gets older and gives more thought to his and his fellow man's responsibilities, he finds that it can't work out that way that some people just won't carry their load ... I believe in welfare a welfare work program. I don't think a fella should be able to sit on his backside and receive welfare. I'd like to know why well-educated idiots keep apologizing for lazy and complaining people who think the world owes them a living. I'd like to know why they make excuses for cowards who spit in the faces of the police and then run behind the judicial sob sisters. I can't understand these people who carry placards to save the life of some criminal, yet have no thought for the innocent victim.[120]
In February 2019, the Playboy interview resurfaced,[125] which resulted in calls for John Wayne Airport to be renamed.[126] John Wayne's son, Ethan, defended him, stating, "It would be an injustice to judge someone based on an interview that's being used out of context."[127] The calls for changing the airport's name back to Orange County Airport were renewed during the George Floyd protests in June 2020.[128]
In October 2019, USC student activists called for removing an exhibit dedicated to Wayne, citing the interview.[129] In July 2020, it was announced that the exhibit would be removed.[130]
Personal life[edit]
Wayne was married three times and divorced twice. His three wives included one of Spanish American descent, Josephine Alicia Saenz, and two from Latin America, Esperanza Baur and Pilar Pallete. He had four children with Josephine: Michael Wayne (November 23, 1934  April 2, 2003), Mary Antonia "Toni" Wayne LaCava (February 25, 1936  December 6, 2000), Patrick Wayne (born July 15, 1939), and Melinda Wayne Munoz (December 3, 1940  April 13, 2022). He had three more children with Pilar: Aissa Wayne (born March 31, 1956), John Ethan Wayne (born February 22, 1962), and Marisa Wayne (born February 22, 1966).
 John and Ethan Wayne with Walter Knott in 1969 Several of Wayne's children entered the film and television industry. Son Ethan was billed as John Ethan Wayne in a few films, and played one of the leads in the 1990s update of the Adam-12 television series.[131]  Ethan has also appeared on the History Channel show Pawn Stars to help authenticate merchandise supposedly related to his father's career. Granddaughter Jennifer Wayne, daughter of Aissa, is a member of the country music group Runaway June.[132]
 Wayne with third wife Pilar Pallete at Knott's Berry Farm in 1971 In 1973, Wayne was encouraged by Pilar, an avid tennis player, to build the John Wayne Tennis Club in Newport Beach, California. In 1995, the club was sold to Ken Stuart, former general manager, and became the Palisades Tennis Club. In The Quiet Man (1952), Wayne tells Michaeleen " ge" Flynn (portrayed by Barry Fitzgerald) that he is six feet "four and a half" (194 cm), an assertion corroborated by Pilar's book John Wayne: My Life With the Duke.[133]
His divorce from Esperanza Baur, a Mexican former actress, was stormy. She believed that Wayne and co-star Gail Russell were having an affair, a claim that both Wayne and Russell denied. The night the film Angel and the Badman (1947) wrapped, the usual party was held for cast and crew, and Wayne came home very late. Esperanza was in a drunken rage by the time he arrived, and she attempted to shoot him as he walked through the front door.[50]
Wayne had several high-profile affairs, including one with Merle Oberon that lasted from 1938 to 1947.[134] After his separation from Pilar, in 1973, Wayne became romantically involved and lived with his former secretary Pat Stacy (1941 1995) until his death in 1979.[25] Stacy published a book about her life with him in 1983, titled Duke: A Love Story.[135]
Wayne's hair began to thin in the 1940s, and he had begun to wear a hairpiece by the end of the decade.[136] He was occasionally seen in public without the hairpiece (such as, according to Life, at Gary Cooper's funeral). During an appearance at Harvard University, Wayne was asked by a student, "Is it true that your toup e is real hair?" He responded: "Well sir, that's real hair. Not mine, but real hair."[137]
A close friend, California Congressman Alphonzo E. Bell Jr., wrote of Wayne: "Duke's personality and sense of humor were very close to what the general public saw on the big screen. It is perhaps best shown in these words he had engraved on a plaque: 'Each of us is a mixture of some good and some not so good qualities. In considering one's fellow man, it's important to remember the good things. ... We should refrain from making judgments just because a fella happens to be a dirty, rotten S.O.B.'"[138]
Wayne was fond of literature, his favorite authors being Charles Dickens, Arthur Conan Doyle, and Agatha Christie. His favorite books were David Copperfield, and Conan Doyle's historical novels The White Company and Sir Nigel.
Wayne was a chess player. Roger Ebert recalls that on the set of Chisum, "we were playing a chess game, both of us bending over the board on an upended apple crate. Wayne, slouched in his old stitched leather director's chair, had a crowd of kibitzers: wranglers, extras, old cronies, drinking buddies, a couple of Mexican stuntmen. He studied the board, roared with laughter, and said, 'God...damn it! You've trapped my queen!' We studied the board. I made a decisive move. 'Why the hell did I just say that?' he asked. If I hadn't-a...said it, you wouldn't-a...seen it.'"[139] According to Michael Munn, when Wayne was asked about Rock Hudson's sexuality, he replied, "Who the hell cares if he's a queer? The man plays great chess."[140]
He used the same 1873 Colt Single Action Army revolver in many of the Westerns in which he appeared.[141][142]
Wayne biographer Michael Munn chronicled Wayne's drinking habits.[21] According to Sam O'Steen's memoir, Cut to the Chase, studio directors knew to shoot Wayne's scenes before noon, because by afternoon, he "was a mean drunk".[143] He had been a chain smoker of cigarettes since young adulthood and was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1964. He underwent successful surgery to remove his entire left lung[92] and two ribs. Despite efforts by his business associates to prevent him from going public with his illness for fear that it would cost him work, Wayne announced he had cancer and called on the public to get preventive examinations. Five years later, Wayne was declared cancer-free. Wayne has been credited with coining the term "the Big C" as a euphemism for cancer.[144] Ebert quotes him as saying: "Tequila makes your head hurt. Not from your hangover. From falling over and hitting your head."[145]
He was a Freemason, a Master Mason in Marion McDaniel Lodge No. 56 F&AM, in Tucson, Arizona.[146][147][148] He became a 32nd Degree Scottish Rite Mason and later joined the Al Malaikah Shrine Temple in Los Angeles. He became a member of the York Rite.[149][150] During the early 1960s, Wayne traveled often to Panama, and he purchased the island of Taborcillo off that nation's Pacific coast. It was sold by his estate at his death.
Wayne's yacht, the Wild Goose, was one of his favorite possessions. He kept it docked in Newport Beach Harbor, and it was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2011.[151]
Acting style[edit]
 Lobby card for The Big Trail (1930) with Tully Marshall and Wayne
 Lobby card for Sagebrush Trail (1933) with Wayne and Yakima Canutt
 Wayne in The Comancheros (1961)
In 1974, film critic Charles Champlin wrote of Wayne: "Wayne is a motion picture actor, first, last and always, who defined as powerfully as anyone else what that means. From the lean and intense early days, in those low-cost dusters which still play on morning television, Wayne has had a presence which got through the lenses and shutters and onto the film undiminished."[152] John Ford said of him: "He's not something out of a book, governed by acting rules. He portrays John Wayne, a rugged American guy. He's not one of those method actors, like they send out here from drama schools in New York. He's real, perfectly natural." Lee Strasberg observed that Wayne was similar to fellow actors Spencer Tracy and Gary Cooper, who "try not to act but be themselves".
Wayne thought of himself as a reactor rather than an actor, and felt that the difference between good and bad acting was in acting and reacting. He explained this difference: "In a bad picture, you see them acting all over the place. In a good picture, they react in a logical way to a situation they're in, so the audience can identify with the actors." When asked about his approach to acting, Wayne commented: "I read dramatic lines undramatically and react to situations normally. This is not as simple as it sounds. I've spent a major portion of my life trying to do it well and I am not past learning it yet." Much like many actors of his generation, Wayne disliked method acting, and once said of them: "Let those actors who picked their noses get all the dialogue, just give me the close-up of reaction."[153]
Howard Hawks, who directed him in five films, felt that after losing one of his lungs, Wayne became a much better actor. Hawks explained: "Because of the lung Wayne lost, he reads his lines differently. He pauses in the strangest places simply because he hasn't got the breath he used to have. This device is terribly effective, because you keep your eyes on him and wait for him to finish, because you don't know what's coming next." Raoul Walsh noted: "Wayne underacts, and it's mighty effective, not because he tries to underact it's a hard thing to do if you try but because he can't overact."[154]
Despite his popularity at the box office, Wayne was often criticized for playing the same type of character during most of his career. In a 1969 interview with Roger Ebert, Wayne remarked: "Of course, they give me that John Wayne stuff so much, claim I always play the same role. Seems like nobody remembers how different the fellows were in The Quiet Man or Iwo Jima, or Yellow Ribbon, where I was 35 playing a man of 65. To stay a star, you have to bring along some of your own personality. Thousands of good actors can carry a scene, but a star has to carry the scene and still, without intruding, allow some of his character into it."[155]
Legacy[edit]
Awards, celebrations, and landmarks[edit]
 Irene Dunne, Wayne, Rosalind Russell and James Stewart at How the West Was Won premiere, 1962
Wayne's enduring status as an iconic American was formally recognized by the U.S. government in the form of the two highest civilian decorations. On his 72nd birthday on May 26, 1979, Wayne was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal. Hollywood figures and American leaders from across the political spectrum, including Maureen O'Hara, Elizabeth Taylor, Frank Sinatra, Mike Frankovich, Katharine Hepburn, General and Mrs. Omar Bradley, Gregory Peck, Robert Stack, James Arness, and Kirk Douglas, testified to Congress in support of the award. Robert Aldrich, president of the Directors Guild of America, made a particularly notable statement:
It is important for you to know that I am a registered Democrat, and to my knowledge, share none of the political views espoused by Duke. However, whether he is ill disposed or healthy, John Wayne is far beyond the normal political sharpshooting in this community. Because of his courage, his dignity, his integrity, and because of his talents as an actor, his strength as a leader, his warmth as a human being throughout his illustrious career, he is entitled to a unique spot in our hearts and minds. In this industry, we often judge people, sometimes unfairly, by asking whether they have paid their dues. John Wayne has paid his dues over and over, and I'm proud to consider him a friend and am very much in favor of my government recognizing in some important fashion the contribution that Mr. Wayne has made.[156]
Wayne was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom on June 9, 1980, by President Jimmy Carter. He had attended Carter's inaugural ball in 1977 "as a member of the loyal opposition", as he described it. In 1998, he was awarded the Naval Heritage Award by the US Navy Memorial Foundation for his support of the Navy and military during his film career. In 1999, the American Film Institute named Wayne 13th among the Greatest Male Screen Legends of classic Hollywood cinema.
In the essay "John Wayne: A Love Song", Joan Didion recalls the first time she saw Wayne in a movie: "it was there, that summer of 1943 while the hot wind blew outside, that I fist saw John Wayne. Saw the walk, heard the voice. Heard him tell the girl in a picture called War of the Wildcats that he would build her a house, 'at the bend in the river where the cottonwoods grow.' As it happened I did not grow up to be kind of woman who is the heroine in a Western, and although the men I have known have had many virtues and have taken me to live in many places I have come to love, they have never been John Wayne, and they have never taken me to that bend in the river where the cottonwoods grow. Deep in that part of my heart where the artificial rain forever falls, that is still the line I want to hear... When John Wayne rode through my childhood, and perhaps through yours, he determined forever the shapes of certain of our dreams. It did not seem possible that such a man could fall ill, could carry within him that most inexplicable and ungovernable of diseases."[157]
Wayne's most enduring image is that of the displaced loner uncomfortable with the very civilization he is helping to establish and preserve...At his first appearance, we usually sense a very private person with some wound, loss or grievance from the past. At his very best he is much closer to a tragic vision of life...projecting the kind of mystery associated with great acting.
  Film historian Andrew Sarris (1979)[158]
Various public locations are named in honor of Wayne, including the John Wayne Airport in Orange County, California, where a 9-foot (2.7 m) bronze equestrian statue of him stands at the entrance;[121] the John Wayne Marina[159] for which Wayne bequeathed the land, near Sequim, Washington; John Wayne Elementary School (P.S. 380) in Brooklyn, New York, which boasts a 38-foot (12 m) mosaic mural commission by New York artist Knox Martin[160] entitled "John Wayne and the American Frontier";[161] and over a 100 miles (160 km) named the "John Wayne Pioneer Trail" in Washington's Iron Horse State Park. A larger-than-life-sized bronze statue of Wayne atop a horse was erected at the corner of La Cienega Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills, California, at the former offices of the Great Western Savings and Loan Corporation, for which Wayne had made a number of commercials. In the city of Maricopa, Arizona, part of Arizona State Route 347 is named John Wayne Parkway, which runs through the center of town.
In 2006, friends of Wayne and his former Arizona business partner, Louis Johnson, inaugurated the "Louie and the Duke Classics" events benefiting the John Wayne Cancer Foundation[162] and the American Cancer Society.[163][164] The weekend-long event each fall in Casa Grande, Arizona, includes a golf tournament, an auction of John Wayne memorabilia, and a team roping competition.[163]
Several celebrations took place on May 26, 2007, the centennial of Wayne's birth. A celebration at the John Wayne birthplace in Winterset, Iowa, included chuck-wagon suppers, concerts by Michael Martin Murphey and Riders in the Sky, a Wild West Revue in the style of Buffalo Bill's Wild West show, and a Cowboy Symposium with Wayne's costars, producers, and costumers. Wayne's films ran repetitively at the local theater. Ground was broken for the new John Wayne Birthplace Museum and Learning Center at a ceremony consisting of over 30 of Wayne's family members, including Melinda Wayne Mu oz, Aissa, Ethan, and Marisa Wayne. Later that year, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Wayne into the California Hall of Fame, located at the California Museum in Sacramento.[165]
In 2016, Republican assemblyman Matthew Harper proposed marking May 26 as "John Wayne Day" in California.[166] This resolution was struck down by a vote of 35 to 20, due to Wayne's views on race and his support of controversial organizations such as the John Birch Society and the House Un-American Activities Committee.[166][167]
American icon[edit]
 With Lucille Ball in I Love Lucy, 1955
Wayne rose beyond the typical recognition for a famous actor to that of an enduring icon who symbolized and communicated American values and ideals.[168]   Using the power of communication through silent films and radio, Wayne was instrumental in creating a national culture from disparate areas of the US, and made the creation of a national hero possible.[169] By the middle of his career, Wayne had developed a larger-than-life image, and as his career progressed, he selected roles that would not compromise his off-screen image.[170] Wayne embodied the icon of strong American masculinity and rugged individualism in both his films and his life.[171] At a party in 1957, Wayne confronted actor Kirk Douglas about the latter's decision to play the role of Vincent van Gogh in the film Lust for Life, saying: "Christ, Kirk, how can you play a part like that? There's so goddamn few of us left. We got to play strong, tough characters. Not these weak queers."[172] However, actor Marlon Brando was notably critical of Wayne's public persona and of the cultural insensitivity of Wayne's characters, arguing on The Dick Cavett Show that, "We [Americans] like to see ourselves as perhaps John Wayne sees us. That we are a country that stands for freedom, for rightness, for justice," before adding that "it just simply doesn't apply."[173][174]
Wayne's rise to being the quintessential movie war hero began to take shape four years after World War II, when Sands of Iwo Jima (1949) was released. His footprints at Grauman's Chinese theater in Hollywood were laid in concrete that contained sand from Iwo Jima.[175] His status grew so large and legendary that when Japanese Emperor Hirohito visited the United States in 1975, he asked to meet John Wayne, the symbolic representation of his country's former enemy.[176] Likewise when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States in 1959, he made two requests: to visit Disneyland and meet Wayne.[177]
 Wayne in The Big Trail (1930)
In the Motion Picture Herald Top Ten Money-Making Western Stars poll, Wayne was listed in 1936 and 1939.[178] He appeared in the similar Box Office poll in 1939 and 1940.[179] While these two polls are really an indication only of the popularity of series stars, Wayne also appeared in the Top Ten Money Makers Poll of all films from 1949 to 1957 and 1958 to 1974, taking first place in 1950, 1951, 1954, and 1971. With a total of 25 years on the list, Wayne has more appearances than any other star, surpassing Clint Eastwood (21) who is in second place.[180]
Wayne is the only actor to appear in every edition of the annual Harris Poll of Most Popular Film Actors, and the only actor to appear on the list after his death. Wayne was in the top 10 in this poll for 19 consecutive years, starting in 1994, 15 years after his death.[181]
Myl ne Demongeot declared in a 2015 filmed interview: "Gary Cooper was sublime, there I have to say, now he, was part of the stars, Gary Cooper, Cary Grant, John Wayne, those great Americans who I've met really were unbelievable guys, there aren't any like them anymore."[182]
John Wayne Cancer Foundation[edit]
The John Wayne Cancer Foundation was founded in 1985 in honor of John Wayne, after his family granted the use of his name (and limited funding) for the continued fight against cancer.[183] The foundation's mission is to "bring courage, strength, and grit to the fight against cancer".[183] The foundation provides funds for innovative programs that improve cancer patient care, including research, education, awareness, and support.[183]
Dispute with Duke University[edit]
Newport Beach, California-based John Wayne Enterprises, a business operated by Wayne's heirs, sells products, including Kentucky straight Bourbon, bearing the "Duke" brand and using Wayne's picture. When the company tried to trademark the image appearing on one of the bottles, Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, filed a notice of opposition. According to court documents, Duke has tried three times since 2005 to stop the company from trademarking the name. The company sought a declaration permitting registration of their trademark. The company's complaint filed in federal court said the university did "not own the word 'Duke' in all contexts for all purposes." The university's official position was not to object provided Wayne's image appeared with the name.[184] On September 30, 2014, Orange County, California federal judge David Carter dismissed the company's suit, deciding the plaintiffs had chosen the wrong jurisdiction.[185]
Filmography[edit]
Main article: John Wayne filmography
 Wayne portrait from 1952
 Screenshot from Rio Bravo (1959)
 Wayne portraying Lt. Colonel Benjamin H. Vandervoort in The Longest Day (1962)
Between 1926 and 1977, Wayne appeared in over 170 films. According to Quigley Polling, which has taken place every year since 1932 to find the top box-office stars, John Wayne was named the top money maker (as of 2005).[186]
Missed roles[edit]
Wayne turned down the lead role in the 1952 film High Noon because he felt the film's story was an allegory against blacklisting, which he actively supported. In a 1971 interview, Wayne said he considered High Noon "the most un-American thing I've ever seen in my whole life", and that he would "never regret having helped run screenwriter Carl Foreman [who was later blacklisted] out of the country".[23]: 142 
An urban legend has it that in 1955, Wayne turned down the role of Matt Dillon in the long-running television series Gunsmoke and recommended James Arness, instead. While he did suggest Arness for the part and introduced him in a prologue to the first episode, no film star of Wayne's stature would have considered a television role at the time.[187]
Terry Southern's biographer Lee Hill wrote that the role of Major T. J. "King" Kong in Dr. Strangelove (1964) was originally written with Wayne in mind, and that Stanley Kubrick offered him the part after Peter Sellers injured his ankle during filming; he immediately turned it down.[188] While Sellers went on to play three other roles in the film, Slim Pickens played Kong.
In 1966, Wayne accepted the role of Major Reisman in The Dirty Dozen (1967), and asked Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for some script changes, but eventually withdrew from the project to make The Green Berets. He was replaced by Lee Marvin.[189]
Though Wayne actively campaigned for the title role in Dirty Harry (1971), Warner Bros. decided that at 63 he was too old, and cast the 41-year-old Clint Eastwood.[190]
Director Peter Bogdanovich and screenwriter Larry McMurtry pitched a film in 1971 called Streets of Laredo that would co-star Wayne along with James Stewart and Henry Fonda. They conceived it as a Western that would bring the final curtain down on Hollywood Westerns. Stewart and Fonda both agreed to appear in it, but after long consideration, Wayne turned it down, citing his feeling that his character was more underdeveloped and uninteresting than those of his co-stars, which was largely based on John Ford's recommendation after perusing the script. The project was shelved for some 20 years, until McMurtry rewrote and expanded the original screenplay co-written with Bogdanovich to make the novel and subsequent TV miniseries Lonesome Dove, with Tommy Lee Jones in Wayne's role and Robert Duvall playing the part originally written for Stewart in the extremely popular miniseries.
Mel Brooks offered Wayne the role of the Waco Kid (eventually played by Gene Wilder) in Blazing Saddles (1974). After reading the script, Wayne declined, fearing the dialogue was "too dirty" for his family-friendly image, but told Brooks that he would be "first in line" to see the movie.[191][192]
Steven Spielberg offered both Wayne and Charlton Heston the role of Major General Joseph Stilwell in the film 1941 with Wayne also considered for a cameo in it. After reading the script, Wayne decided not to participate due to ill health, but also urged Spielberg not to pursue the project. Both Wayne and Heston felt the film was unpatriotic. Spielberg recalled, "[Wayne] was really curious and so I sent him the script. He called me the next day and said he felt it was a very un-American movie, and I shouldn't waste my time making it. He said, 'You know, that was an important war, and you're making fun of a war that cost thousands of lives at Pearl Harbor. Don't joke about World War II'."[193]
Awards and nominations[edit]
Academy Awards[edit]
Year
Work
Category
Result
1949
Sands of Iwo Jima
Best Actor
Nominated
1960
The Alamo
Best Picture
Nominated
1969
True Grit
Best Actor
Won
Golden Globe Awards[edit]
Year
Work
Category
Result
1953
 
Henrietta Award (World Film Favorite   Male)
Won
1966
 
Cecil B. DeMille Award
Honored[194]
1970
True Grit
Best Actor   Motion Picture Drama
Won
Grammy Awards[edit]
Year
Work
Category
Result
1972
America, Why I Love Her
Best Spoken Word Album
Nominated[195]
Brass Balls Award[edit]
In 1973, The Harvard Lampoon, a satirical paper run by Harvard University students, invited Wayne to receive The Brass Balls Award, created in his "honor", after calling him "the biggest fraud in history". Wayne accepted the invitation as a chance to promote the recently released film McQ, and a Fort Devens Army convoy offered to drive him into Harvard Square on an armored personnel carrier.[196][197] The ceremony was held on January 15, 1974, at the Harvard Square Theater and the award was officially presented in honor of Wayne's "outstanding machismo and penchant for punching people".[198] Although the convoy was met with protests by members of the American Indian Movement and others, some of whom threw snowballs, Wayne received a standing ovation from the audience when he walked onto the stage.[196] An internal investigation was launched into the Army's involvement in the day.[197]
Additional awards and honors[edit]
1970, Received the DeMolay Legion of Honor
1970, Received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement[199][200]
1973, Awarded the Gold Medal from the National Football Foundation
1974, Inducted into the Hall of Great Western Performers in the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum
1979, Received the Congressional Gold Medal
1980, Awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, by President Jimmy Carter
1986, Inducted into the DeMolay Hall of Fame
See also[edit]
Biography portal
Hall of Great Western Performers
List of film director and actor collaborations
List of famous amateur chess players
List of Freemasons
National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum
Red Scare
John Wayne filmography
References[edit]
Footnotes
^ After Wayne gained fame under his stage name, studio publicists erroneously referred to his birth name as Marion Michael Morrison; Wayne went along with this himself, because he "really liked the name Michael".[2] The error infected virtually every biography of Wayne, until Roberts and Olson uncovered the facts in their 1995 biography John Wayne: American, drawing on the draft of Wayne's unfinished autobiography, among other sources.
Citations
^ Daniel, Diane (February 27, 2015). "In Iowa, a New John Wayne Museum". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2019.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 647.
^ "John Wayne". The Numbers. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2012.
^ "Quigley's Annual List of Box-Office Champions, 1932 1970". Reel Classics. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2012.
^ "American Film Institute". October 10, 2018. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2021.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, pp. 63 64.
^ Davis, Ronald L. (2012). Duke: The Life and Image of John Wayne. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 6. ISBN 9780806186467. Archived from the original on November 28, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ Duke, We're Glad We Knew You: John Wayne's Friends and Colleagues Remember His Remarkable life  by Herb Fagen Archived August 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine page 230; Retrieved February 13, 2016
^ Easy Riders Raging Bulls: How the Sex-Drugs-And Rock 'N Roll Generation Saved Hollywood   by Peter Biskind page 372; Retrieved February 13, 2016
^ Los Angeles Times Archived July 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine June 12, 1979; Retrieved February 13, 2016
^ Kehr, Dave. "John Wayne News". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Jimmy Carter, 1980 1981, Book 2: May 24 to September 26, 1980. Government Printing Office. p. 1061. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2019.
^ Madison County, Iowa, birth certificate.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, pp. 8 9.
^ Wayne, John, My Kingdom, unfinished draft autobiography, University of Texas Library.
^ Goldstein, Norm (1979). John Wayne: a tribute. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. p. 12. ISBN 9780030530210. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
^ Roberts, Randy (1997). John Wayne: American. ISBN 0803289707. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved June 29, 2020.
^ "John Wayne: American". WashingtonPost.com. May 13, 1997. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ Chilton, Martin (April 25, 2016). "John Wayne: 10 surprising facts". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 37.
^ a b c d Munn, Michael (2003). John Wayne: The Man Behind the Myth. London: Robson Books. p. 7. ISBN 0-451-21244-4.
^ "A Pictorial History of Glendale High School". Glendale High School. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.
^ a b c Ronald L. Davis (May 1, 2001). Duke: The Life and Image of John Wayne. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-3329-4. Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ Travers, Steven (2010). USC Trojans: College Football's All-Time Greatest Dynasty. Lanham, MD: Taylor Trade Publishing. p. 29. ISBN 978-1589795686. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ a b c Shephard, Richard. Biography Archived November 8, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. JWayne.com. Retrieved March 11, 2010.
^ Jewell, Rick (August 1, 2008). "John Wayne, an American Icon". Trojan Family Magazine. University of Southern California. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved February 1, 2012.
^ a b Hughes, Johnny (2012). Famous gamblers, poker history, and texas stories. Iuniverse. ISBN 978-1475942156.
^ Eyman, Scott. John Wayne: The Life and Legend. 2014, pp. 33 34.
^ a b "Biography of John Wayne". Think Quest: Library. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 84.
^ "JOHN WAYNE   The Duke   Vallarta Tribune". Vallarta Tribune. May 19, 2016. Archived from the original on December 13, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ "Inflation Calculator". usinflationcalculator.com. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ Clooney, Nick (November 2002). The Movies That Changed Us: Reflections on the Screen. New York: Atria Books, a trademark of Simon & Schuster. p. 195. ISBN 0-7434-1043-2.
^ Clooney, p. 196.
^ Peterson, Richard A. (1997). Creating Country Music: Fabricating Authenticity. University of Chicago Press. pp. 84 86. ISBN 0-226-66284-5. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2020.
^ Canutt, Yakima, with Oliver Drake, Stuntman. University of Oklahoma Press, 1997, ISBN 0-8061-2927-1.
^ "On John Wayne, Cancel Culture, and the Art of Problematic Artists". Literary Hub. June 21, 2019. Archived from the original on December 23, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2021.
^ Letter, Louise Platt to Ned Scott Archive, July 7, 2002 Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine pp. 40:
^ a b Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 212.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 220.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 213.
^ "Press Kits: American Originals Traveling Exhibit". archives.gov. October 25, 2010. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 253.
^ "John Wayne, in Australia during WWII". ozatwar.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ "John Wayne spends Christmas in Brisbane   John Oxley Library". slq.qld.gov.au. December 19, 2013. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ "John Wayne, World War II and the Draft". jwayne.com. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ "Photo Gallery   Category: Military Life". sunsetters38bg.com. Archived from the original on September 7, 2018. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ Wayne, Pilar, John Wayne, pp. 43 47.
^ Frontier, The New (December 9, 2011). "The New Frontier: John Wayne's Forgotten Radio Show". Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
^ a b c d e f Roberts & Olson 1995.
^ Hyams, J. The Life and Times of the Western Movie. Gallery Books (1984), pp. 109 12. ISBN 0831755458
^ Farkis, John (March 25, 2015). Not Thinkin'... Just Rememberin'... The Making of John Wayne's "The Alamo". BearManor Media. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2020.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 12, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ a b Penton, Edgar (January 27, 1963). "Combat: Unit Is Mythical, But GIs Got 'Basic,' Just the Same". Green Bay Press-Gazette. Retrieved August 21, 2019.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ Inventing Vietnam: The War in Film and Television. Temple University Press. 1991. ISBN 978-0-87722-861-5. JSTOR j.ctt14btcb5.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ Canby, Vincent (January 14, 1972). "' The Cowboys':Wayne Stars in Rydell Work at Music Hall". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ Shepard, Will (April 20, 2021). "John Wayne 'of Fort Apache State' Was Selected in the Final Round of 1972 NFL Draft at 64-Years-Old". Outsider. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ "AFI|Catalog". catalog.afi.com. Retrieved June 3, 2021.
^ Box Office Information for The Shootist. Archived May 25, 2014, at the Wayback Machine The Numbers. Retrieved September 18, 2013.
^ Movie Reviews for The Shootist. Archived May 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved September 18, 2013.
^ Roger Ebert's 10 Best Lists: 1967 to present. Archived January 13, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Roger Ebert's Journal. Retrieved September 18, 2013.
^ a b Rochman, Sue (Fall 2008). "The Duke's Final Showdown". CR. American Association for Cancer Research. Archived from the original on January 17, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ "John Wayne Dead of Cancer on Coast at 72". www.nytimes.com. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
^ "The religion of John Wayne, actor". Adherents.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2006. Retrieved October 20, 2008.
^ Kerr, David (October 4, 2011). "My granddaddy John Wayne". California Catholic Daily. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011. Retrieved October 4, 2011.
^ "Everyone called him 'Duke': John Wayne's conversion to Catholicism". Our Sunday Visitor. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018.
^ Candelaria, Nash. "John Wayne, Person and Personal The love affairs of an American legend" in Hopscotch: A Cultural Review, Volume 2, Number 4, 2001, pp. 2 13, Duke University Press.
^ Gary Wayne. "Pacific View cemetery: Stars' Graves". Seeing-stars.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved March 25, 2012.
^ "Actor John Wayne". Apex.net.au. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved March 25, 2012.
^ a b Jim Beaver, "John Wayne". Films in Review, Volume 28, Number 5, May 1977, pp. 265 284.
^ Thomas, Bob (October 24, 1948). "Hollywood Is Pitching Into Political Race". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
^ "Interview: John Wayne". Playboy. Archived from the original on July 18, 2010. Retrieved April 2, 2014.
^ Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2003). Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar. London: George Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 1-84212-726-8.
^ "Why Stalin loved Tarzan and wanted John Wayne shot" Archived June 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. The Daily Telegraph, April 6, 2004.
^ "John Wayne's racist comments, lack of World War II service resurface in heated Twitter debate". The Mercury News. February 19, 2019. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020.
^ McCarthy, Todd. Howard Hawks: The Grey Fox of Hollywood. p. 583.
^ "John Wayne". Biography. A&E Television Networks. September 11, 2019 [Originally published April 2, 2014]. Archived from the original on November 28, 2016.
^ a b Dowell, Pat (September 25, 1995). "John Wayne, Man and Myth". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ When Hollywood was Right- How Movie Stars, Studio Moguls, and Big Business Remade American Politics; Donald T. Critchlow, 2013
^ Judis, John.  "Kevin Phillips, Ex-Populist: Elite Model" Archived April 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.  The New Republic.  (c/o Carnegie Endowment for International Peace)  May 22, 2006.
^ Ambrose, Stephen E. (1989). Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 480. ISBN 0-671-52837-8.
^ Warner, Edwin.  "That Troublesome Panama Canal Treaty" Archived February 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.  Time.  October 31, 1977.
^ "Reagan Angered John Wayne  New York Times". The New York Times. March 16, 1987. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ Glad, Betty (2009) An Outsider in the White House, Cornell University Press
^ Rose, Steve (June 3, 2021). "'I promised Brando I would not touch his Oscar': the secret life of Sacheen Littlefeather". The Guardian.
^ "Column: Did John Wayne try to assault Sacheen Littlefeather at the 1973 Oscars? Debunking a Hollywood myth". Los Angeles Times. August 23, 2022.
^ Ebert, Roger (June 9, 2009). "Shall we gather at the river?".
^ "Notable Quotables". The Harvard Crimson. September 7, 1986.
^ Time magazine, August 8, 1969.
^ a b Roberts & Olson 1995, p. 580.
^ a b Hiltzik, Michael (February 21, 2019). "It's time to take John Wayne's name off the Orange County airport". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 23, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019.
^ Anatol Lieven (September 27, 2012). America Right Or Wrong: An Anatomy of American Nationalism NEW EDITION. Oxford University Press. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-19-966025-4. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ "'I believe in white supremacy': John Wayne's notorious 1971 Playboy interview goes viral on Twitter". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved July 28, 2022.
^ Nelson, Rett (March 2, 2019). "Critics call for John Wayne Airport to be renamed after interview resurfaces". East Idaho News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019.
^ "On John Wayne, Cancel Culture, and the Art of Problematic Artists". Literary Hub. June 21, 2019. Archived from the original on December 23, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2021.
^ Colgrass, Neal (March 2, 2019). "John Wayne's Son Defends Dad Over Shocking Interview". Newser. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019.
^ Vogt, Adrienne (March 2, 2019). "John Wayne's son defends his father over remarks in 1970s interview". CNN. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019.
^ Choe, Brandon (June 27, 2020). "John Wayne Airport Name Change Again Demanded By Orange County Democrats". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved June 27, 2020.
^ Haring, Bruce (October 10, 2019). "USC Students Want John Wayne Exhibit Removed, Cite His "Enduring Legacy Of White Supremacy"". Deadline. Archived from the original on October 10, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019.
^ Andone, Dakin (July 12, 2020). "USC will remove a John Wayne exhibit after actor's racist comments resurfaced". CNN. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020.
^ TV.com. "New Adam-12". TV.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved February 1, 2020.
^ Konicki, Lisa (June 6, 2016). "Who's New: Runaway June". Nash Country Daily. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved January 23, 2019.
^ Wayne, Pilar; Thorleifson, Alex (1989). John Wayne : my life with the Duke. Internet Archive. Bath : Chivers. ISBN 978-0-7451-7157-9.
^ Roberts & Olson 1995, pp. 195 197.
^ Duke: a love story: an intimate memoir of John Wayne's last years. WorldCat. OCLC 9082896.
^ "Famous Actors Who've Worn a Hair Piece". Click4hair Informational Blog. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ Transcribed from CBS video of the event posted on YouTube at "John Wayne visits the Harvard Lampoon". YouTube. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016.
^ Alphonzo Bell, with Marc L. Weber, The Bel-Air Kid: An Autobiography, Trafford Publishing, 2002, ISBN 978-1-55369-378-9.
^ Ebert, Roger. Life Itself: A Memoir. p. 248.
^ Munn, Michael (2004). John Wayne: The Man Behind the Myth. p. 290.
^ Reader's Digest magazine
^ "Guns John Wayne Used in Movies". May 8, 2019. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2021.
^ "Cut to the Chase" by Sam O'Steen. Los Angeles: Michael Wiese Productions (February 2002) ISBN 0-941188-37-X, p. 11.
^ Graystone, Andrew (November 19, 2013). "Viewpoint: Did Richard Nixon change the way people describe cancer?". BBC News. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014. Retrieved February 12, 2014.
^ Ebert, Roger. Life Itself: A Memoir. p. 248.
^ "List of notable freemasons". freemasonry.bcy.ca. Archived from the original on October 4, 2001. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
^ "List of famous freemasons". Lodge No 11 F.A.A.M., Washington D.C. Archived from the original on November 16, 2015. 33 Deg. Marion McDaniel Lodge No. 56, Tucson, AZ. Came through the system from DeMolay.
^ "Mason in the history". MASTERmason.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
^ "John Wayne". Freemasonry.bcy.ca. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved August 29, 2010.
^ "When Tot  had the apron" (in Italian). April 5, 1999. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. John Wayne, the horseman of Hollywood, the hero of Stagecoach, symbol of the Yankee soldier, took up the degree of Master.
^ "John Wayne's beloved yacht gets historical protection". The Los Angeles Times. August 11, 2011. Archived from the original on July 23, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2011.
^ John Wayne Dies at 72 of Cancer; Los Angeles Times, June 12, 1979
^ John Wayne: Prophet of the American Way of Life; Emmanuel Levy, Jay Levy, 1988
^ John Wayne: The Life and the Legend; Scott Eyman, 2015
^ Ebert, Roger (June 29, 1969). "Interview with John Wayne". Chicago Sun-Times.
^ Whitehead, John W. (June 6, 2011). "John Wayne Was True Grit". The Rutherford Institute. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2013.
^ Didion, Joan (1968). Slouching Towards Bethlehem. pp. 29 30.
^ Sarris, Andrew (1979) in The New Republic August 4 & 11, 1979. Reprinted in American Movie Critics: An Anthology From the Silents Until Now. 2006. Ed: Phillip Lopate The Library of America. p.312 ISBN 1-931082-92-8
^ "John Wayne Marina". Portofpa.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ www.esensedesigns.com (September 21, 2008). "Exhibitions". Knoxmartin.com. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ "John Wayne, Knox Martin  Public Art for Public Schools". Schools.nyc.gov. May 21, 2009. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ "John Wayne Cancer Foundation". Jwcf.org. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ a b Olson, Jim.  "Louie and the Duke Classics 2006" Archived November 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.  Grande Living.  October 2006.  (Adobe Acrobat *.PDF document).
^ "News and Events: 2006 Archive". Jwcf.org. Archived from the original on November 8, 2010. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ Wayne inducted into California Hall of Fame Archived January 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine California Museum. Retrieved March 11, 2010.
^ a b Mettler, Katie. "'John Wayne Day' in Calif. rejected because of actor's statements about minority groups". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved April 29, 2016.
^ "California lawmakers reject John Wayne Day over racist statements". The Guardian. April 29, 2016. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2016.
^ Richard McGhee. John Wayne: Actor, Artist, Hero (1999), p. 135.
^ Candelaria, Nash (2001). "John Wayne, Person and Persona: The love affairs of an American legend". Hopscotch: A Cultural Review. 2 (4): 2 13.
^ Levy, Emanuel. "John Wayne: Choosing Roles". emanuellevy.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2015.
^ Countryman, Edward (2019).  Griffin, Sean (ed.). What Dreams Were Made Of: Movie Stars of the 1940s. Rutgers University Press. pp. 217 234. doi:10.36019/9780813550848-012. ISBN 978-0-8135-5084-8. S2CID 241867122.
^ Scott Eyman. John Wayne: The Life and Legend. (2014), p. 293.
^ Molloy, Tim (June 20, 2019). "When Sacheen Littlefeather and Marlon Brando Fought John Wayne for the Soul of the Oscars". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020.
^ "Listen to Me Marlon". Scripts.com. STANDS4 LLC. p. 27. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020.
^ Endres, Stacey and Robert Cushman. Hollywood at Your Feet. Beverly Hills: Pomegranate Press, 1993 ISBN 0-938817-08-6.
^ "The Nation: Hirohito Winds Up His Grand U.S. Tour". Time.com. October 20, 1975. Archived from the original on November 14, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
^ Rasmussen, Cecilia (January 24, 1999). "Soviet Leader Met Duke but Not Mickey". Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2020   via LA Times.
^ Phil Hardy The Encyclopedia of Western Movies, London, Octopus, 1985, ISBN 0-7064-2555-3
^ Chuck Anderson. "Motion Picture Herald and Boxoffice Polls". B-westerns.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2010.
^ "Top Ten Money Making Stars   Poll Results". quigleypublishing.com. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014.
^ "Denzel Washington Flies to Number One and is America's Favorite Movie Star". Harris Interactive. January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013.
^ "Rencontre avec myl ne demongeot". Mac Mahon Filmed Conferences Paris. July 5, 2015. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2021.
^ a b c "John Wayne Cancer Foundation: Mission". John Wayne. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved May 7, 2014.
^ Nicks, Denver (July 8, 2014). "John 'the Duke' Wayne's Heirs Sue Duke U Over Booze Label". Time. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved March 23, 2020.
^ "John Wayne's heirs lose 'Duke' legal brawl". News and Observer. Associated Press. October 1, 2014. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 15, 2014.
^ "John Wayne All Time Top Money-Making Star." PR Newswire, 24 Feb. 2005. Gale In Context: Biography, link.gale.com/apps/doc/A129166834/BIC?u=uiuc_uc&sid=bookmark-BIC&xid=0c91356d. Accessed 14 Dec. 2021.
^ Barabas, S. Gunsmoke: A Complete History. McFarland (1990), pp. 63 4. ISBN 0899504183.
^ Lee Hill, A Grand Guy: The Life and Art of Terry Southern (Bloomsbury, 2001), pp.118 119
^ Eyman, S. John Wayne: The Life and Legend. Simon & Schuster (2014), p.78. ISBN 1439199582
^ Eyman (2014), p. 143.
^ Interview: Mel Brooks. Blazing Saddles (DVD). Burbank, California: Warner Brothers Pictures/Warner Home Video, 2004. ISBN 0-7907-5735-4.
^ Amorosi, A. D. (May 20, 2016). "Mel Brooks on John Wayne, Improv and the Presidential Race". Metro Philadelphia. Archived from the original on May 23, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2022.
^ "John Wayne   John Wayne Urged Steven Spielberg Not To Make War Comedy". contactmusic.com. December 2, 2011. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
^ "The Cecil B. DeMille Award". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
^ "Grammy Awards 1974". Awards & Shows. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2020.
^ a b Reed, Phillip Jr. (January 16, 1974). "John Wayne handles Harvard challenge well". The Bryan Times. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2013.
^ a b Lotman, Mo (2009). Harvard Square: An Illustrated History Since 1950. New York: Stewart, Tabori & Chang. p. 95. ISBN 978-1-58479-747-0.
^ Zegarac, Nick. "John Wayne   American". The Hollywood Art. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved June 24, 2013.
^ "Golden Plate Awardees of the American Academy of Achievement". www.achievement.org. American Academy of Achievement. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved September 18, 2020.
^ "John Wayne Honored" (PDF). The Dallas Morning News.
Sources[edit]
Roberts, Randy; Olson, James S. (1995). John Wayne: American. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-02-923837-0.
Further reading[edit]
Baur, Andreas; Bitterli, Konrad (2007). "Brave Lonesome Cowboy. Der Mythos des Westerns in der Gegenwartskunst oder: John Wayne zum 100". Verlag f r moderne Kunst N rnberg. Geburstag, Nuremberg. ISBN 978-3-939738-15-2.
Beaver, Jim (May 5, 1977). "John Wayne". Films in Review. 28.
Calder, Jenni (1979), John Wayne - Man and Myth of the West, in Bold, Christine (ed.), Cencrastus No. 1, Autumn 1979, pp. 13   16 ISSN 0264-0856
Campbell, James T. (September 2000). "Print the Legend: John Wayne and Postwar American Culture". Reviews in American History. 28 (3): 465 477. doi:10.1353/rah.2000.0047. S2CID 143182615.
Carey, Harry Jr. (1994). A Company of Heroes: My Life as an Actor in the John Ford Stock Company. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 0-8108-2865-0.
Clark, Donald; Anderson, Christopher (1995). John Wayne's The Alamo: The Making of the Epic Film. New York: Carol Publishing Group. ISBN 0-8065-1625-9.
Davis, Ronald L. (2001). Duke: The Life and Times of John Wayne. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-3329-5.
Eyman, Scott (1999). Print the Legend: The Life and Times of John Ford. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-81161-8.
Eyman, Scott (2014). John Wayne: The Life and Legend. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1439199589. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2015.
Jensen, Richard (2012). When the Legend Became Fact   The True Life of John Wayne. Nashville: Raymond Street Publishers, 2012.
Landesman, Fred (2004). The John Wayne Filmography. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0786432523.
McCarthy, Todd (1997). Howard Hawks: The Grey Fox of Hollywood. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-1598-5.
McGhee, Richard D. (1999). John Wayne: Actor, Artist, Hero. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 0786407522. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2015.
McGivern, Carolyn (2000). John Wayne: A Giant Shadow. Bracknell, England: Sammon. ISBN 0-9540031-0-1.
Munn, Michael (2004). John Wayne: The Man Behind the Myth. Robson. ISBN 978-1-86105-722-8.
Raab, Markus (2007). "Beautiful Hearts, Laughers at the World, Bowlers. Worldviews of the Late Western". Baur/Bitterli: Brave Lonesome Cowboy. Der Mythos des Westerns in der Gegenwartskunst Oder: John Wayne zum 100. Geburtstag. Nuremberg. ISBN 978-3-939738-15-2.
Shepherd, Donald; Slatzer, Robert; Grayson, Dave (1985). Duke: The Life and Times of John Wayne. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-17893-X.
Wayne, Aissa; Delsohn, Steve (April 1998). John Wayne: My Father. Taylor Trade Publications. ISBN 978-0-87833-959-4.
Wills, Garry (1997). John Wayne's America: The Politics of Celebrity. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80823-4.
Maurice Zolotow (1974). Shooting Star: A Biography of John Wayne. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-82969-6.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Wayne.
Wikiquote has quotations related to John Wayne.
Official website 
John Wayne Cancer Foundation
John Wayne Cancer Institute
FBI file on John Wayne
Birthplace of John Wayne official website
John Wayne at IMDb 
John Wayne at the TCM Movie Database 
John Wayne at AllMovie 
"On the Set of The Alamo": Behind-the-scenes footage from the production of the film, from the Texas Archive of the Moving Image
The short film STAFF FILM REPORT 66-28A (1966) is available for free download at the Internet Archive.
John Wayne at Find a Grave 
vteJohn Wayne
Filmography
As director
The Alamo (1960)
The Green Berets (1968, with Ray Kellogg)
As producer
Bullfighter and the Lady (1951)
Hondo (1953)
Track of the Cat (1954)
Good-bye, My Lady (1956)
Gun the Man Down (1956)
The Alamo (1960)
Family
Esperanza Baur (ex-wife)
Michael Wayne (son)
Patrick Wayne (son)
Pilar Pallete (ex-wife)
Ethan Wayne (son)
Jennifer Wayne (granddaughter)
Memorials
John Wayne Airport
Related articles
Batjac Productions
John Wayne Island
John Wayne Tennis Club
The Wild Goose
Awards for John Wayne
vteAcademy Award for Best Actor1928 1950
Emil Jannings (1928)
Warner Baxter (1929)
George Arliss (1930)
Lionel Barrymore (1931)
Fredric March / Wallace Beery (1932)
Charles Laughton (1933)
Clark Gable (1934)
Victor McLaglen (1935)
Paul Muni (1936)
Spencer Tracy (1937)
Spencer Tracy (1938)
Robert Donat (1939)
James Stewart (1940)
Gary Cooper (1941)
James Cagney (1942)
Paul Lukas (1943)
Bing Crosby (1944)
Ray Milland (1945)
Fredric March (1946)
Ronald Colman (1947)
Laurence Olivier (1948)
Broderick Crawford (1949)
Jos  Ferrer (1950)
1951 1975
Humphrey Bogart (1951)
Gary Cooper (1952)
William Holden (1953)
Marlon Brando (1954)
Ernest Borgnine (1955)
Yul Brynner (1956)
Alec Guinness (1957)
David Niven (1958)
Charlton Heston (1959)
Burt Lancaster (1960)
Maximilian Schell (1961)
Gregory Peck (1962)
Sidney Poitier (1963)
Rex Harrison (1964)
Lee Marvin (1965)
Paul Scofield (1966)
Rod Steiger (1967)
Cliff Robertson (1968)
John Wayne (1969)
George C. Scott1 (1970)
Gene Hackman (1971)
Marlon Brando1 (1972)
Jack Lemmon (1973)
Art Carney (1974)
Jack Nicholson (1975)
1976 2000
Peter Finch (1976)
Richard Dreyfuss (1977)
Jon Voight (1978)
Dustin Hoffman (1979)
Robert De Niro (1980)
Henry Fonda (1981)
Ben Kingsley (1982)
Robert Duvall (1983)
F. Murray Abraham (1984)
William Hurt (1985)
Paul Newman (1986)
Michael Douglas (1987)
Dustin Hoffman (1988)
Daniel Day-Lewis (1989)
Jeremy Irons (1990)
Anthony Hopkins (1991)
Al Pacino (1992)
Tom Hanks (1993)
Tom Hanks (1994)
Nicolas Cage (1995)
Geoffrey Rush (1996)
Jack Nicholson (1997)
Roberto Benigni (1998)
Kevin Spacey (1999)
Russell Crowe (2000)
2001 present
Denzel Washington (2001)
Adrien Brody (2002)
Sean Penn (2003)
Jamie Foxx (2004)
Philip Seymour Hoffman (2005)
Forest Whitaker (2006)
Daniel Day-Lewis (2007)
Sean Penn (2008)
Jeff Bridges (2009)
Colin Firth (2010)
Jean Dujardin (2011)
Daniel Day-Lewis (2012)
Matthew McConaughey (2013)
Eddie Redmayne (2014)
Leonardo DiCaprio (2015)
Casey Affleck (2016)
Gary Oldman (2017)
Rami Malek (2018)
Joaquin Phoenix (2019)
Anthony Hopkins (2020)
Will Smith (2021)
Brendan Fraser (2022)
1 refused award that year
vteCecil B. DeMille Award1950s
Cecil B. DeMille (1952)
Walt Disney (1953)
Darryl F. Zanuck (1954)
Jean Hersholt (1955)
Jack L. Warner (1956)
Mervyn LeRoy (1957)
Buddy Adler (1958)
Maurice Chevalier (1959)
1960s
Bing Crosby (1960)
Fred Astaire (1961)
Judy Garland (1962)
Bob Hope (1963)
Joseph E. Levine (1964)
James Stewart (1965)
John Wayne (1966)
Charlton Heston (1967)
Kirk Douglas (1968)
Gregory Peck (1969)
1970s
Joan Crawford (1970)
Frank Sinatra (1971)
Alfred Hitchcock (1972)
Samuel Goldwyn (1973)
Bette Davis (1974)
Hal B. Wallis (1975)
Walter Mirisch (1977)
Red Skelton (1978)
Lucille Ball (1979)
1980s
Henry Fonda (1980)
Gene Kelly (1981)
Sidney Poitier (1982)
Laurence Olivier (1983)
Paul Newman (1984)
Elizabeth Taylor (1985)
Barbara Stanwyck (1986)
Anthony Quinn (1987)
Clint Eastwood (1988)
Doris Day (1989)
1990s
Audrey Hepburn (1990)
Jack Lemmon (1991)
Robert Mitchum (1992)
Lauren Bacall (1993)
Robert Redford (1994)
Sophia Loren (1995)
Sean Connery (1996)
Dustin Hoffman (1997)
Shirley MacLaine (1998)
Jack Nicholson (1999)
2000s
Barbra Streisand (2000)
Al Pacino (2001)
Harrison Ford (2002)
Gene Hackman (2003)
Michael Douglas (2004)
Robin Williams (2005)
Anthony Hopkins (2006)
Warren Beatty (2007)
Steven Spielberg (2009)
2010s
Martin Scorsese (2010)
Robert De Niro (2011)
Morgan Freeman (2012)
Jodie Foster (2013)
Woody Allen (2014)
George Clooney (2015)
Denzel Washington (2016)
Meryl Streep (2017)
Oprah Winfrey (2018)
Jeff Bridges (2019)
2020s
Tom Hanks (2020)
Jane Fonda (2021)
No Award (2022)
Eddie Murphy (2023)
vteGolden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture   Drama1943 1975
Paul Lukas (1943)
Alexander Knox (1944)
Ray Milland (1945)
Gregory Peck (1946)
Ronald Colman (1947)
Laurence Olivier (1948)
Broderick Crawford (1949)
Jos  Ferrer (1950)
Fredric March (1951)
Gary Cooper (1952)
Spencer Tracy (1953)
Marlon Brando (1954)
Ernest Borgnine (1955)
Kirk Douglas (1956)
Alec Guinness (1957)
David Niven (1958)
Anthony Franciosa (1959)
Burt Lancaster (1960)
Maximilian Schell (1961)
Gregory Peck (1962)
Sidney Poitier (1963)
Peter O'Toole (1964)
Omar Sharif (1965)
Paul Scofield (1966)
Rod Steiger (1967)
Peter O'Toole (1968)
John Wayne (1969)
George C. Scott (1970)
Gene Hackman (1971)
Marlon Brando (1972)
Al Pacino (1973)
Jack Nicholson (1974)
Jack Nicholson (1975)
1976 2000
Peter Finch (1976)
Richard Burton (1977)
Jon Voight (1978)
Dustin Hoffman (1979)
Robert De Niro (1980)
Henry Fonda (1981)
Ben Kingsley (1982)
Robert Duvall / Tom Courtenay (1983)
F. Murray Abraham (1984)
Jon Voight (1985)
Bob Hoskins (1986)
Michael Douglas (1987)
Dustin Hoffman (1988)
Tom Cruise (1989)
Jeremy Irons (1990)
Nick Nolte (1991)
Al Pacino (1992)
Tom Hanks (1993)
Tom Hanks (1994)
Nicolas Cage (1995)
Geoffrey Rush (1996)
Peter Fonda (1997)
Jim Carrey (1998)
Denzel Washington (1999)
Tom Hanks (2000)
2001 present
Russell Crowe (2001)
Jack Nicholson (2002)
Sean Penn (2003)
Leonardo DiCaprio (2004)
Philip Seymour Hoffman (2005)
Forest Whitaker (2006)
Daniel Day-Lewis (2007)
Mickey Rourke (2008)
Jeff Bridges (2009)
Colin Firth (2010)
George Clooney (2011)
Daniel Day-Lewis (2012)
Matthew McConaughey (2013)
Eddie Redmayne (2014)
Leonardo DiCaprio (2015)
Casey Affleck (2016)
Gary Oldman (2017)
Rami Malek (2018)
Joaquin Phoenix (2019)
Chadwick Boseman (2020)
Will Smith (2021)
Austin Butler (2022)
vteNational Football Foundation Gold Medal winners
1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis,  Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning
2017: None awarded
2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman
2019: Mark Harmon
vtePeople's Choice Award for Favorite Movie Actor
John Wayne (1975)
John Wayne (1976)
John Wayne (1977)
John Wayne (1978)
Burt Reynolds (1979)
Burt Reynolds (1980)
Clint Eastwood (1981)
Burt Reynolds (1982)
Burt Reynolds (1983)
Clint Eastwood / Burt Reynolds (1984)
Clint Eastwood (1985)
Sylvester Stallone (1986)
Clint Eastwood (1987)
Michael Douglas (1988)
Tom Cruise (1990)
Mel Gibson (1991)
Kevin Costner (1993)
Tom Hanks (1996)
Mel Gibson (1997)
Harrison Ford (1998)
Tom Hanks (1999)
Harrison Ford (2000)
Mel Gibson (2001)
Tom Hanks (2002)
Mel Gibson (2003)
Mel Gibson (2004)
Johnny Depp (2005)
Johnny Depp (2006)
Johnny Depp (2007)
Johnny Depp (2008)
Will Smith (2009)
Johnny Depp (2010)
Johnny Depp (2011)
Johnny Depp (2012)
Robert Downey Jr. (2013)
Johnny Depp (2014)
Robert Downey Jr. (2015)
Channing Tatum (2016)
Ryan Reynolds (2017)
Chadwick Boseman (2018)
Robert Downey Jr. (2019)
Will Smith (2020)
Dwayne Johnson (2021)
Chris Hemsworth (2022)
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Academics
CiNii
Artists
Grammy Awards
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Wayne&oldid=1149771912"