Figure in the Hebrew Bible; son of Nahor
"Tarah" redirects here. For other uses, see Tarrah (disambiguation).
This article is about the person. For the place, see Terah (Exodus).
Terah Illustration of Terah in Latin from "Promptuarii Iconum Insigniorum"BornUr Ka dim, Chaldea, Sumer(present-day southern Iraq)DiedHaran(present-day southeastern Turkey)Children
Abram  (son) 
Nahor (son)
Haran (son)
Sarai (daughter in law)
Parent(s)Nahor ben Serug (father)'Ijaska bat Nestag (mother, according to Book of Jubilees)
Terah or Terach (Hebrew:   Tera ) is a biblical figure in the Book of Genesis. He is listed as the son of Nahor and father of the patriarch Abraham. As such, he is a descendant of Shem's son Arpachshad. Terah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26 27, Book of Joshua 24:2, and 1 Chronicles 1:17 27 of the Hebrew Bible and Luke 3:34 36 in the New Testament.
Biblical narrative[edit]
Terah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26 27,[1] Joshua 24:2,[2] and 1 Chronicles 1:17 27[3] of the Hebrew Bible and Luke 3:34 36[4] in the New Testament. Terah is mentioned in Genesis 11:26 32 as a son of Nahor, the son of Serug, descendants of Shem.[5] He is said to have had three sons: Abram (better known by his later name Abraham), Haran, and Nahor II. The family lived in Ur of the Chaldees. One of his grandchildren was Lot, whose father, Haran, had died at Ur.[5]
In the Book of Joshua, in his final speech to the Israelite leaders assembled at Shechem, Joshua recounts the history of God's formation of the Israelite nation, beginning with "Terah the father of Abraham and Nahor, [who] lived beyond the Euphrates River and worshiped other gods."[5] Terah is also mentioned in a biblical genealogy given in 1 Chronicles.
In the Genesis narrative, Terah took his family and left Ur to move to the land of Canaan. Terah set out for Canaan but stopped in the city of Haran along the way, where he died.[6]
[7]
Jewish tradition[edit]
Children[edit]
Genesis 11:26[8] states that Terah lived 70 years, "and begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran". The Talmud says that Abraham was 52 years old at year 2000 AM (Anno Mundi), which means that he was born in the year 1948 AM.[9][need quotation to verify]
Occupation[edit]
According to rabbinic literature Terah was a wicked (Numbers Rabbah 19:1; 19:33), idolatrous priest (Midrash HaGadol on Genesis 11:28) who manufactured idols (Eliyahu Rabbah 6, and Eliyahu Zuta 25). Abram, in opposition to his father's idol shop, smashed his father's idols and chased customers away. Terah then brought his unruly son before Nimrod, who threw him into a fiery furnace, yet Abram miraculously escaped (Genesis Rabba 38:13). The Zohar says that when God saved Abram from the furnace, Terah repented (Zohar Genesis 1:77b) and Rabbi Abba B. Kahana said that God assured Abram that his father Terah had a portion in the World to Come (Genesis Rabbah 30:4; 30:12).
Rabbi Hiyya relates this account in the Genesis Rabba: 
Terah left Abram to mind the store while he departed. A woman came with a plateful of flour and asked Abram to offer it to the idols. Abram then took a stick, broke the idols, and put the stick in the largest idol s hand. When Terah returned, he demanded that Abram explain what he'd done. Abram told his father that the idols fought among themselves and the largest broke the others with the stick. "Why do you make sport of me?" Terah cried, "Do they have any knowledge?" Abram replied, "Listen to what you are saying!"
Leader of the journey[edit]
Terah is identified as the person who arranged and led the family to embark on a mysterious journey to Canaan. It is shrouded in mystery to Jewish scholars as to why Terah began the journey and as to why the journey ended prematurely. It is suggested that he was a man in search of a greater truth that could possibly be found in the familiar[10] land of Canaan, and that it was Abram who picked up the torch to continue his father's quest, that Terah himself was unable to achieve.[11]
When Abram leaves Haran[edit]
In Jewish tradition, when Terah died at age 205, Abraham (70 years younger) was already 135 years old. Abram thus left Haran at age 75, well before Terah died. The Torah, however, relates Terah's death in Haran before Abram continues the journey to Canaan as an expression that he was not remiss in the Mitzvah of honoring a parent by leaving his aging father behind.[12] The significance of Terah not reaching Canaan was a reflection of his character, a man who was unable to go "all the way". Although on a journey in the right direction, Terah fell short at arriving to the divine destination in contrast to Abram, who did follow through and achieved the divine goal, and was not bound by his father's idolatrous past. Abram's following God's command to leave his father, thus absolved him from the mitzvah of honoring parents, and as Abraham, he would go on to create a new lineage distinct from his ancestors.[13]
Samaritan tradition[edit]
In the Samaritan Pentateuch Terah dies aged 145 years and Abram leaves Haran after his death.[14]
Christian tradition[edit]
In the Christian tradition Abram left Haran after Terah died. The Christian views of the time of Terah come from a passage in the New Testament at Acts 7:2 4[15] where Stephen said some things that contrast with Jewish rabbinical views. He said that God appeared to Abraham in Mesopotamia, and directed him to leave the Chaldeans whereas most rabbinical commentators see Terah as being the one who directed the family to leave Ur Kasdim from Genesis 11:31: "Terah took his son Abram, his daughter-in-law Sarai (his son Abram's wife), and his grandson Lot (his son Haran's child) and left Ur of the Chaldeans to go to the land of Canaan."[16] Stephen asserts that Abram left Haran after Terah died.[17]
Islamic tradition[edit]
According to Ibn Kathir, a scholar of Sunni Islam, Abraham's father is believed to have been a disbelieving man,[18] due to his refusal to listen to the constant advice of his son. The earliest story involving Abraham in the Quran is his discussion with his ab (Arabic:  , lit. 'father'. The name given for this man in Quran 6:74[19] is  zar (Arabic:  )
As a father, Azar required his son's most sincere advice. Abraham explained to him the faults of idolatry,[20] and why he was wrong to worship objects which could neither hear nor see.[21] From the Quran 74/6, "And [mention, O Muhammad], when Abraham said to his a  Azar: Do you take idols as deities? Indeed, I see you and your people to be in manifest error."
Abraham told his father that he had indeed received revelations from God, knowledge which his father did not possess,[22] and told him that belief in God would grant him immense rewards in both this life and the hereafter. Abraham concluded his preaching by warning Azar of the grave punishment he would face if he did not mend his ways.[23] When Abraham offered his father the guidance and advice of God, he rejected it, and threatened to stone him to death.[24] Abraham prayed for his father[25] to be forgiven by God, and although he continued to seek forgiveness, it was only because of a promise that he had made earlier to him. When it became clear that Azar's unrelenting hatred towards monotheism would never be fought, Abraham dissociated himself from him.[26]
The Quran states that the people of Abraham were idolaters. When Abraham was a young boy, he decided to finally teach his community a lesson. He said to himself that he had a plan for their idols, whilst they would be gone away.[27] The Qur'an goes on to narrate that Abraham subsequently broke the idols, all except the largest, which he kept intact.[28] When the people returned, they began questioning each other over the wreckage, until some of the people remembered that the youth, Abraham, had spoken of the idols earlier.[29] When Abraham arrived, the people immediately began to question him, asking him whether he had anything to do with the broken idols. Abraham then, in a clever taunt, asked the people as to why they do not ask the largest of the idols, which, they believed, could indeed hear and speak.[30] The people of Abraham were then confounded with shame, and admitted that the idols were incapable of anything.[31]
After the incident of the idol wreckage, the people of Abraham, while having admitted their fault, are said to have ignored Abraham's warning and instead retaliated by throwing him into a fire and exclaiming "protect your gods".[32] Although the natural nature of fire is one of intense heat, God commanded the flame to be cool and peaceful for Abraham.[33] Abraham, as a result, remained unhurt both physically and spiritually, having survived the fire of persecution. The people continued to taunt and persecute him, but to no avail, as the Qur'an says that it was they "that lost most".[34] This means that Abraham came out unharmed and outstanded people.
In Shia Islam[edit]
Terah as Abraham's father[edit]
There is a consensus among Shia Muslim scholars and exegetes that Azar was not the biological father of Abraham but rather his paternal uncle while Terah is believed to be his father. Shaykh Tusi maintained that Azar was not Abraham's father and cited a hadith from the Muhammad according to which none of the prophet's ancestors up to Adam were polytheists.[35] By this he argued that since Azar was an idolater and Abraham was one of the prophet's ancestors, it is not possible for Azar to be Abraham's father. According to Grand Ayatollah Naser Makarem Shirazi in Tafsir Nemooneh, all Shiite exegetes and scholars believe that Azar was not Abraham's father.[36] Allamah Tabatabai in his Tafsir al-Mizan appealed to the Quranic verses in which Abraham prayed for his parents, that they show that his father was someone other than Azar.[37] In Dua Umm Dawood, a supplication recited by Shi'ite Muslims cited to be from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, the supplicant sends blessings on a person by the name of 'Turakh'.[38][39] In Nahj al-Balagha, Imam Ali is reported to have said in a sermon, "I testify that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, and the chief of His creation; whenever Allah divided the line of descent, He put him in the better one.."[40] Likewise, in Ziyarat Arbaeen, a recitation with which Shiite Muslims pay respect to Imam Husayn, it is recited "I bear witness that you were a light in the sublime loins and purified wombs..",[41] through which it is believed that none of his ancestors up to Adam were impure, which includes Muhammad, Imam Ali and Lady Fatimah and hence including Abraham's biological father.
The Twelver Shi'ite website Al-Islam.org treats Azar as being Abraham's uncle, not his biological father.[42] To justify this view, it references a passage of the Quran, which mentions that the sons of Ya q b (Jacob) referred to his uncle Ism l (Ishmael), father Is- q (Isaac) and grandfather Ibr h m (Abraham) as his  b  (Arabic:  ):[43]
Were you there to see when death came upon Ya'qub? When he said to his sons, "What will you worship after I am gone?" they replied, "We shall worship your God and the God of your aba , Ibrahim, Isma'il, and Is-haq, one single God: we devote ourselves to Him." Qur'an, 2:133[43]
Therefore, the singular word ab does not always mean progenitor, and can be used for an adopter, uncle, step-father, or caretaker, unlike the word w lid (Arabic:  , progenitor). Thus, Al-Islam.org denies that Abraham's biological father was 'Azar', and instead agreed with Ibn Kathir that he was the biblical figure 'Terah',[42] who nevertheless treated him as a polytheist.[18]
As Abraham's uncle[edit]
In contrast to Al-Islam.org,[42] Shi'ite scholar and jurist Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi believed[when?] Terah to be the uncle of Abraham, not his father.[44]: 15 
In popular culture[edit]
Terah is portrayed by Vittorio Gassman in the film Abraham (1993).
References[edit]
^ Genesis 11:26 27
^ Joshua 24:2
^ 1 Chronicles 1:17 27
^ Luke 3:34 36
^ a b c "THE ROLE OF TERAH IN THE FOUNDATIONAL STORIES OF THE PATRIARCHAL FAMILY".
^ The Masoretic Text gives his age at death as 205. The corresponding passage in the Septuagint does not give Terah's age at death. See Larsson, Gerhard. "The Chronology of the Pentateuch: A Comparison of the MT and LXX." Journal of Biblical Literature, vol. 102, no. 3, 1983, pp. 401 409. www.jstor.org/stable/3261014. See also the New English Translation of the Septuagint, Genesis 11:32.
^ The Holy Bible, New Revised Standard Version. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson Publishers. 1989. pp. 6 22.
^ Genesis 11:26
^ Avodah Zara 9A
^ Sforno, Bereishit 12:5
^ Goldin, Shmuel. Unlocking the Torah Text Bereishit, Vol. 1, (ISBN 9652294128, ISBN 978-965-229-412-8), 2010, p. 59, 60
^ Compare Rashi, Bereishis 11:32 with Bereishis Rabbah 39:7
^ (Haggadah shel Pesach)   Levene, Osher C. People of the Book, (ISBN 1568714467, ISBN 978-1-56871-446-2), 2004, p. 79 80
^ "Google Sites". sites.google.com.
^ Acts 7:2 4
^ Genesis 11:31
^ "Bible Gateway passage: Acts 7:4 - King James Version". Bible Gateway.
^ a b Stories of the Prophets, Ibn Kathir, Abraham and his father
^ (6:74)
^ Quran 19:44
^ Quran 19:42
^ Quran 19:43
^ Quran 19:45
^ Quran 19:46
^ Quran 19:47
^ Quran 9:114
^ Quran 21:57
^ Quran 21:58
^ Quran 21:60
^ Quran 21:63
^ Quran 21:65
^ Quran 21:68
^ Quran 21:69
^ Quran 21:70
^  s , al-Tiby n f  tafs r al-Qur n, vol. 4, p. 175
^ Mak rim Sh r z , Tafs r-i nim na, vol. 5, p. 303.
^  ab ab y , al-M z n, vol. 7, p. 261
^ "Aamal e Umme Dawood". www.duas.org.
^ "Wilayat Mission" (PDF).
^ Nahj Al-Balagha, Sermon 214
^ "Ziyarat Arbaeen - Duas.org". www.duas.org.
^ a b c "Was Azar the Father of Prophet Abraham?". Al-Islam.org. Ahlul Bayt Digital Islamic Library Project. 12 November 2013. Retrieved 2017-09-12.
^ a b Quran 2:124 141
^ Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi (26 March 2016). The Laws of Islam (PDF). Enlight Press. ISBN 978-0-9942-4098-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2017.
vteAdam to David according to the Hebrew BibleCreation to  Flood
Adam
Seth
Enos
Kenan
Mahalalel
Jared
Enoch
Methuselah
Lamech
Noah
Shem
Patriarchs after Flood
Arpachshad
Cainan
Shelah
Eber
Peleg
Reu
Serug
Nahor
Terah
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Tribe of Judah to Kingdom
Judah
Perez
Hezron
Ram
Amminadab
Nahshon
Salmon
Boaz
Obed
Jesse
David
Names in italics only appear in the Greek Septuagint version
vtePeople and things in the QuranCharactersNon-humans
All h ('The God')
Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Kar m (Generous)
AnimalsRelated
The baqarah (cow) of Israelites
The dhi b (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph
The f l (elephant) of the Abyssinians
 im r (Domesticated donkey)
The hud-hud (hoopoe) of Solomon
The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave
The namlah (female ant) of Solomon
The n n (fish or whale) of Jonah
The n qat (she-camel) of  li 
Non-related
 Ankab t (Female spider)
D bbat al-Ar  (Beast of the Earth)
 im r (Wild ass)
Na l (Honey bee)
Qaswarah ('Lion', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter')
Mal ikah (Angels)
Angels of Hell
M lik
Zab niyah
Bearers of the Throne
Harut and Marut
Kir man K tib n (Honourable Scribes)
Raqib
Atid
Munkar and Nakir
Muqarrabun
Jibr l (Gabriel, chief)
Ar-R  ('The Spirit')
Ar-R  al-Am n ('The Trustworthy Spirit')
Ar-R  al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit')
Angel of the Trumpet (Isr f l or Raphael)
Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael)
M k il (Michael)
Jinn (Genies)
Jann
 Ifr t
Sakhr (Asmodeus)
Qar n
Shay n (Demons)
Ibl s ash-Shay n (the (chief) Devil)
M rid ('Rebellious one')
Others
Ghilm n or Wild n
 r
ProphetsMentioned
 dam (Adam)
Al-Yasa  (Elisha)
Ayy b (Job)
D w d (David)
Dh l-Kifl (Ezekiel?)
H r n (Aaron)
H d (Eber?)
Idr s (Enoch?)
Ily s (Elijah)
 Imr n (Joachim the father of Maryam)
Is q (Isaac)
Ism l (Ishmael)
Dhabih Ullah
L  (Lot)
 li 
Shu ayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab?)
Sulaym n ibn D w d (Solomon son of David)
 Uzair (Ezra?)
Ya y  ibn Zakariyy  (John the Baptist the son of Zechariah)
Ya q b (Jacob)
Isr l (Israel)
Y nus (Jonah)
Dh n-N n ('He of the Fish (or Whale)' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)')
 ib al- t ('Companion of the Whale')
Y suf ibn Ya q b (Joseph son of Jacob)
Zakariyy  (Zechariah)
Ulul- Azm('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will')
Mu ammad
A mad
Other names and titles of Muhammad
 s  (Jesus)
Al-Mas  (The Messiah)
Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary)
M s  Kal mull h (Moses He who spoke to God)
Ibr h m Khal lull h (Abraham Friend of God)
N  (Noah)
Debatable ones
Dh l-Qarnain
Luqm n
Maryam (Mary)
 l t (Saul or Gideon?)
Implied
Irmiy  (Jeremiah)
 am l (Samuel)
Y sha  ibn N n (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses)
People of ProphetsGood ones
Adam's immediate relatives
Martyred son
Wife
Believer of Ya-Sin
Family of Noah
Father Lamech
Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos
Luqman's son
People of Abraham
Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo
Ishmael's mother
Isaac's mother
People of Jesus
Disciples (including Peter)
Mary's mother
Zechariah's wife
People of Solomon
Mother
Queen of Sheba
Vizier
Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son)
People of Joseph
Brothers (including Biny min (Benjamin) and Simeon)
Egyptians
 Az z (Potiphar, Qatafir or Qittin)
Malik (King Ar-Rayy n ibn Al-Wal d))
Wife of  Az z (Zulaykhah)
Mother
People of Aaron and Moses
Egyptians
Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura)
Imra at Fir awn ( siy  bint Muz im the Wife of Pharaoh, who adopted Moses)
Magicians of the Pharaoh
Wise, pious man
Moses' wife
Moses' sister-in-law
Mother
Sister
Evil ones
 zar (possibly Terah)
Fir awn (Pharaoh of Moses' time)
H m n
J l t (Goliath)
Q r n (Korah, cousin of Moses)
As-S mir 
Ab  Lahab
Slayers of  li 's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr)
Implied ornot specified
Abraha
Abu Bakr
Bal'am/Balaam
Bar 
Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua
Luqman's son
Nebuchadnezzar II
Nimrod
Rahmah the wife of Ayyub
Shaddad
GroupsMentioned
A b al-Jannah
People of Paradise
People of the Burnt Garden
A b as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath)
Jesus' apostles
 aw riyy n (Disciples of Jesus)
Companions of Noah's Ark
A b al-Kahf war-Raq m (Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?
Companions of the Elephant
People of al-Ukhd d
People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin
People of Yathrib or Medina
Qawm L  (People of Sodom and Gomorrah)
Nation of Noah
Tribes, ethnicitiesor families
 Ajam
Ar-R m (literally 'The Romans')
Ban  Isr l (Children of Israel)
Mu tafik t (Sodom and Gomorrah)
People of Ibrahim
People of Ilyas
People of Nuh
People of Shuaib
Ahl Madyan People of Madyan)
A b al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood')
Qawm Y nus (People of Jonah)
Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog
People of Fir'aun
Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad)
A b Mu ammad (Companions of Muhammad)
An r (literally 'Helpers')
Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina)
People of Mecca
Wife of Abu Lahab
Children of Ayyub
Sons of Adam
Wife of Nuh
Wife of Lut
Ya j j wa Ma j j (Gog and Magog)
Son of Nuh
A r b (Arabs or Bedouins)
 d (people of Hud)
Companions of the Rass
Qawm Tubba  (People of Tubba)
People of Saba  or Sheba
Quraysh
Tham d (people of  li )
A b al- ijr ('Companions of the Stoneland')
Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household')
Household of Abraham
Brothers of Y suf
Lot's daughters
Progeny of Imran
Household of Moses
Household of Muhammad
ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim
Daughters of Muhammad
Muhammad's wives
Household of Salih
Implicitlymentioned
Amalek
Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah)
Banu Nadir
Banu Qaynuqa
Banu Qurayza
Iranian people
Umayyad Dynasty
Aus and Khazraj
People of Quba
Religious groups
Ahl al-Dhimmah
K fir n
disbelievers
Maj s Zoroastrians
Mun fiq n (Hypocrites)
Muslims
Believers
Ahl al-Kit b (People of the Book)
Na r  (Christian(s) or People of the Injil)
Ruhban (Christian monks)
Qissis (Christian priest)
Yah d (Jews)
Ahb r (Jewish scholars)
Rabbani/Rabbi
Sabians
Polytheists
Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad
Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot
LocationsMentioned
Al-Ar  Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land')
'Blessed' Land'
Al-Jannah (Paradise, literally 'The Garden')
Jahannam (Hell)
Door of Hittah
Madyan (Midian)
Majma  al-Ba rayn
Mi r (Mainland Egypt)
Salsab l (A river in Paradise)
In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan)
Al-A q f ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills')
Iram dh t al- Im d (Iram of the Pillars)
Al-Mad nah (formerly Yathrib)
 Araf t and Al-Mash ar Al- ar m
Al- ijr (Hegra)
Badr
 unayn
Makkah (Mecca)
Bakkah
 araman  minan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure')
Ka bah (Kaaba)
Maq m Ibr h m (Station of Abraham)
Safa and Marwa
Saba  (Sheba)
 Arim Saba  (Dam of Sheba)
Rass
Sinai Region or T h Desert
Al-W d Al-Muqaddas  uwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa)
Al-W dil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai)
Al-Buq ah Al-Mub rakah ('The Blessed Place')
Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor
In Mesopotamia
Al-J diyy
Munzalanm-Mub rakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed')
B bil (Babylon)
Qaryat Y nus ('Township of Jonah,' that is Nineveh)
Religious locations
Bay a (Church)
Mi r b
Monastery
Masjid (Mosque, literally 'Place of Prostration')
Al-Mash ar Al- ar m ('The Sacred Grove')
Al-Masjid Al-Aq  (Al-Aqsa Mosque, literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration')
Al-Masjid Al- ar m (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca)
Masjid al-Dirar
A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly:
Masjid Qub  (Quba Mosque)
The Prophet's Mosque
Salat (Synagogue)
Implied
Antioch
Antakya
Arabia
Al- ij z (literally 'The Barrier')
Al- ajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il
Cave of Hira
Gh r ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull)
Hudaybiyyah
Ta'if
Ayla
Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn
Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha
Bil d ar-R fidayn (Mesopotamia)
Canaan
Cave of Seven Sleepers
D r an-Nadwa
Jordan River
Nile River
Palestine River
Paradise of Shaddad
Events, incidents, occasions or times
Incident of Ifk
Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree)
Event of Mubahala
Sayl al- Arim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba)
The Farewell Pilgrimage
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Battles ormilitary expeditions
Battle of al-A z b ('the Confederates')
Battle of Badr
Battle of Hunayn
Battle of Khaybar
Battle of Uhud
Expedition of Tabuk
Conquest of Mecca
Days
Al-Jumu ah (The Friday)
As-Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday)
Days of battles
Days of Hajj
Doomsday
Months of theIslamic calendar
12 months: Four holy months
Ash-Shahr Al- ar m (The Sacred or Forbidden Month)
Rama n
Pilgrimages
Al- ajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage)
Al- Umrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage)
Times for prayeror remembranceTimes for Du  ('Invocation'),  al h and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Ta m d ('Praising'), Takb r and Tasb ):
Al- Ashiyy (The Afternoon or the Night)
Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings')
Al-Bukrah ('The Morning')
A - ab  ('The Morning')
Al-Layl ('The Night')
Al- Ish  ('The Late-Night')
A - uhr ('The Noon')
Dul k ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun')
Al-Mas  ('The Evening')
Qabl al-Ghur b ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)')
Al-A l ('The Afternoon')
Al- A r ('The Afternoon')
Qabl  ul  ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun')
Al-Fajr ('The Dawn')Implied
Ghadir Khumm
Laylat al-Mabit
The first pilgrimage
OtherHoly books
Al-Inj l (The Gospel of Jesus)
Al-Qur n (The Book of Muhammad)
 u uf-i Ibr h m (Scroll(s) of Abraham)
At-Tawr t (The Torah)
 u uf-i-M s  (Scroll(s) of Moses)
Tablets of Stone
Az-Zab r (The Psalms of David)
Umm al-Kit b ('Mother of the Book(s)')
Objects of peopleor beings
Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles
Noah's Ark
Staff of Musa
T b t as-Sak nah (Casket of Shekhinah)
Throne of Bilqis
Trumpet of Israfil
Mentioned idols(cult images)
'Ans b
Jibt and  gh t (False god)
Of Israelites
Ba al
The  ijl (golden calf statue) of Israelites
Of Noah's people
Nasr
Suw 
Wadd
Yagh th
Ya q
Of Quraysh
Al-L t
Al- Uzz 
Man t
Celestial bodiesMa b  (literally 'lamps'):
Al-Qamar (The Moon)
Kaw kib (Planets)
Al-Ar  (The Earth)
Nuj m (Stars)
Ash-Shams (The Sun)Plant matter
Ba al (Onion)
F m (Garlic or wheat)
Sha  (Shoot)
S q (Plant stem)
Zar  (Seed)
Fruits
 Adas (Lentil)
Baql (Herb)
Qith-th  (Cucumber)
Rumm n (Pomegranate)
T n (Fig)
Zayt n (Olive)
In Paradise
Forbidden fruit of Adam
Bushes, treesor plants
Plants of Sheba
Athl (Tamarisk)
Sidr (Lote-tree)
L nah (Tender Palm tree)
Nakhl (Date palm)
Sidrat al-Muntah 
Zaqq m
Liquids
M  (Water or fluid)
Nahr (River)
Yamm (River or sea)
Shar b (Drink)
Note: Names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship)
vteLinear genealogy of Muhammad from the first couple, according to various sourcesGenerations after Creation
Adam and Hawwa
Sheyth
Enos
Kenan
Mahalalel
Jared
Idris
Methuselah
Lamik
Nuh
Sam
Ibrahim
Ibrahim
Ismail
Tribe of the Adnanites
Adnan
Ma'ad ibn Adnan
Nizar
Mudar
Ilyas
Mudrikah
Khuzayma
Kinanah
Al-Nadr ibn Kinanah
Malik
Fihr al-Quraysh
Quraysh tribe
Ghalib
Lu'ay
Ka'b
Murrah
Kilab
Qusai
Abd Manaf
Hashim ibn Abd Manaf
The House of Hashim
Abd al-Muttalib
Abd-Allah
Muhammad
Authority control International
VIAF
National
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Terah&oldid=1148335994"