This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Information technology management" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (January 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Information technology management or IT management is the discipline whereby all of the information technology resources of a firm are managed in accordance with its needs and priorities. Managing the responsibility within a company entails many of the basic management functions, like budgeting, staffing, change management, and organizing and controlling, along with other aspects that are unique to technology, like software design, network planning, tech support etc.[1]
Purpose[edit]
The central aim of IT management is to generate value through the use of technology. To achieve this, business strategies and technology must be aligned.
IT Management is different from management information systems. The latter refers to management methods tied to the automation or support of human decision making.[2] IT Management refers to IT related management activities in organizations. MIS is focused mainly on the business aspect, with a strong input into the technology phase of the business/organization.
A primary focus of IT management is the value creation made possible by technology. This requires the alignment of technology and business strategies. While the value creation for an organization involves a network of relationships between internal and external environments, technology plays an important role in improving the overall value chain of an organization. However, this increase requires business and technology management to work as a creative, synergistic, and collaborative team instead of a purely mechanistic span of control.[3]
Historically, one set of resources was dedicated to one particular computing technology, business application or line of business, and managed in a silo-like fashion.[4] These resources supported a single set of requirements and processes, and couldn't easily be optimized or reconfigured to support actual demand.[5] This led technology providers to build out and complement their product-centric infrastructure and management offerings with Converged Infrastructure environments that converge servers, storage, networking, security, management and facilities.[6][7] The efficiencies of having this type of integrated and automated management environment allows enterprises to get their applications up and running faster, with simpler manageability and maintenance, and enables IT to adjust IT resources (such as servers, storage and networking) quicker to meet unpredictable business demand.[8][9]
IT management disciplines[edit]
The below concepts are commonly listed or investigated under the broad term IT Management:[10]
[11]
[12]
[13][14]
Business/IT alignment
IT governance
IT financial management
IT service management
Sourcing
IT configuration management
IT infrastructure[15][16]
IT managers[edit]
IT managers have a lot in common with project managers but their main difference is one of focus: an IT manager is responsible and accountable for an ongoing program of IT services while the project manager's responsibility and accountability are both limited to a project with a clear start and end date.[17]
Most IT management programs are designed to educate and develop managers who can effectively manage the planning, design, selection, implementation, use, and administration of emerging and converging information and communications technologies. The program curriculum provides students with the technical knowledge and management knowledge and skills needed to effectively integrate people, information and communication technologies, and business processes in support of organizational strategic goals.[18]
Graduates should be able:
to explain the important terminology, facts, concepts, principles, analytic techniques, and theories used in IT management.
to apply important terminology, facts, concepts, principles, analytic techniques, and theories in IT management when analyzing complex factual situations.
to integrate (or synthesize) important facts, concepts, principles, and theories in IT management when developing solutions to IT management multifaceted problems in complex situations.[19]
Consequences of IT management deficiencies[edit]
In 2013, hackers managed to install malware with the intent of stealing Target's customers' information. The malware targeted  40 million credit card numbers and 70 million addresses, phone numbers, and other pieces of personal information . About six months before this happened, Target invested 1.6 million dollars to install the malware detection tool made by FireEye, whose security product is also used by the CIA. The software spotted the malware, and alert was sent out as intended. However, nothing done beyond that point. The hackers successfully got away with one third of US Consumers  confidential  information. Target's security system s unresponsiveness led to 90 lawsuits being filed against Target, which went on top of another approximate $61 million USD spent just responding to the breach, [20]
See also[edit]
Information Resources Management Journal
Information infrastructure
References[edit]
^ McNurlin, Barbara;  et al. (2009). Information Systems Management in Practice (8th ed.). Prentice Hall.
^ O Brien, J (1999). Management Information Systems   Managing Information Technology in the Internetworked Enterprise. Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-112373-3.
^ Bird, M. (2010). Modern Management Guide to Information Technology. Create Space.
^ Talbot, Chris,  HP Adds to Converged Infrastructure Lineup,  ChannelInsider, June 7, 2011.
^ "Gardner, Dana, "Converged Infrastructure Approach Paves Way for Improved Data Center Productivity, Private Clouds," February 9, 2010, IT Business Edge". Archived from the original on December 5, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Huff, Lisa,  The Battle for the Converged Data Center Network,  Data Center Knowledge, August 18, 2011.
^ "Harris, Derrick, "Can Open Converged Infrastructure Compete?" GigaOM, October 10, 2010". Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Oestreich, Ken, "Converged Infrastructure," CTO Forum, November 15, 2010. Archived January 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Golden, Bernard, "Cloud Computing: Two Kinds of Agility," CIO, July 16, 2010". Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ 28 Nov. 2008 [1]
^ 28 Nov. 2008 [2]
^ McKeen, James D., and Smith, Heather A., Making IT Happen: Critical Issues in IT Management, Wiley Series in Information Systems, 2003
^ CIO Wisdom: Best Practise from Silicon Valley's Leading IT Experts, Lane, D. (ed), Prentice Hall 2004
^ Veen, Annelies van der; Jan van Bon (2007). Foundations of ITIL V3. Van Haren Publishing. ISBN 978-90-8753-057-0.
^ Axelos (2021). Axelos ITIL 4 Foundation. Axelos.
^ Stationery Office, Claire Agutter (2012). ITIL Foundation Handbook. ISBN 9780113313495.
^ Thomas, Rhan  (June 15, 2009). "IT Managers and Project Management". PM Hut. Retrieved December 13, 2009.
^ "Master of Management (Information Technology)". Charles Sturt University. Retrieved 2014-09-03.
^ "Journal - Knowledge of Management, Economics and Information Technology" (PDF). scientificpapers.org. Retrieved 2014-09-03.
^ Riley, M., Elgin, B., Lawrence, D., & Matlack, C. (2014, March 13). Missed Alarms and 40
Million Stolen Credit Card Numbers: How Target Blew It. Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved from [3] 
vteManagement
Outline of business management
Index of management articles
By type of organization
Academic
Association
Business
Restaurant
Healthcare
Military
Public
By focus (within an organization)By scopeStrategic(top-level)
Capability
Change
Communication
Financial
Innovation
Legal
Performance
Risk
Systems
By component
Facility
Product
Product lifecycle
Brand
Program
Project
Construction
By activity ordepartment managedLine
Marketing
Operations/production
Process
Quality
Sales
Staff
Accounting
Office
Records
By aspect orrelationship
Customer relationship
Engineering
Logistics
Perception
Supply chain
Talent
By problem
Conflict
Crisis
Stress
By resource
Environmental resource
Field inventory
Human resources
Information
Information technology
Knowledge
Land
Materials
Skills
Technology
Time
Managementpositions
Interim
Middle
Senior
Methodsand approaches
Adhocracy
Collaborative method
Distributed
Earned value management
Evidence-based management
Full Range of Leadership Model
Management by objectives
Management style
Macromanagement
Micromanagement
Scientific management
Social entrepreneurship
Team building
Virtual management
Management skillsand activities
Decision-making
Forecasting
Leadership
Pioneers andscholars
Peter Drucker
Eliyahu M. Goldratt
Oliver E. Williamson
Education
Association of Technology, Management, and Applied Engineering
Business school
Certified Business Manager
Chartered Management Institute
Critical management studies
Degrees
Bachelor of Business Administration
Master of Business Administration
PhD in management
Other
Administration
Collaboration
Corporate governance
Executive compensation
Management consulting
Management control
Management cybernetics
Management development
Management fad
Management system
Managerial economics
Managerial psychology
Managerialism
Organization development
Organizational behavior management
Pointy-haired Boss
Williamson's model of managerial discretion
 Systems science portal
Authority control: National 
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Information_technology_management&oldid=1147944020"