English statesman and philosopher (1478 1535)
"Sir Thomas More" redirects here. For the play, see Sir Thomas More (play).
For other uses, see Thomas More (disambiguation).
SirThomas MorePCSir Thomas More (1527)by Hans Holbein the YoungerLord ChancellorIn officeOctober 1529  May 1532MonarchHenry VIIIPreceded byThomas WolseySucceeded byThomas AudleyChancellor of the Duchy of LancasterIn office31 December 1525  3 November 1529MonarchHenry VIIIPreceded byRichard WingfieldSucceeded byWilliam FitzWilliamSpeaker of the House of CommonsIn office15 April 1523  13 August 1523MonarchHenry VIIIPreceded byThomas NevillSucceeded byThomas Audley
Personal detailsBorn7 February 1478City of London, EnglandDied6 July 1535 (aged 57)Tower Hill, London, EnglandSpouses
Jane Colt
   (m. 1505; died 1511) 
Alice Middleton  (m. 1511) 
ChildrenMargaret, Elizabeth, Cicely, and JohnParent(s)Sir John MoreAgnes GraungerEducationUniversity of OxfordLincoln's InnSignaturePhilosophy careerNotable workUtopia (1516)Responsio ad Lutherum (1523)A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation (1553)EraRenaissance philosophy16th-century philosophyRegionWestern philosophy, CatholicSchoolChristian humanism[1]Renaissance humanismMain interestsSocial philosophyCriticism of ProtestantismNotable ideasUtopia
Influences
ErasmusBoethiusJohn FisherAristotleSocratesPlato[2]Cicero[3]Giovanni Pico della MirandolaAmerigo Vespucci[4]Lucian[5]Thomas AquinasDante AlighieriAugustine of Hippo[6]
Influenced
John Henry NewmanWilliam Shakespeare
Sir Thomas More (7 February 1478   6 July 1535), venerated in the Catholic Church as Saint Thomas More,[7][8] was an English lawyer, judge,[9] social philosopher, author, statesman, and noted Renaissance humanist. He also served Henry VIII as Lord High Chancellor of England from October 1529 to May 1532.[10] He wrote Utopia, published in 1516,[11] which describes the political system of an imaginary island state.
More opposed the Protestant Reformation, directing polemics against the theology of Martin Luther, Huldrych Zwingli, John Calvin and William Tyndale. More also opposed Henry VIII's separation from the Catholic Church, refusing to acknowledge Henry as supreme head of the Church of England and the annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. After refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy, he was convicted of treason and executed. On his execution, he was reported to have said: "I die the King's good servant, and God's first".
Pope Pius XI canonised More in 1935 as a martyr. Pope John Paul II in 2000 declared him the patron saint of statesmen and politicians.[12][13][14]
Early life[edit]
Part of a series onCatholic philosophy Aquinas, Scotus, and Ockham
Ethics
Cardinal virtues
Just price
Just war
Principle of Double Effect
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Social teaching
Virtue ethics
Metaphysics
Conceptualism
Realism
Moderate realism
Nominalism
Quiddity (essence / nature)
Haecceity
Quinque Viae
Predestination
Free Will
Divine Attributes
Schools
Augustinianism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Ressourcement
Occamism
Scholasticism
Neo
Scotism
Thomism
Analytic
Salamanca
Philosophers
Ancient
Ambrose
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Benedict of Nursia
Boethius
Clement of Alexandria
Cyprian
Cyril of Alexandria
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Irenaeus
Jerome
John Cassian
John Chrysostom
John Climacus
John of Damascus
Justin Martyr
Maximus the Confessor
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Origen
Paul the Apostle
Tertullian
Postclassical
Peter Abelard
Albertus Magnus
Anselm of Canterbury
Roger Bacon
Bede
Bernard of Clairvaux
Berengar of Tours
Bonaventure
Catherine of Siena
Duns Scotus
John Scotus Eriugena
Pope Gregory I
Gregory of Rimini
Giles of Rome
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Isidore of Seville
James of Viterbo
Jean Buridan
Meister Eckhart
Nicholas of Cusa
Nicole Oresme
Paul of Venice
Paschasius Radbertus
Peter Lombard
Roscellinus
Symeon the New Theologian
Thierry of Chartres
Thomas Aquinas
William of Ockham
Modern
Arnauld
Azpilcueta
Bellarmine
Bonald
Bossuet
Brentano
Vico
Botero
Cajetan
Cort s
Sales
Soto
Descartes
Erasmus
F nelon
Graci n
Ko taj
Krasicki
La Mennais
Liguori
Malebranche
Maistre
Meinong
Mercado
Molina
More
Newman
Pascal
Chateaubriand
Rosmini
 vila
Su rez
Vitoria
Contemporary
Adler
Anscombe
Balthasar
Barron
Benedict XVI
Blondel
Chesterton
Congar
Copleston
Finnis
Garrigou-Lagrange
Geach
Gilson
Girard
Guti rrez
D vila
Guardini
Haldane
Hildebrand
John Paul II
Lonergan
Lubac
MacIntyre
Marcel
Marion
Maritain
McLuhan
Mounier
Pieper
Rahner
Stein
Taylor
 Catholicism portal Philosophy portalvte
Born on Milk Street in the City of London, on 7 February 1478, Thomas More was the son of Sir John More,[15] a successful lawyer and later a judge,[9] and his wife Agnes (n e Graunger). He was the second of six children. More was educated at St. Anthony's School, then considered one of London's best schools.[16][17] From 1490 to 1492, More served John Morton, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor of England, as a household page.[18]: xvi 
Morton enthusiastically supported the "New Learning" (scholarship which was later known as "humanism" or "London humanism"), and thought highly of the young More. Believing that More had great potential, Morton nominated him for a place at the University of Oxford (either in St. Mary Hall or Canterbury College, both now gone).[19]: 38 
More began his studies at Oxford in 1492, and received a classical education. Studying under Thomas Linacre and William Grocyn, he became proficient in both Latin and Greek. More left Oxford after only two years at his father's insistence to begin legal training in London at New Inn, one of the Inns of Chancery.[18]: xvii [20] In 1496, More became a student at Lincoln's Inn, one of the Inns of Court, where he remained until 1502, when he was called to the Bar.[18]: xvii 
Spiritual life[edit]
According to his friend, the theologian Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam, More once seriously contemplated abandoning his legal career to become a monk.[21][22] Between 1503 and 1504 More lived near the Carthusian monastery outside the walls of London and joined in the monks' spiritual exercises. Although he deeply admired their piety, More ultimately decided to remain a layman, standing for election to Parliament in 1504 and marrying the following year.[18]: xxi 
More continued ascetic practices for the rest of his life, such as wearing a hair shirt next to his skin and occasionally engaging in self-flagellation.[18]: xxi  A tradition of the Third Order of Saint Francis honours More as a member of that Order on their calendar of saints.[23]
Family life[edit]
 Rowland Lockey after Hans Holbein the Younger, The Family of Sir Thomas More, c. 1594
More married Jane Colt in 1505. In that year he leased a portion of a house known as the Old Barge (originally there had been a wharf nearby serving the Walbrook river) on Bucklersbury, St Stephen Walbrook parish, London. Eight years later he took over the rest of the house and in total he lived there for almost 20 years, until his move to Chelsea in 1525.[19]: 118, 271 [24][25] Erasmus reported that More wanted to give his young wife a better education than she had previously received at home, and tutored her in music and literature.[19]: 119  The couple had four children: Margaret, Elizabeth, Cicely, and John. Jane died in 1511.[19]: 132 
Going "against friends' advice and common custom," within 30 days, More had married one of the many eligible women among his wide circle of friends.[26][27] He chose Alice Middleton, a widow, to head his household and care for his small children.[28] The speed of the marriage was so unusual that More had to get a dispensation from the banns of marriage, which, due to his good public reputation, he easily obtained.[26]
More had no children from his second marriage, although he raised Alice's daughter from her previous marriage as his own. More also became the guardian of two young girls: Anne Cresacre who would eventually marry his son, John More;[19]: 146  and Margaret Giggs (later Clement) who was the only member of his family to witness his execution (she died on the 35th anniversary of that execution, and her daughter married More's nephew William Rastell). An affectionate father, More wrote letters to his children whenever he was away on legal or government business, and encouraged them to write to him often.[19]: 150 [29]: xiv 
More insisted upon giving his daughters the same classical education as his son, an unusual attitude at the time.[19]: 146 47  His eldest daughter, Margaret, attracted much admiration for her erudition, especially her fluency in Greek and Latin.[19]: 147  More told his daughter of his pride in her academic accomplishments in September 1522, after he showed the bishop a letter she had written:
When he saw from the signature that it was the letter of a lady, his surprise led him to read it more eagerly   he said he would never have believed it to be your work unless I had assured him of the fact, and he began to praise it in the highest terms   for its pure Latinity, its correctness, its erudition, and its expressions of tender affection. He took out at once from his pocket a portague [A Portuguese gold coin]   to send to you as a pledge and token of his good will towards you.[29]: 152 
More's decision to educate his daughters set an example for other noble families. Even Erasmus became much more favourable once he witnessed their accomplishments.[19]: 149 
A portrait of More and his family, Sir Thomas More and Family, was painted by Holbein; however, it was lost in a fire in the 18th century. More's grandson commissioned a copy, of which two versions survive.
Early political career[edit]
 Study for a portrait of Thomas More's family, c. 1527, by Hans Holbein the Younger
In 1504 More was elected to Parliament to represent Great Yarmouth, and in 1510 began representing London.[30]
From 1510, More served as one of the two undersheriffs of the City of London, a position of considerable responsibility in which he earned a reputation as an honest and effective public servant. More became Master of Requests in 1514,[31] the same year in which he was appointed as a Privy Counsellor.[32] After undertaking a diplomatic mission to the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, accompanying Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal Archbishop of York, to Calais and Bruges, More was knighted and made under-treasurer of the Exchequer in 1521.[32]
As secretary and personal adviser to King Henry VIII, More became increasingly influential: welcoming foreign diplomats, drafting official documents, and serving as a liaison between the King and Lord Chancellor Wolsey. More later served as High Steward for the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
In 1523 More was elected as knight of the shire (MP) for Middlesex and, on Wolsey's recommendation, the House of Commons elected More its Speaker.[32] In 1525 More became Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, with executive and judicial responsibilities over much of northern England.[32]
Chancellorship[edit]
After Wolsey fell, More succeeded to the office of Lord Chancellor in 1529. He dispatched cases with unprecedented rapidity.
Campaign against the Protestant Reformation[edit]
 Sir Thomas More is commemorated with a sculpture at the late-19th-century Sir Thomas More House, Carey Street, London, opposite the Royal Courts of Justice.
More supported the Catholic Church and saw the Protestant Reformation as heresy, a threat to the unity of both church and society. More believed in the theology, argumentation, and ecclesiastical laws of the church, and "heard Luther's call to destroy the Catholic Church as a call to war."[33]
His early actions against the Protestant Reformation included aiding Wolsey in preventing Lutheran books from being imported into England, spying on and investigating suspected Protestants,[34] especially publishers, and arresting anyone holding in his possession, transporting, or distributing Bibles and other materials of the Protestant Reformation. Additionally, More vigorously suppressed Tyndale's English translation of the New Testament.[35]
The Tyndale Bible used controversial translations of certain words that More considered heretical and seditious; for example, "senior" and "elder" rather than "priest" for the Greek presbyteros, and "congregation" instead of "church."[36] He also pointed out that some of the marginal glosses challenged Catholic doctrine.[37] It was during this time that most of his literary polemics appeared.
Many accounts circulated during and after More's lifetime regarding persecution of the Protestant "heretics" during his time as Lord Chancellor. The popular sixteenth-century English Protestant historian John Foxe was instrumental in publicising accusations of torture in his Book of Martyrs, claiming that More had often personally used violence or torture while interrogating heretics.[38] Later authors such as Brian Moynahan and Michael Farris cite Foxe when repeating these allegations,[39] although Diarmaid MacCulloch, while acknowledging More's "relish for burning heretics", finds no evidence that he was directly involved.[40] During More's chancellorship, six people were burned at the stake for heresy; they were Thomas Hitton, Thomas Bilney, Richard Bayfield, John Tewkesbury, Thomas Dusgate, and James Bainham.[19]: 299 306  Moynahan argued that More was influential in the burning of Tyndale, as More's agents had long pursued him, even though this took place over a year after his own death.[41]
Peter Ackroyd also lists claims from Foxe's Book of Martyrs and other post-Reformation sources that More "tied heretics to a tree in his Chelsea garden and whipped them", that "he watched as 'newe men' were put upon the rack in the Tower and tortured until they confessed", and that "he was personally responsible for the burning of several of the 'brethren' in Smithfield."[19]: 305  Richard Marius records a similar claim, which tells about James Bainham, and writes that "the story Foxe told of Bainham's whipping and racking at More's hands is universally doubted today".[42] More himself denied these allegations:
Stories of a similar nature were current even in More's lifetime and he denied them forcefully. He admitted that he did imprison heretics in his house   'theyr sure kepynge'   he called it   but he utterly rejected claims of torture and whipping... 'as help me God.'[19]: 298 299 
More instead claimed in his "Apology" (1533) that he only applied corporal punishment to two heretics: a child who was caned in front of his family for heresy regarding the Eucharist, and a "feeble-minded" man who was whipped for disrupting the mass by raising women's skirts over their heads at the moment of consecration.[43]: 404 
Burning at the stake had been a standard punishment for heresy: 30 burnings had taken place in the century before More's elevation to Chancellor, and burning continued to be used by both Catholics and Protestants during the religious upheaval of the following decades.[44] Ackroyd notes that More zealously "approved of burning".[19]: 298  Marius maintains that More did everything in his power to bring about the extermination of the Protestant "heretics".[42]
John Tewkesbury was a London leather seller found guilty by the Bishop of London John Stokesley[45] of harbouring English translated New Testaments; he was sentenced to burning for refusing to recant. More declared: he "burned as there was neuer wretche I wene better worthy."[46] After Richard Bayfield was also executed for distributing Tyndale's Bibles, More commented that he was "well and worthely burned".[19]: 305 
Modern commentators are divided over More's religious actions as Chancellor. Some biographers, including Ackroyd, have taken a relatively tolerant view of More's campaign against Protestantism by placing his actions within the turbulent religious climate of the time and the threat of deadly catastrophes such as the German Peasants' Revolt, which More blamed on Luther,[47][48][49] as did many others, such as Erasmus.[50] Others have been more critical, such as Richard Marius, an American scholar of the Reformation, believing that such persecutions were a betrayal of More's earlier humanist convictions, including More's zealous and well-documented advocacy of extermination for Protestants.[43]: 386 406 
Some Protestants take a different view. In 1980, More was added to the Church of England's calendar of Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church, despite being a fierce opponent of the English Reformation that created the Church of England. He was added jointly with John Fisher, to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as "Thomas More, scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535".[13] Pope John Paul II honoured him by making him patron saint of statesmen and politicians in October 2000, stating: "It can be said that he demonstrated in a singular way the value of a moral conscience ... even if, in his actions against heretics, he reflected the limits of the culture of his time".[12]
Resignation[edit]
As the conflict over supremacy between the Papacy and the King reached its peak, More continued to remain steadfast in supporting the supremacy of the Pope as Successor of Peter over that of the King of England. Parliament's reinstatement of the charge of praemunire in 1529 had made it a crime to support in public or office the claim of any authority outside the realm (such as the Papacy) to have a legal jurisdiction superior to the King's.[51]
In 1530, More refused to sign a letter by the leading English churchmen and aristocrats asking Pope Clement VII to annul Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon, and also quarrelled with Henry VIII over the heresy laws. In 1531, a royal decree required the clergy to take an oath acknowledging the King as Supreme Head of the Church of England. The bishops at the Convocation of Canterbury in 1532 agreed to sign the Oath but only under threat of praemunire and only after these words were added: "as far as the law of Christ allows".[52]
This was considered to be the final Submission of the Clergy.[53] Cardinal John Fisher and some other clergy refused to sign. Henry purged most clergy who supported the papal stance from senior positions in the church. More continued to refuse to sign the Oath of Supremacy and did not agree to support the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine.[51] However, he did not openly reject the King's actions and kept his opinions private.[54]
On 16 May 1532, More resigned from his role as Chancellor but remained in Henry's favour despite his refusal.[55] His decision to resign was caused by the decision of the convocation of the English Church, which was under intense royal threat, on the day before.[56]
Indictment, trial and execution[edit]
In 1533, More refused to attend the coronation of Anne Boleyn as the Queen of England. Technically, this was not an act of treason, as More had written to Henry seemingly acknowledging Anne's queenship and expressing his desire for the King's happiness and the new Queen's health.[57] Despite this, his refusal to attend was widely interpreted as a snub against Anne, and Henry took action against him.
Shortly thereafter, More was charged with accepting bribes, but the charges had to be dismissed for lack of any evidence. In early 1534, More was accused by Thomas Cromwell of having given advice and counsel to the "Holy Maid of Kent," Elizabeth Barton, a nun who had prophesied that the king had ruined his soul and would come to a quick end for having divorced Queen Catherine. This was a month after Barton had confessed, which was possibly done under royal pressure,[58][59] and was said to be concealment of treason.[60]
Though it was dangerous for anyone to have anything to do with Barton, More had indeed met her, and was impressed by her fervour. But More was prudent and told her not to interfere with state matters. More was called before a committee of the Privy Council to answer these charges of treason, and after his respectful answers the matter seemed to have been dropped.[61]
On 13 April 1534, More was asked to appear before a commission and swear his allegiance to the parliamentary Act of Succession. More accepted Parliament's right to declare Anne Boleyn the legitimate Queen of England, though he refused "the spiritual validity of the king's second marriage",[62] and, holding fast to the teaching of papal supremacy, he steadfastly refused to take the oath of supremacy of the Crown in the relationship between the kingdom and the church in England. More furthermore publicly refused to uphold Henry's annulment from Catherine. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, refused the oath along with More. The oath reads:[63]
...By reason whereof the Bishop of Rome and See Apostolic, contrary to the great and inviolable grants of jurisdictions given by God immediately to emperors, kings and princes in succession to their heirs, hath presumed in times past to invest who should please them to inherit in other men's kingdoms and dominions, which thing we your most humble subjects, both spiritual and temporal, do most abhor and detest...
In addition to refusing to support the King's annulment or supremacy, More refused to sign the 1534 Oath of Succession confirming Anne's role as queen and the rights of their children to succession. More's fate was sealed.[64][65] While he had no argument with the basic concept of succession as stated in the Act, the preamble of the Oath repudiated the authority of the Pope.[54][66][67]
His enemies had enough evidence to have the King arrest him on treason. Four days later, Henry had More imprisoned in the Tower of London. There More prepared a devotional Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation. While More was imprisoned in the Tower, Thomas Cromwell made several visits, urging More to take the oath, which he continued to refuse.
The site of the scaffold at Tower Hill where More was executed by decapitationA commemorative plaque at the site of the ancient scaffold at Tower Hill, with Sir Thomas More listed among other notables executed at the site
The charges of high treason related to More's violating the statutes as to the King's supremacy (malicious silence) and conspiring with Bishop John Fisher in this respect (malicious conspiracy) and, according to some sources, included asserting that Parliament did not have the right to proclaim the King's Supremacy over the English Church. One group of scholars believes that the judges dismissed the first two charges (malicious acts) and tried More only on the final one, but others strongly disagree.[51]
Regardless of the specific charges, the indictment related to violation of the Treasons Act 1534 which declared it treason to speak against the King's Supremacy:[68]
If any person or persons, after the first day of February next coming, do maliciously wish, will or desire, by words or writing, or by craft imagine, invent, practise, or attempt any bodily harm to be done or committed to the king's most royal person, the queen's, or their heirs apparent, or to deprive them or any of them of their dignity, title, or name of their royal estates  
That then every such person and persons so offending   shall have and suffer such pains of death and other penalties, as is limited and accustomed in cases of high treason.[69]
The trial was held on 1 July 1535, before a panel of judges that included the new Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Audley, as well as Anne Boleyn's uncle, Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, her father Thomas Boleyn and her brother George Boleyn. Norfolk offered More the chance of the king's "gracious pardon" should he "reform his [ ] obstinate opinion". More responded that, although he had not taken the oath, he had never spoken out against it either and that his silence could be accepted as his "ratification and confirmation" of the new statutes.[70]
Thus More was relying upon legal precedent and the maxim "qui tacet consentire videtur" ("one who keeps silent seems to consent"[71]), understanding that he could not be convicted as long as he did not explicitly deny that the King was Supreme Head of the Church, and he therefore refused to answer all questions regarding his opinions on the subject.[72]
 William Frederick Yeames, The meeting of Sir Thomas More with his daughter after his sentence of death, 1872
Thomas Cromwell, at the time the most powerful of the King's advisors, brought forth Solicitor General Richard Rich to testify that More had, in his presence, denied that the King was the legitimate head of the Church. This testimony was characterised by More as being extremely dubious. Witnesses Richard Southwell and Mr. Palmer (a servant to Southwell) were also present and both denied having heard the details of the reported conversation.[73] As More himself pointed out:
 Can it therefore seem likely to your Lordships, that I should in so weighty an Affair as this, act so unadvisedly, as to trust Mr. Rich, a Man I had always so mean an Opinion of, in reference to his Truth and Honesty,   that I should only impart to Mr. Rich the Secrets of my Conscience in respect to the King's Supremacy, the particular Secrets, and only Point about which I have been so long pressed to explain my self? which I never did, nor never would reveal; when the Act was once made, either to the King himself, or any of his Privy Councillors, as is well known to your Honours, who have been sent upon no other account at several times by his Majesty to me in the Tower. I refer it to your Judgments, my Lords, whether this can seem credible to any of your Lordships.[74]
 Beheading of Thomas More, 1870 illustration
The jury took only fifteen minutes, however, to find More guilty.
After the jury's verdict was delivered and before his sentencing, More spoke freely of his belief that "no temporal man may be the head of the spirituality" (take over the role of the Pope). According to William Roper's account, More was pleading that the Statute of Supremacy was contrary to the Magna Carta, to Church laws and to the laws of England, attempting to void the entire indictment against him.[51]
He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered (the usual punishment for traitors who were not the nobility), but the King commuted this to execution by decapitation.[75]
The execution took place on 6 July 1535 at Tower Hill. When he came to mount the steps to the scaffold, its frame seeming so weak that it might collapse,[76][77] More is widely quoted as saying (to one of the officials): "I pray you, master Lieutenant, see me safe up and [for] my coming down, let me shift for my self";[78] while on the scaffold he declared "that he died the king's good servant, and God's first."[79][80][81] After More had finished reciting the Miserere while kneeling,[82][83] the executioner reportedly begged his pardon, then More rose up merrily, kissed him and gave him forgiveness.[84][85][86][87]
Relics[edit]
 Sir Thomas More family's vault
Another comment he is believed to have made to the executioner is that his beard was completely innocent of any crime, and did not deserve the axe; he then positioned his beard so that it would not be harmed.[88] More asked that his foster/adopted daughter Margaret Clement (n e Giggs) be given his headless corpse to bury.[89] She was the only member of his family to witness his execution. He was buried at the Tower of London, in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in an unmarked grave. His head was fixed upon a pike over London Bridge for a month, according to the normal custom for traitors.
More's daughter Margaret later rescued the severed head.[90] It is believed to rest in the Roper Vault of St Dunstan's Church, Canterbury,[91] perhaps with the remains of Margaret and her husband's family.[92] Some have claimed that the head is buried within the tomb erected for More in Chelsea Old Church.[93]
Among other surviving relics is his hair shirt, presented for safe keeping by Margaret Clement.[94] This was long in the custody of the community of Augustinian canonesses who until 1983 lived at the convent at Abbotskerswell Priory, Devon. Some sources, including one from 2004, claimed that the shirt, made of goat hair was then at the Martyr's church on the Weld family's estate in Chideock, Dorset.[95][96] It is now preserved at Buckfast Abbey, near Buckfastleigh in Devon.[97][98]
Scholarly and literary work[edit]
History of King Richard III[edit]
Between 1512 and 1519 More worked on a History of King Richard III, which he never finished but which was published after his death. The History is a Renaissance biography, remarkable more for its literary skill and adherence to classical precepts than for its historical accuracy.[99] Some consider it an attack on royal tyranny, rather than on Richard III himself or the House of York.[100] More uses a more dramatic writing style than had been typical in medieval chronicles; Richard III is limned as an outstanding, archetypal tyrant however, More was only seven years old when Richard III was killed at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 so he had no first-hand, in-depth knowledge of him.
The History of King Richard III was written and published in both English and Latin, each written separately, and with information deleted from the Latin edition to suit a European readership.[101] It greatly influenced William Shakespeare's play Richard III. Modern historians attribute the unflattering portraits of Richard III in both works to both authors' allegiance to the reigning Tudor dynasty that wrested the throne from Richard III in the Wars of the Roses.[101][102] According to Caroline Barron, Archbishop John Morton, in whose household More had served as a page (see above), had joined the 1483 Buckingham rebellion against Richard III, and Morton was probably one of those who influenced More's hostility towards the defeated king.[103][104] Clements Markham asserts that the actual author of the chronicle was, in large part, Archbishop Morton himself and that More was simply copying, or perhaps translating, Morton's original material.[105][106]
Utopia[edit]
Main article: Utopia (book)
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 A 1516 illustration of Utopia
More's best known and most controversial work, Utopia, is a frame narrative written in Latin.[107] More completed and theologian Erasmus published the book in Leuven in 1516, but it was only translated into English and published in his native land in 1551 (16 years after his execution), and the 1684 translation became the most commonly cited. More (also a character in the book) and the narrator/traveller, Raphael Hythlodaeus (whose name alludes both to the healer archangel Raphael, and 'speaker of nonsense', the surname's Greek meaning), discuss modern ills in Antwerp, as well as describe the political arrangements of the imaginary island country of Utopia (a Greek pun on 'ou-topos' [no place] and 'eu-topos' [good place]) among themselves as well as to Pieter Gillis and Hieronymus van Busleyden.[108] Utopia's original edition included a symmetrical "Utopian alphabet" omitted by later editions, but which may have been an early attempt or precursor of shorthand.
Utopia contrasts the contentious social life of European states with the perfectly orderly, reasonable social arrangements of Utopia and its environs (Tallstoria, Nolandia, and Aircastle). In Utopia, there are no lawyers because of the laws' simplicity and because social gatherings are in public view (encouraging participants to behave well), communal ownership supplants private property, men and women are educated alike, and there is almost complete religious toleration (except for atheists, who are allowed but despised).
More may have used monastic communalism as his model, although other concepts he presents such as legalising euthanasia remain far outside Church doctrine. Hythlodaeus asserts that a man who refuses to believe in a god or an afterlife could never be trusted, because he would not acknowledge any authority or principle outside himself.
Some take the novel's principal message to be the social need for order and discipline rather than liberty. Ironically, Hythlodaeus, who believes philosophers should not get involved in politics, addresses More's ultimate conflict between his humanistic beliefs and courtly duties as the King's servant, pointing out that one day those morals will come into conflict with the political reality.
Utopia gave rise to a literary genre, Utopian and dystopian fiction, which features ideal societies or perfect cities, or their opposite. Early works influenced by Utopia included New Atlantis by Francis Bacon, Erewhon by Samuel Butler, and Candide by Voltaire. Although Utopianism combined classical concepts of perfect societies (Plato and Aristotle) with Roman rhetorical finesse (cf. Cicero, Quintilian, epideictic oratory), the Renaissance genre continued into the Age of Enlightenment and survives in modern science fiction.
Religious polemics[edit]
In 1520 the reformer Martin Luther published three works in quick succession: An Appeal to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (Aug.), Concerning the Babylonish Captivity of the Church (Oct.), and On the Liberty of a Christian Man (Nov.).[19]: 225  In these books, Luther set out his doctrine of salvation through grace alone, rejected certain Catholic practices, and attacked abuses and excesses within the Catholic Church.[19]: 225 6  In 1521, Henry VIII formally responded to Luther's criticisms with the Assertio, written with More's assistance.[109] Pope Leo X rewarded the English king with the title "Fidei defensor" ("Defender of the Faith") for his work combating Luther's heresies.[19]: 226 7 
Martin Luther then attacked Henry VIII in print, calling him a "pig, dolt, and liar".[19]: 227  At the king's request, More composed a rebuttal: the Responsio ad Lutherum was published at the end of 1523. In the Responsio, More defended papal supremacy, the sacraments, and other Church traditions. More, though considered "a much steadier personality",[110] described Luther as an "ape", a "drunkard", and a "lousy little friar" amongst other epithets.[19]: 230  Writing under the pseudonym of Gulielmus Rosseus,[32] More tells Luther that:
for as long as your reverend paternity will be determined to tell these shameless lies, others will be permitted, on behalf of his English majesty, to throw back into your paternity's shitty mouth, truly the shit-pool of all shit, all the muck and shit which your damnable rottenness has vomited up, and to empty out all the sewers and privies onto your crown divested of the dignity of the priestly crown, against which no less than the kingly crown you have determined to play the buffoon.[111]
His saying is followed with a kind of apology to his readers, while Luther possibly never apologized for his sayings.[111] Stephen Greenblatt argues, "More speaks for his ruler and in his opponent's idiom; Luther speaks for himself, and his scatological imagery far exceeds in quantity, intensity, and inventiveness anything that More could muster. If for More scatology normally expresses a communal disapproval, for Luther, it expresses a deep personal rage."[112]
Confronting Luther confirmed More's theological conservatism. He thereafter avoided any hint of criticism of Church authority.[19]: 230  In 1528, More published another religious polemic, A Dialogue Concerning Heresies, that asserted the Catholic Church was the one true church, established by Christ and the Apostles, and affirmed the validity of its authority, traditions and practices.[19]: 279 81  In 1529, the circulation of Simon Fish's Supplication for the Beggars prompted More to respond with the Supplycatyon of Soulys.
In 1531, a year after More's father died, William Tyndale published An Answer unto Sir Thomas More's Dialogue in response to More's Dialogue Concerning Heresies. More responded with a half million words: the Confutation of Tyndale's Answer. The Confutation is an imaginary dialogue between More and Tyndale, with More addressing each of Tyndale's criticisms of Catholic rites and doctrines.[19]: 307 9  More, who valued structure, tradition and order in society as safeguards against tyranny and error, vehemently believed that Lutheranism and the Protestant Reformation in general were dangerous, not only to the Catholic faith but to the stability of society as a whole.[19]: 307 9 
Correspondence[edit]
Most major humanists were prolific letter writers, and Thomas More was no exception. As in the case of his friend Erasmus of Rotterdam, however, only a small portion of his correspondence (about 280 letters) survived. These include everything from personal letters to official government correspondence (mostly in English), letters to fellow humanist scholars (in Latin), several epistolary tracts, verse epistles, prefatory letters (some fictional) to several of More's own works, letters to More's children and their tutors (in Latin), and the so-called "prison-letters" (in English) which he exchanged with his oldest daughter Margaret while he was imprisoned in the Tower of London awaiting execution.[33] More also engaged in controversies, most notably with the French poet Germain de Brie, which culminated in the publication of de Brie's Antimorus (1519). Erasmus intervened, however, and ended the dispute.[37]
More also wrote about more spiritual matters. They include: A Treatise on the Passion (a.k.a. Treatise on the Passion of Christ), A Treatise to Receive the Blessed Body (a.k.a. Holy Body Treaty), and De Tristitia Christi (a.k.a. The Agony of Christ). More handwrote the last in the Tower of London while awaiting his execution. This last manuscript, saved from the confiscation decreed by Henry VIII, passed by the will of his daughter Margaret to Spanish hands through Fray Pedro de Soto, confessor of Emperor Charles V. More's friend Luis Vives received it in Valencia, where it remains in the collection of Real Colegio Seminario del Corpus Christi museum.
Veneration[edit]
SaintThomas MorePortrait of Saint Thomas More, executed on Tower Hill (London) in 1535, apparently based on the Holbein portrait.Reformation Martyr, ScholarVenerated inCatholic ChurchAnglican CommunionBeatified29 December 1886, Florence, Kingdom of Italy, by Pope Leo XIIICanonized19 May 1935, Vatican City, by Pope Pius XIMajor shrineChurch of St Peter ad Vincula, London, EnglandFeast22 June (Catholic Church) 6 July (Church of England) 9 July (Catholic Extraordinary Form)Attributesdressed in the robe of the Chancellor and wearing the Collar of Esses; axePatronageStatesmen and politicians; lawyers; Ateneo de Manila Law School; Diocese of Arlington; Diocese of Pensacola-Tallahassee; Kerala Catholic Youth Movement; University of Malta; University of Santo Tomas Faculty of Arts and Letters
 Catholic Church[edit]
Pope Leo XIII beatified Thomas More, John Fisher, and 52 other English Martyrs on 29 December 1886. Pope Pius XI canonised More and Fisher on 19 May 1935, and More's feast day was established as 9 July.[113] Since 1970 the General Roman Calendar has celebrated More with St John Fisher on 22 June (the date of Fisher's execution). On 31 October 2000 Pope John Paul II declared More "the heavenly Patron of Statesmen and Politicians".[12] More is the patron of the German Catholic youth organisation Katholische Junge Gemeinde.[114]
Anglican Communion[edit]
In 1980, despite their opposition to the English Reformation, More and Fisher were added as martyrs of the reformation to the Church of England's calendar of "Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church", to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as "Thomas More, scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535".[13][115] The annual remembrance of 6 July, is recognized by all Anglican Churches in communion with Canterbury, including Australia, Brazil, Canada, and South Africa.[116]
In an essay examining the events around the addition to the Anglican calendar, Scholar William Sheils links the reasoning for More's recognition to a "long-standing tradition hinted at in Rose Macaulay's ironic debating point of 1935 about More's status as an 'unschismed Anglican', a tradition also recalled in the annual memorial lecture held at St. Dunstan's Church in Canterbury, where More's head is said to be buried."[116] Sheils also noted the influence of the 1960s popular play and film A Man for All Seasons which gave More a 'reputation as a defender of the right of conscience".[116] Thanks to the play's depiction,  this "brought his life to a broader and more popular audience" with the film "extending its impact worldwide following the Oscar triumphs".[116] Around this time the atheist Oxford historian and public intellectual, Hugh Trevor-Roper held More up as "the first great Englishman whom we feel that we know, the most saintly of Humanists...the universal man of our cool northern Renaissance."[116] By 1978, the quincentenary of More's birth Trevor-Roper wrote an essay putting More in the Renaissance Platonist tradition, and claim his reputation was "quite independent of his Catholicism."[116] (Only, later on, did a more critical view arise in academia, led by Professor Sir Geoffrey Elton, which "challenged More's reputation for saintliness by focusing on his dealings with heretics, the ferocity of which, in fairness to him, More did not deny. In this research, More's role as a prosecutor, or persecutor, of dissidents has been at the center of the debate.")[116]
Legacy[edit]
 Statue of More at the Ateneo Law School chapel, Makati, Philippines
The steadfastness and courage with which More maintained his religious convictions, and his dignity during his imprisonment, trial, and execution, contributed much to More's posthumous reputation, particularly among Roman Catholics. His friend Erasmus defended More's character as "more pure than any snow" and described his genius as "such as England never had and never again will have."[117] Upon learning of More's execution, Emperor Charles V said: "Had we been master of such a servant, we would rather have lost the best city of our dominions than such a worthy councillor."[118]
G. K. Chesterton, a Roman Catholic convert from the Church of England, predicted More "may come to be counted the greatest Englishman, or at least the greatest historical character in English history."[119] Hugh Trevor-Roper called More "the first great Englishman whom we feel that we know, the most saintly of humanists, the most human of saints, the universal man of our cool northern renaissance."[120]
Jonathan Swift, an Anglican, wrote that More was "a person of the greatest virtue this kingdom ever produced".[121][122][123] Some consider this quote to be of Samuel Johnson, although it's not found in Johnson's writings.[124][125] The metaphysical poet John Donne, also honoured as a hero by Anglicans,[126] was More's great-great-nephew.[127] US Senator Eugene McCarthy had a portrait of More in his office.[128]
Roman Catholic scholars maintain that More used irony in Utopia, and that he remained an orthodox Christian. Marxist theoreticians such as Karl Kautsky considered the book a critique of economic and social exploitation in pre-modern Europe and More is claimed to have influenced the development of socialist ideas.[129]
In 1963, Moreana, an academic journal focusing on analysis of More and his writings, was founded.[130]
In 2002, More was placed at number 37 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.[131]
In literature and popular culture[edit]
William Roper's biography of More was one of the first biographies in Modern English.
Sir Thomas More is a play written circa 1592 in collaboration between Henry Chettle, Anthony Munday, William Shakespeare, and others. In it More is portrayed as a wise and honest statesman. The original manuscript has survived as a handwritten text that shows many revisions by its several authors, as well as the censorious influence of Edmund Tylney, Master of the Revels in the government of Queen Elizabeth I. The script has since been published and has had several productions.[132][133]
In 1941, the 20th-century British author Elizabeth Goudge (1900-1984) wrote a short story, "The King's Servant", based on the last few years of Thomas More's life, seen through his family, and especially his adopted daughter, Anne Cresacre More.[134]
The 20th-century agnostic playwright Robert Bolt portrayed Thomas More as the tragic hero of his 1960 play A Man for All Seasons. The title is drawn from what Robert Whittington in 1520 wrote of More:
More is a man of an angel's wit and singular learning. I know not his fellow. For where is the man of that gentleness, lowliness and affability? And, as time requireth, a man of marvelous mirth and pastimes, and sometime of as sad gravity. A man for all seasons.[120]
In 1966, the play A Man for All Seasons was adapted into a film with the same title. It was directed by Fred Zinnemann and adapted for the screen by the playwright. It stars Paul Scofield, a noted British actor, who said that the part of Sir Thomas More was "the most difficult part I played."[135] The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture and Scofield won the Best Actor Oscar. In 1988 Charlton Heston starred in and directed a made-for-television film that restored the character of "the common man" that had been cut from the 1966 film.
In the 1969 film Anne of the Thousand Days, More is portrayed by actor William Squire.
Catholic science fiction writer R. A. Lafferty wrote his novel Past Master as a modern equivalent to More's Utopia, which he saw as a satire. In this novel, Thomas More travels through time to the year 2535, where he is made king of the world "Astrobe", only to be beheaded after ruling for a mere nine days. One character compares More favourably to almost every other major historical figure: "He had one completely honest moment right at the end. I cannot think of anyone else who ever had one."
Karl Zuchardt's novel, Stirb du Narr! ("Die you fool!"), about More's struggle with King Henry, portrays More as an idealist bound to fail in the power struggle with a ruthless ruler and an unjust world.
In her 2009 novel Wolf Hall, its 2012 sequel Bring Up the Bodies, and the final book of the trilogy, her 2020 The Mirror and the Light, the novelist Hilary Mantel portrays More (from the perspective of a sympathetically portrayed Thomas Cromwell) as an unsympathetic persecutor of Protestants and an ally of the Habsburg empire.
Literary critic James Wood in his book The Broken Estate, a collection of essays, is critical of More and refers to him as "cruel in punishment, evasive in argument, lusty for power, and repressive in politics".[136]
Aaron S. Zelman's non-fiction book The State Versus the People includes a comparison of Utopia with Plato's Republic. Zelman is undecided as to whether More was being ironic in his book or was genuinely advocating a police state. Zelman comments, "More is the only Christian saint to be honoured with a statue at the Kremlin."[citation needed] By this Zelman implies that Utopia influenced Vladimir Lenin's Bolsheviks, despite their brutal repression of religion.
Other biographers, such as Peter Ackroyd, have offered a more sympathetic picture of More as both a sophisticated philosopher and man of letters, as well as a zealous Catholic who believed in the authority of the Holy See over Christendom.
The protagonist of Walker Percy's novels, Love in the Ruins and The Thanatos Syndrome, is "Dr Thomas More", a reluctant Catholic and descendant of More.
More is the focus of the Al Stewart song "A Man For All Seasons" from the 1978 album Time Passages, and of the Far song "Sir", featured on the limited editions and 2008 re-release of their 1994 album Quick. In addition, the song "So Says I" by indie rock outfit The Shins alludes to the socialist interpretation of More's Utopia.
Jeremy Northam depicts More in the television series The Tudors as a peaceful man, as well as a devout Roman Catholic and loving family patriarch.[137]
More is depicted by Andrew Buchan in the television series The Spanish Princess.[138]
In the years 1968 2007 the University of San Francisco's Gleeson Library Associates awarded the annual Sir Thomas More Medal for Book Collecting to private book collectors of note,[139] including Elmer Belt,[140] Otto Schaefer,[141] Albert Sperisen, John S. Mayfield and Lord Wardington.[142]
Institutions named after More[edit]
Main article: List of institutions named after Thomas More
Communism, socialism and resistance to communism[edit]
Having been praised "as a Communist hero by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Karl Kautsky" because of the Communist attitude to property in his Utopia,[14] under Soviet Communism the name of Thomas More was in ninth position from the top of Moscow's Stele of Freedom (also known as the Obelisk of Revolutionary Thinkers),[143] as one of the most influential thinkers "who promoted the liberation of humankind from oppression, arbitrariness, and exploitation."[144] This monument was erected in 1918 in Aleksandrovsky Garden near the Kremlin at Lenin's suggestion.[14][145][144]
The Great Soviet Encyclopedia's English translation (1979) described More as "the founder of Utopian socialism", the first person "to describe a society in which private property ... had been abolished" (a society in which the family was "a cell for the communist way of life"), and a thinker who "did not believe that the ideal society would be achieved through revolution", but who "greatly influenced reformers of subsequent centuries, especially Morelly, G. Babeuf, Saint-Simon, C. Fourier, E. Cabet, and other representatives of Utopian socialism."[146]
Utopia also inspired socialists such as William Morris.[147]
Many see More's communism or socialism as purely satirical.[147] In 1888, while praising More's communism, Karl Kautsky pointed out that "perplexed" historians and economists often saw the name Utopia (which means "no place") as "a subtle hint by More that he himself regarded his communism as an impracticable dream".[129]
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the Russian Nobel Prize-winning, anti-Communist author of The Gulag Archipelago, argued that Soviet communism needed enslavement and forced labour to survive, and that this had been " ...foreseen as far back as Thomas More, the great-grandfather of socialism, in his Utopia".[148]
In 2008, More was portrayed on stage in Hong Kong as an allegorical symbol of the pan-democracy camp resisting the Chinese Communist Party in a translated and modified version of Robert Bolt's play A Man for All Seasons.[149]
Historic sites[edit]
Westminster Hall[edit]
A plaque in the middle of the floor of London's Westminster Hall commemorates More's trial for treason and condemnation to execution in that original part of the Palace of Westminster.[150] The building, which houses Parliament, would have been well known to More, who served several terms as a member and became Speaker of the House of Commons before his appointment as England's Lord Chancellor.
Beaufort House[edit]
Main article: Beaufort House (Chelsea)
 Beaufort House c.1707
As More's royal duties frequently required his attendance at the king's Thames-side palaces in both Richmond and Greenwich, it was convenient to select a riverside property situated between them (the common method of transport being by boat) for his home. In about 1520 he purchased a parcel of land comprising "undisturbed wood and pasture", stretching from the Thames in Chelsea to the present-day King's Road. There he caused to be built a dignified red-brick mansion (known simply as More's house or Chelsea House) in which he lived until his arrest in 1534.  In the bawdy poem The Twelve Mery Jestes of Wyddow Edyth, written in 1525 by a member of More's household (or even by More himself) using the pseudonym of "Walter Smith", the widow arrives by boat at "Chelsay where she had best cheare of all/in the house of Syr Thomas More."[151]
Upon More's arrest the estate was confiscated, coming into the possession of the Comptroller of the Royal Household, William Paulet.
In 1682, the property was renamed Beaufort House after 1st Duke of Beaufort, a new owner.[152]
Crosby Hall[edit]
 Crosby Hall on its Bishopsgate site, c.1885
In June 1523 More bought the "very large and beautiful" Crosby Place (Crosby Hall) in Bishopsgate, London, but this was not a simple transaction: eight months later he sold the property (never having lived there) at a considerable profit to his friend and business partner Antonio Bonvisi who, in turn, leased it back to More's son-in-law William Roper and nephew William Rastell; possibly this was an agreed means of dealing with a debt between More and Bonvisi. Because of this the Crown did not confiscate the property after More's execution.[153][154][155]
Chelsea Old Church[edit]
 Statue of Thomas More outside Chelsea Old Church in west London
Across a small park and Old Church Street from Crosby Hall is Chelsea Old Church, an Anglican church whose southern chapel More commissioned and in which he sang with the parish choir. Except for his chapel, the church was largely destroyed in the Second World War and rebuilt in 1958.[156] The capitals on the medieval arch connecting the chapel to the main sanctuary display symbols associated with More and his office. On the southern wall of the sanctuary is the tomb and epitaph he erected for himself and his wives, detailing his ancestry and accomplishments in Latin, including his role as peacemaker between the various Christian European states as well as a curiously altered portion about his curbing heresy. When More served Mass, he would leave by the door just to the left of it. He is not, however, buried here, nor is it entirely certain which of his family may be. It is open to the public at specific times. Outside the church, facing the River Thames, is a statue by L. Cubitt Bevis erected in 1969, commemorating More as "saint", "scholar", and "statesman"; the back displays his coat-of-arms. Nearby, on Upper Cheyne Row, the Roman Catholic Church of Our Most Holy Redeemer & St. Thomas More honours the martyr.
Tower Hill[edit]
A plaque and small garden commemorate the famed execution site on Tower Hill, London, just outside the Tower of London, as well as all those executed there, many as religious martyrs or as prisoners of conscience.[157] More's corpse, minus his head, was unceremoniously buried in an unmarked mass grave beneath the Royal Chapel of St. Peter Ad Vincula, within the walls of the Tower of London, as was the custom for traitors executed at Tower Hill. The chapel is accessible to Tower visitors.
St Katharine Docks[edit]
Thomas More is commemorated by a stone plaque near St Katharine Docks, just east of the Tower where he was executed. The street in which it is situated was formerly called Nightingale Lane, a corruption of "Knighten Guild", derived from the original owners of the land. It is now renamed Thomas More Street in his honour.[158]
St Dunstan's Church and Roper House, Canterbury[edit]
St Dunstan's Church, an Anglican parish church in Canterbury, possesses More's head, rescued by his daughter Margaret Roper, whose family lived in Canterbury down and across the street from their parish church. A stone immediately to the left of the altar marks the sealed Roper family vault beneath the Nicholas Chapel, itself to the right of the church's sanctuary or main altar. St Dunstan's Church has carefully investigated, preserved and sealed this burial vault. The last archaeological investigation revealed that the suspected head of More rests in a niche separate from the other bodies, possibly from later interference.[159] Displays in the chapel record the archaeological findings in pictures and narratives. Roman Catholics donated stained glass to commemorate the events in More's life. A small plaque marks the former home of William and Margaret Roper; another house nearby and entitled Roper House is now a home for deaf people.
Works[edit]
Note: The reference "CW" is to the relevant volume of the Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More (New Haven and London 1963 1997)
Published during More's life (with dates of publication)[edit]
A Merry Jest (c. 1516) (CW 1)
Utopia (1516) (CW 4)
Latin Poems (1518, 1520) (CW 3, Pt.2)
Letter to Brixius (1520) (CW 3, Pt. 2, App C)
Responsio ad Lutherum (The Answer to Luther, 1523) (CW 5)
A Dialogue Concerning Heresies (1529, 1530) (CW 6)
Supplication of Souls (1529) (CW 7)
Letter Against Frith (1532) (CW 7) pdf
The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer (1532, 1533) (CW 8) Books 1 4, Books 5 9
Apology (1533) (CW 9)
Debellation of Salem and Bizance (1533) (CW 10) pdf
The Answer to a Poisoned Book (1533) (CW 11) pdf
Published after More's death (with likely dates of composition)[edit]
The History of King Richard III (c. 1513 1518) (CW 2 & 15)
The Four Last Things (c. 1522) (CW 1)
A Dialogue of Comfort Against Tribulation (1534) (CW 12)
Treatise Upon the Passion (1534) (CW 13)
Treatise on the Blessed Body (1535) (CW 13)
Instructions and Prayers (1535) (CW 13)
De Tristitia Christi (1535) (CW 14) (preserved in the Real Colegio Seminario del Corpus Christi, Valencia)
Translations[edit]
Translations of Lucian (many dates 1506 1534) (CW 3, Pt.1)
The Life of Pico della Mirandola, by Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola (c. 1510) (CW 1)
Notes[edit]
^ "Topic 1.3: The Northern Renaissance" (PDF).
^ "Plato's Dialectical Politics and Thomas More's Utopia". Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 14 November 2019.
^ "AUGUSTINE'S AND MORE'S USE OF CICERO" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 27 October 2019.
^ Hodgkinson, Tom. "How Utopia shaped the world". www.bbc.com.
^ "Is Thomas More's 'Utopia'".
^ Roper 2007, p. 2.
^ "St. Thomas More". savior.org. Retrieved 29 June 2020.
^ Homily at the Canonization of St. Thomas More Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine at The Center for Thomas More Studies at the University of Dallas, 2010, citing text "Recorded in The Tablet, June 1, 1935, pp. 694 695"
^ a b Glenn, Garrard (1 January 1941). "St. Thomas More As Judge and lawyer". Fordham Law Review. 10 (2): 187.
^ Linder, Douglas O. The Trial of Sir Thomas More: A Chronology at University Of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) School Of Law
^ Jubilee of parliament and government members, proclamation of Saint Thomas More as patron of statesmen vatican.va
^ a b c Apostolic letter issued motu proprio proclaiming Saint Thomas More Patron of Statesmen and Politicians, 31 October 2000 Vatican.va
^ a b c "Holy Days". Worship   The Calendar. Church of England. 2011. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 20 April 2011.
^ a b c King, Margaret L. (2014). Renaissance Humanism: An Anthology of Sources. Hackett Publishing. p. 157. ISBN 978-1-62466-146-4.
^ Jokinen, A. (13 June 2009). "The Life of Sir Thomas More." Luminarium. Retrieved 19 September 2011.
^ "Sir Thomas More". The Biography Channel website. 2014. Retrieved 30 January 2014.
^ "Thomas More: Always a Londoner". tudortimes.co.uk. 24 September 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2019.
^ a b c d e Rebhorn, Wayne A, ed. (2005). "Introduction". Utopia. Classics. New York: Barnes & Noble..
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Ackroyd, Peter (1999). The Life of Thomas More. New York: Anchor Books..
^ Harpsfield, Nicholas (1931). "The Life and Death of Sr Thomas More". London: Early English Text Society: 12 3. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help).
^ Erasmus, Desiderius (1991). "Letter to Ulrich von Hutten".  In Adams, Robert M. (ed.). Utopia. New York: WW Norton & Co. p. 125. ISBN 9780393961454.
^ "Erasmus to Ulrich von Hutten" (PDF). The Center for Thomas More Studies. Biographical Accounts: Erasmus' Letters about More. Thomasmorestudies.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2016. Retrieved 8 March 2014.
^ "Franciscan Calendar". Tau Cross Region of the Secular Franciscan Order. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013.
^ Wood, Alexander (1874). Ecclesiastical Antiquities of London and Its Suburbs. London: Burns & Oates. pp. 105 6. OCLC 18479600.
^ Reynolds, Ernest E. (1968). The field is won; the life and death of Saint Thomas More. Milwaukee: Bruce Pub. Co. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-223-97628-3.
^ a b Wegemer, Gerard B. (1995). Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage. Scepter Publishing.
^ Wagner, John A.; Walters Schmid, Susan (2011). Encyclopedia of Tudor England. ABC-CLIO. pp. 769 770. ISBN 978-1-59884-299-9.
^ Maddison, The Rev. Canon, ed. (1903). Lincolnshire Pedigrees. London: Harleian Society. p. 5.
^ a b More, Thomas (1961).  Rogers, Elizabeth Frances (ed.). Selected Letters. New Haven and London: Yale University Press..
^ "History of Parliament". History of Parliament Trust. Retrieved 13 October 2011.
^ Magnusson (ed.) Chambers Biographical Dictionary (1990) p. 1039
^ a b c d e Rebhorn, W. A. (ed.) p. xviii
^ a b Gerard B. Wegemer, Portrait of Courage, p. 136.
^ MacCulloch, Diarmaid (27 September 2018). Thomas Cromwell : a life. pp. 160 62. ISBN 978-1-84614-429-5.
^ Mueller & Loewenstein 2002, p. 93, (footnote 36).
^ Hiscock & Wilcox 2017, p. 547.
^ a b Moynahan 2014.
^ Rex, Richard (2011).  Logan, George M. (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Thomas More. Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-1-139-82848-2.
^ Farris, Michael (2007). "From Tyndale to Madison". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help),
^ MacCulloch (2018) p. 160: "[More] turned to waging implacable war on enemies of the Church whom he could crush without inhibition. [He] had a positive relish for burning heretics.".
^ Moynahan, B., William Tyndale: If God Spare My Life, Abacus, London, 2003.[page needed]
^ a b Richard Marius (1999). Thomas More: A Biography. Harvard University Press. p. 406. ISBN 0-674-88525-2.
^ a b Marius, Richard (1999). Thomas More: A Biography, Harvard University Press
^ Guy, John A. Tudor England Oxford, 1988. p 26
^ "John Tewkesbury (1531)". UK Wells. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2014. Having failed in this the Bishop of London, Stokesley, tried him and sentenced him to be burned.
^ More, Thomas (1973).  Schuster, LA; Marius, RC; Lusardi, JP; Schoeck, RJ (eds.). The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer. Complete Works. Vol. 8. Yale. p. 20..
^ Wegemer 1996, p. 173:...civil chaos will surely follow (691 93). This prediction seemed to come true very quickly, as More noted in his next polemical work, A dialogue Concerning Heresies. There he argued that the Peasants' Revolt in Germany (1525), the Lutheran mercenaries' sack of Rome (1527), and the growing unrest in England all stemmed from Luther's inflammatory teachings and especially the lure of false freedom
^ Peter Ackroyd (1998). The Life of Thomas More. Chatto & Windus. p. 244. ISBN 1-85619-711-5. (Chapter 22) ... Already, in these early days of English heresy, he was thinking of the fire. It is a measure of his alarm at the erosion of the traditional order that he should, in this letter, compose a defence of scholastic theology the same scholasticism which in his younger days he had treated with derision. This was no longer a time for questioning, or innovation, or uncertainty, of any kind. He blamed Luther for the Peasants' Revolt in Germany, and maintained that all its havoc and destruction were the direct result of Luther's challenge to the authority of the Church; under the pretext of 'libertas' Luther preached 'licentia' which had in turn led to rape, sacrilege, bloodshed, fire and ruin. (Online citation here)
^ Joanne Paul (2016). Thomas More. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-7456-9220-3. Princes were 'driven by necessity' by the 'importune malice of heretics raising rebellions' to set 'sorer and sorer punishments thereunto' (CTA, 956). In other words, the heretics had started it: 'the Catholic Church did never persecute heretics by any temporal pain or any secular power until the heretics began such violence themself' (CTA, 954). More had in mind violent conflicts on the continent, such as the German Peasants' War (1524 5) and the M nster Rebellion (1532 5).[page needed] (CTA=Confutation of Tyndale's Answer)
^ Wegemer, Gerard (31 October 2001). "Thomas More as statesman" (PDF). The Center for Thomas More Studies. p. 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2018. In the Peasants' Revolt in Germany in 1525, More pointed out, 70,000 German peasants were slaughtered   and More, along with Erasmus and many others, considered Luther to be largely responsible for that wildfire.
^ a b c d Henry Ansgar Kelly; Louis W. Karlin; Gerard Wegemer, eds. (2011). Thomas More's Trial by Jury: A Procedural and Legal Review with a Collection of Documents. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. pp. xiv xvi. ISBN 978-1-84383-629-2.
^ Tanner, Joseph Robson, ed. (1922). Tudor Constitutional Documents: A. D. 1485 1603. CUP Archive. p. 17. Retrieved 15 June 2021.
^ Gerard Wegemer (1995). Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage. Scepter Publishers. p. xiv. ISBN 1-889334-12-X.
^ a b Thomas More (2010). Utopia. Translated by G.C. Richards, William P. Weaver. Broadview Press. pp. 8 9. ISBN 978-1-4604-0211-5.
^ Daniel Eppley (2016). Defending Royal Supremacy and Discerning God's Will in Tudor England. Routledge. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-351-94579-0.
^ George M. Logan, ed. (2011). The Cambridge Companion to Thomas More. Cambridge University Press. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-139-82848-2.
^ Ives, Eric W (2004), The Life and Death of Anne Boleyn, p. 47, [More wrote on the subject of the Boleyn marriage that] [I] neither murmur at it nor dispute upon it, nor never did nor will. ...I faithfully pray to God for his Grace and hers both long to live and well, and their noble issue too...
^ David Knowles (1979). The Religious Orders in England. Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. pp. 188 189. ISBN 0-521-29568-8.
^ Patricia Crawford (2014). Women and Religion in England: 1500 1720. Routledge. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-136-09756-0.
^ Peter Ackroyd (2012). The Life of Thomas More. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 342. ISBN 978-0-307-82301-4.
^ Lee, Sidney (1904). Great Englishmen of the Sixteenth Century. London: Archibald Constable, Limited. p. 48.
^ George M. Logan, ed. (2011). The Cambridge Companion to Thomas More. Cambridge University Press. p. 122. ISBN 978-1-139-82848-2.
^ Elton, Geoffrey Rudolph (1982). "The Crown". The Tudor constitution: documents and commentary (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Cambridgeshire: Cambridge University Press. p. 7. ISBN 0-521-24506-0. OCLC 7876927. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
^ Gerard Wegemer; Stephen W. Smith, eds. (2004). A Thomas More Source Book. The Catholic University of America Press. p. 305. ISBN 0-8132-1376-2.
^ Lawrence Wilde (2016). Thomas More's Utopia: Arguing for Social Justice. Routledge. pp. 112 113. ISBN 978-1-317-28137-5.
^ G. R. Elton (1985). Policy and Police: The Enforcement of the Reformation in the Age of Thomas Cromwell. CUP Archive. p. 223. ISBN 0-521-31309-0.
^ The Twentieth Century, Volume 30, Nineteenth Century and After, 1891, p. 556
^ John A. Wagner (2015). Voices of the Reformation: Contemporary Accounts of Daily Life. ABC-CLIO. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-61069-680-7.
^ "Annotated original text". November 2017.
^ Ackroyd (1998) p383
^ Henry Ansgar Kelly; Louis W. Karlin; Gerard Wegemer, eds. (2011). Thomas More's Trial by Jury: A Procedural and Legal Review with a Collection of Documents. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. p. 189. ISBN 978-1-84383-629-2.
^ Henry Ansgar Kelly; Louis W. Karlin; Gerard Wegemer, eds. (2011). Thomas More's Trial by Jury: A Procedural and Legal Review with a Collection of Documents. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. p. 22. ISBN 978-1-84383-629-2.
^ Hadfield, Andrew (2017). Lying in early modern English culture : from the Oath of supremacy to the Oath of allegiance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 36 38. ISBN 9780192844804.
^ "The Trial and Execution of Sir Thomas More". law2.umkc.edu.
^ Anne Manning; Edmund Lodge (1852). The Household of Sir Thomas More. C. Scribner. p. xiii. thomas more sentenced hanged, drawn and quartered.
^ MacFarlane, Charles; Thomson, Thomas (1876). The comprehensive history of England, from the earliest period to the suppression of the Sepoy revolt. Blackie and Son. p. 798.
^ Bridgett, Thomas Edward (1891). Life and Writings of Sir Thomas More: Lord Chancellor of England and Martyr Under Henry VIII (3 ed.). Burns & Oates. p. 434.
^ Elizabeth M. Knowles, ed. (1999). The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations. Oxford University Press. p. 531. ISBN 0-19-860173-5.
^ "Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic, Henry VIII, Volume 8, January-July 1535". British History Online. University of London. Retrieved 26 June 2022. This is a translation from the archives of Michel de Castelnau, a later French ambassador to England, of an anonymous French eyewitness: Wegemer, Smith (2004), page 357, provides the original text in French: "[ ]qu'il mouroit son bon serviteur et de Dieu premi rement.".
^ Scott W. Hahn; David Scott, eds. (2009). Liturgy and Empire: Faith in Exile and Political Theology. Emmaus Road Publishing. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-931018-56-2. I die the king's good servant, but God's first." Footnote 133: "This phrase from Robert Bolt's play 'A Man for All Seasons' ... is an adjustment of More's actual last words: 'I die the king's good servant, and God's first.'
^ Shepherd, Rose (2014). "Powerhouse, Treasurehouse, Slaughterhouse". At Home with Henry VIII: His Life, His Wives, His Palaces. London: CICO Books. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-78249-160-6.
^ Kerry McCarthy (2008). Liturgy and Contemplation in Byrd's Gradualia. Routledge. p. 61. ISBN 978-1-135-86564-1.
^ Wordsworth 1810, pp. 222 223.
^ Spencer J. Weinreich, ed. (2017). Pedro de Ribadeneyra's 'Ecclesiastical History of the Schism of the Kingdom of England'. BRILL. p. 238. ISBN 978-90-04-32396-4.
^ A Collection of the most remarkable Trials of persons for High-Treason, Murder, Heresy ... Vol. IV. London: T. Read. 1736. p. 94.
^ Agnes M. Stewart (1876). The Life and Letters of Sir Thomas More. Burns & Oates. p. 339.
^ W. Jos Walter (1840). Sir Thomas More His Life and Times: Illustrated from His Own Writings and from Contemporary Documents. London: Charles Dolman. p. 353.
^ Hume, David (1813), The History of England, p. 632.
^ Guy, John, A Daughter's Love: Thomas & Margaret More, London: Fourth Estate, 2008, ISBN 978-0-00-719231-1, p. 266.
^ Thomas Edward Bridgett (1891). Life and Writings of Sir Thomas More: Lord Chancellor of England and Martyr Under Henry VIII. Burns & Oates. p. 436. thomas more head buried.
^ "Journal of the British Archaeological Association". 1. British Archaeological Association. 1895: 142 144. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ "Lady Margaret Roper and the head of Sir Thomas More". Insert Logo Here Lynsted with Kingsdown Society. Retrieved 24 July 2017.
^ Doyne Courtenay Bell (1877). Notices of the Historic Persons Buried in the Chapel of St. Peter Ad Vincula: In the Tower of London. J. Murray. pp. 88 91.
^ "St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopaedia..
^ David Hilliam (2010). Little Book of Dorset. History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-6265-3.[page needed]
^ Anne Vail (2004). Shrines of Our Lady in England. Gracewing Publishing. p. 42. ISBN 0-85244-603-9.
^ Simon Caldwell (21 November 2016). "St. Thomas More's hair shirt now enshrined for public veneration". Catholic Telegraph.
^ "Hair-shirt worn by St Thomas More is enshrined for public veneration for possibly the first time". Diocese of Shrewsbury. Retrieved 31 March 2022.
^ Wegemer 1996, p. 218.
^ Meyer, J rgen (2014). "An Unthinkable History of King Richard the Third: Thomas More's Fragment and his Answer to Lucian's Tyrannicide". Modern Language Review. 109 (3): 629 639. doi:10.5699/modelangrevi.109.3.0629.
^ a b Logan (2011) p168
^ Bate, Jonathan (2008). Soul of the age : the life, mind and world of William Shakespeare. London: Viking. p. 268. ISBN 9780670914821.
^ Schwyzer, Philip (2013). Shakespeare and the remains of Richard III. Oxford University Press. p. 4. ISBN 9780199676101.
^ Barron, Caroline M. (2011). "The making of a London citizen".  In Logan, George M. (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Thomas More. ISBN 9780521888622.
^ Markham, Clements (1906). Richard III: His Life and Character, reviewed in the light of recent research. Smith, Elder & Co. pp. 168 171.
^ Yoran, H. Thomas More's Richard III: Probing the Limits of Humanism. Renaissance Studies 15, no. 4 (2001): 514 37. Retrieved 1 December 2015.
^ More, Thomas (31 October 2013). "Introduction".  In Lumby, J Rawson (ed.). More's Utopia. Translated by Robynson, Raphe (1952 ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. vii. ISBN 978-1-107-64515-8.
^ Logan (2011) pp 39, 142, 144
^ O'Donovan, Louis (5 November 2019). The Defence of the Seven Sacraments. ISBN 978-1-5380-9202-6.
^ John Vidmar (2005). The Catholic Church Through the Ages: A History. Paulist Press. p. 184. ISBN 0-8091-4234-1.
^ a b Rex (2011) p.102
^ Stephen Greenblatt (2012). Learning to Curse: Essays in Early Modern Culture. Routledge. p. 95. ISBN 978-1-136-77420-1.
^ Brown, Brendan F. (1935). "St. Thomas More, lawyer". Fordham Law Review. 3 (3): 375 390.
^ "Thomas Morus". kjg.de. Retrieved 1 July 2016.
^ "The Calendar". The Church of England. Retrieved 27 March 2021.
^ a b c d e f g David J. Crankshaw, George W. C. Gross, ed. (2020). Reformation Reputations: The Power of the Individual in English Reformation History. Springer International Publishing.
^ Daniel J. Boorstin (1999). The Seekers: The Story of Man's Continuing Quest to Understand His World. Random House Digital, Inc. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-375-70475-8.
^ Quoted in Britannica   The Online Encyclopedia, article: Sir Thomas More
^ Chesterton, G. K. (1929). The Fame of Blessed Thomas More. London: Sheed & Ward. p. 63.
^ a b Cited in Marvin O'Connell, "A Man for all Seasons: an Historian's Demur," Catholic Dossier 8 no. 2 (March April 2002): 16 19 online Archived 12 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ Jonathan Swift. "Writings on Religion and the Church, Vol. I. by Jonathan Swift: Ch. 14: Concerning that Universal Hatred".
^ Jonathan Swift,  Prose Works of Jonathan Swift v. 13, Oxford UP, 1959, p. 123
^ "Reputation". Thomas More Studies. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 14 April 2011. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help).
^ Kenny, Jack (2011). "A Man of Enduring Conscience". Resource Center. Catholic Culture via Trinity Communications.
^ Chambers, R. W. (1929). Sir Thomas More's Fame Among His Countrymen. London: Sheed & Ward. p. 13.
^ "The Calendar". Church of England. Retrieved 23 March 2021.
^ Colclough, David (2011) [2004]. "Donne, John (1572 1631)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/7819. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ McNamara, Robert (2003). "Irish Perspectives on the Vietnam War". Irish Studies in International Affairs. 14: 75 94. doi:10.3318/ISIA.2003.14.1.75. JSTOR 30001965. S2CID 153710978.
^ a b Kautsky, Karl (1888). Thomas More and his Utopia. Retrieved 16 January 2015. Part III. UTOPIA   Chapter V. THE AIM OF UTOPIA   Historians and economists who are perplexed by Utopia perceive in this name a subtle hint by More that he himself regarded his communism as an impracticable dream.
^ Moreau, Jean-Philippe (1992). "Review of Miscellanea Moreana: Essays for Germain Marc'hadour".  tudes Anglaises. 45 (2): 202 204.
^ Sue Parrill, William Baxter Robison (2013). "The Tudors on Film and Television", p. 92. McFarland,
^ Long, William B. The Occasion of the Book of Sir Thomas More. Howard-Hill, T.H. editor. Shakespeare and Sir Thomas More; essays on the play and its Shakespearean Interest. Cambridge University Press. (1989) ISBN 0-521-34658-4. pages 49 54
^ Gabrieli, Vittorio. Melchiori, Giorgio, editors Introduction. Munday, Anthony. And others. Sir Thomas More. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-1544-8. Page 1
^ Rawlins, Christine (2015). Beyond the snow : the life and faith of Elizabeth Goudge. Bloomington, IN: Westbow. ISBN 978-1-4908-8619-0.
^ Gary O'Connor (2002), Paul Scofield: An Actor for All Seasons, Applause Books. Page 150.
^ Wood, James (2010). The Broken Estate: Essays on Literature and Belief. New York: Picador. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-312-42956-0.
^ Robison, William B. (2016). History, fiction, and the Tudors : sex, politcs, power, and artistic license in the Showtime television series. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-137-43881-2.
^ Nissen, Dano (26 September 2019). "TV News Roundup: 'The Spanish Princess' Sets New and Returning Cast". Variety.
^ USF perhaps considering to sell rare books, phil-hum-ren.uni-muenchen.de. Retrieved 19 May 2021.
^ Sangorski Manuscript a Top Lot at PBA's Sale of Dr. Elmer Belt's Collection, finebooksmagazine.com. Retrieved 19 May 2021.
^ Otto Schaefer, "Aims in Book Collecting", The Record, Gleeson Library Associates, Number 11, San Francisco: University of San Francisco, 1978.
^ Lord Wardington, oxfordmail.co.uk. Retrieved 19 May 2021.
^ Valavoi, Dmitry; Lapshina, Henrietta (1983). Names on an obelisk. Translated by Peter Greenwood. Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 8 9. OCLC 878939730.
^ a b "The Center for Thomas More Studies Art > Gallery > Moscow". The Center for Thomas More Studies at The University of Dallas. 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2014. This monument, suggested by Lenin and built in 1918, lists Thomas More (ninth from the top) among the most influential thinkers "who promoted the liberation of humankind from oppression, arbitrariness, and exploitation." It is in Aleksndrovsky Garden near the Kremlin.
^ Guy, John Alexander (2000). Thomas More. Arnold. pp. 95 96. ISBN 978-0-340-73139-0.
^ ""Thomas More." The Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 3rd Edition. 1970 1979. The Gale Group, Inc". The Free Dictionary [Internet]. 1979. Retrieved 14 September 2021. The following article is from The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979). It might be outdated or ideologically biased. ... More, Thomas ... English humanist, statesman, and writer; founder of Utopian socialism. ... More is especially famous for the dialogue Utopia (1516; Russian translation, 1789), which describes the ideal society on the imaginary island of Utopia. ... He was the first to describe a society in which private property (even personal property) has been abolished, equality of consumption has been introduced (as in the early Christian communes), and production and the way of life have been socialized. ... The family, a cell for the communist way of life, is organized more as a productive unit than as a kinship unit. ... More did not believe that the ideal society would be achieved through revolution. Utopia ... greatly influenced reformers of subsequent centuries, especially Morelly, G. Babeuf, Saint-Simon, C. Fourier, E. Cabet, and other representatives of Utopian socialism. ... The Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 3rd Edition (1970-1979).   2010 The Gale Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
^ a b "St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopaedia. 1913. The whole work is really an exercise of the imagination with much brilliant satire upon the world of More's own day.   there can be no doubt that he would have been delighted at entrapping William Morris, who discovered in it a complete gospel of Socialism
^ Bloom, Harold; Hobby, Blake (2010). Enslavement Enslavement and Emancipation] and Emancipation. Infobase Publishing. pp. 173 174. ISBN 978-1-60413-441-4. Retrieved 20 January 2015. Moreover, Solzhenitsyn insists that the Soviet system cannot survive without the camps, that Soviet communism requires enslavement and forced labour. " ...foreseen as far back as Thomas More, the great-grandfather of socialism, in his Utopia [,the] labor of zeks was needed for degrading and particularly heavy work, which no one, under socialism, would wish to perform" (Gulag, Vol 3." 578).
^ Chen, Chapman (2011).  Pekka Kujam ki (ed.). "Postcolonial Hong Kong Drama Translation" in "Beyond Borders: Translations Moving Languages, Literatures and Cultures". Volume 39 of Trans D. Arbeiten zur Theorie und Praxis des  bersetzens und Dolmetschens. Frank & Timme GmbH, Berlin. pp. 47 54. ISBN 978-3-86596-356-7. Retrieved 8 January 2015. {{cite book}}: External link in |series= (help)
^ Thomas More : the saint and the society ; addresses and articles on St Thomas More further published to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of the foundation of the St Thomas More Society on 14th August 1945. Sydney: St Thomas More Society. 1995. p. 110. ISBN 978-0-646-26104-1.
^ Ackroyd (1999) p. 244. Bibliographer William Carew Hazlitt in his Shakespeare Jest Book Volume III (OCLC 690506548) assigns publication of the work to More's brother-in-law John Rastell, with a date of 23 March 1525.
^ Beaver, Alfred (1892). Memorials of Old Chelsea. London: Elliot Stock. pp. 118 138. OCLC 499072940. In 1682 Chelsey was sold to the first Duke of Beaufort and henceforth bore [the] name.
^ Ackroyd (1999) pp. 234 5
^ Weinreb, Ben; Hibbert, Christopher (1983). "Crosby Hall". The London Encyclop dia (1993 ed.). London: Macmillan. pp. 219 220. ISBN 0-333-57688-8.
^ Norman, Philip; Caroe, W. D. (1908). Survey of London Monograph 9, Crosby Place. London: Committee for the Survey of the Memorials of Greater London. pp. 15 32. OCLC 644450239. From the[ ] indentures between More and the executors of Sir John Rest[ ]More paid to the said executors 150, and the date was June 1st, 1523.
^ "Thomas More Comes to Chelsea". www.rbkc.gov.uk. Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Retrieved 19 January 2021.
^ Eagle, Dorothy;  et al., eds. (2008). The Oxford guide to literary Britain & Ireland (3rd ed.). Oxford [England]: Oxford University Press. p. 115. ISBN 978-0-19-861460-9.
^ "St Katharine's Dock". Exploring East London. Retrieved 4 November 2015.
^ Schulte Herbr ggen, Hubertus (1982). Das Haupt des Thomas Morus in der St. Dunstan-Kirche zu Canterbury. Forschungsberichte des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen. VS Verlag f r Sozialwissenschaften.
Sources[edit]
Biographies[edit]
Ackroyd, Peter (1999). The Life of Thomas More. ISBN 9780385477093.
Basset, Bernard, SJ (1965). Born for Friendship: The Spirit of Sir Thomas More. London: Burns & Oates.
Berglar, Peter (2009). Thomas More: A Lonely Voice against the Power of the State. New York: Scepter Publishers. ISBN 978-1-59417-073-7. (Note: this is a 2009 translation (from the original German, by Hector de Cavilla) of Berglar's 1978 work Die Stunde des Thomas Morus   Einer gegen die Macht. Freiburg 1978; Adamas-Verlag, K ln 1998, ISBN 3-925746-78-1)
Brady, Charles A. (1953). Stage of Fools: A Novel of Sir Thomas More. Dutton.
Br mond, Henri (1904)   Le Bienheureux Thomas More 1478 1535 (1904) as Sir Thomas More (1913) translated by Henry Child;
1920 edition published by R. & T. Washbourne Limited, OCLC 1224822, 749455885;
Paperback edition by Kessinger Publishing, LLC (26 May 2006) with ISBN 1-4286-1904-6, ISBN 978-1-4286-1904-3;
published in French in Paris by Gabalda, 1920, OCLC 369064822
(Note: Br mond is frequently cited in Berglar (2009))
Bridgett, Thomas Edward (1891). Life and Writings of Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England and Martyr under Henry VIII.
Chambers, RW (1935). Thomas More. Harcourt, Brace.
Guy, John (1980). The Public Career of Sir Thomas More. ISBN 978-0-300-02546-0.
  (2000). Thomas More. ISBN 978-0-340-73138-3.
  (2009). A Daughter's Love: Thomas More and His Daughter Meg.
Hiscock, Andrew; Wilcox, Helen, eds. (2017). The Oxford Handbook of Early Modern English Literature and Religion. Oxford: University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-165342-1.
House, Seymour B. (2008) [2004]. "More, Thomas". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/19191. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
Marius, Richard (1984). Thomas More: A Biography. Vintage Books. ISBN 9780394741468.
  (1999). Thomas More: a biography. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-88525-7.
More, Cresacre (1828). The Life of Sir Thomas More by His Great-Grandson. W. Pickering. p. 344.
Moynahan, Brian (2014). God's Bestseller: William Tyndale, Thomas More, and the Writing of the English Bible A Story of Martyrdom and Betrayal. St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4668-6650-8.
Mueller, Janel; Loewenstein, David, eds. (2002). The Cambridge History of Early Modern English Literature. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-63156-3.
Ph lippeau, Marie-Claire (2016). Thomas More. Gallimard.
Reynolds, EE (1964). The Trialet of St Thomas More.
  (1965). Thomas More and Erasmus. New York, Fordham University Press.
Ridley, Jasper (1983). Statesman and Saint: Cardinal Wolsey, Sir Thomas More, and the Politics of Henry VIII. ISBN 0-670-48905-0.
Roper, William (2003),  Wegemer, Gerard B; Smith, Stephen W (eds.), The Life of Sir Thomas More (1556) (PDF), Center for Thomas More Studies, archived from the original (PDF) on 8 June 2012, retrieved 5 March 2012
Roper, William (2007). The Life of St. Thomas More. Benediction Classics. ISBN 978-1-4092-2795-3.
Stapleton, Thomas, The Life and Illustrious Martyrdom of Sir Thomas More (1588) (PDF), archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2016, retrieved 3 January 2016.
Wegemer, Gerard (1985). Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage. ISBN 978-1-889334-12-7.
Wegemer, Gerard (1996). Thomas More on Statesmanship. Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 978-0-8132-0836-7.
Wordsworth, Christopher (1810). Ecclesiastical Biography, Or, Lives of Eminent Men Connected with the History of Religion in England. Vol. 2. London: Rivingtons.
Historiography[edit]
Gushurst-Moore, Andr  (2004), "A Man for All Eras: Recent Books on Thomas More", Political Science Reviewer, 33: 90 143.
Guy, John (2000), "The Search for the Historical Thomas More", History Review: 15+.
Miles, Leland.  Persecution and the Dialogue of Comfort: A Fresh Look at the Charges against Thomas More.  Journal of British Studies, vol. 5, no. 1, 1965, pp. 19 30. online
Primary sources[edit]
More, Thomas (1947),  Rogers, Elizabeth (ed.), The Correspondence of Sir Thomas More, Princeton University Press.
  (1963 1997), Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More, Yale University Press.
  (2001),  da Silva,  lvaro (ed.), The Last Letters of Thomas More.
  (2003),  Thornton, John F (ed.), Saint Thomas More: Selected Writings.
  (2004),  Wegemer, Gerald B; Smith, Stephen W (eds.), A Thomas More Source Book, Catholic University of America Press.
  (2010),  Logan, George M; Adams, Robert M (eds.), Utopia, Critical Editions (3rd ed.), Norton.
External links[edit]
Saints portalBiography portal
Wikiquote has quotations related to Thomas More.
Wikisource has original works by or about:Thomas More
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas More.
"Archival material relating to Thomas More". UK National Archives. 
Portraits of Sir Thomas More at the National Portrait Gallery, London 
The Center for Thomas More Studies at the University of Dallas
Thomas More Studies database Archived 20 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine: contains several of More's English works, including dialogues, early poetry and letters, as well as journal articles and biographical material
Works by Thomas More at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas More at Internet Archive
Works by Thomas More at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Wood, James, Sir Thomas More: A Man for One Season (essay). Presents a critical view of More's anti-Protestantism
More and The History of Richard III
Kautsky, Karl, Thomas More and his Utopia, Marxists.
Thomas More and Utopias   a learning resource from the British Library
Wegemer, Gerard, Integrity and Conscience in the Life and Thought of Thomas More.
The Essential Works of Thomas More   The Center for Thomas More Studies at the University of Dallas
Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "St. Thomas More" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
Patron Saints Index entry   Saint Thomas More biography, prayers, quotes, Catholic devotions to him.
Trial of Sir Thomas More, Professor Douglas O. Linder, University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) School of Law
John Fisher and Thomas More: Martyrs of England and Wales
Saint Thomas More at Library of Congress, with 186 library catalogue records
Political offices
Preceded bySir Richard Wingfield
 Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1525 1529
Succeeded bySir William Fitzwilliam
Preceded bySir Thomas Neville
 Speaker of the House of Commons 1523
Succeeded bySir Thomas Audley
Preceded byThomas Wolsey
 Lord Chancellor 1529 1532
vteEnglish Lord Chancellors under the House of Tudor (1485 1603)Henry VII(1485 1509)
Thomas Rotherham (1485)
John Alcock (1485 1486)
John Morton (1486 1500)
Henry Deane (1500 1502)
William Warham (1502 1509)
Henry VIII(1509 1547)
William Warham (1509 1515)
Thomas Wolsey (1515 1529)
Thomas More (1529 1532)
1st Baron Audley of Walden (1532 1544)
1st Earl of Southampton (1544 1547)
Edward VI(1547 1553)
1st Marquess of Winchester (1547)
1st Baron Rich (1547 1551)
Thomas Goodrich (1552 1553)
Lady Jane Grey(July 1553)
Thomas Goodrich (July 1553)
Mary I(July 1553 1558)
Stephen Gardiner (1553 1555)
Nicholas Heath (1555 1558)
Elizabeth I(1558 1603)
Nicholas Bacon (1558 1579)
Thomas Bromley (1579 1587)
Christopher Hatton (1587 1591)
1st Baron Burghley/1st Baron Hunsdon/10th Baron Cobham/1st Earl of Dorset/Gilbert Gerard (1591 1592)
John Puckering (1592 1596)
1st Viscount Brackley (1596 1603)
Italics indicate service when the Greal Seal was held in Commission
vteSpeakers of the House of CommonsHouse of Commonsof England14th century
de Shareshull
De la Mare
Hungerford
De la Mare
Pickering
Guildesborough
Waldegrave
Pickering
Bussy
Cheney
Doreward
Savage
Redford
Savage
15th century
Esturmy
Tiptoft
Chaucer
Stourton
Doreward
Hungerford
Chaucer
Redman
Beauchamp
Flower
Hunt
Chaucer
Baynard
Flower
Russell
Walton
Vernon
Tyrell
Alington, Sr.
Tyrell
Russell
Hunt
Bowes
Tyrell
Burley
W. Tresham
Burley
W. Tresham
Say
Popham I
W. Tresham
Oldhall
Thorpe
Charlton
Wenlock
T. Tresham
Green
Strangeways
Say
Alington Jr.
Wood
Catesby
Lovell
Mordaunt
Fitzwilliam
Empson
Drury
Englefield
16th century
Dudley
Englefield
Sheffield
Nevill
More
Audley
Wingfield
Rich
Hare
Moyle
Baker
Dyer
Pollard
Broke
Higham
Cordell
Gargrave
T. Williams
Onslow
Wray
Bell
Popham II
Puckering
Snagge
Coke
Yelverton
17th century
Croke
Phelips
R. Crewe
Richardson
T. Crewe
H. Finch
J. Finch
Glanville
Lenthall
Pelham
Lenthall
Rous (Barebones Parliament)
Lenthall
Widdrington (2nd Protectorate Parliament)
Chute, Long & Bampfield (3rd Protectorate Parliament)
Lenthall
Grimston
Turnour
Charlton
Seymour
Sawyer
Seymour
Gregory
W. Williams
Trevor
Powle
Trevor
Foley
Littleton
18th century
Harley
Smith
House of Commonsof Great Britain18th century
Smith
R. Onslow
Bromley
Hanmer
Compton
A. Onslow
Cust
Norton
Cornwall
Grenville
Addington
House of Commonsof the United Kingdom19th century
Addington
Mitford
Abbot
Manners-Sutton
Abercromby
Shaw-Lefevre
Denison
Brand
Peel
Gully
20th century
Lowther
Whitley
FitzRoy
Brown
Morrison
Hylton-Foster
King
Lloyd
Thomas
Weatherill
Boothroyd
Martin
21st century
Martin
Bercow
Hoyle
vteHistory of the Catholic ChurchGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
By country or region
Ecclesiastical history
Timeline
Papacy
Papal primacy
Catholic ecumenical councils
First seven
Catholic Bible
Biblical canon
Vulgate
Crusading movement
History of the Roman Curia
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Catholic culture
Art
Role in civilization
Vatican City
Papal States
Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches
Early Church(30 325/476)Origins andApostolic Age (30 100)
Jesus
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Holy Spirit
Mary
John the Baptist
Apostles in the New Testament
Commissioning
Peter
John
Paul
Stephen
Council of Jerusalem
Split with Judaism
New Testament
Background
Gospels
Acts
Pauline epistles
General epistles
Revelation
Ante-Nicene period (100 325)
Persecution
Church Fathers
Apostolic Fathers
Pope Clement I
Polycarp
Ignatius
Irenaeus
Justin Martyr
Canon
Tertullian
Origen
Late antiquity(313 476)Great Church(180 451)Romanstate church(380-451)
Constantine the Great
Christianity
Arian controversy
Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran
Old St. Peter's Basilica
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Early Middle Ages
Benedict of Nursia
Monasticism
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant
Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East West Schism
High Middle Ages
Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Universities
Scholasticism
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Late Middle Ages
Thomas Aquinas
Pope Boniface VIII
Western Schism
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI
Age of Discovery
ReformationCatholic Reformation
Reformation
Catholic Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of  vila
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine
Thirty Years' War
Baroque period to theFrench Revolution
Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Age of Enlightenment
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution
19th century
Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum
20th century
Pope Pius X
Our Lady of F tima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Nazism
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI (coronation)
Pope John Paul I
Mother Teresa
Communism
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day
1995
21st century
Sexual abuse scandal
Islam
World Youth Day
2000
2002
2005
2008
2011
2013
2016
2019
Pope Benedict XVI
Pope Francis
COVID-19 pandemic
 Vatican City portal
 Catholicism portal
vteHistory of Catholic theologyKey figuresGeneral
History of the Catholic Church
Timeline
History of the papacy
Papal primacy
Ecumenical councils
Catholic Bible
Vulgate
Biblical canon
History of Christian theology
Early Church
Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian
Constantine toPope Gregory I
Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I
Early Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena
High Middle Ages
Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzm n
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon
Mysticism and reforms
Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Bridget of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas   Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
ReformationCounter-Reformation
Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of  vila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of  vila
Luis de Le n
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Su rez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales
Baroque period toFrench Revolution
Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de B rulle
Pierre Gassendi
Ren  Descartes
Mary of Jesus of  greda
Ant nio Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-B nigne Bossuet
Fran ois F nelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri
19th century
Joseph G rres
F licit  de La Mennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von D llinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenr ther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben
 mile Boutroux
Modernism
Neo-scholasticism
L on Bloy
D sir -Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von H gel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Th r se of Lisieux
20th century
G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Mar chal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
 tienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Georges Bernanos
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Dorothy Day
Daniel-Rops
Jean Guitton
Josemar a Escriv 
Nouvelle th ologie
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Dani lou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Marcel Lefebvre
Frederick Copleston
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
Ren  Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen
21st century
Pope John Paul II
Alice von Hildebrand
Carlo Maria Martini
Pope Benedict XVI
Gustavo Guti rrez
Alasdair MacIntyre
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Micha  Heller
Peter Kreeft
Jean-Luc Marion
Tom  Hal k
Aidan Nichols
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron
 Catholicism portal
vteCatholic philosophyEthics
Cardinal virtues
Divine command
Just price
Just war
Probabilism
Natural law
Personalism
Seven virtues
Social teaching
Theological virtues
Virtue ethics
SchoolsMedieval
Augustinianism
Scholasticism
Thomism
Scotism
Occamism
Modern
Salamanca
Christian humanism
Cartesianism
Molinism
Neo-scholasticism
Analytical Thomism
Universals
Augustinian realism
Nominalism
Conceptualism
Moderate realism
Scotistic realism
Other
Theological intellectualism
Theological voluntarism
Foundationalism
Philosophers
Clement
Augustine
Boethius
Dionysius
Isidore
Eriugena
Alcuin
Anselm
Abelard
Lombard
Albertus
Bonaventure
Aquinas
Llull
Scotus
Occam
Ficino
Pico
Erasmus
Cusa
Luis
More
Su rez
Descartes
Gassendi
Montaigne
Pascal
Krasicki
Ko taj
Staszic
Newman
Scheler
Chesterton
Maritain
Stein
Mortimer
Rahner
Anscombe
MacIntyre
Wojty a
Ratzinger
Malebranche
Concepts
Actus Essendi
Actus primus
Actus purus
Aevum
Augustinian values
Cardinal virtues
Cartesian dualism
Cogito, ergo sum
Dehellenization
Differentia
Disputation
Divine illumination
Double truth
Evil demon
Formal distinction
Guardian angel
Haecceity
Head of a pin
Homo unius libri
Infused righteousness
Memento mori
Occam's razor
Ontological argument
Pascal's wager
Peripatetic axiom
Principle of double effect
Quiddity
Quinque viae
Ressentiment
Rota Fortunae
Seven deadly sins
Stratification of emotional life
Theodicy
Augustinian
Irenaean
Trademark argument
Univocity
Utopia
Related
Catholic theology
Platonism
Aristotelianism
Neoplatonism
Islamic philosophy
Doctor of the Church
Renaissance
Rationalism
Empiricism
Phenomenology
 Catholicism portal
 Philosophy portal
vteSocial and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Bo tie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
M ntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Su rez
18th 19th-century
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cort s
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helv tius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Sta l
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
20th 21st-century
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Gu non
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Ko akowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Latifiyan
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nurs 
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
R pke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
 i ek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
vteSocialismHistory - OutlineSchools of thought
21st century
Agrarian
Communist
Democratic
Ethical
Feminist
Green
Guild
Labourism
Syndicalism
Liberal
Market
Marxian
Nationalist
Reformist
Revolutionary
Scientific
Social democracy
Utopian
Fourierism
Icarianism
Owenism
Saint-Simonianism
Technocracy
Libertarian(from below)
Anarchism
Collectivist
Communist
Free-market
Left-wing laissez-faire
Left-wing market
Green
Individualist
Insurrectionary
Magonism
Mutualism
Neozapatismo
Platformism
Communalism
Social
Syndicalist
Left-libertarianism
Libertarian Marxism
Left communism
Council communism
Luxemburgism
Mao-Spontex
Third camp
Authoritarian(from above)
Barracks
Nechayevism
Blanquism
Bolshevism
Leninism
Marxism Leninism
Brezhnevism
Castroism
Ceau ism
Guevarism
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Hoxhaism
Husakism
Juche (originally)
Kadarism
Khrushchevism
Pol Potism
Maoism
Dengism
Maoism Third Worldism
Marxism Leninism Maoism
Marxism Leninism Maoism Gonzalo Thought
Marxism Leninism Maoism Prachanda Path
Xi Jinping Thought
Stalinism
Neo-Stalinism
National Bolshevism
Tkachevism
Trotskyism
Pabloism
Posadism
Orthodox Trotskyism
State
Lassallism
Religious
Buddhist
Christian
Christian communism
Islamic
Jewish
Regional variants
African
African-Caribbean
Arab
Bolivarian
Chinese
Communist
Nationalist
European
Eurocommunism
Indian
Israeli
Indonesian
Melanesian
Mexican
Soviet
In one country
Real
Sri Lankan
Third World
Yugoslav
Key topics and issues
Anarchist economics
Anti-revisionism
Criticism of capitalism
Criticism of socialism
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Class struggle
Democracy
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Egalitarianism
Equal liberty
Equality of opportunity
Equality of outcome
History of anarchism
History of communism
History of socialism
Impossibilism
"The Internationale"
Internationalism
State-owned enterprise
Land reform
Left-wing politics
Mixed economy
Mode of production
Nanosocialism
Nationalization
Planned economy
Post-capitalism
Proletarian revolution
Reformism
Revisionism
Socialisation of production
Socialist economics
Socialist market economy
Socialist state
State capitalism
Trade union
Welfare state
Concepts
Adhocracy
Anarchist economics
Basic income
Calculation in kind
Common ownership
Cooperative ownership
Decentralized planning
Direct democracy
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal opportunity
Free association
Industrial democracy
Labor-time calculation
Labour voucher
Organizational self-management
Production for use
Public ownership
Social dividend
Socialist mode of production
Technocracy
Workplace democracy
People16th century
Tommaso Campanella
Thomas More
18th century
Gracchus Babeuf
Victor d'Hupay
Gabriel Bonnot de Mably
Sylvain Mar chal
 tienne-Gabriel Morelly
19th century
Stephen Pearl Andrews
Mikhail Bakunin
John Goodwyn Barmby
Enrico Barone
August Bebel
Edward Bellamy
Eduard Bernstein
Louis Blanc
Louis Auguste Blanqui
Philippe Buchez
Georg B chner
Philippe Buonarroti
 tienne Cabet
Thomas Carlyle
Edward Carpenter
Nikolay Chernyshevsky
James Connolly
Victor Prosper Considerant
Claire D mar
Th odore D zamy
W. E. B. Du Bois
Prosper Enfantin
Friedrich Engels
Charles Fourier
Emma Goldman
William Batchelder Greene
Charles Hall
Alexander Herzen
Thomas Hodgskin
Jean Jaur s
Mother Jones
Karl Kautsky
Peter Kropotkin
Paul Lafargue
Albert Laponneraye
Ferdinand Lassalle
Pyotr Lavrov
Alexandre Ledru-Rollin
Pierre Leroux
Helen Macfarlane
Jyoti Basu
Errico Malatesta
Karl Marx
Louise Michel
Nikolay Mikhaylovsky
William Morris
Robert Owen
Antonie Pannekoek
Giovanni Pascoli
Constantin Pecqueur
Georgi Plekhanov
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Henri de Saint-Simon
Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin
George Sand
Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz
Eug ne Sue
Lysander Spooner
Fred M. Taylor
William Thompson
Pyotr Tkachev
Benjamin Tucker
Suzanne Voilquin
Alfred Russel Wallace
Josiah Warren
Wilhelm Weitling
Oscar Wilde
20th century
Tariq Ali
Salvador Allende
Louis Aragon
Clement Attlee
Henri Barbusse
Zygmunt Bauman
Simone de Beauvoir
Walter Benjamin
Tony Benn
L on Blum
Grace Lee Boggs
Murray Bookchin
Bertolt Brecht
Aristide Briand
Nikolai Bukharin
Cornelius Castoriadis
Hugo Ch vez
Noam Chomsky
M. N. Roy
G. D. H. Cole
Jeremy Corbyn
Bob Crow
Guy Debord
Eugene V. Debs
John Dewey
Alexander Dub ek
Albert Einstein
Einar Gerhardsen
Mikhail Gorbachev
Maxim Gorky
Antonio Gramsci
B. T. Ranadive
Chris Hedges
Eric Hobsbawm
Dolores Ib rruri
Pablo Iglesias Posse
Elfriede Jelinek
Jayaprakash Narayan
Martin Luther King Jr.
Alexandra Kollontai
James Larkin
E. M. S. Namboodiripad
Jack Layton
Henri Lefebvre
Claude Lefort
Vladimir Lenin
Ken Livingstone
Gy rgy Luk cs
Rosa Luxemburg
Nestor Makhno
Nelson Mandela
Mao Dun
Vladimir Mayakovsky
Faiz Ahmad Faiz
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
China Mi ville
Safdar Hashmi
Fran ois Mitterrand
Evo Morales
Imre Nagy
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Otto Neurath
Paul Nizan
Abdullah  calan
Se n O'Casey
George Orwell
Sylvia Pankhurst
Fred Paterson
Pier Paolo Pasolini
Karl Polanyi
Bertrand Russell
Gaetano Salvemini
Bernie Sanders
Jean-Paul Sartre
Arthur Scargill
L opold S dar Senghor
George Bernard Shaw
R. H. Tawney
E. P. Thompson
Ernst Toller
Leon Trotsky
Yanis Varoufakis
Ram Manohar Lohia
H. G. Wells
Cornel West
Richard D. Wolff
Clara Zetkin
Howard Zinn
Slavoj  i ek
Organizations
International (International socialist organisations)
National (Socialist parties)
See also
Anarchism
Criticism of socialism
Communism
Economic calculation problem
Marxist philosophy
New Left
Old Left
Socialism by country
Socialist calculation debate
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
 Categories
 Socialism WikiProject
 Socialism portal
 Communism portal
 Organized Labour portal
vteSaints of the Catholic ChurchCongregation for the Causes of SaintsStages of canonization: Servant of God       Venerable       Blessed       SaintVirgin Mary
Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition
Titles of Mary
Joseph (husband)
Apostles
Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Great
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas
Archangels
Gabriel
Michael  in the Catholic Church
Raphael
Confessors
Anatolius
Anthony of Kiev
Athanasius the Confessor
Chariton the Confessor
Dominic
Edward the Confessor
Francis of Assisi
Francis Borgia
Homobonus
Lazarus Zographos
Louis Bertrand
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Peter Claver
Salonius
Sergius of Radonezh
Theophanes the Confessor
Disciples
Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples
Doctors of the Church
Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of  vila
Catherine of Siena
Th r se of Lisieux
John of  vila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek
Irenaeus
Evangelists
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
ChurchFathers
Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of L rins
Zephyrinus
Martyrs
Abda and Abdjesus
Charles de Foucauld
Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala
Christina of Persia
Devasahayam Pillai
Dismas the Good Thief
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Gerard of Csan d
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
John Fisher
Korean Martyrs
Lorenzo Ruiz
Martyrs of L beck
Luigi Versiglia
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of Algeria
Martyrs of Cajonos
Martyrs of Drina
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Gorkum
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of La Rioja
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of Prague
Martyrs of Sandomierz
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Martyrs of Zenta
Maximilian Kolbe
 scar Romero
Pedro Calungsod
Perpetua and Felicity
Peter Chanel
Pietro Parenzo
Philomena
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Teresa Benedicta of the Cross
Titus Brandsma
Thomas Becket
Thomas More
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs
Valentine of Rome
Victor and Corona
Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia
Missionaries
Augustine of Canterbury
Boniface
Damien of Molokai
Evermode of Ratzeburg
Francis Xavier
Fran ois de Laval
Gregory the Illuminator
Jun pero Serra
Nico of Georgia
Patrick of Ireland
Remigius
Patriarchs
Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs
Popes
Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Paul VI
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus
Prophets
Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah
Virgins
Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Angela of the Cross
 thelthryth
Bernadette Soubirous
Catherine of Bologna
Brigid of Kildare
Catherine Labour 
Catherine of Siena
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of M rida
Euphemia
Faustina Kowalska
Faustina and Liberata of Como
Genevieve
Hiltrude of Liessies
Joan of Arc
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
Mar a de las Maravillas de Jes s
Narcisa de Jes s
Patricia of Naples
Rosalia
Rose of Lima
Teresa of the Andes
Teresa of Calcutta
Trasilla and Emiliana
Ubaldesca Taccini
See also
Calendar of saints
Congregation for the Causes of Saints
Four Holy Marshals
Fourteen Holy Helpers
Military saints
Athleta Christi
Miles Christianus
Church Militant
Seven Champions
Virtuous pagan
 Catholic Church portal
 Saints portal
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
2
3
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
2
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
Te Papa (New Zealand)
ULAN
People
Netherlands
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
2
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
RISM
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_More&oldid=1149186513"