German priest, theologian and author
Not to be confused with Martin Luther King Jr. For other uses, see Martin Luther (disambiguation).
The ReverendMartin LutherOSAMartin Luther (1529) by Lucas Cranach the ElderBorn10 November 1483Eisleben, County of Mansfeld, Holy Roman EmpireDied18 February 1546(1546-02-18) (aged 62)Eisleben, County of Mansfeld, Holy Roman EmpireEducationUniversity of ErfurtUniversity of WittenbergOccupationsPriestTheologianAuthorHymnwriterNotable workNinety-five Theses (1517)SpouseKatharina von Bora   (m. 1525) ChildrenHans (Johannes)ElisabethMagdalenaMartinPaulMargaretheTheological workEraRenaissanceTradition or movement
Reformation
Lutheranism
Main interestsProlegomenaSoteriologyNotable ideasLaw and GospelFive solae (Sola fide)Theology of the CrossTwo kingdoms doctrine
Signature
Part of a series onLutheranismLuther's rose
Background
Christianity
Start of the Reformation
Reformation
Protestantism
Doctrine and theology
Bible
Old Testament
New Testament
Creeds
Apostles' Creed
Nicene Creed
Athanasian Creed
Book of Concord
Augsburg Confession
Apology of the Augsburg Confession
Luther's Small / Large Catechism
Smalcald Articles
Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope
Formula of Concord
Distinctive theological concepts
Theology of Martin Luther
Justification
Law and Gospel
Sola gratia
Sola scriptura
Christology
Sanctification
Two kingdoms
catholicity
Two states of the Church
Priesthood of all believers
Divine Providence
Marian theology
Theology of the Cross
Sacramental Union
Other relevant topics
Homosexuality
Sacraments and worship
Baptism
Eucharist
Confession
Confirmation
Matrimony
Anointing of the Sick
Holy Orders
Divine Service
Matins
Vespers
Liturgical calendar
Calendar of saints
Lutheran hymn
Lutheran hymnwriters
Normative principle
Lutheran art
Organization
Confessional EvangelicalLutheran Conference
Global Confessional &Missional Lutheran Forum
International Lutheran Council
Lutheran World Federation
Denominations
Lutheranism by region
Movements
History of Lutheranism
Crypto-Lutherans
Gnesio-Lutherans
Lutheran orthodoxy
Pietists
Radical Pietism
Haugeans
Laestadians
Finnish Awakening
Old Lutherans
Neo-Lutherans
High church Lutherans
Confessional Lutheranism
Missionaries
John Campanius
Bartholom us Ziegenbalg
Hans Egede
Johann Heinrich Callenberg
Johann Phillip Fabricius
Paul Henkel
John Christian Frederick Heyer
Karl Graul
Martti Rautanen
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken
Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Lars Olsen Skrefsrud
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
Onesimos Nesib
Paul Olaf Bodding
Johann Flierl
Christian Keyser
Jens Christensen
Bible translators
Martin Luther
Casiodoro de Reina
Kjell Magne Yri
Onesimos Nesib
Aster Ganno
Kristian Osvald Vider 
J kup Dahl
Bartholom us Ziegenbalg
Johann Phillip Fabricius
William Tyndale
John Rogers
George Constantine
Jozef Roh ek
Johannes Avetaranian
Gu brandur  orl ksson
Ludvig Olsen Fossum
Hans Egede / Paul Egede
Otto Fabricius
Nils Vibe Stockfleth
Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri
Martti Rautanen
Primo  Trubar
Jurij Dalmatin
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
Sebastian Krelj
Mikael Agricola
Norwegian Bible Society
Swedish Bible Society
Samuel Ludwik Zasadius
Stanislovas Rapolionis
Laurentius Andreae
Hans Tausen
Olaf M. Norlie
Jonas Bretk nas
Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder
Antonio Brucioli
Miko aj Jakubica
Matthias Bel
Johann Ernst Gl ck
William F. Beck
Theologians
Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen
Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas
Hans Tausen
Laurentius Petri
Olaus Petri
Mikael Agricola
Matthias Flacius
Martin Chemnitz
Johann Gerhard
Abraham Calovius
Johannes Andreas Quenstedt
Johann Wilhelm Baier
Philipp Spener
David Hollaz
August Hermann Francke
Henry Muhlenberg
Friedrich Schleiermacher
Lars Levi Laestadius
Charles Porterfield Krauth
C. F. W. Walther
F. W. Stellhorn
S ren Kierkegaard
Rudolf Otto
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Bultmann
Paul Tillich
Hermann Sasse
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Wolfhart Pannenberg
vte
Martin Luther OSA (/ lu r/;[1] German: [ ma ti n  l t ] (listen); 10 November 1483[2]  18 February 1546) was a German priest, theologian, author, hymnwriter, professor, and Augustinian friar.[3] He was the seminal figure of the Protestant Reformation, and his theological beliefs form the basis of Lutheranism. 
Luther was ordained to the priesthood in 1507. He came to reject several teachings and practices of the Roman Catholic Church; in particular, he disputed the view on indulgences. Luther proposed an academic discussion of the practice and efficacy of indulgences in his Ninety-five Theses of 1517. His refusal to renounce all of his writings at the demand of Pope Leo X in 1520 and the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V at the Diet of Worms in 1521 resulted in his excommunication by the pope and condemnation as an outlaw by the Holy Roman Emperor. Luther died in 1546 with Pope Leo X's excommunication still in effect.
Luther taught that salvation and, consequently, eternal life are not earned by good deeds; rather, they are received only as the free gift of God's grace through the believer's faith in Jesus Christ as redeemer from sin. His theology challenged the authority and office of the pope by teaching that the Bible is the only source of divinely revealed knowledge,[4] and opposed sacerdotalism by considering all baptized Christians to be a holy priesthood.[5] Those who identify with these, and all of Luther's wider teachings, are called Lutherans, though Luther insisted on Christian or Evangelical (German: evangelisch) as the only acceptable names for individuals who professed Christ. His translation of the Bible into the German vernacular (instead of Latin) made it more accessible to the laity, an event that had a tremendous impact on both the church and German culture. It fostered the development of a standard version of the German language, added several principles to the art of translation,[6] and influenced the writing of an English translation, the Tyndale Bible.[7] His hymns influenced the development of singing in Protestant churches.[8] His marriage to Katharina von Bora, a former nun, set a model for the practice of clerical marriage, allowing Protestant clergy to marry.[9]
In two of his later works, Luther expressed anti-Judaistic views, calling for the expulsion of Jews and burning of synagogues.[10] In addition, these works also targeted Roman Catholics, Anabaptists, and nontrinitarian Christians.[11] Based upon his teachings,[12][13][14] the prevailing view among historians is that his rhetoric contributed significantly to the development of antisemitism in Germany and of the Nazi Party.[15][16][17]
Early life
Birth and education
 Portraits of Hans and Margarethe Luther by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1527
 Former monks' dormitory, St Augustine's Monastery, Erfurt
Martin Luther was born to Hans Luder (or Ludher, later Luther)[18] and his wife Margarethe (n e Lindemann) on 10 November 1483 in Eisleben, County of Mansfeld, in the Holy Roman Empire. Luther was baptized the next morning on the feast day of St. Martin of Tours. In 1484, his family moved to Mansfeld, where his father was a leaseholder of copper mines and smelters[19] and served as one of four citizen representatives on the local council; in 1492 he was elected as a town councilor.[20][18] The religious scholar Martin Marty describes Luther's mother as a hard-working woman of "trading-class stock and middling means", contrary to Luther's enemies, who labeled her a whore and bath attendant.[18]
He had several brothers and sisters and is known to have been close to one of them, Jacob.[21]
Hans Luther was ambitious for himself and his family, and he was determined to see Martin, his eldest son, become a lawyer. He sent Martin to Latin schools in Mansfeld, then Magdeburg in 1497, where he attended a school operated by a lay group called the Brethren of the Common Life, and Eisenach in 1498.[22] The three schools focused on the so-called "trivium": grammar, rhetoric, and logic. Luther later compared his education there to purgatory and hell.[23]
In 1501, at age 17, he entered the University of Erfurt, which he later described as a beerhouse and whorehouse.[24] He was made to wake at four every morning for what has been described as "a day of rote learning and often wearying spiritual exercises."[24] He received his master's degree in 1505.[25]
 Luther as a friar, with tonsure
 Luther's accommodation in Wittenberg
In accordance with his father's wishes, he enrolled in law but dropped out almost immediately, believing that law represented uncertainty.[25] Luther sought assurances about life and was drawn to theology and philosophy, expressing particular interest in Aristotle, William of Ockham, and Gabriel Biel.[25] He was deeply influenced by two tutors, Bartholomaeus Arnoldi von Usingen and Jodocus Trutfetter, who taught him to be suspicious of even the greatest thinkers[25] and to test everything himself by experience.[26]
Philosophy proved to be unsatisfying, offering assurance about the use of reason but none about loving God, which to Luther was more important. Reason could not lead men to God, he felt, and he thereafter developed a love-hate relationship with Aristotle over the latter's emphasis on reason.[26] For Luther, reason could be used to question men and institutions, but not God. Human beings could learn about God only through divine revelation, he believed, and Scripture therefore became increasingly important to him.[26]
On 2 July 1505, while Luther was returning to university on horseback after a trip home, a lightning bolt struck near him during a thunderstorm. Later telling his father he was terrified of death and divine judgment, he cried out, "Help! Saint Anna, I will become a monk!"[27][28] He came to view his cry for help as a vow he could never break. He left university, sold his books, and entered St. Augustine's Monastery in Erfurt on 17 July 1505.[29] One friend blamed the decision on Luther's sadness over the deaths of two friends. Luther himself seemed saddened by the move. Those who attended a farewell supper walked him to the door of the Black Cloister. "This day you see me, and then, not ever again," he said.[26] His father was furious over what he saw as a waste of Luther's education.[30]
Monastic life
 A posthumous portrait of Luther as an Augustinian friar
Luther dedicated himself to the Augustinian order, devoting himself to fasting, long hours in prayer, pilgrimage, and frequent confession.[31] Luther described this period of his life as one of deep spiritual despair. He said, "I lost touch with Christ the Savior and Comforter, and made of him the jailer and hangman of my poor soul."[32]
Johann von Staupitz, his superior, concluded that Luther needed more work to distract him from excessive introspection and ordered him to pursue an academic career. On 3 April 1507, Jerome Schultz (lat. Hieronymus Scultetus), the Bishop of Brandenburg, ordained Luther in Erfurt Cathedral. In 1508, he began teaching theology at the University of Wittenberg.[33] He received a bachelor's degree in biblical studies on 9 March 1508 and another bachelor's degree in the Sentences by Peter Lombard in 1509.[34] On 19 October 1512, he was awarded his Doctor of Theology and, on 21 October 1512, was received into the senate of the theological faculty of the University of Wittenberg,[35] having succeeded von Staupitz as chair of theology.[36] He spent the rest of his career in this position at the University of Wittenberg.
He was made provincial vicar of Saxony and Thuringia by his religious order in 1515. This meant he was to visit and oversee each of eleven monasteries in his province.[37]
Start of the Reformation
Further information: History of Protestantism and History of Lutheranism
 Luther's theses are engraved into the door of All Saints' Church, Wittenberg. The Latin inscription above informs the reader that the original door was destroyed by a fire, and that in 1857, King Frederick William IV of Prussia ordered a replacement be made.
In 1516, Johann Tetzel, a Dominican friar, was sent to Germany by the Roman Catholic Church to sell indulgences to raise money in order to rebuild St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.[38] Tetzel's experiences as a preacher of indulgences, especially between 1503 and 1510, led to his appointment as general commissioner by Albrecht von Brandenburg, Archbishop of Mainz, who, deeply in debt to pay for a large accumulation of benefices, had to contribute the considerable sum of ten thousand ducats[39] toward the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. Albrecht obtained permission from Pope Leo X to conduct the sale of a special plenary indulgence (i.e., remission of the temporal punishment of sin), half of the proceeds of which Albrecht was to claim to pay the fees of his benefices.
On 31 October 1517, Luther wrote to his bishop, Albrecht von Brandenburg, protesting against the sale of indulgences. He enclosed in his letter a copy of his "Disputation on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences",[a] which came to be known as the Ninety-five Theses. Hans Hillerbrand writes that Luther had no intention of confronting the church but saw his disputation as a scholarly objection to church practices, and the tone of the writing is accordingly "searching, rather than doctrinaire."[41] Hillerbrand writes that there is nevertheless an undercurrent of challenge in several of the theses, particularly in Thesis 86, which asks: "Why does the pope, whose wealth today is greater than the wealth of the richest Crassus, build the basilica of St. Peter with the money of poor believers rather than with his own money?"[41]
 The Catholic sale of indulgences shown in A Question to a Mintmaker, woodcut by J rg Breu the Elder of Augsburg, c. 1530
Luther objected to a saying attributed to Tetzel that "As soon as the coin in the coffer rings, the soul from purgatory (also attested as 'into heaven') springs."[42] He insisted that, since forgiveness was God's alone to grant, those who claimed that indulgences absolved buyers from all punishments and granted them salvation were in error. Christians, he said, must not slacken in following Christ on account of such false assurances.
According to one account, Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses to the door of All Saints' Church in Wittenberg on 31 October 1517. Scholars Walter Kr mer, G tz Trenkler, Gerhard Ritter, and Gerhard Prause contend that the story of the posting on the door, although it has become one of the pillars of history, has little foundation in truth.[43][44][45][46] The story is based on comments made by Luther's collaborator Philip Melanchthon, though it is thought that he was not in Wittenberg at the time.[47] According to Roland Bainton, on the other hand, it is true.[48]
The Latin Theses were printed in several locations in Germany in 1517. In January 1518 friends of Luther translated the Ninety-five Theses from Latin into German.[49] Within two weeks, copies of the theses had spread throughout Germany. Luther's writings circulated widely, reaching France, England, and Italy as early as 1519. Students thronged to Wittenberg to hear Luther speak. He published a short commentary on Galatians and his Work on the Psalms. This early part of Luther's career was one of his most creative and productive.[50] Three of his best-known works were published in 1520: To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation, On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church, and On the Freedom of a Christian.
Justification by faith alone
Main article: Sola fide
 Luther at Erfurt, which depicts Martin Luther discovering the doctrine of sola fide (by faith alone). Painting by Joseph Noel Paton, 1861.
From 1510 to 1520, Luther lectured on the Psalms, and on the books of Hebrews, Romans, and Galatians. As he studied these portions of the Bible, he came to view the use of terms such as penance and righteousness by the Catholic Church in new ways. He became convinced that the church was corrupt in its ways and had lost sight of what he saw as several of the central truths of Christianity. The most important for Luther was the doctrine of justification God's act of declaring a sinner righteous by faith alone through God's grace. He began to teach that salvation or redemption is a gift of God's grace, attainable only through faith in Jesus as the Messiah.[51] "This one and firm rock, which we call the doctrine of justification", he writes, "is the chief article of the whole Christian doctrine, which comprehends the understanding of all godliness."[52]
Luther came to understand justification as entirely the work of God. This teaching by Luther was clearly expressed in his 1525 publication On the Bondage of the Will, which was written in response to On Free Will by Desiderius Erasmus (1524). Luther based his position on predestination on St. Paul's epistle to the Ephesians 2:8 10. Against the teaching of his day that the righteous acts of believers are performed in cooperation with God, Luther wrote that Christians receive such righteousness entirely from outside themselves; that righteousness not only comes from Christ but actually is the righteousness of Christ, imputed to Christians (rather than infused into them) through faith.[53]
"That is why faith alone makes someone just and fulfills the law," he writes. "Faith is that which brings the Holy Spirit through the merits of Christ."[54] Faith, for Luther, was a gift from God; the experience of being justified by faith was "as though I had been born again." His entry into Paradise, no less, was a discovery about "the righteousness of God" a discovery that "the just person" of whom the Bible speaks (as in Romans 1:17) lives by faith.[55] He explains his concept of "justification" in the Smalcald Articles:
The first and chief article is this: Jesus Christ, our God and Lord, died for our sins and was raised again for our justification (Romans 3:24 25). He alone is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world (John 1:29), and God has laid on Him the iniquity of us all (Isaiah 53:6). All have sinned and are justified freely, without their own works and merits, by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, in His blood (Romans 3:23 25). This is necessary to believe. This cannot be otherwise acquired or grasped by any work, law or merit. Therefore, it is clear and certain that this faith alone justifies us ... Nothing of this article can be yielded or surrendered, even though heaven and earth and everything else falls (Mark 13:31).[56]
Breach with the papacy
 Pope Leo X's Bull against the errors of Martin Luther, 1521, commonly known as Exsurge Domine
Archbishop Albrecht did not reply to Luther's letter containing the Ninety-five Theses. He had the theses checked for heresy and in December 1517 forwarded them to Rome.[57] He needed the revenue from the indulgences to pay off a papal dispensation for his tenure of more than one bishopric. As Luther later notes, "the pope had a finger in the pie as well, because one half was to go to the building of St. Peter's Church in Rome".[58]
Pope Leo X was used to reformers and heretics,[59] and he responded slowly, "with great care as is proper."[60] Over the next three years he deployed a series of papal theologians and envoys against Luther, which served only to harden the reformer's anti-papal theology. First, the Dominican theologian Sylvester Mazzolini drafted a heresy case against Luther, whom Leo then summoned to Rome. The Elector Frederick persuaded the pope to have Luther examined at Augsburg, where the Imperial Diet was held.[61] Over a three-day period in October 1518, Luther defended himself under questioning by papal legate Cardinal Cajetan. The pope's right to issue indulgences was at the centre of the dispute between the two men.[62][63] The hearings degenerated into a shouting match. More than writing his theses, Luther's confrontation with the church cast him as an enemy of the pope: "His Holiness abuses Scripture", retorted Luther. "I deny that he is above Scripture".[64][65] Cajetan's original instructions had been to arrest Luther if he failed to recant, but the legate desisted from doing so.[66] With help from the Carmelite monk Christoph Langenmantel, Luther slipped out of the city at night, unbeknownst to Cajetan.[67]
 The meeting of Martin Luther (right) and Cardinal Cajetan (left, holding the book)
In January 1519, at Altenburg in Saxony, the papal nuncio Karl von Miltitz adopted a more conciliatory approach. Luther made certain concessions to the Saxon, who was a relative of the Elector and promised to remain silent if his opponents did.[68] The theologian Johann Eck, however, was determined to expose Luther's doctrine in a public forum. In June and July 1519, he staged a disputation with Luther's colleague Andreas Karlstadt at Leipzig and invited Luther to speak.[69] Luther's boldest assertion in the debate was that Matthew 16:18 does not confer on popes the exclusive right to interpret scripture, and that therefore neither popes nor church councils were infallible.[70] For this, Eck branded Luther a new Jan Hus, referring to the Czech reformer and heretic burned at the stake in 1415. From that moment, he devoted himself to Luther's defeat.[71]
Excommunication
On 15 June 1520, the Pope warned Luther with the papal bull (edict) Exsurge Domine that he risked excommunication unless he recanted 41 sentences drawn from his writings, including the Ninety-five Theses, within 60 days. That autumn, Eck proclaimed the bull in Meissen and other towns. Von Miltitz attempted to broker a solution, but Luther, who had sent the pope a copy of On the Freedom of a Christian in October, publicly set fire to the bull and decretals at Wittenberg on 10 December 1520,[72] an act he defended in Why the Pope and his Recent Book are Burned and Assertions Concerning All Articles. As a consequence, Luther was excommunicated by Pope Leo X on 3 January 1521, in the bull Decet Romanum Pontificem.[73] And although the Lutheran World Federation, Methodists and the Catholic Church's Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity agreed (in 1999 and 2006, respectively) on a "common understanding of justification by God's grace through faith in Christ," the Catholic Church has never lifted the 1521 excommunication.[74][75][76]
Diet of Worms
Main article: Diet of Worms
 Luther Before the Diet of Worms by Anton von Werner (1843 1915)
The enforcement of the ban on the Ninety-five Theses fell to the secular authorities. On 18 April 1521, Luther appeared as ordered before the Diet of Worms. This was a general assembly of the estates of the Holy Roman Empire that took place in Worms, a town on the Rhine. It was conducted from 28 January to 25 May 1521, with Emperor Charles V presiding. Prince Frederick III, Elector of Saxony, obtained a safe conduct for Luther to and from the meeting.
Johann Eck, speaking on behalf of the empire as assistant of the Archbishop of Trier, presented Luther with copies of his writings laid out on a table and asked him if the books were his and whether he stood by their contents. Luther confirmed he was their author but requested time to think about the answer to the second question. He prayed, consulted friends, and gave his response the next day:
Unless I am convinced by the testimony of the Scriptures or by clear reason (for I do not trust either in the pope or in councils alone, since it is well known that they have often erred and contradicted themselves), I am bound by the Scriptures I have quoted and my conscience is captive to the Word of God. I cannot and will not recant anything, since it is neither safe nor right to go against conscience. May God help me. Amen.[77]
At the end of this speech, Luther raised his arm "in the traditional salute of a knight winning a bout." Michael Mullett considers this speech as a "world classic of epoch-making oratory."[78]
 Luther Monument in Worms. His statue is surrounded by the figures of his lay protectors and earlier Church reformers including John Wycliffe, Jan Hus and Girolamo Savonarola.
Eck informed Luther that he was acting like a heretic, saying,
Martin, there is no one of the heresies which have torn the bosom of the church, which has not derived its origin from the various interpretation of the Scripture. The Bible itself is the arsenal whence each innovator has drawn his deceptive arguments. It was with Biblical texts that Pelagius and Arius maintained their doctrines. Arius, for instance, found the negation of the eternity of the Word an eternity which you admit, in this verse of the New Testament Joseph knew not his wife till she had brought forth her first-born son; and he said, in the same way that you say, that this passage enchained him. When the fathers of the Council of Constance condemned this proposition of Jan Hus The church of Jesus Christ is only the community of the elect, they condemned an error; for the church, like a good mother, embraces within her arms all who bear the name of Christian, all who are called to enjoy the celestial beatitude.[79]
Luther refused to recant his writings. He is sometimes also quoted as saying: "Here I stand. I can do no other". Recent scholars consider the evidence for these words to be unreliable since they were inserted before "May God help me" only in later versions of the speech and not recorded in witness accounts of the proceedings.[80] However, Mullett suggests that given his nature, "we are free to believe that Luther would tend to select the more dramatic form of words."[78]
Over the next five days, private conferences were held to determine Luther's fate. The emperor presented the final draft of the Edict of Worms on 25 May 1521, declaring Luther an outlaw, banning his literature, and requiring his arrest: "We want him to be apprehended and punished as a notorious heretic."[81] It also made it a crime for anyone in Germany to give Luther food or shelter. It permitted anyone to kill Luther without legal consequence.
At Wartburg Castle
 Wartburg Castle, Eisenach
 The Wartburg room where Luther translated the New Testament into German. An original first edition is kept in the case on the desk.
Luther's disappearance during his return to Wittenberg was planned. Frederick III had him intercepted on his way home in the forest near Wittenberg by masked horsemen impersonating highway robbers. They escorted Luther to the security of the Wartburg Castle at Eisenach.[82] During his stay at Wartburg, which he referred to as "my Patmos",[83] Luther translated the New Testament from Greek into German and poured out doctrinal and polemical writings. These included a renewed attack on Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz, whom he shamed into halting the sale of indulgences in his episcopates,[84] and a Refutation of the Argument of Latomus, in which he expounded the principle of justification to Jacobus Latomus, an orthodox theologian from Louvain.[85] In this work, one of his most emphatic statements on faith, he argued that every good work designed to attract God's favor is a sin.[86] All humans are sinners by nature, he explained, and God's grace alone (which cannot be earned) can make them just. On 1 August 1521, Luther wrote to Melanchthon on the same theme: "Be a sinner, and let your sins be strong, but let your trust in Christ be stronger, and rejoice in Christ who is the victor over sin, death, and the world. We will commit sins while we are here, for this life is not a place where justice resides."[87]
In the summer of 1521, Luther widened his target from individual pieties like indulgences and pilgrimages to doctrines at the heart of Church practice. In On the Abrogation of the Private Mass, he condemned as idolatry the idea that the mass is a sacrifice, asserting instead that it is a gift, to be received with thanksgiving by the whole congregation.[88] His essay On Confession, Whether the Pope has the Power to Require It rejected compulsory confession and encouraged private confession and absolution, since "every Christian is a confessor."[89] In November, Luther wrote The Judgement of Martin Luther on Monastic Vows. He assured monks and nuns that they could break their vows without sin, because vows were an illegitimate and vain attempt to win salvation.[90]
 Luther disguised as "Junker J rg", 1521
Luther made his pronouncements from Wartburg in the context of rapid developments at Wittenberg, of which he was kept fully informed. Andreas Karlstadt, supported by the ex-Augustinian Gabriel Zwilling, embarked on a radical programme of reform there in June 1521, exceeding anything envisaged by Luther. The reforms provoked disturbances, including a revolt by the Augustinian friars against their prior, the smashing of statues and images in churches, and denunciations of the magistracy. After secretly visiting Wittenberg in early December 1521, Luther wrote A Sincere Admonition by Martin Luther to All Christians to Guard Against Insurrection and Rebellion.[91] Wittenberg became even more volatile after Christmas when a band of visionary zealots, the so-called Zwickau prophets, arrived, preaching revolutionary doctrines such as the equality of man,[clarification needed] adult baptism, and Christ's imminent return.[92] When the town council asked Luther to return, he decided it was his duty to act.[93]
Return to Wittenberg and Peasants' War
See also: Radical Reformation and German Peasants' War
 Lutherhaus, Luther's residence in Wittenberg
Luther secretly returned to Wittenberg on 6 March 1522. He wrote to the Elector: "During my absence, Satan has entered my sheepfold, and committed ravages which I cannot repair by writing, but only by my personal presence and living word."[94] For eight days in Lent, beginning on Invocavit Sunday, 9 March, Luther preached eight sermons, which became known as the "Invocavit Sermons". In these sermons, he hammered home the primacy of core Christian values such as love, patience, charity, and freedom, and reminded the citizens to trust God's word rather than violence to bring about necessary change.[95]
Do you know what the Devil thinks when he sees men use violence to propagate the gospel? He sits with folded arms behind the fire of hell, and says with malignant looks and frightful grin: "Ah, how wise these madmen are to play my game! Let them go on; I shall reap the benefit. I delight in it." But when he sees the Word running and contending alone on the battle-field, then he shudders and shakes for fear.[96]
The effect of Luther's intervention was immediate. After the sixth sermon, the Wittenberg jurist Jerome Schurf wrote to the elector: "Oh, what joy has Dr. Martin's return spread among us! His words, through divine mercy, are bringing back every day misguided people into the way of the truth."[96]
Luther next set about reversing or modifying the new church practices. By working alongside the authorities to restore public order, he signalled his reinvention as a conservative force within the Reformation.[97] After banishing the Zwickau prophets, he faced a battle against both the established Church and the radical reformers who threatened the new order by fomenting social unrest and violence.[98]
 The Twelve Articles, 1525
Despite his victory in Wittenberg, Luther was unable to stifle radicalism further afield. Preachers such as Thomas M ntzer and Zwickau prophet Nicholas Storch found support amongst poorer townspeople and peasants between 1521 and 1525. There had been revolts by the peasantry on smaller scales since the 15th century.[99] Luther's pamphlets against the Church and the hierarchy, often worded with "liberal" phraseology, led many peasants to believe he would support an attack on the upper classes in general.[100] Revolts broke out in Franconia, Swabia, and Thuringia in 1524, even drawing support from disaffected nobles, many of whom were in debt. Gaining momentum under the leadership of radicals such as M ntzer in Thuringia, and Hipler and Lotzer in the south-west, the revolts turned into war.[101]
Luther sympathised with some of the peasants' grievances, as he showed in his response to the Twelve Articles in May 1525, but he reminded the aggrieved to obey the temporal authorities.[102] During a tour of Thuringia, he became enraged at the widespread burning of convents, monasteries, bishops' palaces, and libraries. In Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants, written on his return to Wittenberg, he gave his interpretation of the Gospel teaching on wealth, condemned the violence as the devil's work, and called for the nobles to put down the rebels like mad dogs:
Therefore let everyone who can, smite, slay, and stab, secretly or openly, remembering that nothing can be more poisonous, hurtful, or devilish than a rebel ... For baptism does not make men free in body and property, but in soul; and the gospel does not make goods common, except in the case of those who, of their own free will, do what the apostles and disciples did in Acts 4 [:32 37]. They did not demand, as do our insane peasants in their raging, that the goods of others of Pilate and Herod should be common, but only their own goods. Our peasants, however, want to make the goods of other men common, and keep their own for themselves. Fine Christians they are! I think there is not a devil left in hell; they have all gone into the peasants. Their raving has gone beyond all measure.[103]
Luther justified his opposition to the rebels on three grounds. First, in choosing violence over lawful submission to the secular government, they were ignoring Christ's counsel to "Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's"; St. Paul had written in his epistle to the Romans 13:1 7 that all authorities are appointed by God and therefore should not be resisted. This reference from the Bible forms the foundation for the doctrine known as the divine right of kings, or, in the German case, the divine right of the princes. Second, the violent actions of rebelling, robbing, and plundering placed the peasants "outside the law of God and Empire", so they deserved "death in body and soul, if only as highwaymen and murderers." Lastly, Luther charged the rebels with blasphemy for calling themselves "Christian brethren" and committing their sinful acts under the banner of the Gospel.[104] Only later in life did he develop the Beerwolf concept permitting some cases of resistance against the government.[105]
Without Luther's backing for the uprising, many rebels laid down their weapons; others felt betrayed. Their defeat by the Swabian League at the Battle of Frankenhausen on 15 May 1525, followed by M ntzer's execution, brought the revolutionary stage of the Reformation to a close.[106] Thereafter, radicalism found a refuge in the Anabaptist movement and other religious movements, while Luther's Reformation flourished under the wing of the secular powers.[107] In 1526 Luther wrote: "I, Martin Luther, have during the rebellion slain all the peasants, for it was I who ordered them to be struck dead."[108]
Marriage
 Katharina von Bora, Luther's wife, by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1526
Martin Luther married Katharina von Bora, one of 12 nuns he had helped escape from the Nimbschen Cistercian convent in April 1523, when he arranged for them to be smuggled out in herring barrels.[109] "Suddenly, and while I was occupied with far different thoughts," he wrote to Wenceslaus Link, "the Lord has plunged me into marriage."[110] At the time of their marriage, Katharina was 26 years old and Luther was 41 years old.
 Martin Luther at his desk with family portraits (17th century)
On 13 June 1525, the couple was engaged, with Johannes Bugenhagen, Justus Jonas, Johannes Apel, Philipp Melanchthon and Lucas Cranach the Elder and his wife as witnesses.[111] On the evening of the same day, the couple was married by Bugenhagen.[111] The ceremonial walk to the church and the wedding banquet were left out and were made up two weeks later on 27 June.[111]
Some priests and former members of religious orders had already married, including Andreas Karlstadt and Justus Jonas, but Luther's wedding set the seal of approval on clerical marriage.[112] He had long condemned vows of celibacy on biblical grounds, but his decision to marry surprised many, not least Melanchthon, who called it reckless.[113] Luther had written to George Spalatin on 30 November 1524, "I shall never take a wife, as I feel at present. Not that I am insensible to my flesh or sex (for I am neither wood nor stone); but my mind is averse to wedlock because I daily expect the death of a heretic."[114]
Before marrying, Luther had been living on the plainest food, and, as he admitted himself, his mildewed bed was not properly made for months at a time.[115]
Luther and his wife moved into a former monastery, "The Black Cloister," a wedding present from Elector John the Steadfast. They embarked on what appears to have been a happy and successful marriage, though money was often short.[116] Katharina bore six children: Hans  June 1526; Elisabeth  10 December 1527, who died within a few months; Magdalene  1529, who died in Luther's arms in 1542; Martin  1531; Paul  January 1533; and Margaret  1534; and she helped the couple earn a living by farming and taking in boarders.[117] Luther confided to Michael Stiefel on 11 August 1526: "My Katie is in all things so obliging and pleasing to me that I would not exchange my poverty for the riches of Croesus."[118]
Organising the church
 Church orders, Mecklenburg 1650
By 1526, Luther found himself increasingly occupied in organising a new church. His biblical ideal of congregations choosing their own ministers had proved unworkable.[119] According to Bainton: "Luther's dilemma was that he wanted both a confessional church based on personal faith and experience and a territorial church including all in a given locality. If he were forced to choose, he would take his stand with the masses, and this was the direction in which he moved."[120]
From 1525 to 1529, he established a supervisory church body, laid down a new form of worship service, and wrote a clear summary of the new faith in the form of two catechisms.[121] To avoid confusing or upsetting the people, Luther avoided extreme change. He also did not wish to replace one controlling system with another. He concentrated on the church in the Electorate of Saxony, acting only as an adviser to churches in new territories, many of which followed his Saxon model. He worked closely with the new elector, John the Steadfast, to whom he turned for secular leadership and funds on behalf of a church largely shorn of its assets and income after the break with Rome.[122] For Luther's biographer Martin Brecht, this partnership "was the beginning of a questionable and originally unintended development towards a church government under the temporal sovereign".[123]
The elector authorised a visitation of the church, a power formerly exercised by bishops.[124] At times, Luther's practical reforms fell short of his earlier radical pronouncements. For example, the Instructions for the Visitors of Parish Pastors in Electoral Saxony (1528), drafted by Melanchthon with Luther's approval, stressed the role of repentance in the forgiveness of sins, despite Luther's position that faith alone ensures justification.[125] The Eisleben reformer Johannes Agricola challenged this compromise, and Luther condemned him for teaching that faith is separate from works.[126] The Instruction is a problematic document for those seeking a consistent evolution in Luther's thought and practice.[127]
 Lutheran church liturgy and sacraments
In response to demands for a German liturgy, Luther wrote a German Mass, which he published in early 1526.[128] He did not intend it as a replacement for his 1523 adaptation of the Latin Mass but as an alternative for the "simple people", a "public stimulation for people to believe and become Christians."[129] Luther based his order on the Catholic service but omitted "everything that smacks of sacrifice", and the Mass became a celebration where everyone received the wine as well as the bread.[130] He retained the elevation of the host and chalice, while trappings such as the Mass vestments, altar, and candles were made optional, allowing freedom of ceremony.[131] Some reformers, including followers of Huldrych Zwingli, considered Luther's service too papistic, and modern scholars note the conservatism of his alternative to the Catholic Mass.[132] Luther's service, however, included congregational singing of hymns and psalms in German, as well as parts of the liturgy, including Luther's unison setting of the Creed.[133] To reach the simple people and the young, Luther incorporated religious instruction into the weekday services in the form of catechism.[134] He also provided simplified versions of the baptism and marriage services.[135]
Luther and his colleagues introduced the new order of worship during their visitation of the Electorate of Saxony, which began in 1527.[136] They also assessed the standard of pastoral care and Christian education in the territory. "Merciful God, what misery I have seen," Luther writes, "the common people knowing nothing at all of Christian doctrine ... and unfortunately many pastors are well-nigh unskilled and incapable of teaching."[137]
Catechisms
 A stained glass portrayal of Luther
Luther devised the catechism as a method of imparting the basics of Christianity to the congregations. In 1529, he wrote the Large Catechism, a manual for pastors and teachers, as well as a synopsis, the Small Catechism, to be memorised by the people.[138] The catechisms provided easy-to-understand instructional and devotional material on the Ten Commandments, the Apostles' Creed, The Lord's Prayer, baptism, and the Lord's Supper.[139] Luther incorporated questions and answers in the catechism so that the basics of Christian faith would not just be learned by rote, "the way monkeys do it", but understood.[140]
The catechism is one of Luther's most personal works. "Regarding the plan to collect my writings in volumes," he wrote, "I am quite cool and not at all eager about it because, roused by a Saturnian hunger, I would rather see them all devoured. For I acknowledge none of them to be really a book of mine, except perhaps the Bondage of the Will and the Catechism."[141] The Small Catechism has earned a reputation as a model of clear religious teaching.[142] It remains in use today, along with Luther's hymns and his translation of the Bible.
Luther's Small Catechism proved especially effective in helping parents teach their children; likewise the Large Catechism was effective for pastors.[143] Using the German vernacular, they expressed the Apostles' Creed in simpler, more personal, Trinitarian language. He rewrote each article of the Creed to express the character of the Father, the Son, or the Holy Spirit. Luther's goal was to enable the catechumens to see themselves as a personal object of the work of the three persons of the Trinity, each of which works in the catechumen's life.[144] That is, Luther depicts the Trinity not as a doctrine to be learned, but as persons to be known. The Father creates, the Son redeems, and the Spirit sanctifies, a divine unity with separate personalities. Salvation originates with the Father and draws the believer to the Father. Luther's treatment of the Apostles' Creed must be understood in the context of the Decalogue (the Ten Commandments) and The Lord's Prayer, which are also part of the Lutheran catechetical teaching.[144]
Translation of the Bible
Main article: Luther Bible
 Luther's 1534 Bible
Luther had published his German translation of the New Testament in 1522, and he and his collaborators completed the translation of the Old Testament in 1534, when the whole Bible was published. He continued to work on refining the translation until the end of his life.[145] Others had previously translated the Bible into German, but Luther tailored his translation to his own doctrine.[146]
Two of the earlier translations were the Mentelin Bible (1456)[147] and the Koberger Bible (1484).[148] There were as many as fourteen in High German, four in Low German, four in Dutch, and various other translations in other languages before the Bible of Luther.[149]
Luther's translation used the variant of German spoken at the Saxon chancellery, intelligible to both northern and southern Germans.[150] He intended his vigorous, direct language to make the Bible accessible to everyday Germans, "for we are removing impediments and difficulties so that other people may read it without hindrance."[151] Published at a time of rising demand for German-language publications, Luther's version quickly became a popular and influential Bible translation. As such, it contributed a distinct flavor to the German language and literature.[152] Furnished with notes and prefaces by Luther, and with woodcuts by Lucas Cranach that contained anti-papal imagery, it played a major role in the spread of Luther's doctrine throughout Germany.[153] The Luther Bible influenced other vernacular translations, such as the Tyndale Bible (from 1525 forward), a precursor of the King James Bible.[154]
When he was criticised for inserting the word "alone" after "faith" in Romans 3:28,[155] he replied in part: "[T]he text itself and the meaning of St. Paul urgently require and demand it. For in that very passage he is dealing with the main point of Christian doctrine, namely, that we are justified by faith in Christ without any works of the Law. ... But when works are so completely cut away and that must mean that faith alone justifies whoever would speak plainly and clearly about this cutting away of works will have to say, 'Faith alone justifies us, and not works'."[156] Luther did not include First Epistle of John 5:7 8,[157] the Johannine Comma in his translation, rejecting it as a forgery. It was inserted into the text by other hands after Luther's death.[158][159]
Hymnodist
Main article: List of hymns by Martin Luther
 An early printing of Luther's hymn "Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott"
Ein feste Burg sung in German
The German text of "Ein feste Burg" ("A Mighty Fortress") sung to the isometric, more widely known arrangement of its traditional melody
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Luther was a prolific hymnodist, authoring hymns such as "Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott" ("A Mighty Fortress Is Our God"), based on Psalm 46, and "Vom Himmel hoch, da komm ich her" ("From Heaven Above to Earth I Come"), based on Luke 2:11 12.[160] Luther connected high art and folk music, also all classes, clergy and laity, men, women and children. His tool of choice for this connection was the singing of German hymns in connection with worship, school, home, and the public arena.[161] He often accompanied the sung hymns with a lute, later recreated as the waldzither that became a national instrument of Germany in the 20th century.[162]
Luther's hymns were frequently evoked by particular events in his life and the unfolding Reformation. This behavior started with his learning of the execution of Jan van Essen and Hendrik Vos, the first individuals to be martyred by the Roman Catholic Church for Lutheran views, prompting Luther to write the hymn "Ein neues Lied wir heben an" ("A New Song We Raise"), which is generally known in English by John C. Messenger's translation by the title and first line "Flung to the Heedless Winds" and sung to the tune Ibstone composed in 1875 by Maria C. Tiddeman.[163]
Luther's 1524 creedal hymn "Wir glauben all an einen Gott" ("We All Believe in One True God") is a three-stanza confession of faith prefiguring Luther's 1529 three-part explanation of the Apostles' Creed in the Small Catechism. Luther's hymn, adapted and expanded from an earlier German creedal hymn, gained widespread use in vernacular Lutheran liturgies as early as 1525. Sixteenth-century Lutheran hymnals also included "Wir glauben all" among the catechetical hymns, although 18th-century hymnals tended to label the hymn as Trinitarian rather than catechetical, and 20th-century Lutherans rarely used the hymn because of the perceived difficulty of its tune.[161]
Autograph of "Vater unser im Himmelreich", with the only notes extant in Luther's handwriting
Luther's 1538 hymnic version of the Lord's Prayer, "Vater unser im Himmelreich", corresponds exactly to Luther's explanation of the prayer in the Small Catechism, with one stanza for each of the seven prayer petitions, plus opening and closing stanzas. The hymn functions both as a liturgical setting of the Lord's Prayer and as a means of examining candidates on specific catechism questions. The extant manuscript shows multiple revisions, demonstrating Luther's concern to clarify and strengthen the text and to provide an appropriately prayerful tune. Other 16th- and 20th-century versifications of the Lord's Prayer have adopted Luther's tune, although modern texts are considerably shorter.[164]
Luther wrote "Aus tiefer Not schrei ich zu dir" ("From depths of woe I cry to You") in 1523 as a hymnic version of Psalm 130 and sent it as a sample to encourage his colleagues to write psalm-hymns for use in German worship. In a collaboration with Paul Speratus, this and seven other hymns were published in the Achtliederbuch, the first Lutheran hymnal. In 1524 Luther developed his original four-stanza psalm paraphrase into a five-stanza Reformation hymn that developed the theme of "grace alone" more fully. Because it expressed essential Reformation doctrine, this expanded version of "Aus tiefer Not" was designated as a regular component of several regional Lutheran liturgies and was widely used at funerals, including Luther's own. Along with Erhart Hegenwalt's hymnic version of Psalm 51, Luther's expanded hymn was also adopted for use with the fifth part of Luther's catechism, concerning confession.[165]
Luther wrote "Ach Gott, vom Himmel sieh darein" ("Oh God, look down from heaven"). "Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland" (Now come, Savior of the gentiles), based on Veni redemptor gentium, became the main hymn (Hauptlied) for Advent. He transformed A solus ortus cardine to "Christum wir sollen loben schon" ("We should now praise Christ") and Veni Creator Spiritus to "Komm, Gott Sch pfer, Heiliger Geist" ("Come, Holy Spirit, Lord God").[166] He wrote two hymns on the Ten Commandments, "Dies sind die heilgen Zehn Gebot" and "Mensch, willst du leben seliglich". His "Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ" ("Praise be to You, Jesus Christ") became the main hymn for Christmas. He wrote for Pentecost "Nun bitten wir den Heiligen Geist", and adopted for Easter "Christ ist erstanden" (Christ is risen), based on Victimae paschali laudes. "Mit Fried und Freud ich fahr dahin", a paraphrase of Nunc dimittis, was intended for Purification, but became also a funeral hymn. He paraphrased the Te Deum as "Herr Gott, dich loben wir" with a simplified form of the melody. It became known as the German Te Deum.
Luther's 1541 hymn "Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam" ("To Jordan came the Christ our Lord") reflects the structure and substance of his questions and answers concerning baptism in the Small Catechism. Luther adopted a preexisting Johann Walter tune associated with a hymnic setting of Psalm 67's prayer for grace; Wolf Heintz's four-part setting of the hymn was used to introduce the Lutheran Reformation in Halle in 1541. Preachers and composers of the 18th century, including J.S. Bach, used this rich hymn as a subject for their own work, although its objective baptismal theology was displaced by more subjective hymns under the influence of late-19th-century Lutheran pietism.[161]
Luther's hymns were included in early Lutheran hymnals and spread the ideas of the Reformation. He supplied four of eight songs of the First Lutheran hymnal Achtliederbuch, 18 of 26 songs of the Erfurt Enchiridion, and 24 of the 32 songs in the first choral hymnal with settings by Johann Walter, Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn, all published in 1524. Luther's hymns inspired composers to write music. Johann Sebastian Bach included several verses as chorales in his cantatas and based chorale cantatas entirely on them, namely Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4, as early as possibly 1707, in his second annual cycle (1724 to 1725) Ach Gott, vom Himmel sieh darein, BWV 2, Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam, BWV 7, Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland, BWV 62, Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ, BWV 91, and Aus tiefer Not schrei ich zu dir, BWV 38, later Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott, BWV 80, and in 1735 W r Gott nicht mit uns diese Zeit, BWV 14.
On the soul after death
 Luther on the left with Lazarus being raised by Jesus from the dead, painting by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1558
In contrast to the views of John Calvin[167] and Philipp Melanchthon,[168] throughout his life Luther maintained that it was not false doctrine to believe that a Christian's soul sleeps after it is separated from the body in death.[169] Accordingly, he disputed traditional interpretations of some Bible passages, such as the parable of the rich man and Lazarus.[170] This also led Luther to reject the idea of torments for the saints: "It is enough for us to know that souls do not leave their bodies to be threatened by the torments and punishments of hell, but enter a prepared bedchamber in which they sleep in peace."[171] He also rejected the existence of purgatory, which involved Christian souls undergoing penitential suffering after death.[172] He affirmed the continuity of one's personal identity beyond death. In his Smalcald Articles, he described the saints as currently residing "in their graves and in heaven."[173]
The Lutheran theologian Franz Pieper observes that Luther's teaching about the state of the Christian's soul after death differed from the later Lutheran theologians such as Johann Gerhard.[174] Lessing (1755) had earlier reached the same conclusion in his analysis of Lutheran orthodoxy on this issue.[175]
Luther's Commentary on Genesis contains a passage which concludes that "the soul does not sleep (anima non sic dormit), but wakes (sed vigilat) and experiences visions".[176] Francis Blackburne argues that John Jortin misread this and other passages from Luther,[177] while Gottfried Fritschel points out that it actually refers to the soul of a man "in this life" (homo enim in hac vita) tired from his daily labour (defatigus diurno labore) who at night enters his bedchamber (sub noctem intrat in cubiculum suum) and whose sleep is interrupted by dreams.[178]
Henry Eyster Jacobs' English translation from 1898 reads:
"Nevertheless, the sleep of this life and that of the future life differ; for in this life, man, fatigued by his daily labour, at nightfall goes to his couch, as in peace, to sleep there, and enjoys rest; nor does he know anything of evil, whether of fire or of murder."[179]
Sacramentarian controversy and the Marburg Colloquy
See also: The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ Against the Fanatics
 The Marburg Colloquy, by August Noack
In October 1529, Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse, convoked an assembly of German and Swiss theologians at the Marburg Colloquy, to establish doctrinal unity in the emerging Protestant states.[180] Agreement was achieved on fourteen points out of fifteen, the exception being the nature of the Eucharist the sacrament of the Lord's Supper an issue crucial to Luther.[181] The theologians, including Zwingli, Melanchthon, Martin Bucer, and Johannes Oecolampadius, differed on the significance of the words spoken by Jesus at the Last Supper: "This is my body which is for you" and "This cup is the new covenant in my blood" (1 Corinthians 11:23 26).[182] Luther insisted on the Real presence of the body and blood of Christ in the consecrated bread and wine, which he called the sacramental union,[183] while his opponents believed God to be only spiritually or symbolically present.[184]
Zwingli, for example, denied Jesus' ability to be in more than one place at a time. Luther stressed the omnipresence of Jesus' human nature.[185] According to transcripts, the debate sometimes became confrontational. Citing Jesus' words "The flesh profiteth nothing" (John 6.63), Zwingli said, "This passage breaks your neck". "Don't be too proud," Luther retorted, "German necks don't break that easily. This is Hesse, not Switzerland."[186] On his table Luther wrote the words "Hoc est corpus meum" ("This is my body") in chalk, to continually indicate his firm stance.[187]
Despite the disagreements on the Eucharist, the Marburg Colloquy paved the way for the signing in 1530 of the Augsburg Confession, and for the formation of the Schmalkaldic League the following year by leading Protestant nobles such as John of Saxony, Philip of Hesse, and George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach. The Swiss cities, however, did not sign these agreements.[188]
Epistemology
Some scholars have asserted that Luther taught that faith and reason were antithetical in the sense that questions of faith could not be illuminated by reason. He wrote, "All the articles of our Christian faith, which God has revealed to us in His Word, are in presence of reason sheerly impossible, absurd, and false."[189] and "[That] Reason in no way contributes to faith. [...] For reason is the greatest enemy that faith has; it never comes to the aid of spiritual things."[190] However, though seemingly contradictorily, he also wrote in the latter work that human reason "strives not against faith, when enlightened, but rather furthers and advances it",[191] bringing claims he was a fideist into dispute. Contemporary Lutheran scholarship, however, has found a different reality in Luther. Luther rather seeks to separate faith and reason in order to honor the separate spheres of knowledge that each applies to.
On Islam
Further information: Protestantism and Islam
 The battle between the Turks and the Christians, in the 16th century
At the time of the Marburg Colloquy, Suleiman the Magnificent was besieging Vienna with a vast Ottoman army.[192] Luther had argued against resisting the Turks in his 1518 Explanation of the Ninety-five Theses, provoking accusations of defeatism. He saw the Turks as a scourge sent by God to punish Christians, as agents of the biblical apocalypse that would destroy the Antichrist, whom Luther believed to be the papacy and the Roman Church.[193] He consistently rejected the idea of a Holy War, "as though our people were an army of Christians against the Turks, who were enemies of Christ. This is absolutely contrary to Christ's doctrine and name".[194] On the other hand, in keeping with his doctrine of the two kingdoms, Luther did support non-religious war against the Turks.[195] In 1526, he argued in Whether Soldiers can be in a State of Grace that national defence is reason for a just war.[196] By 1529, in On War against the Turk, he was actively urging Emperor Charles V and the German people to fight a secular war against the Turks.[197]
He made clear, however, that the spiritual war against an alien faith was separate, to be waged through prayer and repentance.[198] Around the time of the Siege of Vienna, Luther wrote a prayer for national deliverance from the Turks, asking God to "give to our emperor perpetual victory over our enemies".[199]
In 1542, Luther read a Latin translation of the Qur'an.[200] He went on to produce several critical pamphlets on Islam, which he called "Mohammedanism" or "the Turk".[201] Though Luther saw the Muslim faith as a tool of the devil, he was indifferent to its practice: "Let the Turk believe and live as he will, just as one lets the papacy and other false Christians live."[202] He opposed banning the publication of the Qur'an, wanting it exposed to scrutiny.[203]
Antinomian controversy
 Pulpit of St. Andreas Church, Eisleben, where Agricola and Luther preached
Early in 1537, Johannes Agricola serving at the time as pastor in Luther's birthplace, Eisleben preached a sermon in which he claimed that God's gospel, not God's moral law (the Ten Commandments), revealed God's wrath to Christians. Based on this sermon and others by Agricola, Luther suspected that Agricola was behind certain anonymous antinomian theses circulating in Wittenberg. These theses asserted that the law is no longer to be taught to Christians but belonged only to city hall.[204] Luther responded to these theses with six series of theses against Agricola and the antinomians, four of which became the basis for disputations between 1538 and 1540.[205] He also responded to these assertions in other writings, such as his 1539 open letter to C. G ttel Against the Antinomians,[206] and his book On the Councils and the Church from the same year.[207]
In his theses and disputations against the antinomians, Luther reviews and reaffirms, on the one hand, what has been called the "second use of the law," that is, the law as the Holy Spirit's tool to work sorrow over sin in man's heart, thus preparing him for Christ's fulfillment of the law offered in the gospel.[208] Luther states that everything that is used to work sorrow over sin is called the law, even if it is Christ's life, Christ's death for sin, or God's goodness experienced in creation.[209] Simply refusing to preach the Ten Commandments among Christians thereby, as it were, removing the three letters l-a-w from the church does not eliminate the accusing law.[210] Claiming that the law in any form should not be preached to Christians anymore would be tantamount to asserting that Christians are no longer sinners in themselves and that the church consists only of essentially holy people.[211]
Luther also points out that the Ten Commandments when considered not as God's condemning judgment but as an expression of his eternal will, that is, of the natural law positively teach how the Christian ought to live.[212] This has traditionally been called the "third use of the law."[213] For Luther, also Christ's life, when understood as an example, is nothing more than an illustration of the Ten Commandments, which a Christian should follow in his or her vocations on a daily basis.[214]
The Ten Commandments, and the beginnings of the renewed life of Christians accorded to them by the sacrament of baptism, are a present foreshadowing of the believers' future angel-like life in heaven in the midst of this life.[215] Luther's teaching of the Ten Commandments, therefore, has clear eschatological overtones, which, characteristically for Luther, do not encourage world-flight but direct the Christian to service to the neighbor in the common, daily vocations of this perishing world.
Bigamy of Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse
From December 1539, Luther became involved in the designs of Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse to marry a lady-in-waiting of his wife, Christine of Saxony. Philip solicited the approval of Luther, Melanchthon, and Bucer, citing as a precedent the polygamy of the patriarchs. The theologians were not prepared to make a general ruling, and they reluctantly advised the landgrave that if he was determined, he should marry secretly and keep quiet about the matter because divorce was worse than bigamy.[216] As a result, on 4 March 1540, Philip married a second wife, Margarethe von der Saale, with Melanchthon and Bucer among the witnesses. However, Philip's sister Elisabeth quickly made the scandal public, and Philip threatened to expose Luther's advice. Luther told him to "tell a good, strong lie" and deny the marriage completely, which Philip did.[217] Margarethe gave birth to nine children over a span of 17 years, giving Philip a total of 19 children. In the view of Luther's biographer Martin Brecht, "giving confessional advice for Philip of Hesse was one of the worst mistakes Luther made, and, next to the landgrave himself, who was directly responsible for it, history chiefly holds Luther accountable".[218] Brecht argues that Luther's mistake was not that he gave private pastoral advice, but that he miscalculated the political implications.[219] The affair caused lasting damage to Luther's reputation.[220]
Anti-Jewish polemics and antisemitism
Main article: Martin Luther and antisemitism
See also: Christianity and antisemitism
 The original title page of On the Jews and Their Lies, written by Martin Luther in 1543
Luther wrote negatively about the Jews throughout his career.[221] Though Luther rarely encountered Jews during his life, his attitudes reflected a theological and cultural tradition which saw Jews as a rejected people guilty of the murder of Christ, and he lived in a locality which had expelled Jews some ninety years earlier.[222] He considered the Jews blasphemers and liars because they rejected the divinity of Jesus.[223] In 1523, Luther advised kindness toward the Jews in That Jesus Christ was Born a Jew and also aimed to convert them to Christianity.[224] When his efforts at conversion failed, he grew increasingly bitter toward them.[225]
Luther's major works on the Jews were his 60,000-word treatise Von den Juden und Ihren L gen (On the Jews and Their Lies), and Vom Schem Hamphoras und vom Geschlecht Christi (On the Holy Name and the Lineage of Christ), both published in 1543, three years before his death.[226] Luther argued that the Jews were no longer the chosen people but "the devil's people", and referred to them with violent language.[227][228] Citing Deuteronomy 13, wherein Moses commands the killing of idolaters and the burning of their cities and property as an offering to God, Luther called for a "scharfe Barmherzigkeit" ("sharp mercy") against the Jews "to see whether we might save at least a few from the glowing flames."[229] Luther advocated setting synagogues on fire, destroying Jewish prayerbooks, forbidding rabbis from preaching, seizing Jews' property and money, and smashing up their homes, so that these "envenomed worms" would be forced into labour or expelled "for all time".[230] In Robert Michael's view, Luther's words "We are at fault in not slaying them" amounted to a sanction for murder.[231] "God's anger with them is so intense," Luther concluded, "that gentle mercy will only tend to make them worse, while sharp mercy will reform them but little. Therefore, in any case, away with them!"[229]
Luther launched a polemic against vagrants in his 1528 preface to Liber Vagatorum, saying that the Jews had contributed Hebrew words as a main basis of the Rotwelsch cryptolect. He warned in the admonitory preface Christians not to give them alms as it was, in his opinion, to forsake the truly poor.[232][233]
Luther spoke out against the Jews in Saxony, Brandenburg, and Silesia.[234] Josel of Rosheim, the Jewish spokesman who tried to help the Jews of Saxony in 1537, later blamed their plight on "that priest whose name was Martin Luther may his body and soul be bound up in hell! who wrote and issued many heretical books in which he said that whoever would help the Jews was doomed to perdition."[235] Josel asked the city of Strasbourg to forbid the sale of Luther's anti-Jewish works: they refused initially but did so when a Lutheran pastor in Hochfelden used a sermon to urge his parishioners to murder Jews.[234] Luther's influence persisted after his death. Throughout the 1580s, riots led to the expulsion of Jews from several German Lutheran states.[236]
Tovia Singer, an Orthodox Jewish rabbi, remarking about Luther's attitude toward Jews, put it thus: "Among all the Church Fathers and Reformers, there was no mouth more vile, no tongue that uttered more vulgar curses against the Children of Israel than this founder of the Reformation."[237]
Influence within Nazism
 The statue outside the Frauenkirche in Dresden after the bombing of the city in World War II
Luther was the most widely read author of his generation, and within Germany he acquired the status of a prophet.[238] According to the prevailing opinion among historians,[239] his anti-Jewish rhetoric contributed significantly to the development of antisemitism in Germany,[240] and in the 1930s and 1940s provided an "ideal underpinning" for the Nazis' attacks on Jews.[241] Reinhold Lewin writes that anybody who "wrote against the Jews for whatever reason believed he had the right to justify himself by triumphantly referring to Luther." According to Michael, just about every anti-Jewish book printed in Nazi Germany contained references to and quotations from Luther. Heinrich Himmler (albeit never a Lutheran, having been brought up Catholic) wrote admiringly of his writings and sermons on the Jews in 1940.[242] The city of Nuremberg presented a first edition of On the Jews and their Lies to Julius Streicher, editor of the Nazi newspaper Der St rmer, on his birthday in 1937; the newspaper described it as the most radically antisemitic tract ever published.[243] It was publicly exhibited in a glass case at the Nuremberg rallies and quoted in a 54-page explanation of the Aryan Law by E.H. Schulz and R. Frercks.[244]
On 17 December 1941, seven Protestant regional church confederations issued a statement agreeing with the policy of forcing Jews to wear the yellow badge, "since after his bitter experience Luther had already suggested preventive measures against the Jews and their expulsion from German territory." According to Daniel Goldhagen, Bishop Martin Sasse, a leading Protestant churchman, published a compendium of Luther's writings shortly after Kristallnacht, for which Diarmaid MacCulloch, professor of the history of the church at the University of Oxford argued that Luther's writing was a "blueprint."[245] Sasse applauded the burning of the synagogues and the coincidence of the day, writing in the introduction, "On 10 November 1938, on Luther's birthday, the synagogues are burning in Germany." The German people, he urged, ought to heed these words "of the greatest antisemite of his time, the warner of his people against the Jews."[246]
"There is a world of difference between his belief in salvation and a racial ideology. Nevertheless, his misguided agitation had the evil result that Luther fatefully became one of the 'church fathers' of anti-Semitism and thus provided material for the modern hatred of the Jews, cloaking it with the authority of the Reformer."
Martin Brecht[247]
At the heart of scholarly debate about Luther's influence is whether it is anachronistic to view his work as a precursor of the racial antisemitism of the Nazis. Some scholars see Luther's influence as limited, and the Nazis' use of his work as opportunistic. Johannes Wallmann argues that Luther's writings against the Jews were largely ignored in the 18th and 19th centuries, and that there was no continuity between Luther's thought and Nazi ideology.[248] Uwe Siemon-Netto agreed, arguing that it was because the Nazis were already antisemites that they revived Luther's work.[249][250] Hans J. Hillerbrand agreed that to focus on Luther was to adopt an essentially ahistorical perspective of Nazi antisemitism that ignored other contributory factors in German history.[251] Similarly, Roland Bainton, noted church historian and Luther biographer, wrote "One could wish that Luther had died before ever [On the Jews and Their Lies] was written. His position was entirely religious and in no respect racial."[252][253]
However, Christopher J. Probst, in his book Demonizing the Jews: Luther and the Protestant Church in Nazi Germany (2012), shows that a large number of German Protestant clergy and theologians during the Nazi era used Luther's hostile publications towards the Jews and their Jewish religion to justify at least in part the anti-Semitic policies of the National Socialists.[254] The pro-Nazi Christian group Deutsche Christen drew parallels between Martin Luther and the "F hrer" Adolf Hitler.[255]
Some scholars, such as Mark U. Edwards in his book Luther's Last Battles: Politics and Polemics 1531 46 (1983), suggest that since Luther's increasingly antisemitic views developed during the years his health deteriorated, it is possible they were at least partly the product of a state of mind. Edwards also comments that Luther often deliberately used "vulgarity and violence" for effect, both in his writings condemning the Jews and in diatribes against "Turks" (Muslims) and Catholics.[256]
Since the 1980s, Lutheran denominations have repudiated Martin Luther's statements against the Jews[citation needed] and have rejected the use of them to incite hatred against Lutherans.[citation needed][257][258] Strommen et al.'s 1970 survey of 4,745 North American Lutherans aged 15 65 found that, compared to the other minority groups under consideration, Lutherans were the least prejudiced toward Jews.[259] Nevertheless, Professor Richard Geary, former professor of modern history at the University of Nottingham and the author of Hitler and Nazism (Routledge 1993), published an article in the magazine History Today examining electoral trends in Weimar Germany between 1928 and 1933. Geary notes that, based on his research, the Nazi Party received disproportionately more votes from Protestant than Catholic areas of Germany.[260][261]
Final years, illness and death
 Luther on his deathbed, painting by Lucas Cranach the Elder
 Martin Luther's grave, Schlosskirche, Wittenberg
Luther had been suffering from ill health for years, including M ni re's disease, vertigo, fainting, tinnitus, and a cataract in one eye.[262] From 1531 to 1546 his health deteriorated further.  In 1536, he began to suffer from kidney and bladder stones, arthritis, and an ear infection ruptured an ear drum. In December 1544, he began to feel the effects of angina.[263]
His poor physical health made him short-tempered and even harsher in his writings and comments. His wife Katharina was overheard saying, "Dear husband, you are too rude," and he responded, "They are teaching me to be rude."[264] In 1545 and 1546 Luther preached three times in the Market Church in Halle, staying with his friend Justus Jonas during Christmas.[265]
His last sermon was delivered at Eisleben, his place of birth, on 15 February 1546, three days before his death.[266] It was "entirely devoted to the obdurate Jews, whom it was a matter of great urgency to expel from all German territory," according to L on Poliakov.[267] James Mackinnon writes that it concluded with a "fiery summons to drive the Jews bag and baggage from their midst, unless they desisted from their calumny and their usury and became Christians."[268] Luther said, "we want to practice Christian love toward them and pray that they convert," but also that they are "our public enemies ... and if they could kill us all, they would gladly do so. And so often they do."[269]
Luther's final journey, to Mansfeld, was taken because of his concern for his siblings' families continuing in their father Hans Luther's copper mining trade. Their livelihood was threatened by Count Albrecht of Mansfeld bringing the industry under his own control. The controversy that ensued involved all four Mansfeld counts: Albrecht, Philip, John George, and Gerhard. Luther journeyed to Mansfeld twice in late 1545 to participate in the negotiations for a settlement, and a third visit was needed in early 1546 for their completion.
The negotiations were successfully concluded on 17 February 1546. After 8 p.m., he experienced chest pains. When he went to his bed, he prayed, "Into your hand I commit my spirit; you have redeemed me, O Lord, faithful God" (Ps. 31:5), the common prayer of the dying. At 1 a.m. on 18 February, he awoke with more chest pain and was warmed with hot towels. He thanked God for revealing his Son to him in whom he had believed. His companions, Justus Jonas and Michael Coelius, shouted loudly, "Reverend father, are you ready to die trusting in your Lord Jesus Christ and to confess the doctrine which you have taught in his name?" A distinct "Yes" was Luther's reply.[270]
An apoplectic stroke deprived him of his speech, and he died shortly afterwards at 2:45 a.m. on 18 February 1546, aged 62, in Eisleben, the city of his birth. He was buried in the Schlosskirche in Wittenberg, in front of the pulpit.[271] The funeral was held by his friends Johannes Bugenhagen and Philipp Melanchthon.[272] A year later, troops of Luther's adversary Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor entered the town but were ordered by Charles not to disturb the grave.[272]
A piece of paper was later found on which Luther had written his last statement. The statement was in Latin, apart from "We are beggars," which was in German. The statement reads:
No one can understand Virgil's Bucolics unless he has been a shepherd for five years. No one can understand Virgil's Georgics, unless he has been a farmer for five years.
No one can understand Cicero's Letters (or so I teach), unless he has busied himself in the affairs of some prominent state for twenty years.
Know that no one can have indulged in the Holy Writers sufficiently, unless he has governed churches for a hundred years with the prophets, such as Elijah and Elisha, John the Baptist, Christ and the apostles.
Do not assail this divine Aeneid; nay, rather prostrate revere the ground that it treads.
We are beggars: this is true.[273][274]
The tomb of Philipp Melanchthon, Luther's contemporary and fellow reformer, is also located in the All Saints' Church.[275][276][277][278][279]
Martin Luther's Death House, considered the site of Luther's death since 1726. However the building where Luther actually died (at Markt 56, now the site of Hotel Graf von Mansfeld) was torn down in 1570.[280]
Casts of Luther's face and hands at his death, in the Market Church in Halle[281]
Schlosskirche in Wittenberg, where Luther posted his Ninety-five Theses, is also his gravesite.
Luther's tombstone beneath the pulpit in the Castle Church in Wittenberg
Close-up of the grave with inscription in Latin
Legacy and commemoration
 Worldwide Protestantism in 2010
Luther made effective use of Johannes Gutenberg's printing press to spread his views. He switched from Latin to German in his writing to appeal to a broader audience. Between 1500 and 1530, Luther's works represented one fifth of all materials printed in Germany.[282]
In the 1530s and 1540s, printed images of Luther that emphasized his monumental size were crucial to the spread of Protestantism. In contrast to images of frail Catholic saints, Luther was presented as a stout man with a "double chin, strong mouth, piercing deep-set eyes, fleshy face, and squat neck." He was shown to be physically imposing, an equal in stature to the secular German princes with whom he would join forces to spread Lutheranism. His large body also let the viewer know that he did not shun earthly pleasures like drinking behavior that was a stark contrast to the ascetic life of the medieval religious orders. Images from this period include the woodcuts by Hans Brosamer (1530) and Lucas Cranach the Elder and Lucas Cranach the Younger (1546).[283]
 Luther Monument in Eisenach, Germany
Luther is honoured on 18 February with a commemoration in the Lutheran Calendar of Saints and in the Episcopal (United States) Calendar of Saints. In the Church of England's Calendar of Saints he is commemorated on 31 October.[284] Luther is honored in various ways by Christian traditions coming out directly from the Protestant Reformation, i.e. Lutheranism, the Reformed tradition, and Anglicanism. Branches of Protestantism that emerged afterwards vary in their remembrance and veneration of Luther, ranging from a complete lack of a single mention of him to a commemoration almost comparable to the way Lutherans commemorate and remember his persona. There is no known condemnation of Luther by Protestants themselves.
 Martin Luther College in New Ulm, Minnesota, United States
Various sites both inside and outside Germany (supposedly) visited by Martin Luther throughout his lifetime commemorate it with local memorials. Saxony-Anhalt has two towns officially named after Luther, Lutherstadt Eisleben and Lutherstadt Wittenberg. Mansfeld is sometimes called Mansfeld-Lutherstadt, although the state government has not decided to put the Lutherstadt suffix in its official name.
Reformation Day commemorates the publication of the Ninety-five Theses in 1517 by Martin Luther; it has been historically important in the following European entities. It is a civic holiday in the German states of Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, Schleswig-Holstein and Hamburg. Two further states (Lower Saxony and Bremen) are pending a vote on introducing it. Slovenia celebrates it because of the profound contribution of the Reformation to its culture. Austria allows Protestant children not to go to school that day, and Protestant workers have a right to leave work in order to participate in a church service. Switzerland celebrates the holiday on the first Sunday after 31 October. It is also celebrated elsewhere around the world.
Luther and the swan
Luther with a swan (painting in the church at Str mpfelbach im Remstal, Weinstadt, Germany, by J. A. List)
Swan weather vane, Round Lutheran Church, Amsterdam
Altar in St Martin's Church, Halberstadt, Germany. Luther and the swan are toward the top on the right.
Coin commemorating Luther (engraving by Georg Wilhelm G bel, Saxony, 1706)
Luther is often depicted with a swan as his attribute, and Lutheran churches often have a swan for a weather vane. This association with the swan arises out of a prophecy reportedly made by the earlier reformer Jan Hus from Bohemia and endorsed by Luther. In the Bohemian language (now Czech), Hus's name meant "grey goose". In 1414, while imprisoned by the Council of Constance and anticipating his execution by burning for heresy, Hus prophesied, "Now they will roast a goose, but in a hundred years' time they'll hear a swan sing. They'd better listen to him." Luther published his Ninety-five Theses some 103 years later.[285][286][287]
Works and editions
Main article: Martin Luther bibliography
 Various books of the Weimar Edition of Luther's works
The Erlangen Edition (Erlangener Ausgabe: "EA"), comprising the Exegetica opera latina  Latin exegetical works of Luther.
The Weimar Edition (Weimarer Ausgabe) is the exhaustive, standard German edition of Luther's Latin and German works, indicated by the abbreviation "WA". This is continued into "WA Br" Weimarer Ausgabe, Briefwechsel (correspondence), "WA Tr" Weimarer Ausgabe, Tischreden (tabletalk) and "WA DB" Weimarer Ausgabe, Deutsche Bibel (German Bible).
The American Edition (Luther's Works) is the most extensive English translation of Luther's writings, indicated either by the abbreviation "LW" or "AE". The first 55 volumes were published 1955 1986, and a twenty volume extension (vols. 56 75) is planned of which volumes 58, 60, and 68 have appeared thus far.
See also
Christianity portal
Antilegomena
George of Hungary
Luther's canon
Luther's Marian theology
Lutherhaus Eisenach
Martin Luther's Birth House
Propaganda during the Reformation
Protestantism in Germany
Resources about Martin Luther
Theology of Martin Luther
Bruder Martin
Hochstratus Ovans
Theologia Germanica
Notes
^ Latin: "Disputatio pro declaratione virtutis indulgentiarum"   The first printings of the Theses use an incipit rather than a title which summarizes the content. Luther usually called them "meine Propositiones" (my propositions).[40]
References
^ "Luther" Archived 27 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Luther himself, however, believed that he had been born in 1484. Hendrix, Scott H. (2015). Martin Luther: Visionary Reformer. Yale University Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-300-16669-9. Retrieved 12 November 2017.
^ Luther consistently referred to himself as a former monk. For example: "Thus formerly, when I was a monk, I used to hope that I would be able to pacify my conscience with the fastings, the praying, and the vigils with which I used to afflict my body in a way to excite pity. But the more I sweat, the less quiet and peace I felt; for the true light had been removed from my eyes." Martin Luther, Lectures on Genesis: Chapters 45 50, ed. Jaroslav Jan Pelikan, Hilton C. Oswald, and Helmut T. Lehmann, vol. 8 Luther's Works. (Saint Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1999), 5:326.
^ Ewald M. Plass, What Luther Says, 3 vols., (St. Louis: CPH, 1959), 88, no. 269; M. Reu, Luther and the Scriptures, (Columbus, Ohio: Wartburg Press, 1944), 23.
^ Luther, Martin. Concerning the Ministry (1523), tr. Conrad Bergendoff, in Bergendoff, Conrad (ed.) Luther's Works. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1958, 40:18 ff.
^ Fahlbusch, Erwin and Bromiley, Geoffrey William. The Encyclopedia of Christianity. Grand Rapids, MI: Leiden, Netherlands: Wm. B. Eerdmans; Brill, 1999 2003, 1:244.
^ Tyndale's New Testament, trans. from the Greek by William Tyndale in 1534 in a modern-spelling edition and with an introduction by David Daniell. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989, ix x.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: a Life of Martin Luther. New York: Penguin, 1995, 269.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: a Life of Martin Luther. New York: Penguin, 1995, p. 223.
^ Hendrix, Scott H. "The Controversial Luther" Archived 2 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Word & World 3/4 (1983), Luther Seminary, St. Paul, MN. Also see Hillerbrand, Hans. "The legacy of Martin Luther" Archived 16 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, in Hillerbrand, Hans & McKim, Donald K. (eds.) The Cambridge Companion to Luther. Cambridge University Press, 2003. In 1523, Luther wrote that Jesus Christ was born a Jew which discouraged mistreatment of the Jews and advocated their conversion by proving that the Old Testament could be shown to speak of Jesus Christ. However, as the Reformation grew, Luther began to lose hope in large-scale Jewish conversion to Christianity, and in the years his health deteriorated he grew more acerbic toward the Jews, writing against them with the kind of venom he had already unleashed on the Anabaptists, Zwingli, and the pope.
^ Schaff, Philip: History of the Christian Church, Vol. VIII: Modern Christianity: The Swiss Reformation, William B. Eerdmans Pub. Co., Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA, 1910, page 706.
^ Martin Brecht, Martin Luther (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1985 1993), 3:336.
^ Luther's letter to Rabbi Josel as cited by Gordon Rupp, Martin Luther and the Jews (London: The Council of Christians and Jews, 1972), 14. According to "Luther and the Jews". Archived from the original on 4 November 2005. Retrieved 21 March 2017., this paragraph is not available in the English edition of Luther's works.
^ Sydow, Michael (1 December 1999). "JOURNAL OF THEOLOGY: Martin Luther, Reformation Theologian and Educator" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2008. Retrieved 17 May 2022.
^ "The assertion that Luther's expressions of anti-Jewish sentiment have been of major and persistent influence in the centuries after the Reformation, and that there exists a continuity between Protestant anti-Judaism and modern racially oriented antisemitism, is at present wide-spread in the literature; since the Second World War it has understandably become the prevailing opinion." Johannes Wallmann, "The Reception of Luther's Writings on the Jews from the Reformation to the End of the 19th century", Lutheran Quarterly, n.s. 1 (Spring 1987) 1:72 97.
^ For similar views, see:
Berger, Ronald. Fathoming the Holocaust: A Social Problems Approach (New York: Aldine De Gruyter, 2002), 28.
Rose, Paul Lawrence. "Revolutionary Antisemitism in Germany from Kant to Wagner," (Princeton University Press, 1990), quoted in Berger, 28;
Shirer, William. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1960).
Johnson, Paul. A History of the Jews (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1987), 242.
Poliakov, Leon. History of Anti-Semitism: From the Time of Christ to the Court Jews. (N.P.: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003), 216.
Berenbaum, Michael. The World Must Know. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press and the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, 1993, 2000), 8 9.
^ Grunberger, Richard. The 12-Year Reich: A Social History of Nazi German 1933 1945 (NP:Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), 465.
^ a b c Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 1.
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:3 5.
^ "Martin Luther | Biography, Reformation, Works, & Facts".
^ Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 3.
^ Rupp, Ernst Gordon. "Martin Luther," Encyclop dia Britannica, accessed 2006.
^ Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, pp. 2 3.
^ a b Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 4.
^ a b c d Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 5.
^ a b c d Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 6.
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:48.
^ Brecht, Martin (1985). Google Books Archive of Martin Luther: His road to Reformation, 1483 1521 (By Martin Brecht). Martin Luther: His road to Reformation, 1483 1521 (By Martin Brecht). ISBN 978-1-4514-1414-1. Retrieved 14 May 2015.
^ Schwiebert, E.G. Luther and His Times. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1950, 136.
^ Marty, Martin. Martin Luther. Viking Penguin, 2004, p. 7.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: a Life of Martin Luther. New York: Penguin, 1995, 40 42.
^ Kittelson, James. Luther The Reformer. Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress Publishing House, 1986, 79.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: a Life of Martin Luther. New York: Penguin, 1995, 44 45.
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:93.
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:112 27.
^ Hendrix, Scott H. (2015). Martin Luther: Visionary Reformer. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-300-16669-9.
^ Hendrix, Scott H. (2015). Martin Luther: Visionary Reformer. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-300-16669-9.
^ "Johann Tetzel," Encyclop dia Britannica, 2007
^ At first, "the pope demanded twelve thousand ducats for the twelve apostles. Albert offered seven thousand ducats for the seven deadly sins. They compromised on ten thousand, presumably not for the Ten Commandments". Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1950), p. 75, online
^ Cummings 2002, p. 32.
^ a b Hillerbrand, Hans J. "Martin Luther: Indulgences and salvation," Encyclop dia Britannica, 2007.
^ Thesis 55 of Tetzel's One Hundred and Six Theses. These "Anti-theses" were a reply to Luther's Ninety-five Theses and were drawn up by Tetzel's friend and former professor, Konrad Wimpina. Theses 55 & 56 (responding to Luther's 27th Theses) read: "For a soul to fly out, is for it to obtain the vision of God, which can be hindered by no interruption, therefore he errs who says that the soul cannot fly out before the coin can jingle in the bottom of the chest." In, The reformation in Germany, Henry Clay Vedder, 1914, Macmillan Company, p. 405. [1] Animam purgatam evolare, est eam visione dei potiri, quod nulla potest intercapedine impediri. Quisquis ergo dicit, non citius posse animam volare, quam in fundo cistae denarius possit tinnire, errat. In: D. Martini Lutheri, Opera Latina: Varii Argumenti, 1865, Henricus Schmidt, ed., Heyder and Zimmer, Frankfurt am Main & Erlangen, vol. 1, p. 300. (Print on demand edition: Nabu Press, 2010, ISBN 978-1-142-40551-9). [2] See also: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Johann Tetzel" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
^ Kr mer, Walter and Trenkler, G tz. "Luther" in Lexicon van Hardnekkige Misverstanden. Uitgeverij Bert Bakker, 1997, 214:216.
^ Ritter, Gerhard. Luther, Frankfurt 1985.
^ Gerhard Prause "Luthers Thesanschlag ist eine Legende,"in Niemand hat Kolumbus ausgelacht. D sseldorf, 1986.
^ Marshall, Peter 1517: Martin Luther and the Invention of the Reformation (Oxford University Press, 2017) ISBN 978-0-19-968201-0
^ Bekker, Henrik (2010). Dresden Leipzig & Saxony Adventure Guide. Hunter Publishing, Inc. p. 125. ISBN 978-1-58843-950-5. Retrieved 7 February 2012.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1950), p. 79, online
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 1:204 05.
^ Spitz, Lewis W. The Renaissance and Reformation Movements, St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1987, 338.
^ Wriedt, Markus. "Luther's Theology," in The Cambridge Companion to Luther. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003, 88 94.
^ Bouman, Herbert J.A. "The Doctrine of Justification in the Lutheran Confessions", Concordia Theological Monthly, 26 November 1955, No. 11:801.
^ Dorman, Ted M., "Justification as Healing: The Little-Known Luther", Quodlibet Journal: Volume 2 Number 3, Summer 2000. Retrieved 13 July 2007.
^ "Luther's Definition of Faith".
^ "Justification by Faith: The Lutheran-Catholic Convergence". Archived from the original on 15 June 2010.
^ Luther, Martin. "The Smalcald Articles," in Concordia: The Lutheran Confessions. Saint Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 2005, 289, Part two, Article 1.
^ Michael A. Mullett, Martin Luther, London: Routledge, 2004, ISBN 978-0-415-26168-5, 78; Oberman, Heiko, Luther: Man Between God and the Devil, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006, ISBN 0-300-10313-1, 192 93.
^ Mullett, 68 69; Oberman, 189.
^ Richard Marius, Luther, London: Quartet, 1975, ISBN 0-7043-3192-6, 85.
^ Papal Bull Exsurge Domine, 15 June 1520.
^ Mullett, 81 82.
^ "Luther meets with Cajetan at Augsburg". Reformation 500   Concordia Seminary, St. Louis. 11 January 2012. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2016.
^ "The Acts and Monuments of the Church   Martin Luther". exclassics.com. Retrieved 28 March 2016.
^ Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1950), Chapter V, p. 96, online
^ Mullett, 82.
^ Mullett, 83.
^ Oberman, 197.
^ Mullett, 92 95; Roland H. Bainton, Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther, New York: Mentor, 1955, OCLC 220064892, 81.
^ Marius, 87 89; Bainton, Mentor edition, 82.
^ Marius, 93; Bainton, Mentor edition, 90.
^ G. R. Elton, Reformation Europe: 1517 1559, London: Collins, 1963, OCLC 222872115, 177.
^ Brecht, Martin. (tr. Wolfgang Katenz) "Luther, Martin," in Hillerbrand, Hans J. (ed.) Oxford Encyclopedia of the Reformation. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996, 2:463.
^ Becking, Bob; Cannegieter, Alex; van er Poll, Wilfred (2016). From Babylon to Eternity: The Exile Remembered and Constructed in Text and Tradition. Routledge. p. 91. ISBN 978-1-134-90386-3.
^ Wooden, Cindy. "Methodists adapt Catholic-Lutheran declaration on justification." 24 July 2006
^ David Van Biema, "A Half-Millennium Rift," TIME, 6 July 1998, 80.
^ Cindy Wooden, "Lutheran World Council OKs joint declaration on justification," The Pilot, 19 June 1998, 20.
^ Brecht, 1:460.
^ a b Mullett (1986), p. 25
^ Luther, Martin. "Life of Luther (Luther by Martin Luther)".
^ Wilson, 153, 170; Marius, 155.
^ Bratcher, Dennis. "The Diet of Worms (1521) Archived 3 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine," in The Voice: Biblical and Theological Resources for Growing Christians. Retrieved 13 July 2007.
^ Reformation Europe: 1517 1559, London: Fontana, 1963, 53; Diarmaid MacCulloch, Reformation: Europe's House Divided, 1490 1700, London: Allen Lane, 2003, 132.
^ Luther, Martin. "Letter 82," in Luther's Works. Jaroslav Jan Pelikan, Hilton C. Oswald and Helmut T. Lehmann (eds), Vol. 48: Letters I, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1999, c1963, 48:246; Mullett, 133. John, author of Revelation, had been exiled on the island of Patmos.
^ Brecht, 2:12 14.
^ Mullett, 132, 134; Wilson, 182.
^ Brecht, 2:7 9; Marius, 161 62; Marty, 77 79.
^ Martin Luther, "Let Your Sins Be Strong," a Letter From Luther to Melanchthon Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, August 1521, Project Wittenberg, retrieved 1 October 2006.
^ Brecht, 2:27 29; Mullett, 133.
^ Brecht, 2:18 21.
^ Marius, 163 64.
^ Mullett, 135 36.
^ Wilson, 192 202; Brecht, 2:34 38.
^ Bainton, Mentor edition, 164 65.
^ Letter of 7 March 1522. Schaff, Philip, History of the Christian Church, Vol VII, Ch IV Archived 23 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine; Brecht, 2:57.
^ Brecht, 2:60; Bainton, Mentor edition, 165; Marius, 168 69.
^ a b Schaff, Philip, History of the Christian Church, Vol VII, Ch IV Archived 23 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Marius, 169.
^ Mullett, 141 43.
^ Michael Hughes, Early Modern Germany: 1477 1806, London: Macmillan, 1992, ISBN 0-333-53774-2, 45.
^ A.G. Dickens, The German Nation and Martin Luther, London: Edward Arnold, 1974, ISBN 0-7131-5700-3, 132 33. Dickens cites as an example of Luther's "liberal" phraseology: "Therefore I declare that neither pope nor bishop nor any other person has the right to impose a syllable of law upon a Christian man without his own consent".
^ Hughes, 45 47.
^ Hughes, 50.
^ Jaroslav J. Pelikan, Hilton C. Oswald, Luther's Works, 55 vols. (St. Louis and Philadelphia: Concordia Pub. House and Fortress Press, 1955 1986), 46: 50 51.
^ Mullett, 166.
^ Whitford, David, Tyranny and Resistance: The Magdeburg Confession and the Lutheran Tradition, 2001, 144 pages
^ Hughes, 51.
^ Andrew Pettegree, Europe in the Sixteenth Century, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-20704-X, 102 03.
^ Erlangen Edition of Luther's Works, Vol. 59, p. 284
^ Wilson, 232.
^ Schaff, Philip, History of the Christian Church, Vol VII, Ch V Archived 23 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine, rpt. Christian Classics Ethereal Library. Retrieved 17 May 2009; Bainton, Mentor edition, 226.
^ a b c Scheible, Heinz (1997). Melanchthon. Eine Biographie (in German). Munich: C.H.Beck. p. 147. ISBN 978-3-406-42223-2.
^ Lohse, Bernhard, Martin Luther: An Introduction to his Life and Work,, translated by Robert C. Schultz, Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1987, ISBN 0-567-09357-3, 32; Brecht, 2:196 97.
^ Brecht, 2:199; Wilson, 234; Lohse, 32.
^ Schaff, Philip. "Luther's Marriage. 1525." Archived 7 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine, History of the Christian Church, Volume VII, Modern Christianity, The German Reformation.   77, rpt. Christian Classics Ethereal Library. Retrieved 17 May 2009; Mullett, 180 81.
^ Marty, 109; Bainton, Mentor edition, 226.
^ Brecht, 2: 202; Mullett, 182.
^ Oberman, 278 80; Wilson, 237; Marty, 110.
^ Bainton, Mentor edition, 228; Schaff, "Luther's Marriage. 1525." Archived 7 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine; Brecht, 2: 204.
^ MacCulloch, 164.
^ Bainton, Mentor edition, 243.
^ Schroeder, Steven (2000). Between Freedom and Necessity: An Essay on the Place of Value. Rodopi. p. 104. ISBN 978-90-420-1302-5.
^ Brecht, 2:260 63, 67; Mullett, 184 86.
^ Brecht, 2:267; Bainton, Mentor edition, 244.
^ Brecht, 2:267; MacCulloch, 165. On one occasion, Luther referred to the elector as an "emergency bishop" (Notbischof).
^ Mullett, 186 87; Brecht, 2:264 65, 267.
^ Brecht, 2:264 65.
^ Brecht, 2:268.
^ Brecht, 2:251 54; Bainton, Mentor edition, 266.
^ Brecht, 2:255.
^ Mullett, 183; Eric W. Gritsch, A History of Lutheranism, Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002, ISBN 0-8006-3472-1, 37.
^ Brecht, 2:256; Mullett, 183.
^ Brecht, 2:256; Bainton, Mentor edition, 265 66.
^ Brecht, 2:256; Bainton, Mentor edition, 269 70.
^ Brecht, 2:256 57.
^ Brecht, 2:258.
^ Brecht, 2:263.
^ Mullett, 186. Quoted from Luther's preface to the Small Catechism, 1529; MacCulloch, 165.
^ Marty, 123.
^ Brecht, 2:273; Bainton, Mentor edition, 263.
^ Marty, 123; Wilson, 278.
^ Luther, Martin. Luther's Works. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1971, 50:172 73; Bainton, Mentor edition, 263.
^ Brecht, 2:277, 280.
^ See texts at English translation Archived 16 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Charles P. Arand, "Luther on the Creed." Lutheran Quarterly 2006 20(1): 1 25. ISSN 0024-7499; James Arne Nestingen, "Luther's Catechisms" The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Reformation. Ed. Hans J. Hillerbrand. (1996)
^ Mullett, 145; Lohse, 119.
^ Mullett, 148 50.
^ "Mentelin Bible". The Library of Congress. 1466. Retrieved 2 June 2018.
^ "Koberger Bible". World Digital Library. 1483. Retrieved 2 June 2018.
^ Gow, Andrew C. (2009). "The Contested History of a Book: The German Bible of the Later Middle Ages and Reformation in Legend, Ideology, and Scholarship". Journal of Hebrew Scriptures. 9. doi:10.5508/jhs.2009.v9.a13. ISSN 1203-1542.
^ Wilson, 183; Brecht, 2:48 49.
^ Mullett, 149; Wilson, 302.
^ Marius, 162.
^ Lohse, 112 17; Wilson, 183; Bainton, Mentor edition, 258.
^ Daniel Weissbort and Astradur Eysteinsson (eds.), Translation   Theory and Practice: A Historical Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, ISBN 0-19-871200-6, 68.
^ Mullett, 148; Wilson, 185; Bainton, Mentor edition, 261. Luther inserted the word "alone" (allein) after the word "faith" in his translation of St Paul's Epistle to the Romans, 3:28. The clause is rendered in the English Authorised Version as "Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law".
^ Lindberg, Carter. "The European Reformations: Sourcebook". Blackwell Publishing Ltd., 2000. p. 49. Original sourcebook excerpt taken from Luther's Works. St. Louis: Concordia/Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1955 86. ed. Jaroslav Pelikan and Helmut T. Lehmann, vol. 35. pp. 182, 187 89, 195.
^ Metzger, Bruce M. (1994). A textual commentary on the Greek New Testament: a companion volume to the United Bible Societies' Greek New Testament (fourth revised edition) (2 ed.). Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. pp. 647 49. ISBN 978-3-438-06010-5.
^ Criticus, (Rev. William Orme) (1830). Memoir of The Controversy respecting the Three Heavenly Witnesses, I John V.7. London: (1872, Boston, "a new edition, with notes and an appendix by Ezra Abbot"). p. 42.
^ White, Andrew Dickson (1896). A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology, Vol. 2. New York: Appleton. p. 304.
^ For a short collection see online hymns Archived 16 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b c Christopher Boyd Brown, Singing the Gospel: Lutheran Hymns and the Success of the Reformation. (2005)
^ "Waldzither   Bibliography of the 19th century". Studia Instrumentorum. Retrieved 23 March 2014. Es ist eine unbedingte Notwendigkeit, dass der Deutsche zu seinen Liedern auch ein echt deutsches Begleitinstrument besitzt. Wie der Spanier seine Gitarre (f lschlich Laute genannt), der Italiener seine Mandoline, der Engl nder das Banjo, der Russe die Balalaika usw. sein Nationalinstrument nennt, so sollte der Deutsche seine Laute, die Waldzither, welche schon von Dr. Martin Luther auf der Wartburg im Th ringer Walde (daher der Name Waldzither) gepflegt wurde, zu seinem Nationalinstrument machen. Liederheft von C.H. B hm (Hamburg, March 1919)
^ "Flung to the heedless winds". Hymntime. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2012.
^ Robin A. Leaver, "Luther's Catechism Hymns." Lutheran Quarterly 1998 12(1): 79 88, 89 98.
^ Robin A. Leaver, "Luther's Catechism Hymns: 5. Baptism." Lutheran Quarterly 1998 12(2): 160 69, 170 80.
^ Christoph Markschies, Michael Trowitzsch: Luther zwischen den Zeiten  Eine Jenaer Ringvorlesung; Mohr Siebeck, 1999; pp. 215 19 (in German).
^ Psychopannychia (the night banquet of the soul), manuscript Orl ans 1534, Latin Strasbourg 1542, 2nd.ed. 1545, French, Geneva 1558, English 1581.
^ Liber de Anima 1562
^ D. Franz Pieper Christliche Dogmatik, 3 vols., (Saint Louis: CPH, 1920), 3:575: "Hieraus geht sicher so viel hervor, da  die abgeschiedenen Seelen der Gl ubigen in einem Zustande des seligen Genie ens Gottes sich befinden .... Ein Seelenschlaf, der ein Genie en Gottes einschlie t (so Luther), ist nicht als irrige Lehre zu bezeichnen"; English translation: Francis Pieper, Christian Dogmatics, 3 vols., (Saint Louis: CPH, 1953), 3:512: "These texts surely make it evident that the departed souls of the believers are in a state of blessed enjoyment of God .... A sleep of the soul which includes enjoyment of God (says Luther) cannot be called a false doctrine."
^ Sermons of Martin Luther: the House Postils, Eugene F.A. Klug, ed. and trans., 3 vols., (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1996), 2:240.
^ Weimarer Ausgabe 43, 360, 21 23 (to Genesis 25:7 10): also Exegetica opera latina Vol 5 6 1833 p. 120 and the English translation: Luther's Works, American Edition, 55 vols. (St. Louis: CPH), 4:313; "Sufficit igitur nobis haec cognitio, non egredi animas ex corporibus in periculum cruciatum et paenarum inferni, sed esse eis paratum cubiculum, in quo dormiant in pace."
^ "Smalcald Articles, Part II, Article II, paragraph 12". Bookofconcord.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2012.
^ "Smalcald Articles, Part II, Article II, paragraph 28". Bookofconcord.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2012.
^ Gerhard Loci Theologici, Locus de Morte,   293 ff. Pieper writes: "Luther speaks more guardedly of the state of the soul between death and resurrection than do Gerhard and the later theologians, who transfer some things to the state between death and resurrection which can be said with certainty only of the state after the resurrection" (Christian Dogmatics, 3:512, footnote 21).
^ Article in the Berlinischer Zeitung 1755 in Complete Works ed. Karl Friedrich Theodor Lachmann  1838 p. 59 "Was die Gegner auf alle diese Stellen antworten werden, ist leicht zu errathen. Sie werden sagen, da  Luther mit dem Worte Schlaf gar die Begriffe nicht verbinde, welche Herr R. damit verbindet. Wenn Luther sage, da  die Seele IS nach dem Tode schlafe, so denke er nichts mehr dabey, als was alle Leute denken, wenn sie den Tod des Schlafes Bruder nennen. Tode ruhe, leugneten auch die nicht, welche ihr Wachen behaupteten :c. Ueberhaupt ist mit Luthers Ansehen bey der ganzen Streitigkeit nichts zu gewinnen."
^ Exegetica opera Latina, Volumes 5 6 Martin Luther, ed. Christopf Stephan Elsperger (Gottlieb) p. 120 "Differunt tamen somnus sive quies hujus vitae et futurae. Homo enim in hac vita defatigatus diurno labore, sub noctem intrat in cubiculum suum tanquam in pace, ut ibi dormiat, et ea nocte fruitur quiete, neque quicquam scit de ullo malo sive incendii, sive caedis. Anima autem non sic dormit, sed vigilat, et patitur visiones loquelas Angelorum et Dei. Ideo somnus in futura vita profundior est quam in hac vita et tamen anima coram Deo vivit. Hac similitudine, quam habeo a somno viventia." (Commentary on Genesis  Enarrationes in Genesin, XXV, 1535 1545)"
^ Blackburne A short historical view of the controversy concerning an intermediate state (1765) p121
^ Gottfried Fritschel. Zeitschrift f r die gesammte lutherische Theologie und Kirche p. 657 "Denn dass Luther mit den Worten "anima non sic dormit, sed vigilat et patitur visiones, loquelas Angelorum et Dei" nicht dasjenige leugnen will, was er an allen andern Stellen seiner Schriften vortragt"
^ Henry Eyster Jacobs Martin Luther the Hero of the Reformation 1483 to 1546 (1898). Emphasis added.
^ Mullett, 194 95.
^ Brecht, 2:325 34; Mullett, 197.
^ Wilson, 259.
^ Weimar Ausgabe 26, 442; Luther's Works 37, 299 300.
^ Oberman, 237.
^ Marty, 140 41; Lohse, 74 75.
^ Quoted by Oberman, 237.
^ Brecht 2:329.
^ Oberman, 238.
^ Martin Luther, Werke, VIII
^ Martin Luther, Table Talk.
^ Martin Luther, "On Justification CCXCIV", Table Talk
^ Mallett, 198; Marius, 220. The siege was lifted on 14 October 1529, which Luther saw as a divine miracle.
^ Andrew Cunningham, The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse: Religion, War, Famine and Death in Reformation Europe Archived 22 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-46701-2, 141; Mullett, 239 40; Marty, 164.
^ From On War against the Turk, 1529, quoted in William P. Brown, The Ten Commandments: The Reciprocity of Faithfulness, Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2004, ISBN 0-664-22323-0, 258; Lohse, 61; Marty, 166.
^ Marty, 166; Marius, 219; Brecht, 2:365, 368.
^ Mullett, 238 39; Lohse, 59 61.
^ Brecht, 2:364.
^ Wilson, 257; Brecht, 2:364 65.
^ Brecht, 2:365; Mullett, 239.
^ Brecht, 3:354.
^ Daniel Goffman, The Ottoman Empire and Early Modern Europe Archived 22 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 0-521-45908-7, 109; Mullett, 241; Marty, 163.
^ From On war against the Turk, 1529, quoted in Roland E. Miller, Muslims and the Gospel Archived 22 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Minneapolis: Kirk House Publishers, 2006, ISBN 1-932688-07-2, 208.
^ Brecht, 3:355.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal: Martin Luther's Complete Antinomian Theses and Disputations, ed. and tr. H. Sonntag, Minneapolis: Lutheran Press, 2008, 23 27. ISBN 978-0-9748529-6-6
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal: Martin Luther's Complete Antinomian Theses and Disputations, ed. and tr. H. Sonntag, Minneapolis: Lutheran Press, 2008, 11 15. ISBN 978-0-9748529-6-6
^ Cf. Luther's Works 47:107 19. There he writes: "Dear God, should it be unbearable that the holy church confesses itself a sinner, believes in the forgiveness of sins, and asks for remission of sin in the Lord's Prayer? How can one know what sin is without the law and conscience? And how will we learn what Christ is, what he did for us, if we do not know what the law is that he fulfilled for us and what sin is, for which he made satisfaction?" (112 13).
^ Cf. Luther's Works 41, 113 14, 143 44, 146 47. There he said about the antinomians: "They may be fine Easter preachers, but they are very poor Pentecost preachers, for they do not preach de sanctificatione et vivificatione Spiritus Sancti, "about the sanctification by the Holy Spirit," but solely about the redemption of Jesus Christ" (114). "Having rejected and being unable to understand the Ten Commandments, ... they see and yet they let the people go on in their public sins, without any renewal or reformation of their lives" (147).
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 33 36.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 170 72
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 76, 105 07.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 140, 157.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 75, 104 05, 172 73.
^ The "first use of the law," accordingly, would be the law used as an external means of order and coercion in the political realm by means of bodily rewards and punishments.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 110.
^ Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal, 35: "The law, therefore, cannot be eliminated, but remains, prior to Christ as not fulfilled, after Christ as to be fulfilled, although this does not happen perfectly in this life even by the justified. ... This will happen perfectly first in the coming life." Cf. Luther, Only the Decalogue Is Eternal,, 43 44, 91 93.
^ Brecht, Martin, Martin Luther, tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 3: 206. For a more extensive list of quotes from Luther on the topic of polygamy, see page 11 and following of Luther's Authentic Voice on Polygamy Archived 20 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine Nathan R. Jastram, Concordia Theological Journal, Fall 2015/Spring 2016, Volume 3
^ Brecht, Martin, Martin Luther, tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 3:212.
^ Brecht, Martin, Martin Luther, tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 3:214.
^ Brecht, Martin, Martin Luther, tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 3:205 15.
^ Oberman, Heiko, Luther: Man Between God and the Devil, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006, 294.
^ Michael, Robert. Holy Hatred: Christianity, Antisemitism, and the Holocaust. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, 109; Mullett, 242.
^ Edwards, Mark. Luther's Last Battles. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1983, 121.
^ Brecht, 3:341 43; Mullett, 241; Marty, 172.
^ Brecht, 3:334; Marty, 169; Marius, 235.
^ Noble, Graham. "Martin Luther and German anti-Semitism," History Review (2002) No. 42:1 2; Mullett, 246.
^ Brecht, 3:341 47.
^ Luther, On the Jews and their Lies, quoted in Michael, 112.
^ Luther, Vom Schem Hamphoras, quoted in Michael, 113.
^ a b Gritsch, Eric W. (2012). Martin Luther's Anti-Semitism: Against His Better Judgment. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-6676-9. pp. 86 87.
^ Luther, On the Jews and Their Lies, Luthers Werke. 47:268 71.
^ Luther, On the Jews and Their Lies, quoted in Robert Michael, "Luther, Luther Scholars, and the Jews," Encounter 46 (Autumn 1985) No. 4:343 44.
^ Rosenfeld, Moshe N. (1988). "Chapter 9. Early Yiddish in Non-Jewish Books".  In Katz, Dovid (ed.). Dialects of the Yiddish Language: Winter Studies in Yiddish, Volume 2. Papers from the Second Annual Oxford Winter Symposium in Yiddish Language and Literature, 14-16 December 1986. Pergamon Press. p. 99. ISBN 9780080365640. OCLC 17727332. Retrieved 22 February 2023   via Google Books.
^ Considine, John P. (2017). "Chapter 5. first curiosity-driven wordlists: Rotwelsch". Small Dictionaries and Curiosity: Lexicography and Fieldwork in Post-medieval Europe. Oxford University Press. p. 37. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198785019.001.0001. ISBN 9780198785019. OCLC 955312844. Retrieved 22 February 2023   via Google Books.
^ a b Michael, 117.
^ Quoted by Michael, 110.
^ Michael, 117 18.
^ Singer, Tovia (30 April 2014). "A Closer Look at the "Crucifixion Psalm"". Outreach Judaism. Outreach Judaism. Retrieved 20 July 2019.
^ Gritsch, 113 14; Michael, 117.
^ "The assertion that Luther's expressions of anti-Jewish sentiment have been of major and persistent influence in the centuries after the Reformation, and that there exists a continuity between Protestant anti-Judaism and modern racially oriented antisemitism, is at present wide-spread in the literature; since the Second World War it has understandably become the prevailing opinion." Johannes Wallmann, "The Reception of Luther's Writings on the Jews from the Reformation to the End of the 19th century", Lutheran Quarterly, n.s. 1 (Spring 1987) 1:72 97.
^ Berger, Ronald. Fathoming the Holocaust: A Social Problems Approach (New York: Aldine De Gruyter, 2002), 28; Johnson, Paul. A History of the Jews (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1987), 242; Shirer, William. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1960).
^ Grunberger, Richard. The 12-Year Reich: A Social History of Nazi German 1933 1945 (NP:Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), 465.
^ Himmler wrote: "what Luther said and wrote about the Jews. No judgment could be sharper."
^ Ellis, Marc H. Hitler and the Holocaust, Christian Anti-Semitism" Archived 10 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine, (NP: Baylor University Center for American and Jewish Studies, Spring 2004), Slide 14. "Hitler and the Holocaust". Baylor University. Archived from the original on 22 April 2006. Retrieved 22 April 2006..
^ See Noble, Graham. "Martin Luther and German anti-Semitism," History Review (2002) No. 42:1 2.
^ Diarmaid MacCulloch, Reformation: Europe's House Divided, 1490 1700. New York: Penguin Books Ltd, 2004, pp. 666 67.
^ Bernd Nellessen, "Die schweigende Kirche: Katholiken und Judenverfolgung," in Buttner (ed), Die Deutschen und die Jugendverfolg im Dritten Reich, p. 265, cited in Daniel Goldhagen, Hitler's Willing Executioners (Vintage, 1997)
^ Brecht 3:351.
^ Wallmann, 72 97.
^ Siemon-Netto, The Fabricated Luther, 17 20.
^ Siemon-Netto, "Luther and the Jews," Lutheran Witness 123 (2004) No. 4:19, 21.
^ Hillerbrand, Hans J. "Martin Luther," Encyclop dia Britannica, 2007. Hillerbrand writes: "His strident pronouncements against the Jews, especially toward the end of his life, have raised the question of whether Luther significantly encouraged the development of German anti-Semitism. Although many scholars have taken this view, this perspective puts far too much emphasis on Luther and not enough on the larger peculiarities of German history."
^ Bainton, Roland: Here I Stand, (Nashville: Abingdon Press, New American Library, 1983), p. 297
^ For similar views, see:
Briese, Russell. "Martin Luther and the Jews," Lutheran Forum (Summer 2000):32;
Brecht, Martin Luther, 3:351;
Edwards, Mark U. Jr. Luther's Last Battles: Politics and Polemics 1531 46. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983, 139;
Gritsch, Eric. "Was Luther Anti-Semitic?", Christian History, No. 3:39, 12.;
Kittelson, James M., Luther the Reformer, 274;
Oberman, Heiko. The Roots of Anti-Semitism: In the Age of Renaissance and Reformation. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984, 102;
Rupp, Gordon. Martin Luther, 75;
Siemon-Netto, Uwe. Lutheran Witness, 19.
^ Christopher J. Probst, Demonizing the Jews: Luther and the Protestant Church in Nazi Germany Archived 11 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Indiana University Press in association with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, 2012, ISBN 978-0-253-00100-9
^ "Der Deutsche Luthertag 1933 und die Deutschen Christen" by
Hansj rg Buss. In: Kirchliche Zeitgeschichte Vol. 26, No. 2
^ Dr. Christopher Probst. "Martin Luther and "The Jews" A Reappraisal". The Theologian. Retrieved 20 March 2014.
^ Synod deplores and disassociates itself from Luther's negative statements about the Jewish people and the use of these statements to incite anti-Lutheran sentiment, from a summary of Official Missouri Synod Doctrinal Statements Archived 25 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ Lull, Timothy Martin Luther's Basic Theological Writings, Second Edition (2005), p. 25
^ See Merton P. Strommen et al., A Study of Generations (Minneapolis: Augsburg Publishing, 1972), p. 206. P. 208 also states "The clergy [ALC, LCA, or LCMS] are less likely to indicate anti-Semitic or racially prejudiced attitudes [compared to the laity]."
^ Richard (Dick) Geary, "Who voted for the Nazis? (electoral history of the National Socialist German Workers' Party)", in History Today, 1 October 1998, Vol. 48, Issue 10, pp. 8 14
^ "Special Interests at the Ballot Box? Religion and the Electoral Success of the Nazis" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2017.
^ Iversen OH (1996). "Martin Luther's somatic diseases. A short life-history 450 years after his death". Tidsskr. Nor. Legeforen. (in Norwegian). 116 (30): 3643 46. PMID 9019884.
^ Edwards, 9.
^ Spitz, 354.
^ Die Beziehungen des Reformators Martin Luther zu Halle Archived 7 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine buergerstiftung-halle.de (in German)
^ Luther, Martin. Sermon No. 8, "Predigt  ber Mat. 11:25, Eisleben gehalten," 15 February 1546, Luthers Werke, Weimar 1914, 51:196 97.
^ Poliakov, L on. From the Time of Christ to the Court Jews, Vanguard Press, p. 220.
^ Mackinnon, James. Luther and the Reformation. Vol. IV, (New York): Russell & Russell, 1962, p. 204.
^ Luther, Martin. Admonition against the Jews, added to his final sermon, cited in Oberman, Heiko. Luther: Man Between God and the Devil, New York: Image Books, 1989, p. 294. A complete translation of Luther's Admonition can be found in Wikisource. s:Warning Against the Jews (1546)
^ Reeves, Michael. "The Unquenchable Flame". Nottingham: IVP, 2009, p. 60.
^ Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther. tr. James L. Schaaf, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985 93, 3:369 79.
^ a b McKim, Donald K. (2003). The Cambridge companion to Martin Luther. Cambridge companions to religion. Cambridge University Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-521-01673-5.
^ Kellermann, James A. (translator) "The Last Written Words of Luther: Holy Ponderings of the Reverend Father Doctor Martin Luther" Archived 4 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. 16 February 1546.
^ Original German and Latin of Luther's last written words is: "Wir sein pettler. Hoc est verum." Heinrich Bornkamm [de], Luther's World of Thought, tr. Martin H. Bertram (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1958), 291.
^ "Slide Collection". Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
^ Fairchild, Mary. "Martin Luther's Great Accomplishments". Learn Religions. Archived from the original on 22 November 2007. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
^ "OurRedeermLCMS.org". Archived from the original on 22 November 2003.
^ McKim, Donald K (10 July 2003). The Cambridge Companion to Martin Luther. ISBN 978-0-521-01673-5.
^ SignatureToursInternational.comArchived 1 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ Dorfpredigten: Biblische Einsichten aus Deutschlands 'wildem S den'. Ausgew hlte Predigten aus den Jahren 1998 bis 2007 Teil II 2002 2007 by Thomas O.H. Kaiser, p. 354
^ Martin Luther's Death Mask on View at Museum in Halle, Germany Archived 29 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine artdaily.com
^ Wall Street Journal, "The Monk Who Shook the World", Richard J. Evans,
 31 March 2017
^ Roper, Lyndal (April 2010). "Martin Luther's Body: The 'Stout Doctor' and His Biographers". American Historical Review. 115 (2): 351 62. doi:10.1086/ahr.115.2.351. PMID 20509226.
^ "The Calendar". The Church of England. Retrieved 9 April 2021.
^ Luther und der Schwan Archived 19 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine hamburger-reformation.de, retrieved 19 October 2019
^ The Swan Archived 6 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Lutheran Press, retrieved 6 July 2020
^ The Lutheran Identity of Josquin's Missa Pange Lingua (reference note 94) Archived 6 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Early Music History, vol. 36, October 2017, pp. 193 249; CUP; retrieved 6 July 2020
Sources
Brecht, Martin; tr. James L. Schaaf (1985). Martin Luther. Vol. 1: His Road to Reformation, 1483 1521. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Brecht, Martin; tr. James L. Schaaf (1994). Martin Luther. Vol. 2: Shaping and Defining the Reformation, 1521 1532. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Brecht, Martin; tr. James L. Schaaf (1999). Martin Luther. Vol. 3: The Preservation of the Church, 1532 1546. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Cummings, Brian (2002). The Literary Culture of the Reformation: Grammar and Grace. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198187356.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-818735-6   via Oxford Scholarship Online.
Mullett, Michael A. (2004). Martin Luther. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26168-5.
Michael A. Mullett (1986) (1986). Luther. Methuen & Co (Lancashire Pamphlets). ISBN 978-0-415-10932-1.
Wilson, Derek (2007). Out of the Storm: The Life and Legacy of Martin Luther. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-180001-7.
Further reading
For works by and about Luther, see Martin Luther (resources) or Luther's works at Wikisource.
Atkinson, James (1968). Martin Luther and the Birth of Protestantism, in series, Pelican Book[s]. Harmondsworth, Eng.: Penguin Books. 352 pp.
Bainton, Roland. Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1950), online
Brecht, Martin. Martin Luther: His Road to Reformation 1483 1521 (vol 1, 1985); Martin Luther 1521 1532: Shaping and Defining the Reformation (vol 2, 1994); Martin Luther The Preservation of the Church Vol 3 1532 1546 (1999), a standard scholarly biography excerpts
Dillenberger, John (1961). Martin Luther: Selections from his Writings. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. OCLC 165808.
Erikson, Erik H. (1958). Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton.
Fife, Robert Herndon. (1928). Young Luther: The Intellectual and Religious Development of Martin Luther to 1518. New York: Macmillan.
Fife, Robert Herndon. (1957). The Revolt of Martin Luther. New York NY: Columbia University Press.
Friedenthal, Richard (1970). Luther, His Life and Times. Trans. from the German by John Nowell. First American ed. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. viii, 566 p. N.B.: Trans. of the author's Luther, sein Leben und seine Zeit.
Lull, Timothy (1989). Martin Luther: Selections from his Writings. Minneapolis: Fortress. ISBN 978-0-8006-3680-7.
Lull, Timothy F.; Nelson, Derek R. (2015). Resilient Reformer: The Life and Thought of Martin Luther. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress. ISBN 978-1-4514-9415-0   via Project MUSE.
Kolb, Robert; Dingel, Irene; Batka,  ubom r (eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Martin Luther's Theology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0-19-960470-8.
Luther, M. The Bondage of the Will. Eds. J.I. Packer and O.R. Johnson. Old Tappan, NJ: Revell, 1957. OCLC 22724565.
Luther, Martin (1974). Selected Political Writings, ed. and with an introd. by J.M. Porter. Philadelphia: Fortress Press. ISBN 0-8006-1079-2
Luther's Works, 55 vols. Eds. H.T. Lehman and J. Pelikan. St Louis, Missouri, and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1955 86. Also on CD-ROM. Minneapolis and St Louis: Fortress Press and Concordia Publishing House, 2002.
Maritain, Jacques (1941). Three Reformers: Luther, Descartes, Rousseau. New York: C. Scribner's Sons. N.B.: Reprint of the ed. published by Muhlenberg Press.
Nettl, Paul (1948). Luther and Music, trans. by Frida Best and Ralph Wood. New York: Russell & Russell, 1967, cop. 1948. vii, 174 p.
Reu, Johann Michael (1917). Thirty-five Years of Luther Research. Chicago: Wartburg Publishing House.
Schalk, Carl F. (1988). Luther on Music: Paradigms of Praise. Saint Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House. ISBN 0-570-01337-2
Stang, William (1883). The Life of Martin Luther. Eighth ed. New York: Pustet & Co. N.B.: This is a work of Roman Catholic polemical nature.
Warren Washburn Florer, Ph.D. (1912, 2012). Luther's Use of the Pre-Lutheran Versions of the Bible: Article 1, George Wahr, The Ann Arbor Press, Ann Arbor, Mich. Reprint 2012: Nabu Press, ISBN 978-1-278-81819-1
External links
This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (November 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Listen to this article (1 hour and 32 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 17 July 2011 (2011-07-17), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
Martin Luther  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
Works by Martin Luther at Project Gutenberg
Robert Stern. "Martin Luther".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Robert Stern. "Luther's Influence on Philosophy".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Works by or about Martin Luther at Internet Archive
Maarten Luther Werke
Digitized 1543 edition of Von den Juden und ihren Luegen by Martin Luther at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York
Works by Martin Luther at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Martin Luther at Post-Reformation Digital Library
The Mutopia Project has compositions by Martin Luther
Website about Martin Luther
Commentarius in psalmos Davidis Manuscript of Luther's first lecture as Professor of Theology at the University of Wittenberg, digital version at the Saxon State and University Library, Dresden (SLUB)
"Martin Luther". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Martin Luther Collection: Early works attributed to Martin Luther, (285 titles). From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
Robin Leaver: Luther's Liturgical Music
vteMartin Luther
Bibliography
Resources about Martin Luther
Works
Ninety-five Theses (1517)
Sermon on Indulgences and Grace (1518)
To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (1520)
On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church (1520)
On the Freedom of a Christian (1520)
Against Henry, King of the English (1522)
Luther Bible (1522, 1534)
The Adoration of the Sacrament (1523)
Formula missae (1523)
Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants (1525)
On the Bondage of the Will (1525)
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ Against the Fanatics (1526)
Deutsche Messe (1526)
Confession Concerning Christ's Supper (1528)
On War Against the Turk (1529)
Small Catechism (1529)
Articles of Schwabach (1529)
Large Catechism (1529)
Smalcald Articles (1537)
On the Councils and the Church (1539)
On the Jews and Their Lies (1543)
Vom Schem Hamphoras (1543)
Luther's Table Talk (1566)
Weimar edition of Luther's works
List of hymns
First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
"A Mighty Fortress Is Our God" (1529)
"Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam" (1543)
Topicsand events
Reformation
Lutheranism
Heidelberg Disputation, 1518
Leipzig Debate, 1519
Exsurge Domine, 1520
Diet of Worms, 1521
Decet Romanum Pontificem, 1521
Marburg Colloquy, 1529
Augsburg Confession, 1530
Luther's canon
Theology of Martin Luther
Theology of the Cross
Priesthood of all believers
Sola fide
Sola scriptura
Two kingdoms
Beerwolf (1539)
Law and Gospel
Marian theology
Eucharist in Lutheranism
Sacramental union
Words of Institution
Antisemitism
Propaganda during the Reformation
Die L gend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo (1537 edition)
People
Hans and Margarethe Luther (parents)
Katharina von Bora (wife)
Magdalena Luther (daughter)
Paul Luther (son)
Albert of Brandenburg
Bartholomaeus Arnoldi
Erasmus
Georg R rer
Johann Cochlaeus
Johann Reuchlin
Johann von Staupitz
Justus Jonas
Karl von Miltitz
Andreas Karlstadt
Philip Melanchthon
Pope Leo X
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
Frederick the Wise
Albrecht VII. von Mansfeld
Luther sites
All Saints' Church, Wittenberg
Stadtkirche Wittenberg
Lutherhaus
Lutherst dte
Martin Luther's Birth House
Martin Luther's Death House
Melanchthonhaus (Wittenberg)
St. Augustine's Monastery
Veste Coburg (Fortress)
Wartburg Castle
Film and theatre
Martin Luther (1923 film)
Luther (1928 film)
Martin Luther (1953 film)
Luther (1961 play)
Luther (1964 film)
Luther (1974 film)
Martin Luther, Heretic (1983 film)
Luther (2003 film)
Luther and I (2017 film)
Luther Monuments
Luther Monument, Washington D.C.
Luther Monument, Worms
Related
Luther rose
Theologia Germanica
vteHistory of LutheranismStart of theReformationEvents
Ninety-five Theses
Heidelberg Disputation
Leipzig Debate
Marburg Colloquy
Diet of Speyer (1529)
Protestation at Speyer
Articles of Schwabach
Presentation of the Augsburg Confession
Nuremberg Religious Peace
Reformation in
Denmark Norway and Holstein
Finland
Germany
Iceland
Sweden
Reformers
Martin Luther
Katharina von Bora
Philip Melanchthon
Johannes Bugenhagen
Johannes Brenz
Justus Jonas
Argula von Grumbach
Petrus S rkilahti
Mikael Agricola
Stephan Agricola
Nicolaus von Amsdorf
Laurentius Andreae
Olaus Petri
Laurentius Petri
Stephan Praetorius
Johann Pfeffinger
Frederick the Wise
Early turmoilEvents
Dissemination of the Augsburg Confession Variata
Colloquy of Worms (1540 1541)
Diet of Regensburg
Regensburg Interim
Schmalkaldic War
Augsburg Interim
Leipzig Interim
Peace of Passau
Peace of Augsburg
Colloquy of Worms (1557)
Counter-Reformation
Council of Trent   Protestant response
Publication of the Magdeburg Centuries
Adiaphoristic controversies (first
second)
Controversy on the Descent into Hell
Presentation of the Greek Augsburg Confession
Signing of the Formula of Concord
Liturgical struggle
Uppsala Synod
People
Philip Melanchthon
Matthias Flacius
Nicolaus Gallus
Cyriacus Spangenberg
Joachim Westphal
Andreas Musculus
Victorinus Strigel
Johannes Agricola
Andreas Osiander
John the Magnanimous
Factions
Crypto-Calvinism
Sacramentarians
Philippists
Ubiquitarians
Gnesio-Lutherans
Crypto-Lutherans
Orthodox andScholasticperiodsEarly
Acceptance of the Book of Concord
Martin Chemnitz
Colloquy of Mumpelgart
Jakob Andreae
Nikolaus Selnecker
David Chytraeus
Matthias Hafenreffer
Leonhard Hutter
Aegidius Hunnius
Stephan Praetorius
High
Johann Gerhard
J. A. Quenstedt
Abraham Calovius
Georg Calixtus
Nicolaus Hunnius
Jesper Brochmand
Salomo Glassius
Johann H lsemann
J. C. Dannhauer
J. F. K nig
Johannes Musaeus
J. W. Baier
Thirty Years' War
Late
David Hollatz
Christian Scriver
V. E. L scher
J. M. Goeze
Salzburg Protestants
Landlers
Speculative 
or critical 
theologiesWolffian
Johann Salomo Semler
Johann David Michaelis
Johann Christoph D derlein
Old T bingen school
Gottlob Christian Storr
Friedrich Gottlieb S skind
Johann Friedrich Flatt
Kantian
Christoph Friedrich von Ammon
Julius Wegscheider
Wilhelm Gesenius
Albrecht Ritschl
Adolf von Harnack
Wilhelm Herrmann
Hegelian
Karl Daub
Philip Marheineke
David Strauss
Ferdinand Christian Baur
Richard Adelbert Lipsius
Otto Pfleiderer
Moderate
Franz Volkmar Reinhard
Karl Gottlieb Bretschneider
Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de Wette
Transitional
Johann Gottfried Herder
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
Friedrich Schleiermacher
RevivalsPietist
Martin Moller
Johann Arndt
Jakob B hme
J. V. Andreae
P. J. Spener
J. W. Petersen
A. H. Francke
J. F. Buddeus
J. A. Bengel
G. C. Knapp
Awakening
J. G. Hamann
Hans Nielsen Hauge
Haugeanism
Paavo Ruotsalainen
Finnish Awakening
Claus Harms
Lars Levi Laestadius
Laestadianism
Carl Olof Rosenius
N. F. S. Grundtvig
August Tholuck
Zillertal Valley expulsion
Neo-LutheranRepristination
E. W. Hengstenberg
F. A. Philippi
F. G. Hedberg
Carl Paul Caspari
C. P. Krauth
L .A. Gotwald
Erlangen
G. C. A. von Harless
J. W. F. H fling
Gottfried Thomasius
J. C. K. von Hofmann
Franz Delitzsch
K. F. A. Kahnis
Theodosius Harnack
C. E. Luthardt
F. H. R. von Frank
Paul Althaus
Werner Elert
High Church
A. F. C. Vilmar
F. J. Stahl
A. F. O. M nchmeyer
J. K. W. L he
Theodor Kliefoth
Heinrich Hansen
Old LutheranGermany
Old Lutheran schism
Background
J. G. Scheibel
Eduard Huschke
Henrik Steffens
H. E. F. Guericke
G. P. E. Huschke
Free churches
Australia / New Guinea
August Kavel
Gotthard Fritzsche
Johann Flierl
Lutheran Church of Australia
United States
Martin Stephan
J. A. A. Grabau
Wilhelm Sihler
F. C. D. Wyneken
C. F. W. Walther
H. A. Preus
F. W. Stellhorn
Synodical Conference of North America
Present
Confessional Lutheranism
Homosexuality
vteLutheran hymnodyEnglish hymnals
Christian Worship (1993)
Common Service Book (1917)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996)
Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006)
Lutheran Book of Worship (1978)
The Lutheran Hymnal (1941)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989)
Lutheran Service Book (2006)
Lutheran Worship (1982)
ReClaim Hymnal (2006)
Service Book and Hymnal (1958)
German hymnals
First Lutheran hymnal (1524)
Erfurt Enchiridion (1524)
Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn (1524)
Praxis pietatis melica (1640/47)
Becker Psalter (1602)
Evangelisches Gesangbuch (1993)
In other languagesDanish
Den Danske Salmebog
Guldberg's hymnal
Kingo's hymnal
Thomiss n's hymnal
Faroese
S lmab k F roya kirkju
Finnish
Siionin Virret
Virsikirja
Icelandic
Passion Hymns
Norwegian
Nokre salmar (1869)
Landstads kirkesalmebog (1870)
Psalmebog for Kirke og Hus (1873)
Landstads reviderte salmebok (1924)
Nynorsk salmebok (1925)
Salmer 1973
Norsk Salmebok (1985)
Salmer 1997
Norsk salmebok 2013
Spanish
Culto Cristiano
Swedish
Swenske songer (1536)
Een liten Songbook (in Swedish, 1553)
Den svenska psalmboken 1695
Den svenska psalmboken 1819
Hemlandss nger (in Swedish, 1891)
Hymnodistsandhymnologists
Mikael Agricola
Johann Georg Albinus
Albert von Brandenburg
Michael Altenburg
Anna Sophia II
Johann Sebastian Bach
Emilie Juliane of Barby-M hlingen
Martin Behm
Sigmund von Birken
Carl Boberg
Birgitte Cathrine Boye
Hans Adolph Brorson
Johan Nordahl Brun
Joachim a Burck
Dieterich Buxtehude
Christian Cappelen
Elisabeth Cruciger
Johann Cr ger
Simon Dach
Wolfgang Dachstein
Nikolaus Decius
Paul Eber
Ludmilla Elisabeth
Princess Eug nie
Jacobus Finno
Paul Fleming
Johann Franck
Michael Franck
Melchior Franck
Salomon Franck
Frans Michael Franz n
Erik Gustaf Geijer
Paul Gerhardt
Bartholom us Gesius
Johannes Gigas
N. F. S. Grundtvig
Britt G. Hallqvist
Andreas Hammerschmidt
Claus Harms
Fredrik Gabriel Hedberg
Christian F rchtegott Gellert
Johann Heermann
Ludwig Helmbold
Valerius Herberger
Nikolaus Herman
Johannes Hermann
Sebald Heyden
Anders Hovden
Konrad Hubert
Bernhard Severin Ingemann
Justus Jonas
Sigfrid Karg-Elert
Christian Keymann
Balthasar Kindermann
Thomas Kingo
B rre Knudsen
Johann Kolross
Johann Balthasar K nig
Julius Krohn
Magnus Brostrup Landstad
Ludvig Mathias Lindeman
Elias L nnrot
Matth us Apelles von L wenstern
Matthias Loy
Sigurd Lunde
Martin Luther
Wilhelmi Malmivaara
Hemminki of Masku
Felix Mendelssohn
Johann Matth us Meyfart
Georg Neumark
Erdmann Neumeister
Philipp Nicolai
Johann Pachelbel
Hallgr mur P tursson
Michael Praetorius
Christian Heinrich Postel
Adam Reusner
Bartholom us Ringwaldt
Martin Rinkart
Johann Rist
Christian Knorr von Rosenroth
Daniel Rumpius
Johan Runeberg
Gottfried Wilhelm Sacer
Lina Sandell
Carl Schalk
Martin Schalling
Heinrich Scheidemann
Johann Hermann Schein
Benjamin Schmolck
Cyriakus Schneegass
Johann Schop
Johann Balthasar Schupp
Heinrich Sch tz
Nikolaus Selnecker
Eyvind Skeie
Haquin Spegel
Lazarus Spengler
Paul Speratus
Philipp Spitta
Paul Stockmann
Jesper Swedberg
Ji  T anovsk 
Melchior Teschner
N. Samuel of Tranquebar
Zachris Topelius
Leonard Typp 
Jaroslav Vajda
Gottfried Vopelius
Philipp Wackernagel
Johan Olof Wallin
Johann Walter
Michael Wei e
Georg Weissel
Olle Widestrand
Carl David af Wirs n
Catherine Winkworth
Johannes Zahn
Luther   Hymnodist
Hymns by Luther
Lutheran hymn
In continental Europe
Lutheran chorale
Chorale setting
Chorale cantata
vteHistory of Christianity
Early Christianity
Spread
Centuries
1st
2nd & 3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
20th
21st
Origins andApostolic Age
Background
Jesus
Baptism
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Great Commission
Holy Spirit
Apostles in the New Testament
Jewish Christians
Paul the Apostle
Council of Jerusalem
Gospels
Acts
Pauline epistles
General epistles
Revelation
Ante-Niceneperiod
Diversity
Adoptionism
Arianism
Docetism
Donatism
Gnosticism
Marcionism
Montanism
Canon development
Persecution
Church / Apostolic Fathers
Clement of Rome
Polycarp
Ignatius
Irenaeus
Justin Martyr
Tertullian
Origen
Early African
Late antiquity(Great Church)
Constantine
Constantinian shift
Monasticism
Councils
Nicaea I
Nicene Creed
Athanasius
Jerome
Augustine
Constantinople I
Ephesus I
Chalcedon
Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian
Biblical canon
Catholicism
Papacy
Development of primacy
Eastern Orthodox opposition
Crusading movement
Lateran IV
Art patronage of Julius II
Leo X
Counter-Reformation
Trent
Art
Catholic Reformation
Jesuits
Xavier
Thomas More
Monastery dissolution
Wars
Mass rocks and priest holes
Guadalupe
Jansenists
Molinists
Neo-Scholasticism
Teresa
Modernism
Independent Catholics
Vatican I and Vatican II
Ecclesial community
Timeline
EasternChristianity
Eastern Orthodoxy
Church of the East
Oriental Orthodoxy
Chrysostom
Nestorianism
Icons
Iconodulism
Iconoclasm
Great Schism
Fall of Constantinople
Armenia
Georgia
Greece
Egypt
Syriac
Serbian
Ethiopia
Ottoman Empire
Russia
America
Middle Ages
Pelagianism
Gregory I
Celtic
Germanic
Anglo-Saxon
Franks
Gothic
Scandinavian
Iceland
Slavs
Bohemia
Bulgaria
Kievan Rus'
Moravia
Poland
Pomerania
Investiture
Anselm
Abelard
Bernard
Bogomils
Bosnian
Cathars
Apostolic Brethren
Dulcinian
Crusades
Waldensians
Inquisition
Early Scholasticism
Christian mysticism
Dominic
Francis
Bonaventure
Aquinas
Five Ways
Wycliffe
Avignon
Papal Schism
Bohemian Reformation
Hus
Conciliarism
Synods
ReformationandProtestantism
Erasmus
Eucharist
Calvinist Arminian debate
Arminianism
Wars
Resistance theories
Separation of church and state
Nicodemites
Hymnody of continental Europe
Formal and material principles
Literature
Protestant work ethic
Lutheranism
Luther
95 Theses
Diet of Worms
Theology
Bible
Melanchthon
Book of Concord
Orthodoxy
Scholasticism
Eucharist
Art
Calvinism
Zwingli
Calvin
Huguenots
Presbyterianism
Scotland
Knox
TULIP
Baptism
Law and Gospel
Dort
Three Forms of Unity
Westminster
Scholasticism
Metrical psalters
Anglicanism
Timeline
Henry VIII
Cranmer
Elizabethan
39 Articles
Puritans
Civil War
Church music
Book of Common Prayer
King James Version
Anabaptism
Theology
Radical Reformation
Grebel
Swiss Brethren
M ntzer
Martyrs' Synod
Menno Simons
Smyth
Martyrs Mirror
Ausbund
1640 1789
Revivalism
Missionaries
Baptists
Separation of church and state
Edicts of toleration
Congregationalism
First Great Awakening
Methodism
Millerism
Pietism
Fostering of early experimental science
Neo- and Old Lutherans
1789 present
Camp meeting
Holiness movement
Second Great Awakening
Restorationists
Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Seventh-day Adventist
Adventism
Oxford Movement
Laestadianism
Finnish Awakening
Christian existentialism
Third Great Awakening
Azusa Revival
Gospel music
Fundamentalist   Modernist controversy
Pacifism
Ecumenism
Five solae
Jesus movement
Pentecostalism
Charismatics
Liberation theology
Reformed epistemology
Fourth Great Awakening
Evangelical and Mainline Protestants
Christian right and left
Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America
Timeline
Missions
Martyrs
Theology
Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy
Protestantism
Catholicism
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Finland
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
RKD Artists
ULAN
People
Netherlands
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
RISM
SNAC
IdRef
 sl m Ansiklopedisi
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_Luther&oldid=1148274369"