Non-judicial body which can interpret lawAdministrative law
General principles
Administrative court
Delegated legislation
Exhaustion of remedies
Justiciability
Ministerial act
Ouster clause
Prerogative writ
Certiorari
Habeas corpus
Mandamus
Prohibition
Quo warranto
Rulemaking
Ultra vires
Grounds for judicial review
Fettering of discretion
Legitimate expectation
Nondelegation doctrine
Procedural justice
Natural justice
Due process
Fundamental justice
Proportionality
Unreasonableness
Wednesbury
Patent unreasonableness
Administrative law incommon law jurisdictions
Australia
Canada
Singapore
South Africa
United Kingdom
Scotland
United States
Administrative law incivil law jurisdictions
China
Mongolia
Ukraine
Related topics
Constitutional law
vte
A quasi-judicial body is a non-judicial body which can interpret law. It is an entity such as an arbitration panel or tribunal board, which can be a public administrative agency but also a contract- or private law entity, which has been given powers and procedures resembling those of a court of law or judge and which is obliged to objectively determine facts and draw conclusions from them so as to provide the basis of an official action. Such actions are able to remedy a situation or impose legal penalties, and they may affect the legal rights, duties or privileges of specific parties.[1]
Powers[edit]
Such bodies usually have powers of adjudication in such matters as:
breach of discipline
conduct rules
trust in the matters of money or otherwise
Their powers are usually limited to a very specific area of expertise and authority, such as land use and zoning, financial markets, employment law, public standards, and/or a specific set of regulations of an agency.[1]
The decisions of such a body are often made after a quasi-judicial proceeding, which may resemble a court.
Differences from judicial bodies[edit]
There are some key differences between judicial and quasi-judicial bodies, in that:
Judicial decisions are bound by precedent in common law, whereas quasi-judicial decisions usually are not so bound;
In the absence of precedent in common law, judicial decisions may create new law, whereas quasi-judicial decisions must be based on conclusions of existing law;[1]
Quasi-judicial bodies need not always follow strict judicial rules of evidence and procedure;
Quasi-judicial bodies must hold formal hearings only if mandated to do so under their governing laws, regulations or agreements;[1]
Quasi-judicial bodies, unlike courts, may be a party in a matter and issue a decision thereon at the same time, depending on the specifically governing rules.
Decisions[edit]
In general, decisions of a quasi-judicial body require findings of facts to reach conclusions of law that justify the decision. They usually depend on a predetermined set of guidelines or criteria to assess the nature and gravity of the permission or relief sought, or of the offense committed. Decisions of a quasi-judicial body are often legally enforceable under the laws of a jurisdiction; they can be challenged in a court of law, which is the final decisive authority.[1]
List of quasi-judicial bodies[edit]
The following is a partial list of quasi-judicial bodies:
Canada[edit]
Canadian International Trade Tribunal
Canadian Transportation Agency
Ontarian committees of adjustment
Ontario Municipal Board
Trademarks Opposition Board
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
India[edit]
Some non-constitutional bodies that are quasi-judicial in nature:[2]
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT)
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)
Assessing authorities under the Income Tax Laws
National Human Rights Commission
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
Competition Commission of India
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity
Railway Claims Tribunal
Intellectual Property Appellate Tribunal
Banking Ombudsman
National Green Tribunal
Central Information Commission
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Employees Provident Fund Organization
United Kingdom[edit]
Parades Commission
Planning Committee
Sheriffs Principal in Scotland
Financial Services Authority
United States[edit]
United States Merit Systems Protection Board
Commercial Fisheries Entry Commission
Californian planning commissions
California Coastal Commission
Federal Aviation Administration
US Patent & Trademark Office including the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences
Local Zoning Board of Appeals
National Labor Relations Board
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Federal Election Commission
Federal Trade Commission
International Trade Commission
Other[edit]
Parole boards
Commission of Inquiry
United Nations Human Rights Committee
Court of Arbitration for Sport
Philippines Commission on Elections
National Privacy Commission (Philippines)
European Patent Office
National Labor Relations Commission
New Zealand's Broadcasting Standards Authority
Botswana Communications Regulatory Authority
Chief District Officer of Nepal
Federal Judicial Administration Council (Ethiopia)
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement
Further reading[edit]
Mashaw, Jerry L., Richard A. Merrill, and Peter M. Shane. 1992. Administrative Law: The American Public Law System; Cases and Materials. 3d ed. St. Paul, Minn.: West.
References[edit]
^ a b c d e West's Encyclopedia of American Law, edition 2. Copyright 2008 The Gale Group, Inc.
^ "Non-Constitutional Bodies in India (Statutory and Non-Statutory Bodies)". ClearIAS. 11 June 2021. Retrieved 1 November 2021.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quasi-judicial_body&oldid=1148746586"