Legendary Geatish hero
Fictional character
BeowulfB owulfBeowulf battles the dragonIn-universe informationGenderMaleOccupationWarrior, MonarchFamilyEcgtheow (father),Hrethel (maternal grandfather),Hygelac (maternal uncle, fl. 515)NationalityGeatish
Beowulf (/ be w lf/;[1][2] Old English: B owulf [ be owu f]) is a legendary Geatish hero in the eponymous epic poem, one of the oldest surviving pieces of English literature.
Etymology and origins of the character[edit]
A number of origins have been proposed for the name Beowulf.
Beowulf[edit]
Henry Sweet, a philologist and linguist specializing in Germanic languages, proposed that the name B owulf literally means in Old English "bee-wolf" or "bee-hunter" and that it is a kenning for "bear".[3] Recorded instances of similar names mirror this etymology. The AD 1031 Liber Vitae records the name Biuuuwulf. The name is attested to a monk from Durham and means bee wolf in the Old Northumbrian dialect.[4] The 11th century English Domesday Book contains a recorded instance of the name Beulf.[4] The scholar Gregor Sarrazin [de] suggested that the name Beowulf derived from a mistranslation of B varr with -varr interpreted as vargr meaning "wolf".[5]
However, Sophus Bugge questioned this etymology, and instead suggested that the personage B varr Bjarki derived from Beowulf.[5]
Beow-Wolf[edit]
In 2005, Andy Orchard theorized an etymology on the basis of the common Old Norse name  r lfr (which literally translates to "Thor Wolf"), stating in parallel that a "more likely" meaning for the name would be the "wolf" of the Germanic god Beow.[6]
Biewolf[edit]
English philologist Walter William Skeat proposed an etymological origin in a term for "Woodpecker" citing the Old Dutch term biewolf for the bird. Skeat states that the black woodpecker is common in Norway and Sweden and further reasons that the "indominatable nature" and that the "bird fights to the death" might have influenced the choice of the name.[7] This etymological origin has been criticized as not being in accordance to Grimm's law and Skeat may have recanted the proposal at a later date.[8]
Beado-Wulf (war wolf)[edit]
The editors of Bosworth's monumental dictionary of Anglo-Saxon propose that Beowulf is a variant of beado-wulf meaning "war wolf" and that it is cognate with the Icelandic Bodulfr which also means "war wolf".[9]
Beowulf before Beowulf[edit]
Scholars have long debated the origins of the character Beowulf. Some have argued that Beowulf existed in heroic-legendary tradition prior to the composition of Beowulf, while others have believed that the Beowulf poet invented his Geatish protagonist. Leonard Neidorf has argued that Beowulf was present in (now lost) heroic-legendary cycles before Beowulf was composed. Neidorf argued that the seventh-century usage of the name  Biuuulf  (Beowulf), which involves an element (Beow) that was unproductive in contemporary name-giving, suggests that legends of Beowulf existed well before the composition of our extant poem.[10]
Beowulf manuscript[edit]
Main article: Beowulf
Origins in Geatland[edit]
 Tribes mentioned in the epic poem Beowulf, showing Beowulf's voyage to Heorot in what is now Zealand, and the kingdoms of the Geats and Wulfings in what is now southern Sweden
As told in the surviving epic poem, Beowulf was the son of Ecg eow, a warrior of the  Swedish W gmundings. Ecg eow had slain Hea olaf, a man from another clan (named the Wulfings) (according to Scandinavian sources, they were the ruling dynasty of the Geatish petty kingdom of  sterg tland). Apparently, because the victim was from a prominent family, the weregild was set too high, and so Ecg eow was banished and had to seek refuge among the Danes. The Danish king Hro gar generously paid the weregild, and had Ecg eow swear an oath.
Ecg eow was in the service of the Geatish king Hre el, whose daughter he married. They had Beowulf, who grew up with the Geats. Beowulf's childhood friend was Breca the Bronding "supposed to be the inhabitants of the island Br nn , lying off the coast of West Gothland in the Cattegat".[11] This would be a realistic location for a childhood friend of Beowulf, and the poem describes a swimming contest between them.
Zealand and Grendel[edit]
When King Hro gar, his wife Wealh eow, and his court were terrorized by the monstrous Grendel, Beowulf left Geatland (West G taland) and sailed to Zealand with fourteen warriors in order to pay his father's debt. During the night, Grendel arrived to attack the sleeping men and devoured one of the other Geats before seizing Beowulf. As no manmade weapon could harm Grendel, Beowulf fought back with his bare hands and tore off the beast's arm. Grendel fled back to the bog to die from his wound, and his arm was attached to the wall of Heorot. The next day, Beowulf was lauded and a skald (scop) sang and compared Beowulf with the hero Sigmund.
However, during the following night Grendel's mother arrived to avenge her son's death and collect weregild. As Beowulf slept in a different building he could not stop her. He resolved to descend into the bog in order to kill her. They fought beside Grendel's corpse, and Beowulf finally won with the aid of an enchanted giant sword stolen from the lair's plundered wooden box.
Return to Geatland, kingdom, and death[edit]
Having returned to Geatland, Beowulf is described as taking part in a raid (a genuine historic event) against the Franks with his king Higlac. Higlac died during the raid, and Beowulf swam home in full armour. Back in Geatland, queen Hygd offered Beowulf the throne but Beowulf declined in favour of the young prince Heardred. However, Heardred received two Swedish princes, Eadgils and Eanmund who reported that they had fled their uncle Onela who had usurped the Swedish throne. This led to a Swedish invasion in which Heardred was killed. Beowulf was proclaimed king and decided to avenge Heardred and to help Eadgils become king of Sweden.
The event when Onela was slain was probably a historic event. Even though it is only briefly mentioned in Beowulf, it occurs extensively in several Scandinavian sources where it is called the Battle on the Ice of Lake V nern. For example, Snorri Sturluson wrote: Onela rode Raven, as they rode to the ice, but a second one, a grey one, hastened, wounded by spears, eastwards under Eadgils. [...] In this fight Onela died and a great many of his people. Then king Eadgils took from him his helmet Battle-boar and his horse Raven.[citation needed] (Although, in Snorri's text the names are in their corresponding Old Norse forms).
Beowulf ruled the Geats for 50 years, until his realm was terrorized by a fire-breathing dragon after a thief stole a golden cup from its hoard of treasure. After unsuccessfully attacking the dragon with his thegns, Beowulf decided to pursue the monster into its lair at Earnan s, but only his young Swedish relative Wiglaf dared join him. Beowulf's sword broke; but he dealt the dragon its death-blow with his dagger. He had been mortally wounded by the dragon's poisonous bite. Dying, he was carried out by Wiglaf, and with his last breaths named Wiglaf his rightful heir. His body was burned on a funeral pyre, and his ashes buried in a barrow by the sea.
The last three lines of the poem are, in Seamus Heaney's translation:
They [the Geats] said that of all the kings upon the earth,
he was the man most gracious and fair-minded,
kindest to his people and keenest to win fame.
[12]
The statement is clear, except for the final word, lof-geornest ('keenest to seek fame'), which is two-edged. It is no shame for a hero to seek fame, but it may be possible to be too eager for it.[13]
References[edit]
^ "Beowulf". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 2021-03-01. 
^ "Beowulf". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 2016-01-21.
^ Sweet, Henry. (1884) Anglo-Saxon Reader in Prose and Verse  The Clarendon Press, p. 202.
^ a b Chadwick, Hector Munro (1983) The Origin of the English Nation, p. 294. ISBN 0-941694-09-7
^ a b 
The Relation of the Hrolfs Saga Kraka and the Bjarkarimur to Beowulf by Olson, 1916, at Project Gutenberg.
^ Orchard, Andy. (2003) A Critical Companion to Beowulf ISBN 1-84384-029-4
^ Skaet, Walter William. (1877) "The Name Beowulf" from The Academy 24 February 1877, p. 163.
^ Shippey, Tom A. Beowulf: The Critical Heritage pp. 387 88. ISBN 0-415-02970-8
^ The Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, the posthumous dictionary by Joseph Bosworth (1898), see beorne   Be -wulf.
^ Neidorf, Leonard. "Beowulf before Beowulf: Anglo-Saxon Anthroponymy and Heroic Legend." Review of English Studies 64 (2013): 553 73
^ The Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, the posthumous dictionary by Joseph Bosworth (1898), see br c   brot.
^ Heaney, Seamus (1999). Beowulf (PDF). Faber & Faber. ISBN 0-571-20113-X. Retrieved 24 November 2018.
^ Chickering, Howell D. Jr. (1977). Beowulf: A Dual-Language Edition. Anchor Books. p. 379. ISBN 0-385-06213-3.
Legendary titles
Preceded byHeardred
 King of the Geats 
Succeeded byWiglaf
vteBeowulf
Old English
Alliterative verse
Kenning
Clans,(Characters)
Geats
Beowulf
Heardred
Hygd
Hygelac
Hundings
Scyldings
 schere
Healfdene
Heorogar
Hro gar
Unfer 
Scylfings
Eadgils
Eanmund
Ohthere
Onela
Ongentheow
Waegmundings
Ecg eow
Weohstan
Wiglaf
Wulfings
Wealhtheow
Monsters
Grendel
Grendel's mother
The Dragon
TranslatingBeowulf
List of translations of Beowulf
Seamus Heaney
Beowulf: A New Verse Translation
J. R. R. Tolkien
Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary
"Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics"
Beowulf and the Critics
"On Translating Beowulf"
"Sellic Spell"
Finn and Hengest
Scholars
Nora K. Chadwick
Michael D. C. Drout
Robert D. Fulk
Kevin Kiernan
Leonard Neidorf
John D. Niles
Geoffrey Russom
Tom Shippey
Related
List of adaptations of Beowulf
Anglo-Saxon paganism
Battle of Finnsburg
Beowulf and Middle-earth
Heorot
Hrunting
N gling
Nowell Codex
vteAnglo-Saxon paganism and mythologyGods and divine figures
 se
Beowa
 ostre
Frige
Gefjon
Hretha
Ing
Saxnot
 unor
Tiw
Wade
Wayland the Smith
W den
Heroic figures
 gil
Beowa
Eormenric
Finn
Hengist and Horsa
Sceafa
Waldere
Other beings
Cofgod
Dragon
Dwarf (Dweorh)
Elf
Ides
Eoten/Thurs
Mare
Neck
W lcyrge
Wight
Locations
Middangeard
Sources
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
 cerbot
Anglo-Saxon Rune Poem
Beowulf
De temporum ratione
Deor
Ealuscerwen
Finnesburg Fragment
Franks Casket
Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum
Nine Herbs Charm
Old English language
Spong Hill
Sutton Hoo
Widsith
Wi  f rstice
Society and culture
B ot
Bl tan
Burial
Early Germanic calendars
Folkmoot
Frith
Germanic paganism
Hearg
Law
Maypole
Moot hill
Runes
Rings
Scop
Symbel
Thegn
Thing
Thyle
Weregild
Wicce
Wilweorthunga
Wyrd
Yule
Modern pagan revival
Heathenry
Seax-Wica
 Category
Authority control International
FAST
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beowulf_(hero)&oldid=1149026033"