This article is about the holiday. For the peace deal, see Good Friday Agreement. For other uses, see Good Friday (disambiguation).
Christian religious holiday preceding Easter
Good FridayA Stabat Mater depiction, 1868TypeChristianSignificanceCommemoration of the crucifixion and the death of Jesus ChristCelebrationsCelebration of the Passion of the LordObservancesWorship services, prayer and vigil services, fasting, almsgivingDateThe Friday immediately preceding Easter Sunday2022 dateApril 15 (Western)April 22 (Eastern)2023 dateApril 7[1] (Western)April 14 (Eastern)2024 dateMarch 29 (Western)May 3 (Eastern)2025 dateApril 18 (Western)April 18 (Eastern)FrequencyAnnualRelated toPassover, Christmas (which celebrates the birth of Jesus), Septuagesima, Quinquagesima, Shrove Tuesday, Ash Wednesday, Lent, Palm Sunday, Holy Wednesday, Maundy Thursday, and Holy Saturday which lead up to Easter, Easter Sunday (primarily), Divine Mercy Sunday, Ascension, Pentecost, Whit Monday, Trinity Sunday, Corpus Christi and Feast of the Sacred Heart which follow it. It is related to the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, which focuses on the benefits, graces, and merits of the Cross, rather than Jesus's death.
Good Friday is a Christian holiday commemorating the crucifixion of Jesus and his death at Calvary. It is observed during Holy Week as part of the Paschal Triduum. It is also known as Holy Friday, Great Friday, Great and Holy Friday (also Holy and Great Friday), and Black Friday.[2][3][4]
Members of many Christian denominations, including the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, Methodist, Oriental Orthodox, United Protestant and some Reformed traditions (including certain Continental Reformed, Presbyterian and Congregationalist churches), observe Good Friday with fasting and church services.[5][6][7] In many Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and Methodist churches, the Service of the Great Three Hours' Agony is held from noon until 3 pm, the time duration that the Bible records as darkness covering the land to Jesus' sacrificial death on the cross.[8] Communicants of the Moravian Church have a Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemeteries.[9]
The date of Good Friday varies from one year to the next in both the Gregorian and Julian calendars. Eastern and Western Christianity disagree over the computation of the date of Easter and therefore of Good Friday. Good Friday is a widely instituted legal holiday around the world, including in most Western countries and 12 U.S. states.[10] Some predominantly Christian countries, such as Germany, have laws prohibiting certain acts such as dancing and horse racing, in remembrance of the somber nature of Good Friday.[11][12]
Etymology[edit]
'Good Friday' comes from the sense 'pious, holy' of the word "good".[13] Less common examples of expressions based on this obsolete sense of "good" include "the good book" for the Bible, "good tide" for "Christmas" or Shrovetide, and Good Wednesday for the Wednesday in Holy Week.[14] A common folk etymology incorrectly analyzes "Good Friday" as a corruption of "God Friday" similar to the linguistically correct description of "goodbye" as a contraction of "God be with you". In Old English, the day was called "Long Friday" (langa friged g [ l   fri jed j]), and equivalents of this term are still used in Scandinavian languages and Finnish.[15]
Other languages[edit]
In Latin, the name used by the Catholic Church until 1955 was Feria sexta in Parasceve ("Friday of Preparation [for the Sabbath]"). In the 1955 reform of Holy Week, it was renamed Feria sexta in Passione et Morte Domini ("Friday of the Passion and Death of the Lord"), and in the new rite introduced in 1970, shortened to Feria sexta in Passione Domini ("Friday of the Passion of the Lord").
In Dutch, Good Friday is known as Goede Vrijdag, in Frisian as Goedfreed. In German-speaking countries, it is generally referred to as Karfreitag ("Mourning Friday", with Kar from Old High German kara  "bewail", "grieve"  "mourn", which is related to the English word "care" in the sense of cares and woes), but it is sometimes also called Stiller Freitag ("Silent Friday") and Hoher Freitag ("High Friday, Holy Friday"). In the Scandinavian languages and Finnish ("pitk perjantai"), it is called the equivalent of "Long Friday" as it was in Old English ("Langa friged g").
In Irish it is known as Aoine an Ch asta, "Friday of Crucifixion", from c as, "suffer;"[16] similarly, it is DihAoine na Ceusta in Scottish Gaelic.[17] In Welsh it is called Dydd Gwener y Groglith, "Friday of the Cross-Reading", referring to Y Groglith, a medieval Welsh text on the Crucifixion of Jesus that was traditionally read on Good Friday.[18]
In Greek, Polish, Hungarian, Romanian, Breton and Armenian it is generally referred to as the equivalent of "Great Friday" (   , Wielki Pi tek, Nagyp ntek, Vinerea Mare, Gwener ar Groaz,    ). In Serbian, it is referred either     ("Great Friday"), or, more commonly,     ("Suffer Friday"). In Bulgarian, it is called either     ("Great Friday"), or, more commonly,     ("Crucified Friday"). In French, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese it is referred to as Vendredi saint, Venerd  santo, Viernes Santo and Sexta-Feira Santa ("Holy Friday"), respectively. In Arabic and Maltese, it is known as "   " and Il- img a l-Kbira ("Great Friday") respectively. In Malayalam, it is called     ("Sad Friday").
Biblical accounts[edit]
Main articles: Passion, Crucifixion of Jesus, and Sayings of Jesus on the cross
 The Judas Kiss by Gustave Dor , 1866
Part of a series onDeath and Resurrection of Jesus
Passion
Last Supper
Arrest
Trials
Sanhedrin trial
Herod's court
Pilate's court
Flagellation
Mocking
Crown of thorns
Via Dolorosa
Crucifixion and Death
Burial
Resurrection
Empty tomb
Biblical accounts (overview)
Noli me tangere
Road to Emmaus
Great Commission
Ascension
Holy Week
Palm Sunday
Holy Monday
Holy Tuesday
Spy Wednesday
Maundy Thursday
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Sunday
Significance
Session of Christ
Salvation
Jewish eschatology
Christian eschatology
Visions of Jesus
Vision theory
Visions
Religious experience
Empty tomb theories
Stolen body
Swoon
Lost body
Twin
Related
Instrument of crucifixion
Crucifixion darkness
Conversion of Paul the Apostle
Islamic view
Portals:  Christianity  Biblevte
According to the accounts in the Gospels, the royal soldiers, guided by Jesus' disciple Judas Iscariot, arrested Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane. Judas received money (30 pieces of silver) [19] for betraying Jesus and told the guards that whomever he kisses is the one they are to arrest. Following his arrest, Jesus was taken to the house of Annas, the father-in-law of the high priest, Caiaphas. There he was interrogated with little result and sent bound to Caiaphas the high priest where the Sanhedrin had assembled.[20]
Conflicting testimony against Jesus was brought forth by many witnesses, to which Jesus answered nothing. Finally the high priest adjured Jesus to respond under solemn oath, saying "I adjure you, by the Living God, to tell us, are you the Anointed One, the Son of God?" Jesus testified ambiguously, "You have said it, and in time you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of the Almighty, coming on the clouds of Heaven." The high priest condemned Jesus for blasphemy, and the Sanhedrin concurred with a sentence of death.[21] Peter, waiting in the courtyard, also denied Jesus three times to bystanders while the interrogations were proceeding just as Jesus had foretold.
In the morning, the whole assembly brought Jesus to the Roman governor Pontius Pilate under charges of subverting the nation, opposing taxes to Caesar, and making himself a king.[22] Pilate authorized the Jewish leaders to judge Jesus according to their own law and execute sentencing; however, the Jewish leaders replied that they were not allowed by the Romans to carry out a sentence of death.[23]
Pilate questioned Jesus and told the assembly that there was no basis for sentencing. Upon learning that Jesus was from Galilee, Pilate referred the case to the ruler of Galilee, King Herod, who was in Jerusalem for the Passover Feast. Herod questioned Jesus but received no answer; Herod sent Jesus back to Pilate. Pilate told the assembly that neither he nor Herod found Jesus to be guilty; Pilate resolved to have Jesus whipped and released.[24] Under the guidance of the chief priests, the crowd asked for Barabbas, who had been imprisoned for committing murder during an insurrection. Pilate asked what they would have him do with Jesus, and they demanded, "Crucify him"[25] Pilate's wife had seen Jesus in a dream earlier that day, and she forewarned Pilate to "have nothing to do with this righteous man".[26] Pilate had Jesus flogged and then brought him out to the crowd to release him. The chief priests informed Pilate of a new charge, demanding Jesus be sentenced to death "because he claimed to be God's son." This possibility filled Pilate with fear, and he brought Jesus back inside the palace and demanded to know from where he came.[27]
 Antonio Ciseri's depiction of Ecce Homo with Jesus and Pontius Pilate, 19th century
Coming before the crowd one last time, Pilate declared Jesus innocent and washed his own hands in water to show he had no part in this condemnation. Nevertheless, Pilate handed Jesus over to be crucified in order to forestall a riot.[28] The sentence written was "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews." Jesus carried his cross to the site of execution (assisted by Simon of Cyrene), called the "place of the Skull", or "Golgotha" in Hebrew and in Latin "Calvary". There he was crucified along with two criminals.[29]
Jesus agonized on the cross for six hours. During his last three hours on the cross, from noon to 3 pm, darkness fell over the whole land.[30] In the gospels of Mathew and Mark, Jesus is said to have spoken from the cross, quoting the messianic Psalm 22: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"[31]
With a loud cry, Jesus gave up his spirit. There was an earthquake, tombs broke open, and the curtain in the Temple was torn from top to bottom. The centurion on guard at the site of crucifixion declared, "Truly this was God's Son!"[32]
Joseph of Arimathea, a member of the Sanhedrin and a secret follower of Jesus, who had not consented to his condemnation, went to Pilate to request the body of Jesus[33] Another secret follower of Jesus and member of the Sanhedrin named Nicodemus brought about a hundred-pound weight mixture of spices and helped wrap the body of Jesus.[34] Pilate asked confirmation from the centurion of whether Jesus was dead.[35] A soldier pierced the side of Jesus with a lance causing blood and water to flow out[36] and the centurion informed Pilate that Jesus was dead.[37]
Joseph of Arimathea took Jesus' body, wrapped it in a clean linen shroud, and placed it in his own new tomb that had been carved in the rock[38] in a garden near the site of the crucifixion. Nicodemus[39] also brought 75 pounds of myrrh and aloes, and placed them in the linen with the body, in keeping with Jewish burial customs[34] They rolled a large rock over the entrance of the tomb.[40] Then they returned home and rested, because Shabbat had begun at sunset.[41]
Orthodox[edit]
 Icon of the Crucifixion, 16th century, by Theophanes the Cretan (Stavronikita Monastery, Mount Athos)
Byzantine Christians (Eastern Christians who follow the Rite of Constantinople: Orthodox Christians and Greek-Catholics) call this day "Great and Holy Friday", or simply "Great Friday".[42] Because the sacrifice of Jesus through his crucifixion is recalled on this day, the Divine Liturgy (the sacrifice of bread and wine) is never celebrated on Great Friday, except when this day coincides with the Great Feast of the Annunciation, which falls on the fixed date of 25 March (for those churches which follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 25 March currently falls on 7 April of the modern Gregorian Calendar). Also on Great Friday, the clergy no longer wear the purple or red that is customary throughout Great Lent,[43] but instead don black vestments. There is no "stripping of the altar" on Holy and Great Thursday as in the West; instead, all of the church hangings are changed to black, and will remain so until the Divine Liturgy on Great Saturday.
The faithful revisit the events of the day through the public reading of specific Psalms and the Gospels, and singing hymns about Christ's death. Rich visual imagery and symbolism, as well as stirring hymnody, are remarkable elements of these observances. In the Orthodox understanding, the events of Holy Week are not simply an annual commemoration of past events, but the faithful actually participate in the death and the resurrection of Jesus. 
Each hour of this day is the new suffering and the new effort of the expiatory suffering of the Savior. And the echo of this suffering is already heard in every word of our worship service   unique and incomparable both in the power of tenderness and feeling and in the depth of the boundless compassion for the suffering of the Savior. The Holy Church opens before the eyes of believers a full picture of the redeeming suffering of the Lord beginning with the bloody sweat in the Garden of Gethsemane up to the crucifixion on Golgotha. Taking us back through the past centuries in thought, the Holy Church brings us to the foot of the cross of Christ erected on Golgotha and makes us present among the quivering spectators of all the torture of the Savior.[44]
Great and Holy Friday is observed as a strict fast, also called the Black Fast, and adult Byzantine Christians are expected to abstain from all food and drink the entire day to the extent that their health permits. "On this Holy day neither a meal is offered nor do we eat on this day of the crucifixion. If someone is unable or has become very old [or is] unable to fast, he may be given bread and water after sunset. In this way we come to the holy commandment of the Holy Apostles not to eat on Great Friday."[44]
Matins of Holy and Great Friday[edit]
The Byzantine Christian observance of Holy and Great Friday, which is formally known as The Order of Holy and Saving Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, begins on Thursday night with the Matins of the Twelve Passion Gospels. Scattered throughout this Matins service are twelve readings from all four of the Gospels which recount the events of the Passion from the Last Supper through the Crucifixion and burial of Jesus. Some churches have a candelabrum with twelve candles on it, and after each Gospel reading one of the candles is extinguished.[45]
 Good Friday cross from the Catholicon at Holy Trinity Monastery, Meteora, Greece
The first of these twelve readings[46] is the longest Gospel reading of the liturgical year, and is a concatenation from all four Gospels. Just before the sixth Gospel reading, which recounts Jesus being nailed to the cross, a large cross is carried out of the sanctuary by the priest, accompanied by incense and candles, and is placed in the center of the nave (where the congregation gathers) S meron Krem tai Ep  X lou:
Today He who hung the earth upon the waters is hung upon the Cross (three times).He who is King of the angels is arrayed in a crown of thorns.He who wraps the Heavens in clouds is wrapped in the purple of mockery. He who in Jordan set Adam free receives blows upon His face.The Bridegroom of the Church is transfixed with nails. The Son of the Virgin is pierced with a spear.We venerate Thy Passion, O Christ (three times).Show us also Thy glorious Resurrection.[47][48]
The readings are:
John 13:31-18:1   Christ's last sermon, Jesus prays for the apostles.
John 18:1 28   The agony in the garden, the mockery and denial of Christ.
Matthew 26:57 75   The mockery of Christ, Peter denies Christ.
John 18:28 19:16   Pilate questions Jesus; Jesus is condemned; Jesus is mocked by the Romans.
Matthew 27:3 32   Judas commits suicide; Jesus is condemned; Jesus mocked by the Romans; Simon of Cyrene compelled to carry the cross.
Mark 15:16 32   Jesus dies.
Matthew 27:33 54   Jesus dies.
Luke 23:32 49   Jesus dies.
John 19:25 37   Jesus dies.
Mark 15:43 47   Joseph of Arimathea buries Christ.
John 19:38 42   Joseph of Arimathea buries Christ.
Matthew 27:62 66   The Jews set a guard.
During the service, all come forward to kiss the feet of Christ on the cross. After the Canon, a brief, moving hymn, The Wise Thief is chanted by singers who stand at the foot of the cross in the center of the nave. The service does not end with the First Hour, as usual, but with a special dismissal by the priest:
May Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the world endured spitting, and scourging, and buffeting, and the Cross, and death, through the intercessions of His most pure Mother, of our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind.
Royal Hours[edit]
 Vigil during the Service of the Royal Hours
Main article: Royal Hours
The next day, in the forenoon on Friday, all gather again to pray the Royal Hours,[49] a special expanded celebration of the Little Hours (including the First Hour, Third Hour, Sixth Hour, Ninth Hour and Typica) with the addition of scripture readings (Old Testament, Epistle and Gospel) and hymns about the Crucifixion at each of the Hours (some of the material from the previous night is repeated). This is somewhat more festive in character, and derives its name of "Royal" from both the fact that the Hours are served with more solemnity than normal, commemorating Christ the King who humbled himself for the salvation of mankind, and also from the fact that this service was in the past attended by the Emperor and his court.[50]
Vespers of Holy and Great Friday[edit]
 The crucified Christ, just before the Deposition from the Cross and the placing of the Epitaphios in the Sepulchre
In the afternoon, around 3 pm, all gather for the Vespers of the Taking-Down from the Cross,[51] commemorating the Deposition from the Cross. Following Psalm 103 (104) and the Great Litany, 'Lord, I call' is sung without a Psalter reading. The first five stichera (the first being repeated) are taken from the Aposticha at Matins the night before, but the final 3 of the 5 are sung in Tone 2. Three more stichera in Tone 6 lead to the Entrance. The Evening Prokimenon is taken from Psalm 21 (22): 'They parted My garments among them, and cast lots upon My vesture.'
There are then four readings, with Prokimena before the second and fourth:
Exodus 33:11-23 - God shows Moses His glory
The second Prokimenon is from Psalm 34 (35): 'Judge them, O Lord, that wrong Me: fight against them that fight against Me.'
Job 42:12-20 - God restores Job's wealth (note that verses 18-20 are found only in the Septuagint)
Isaiah 52:13-54:1 - The fourth Suffering Servant song
The third Prokimenon is from Psalm 87 (88): 'They laid Me in the lowest pit: in dark places and in the shadow of death.'
1 Corinthians 1:18-2:2 - St. Paul places Christ crucified as the centre of the Christian life
An Alleluia is then sung, with verses from Psalm 68 (69): 'Save Me, O God: for the waters are come in, even unto My soul.'
The Gospel reading is a composite taken from three of the four the Gospels (Matthew 27:1-38; Luke 23:39-43; Matthew 27:39-54; John 19:31-37; Matthew 27:55-61), essentially the story of the Crucifixion as it appears according to St. Matthew, interspersed with St. Luke's account of the confession of the Good Thief and St. John's account of blood and water flowing from Jesus' side. During the Gospel, the body of Christ (the soma) is removed from the cross, and, as the words in the Gospel reading mention Joseph of Arimathea, is wrapped in a linen shroud, and taken to the altar in the sanctuary. The epitaphios ("winding sheet"), depicting the preparation of the body of Jesus for burial The Aposticha reflects on the burial of Christ. Either at this point (in the Greek use) or during the troparion following (in the Slav use):
Noble Joseph, taking down Thy most pure body from the Tree, wrapped it in pure linen and spices, and he laid it in a new tomb.[52]
an epitaphios or "winding sheet" (a cloth embroidered with the image of Christ prepared for burial) is carried in procession to a low table in the nave which represents the Tomb of Christ; it is often decorated with an abundance of flowers. The epitaphios itself represents the body of Jesus wrapped in a burial shroud, and is a roughly full-size cloth icon of the body of Christ. The service ends with a hope of the Resurrection:
The Angel stood by the tomb, and to the women bearing spices he cried aloud: 'Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ has shown Himself a stranger to corruption.[52]
Then the priest may deliver a homily and everyone comes forward to venerate the epitaphios. In the Slavic practice, at the end of Vespers, Compline is immediately served, featuring a special Canon of the Crucifixion of our Lord and the Lamentation of the Most Holy Theotokos by Symeon the Logothete.[53]
Matins of Holy and Great Saturday[edit]
 The Epitaphios being carried in procession in a church in Greece.
On Friday night, the Matins of Holy and Great Saturday, a unique service known as The Lamentation at the Tomb[54] (Epit phios Thr nos) is celebrated. This service is also sometimes called Jerusalem Matins. Much of the service takes place around the tomb of Christ in the center of the nave.[55]
 Epitaphios adorned for veneration, Church of Saints Constantine and Helen, Hippodromion Sq., Thessaloniki, Greece
A unique feature of the service is the chanting of the Lamentations or Praises (Enk mia), which consist of verses chanted by the clergy interspersed between the verses of Psalm 119 (which is, by far, the longest psalm in the Bible). The Enk mia are the best-loved hymns of Byzantine hymnography, both their poetry and their music being uniquely suited to each other and to the spirit of the day.[56]
They consist of 185 tercet antiphons arranged in three parts (st seis or "stops"), which are interjected with the verses of Psalm 119, and nine short doxastik  ("Gloriae") and Theot kia (invocations to the Virgin Mary). The three st seis are each set to its own music, and are commonly known by their initial antiphons:        , "Life in a grave",    , "Worthy it is", and      , "All the generations". Musically they can be classified as strophic, with 75, 62, and 48 tercet stanzas each, respectively.[57]
The climax of the Enk mia comes during the third st sis, with the antiphon "  glyk  mou  ar", a lamentation of the Virgin for her dead Child ("O, my sweet spring, my sweetest child, where has your beauty gone?"). Later, during a different antiphon of that stasis ("Early in the morning the myrrh-bearers came to Thee and sprinkled myrrh upon Thy tomb"), young girls of the parish place flowers on the Epitaphios and the priest sprinkles it with rose-water. The author(s) and date of the Enk mia are unknown. Their High Attic linguistic style suggests a dating around the 6th century, possibly before the time of St. Romanos the Melodist.[58]
 The Epitaphios mounted upon return of procession, at an Orthodox Church in Adelaide, Australia.
The  Evlogitaria (Benedictions) of the Resurrection are sung as on Sunday, since they refer to the  conversation between the myrrh-bearers and the angel in the tomb, followed by kathismata about the burial of Christ. Psalm 50 (51) is then immediately read, and then followed by a much loved-canon, written by Mark the Monk, Bishop of Hydrous and Kosmas of the Holy City, with irmoi by Kassiani the Nun. The high-point of the much-loved Canon is Ode 9, which takes the form of a dialogue between Christ and the Theotokos, with Christ promising His Mother the hope of the Resurrection. This Canon will be sung again the following night at the Midnight Office.
Lauds follows, and its stichera take the form of a funeral lament, while always preserving the hope of the Resurrection. The doxasticon links Christ's rest in the tomb with His rest on the seventh day of creation, and the theotokion ("Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos...) is the same as is used on Sundays.
At the end of the Great Doxology, while the Trisagion is sung, the epitaphios is taken in procession around the outside the church, and is then returned to the tomb. Some churches observe the practice of holding the epitaphios at the door, above waist level, so the faithful most bow down under it as they come back into the church, symbolizing their entering into the death and resurrection of Christ. The epitaphios will lay in the tomb until the Paschal Service early Sunday morning. In some churches, the epitaphios is never left alone, but is accompanied 24 hours a day by a reader chanting from the Psalter.[citation needed]
When the procession has returned to the church, a troparion is read, similar to hthe ones read at the Sixth Hour throughout Lent, focusing on the purpose of Christ's burial. A series of prokimena and readings are then said:
The first prokimenon is from Psalm 43 (44): 'Arise, Lord, and help us: and deliver us for Thy Name's sake.'
Ezekiel 37:1-14 - God tells Ezekiel to command bones to come to life.
The second prokimenon is from Psalm 9 (9-10), and is based on the verses sung at the kathismata and Lauds on Sundays: 'Arise, O Lord my God, lift up Thine hand: forget not Thy poor forever.'
1 Corinthians 5:6-8; Galatians 3:13-14 - St. Paul celebrates the Passion of Christ and explains its role in the life of Gentile Christians.
The Alleluia verses are from Psalm 67 (68), and are based on the Paschal verses: 'Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered.'
Matthew 27:62-66 - The Pharisees ask Pilate to set a watch at the tomb.
At the end of the service, a final hymn is sung as the faithful come to venerate the Epitaphios.
Roman Catholic[edit]
Day of Fasting[edit]
 Crucifix prepared for veneration
The Catholic Church regards Good Friday and Holy Saturday as the Paschal fast, in accordance with Article 110 of Sacrosanctum Concilium.[59] In the Latin Church, a fast day is understood as having only one full meal and two collations (a smaller repast, the two of which together do not equal the one full meal)[60][61]   although this may be observed less stringently on Holy Saturday than on Good Friday.[59]
Services on the day[edit]
The Roman Rite has no celebration of Mass between the Lord's Supper on Holy Thursday evening and the Easter Vigil unless a special exemption is granted for rare solemn or grave occasions by the Vatican or the local bishop. The only sacraments celebrated during this time are Baptism (for those in danger of death), Penance, and Anointing of the Sick.[62] While there is no celebration of the Eucharist, it is distributed to the faithful only in the Celebration of the Lord's Passion, but can also be taken at any hour to the sick who are unable to attend this celebration.[63]
The Celebration of the Passion of the Lord takes place in the afternoon, ideally at three o'clock; however, for pastoral reasons (especially in countries where Good Friday is not a public holiday), it is permissible to celebrate the liturgy earlier,[64] even shortly after midday, or at a later hour.[65] The celebration consists of three parts: the liturgy of the word, the adoration of the cross, and the Holy communion.[66] The altar is bare, without cross, candlesticks and altar cloths.[67] It is also customary to empty the holy water fonts in preparation of the blessing of the water at the Easter Vigil.[68] Traditionally, no bells are rung on Good Friday or Holy Saturday until the Easter Vigil.[69]
The liturgical colour of the vestments used is red.[70] Before 1970, vestments were black except for the Communion part of the rite when violet was used.[71] If a bishop or abbot celebrates, he wears a plain mitre (mitra simplex).[72] Before the reforms of the Holy Week liturgies in 1955, black was used throughout.
The Vespers of Good Friday are only prayed by those who could not attend the Celebration of the Passion of the Lord.[73]
Three Hours' Agony[edit]
Main article: Three Hours' Agony
The Three Hours' Devotion based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross begins at noon and ends at 3 pm, the time that the Christian tradition teaches that Jesus died on the cross.[74]
Liturgy[edit]
 The Great Intercessions are sung at Heiligenkreuz Abbey, Austria
The Good Friday liturgy consists of three parts: the Liturgy of the Word, the Veneration of the Cross, and the Holy Communion.
The Liturgy of the Word consists of the clergy and assisting ministers entering in complete silence, without any singing. They then silently make a full prostration. This signifies the abasement (the fall) of (earthly) humans.[75] It also symbolizes the grief and sorrow of the Church.[76] Then follows the Collect prayer, and the reading or chanting of Isaiah 52:13 53:12, Hebrews 4:14 16, Hebrews 5:7 9, and the Passion account from the Gospel of John, traditionally divided between three deacons,[77] yet usually read by the celebrant and two other readers. In the older form of the Mass known as the Tridentine Mass the readings for Good Friday are taken from Exodus 12:1-11 and the Gospel according to St. John (John 18:1-40); (John 19:1-42).
The Great Intercessions also known as orationes sollemnes immediately follows the Liturgy of the Word and consists of a series of prayers for the Church, the Pope, the clergy and laity of the Church, those preparing for baptism, the unity of Christians, the Jews, those who do not believe in Christ, those who do not believe in God, those in public office, and those in special need.[78] After each prayer intention, the deacon calls the faithful to kneel for a short period of private prayer; the celebrant then sums up the prayer intention with a Collect-style prayer. As part of the pre-1955 Holy Week Liturgy, the kneeling was omitted only for the prayer for the Jews.[79]
The Adoration of the Cross has a crucifix, not necessarily the one that is normally on or near the altar at other times of the year, solemnly unveiled and displayed to the congregation, and then venerated by them, individually if possible and usually by kissing the wood of the cross, while hymns and the Improperia ("Reproaches") with the Trisagion hymn are chanted.[80]
Holy Communion is bestowed according to a rite based on that of the final part of Mass, beginning with the Lord's Prayer, but omitting the ceremony of "Breaking of the Bread" and its related acclamation, the Agnus Dei. The Eucharist, consecrated at the Evening Mass of the Lord's Supper on Holy Thursday, is distributed at this service.[81] Before the Holy Week reforms of Pope Pius XII in 1955, only the priest received Communion in the framework of what was called the Mass of the Presanctified, which included the usual Offertory prayers, with the placing of wine in the chalice, but which omitted the Canon of the Mass.[79] The priest and people then depart in silence, and the altar cloth is removed, leaving the altar bare except for the crucifix and two or four candlesticks.[82]
Stations of the Cross[edit]
 The Way of the Cross, celebrated at the Colosseum in Rome on Good Friday
 Canopy erected at the "Temple of Venus and Rome" during the "Way of the Cross" ceremony in Rome.
In addition to the prescribed liturgical service, the Stations of the Cross are often prayed either in the church or outside, and a prayer service may be held from midday to 3.00 pm, known as the Three Hours' Agony. In countries such as Malta, Italy, Philippines, Puerto Rico and Spain, processions with statues representing the Passion of Christ are held.[citation needed]
In Rome, since the papacy of John Paul II, the heights of the Temple of Venus and Roma and their position opposite the main entrance to the Colosseum have been used to good effect as a public address platform. This may be seen in the photograph below where a red canopy has been erected to shelter the Pope as well as an illuminated cross, on the occasion of the Way of the Cross ceremony. The Pope, either personally or through a representative, leads the faithful through meditations on the stations of the cross while a cross is carried from there to the Colosseum.[83]
Novena to the Divine Mercy[edit]
The Novena to the Divine Mercy begins on that day and lasts until the Saturday before the Feast of Mercy. Both holidays are strictly connected, as the mercy of God flows from the Heart of Jesus that was pierced on the Cross.[84][85]
Protestant[edit]
Lutheran Church[edit]
 The chancel of this Lutheran church is adorned with black paraments on Good Friday, the liturgical colour associated with Good Friday in the Lutheran Churches.
In Lutheran tradition from the 16th to the 20th century, Good Friday was the most important religious holiday, and abstention from all worldly works was expected. During that time, Lutheranism had no restrictions on the celebration of the Eucharist on Good Friday; on the contrary, it was a prime day on which to receive the Eucharist, and services were often accentuated by special music such as the St Matthew Passion by Johann Sebastian Bach.[86]
 Good Friday service in a Lutheran church in Hanover, Germany, 2014.
More recently, Lutheran liturgical practice has recaptured Good Friday as part of the larger sweep of the great Three Days: Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and the Vigil of Easter. The three days remain one liturgy which celebrates the death and resurrection of Jesus. As part of the liturgy of the three days, Lutherans generally fast from the Eucharist on Good Friday. Rather, it is celebrated in remembrance of the Last Supper on Maundy Thursday and at the Vigil of Easter. One practice among Lutheran churches is to celebrate a tenebrae service on Good Friday, typically conducted in candlelight and consisting of a collection of passion accounts from the four gospels. While being called "Tenebrae" it holds little resemblance to the now-suppressed Catholic monastic rite of the same name.[87]
The Good Friday liturgy appointed in Evangelical Lutheran Worship, the worship book of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, specifies a liturgy similar to the revised Roman Catholic liturgy. A rite for adoration of the crucified Christ includes the optional singing of the Solemn Reproaches in an updated and revised translation which eliminates some of the anti-Jewish overtones in previous versions. Many Lutheran churches have Good Friday services, such as the Three Hours' Agony centered on the remembrance of the "Seven Last Words," sayings of Jesus assembled from the four gospels, while others hold a liturgy that places an emphasis on the triumph of the cross, and a singular biblical account of the Passion narrative from the Gospel of John.[citation needed]
Along with observing a general Lenten fast,[86] many Lutherans emphasize the importance of Good Friday as a day of fasting within the calendar.[6][7] A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent recommends the Lutheran guideline to "Fast on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday with only one simple meal during the day, usually without meat".[88]
Anglican Communion[edit]
The 1662 Book of Common Prayer did not specify a particular rite to be observed on Good Friday but local custom came to mandate an assortment of services, including the Seven Last Words from the Cross and a three-hour service consisting of Matins, Ante-communion (using the Reserved Sacrament in high church parishes) and Evensong. In recent times,[when?] revised editions of the Prayer Book and Common Worship have re-introduced pre-Reformation forms of observance of Good Friday corresponding to those in today's Roman Catholic Church, with special nods to the rites that had been observed in the Church of England prior to the Henrican, Edwardian and Elizabethan reforms, including Creeping to the Cross.[citation needed]
Methodist Church[edit]
 A United Methodist minister prostrates at the start of the Good Friday liturgy at Holy Family Church, in accordance with the rubrics in the Book of Worship. The processional cross is veiled in black, the liturgical colour associated with Good Friday in Methodist Churches.
 Altar and cross veiled in a Methodist church on Maundy Thursday in preparation for Good Friday.
Some Methodist denominations commemorate Good Friday with fasting,[5][89] as well as a service of worship based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross; this liturgy is known as the Three Hours Devotion as it starts at noon and concludes at 3 pm, the latter being the time that Jesus died on the cross.[90][91]
On Maundy Thursday, the altar and the cross are usually veiled in black for Good Friday, as black is the liturgical colour for Good Friday in the United Methodist Church. A wooden cross may sit in front of the bare chancel.[92]
Moravian Church[edit]
Moravians hold a Lovefeast on Good Friday as they receive Holy Communion on Maundy Thursday.
Communicants of the Moravian Church practice the Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemeteries.[9]
Reformed Churches[edit]
In the Reformed tradition, Good Friday is one of the evangelical feasts and is thus widely observed with church services, which feature the Solemn Reproaches in the pattern of Psalm 78, towards the end of the liturgy.[93]
Other Christian traditions[edit]
Many Protestant churches hold an Interdenominational service with Lord's Supper. [94]
Associated customs[edit]
 Good Friday service in a Catholic Church, Ireland
In many countries and territories with a strong Christian tradition such as Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Canada, the countries of the Caribbean, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand,[95][96][97] Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela, the day is observed as a public or federal holiday. In the United States, 12 states observe Good Friday as state holiday: Connecticut, Texas, Delaware, Hawaii, Indiana, Tennessee, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina and North Dakota. One associated custom is strict adherence to the Black Fast to 3pm or 6pm,[98] where only water can be consumed or restricted handout of bread, herbs and salt. St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom and St. Basil attest to the practice. 
The processions of the day, hymns "Crux fidelis" by King John of Portugal, and Eberlin's "Tenebrae factae sunt", followed by "Vexilla Regis" is sung, translated from Latin as the standards of the King advance, and then follows a ceremony that is not a real Mass, it is called the "Mass of the Pre-Sanctified.". This custom is respected also by forgoing the Mass, this is to take heed to the solemnity of the Sacrifice of Calvary. This is where the host of the prior day is placed at the altar, incensed, elevated so "that it may be seen by the people" and consumed. Germany and some other countries have laws prohibiting certain acts, such as dancing and horse racing, that are seen as profaning the solemn nature of the day.[11][12]
Australia[edit]
Good Friday is a holiday under state and territory laws in all states and territories in Australia.[99] Generally speaking, shops in all Australian states (but not in the two territories of the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory) are required to remain closed for the duration of Good Friday, although there are certain shops which are permitted to open and other shops can apply for exemptions. All schools and universities close on Good Friday in Australia, and Good Friday falls within the school holidays in most years in all states and territories except the Northern Territory, although many states now commence their school holidays in early April regardless of Easter. In 2018, for example, when Good Friday fell on 30 March, only Queensland and Victoria had school holidays which coincided with Good Friday.[100] The vast majority of businesses are closed on Good Friday, although many recreational businesses, such as the Sydney Royal Easter Show, open on Good Friday as among non-religious families Good Friday is a popular day to indulge in such activities.
Canada[edit]
 The descent from the cross, commemorated in Vespers of Holy and Great Friday, Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Toronto, Canada
In Canada, Good Friday is a federal statutory holiday. In the province of Quebec "employers can choose to give the day off either on Good Friday or Easter Monday."[101]
Cuba[edit]
In an online article posted on Catholic News Agency by Alejandro Berm dez on 31 March 2012, Cuban President Ra l Castro, with the Communist Party and his advisers, decreed that Good Friday that year would be a holiday. This was Castro's response to a request made personally to him by Pope Benedict XVI during the latter's Apostolic Visitation to the island and Le n, Mexico that month. The move followed the pattern of small advances in Cuba's relations with the Vatican, mirroring Pope John Paul II's success in getting Fidel Castro to declare Christmas Day a holiday.[102] Both Good Friday and Christmas are now annual holidays in Cuba.
Hong Kong[edit]
In Hong Kong, Good Friday was designated a public holiday in the Holidays Ordinance, 1875.[103] Good Friday continues to be a holiday after the transfer of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997.[104] Government offices, banks, post offices and most offices are closed on Good Friday.
Ireland[edit]
In the Republic of Ireland, Good Friday is not an official public holiday, but most non-retail businesses close for the day. Up until 2018 it was illegal to sell alcoholic beverages on Good Friday, with some exceptions, so pubs and off-licences generally closed.[105] Critics of the ban included the catering and tourism sector, but surveys showed that the general public were divided on the issue.[106][107] In Northern Ireland, a similar ban operates until 5 pm on Good Friday.[108]
Malaysia[edit]
Although Malaysia is a Muslim majority country, Good Friday is declared as a public holiday in the states of Sabah and Sarawak in East Malaysia as there is a significant Christian indigenous population in both states.[109]
Malta[edit]
 Holy Week procession in Malta
The Holy Week commemorations reach their peak on Good Friday as the Roman Catholic Church celebrates the passion of Jesus. Solemn celebrations take place in all churches together with processions in different villages around Malta and Gozo. During the celebration, the narrative of the passion is read in some localities, while the Adoration of the Cross follows. Good Friday processions take place in Birgu, Bormla, G axaq, Luqa, Mosta, Naxxar, Paola, Qormi, Rabat, Senglea, Valletta,  ebbu  (Citt  Rohan) and  ejtun. Processions in Gozo will be in Nadur, Victoria (St. George and Cathedral), Xag ra and  ebbu , Gozo.[citation needed]
New Zealand[edit]
In New Zealand, Good Friday is a legal holiday[110] and is a day of mandatory school closure for all New Zealand state and integrated schools.[111] Good Friday is also a restricted trading day in New Zealand, which means that unexempted shops are not permitted to open on this day.[112]
Philippines[edit]
In the predominantly Roman Catholic Philippines, the day is commemorated with street processions, the Way of the Cross, the chanting of the Pasy n, and performances of the Sen kulo or Passion play. Some devotees engage in self-flagellation and even have themselves crucified as expressions of penance despite health risks and strong disapproval from the Church.[113]
Church bells are not rung and Masses are not celebrated, while television features movies, documentaries and other shows focused on the religious event and other topics related to the Catholic faith, broadcasting mostly religious content. Malls and shops are generally closed, as are restaurants as it is the second of three public holidays within the week.[citation needed]
After three o'clock in the afternoon (the time at which Jesus is traditionally believed to have died), the faithful venerate the cross in the local church and follow the procession of the Burial of Jesus.[citation needed]
In Cebu and many parts of the Visayan Islands, people usually eat binignit and biko as a form of fasting.[114][115]
Poland[edit]
In Polish churches, a tableau of Christ's Tomb is unveiled in the sanctuary. Many of the faithful spend long hours into the night grieving at the Tomb, where it is customary to kiss the wounds on the Lord's body. A life-size figure of Jesus lying in his tomb is widely visited by the faithful, especially on Holy Saturday. The tableaux may include flowers, candles, figures of angels standing watch, and the three crosses atop Mt Calvary, and much more. Each parish strives to come up with the most artistically and religiously evocative arrangement in which the Blessed Sacrament, draped in a filmy veil, is prominently displayed.[citation needed]
Singapore[edit]
Good Friday is a public holiday in Singapore.[116][117]
Spain[edit]
 Nazarenos wearing capirotes, in M laga, Spain
Main articles: Holy Week in Spain, Holy Week in M laga, Holy Week in Seville, Holy Week in Valladolid, Holy Week in Viveiro, and Holy Week in Zamora
United Kingdom[edit]
 Hot cross buns are traditionally toasted and eaten on Good Friday in Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.[118]
In the UK, Good Friday was historically a common law holiday and is recognised as an official public holiday[119] (also known as a Bank Holiday). All state schools are closed and most businesses treat it as a holiday for staff; however, many retail stores now remain open. Government services in Northern Ireland operate as normal on Good Friday, substituting Easter Tuesday for the holiday.
There has traditionally been no horse racing on Good Friday in the UK. However, in 2008, betting shops and stores opened for the first time on this day[120] and in 2014 Lingfield Park and Musselburgh staged the UK's first Good Friday race meetings.[121][122] The BBC has for many years introduced its 7 am News broadcast on Radio 4 on Good Friday with a verse from Isaac Watts' hymn "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross".
The tradition of Easter plays include 1960 Eastertime performance of Good Friday: A Play in Verse (1916) Artists Ursula O'Leary (Procula), and William Devlin as Pontius Pilate, perform with the atmospheric sound effects of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. The Hugh Stewart production for the Home Service used soundware such as the EMS Synthi 100 and ARP Odyssey l.[123]
United States[edit]
In the United States, Good Friday is not a government holiday at the federal level; however, individual states, counties and municipalities may observe the holiday. Good Friday is a state holiday in Connecticut,[124] Delaware,[125] Florida,[126] Hawaii,[127] Indiana,[128] Kentucky (half-day),[129] Louisiana,[130] New Jersey,[131] North Carolina,[132] North Dakota,[133] Tennessee[134] and Texas.[135][136] State and local government offices and courts are closed, as well as some banks and post offices in these states, and in those counties and municipalities where Good Friday is observed as a holiday. Good Friday is also a holiday in the U.S. territories of Guam,[137] U.S. Virgin Islands[138] and Puerto Rico.[139]
The stock markets are closed on Good Friday,[140][141] but the foreign exchange and bond trading markets open for a partial business day.[142][143] Most retail stores remain open, while some of them may close early. Public schools and universities are often closed on Good Friday, either as a holiday of its own, or as part of spring break. The postal service operates, and banks regulated by the federal government do not close for Good Friday.[144]
In some governmental contexts Good Friday has been referred to by a generic name such as "spring holiday".[145][146][147] In 1999, in the case of Bridenbaugh v. O'Bannon, an Indiana state employee sued the governor for giving state employees Good Friday as a day off. The US Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against the plaintiff, stating that the government could give state employees a paid day off when that day is a religious holiday, including Good Friday, but only so long as the state can provide a valid secular purpose that coincides with the obvious religious purpose of the holiday.[148]
Calculating the date[edit]
See also: Date of Easter
Dates for Good Friday, 2020 2035
Year
Western
Eastern
2020
April 10
April 17
2021
April 2
April 30
2022
April 15
April 22
2023
April 7
April 14
2024
March 29
May 3
2025
April 18
April 18
2026
April 3
April 10
2027
March 26
April 30
2028
April 14
April 14
2029
March 30
April 6
2030
April 19
April 26
2031
April 11
April 11
2032
March 26
April 30
2033
April 15
April 22
2034
April 7
April 7
2035
March 23
April 27
Good Friday is the Friday before Easter, which is calculated differently in Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity (see Computus for details). Easter falls on the first Sunday following the Paschal Full Moon, the full moon on or after 21 March, taken to be the date of the vernal equinox. The Western calculation uses the Gregorian calendar, while the Eastern calculation uses the Julian calendar, whose 21 March now corresponds to the Gregorian calendar's 3 April. The calculations for identifying the date of the full moon also differ.[citation needed]
In Eastern Christianity, Easter can fall between 22 March and 25 April on Julian Calendar (thus between 4 April and 8 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar, during the period 1900 and 2099), so Good Friday can fall between 20 March and 23 April, inclusive (or between 2 April and 6 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar).[citation needed]
 Good Friday and other named days and day ranges around Lent and Easter in Western Christianity, with the fasting days of Lent numbered
Cultural references[edit]
Good Friday assumes a particular importance in the plot of Richard Wagner's music drama Parsifal, which contains an orchestral interlude known as the "Good Friday Music".[149]
Memoration on Wednesday of the Holy Week[edit]
Some Baptist congregations,[150] the Philadelphia Church of God,[151] and some non-denominational churches oppose the observance of Good Friday, regarding it as a so-called "papist" tradition, and instead observe the Crucifixion of Jesus on Wednesday to coincide with the Jewish sacrifice of the Passover Lamb (which some/many Christians believe is an Old Testament pointer to Jesus Christ). A Wednesday Crucifixion of Jesus allows for him to be in the tomb ("heart of the earth") for three days and three nights as he told the Pharisees he would be (Matthew 12:40), rather than two nights and a day (by inclusive counting, as was the norm at that time) if he had died on a Friday.[152][153]
Further support for a Wednesday crucifixion based on Matthew 12:40 includes the Jewish belief that death was not considered official until the beginning of the fourth day, which is disallowed with the traditional Friday afternoon to Sunday morning period of time. As "the Jews require a sign" (1 Corinthians 1:22), the resurrection of Christ is thus invalidated with the shorter interval, since it can thus be claimed that Christ could have only 'swooned,' rather than actually died.
See also[edit]
Christianity portalHolidays portal
Good Friday Prayer
Good Friday Prayer for the Jews
Easter season
Passion (music)
Ascension of Jesus
Life of Jesus in the New Testament
Salvation in Christianity
References[edit]
^ Selected Christian Observances, 2023, U.S. Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications Department
^ The Chambers Dictionary. Allied Publishers. 2002. p. 639. ISBN 978-81-86062-25-8. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
^ Elizabeth Webber; Mike Feinsilber (1999). Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of Allusions. Merriam-Webster. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-87779-628-2. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
^ Franklin M. Segler; Randall Bradley (2006). Christian Worship: Its Theology And Practice. B&H Publishing Group. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-8054-4067-6. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
^ a b Ripley, George; Dana, Charles Anderson (1883). The American Cyclopaedia: A Popular Dictionary for General Knowledge. D. Appleton and Company. p. 101. The Protestant Episcopal, Lutheran, and Reformed churches, as well as many Methodists, observe the day by fasting and special services.
^ a b Pfatteicher, Philip H. (1990). Commentary on the Lutheran Book of Worship: Lutheran Liturgy in Its Ecumenical Context. Augsburg Fortress Publishers. pp. 223 244, 260. ISBN 978-0800603922. The Good Friday fast became the principal fast in the calendar, and even after the Reformation in Germany many Lutherans who observed no other fast scrupulously kept Good Friday with strict fasting.
^ a b Jacobs, Henry Eyster; Haas, John Augustus William (1899). The Lutheran Cyclopedia. Scribner. p. 110. By many Lutherans Good Friday is observed as a strict fast. The lessons on Ash Wednesday emphasize the proper idea of the fast. The Sundays in Lent receive their names from the first words of their Introits in the Latin service, Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Lcetare, Judica.
^ "What is the significance of Good Friday?". The Free Press Journal. 2 April 2021. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ a b "PHOTOS: Cleaning Moravian gravestones, a Good Friday tradition". Winston-Salem Journal. 10 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.[permanent dead link]
^ Harper's New Monthly Magazine, Volume 36, Issue 214. Harper & Brothers. 1868. p. 521. In England Good-Friday and Christmas are the only close holidays of the year when the shops are all closed and the churches opened.
^ a b Petre, Jonathan (21 March 2008). "Good Friday gambling anger churches". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Bookmakers estimate that thousands of shops will be operating, even though Good Friday is one of three days in the year when no horse racing takes place.
^ a b Stevens, Laura (29 March 2013). "In Germany, Some Want to Boogie Every Day of the Year". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 11 July 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017. Every year on Good Friday, Germany becomes a little like the fictional town in the movie 'Footloose'   dancing is verboten. The decades-old 'Tanzverbot,' or dance ban, applies to all clubs, discos and other forms of organized dancing in all German states.
^ "Good Friday   Definition of Good Friday in the American Heritage Dictionary". Yourdictionary.com. 4 April 2014. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Home: Oxford English Dictionary". Oed.com. Archived from the original on 27 December 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Svensk etymologisk ordbok 434". runeberg.org. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021.
^ Ireland, The Educational Company of (10 October 2000). Irish-English/English-Irish Easy Reference Dictionary. Roberts Rinehart. ISBN 9781461660316   via Google Books.
^ Mark, Colin B. D. (2 September 2003). The Gaelic-English Dictionary. Routledge. ISBN 9781134430604   via Google Books.
^ Wales, National Library of (15 April 1946). "Cylchgrawn Llyfrgell Genedlaethol Cymru". National Library of Wales   via Google Books.
^ Matthew 26:14 16)
^ John 18:1 24
^ Matthew 26:57 66
^ Luke 23:1 2
^ John 18:31
^ Luke 23:3 16
^ Mark 15:6 14
^ Matthew 27:19
^ John 19:1 9
^ Matthew 27:24 26
^ John 19:17 22)
^ Matthew 27:45; Mark 15:13; Luke 23:44
^ Matthew 27:45; Mark 15:34
^ Matthew 27:45 54
^ Luke 23:50 52
^ a b John 19:39 40
^ Mark 15:44
^ John 19:34
^ Mark 15:45
^ Matthew 27:59 60
^ John 3:1
^ Matthew 27:60
^ Luke 23:54 56
^ Gerald O'Collins, Edward G. Farrugia (2013). A Concise Dictionary of Theology. Paulist Press. p. 108. ISBN 978-1-587-68236-0.
^ There is a wide variety of uses regarding the liturgical colors worn during Great Lent and Holy Week in the Rite of Constantinople.
^ a b Bulgakov, Sergei V. (1900). "Great Friday". Handbook for Church Servers (PDF) (2nd ed.). Kharkov: Tr. Archpriest Eugene D. Tarris. p. 543. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2015.
^ "Matins for Great and Holy Friday" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2021.
^ John 13:31 18:1
^ Archimandrite Kallistos (Ware) and Mother Mary (2002). "Service of the Twelve Gospels". The Lenten Triodion. South Cannan, PA: St. Tikhon's Seminary Press. p. 587.
^ Today He who hung the earth upon the waters  Archived 7 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Chanted by the Byzantine Choir of Athens
^ "Royal Hours". YouTube. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2019.
^ "What happened on Good Friday? The Easter story explained". Metro. 30 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 October 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2020.
^ "Vespers of the Taking-Down from the Cross". YouTube. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2019.
^ a b Ware, Kallistos; Mother Mary (1977). The Lenten Triodion. South Canaan, PA: St Tikhon's Seminary Press. p. 616. ISBN 1-878997-51-3.
^ "Good Friday | Definition, History, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2 May 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2020.
^ "The Lamentation at the Tomb". YouTube. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2019.
^ "History of Good Friday   Good Friday Story, Eastergoodfriday.com". www.eastergoodfriday.com. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2020.
^ Maunder, Chris (7 August 2019). The Oxford Handbook of Mary. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-879255-0.
^ Maunder, Chris (7 August 2019). The Oxford Handbook of Mary. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-879255-0.
^ Maunder, Chris (7 August 2019). The Oxford Handbook of Mary. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-879255-0.
^ a b "Sacrosanctum concilium". Archived from the original on 21 February 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2017.
^ "Fast & Abstinence". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2017.
^ "Fasting and Abstinence" (PDF). Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales. 24 January 1985. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2017.
^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 1.
^ The Holy Week Missal, Friday of the Passion of the Lord No. 2
^ "V. Good Friday". The Catholic Liturgical Library. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2018.
^ The Holy Week Missal, Friday of the Passion of the Lord No. 4
^ The Holy Week Missal, Friday of the Passion of the Lord No. 4
^ The Holy Week Missal, Friday of the Passion of the Lord No. 3
^ "Removing Holy Water During Lent. Letter of the Congregation for Divine Worship". 14 March 2003. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2008.
^ "Good Friday   Easter/Lent". Catholic Online. 12 January 2018. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2018.
^ The Holy Week Missal, Friday of the Passion of the Lord No. 5
^ 1962 edition of the Roman Missal Archived 26 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Caeremoniale Episcoporum, 315.
^ The General Instruction on the Liturgy of the Hours, No. 209
^ Robert Barron. "Tre Ore - The Three Hours' Agony". Word on Fire. Archived from the original on 1 October 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2019. 'The Three Hours' Agony' or Tre Ore is a liturgical service held on Good Friday from noon until 3 o'clock to commemorate the Passion of Christ. Specifically, it refers to the three hours that Jesus hung on the Cross and includes a series of homilies on the seven last words spoken by Christ.
^ Roman Missal, "Good Friday", Celebration of the Lord's Passion, n. 5.
^ Circular Letter Concerning the Preparation and Celebration of the Easter Feasts, V. Good Friday Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, 16 January 1988, Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship.
^ Congregation of Divine Worship and Discipline of the Sacraments, Paschale Solemnitatis, III, n. 66 (cf. n. 33)
^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 7 13.
^ a b "Compendium of the 1955 Holy Week Revisions". Archived from the original on 21 August 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2020.
^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 14 21.
^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 22 31.
^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 32 33.
^ "Traditional Via Crucis at the Colosseum in Rome". ITALY Magazine. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021.
^ "Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy". Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2019.
^ "Saint Faustina". Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 28 April 2019.
^ a b Gassmann, G nther; Oldenburg, Mark W. (2011). Historical Dictionary of Lutheranism. Scarecrow Press. p. 229. ISBN 978-0810874824. In many Lutheran churches, the Sundays during the Lenten season are called by the first word of their respective Latin Introitus (with the exception of Palm/Passion Sunday): Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Laetare, and Judica. Many Lutheran church orders of the 16th century retained the observation of the Lenten fast, and Lutherans have observed this season with a serene, earnest attitude. Special days of eucharistic communion were set aside on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday.
^ "A Word About Tenebrae |". Historiclectionary.com. 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 6 October 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ Weitzel, Thomas L. (1978). "A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent" (PDF). Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
^ Bays, Daniel H; Wacker, Grant (2010). The Foreign Missionary Enterprise at Home: Explorations in North American Cultural History. University of Alabama Press. p. 277. ISBN 978-0817356408.
^ The United Methodist Book of Worship: Regular Edition Black. United Methodist Publishing House. 2016. p. 365. ISBN 978-1426735004.
^ "Christians mark Good Friday". The Daily Reflector. Archived from the original on 30 March 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
^ The United Methodist Book of Worship: Regular Edition Black. United Methodist Publishing House. 2016. p. 363. ISBN 978-1426735004. ...a plain wooden cross may now be brought into the church and placed in the sight of the people. ... During Silent Meditation and The Reproaches, persons may be invited to come forward informally to kneel briefly before the cross or touch it.
^ "Good Friday". Reformed Church in America. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 8 March 2018.
^  Britannica, Encyclopedia of World Religions, Encyclopaedia Britannica, USA, 2008, p. 309
^ Holidays Act 2003 (New Zealand), Section 17 Days that are public holidays Archived 5 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ Shop Trading Hours Act Repeal Act 1990 (New Zealand), Section 3 Shops to be closed on Anzac Day morning, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, and Christmas Day Archived 18 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ Broadcasting Act 1989 (New Zealand), Section 79A Hours during which election programmes prohibited Archived 26 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Section 81 Advertising hours Archived 18 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ "The Black Fast". Catholic Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2019.
^ "Public holidays   australia.gov.au". Archived from the original on 14 April 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2016.
^ "School Term Dates". australia.gov.au. Archived from the original on 14 April 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2018.
^ "Statutory holidays in Canada both national and provincial". Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2022.
^ "Cuban authorities declare Good Friday 2012 a holiday". Catholic News Agency. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "The Holidays Ordinance, 1875" (PDF). 7 July 1875. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2021.
^ "GovHK: General holidays for 2007   2022". Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 26 December 2017.
^ Gleeson, Colin (2 April 2010). "You can have a pint today   if you know where to look". Irish Independent. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2015.
^ Hade, Emma Jane (2 April 2015). "Good Friday alcohol ban still splits public as only half want it abolished". Irish Independent. Archived from the original on 1 May 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2015.
^ 'Times have changed a lot'   one of Ireland's oldest barmaids (98) pulls pints for the first time on Good Friday Archived 3 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine independent.ie, 30 March 2018
^ Coulter, Peter (23 March 2016). "Pub owners frustrated at assembly failure to change Easter opening hours". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2016.
^ Michael Ipgrave (2008). Building a Better Bridge: Muslims, Christians, and the Common Good : a Record of the Fourth Building Bridges Seminar Held in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, May 15 18, 2005. Georgetown University Press. pp. 109 . ISBN 978-1-58901-731-3. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2016.
^ "Public holidays and anniversary dates". NZ Government. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
^ "PMore information on setting term dates, holidays and closing days". 31 July 2015. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
^ "Restricted shop trading days  Employment New Zealand". Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
^ Marks, Kathy (22 March 2008). "Dozens ignore warnings to re-enact crucifixion". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2008.
^ Izobelle T. Pulgo, "Binignit: A Good Friday Cebuano soul food Archived 15 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine", Cebu Daily News, 23 March 2016.
^ Deralyn Ramos, "Holy Week in the Philippines Archived 27 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine", Tsuneishi Balita, March 2013, p. 4.
^ "Holidays Act (Chapter 126)". Singapore Statutes Online. 1999. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ "Holidays Act (Chapter 126), Legislative History". Singapore Statutes Online. 1999. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021.
^ Rohrer, Finlo (1 April 2010). "How did hot cross buns become two a penny?". BBC News magazine. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 6 April 2012.
^ "Bank holidays and British Summer Time". Directgov. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 19 April 2011.
^ Petre, Jonathan (21 March 2008). "Good Friday gambling angers churches". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2012.
^ "Lingfield:  1m Good Friday fixture to be held at Surrey racecourse". BBC News. 9 October 2013. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2013.
^ Brown, Craig (11 October 2013). "Musselburgh to host historic Good Friday racing". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2013.
^ John Masefield Society: Good Friday: A Play in Verse (1916) Archived 12 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine
^ Government of Connecticut. "Legal State Holidays". CT.gov. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2018.
^ "Delaware   Office of Management and Budget   State of Delaware Holidays". Delawarepersonnel.com. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Title XXXIX Commercial Relations Section 683.01 Legal holidays". onecle.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014.
^ "Hawaii State Holidays for 2014". Miraclesalad.com. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Secretary of State: 2011 Indiana State Holidays". In.gov. Archived from the original on 13 December 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Holidays". Personnel.ky.gov. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ Sandra G. Gillen, CPPB. "2014 State Holidays Calendar Observed by OSP". Doa.louisiana.gov. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "The Official Web Site for The State of New Jersey | State Holidays". Nj.gov. Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "N.C. State Government Holiday Schedule for 2013 and 2014". Ic.nc.gov. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "North Dakota State Holidays 2014". The Holiday Schedule. Archived from the original on 18 August 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Official State Holidays". TN.gov. Archived from the original on 29 May 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ In addition to holidays where offices are closed, Texas also has "partial staffing holidays" (where offices are required to be open for public business, but where employees may take it off as a holiday) and "optional holidays" (where an employee may take off in lieu of taking off on a partial staffing holiday; Good Friday is an optional holiday).
^ "Texas State Holidays". The State of Texas. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2018.
^ "Guam Public Holidays 2012 (Oceania)". Qppstudio.net. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "US Virgin Islands Public Holidays 2012 (Americas/Caribbean)". Qppstudio.net. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Puerto Rican Holidays". Topuertorico.org. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "NYSE: Holidays and Trading Hours". nyse.com. Archived from the original on 9 May 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2015.
^ "Stock Market Holidays". Money-zine.com. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "CME Group Chicago Trading Floor Holiday Schedule for 2015" (PDF). CME Group. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2015.
^ "Holiday Schedule". sifma.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2015.
^ "Federal Holidays". Opm.gov. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ [1] Archived 14 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine
^ Goldman, Russell (29 March 2010). "Iowa Town Renames Good Friday to 'Spring Holiday'". ABC News. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ Villarreal, Abe (17 April 2014). "Spring Holiday   Western New Mexico University". Wnmu.edu. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Good Friday in the United States". Archived from the original on 3 August 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2016.
^ "Good Friday Music   Dictionary definition of Good Friday Music". Encyclopedia.com: FREE online dictionary. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2017.
^ Landis, L. K. (8 June 1998). "Proof for a Wednesday Crucifixion". King James Bible Baptist Church, Ladson, South Carolina. Archived from the original on 22 August 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "The Resurrection Was Not on Sunday". thetrumpet.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2009.
^ "The Cradle & the Cross (original)". thebereancall.org. 1 December 1992. Archived from the original on 4 August 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Cult, Cults, Abuse by Religions, Abuse Recovery Discussion & Resources, Peer-Support, Legal support". factnet.org. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009.
Further reading[edit]
Bellarmine, Robert (1902). "Good Friday: The Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ." . Sermons from the Latins. Benziger Brothers.
Gilmartin, Thomas Patrick (1909). "Good Friday" .  In Herbermann, Charles (ed.). Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Good Friday.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Good Friday.
The Eastern Orthodox commemoration of Holy Friday (archived 7 June 2011)
Great Friday instructions from S. V. Bulgakov's Handbook for Church Servers (Russian Orthodox Church) (archived 3 March 2016)
Episcopal Good Friday Service
Who, What, Why: Why is Good Friday called Good Friday?
Good Friday
"Mayor wants 'draconian' Good Friday booze ban lifted before 1916 centenary". Independent.ie. Retrieved 25 March 2016.
Links to related articles
vteEaster and its cycleLentShrovetide
Septuagesima
Sexagesima
Quinquagesima
Carnival
Cascar n
Maslenitsa
Shrove Tuesday
Mardi Gras
Holy Face of Jesus
Lent proper
Ash Wednesday
Great Lent
Temptation of Christ
First Sunday of Lent
Ember days
Second Sunday of Lent
Third Sunday of Lent
Laetare Sunday (Mothering Sunday)
Passiontide
Passion Sunday
Friday of Sorrows
Music
Ave Regina caelorum
Passion (music)
Passion hymns
Stabat Mater
Holy WeekPalm Sunday
Triumphal entry into Jerusalem
Ferias
Holy Monday
Holy Tuesday
Holy Wednesday
Triduum
Tenebrae
Maundy Thursday
Chrism Mass
Last Supper
Crotalus
Art
Farewell Discourse
Mass of the Lord's Supper
Foot washing
Stripping of the Altar
Good Friday
Passion of Jesus
Arma Christi
Stations of the Cross
Crucifixion of Jesus
Descent from the Cross
Lamentation
Epitaphios
Piet 
Burial of Jesus
Tomb of Jesus
Easter Sepulchre
Good Friday prayer
for the Jews
Gorzkie  ale
Holy Saturday
Harrowing of Hell
 wi conka
Easter Vigil
Paschal candle
Holy Fire
Lumen Christi
Exsultet
Artos
Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults
Traditions
Burning of Judas
Processions
By location
Colombia
Popay n
Guatemala
Italy
Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto
Ruvo di Puglia
Malta
Mexico
Taxco
Philippines
Portugal
Braga
Spain
Cuenca
M laga
Salamanca
San Crist bal de La Laguna
Santa Cruz de La Palma
Seville
Valladolid
Viveiro
Zamora
EasterDay
Resurrection of Jesus
Art
Myrrhbearers
Road to Emmaus
Paschal Homily
Sunrise service
Date
List of dates
Calculation
Ecclesiastical new moon
Ecclesiastical full moon
Epact
Golden number
Sardica paschal table
Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table
Controversy
Quartodecimanism
Gregorian calendar
Reform proposals
SeasonLiturgical features
Alleluia
Pentecostarion
Trikirion
OctaveBright Week
Easter Sunday
Easter Monday
 migus-dyngus
Easter whip
Easter Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Second Sunday of Easter
Doubting Thomas
Divine Mercy Sunday
Radonitsa
Third Sunday of Easter
Fourth Sunday of Easter
Mid-Pentecost
Fifth Sunday of Easter
Sixth Sunday of Easter
Rogation days
Ascensiontide
Ascension of Jesus
Art
Feast of the Ascension
Cenacle
Novena
Seventh Sunday of Easter
Matthias the Apostle
Traditions
Basket
Bonnet
Bunny
Bilby
Food
Greeting
Parade
Pace Egg play
Postcard
Rouketopolemos
Saitopolemos
Scoppio del carro
Easter eggs
Dance
Decorating
in Slavic culture
Rolling
Hunt
Osterbrunnen
Tapping
Tree
Tossing
By country
Croatia
Poland
Ukraine
By country
Ethiopia and Eritrea
Latvia
Poland
Pre-Christian
 ostre
Music
Easter Oratorio
I Will Mention the Loving-kindnesses
Russian Easter Festival Overture
Salzburg Easter Festival
Liturgical
Regina caeli
Troparion
Victimae paschali laudes
Cantatas
Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden, BWV 6
Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4
Der Friede sei mit dir, BWV 158
Der Himmel lacht! Die Erde jubilieret, BWV 31
Ein Herz, das seinen Jesum lebend wei , BWV 134
Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen, BWV 66
Ich lebe, mein Herze, zu deinem Erg tzen, BWV 145
Hymns
Christ the Lord Is Risen Today
Jesus Christ Is Risen Today
O filii et filiae
The Strife is O'er, the Battle Done
Film and TV
Films
Television episodes
PentecostSeasonOctave
Pentecost Sunday
Whitsun
Whit Monday
Whit Tuesday
Ember days
Feast of Christ the Priest
Trinity Sunday
Feast of Corpus Christi
Feast of the Sacred Heart
vteLiturgical year of the Catholic ChurchOrdinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1969 Calendar)Advent
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Immaculate Conception
December 17 to 23
Christmas Season
Christmas
Holy Family
Mary, Mother of God
Epiphany
Baptism of the Lord
Ordinary Time
Presentation of the Lord
Lent
Ash Wednesday
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Saint Joseph
Annunciation
Palm Sunday
Holy Week
Paschal Triduum
Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass
Mass of the Lord's Supper
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil
Easter Season
Easter Sunday
Octave
Divine Mercy Sunday
Sundays
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
Ascension
Pentecost
Ordinary Time
Trinity Sunday
Corpus Christi
Sacred Heart
Visitation
Saint John the Baptist
Saints Peter and Paul
Transfiguration
Assumption
Nativity of Mary
Exaltation of the Cross
All Saints' Day
All Souls' Day
Presentation of Mary
Christ the King
Tridentine Mass of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1960 Calendar)Advent
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Rorate Mass
Immaculate Conception
Greater Ferias
Winter Ember Days
Christmas Season
Christmas
Octave Day of Christmas
Holy Name of Jesus
Epiphany Season
Epiphany
Holy Family
Baptism of the Lord
Purification of MaryP
LentPre-Lent
Septuagesima
Sexagesima
Quinquagesima
Lent
Ash Wednesday
Sundays
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Spring Ember Days
Saint Joseph
Annunciation
Passiontide
Passion Sunday
Palm SundayP
Holy WeekP
Paschal Triduum
Tenebrae
Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass
Mass of the Lord's Supper
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil
Easter Season
Easter SundayP
Octave
Sundays after Easter
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Rogation DaysP
AscensionP
Pentecost Season
Pentecost
Summer Ember Days
Trinity Sunday
Corpus ChristiP
Sacred Heart
Saint John the Baptist
Saints Peter and Paul
Precious Blood
Visitation
Transfiguration
Assumption
Nativity of Mary
Exaltation of the CrossP
Autumn Ember Days
Maternity of Mary
Christ the King
All Saints' Day
All Souls' Day
Presentation of Mary
Legend
P = Ordinary Procession according to the Roman Ritual
Legend
Italic font marks the 10 holy days of obligation in the universal calendar which do not normally fall on a Sunday.
Older calendars
1955
pre-1955
Tridentine
Liturgical colours
Ranking
Computus
Easter cycle
 Catholicism portal
vte Public holidays in Australia
New Year's Day
Australia Day
Good Friday
Easter Saturday
Easter Monday
Anzac Day
King's Birthday
Labour Day
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
vteHolidays in CanadaNationwide statutory holidays
New Year's Day
Good Friday
Canada Day
Labour Day
Christmas Day
Statutory holidays forfederal employees
Easter Monday
Victoria Day
National Day for Truth and Reconciliation
Thanksgiving
Remembrance Day
Boxing Day
Indigenous holidays
National Indigenous Peoples Day
National Day for Truth and Reconciliation
Anishinaabe Giizhigad
Goose Break
Hobiyee
Pestie'wa'taqetimk
Quviasukvik
Other common holidays
April Fools' Day
August Civic Holiday
Commonwealth Day
Earth Day
Emancipation Day
Father's Day
Flag Day
Grandparents' Day
Groundhog Day/Daks Day
Halloween
International Women's Day
Mother's Day
National Family Week
National Peacekeepers' Day
Saint Patrick's Day
Tartan Day
Valentine's Day
White Ribbon Day
Alberta
Family Day
British Columbia
Family Day
Manitoba
Louis Riel Day
New Brunswick
Family Day
Loyalist Day
Newfoundland & Labrador
Discovery Day
Memorial Day
Orangemen's Day
Saint George's Day
Nova Scotia
Davis Day
Heritage Day
Nunavut
Nunavut Day
Ontario
Family Day
Loyalist Day
Prince Edward Island
Gold Cup Parade Day
Islander Day
Qu bec
Construction Holiday
Goose Break
National Patriots Day
Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day
Saskatchewan
Family Day
Yukon
Discovery Day
vte Public holidays in Hong Kong
New Year's Day
Lunar New Year (first 3 days of the period)
Ching Ming Festival
Good Friday
Holy Saturday
Easter Monday
Buddha's Birthday
Labour Day
Tuen Ng Festival
Hong Kong SAR Establishment Day
Mid-Autumn Festival
PRC National Day
Chung Yeung Festival
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Cancelled
Queen's Birthday
Liberation Day
Double Ten Day
Remembrance Day
vte Public holidays in Indonesia
New Year's Day
Chinese New Year
Day of Silence
Isra and Mi'raj
Good Friday
Labour Day
Waisak Day
Ascension Day
Pancasila Day
Collective Days
Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Adha
Independence Day
Islamic New Year
Prophet's Birthday
Christmas
vte Public holidays in MalaysiaNational holidays
Chinese New Year
Labour Day
Wesak Day
Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Adha
Islamic New Year
Merdeka Day
Muharram
Agong's Birthday
Malaysia Day
Muhammad's Birthday
Christmas
State holidays(differ by states)
New Year's Day
Yang di-Pertua Negeri Sembilan's Birthday
Sultan of Kedah's Birthday
Thaipusam
Federal Territory Day
Anniversary of Installation of the Sultan of Terengganu
Sultan of Johor's Birthday
Isra and Mi'raj
Declaration of Malacca City as Historical City
Good Friday
Sultan of Terengganu's Birthday
First Day of Ramadan
Day of Nuzul Al-Quran
Tadau Kaamatan
Gawai Dayak
Declaration of George Town as World Heritage Site
Penang State Governor's Birthday
Raja of Perlis's Birthday
Sarawak Independence Day
Hol Day of Sultan Iskandar of Johor
Sabah State Governor's Birthday
Malacca State Governor's Birthday
Sarawak State Governor's Birthday
Sultan of Pahang's Birthday
Deepavali
Sultan of Perak's Birthday
Sultan of Kelantan's Birthday
Sultan of Selangor's Birthday
Christmas Eve
vte Public holidays in New Zealand
New Year's Day
January 2
Waitangi Day
Good Friday
Easter Sunday
Easter Monday
Anzac Day
King's Birthday
Matariki
Labour Day
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
vte Public holidays in the PhilippinesRegular holidays
New Year's Day
Maundy Thursday
Good Friday
Day of Valor
Labor Day
Independence Day
Eid'l Fitr
National Heroes Day
Eid'l Adha
Bonifacio Day
Christmas
Rizal Day
Special non-working days
Chinese New Year
EDSA Revolution Anniversary
Black Saturday
Ninoy Aquino Day
All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day
Feast of the Immaculate Conception
Christmas Eve
Last day of the year
Italicized: Movable holidaySee also: Holiday economics
vte Public holidays in South Africa
New Year's Day
Human Rights Day
Good Friday
Family Day
Freedom Day
Workers' Day
Youth Day
National Women's Day
Heritage Day
Day of Reconciliation
Christmas Day
Day of Goodwill
vte Public holidays in Sri LankaJan Mar
Thai Pongal
Duruthu Poya Day
Independence Day
Navam Poya Day
Maha Shivratri
Madin Poya Day
Apr Jun
Sinhala and Tamil New Year Day eve
Sinhalese New Year/Tamil New Year
Bak Poya Day
Good Friday
May Day
Vesak Poya Day
Day following Vesak Poya Day
Id-Ul-Fitr (Ramazan Festival Day)
Poson
Jul Sep
Esala Poya Day
Id-Ul-Alha (Hadji Festival Day)
Nikini Poya Day
Binara Poya Day
Oct Dec
Vap Poya Day
Deepavali Festival Day
Milad-Un-Nabi (Holy Prophet s Birthday)
Ill Poya Day
Unduvap Poya Day
Christmas Day
vte Public holidays in the United KingdomAll regions
New Year's Day
May Bank Holiday
Summer Bank Holiday
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
England and Wales
Good Friday
Easter Monday
Spring Bank Holiday
Northern Ireland
Saint Patrick's Day
Easter Monday
Easter Tuesday
Spring Bank Holiday
Battle of the Boyne (Orangemen's Day)
Scotland
2nd January
Good Friday
St Andrew's Day (optional)
vte Holidays, observances, and celebrations in the United StatesJanuary
New Year's Day (federal)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day (federal)
Birthday of Eugenio Mar a de Hostos (PR)
Confederate Heroes Day (TX)
Eve of Three Kings' Day (PR, religious)
Feast of Epiphany / Feast of Theophany (religious)
Fred Korematsu Day (AZ, CA, FL, HI, VA)
Idaho Human Rights Day (ID)
Inauguration Day (federal quadrennial)
Kansas Day (KS)
Makar Sankranti / Pongal (religious)
Robert E. Lee Day (FL)
Stephen Foster Memorial Day (36)
The Eighth (LA)
Three Kings' Day (PR, VI, religious)
World Religion Day (religious)January February
Super Bowl Sunday
Chinese New Year / Lunar New Year (NY, cultural, religious)
Vasant Panchami (religious)FebruaryAmerican Heart MonthBlack History Month
Washington's Birthday (federal)
Valentine's Day
Birthday of Luis Mu oz Mar n (PR)
Candlemas (religious)
Charles Darwin Day / Darwin Day (CA, DE)
Day of Remembrance (CA, OR, WA, cultural)
Georgia Day (GA)
Groundhog Day
Imbolc (religious)
Lincoln's Birthday (CA, CT, IL, IN, MO, NY, WV)
National Girls and Women in Sports Day
National Freedom Day (36)
Nirvana Day (religious)
Presentation of Our Lord to the Temple (religious)
Promised Reformer Day (religious)
Ronald Reagan Day (CA)
Rosa Parks Day (CA, MO)
Saviours' Day (religious)
Susan B. Anthony Day (CA, FL, NY, WI, WV, proposed federal)
Tu B shvat (religious)February March
Mardi Gras
Ash Wednesday (PR, religious)
Carnival (PR, VI, religious)
Clean Monday (religious)
Courir de Mardi Gras (religious)
Intercalary Days (religious)
Mahashivaratri (religious)
Purim (religious)
Shrove Tuesday (religious)
Super TuesdayMarchIrish-American Heritage MonthColon Cancer Awareness MonthWomen's History Month
Saint Patrick's Day (religious)
Spring break (week)
Annunciation of the Virgin Mary / Annunciation of the Theotokos (religious)
Casimir Pulaski Day (IL)
Cesar Chavez Day (CA, CO, TX, proposed federal)
Emancipation Day in Puerto Rico (PR, cultural)
Evacuation Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Harriet Tubman Day (NY)
Hola Mohalla (religious)
Holi (NY, religious)
L. Ron Hubbard s Birthday (religious)
Lailat al-Mi'raj (religious)
Liberation and Freedom Day (Charlottesville, VA, cultural)
Mardi Gras (AL (in two counties), LA)
Maryland Day (MD)
National Poison Prevention Week (week)
Nowruz (cultural, religious)
Ostara (religious)
Prince Jonah K hi  Kalaniana ole Day (HI)
Promised Messiah Day (religious)
Saint Joseph's Day (religious)
Seward's Day (AK)
Texas Independence Day (TX)
Town Meeting Day (VT)
Transfer Day (VI)
Trans Day of Visibility (cultural)March April
Easter (religious)
Good Friday (CT, NC, PR, NJ, VI, religious)
Hanuman Jayanti (religious)
Holy Thursday (PR, VI, religious)
Holy Week (PR, religious, week)
Lazarus Saturday (religious)
Mahavir Janma Kalyanak (religious)
Mesha Sankranti / Hindu New Year (religious)
Palm Sunday (PR, religious)
Passover (religious, week)
Easter Monday / Bright Monday (VI, religious)
Ramnavami (religious)
Chandramana Uugadi / Souramana Uugadi (religious)AprilArab American Heritage MonthConfederate History Month
420
April Fools' Day
Arbor Day
Birthday of Jos  de Diego (PR)
Confederate Memorial Day (AL, MS)
Days of Remembrance of the Victims of the Holocaust (week)
Earth Day
Emancipation Day (cultural)
Thomas Jefferson's Birthday (AL)
Lag B Omer (religious)
Last Friday of Great Lent (religious)
Pascua Florida (FL)
Patriots' Day (MA, ME)
Ridv n (religious)
San Jacinto Day (TX)
Siblings Day
Walpurgis Night (religious)
Yom Ha'atzmaut (cultural, religious)
MayAsian Pacific American Heritage MonthJewish American Heritage MonthMilitary Appreciation Month
Memorial Day (federal)
Mother's Day (36)
Cinco de Mayo
Ascension of Bah u'll h (religious)
Ascension of Our Lord (religious)
Caliphate Day (religious)
Declaration of the Bab (religious)
Harvey Milk Day (CA)
International Workers' Day / May Day (CA, unofficial, proposed state)
Law Day (36)
Loyalty Day (36)
Malcolm X Day (CA, IL, proposed federal)
Military Spouse Day
National Day of Prayer (36)
National Day of Reason
National Defense Transportation Day (36)
National Maritime Day (36)
Peace Officers Memorial Day (36)
Pentecost (religious)
Shavuot (religious)
Truman Day (MO)
Vesak / Buddha's Birthday (religious)JuneLesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Pride Month
Juneteenth (federal, cultural)
Father's Day (36)
Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Carolina Day (SC)
Fast of the Holy Apostles (religious)
Flag Day (36, proposed federal)
Helen Keller Day (PA)
Honor America Days (3 weeks)
Jefferson Davis Day (AL, FL)
Kamehameha Day (HI)
Litha (religious)
Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev Sahib (religious)
Odunde Festival (Philadelphia, PA, cultural)
Senior Week (week)
Saint John's Day (PR, religious)
West Virginia Day (WV)July
Independence Day (federal)
Asalha Puja Day (religious)
Birthday of Don Luis Mu oz Rivera (PR)
Birthday of Dr. Jos  Celso Barbosa (PR)
Emancipation Day in the U.S. Virgin Islands (VI, cultural)
Guru Purnima (religious)
Khordad Sal (religious)
L  Ho iho i Ea (HI, unofficial, cultural)
Martyrdom of the B b (religious)
Parents' Day (36)
Pioneer Day (UT)
Puerto Rico Constitution Day (PR)July August
Summer vacation
Tisha B'Av (religious)August
American Family Day (AZ)
Barack Obama Day in Illinois (IL)
Bennington Battle Day (VT)
Dormition of the Theotokos (religious)
Eid-e-Ghadeer (religious)
Fast in Honor of the Holy Mother of Lord Jesus (religious)
Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (religious)
Hawaii Admission Day / Statehood Day (HI)
Krishna Janmashtami (religious)
Lammas (religious)
Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (TX)
Naga Panchami (religious)
National Aviation Day (36)
Paryushana (religious)
Raksha Bandhan (religious)
Transfiguration of the Lord (religious)
Victory Day (RI)
Women's Equality Day (36)
SeptemberProstate Cancer Awareness MonthChildhood Cancer Awareness Month
Labor Day (federal)
Brazilian Day (NY, cultural)
California Admission Day (CA)
Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day (36)
Constitution Day (36)
Constitution Week (week)
Defenders Day (MD)
Elevation of the Holy Cross (religious)
Feast of San Gennaro (NY, cultural, religious)
Ganesh Chaturthi (religious)
Gold Star Mother's Day (36)
His Holiness Sakya Trizin s Birthday (religious)
Mabon (religious)
National Grandparents Day (36)
National Payroll Week (week)
Nativity of Mary / Nativity of the Theotokos (religious)
Native American Day (proposed federal)
Patriot Day (36)September OctoberHispanic Heritage Month
Chehlum Imam Hussain (religious)
Oktoberfest
Pitri Paksha (religious)
Rosh Hashanah / Feast of Trumpets (TX, NY, religious)
Shemini Atzeret (religious)
Simchat Torah (religious)
Vijaya Dashami (religious)
Yom Kippur / Day of Atonement (TX, NY, religious)
OctoberBreast Cancer Awareness MonthDisability Employment Awareness Month Italian-American Heritage and Culture Month  Filipino American History MonthLGBT History Month
Columbus Day (federal)
Halloween
Alaska Day (AK)
Child Health Day (36)
General Pulaski Memorial Day
German-American Day
Indigenous Peoples' Day
International Day of Non-Violence
Leif Erikson Day (36)
Missouri Day (MO)
Nanomonestotse (cultural)
National School Lunch Week (week)
Native American Day in South Dakota (SD)
Nevada Day (NV)
Spirit Day (cultural)
Sweetest Day
Sukkot / Feast of Tabernacles (religious, week)
Virgin Islands Puerto Rico Friendship Day (PR, VI)
White Cane Safety Day (36)October November
Birth of the B b (religious)
Birth of Bah u'll h (religious)
Day of the Dead (VI)
Diwali (NY, religious)
Mawlid al-Nabi (religious)
November Native American Indian Heritage Month
Veterans Day (federal)
Thanksgiving (federal)
Ascension of  Abdu l Baha (religious)
All Saints' Day (religious)
Beginning of the Nativity Fast (religious)
Beltane / Samhain (religious)
Barack Obama Day in Alabama (Perry County, AL)
D. Hamilton Jackson Day (VI)
Day after Thanksgiving (24)
Day of the Covenant (religious)
Discovery of Puerto Rico Day (PR)
Election Day (CA, DE, HI, KY, MT, NJ, NY, OH, PR, VA, WV, proposed federal)
Family Day (NV)
Guru Nanak Gurpurab (religious)
Hanukkah (religious)
L  K oko a (HI, unofficial, cultural)
Martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur (religious)
Native American Heritage Day (MD, WA, cultural)
Presentation of the Theotokos to the Temple (religious)
Trans Day of Remembrance (cultural)
Unthanksgiving Day (cultural)December
Christmas (religious, federal)
New Year's Eve
Advent Sunday (religious)
Alabama Day (AL)
Birthday of Guru Gobind Singh Sahib (religious)
Bodhi Day (religious)
Chalica (religious)
Christmas Eve (KY, NC, SC, PR, VI)
Day after Christmas (KY, NC, SC, TX, VI)
Festivus
HumanLight
Hanukkah (religious, week)
Immaculate Conception (religious)
Indiana Day (IN)
Kwanzaa (cultural, week)
Milad Syedna Mohammed Burhanuddin (religious)
National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (36)
Nativity of Jesus (religious)
Old Year's Night (VI)
Pan American Aviation Day (36)
Pancha Ganapati (religious, week)
Rosa Parks Day (OH, OR)
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God (religious)
Wright Brothers Day (36)
Yule (religious)
Zartosht No-Diso (religious)Varies (year round)
Eid al-Adha (NY, religious)
Eid al-Fitr (NY, religious)
Islamic New Year (religious)
Yawm al-Arafa (religious)
Hajj (religious)
Laylat al-Qadr (religious)
Navaratri (religious, four times a year)
Obon (religious)
Onam (religious)
Ramadan (religious, month)
Ghost Festival (religious)
Yawm Aashura (religious)
Legend: 
(federal) = federal holidays, (abbreviation) = state/territorial holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (cultural) = holiday related to a specific racial/ethnic group or sexual minority, (week) = week-long holidays, (month) = month-long holidays, (36) = Title 36 Observances and Ceremonies
See also: Lists of holidays, Hallmark holidays, Public holidays in the United States, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands.
Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Good_Friday&oldid=1149283326"