Cake made with candied or dried fruit, nuts, and spices
For other uses, see Fruitcake (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Fruitcake" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
FruitcakeA traditional fruitcake loafTypeCakePlace of originEuropeRegion or stateVariousCreated byOriginally from Roman times[citation needed]Main ingredientsCandied fruit and/or dried fruit, nuts, spices, sugars, flourVariationsQuickbread or yeasted. Can optionally be soaked in liquor. Many varied combinations of dried fruits and nuts possible. Sometimes topped with icing.  Media: Fruitcake
Fruitcake (or fruit cake or fruit bread) is a cake made with candied or dried fruit, nuts, and spices, and optionally soaked in spirits. In the United Kingdom, certain rich versions may be iced and decorated.
Fruitcakes are usually served in celebration of weddings and Christmas. Given their rich nature, fruitcakes are most often consumed on their own, as opposed to with condiments (such as butter or cream).[1]
History[edit]
 A traditional Easter Simnel cake
The earliest recipe from ancient Rome lists pomegranate seeds, pine nuts, and raisins that were mixed into barley mash.[2] In the Middle Ages, honey, spices, and preserved fruits were added.
Fruitcakes soon proliferated all over Europe. Recipes varied greatly in different countries throughout the ages, depending on the available ingredients as well as (in some instances) church regulations forbidding the use of butter, regarding the observance of Fasting. Pope Innocent VIII (1432 1492) finally granted the use of butter, in a written permission known as the  Butter Letter' or Butterbrief in 1490, giving permission to Saxony to use milk and butter in the Stollen fruitcakes.[3]
Starting in the 16th century, sugar from the American Colonies (and the discovery that high concentrations of sugar could preserve fruits) created an excess of candied fruit, thus making fruitcakes more affordable and popular.[4]
The 17th century English fruitcake was originally yeast-leavened, and the rum and dried fruit helped extend the shelf life of the cake.[5]
In various countries[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Australia[edit]
In Australia, fruitcake is consumed throughout the year, but most commonly at Christmas, and is available at most major retail outlets. The cake is rarely given icing; often it is consumed with butter or margarine, or custard.
Bahamas[edit]
In the Bahamas, not only is the fruitcake drenched with rum, but the ingredients are as well. All of the candied fruits, walnuts, and raisins are placed in an enclosed container and are soaked with the darkest variety of rum, anywhere from 2 weeks to 3 months in advance. The cake ingredients are mixed, and once the cake has finished baking, rum is poured onto it while it is still hot.
Bulgaria[edit]
 Keks sold in a shop
In Bulgaria, the common fruitcake is known as keks (Bulgarian:   [k ks]), is home-made and is consumed throughout the year. Recipes for keks vary, but commonly it contains flour, butter and/or cooking oil, milk, yeast, yoghurt, eggs, cocoa, walnuts, and raisins. It is usually baked in Bundt-style pans.
There is also another specific type of fruitcake prepared for Easter, which is known as kozunak (Bulgarian:   [kozu nak]).
Canada[edit]
The fruitcake is commonly eaten during the Christmas season in Canada. Rarely is it seen during other times of the year. The Canadian fruitcake is similar in style to the UK version. However, there is rarely icing on the cake, and alcohol is not commonly put into Christmas cakes that are sold. The cakes are shaped like a small loaf of bread, and often covered in marzipan.
Dark, moist and rich Christmas fruitcakes are the most frequently consumed, with white Christmas fruitcake less common. These cakes tend to be made in mid-November to early December when the weather starts to cool down. They are a staple during Christmas dinner and also can be a gift generally exchanged between business associates and close friends/family.
Chile[edit]
Pan de Pascua is a fruitcake traditionally eaten around Christmas and Epiphany.
France[edit]
In France, fruitcake is called g teau aux fruits.
Germany[edit]
 German Fr chtebrot
In Germany, baked goods which fit the description of fruitcake are not usually regarded as cake but rather as sweet breads.
Stollen is loaf-shaped and often powdered with icing sugar on the outside. It is usually made with yeast, butter, water, and flour, with the addition of citrus zest, candied citrus peel, raisins, and almonds.
The most famous Stollen is the Dresdner Stollen,[6] sold at the Dresden Christmas market, the Striezelmarkt.
Official Dresden Stollen, produced by only 150 Dresden bakers, bears a special seal depicting Elector Augustus II the Strong.
In Bremen, the local fruitcake called Klaben is traditionally sold and eaten during the Christmas season. Bremer Klaben is a kind of stollen which is not dusted with powdered sugar after baking. Both Dresdner Stollen and Bremen Klaben are protected geographical indications.
In Southern Germany and the Alpine region, Fr chtebrot (also called Berewecke, Birnenbrot, Hutzenbrot, Hutzelbrot, Kletzenbrot, Schnitzbrot, or Zelten) is a sweet, dark bread baked with nuts and dried fruit, e.g. apricots, figs, dates, plums, etc.
India[edit]
Fruitcake is a rich dense cake packed with dry fruits and nuts flavoured with spices usually made during Christmas. In India, this is found everywhere during the Christmas season, although it is also available commonly throughout the year.
Ireland[edit]
 Irish barmbrack
In Ireland, a type of sweetbread called barmbrack is eaten at Hallowe'en. The cake contains different objects such as a ring or small coin, each signifying a different fortune for the person who finds it.
Italy[edit]
 Italian panettone is a yeast-leavened fruitcake
Panforte is a chewy, dense Tuscan fruitcake dating back to 13th-century Siena. Panforte is strongly flavored with spices (panforte means "strong bread") and baked in a shallow form. Genoa's fruitcake, a lower, denser but still crumbly variety, is called pandolce ("sweet bread").
There are various types of fruitcakes from the Emilia-Romagna region, most being dark and heavily spiced with an abundance of candied fruit and nuts. The certosino from Bologna is a round cake similar to pan forte but with Chinese spices and a variety of whole-halved candied fruit decorating the top; dark chocolate is often added to the dough for a richer flavour. The certosino is low and very dense. Panone, produced in much of Emilia, is similar to the certosino, but with a lighter, fluffier dough and candied fruit inside the cake rather than used as decoration. Panpepato from Ferrara has a dough similar to panone but has a higher ginger content, giving it almost a gingerbread taste. Candied fruit is not often found and instead there is a high concentration of nuts within the dough; the entire cake is often coated in dark chocolate. 
Gubana is a Christmas/holiday cake from the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region, specifically from the area around Cividale del Friuli. It is a leavened dough cake with a filling of nuts, dried fruit, sugar, and grappa which is rolled into a spiral filled tube which is then twisted into the shape of a rose or snail's shell. Gubana is often eaten with alcohol (slivovitz or grappa) around the holiday season. It combines Italian, Friulan, and Slovenian tastes and cooking styles to make a unique sweet. 
Panettone is a Milanese sweet bread loaf (widely available throughout Italy and in many other countries), served around Christmas, which is traditionally filled with dried and candied fruits, with a bread loaf consistency.
New Zealand[edit]
Fruitcakes arrived in New Zealand with early settlers from Britain. Until the 1960s fruitcake was generally homemade, but since then has become commercially widely available in a range of styles. Light coloured fruitcake is often sold as tennis cake or light fruit-cake all year round.
Most New Zealand wedding cakes are finely iced and decorated fruitcake often several tiers high. Most fruitcake is eaten in the Christmas period. It is dark, rich and made from multiple dried fruits. Homemade cakes may use brandy or sherry to enhance flavour rather than as a preservative. They may be square or round, iced or uniced. A Christmas cake is usually simply decorated with a Christmas scene or the words Merry Christmas.
Poland[edit]
 Polish keks
Keks is a traditional fruitcake eaten during Christmas season. It is a loaf shaped sponge cake with a substantial content of nuts, raisins, figs and candied fruits.
Portugal[edit]
Although French in its origin, Bolo Rei is a traditional fruitcake enjoyed during Christmas season and a staple dessert in any Portuguese home during the holidays. Included is the characteristic fava bean and, according to tradition, whoever finds the fava bean has to pay for the cake the following year.
Switzerland[edit]
Birnenbrot[7] is a dense sweet Swiss fruitcake with candied fruits and nuts.
Anglophone Caribbean[edit]
Black cake, is a traditional part of Christmas celebration in the English Caribbean. The cake incorporates a large quantity of mixed fruits and rum/wine and becomes a treasured Christmas treat consumed and given out between the Christmas season and New Year. The fruit, wine and rum is prepared weeks, sometimes months, ahead, and has its origin in the English Christmas pudding, and can be quite expensive. It is very different from a North American fruitcake.
United Kingdom[edit]
 Dundee cake
In the UK, fruitcakes are made in types ranging from extremely light to rich and moist.
The traditional Christmas cake is a round fruitcake covered in marzipan and then in white royal icing or fondant icing. It is often further decorated with snow scenes, holly leaves, and berries (real or artificial), or tiny decorative robins or snowmen. It is also the tradition for a similar kind of cake to be served at weddings.
In Yorkshire, fruitcake is often served accompanied with cheese. Fruitcakes in the United Kingdom often contain currants and glace cherries, an example of this type being the Genoa cake. A type of fruitcake which originated in Scotland, the Dundee Cake, owes its name to Keiller's marmalade. It does not contain glace cherries, but is decorated with almonds.
Fruitcake was historically referred to as plum cake in England from around 1700.[8]
United States[edit]
 Traditional American fruitcake with fruits and nuts.
Typical American fruitcakes are rich in fruit and nuts.
Mail-order fruitcakes in America began in 1913. Some well-known American bakers of fruitcake include Collin Street Bakery in Corsicana, Texas, and The Claxton Bakery in Claxton, Georgia. Both Collin Street and Claxton are Southern companies with inexpensive access to large quantities of nuts, for which the expression "nutty as a fruitcake" was derived in 1935.[4] Commercial fruitcakes are often sold from catalogues by charities as a fund raiser.
Most American mass-produced fruitcakes are alcohol-free, but those made according to traditional recipes are saturated with liqueurs or brandy and covered in powdered sugar, both of which prevent mould. Brandy (or wine) soaked linens can be used to store the fruitcakes, and some people feel that fruitcakes improve with age.[citation needed]
In the United States, the fruitcake has become a ridiculed dessert, in part due to the mass-produced inexpensive cakes of questionable age. Some attribute the beginning of this trend with The Tonight Show host Johnny Carson.[4] He would joke that there really is only one fruitcake in the world, passed from family to family. After Carson's death, the tradition continued with "The Fruitcake Lady" (Marie Rudisill), who made appearances on the show and offered her "fruitcake" opinions.  In fact, the fruitcake had been a butt of jokes on television programs such as Father Knows Best and The Donna Reed Show years before The Tonight Show debuted and appears to have first become a vilified confection in the early 20th century, as evidenced by Warner Brothers cartoons.
Since 1995, Manitou Springs, Colorado, has hosted the Great Fruitcake Toss on the first Saturday of every January. "We encourage the use of recycled fruitcakes," says Leslie Lewis of the Manitou Springs Chamber of Commerce. The all-time Great Fruitcake Toss record is 1,420 feet, set in January 2007 by a group of eight Boeing engineers who built the "Omega 380," a mock artillery piece fueled by compressed air pumped by an exercise bike.[9]
Shelf life[edit]
When a fruitcake contains a good deal of alcohol, it can be preserved for many years. For example, a fruitcake baked in 1878 has been kept as an heirloom by a family in Tecumseh, Michigan; as of 2019, the baker's great-great-granddaughter is the custodian of the cake.[10][11] Wrapping the cake in alcohol-soaked linen before storing is one method of lengthening its shelf life.[citation needed]
A 106-year-old fruitcake discovered in 2017 by the Antarctic Heritage Trust was described as in "excellent condition" and "almost" edible.[12]
See also[edit]
Food portal
List of cakes
List of fruit dishes
Bara brith
Christmas cake
Christmas pudding
Clementine cake
Crema de fruta
Fig cake
Kulich
Panettone
Plum cake
Stollen
[13]
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ Rowan, Terry. Having a Wonderful Christmas Time Film Guide. Retrieved June 12, 2015.
^ Vehling (1977).
^ Stollen history
^ a b c Robert Sietsema. "A Short History of Fruitcake", The Village Voice, November 20 26, 2002.
^ Goldstein, Darra (2015). The Oxford Companion to Sugar and Sweets. Oxford University Press. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-19-931339-6.
^ Meyers Lexikon Archived 2009-12-31 at the Wayback Machine: "Besonders bekannt ist der Dresdner Stollen" ("the Dresden Stollen is especially well-known")
^ Swiss recipes, Grandma s Birnenbrot Archived 2009-04-12 at the Wayback Machine
^ Goldstein, D.; Mintz, S.; Krondl, M.; Rath, E.; Mason, L.; Quinzio, G.; Heinzelmann, U. (2015). The Oxford Companion to Sugar and Sweets. Oxford University Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-19-931339-6.
^ Photos from the 2009 event: www.blueskiesbb.com/fruitcake-popup.html
^ "Holidays and Centuries Come and Go, but for the Faithful Fords, It's Semper Fidelia's Fruitcake". People Magazine. November 30, 1987. Retrieved April 9, 2016.
^ "A Michigan family has preserved a fruitcake that was baked in 1878". The Indian Express. 2019-12-16. Retrieved 2022-09-27.
^ "Fruitcake From Robert Scott Expedition Is 'Almost' Edible at 106 Years Old". New York Times. August 15, 2017. Retrieved August 14, 2017.
^  Robert Sietsema. "A Short History of Fruitcake", The Village Voice, November 20 26, 2002.
Works Cited[edit]
Vehling, Joseph Dommers (1977). Apicius: Cookery and Dining in Imperial Rome. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-23563-7.
vteCakesList of cakesButter cakes
Babka
Banana bread
G teau nantais
Gooey butter cake
Pound cake
Cheesecakes
Fiadone
Japanese cheesecake
Ostkaka
Ube cheesecake
Smoked salmon cheesecake
Tu
Nut cakes
Brazil nut cake
Castagnaccio
Chestnut cake
Falculelle
Financier
Neccio
Pain de G nes
Chocolatecakes
Amandine
Batik cake
Black Forest gateau
Blackout cake
Chantilly cake
Chocolate brownie
Flourless chocolate cake
Fudge cake
Garash cake
German chocolate cake
Hedgehog slice
Joffre cake
Kladdkaka
Molten chocolate cake
Sachertorte
Torta caprese
Fruitcakes
Apple cake
Avocado cake
Banana cake
B nh chu i
Black bun
Bolo-rei
Cherry cake
Clementine cake
Crema de fruta
Dundee cake
Fig cake
Genoa cake
Jewish apple cake
Kornigou
Mango cake
Mango float
Panforte
Panpepato
Plum cake
Queen Elizabeth cake
Raisin cake
Torta alla Monferrina
Layer cakes
Angel cake
Bolo fiado
Buckwheat gateau
Cassata
Coconut cake
Devil's food cake
Doberge cake
Dobos torte
Esterh zy torte
Flan cake
G teau magique
Liver cake
Maria Luisa cake
Cremeschnitte
 ampita
Tompouce
Princess cake
Prinzregententorte
Rainbow cake
Sarawak cake
Smith Island cake
Spekkoek
Torta setteveli
Torta Tre Monti
Torte
V narterta
Spit cakes
Baumkuchen
K rt skal cs (Chimney cake)
 akotis
Spettekaka
Trdeln k
Spongecakes
Bahulu
B nh b 
Battenberg cake
Boston cream pie
Buko pandan cake
Bundt cake
Castella
Charlotte
Coffee and walnut cake
Donauwelle
Frankfurter Kranz
French Fancy
Frog cake
G noise
Hot milk cake
Lady Baltimore cake
Ladyfinger
Lamington
Madeira cake
Madeleine
Mantecadas
Marry girl cake
Mis rable cake
Opera cake
Pandan cake
Paper wrapped cake
Pionono
Red velvet cake
Rum cake
Shortcake
Spice cake
Swiss roll
Tres leches cake
Upside-down cake
Foam cakesand meringue
Angel food cake
Brazo de Mercedes
Chiffon cake
Dacquoise
Kyiv cake
Mam n
Mango cake
Pavlova
Sans rival
Spanische Windtorte
Ube cake
Yema cake
Zuger Kirschtorte
Yeast cakes
Banbury cake
Berlingozzo
Bienenstich
Breudher
Cacavellu
Campanile
Canestru
Chorley cake
Cozonac
Date and walnut loaf
Easter bread
Flies' graveyard
Gugelhupf
Inuliata
Pandoro
Rum baba
Streuselkuchen
Specialoccasions
Birthday cake
Buccellato
Christmas cake
B che de No l
Pan de Pascua
Groom's cake
Halloween cake
King cake
Rosca de reyes
Kransekake
Lekach
Love cake
Marry girl cake
Mooncake
Pasc 
Pop out cake
Simnel cake
Soul cake
Stack cake
Stollen
Strenna
Wedding cake
Other
Basbousa
Beer cake
Better than sex cake
Bizcocho
Bulla cake
Cake balls
Cake pop
Carrot cake
Coffee cake
Cupcake
Cupcone
Gingerbread
house
man
Heavy cake
Ice cream cake
Ispanakl  kek
Kue
Kuih
Lolly cake
Marble cake
Nonnette
Ontbijtkoek
Pain d' pices
Pancake
Parkin
Parrozzo
Petit four
Punschkrapfen
Rice cake
Ruske kape
Sugee cake
Sweetheart cake
Teacake
Tiramisu
Welsh cake
 Food portal
 Category
Authority control 
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fruitcake&oldid=1147203386"