Chinese characters used in Japanese writing
This article is about the Chinese-derived characters used in Japanese writing. For other uses, see Kanji (disambiguation).
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Multiple sections lacking inline citations, overly verbose 'readings' section, references. Please help improve this article if you can. (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
KanjiKanji written in kanji with furiganaScript type Logographic
Time period5th century AD   presentDirectionvertical right-to-left, left-to-right LanguagesOld Japanese, Kanbun, Japanese, Ryukyuan languagesRelated scriptsParent systemsOracle bone scriptSeal scriptClerical scriptRegular scriptKanjiSister systemsHanja, Zhuyin, traditional Chinese, simplified Chinese, Ch  H n, Ch  N m, Khitan script, Jurchen script, Tangut script, Yi scriptISO 15924ISO 15924Hani (500),  Han (Hanzi, Kanji, Hanja)UnicodeUnicode aliasHan This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. For the distinction between [ ], / / and  , see IPA  Brackets and transcription delimiters.
Kanji ( , pronounced [ka d i] (listen)) are the logographic Chinese characters taken from the Chinese script, and used in the writing of Japanese.[1] They were made a major part of the Japanese writing system during the time of Old Japanese and are still used, along with the subsequently-derived syllabic scripts of hiragana and katakana.[2][3] The characters have Japanese pronunciations; most have two, with one based on the Chinese sound. A few characters were invented in Japan by constructing character components derived from other Chinese characters. After World War II, Japan made its own efforts to simplify the characters, now known as shinjitai, by a process similar to China's simplification efforts, with the intention to increase literacy among the common folk. Since the 1920s, the Japanese government has published character lists periodically to help direct the education of its citizenry through the myriad Chinese characters that exist. There are nearly 3,000 kanji used in Japanese names and in common communication.
The term kanji in Japanese literally means "Han characters".[4] It is written in Japanese by using the same characters as in traditional Chinese, and both refer to the character writing system known in Chinese as hanzi (traditional Chinese:  ; simplified Chinese:  ; pinyin: h nz ; lit. 'Han characters').[5] The significant use of Chinese characters in Japan first began to take hold around the 5th century AD and has since had a profound influence in shaping Japanese culture, language, literature, history, and records.[6] Inkstone artifacts at archaeological sites dating back to the earlier Yayoi period were also found to contain Chinese characters.[7]
Although some characters, as used in Japanese and Chinese, have similar meanings and pronunciations, others have meanings or pronunciations that are unique to one language or the other. For example,   means 'honest' in both languages but is pronounced makoto or sei in Japanese, and ch ng in Standard Mandarin Chinese. Individual kanji characters invented in Japan, or multi-kanji words coined in Japanese, have also influenced and been borrowed into Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese in recent times. For example, the word for telephone,   denwa in Japanese, is calqued as di nhu  in Mandarin Chinese,  i n tho i in Vietnamese and   jeonhwa in Korean.[8]
Japanese writing
Components
Kanji
Stroke order
Radicals
Ky iku kanji
J y  kanji
Jinmeiy  kanji
Hy gai kanji
List of kanji by stroke count
Kana
Hiragana
Katakana
Hentaigana
Man'y gana
S gana
Goj on
Typographicsymbols
Japanese punctuation
Iteration mark
Uses
Syllabograms
Furigana
Okurigana
Braille
Transliteration
R maji
Hepburn (colloquial)
Kunrei (ISO)
Nihon (ISO transliteration)
JSL (transliteration)
W puro (keyboard)
Cyrillization
Polivanov system
vte
Chinese characters
Scripts
Precursors
Oracle-bone
Bronze
Seal (bird-wormlargesmall)
Clerical
Regular
Semi-cursive
Cursive
Flat brush
Simplified characters
Type styles
Imitation Song
Ming
Sans-serif
Properties
Strokes (order)
Radicals
Classification
Variants
Character-form standards
Kangxi Dictionary
Jiu Zixing/Inherited Form
Xin Zixing
General Standard Chinese Characters (PRC)
Graphemes of Commonly-used Chinese Characters (Hong Kong)
Standard Typefaces for Chinese Characters (ROC Taiwan)
Grapheme-usage standards
Graphemic variants
General Standard Characters (PRC)
J y  kanji (Japan)
Other standards
Standardized Forms of Words with Variant Forms (PRC)
Previous standards
Commonly-used Characters (PRC)
T y  kanji (Japan)
Reforms
Chinese
Clerical reforms
Traditional characters
Simplified characters (first roundsecond round)
Debate
Japanese
Old (Ky jitai)
New (Shinjitai)
Ryakuji
Sino-Japanese
Differences between Shinjitai and Simplified characters
Korean
Yakja
Singaporean
Table of Simplified Characters
Homographs
Literary and colloquial readings
Use in particular scripts
Written Chinese
Zetian characters
Slavonic transcription
Hokkien
N shu
Kanji (Kokuji)
Kana (Man'y gana)
Idu
Hanja (Gukja)
Ch  N m
Sawndip
vte
For a list of words relating to kanji, see the Japanese-coined CJKV characters category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
History[edit]
 Nihon Shoki (720 AD), considered by historians and archaeologists as the most complete extant historical record of ancient Japan, was written entirely in kanji.
Chinese characters first came to Japan on official seals, letters, swords, coins, mirrors, and other decorative items imported from China.[9] The earliest known instance of such an import was the King of Na gold seal given by Emperor Guangwu of Han to a Wa emissary in 57 AD.[10] Chinese coins as well as inkstones from the first century AD have also been found in Yayoi period archaeological sites.[6][7] However, the Japanese people of that era probably had little to no comprehension of the script, and they would remain relatively illiterate until the fifth century AD, when writing in Japan became more widespread.[6] According to the Nihon Shoki and Kojiki, a semi-legendary scholar called Wani was dispatched to Japan by the Kingdom of Baekje during the reign of Emperor  jin in the early fifth century, bringing with him knowledge of Confucianism and Chinese characters.[11]
The earliest Japanese documents were probably written by bilingual Chinese or Korean officials employed at the Yamato court.[6] For example, the diplomatic correspondence from King Bu of Wa to Emperor Shun of Liu Song in 478 AD has been praised for its skillful use of allusion. Later, groups of people called fuhito were organized under the monarch to read and write Classical Chinese. During the reign of Empress Suiko (593 628), the Yamato court began sending full-scale diplomatic missions to China, which resulted in a large increase in Chinese literacy at the Japanese court.[11]
In ancient times, paper was so rare that people wrote kanji onto thin, rectangular strips of wood, called mokkan ( ). These wooden boards were used for communication between government offices, tags for goods transported between various countries, and the practice of writing. The oldest written kanji in Japan discovered so far were written in ink on wood as a wooden strip dated to the 7th century, a record of trading for cloth and salt.
The Japanese language had no written form at the time Chinese characters were introduced, and texts were written and read only in Chinese. Later, during the Heian period (794 1185), a system known as kanbun emerged, which involved using Chinese text with diacritical marks to allow Japanese speakers to read Chinese sentences and restructure them into Japanese on the fly, by changing word order and adding particles and verb endings, in accordance with the rules of Japanese grammar. This was essentially a kind of codified sight translation.
Chinese characters also came to be used to write texts in the vernacular Japanese language, resulting in the modern kana syllabaries. Around 650 AD, a writing system called man'y gana (used in the ancient poetry anthology Man'y sh ) evolved that used a number of Chinese characters for their sound, rather than for their meaning. Man'y gana written in cursive style evolved into hiragana (literally "fluttering kana" in reference to the motion of the brush during cursive writing), or onna-de, that is, "ladies' hand",[12] a writing system that was accessible to women (who were denied higher education). Major works of Heian-era literature by women were written in hiragana. Katakana (literally "partial kana", in reference to the practice of using a part of a kanji character) emerged via a parallel path: monastery students simplified man'y gana to a single constituent element. Thus the two other writing systems, hiragana and katakana, referred to collectively as kana, are descended from kanji. In contrast with kana ( , literally "borrowed name", in reference to the character being "borrowed" as a label for its sound), kanji are also called mana ( , literally "true name", in reference to the character being used as a label for its meaning).
In modern Japanese, kanji are used to write certain words or parts of words (usually content words such as nouns, adjective stems, and verb stems), while hiragana are used to write inflected verb and adjective endings, phonetic complements to disambiguate readings (okurigana), particles, and miscellaneous words which have no kanji or whose kanji are considered obscure or too difficult to read or remember. Katakana are mostly used for representing onomatopoeia, non-Japanese loanwords (except those borrowed from ancient Chinese), the names of plants and animals (with exceptions), and for emphasis on certain words.
Orthographic reform and lists of kanji[edit]
Main article: Japanese script reform
 A young woman practicing kanji. Ukiyo-e woodblock print by Y sh  Chikanobu, 1897.
Since ancient times, there has been a strong opinion in Japan that kanji is the orthodox form of writing, but there were also people who argued against it.[13] Kamo no Mabuchi, a scholar of the Edo period, criticized the large number of characters in kanji. He also appreciated the small number of characters in kana characters and argued for the limitation of kanji.
After the Meiji Restoration and as Japan entered an era of active exchange with foreign countries, the need for script reform in Japan began to be called for. Some scholars argued for the abolition of kanji and the writing of Japanese using only kana or Latin characters. However, these views were not so widespread.
However, the need to limit the number of kanji characters was understood, and in May 1923, the Japanese government announced 1,962 kanji characters for regular use. In 1940, the Japanese Army decided on the "Table of Restricted Kanji for Weapons Names" ( , heiki meish  y  seigen kanji hy ) which limited the number of kanji that could be used for weapons names to 1,235. In 1942, the National Language Council announced the "Standard Kanji Table" ( , hy jun kanji-hy ) with a total of 2,528 characters, showing the standard for kanji used by ministries and agencies and in general society.[14]
In 1946, after World War II and under the Allied Occupation of Japan, the Japanese government, guided by the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers, instituted a series of orthographic reforms, to help children learn and to simplify kanji use in literature and periodicals.
The number of characters in circulation was reduced, and formal lists of characters to be learned during each grade of school were established.
Some characters were given simplified glyphs, called shinjitai ( ). Many variant forms of characters and obscure alternatives for common characters were officially discouraged.
These are simply guidelines, so many characters outside these standards are still widely known and commonly used; these are known as hy gaiji ( ).
Ky iku kanji[edit]
Main article: Ky iku kanji
The ky iku kanji ( , lit. "education kanji") are the 1,026 first kanji characters that Japanese children learn in elementary school, from first grade to sixth grade. The grade-level breakdown is known as the gakunen-betsu kanji hait hy  ( ), or the gakush  kanji ( ). This list of kanji is maintained by the Japanese Ministry of Education and prescribes which kanji characters and which kanji readings students should learn for each grade.
J y  kanji[edit]
Main article: J y  kanji
The j y  kanji ( , regular-use kanji) are 2,136 characters consisting of all the Ky iku kanji, plus 1,110 additional kanji taught in junior high and high school.[15] In publishing, characters outside this category are often given furigana. The j y  kanji were introduced in 1981, replacing an older list of 1,850 characters known as the t y  kanji ( , general-use kanji), introduced in 1946. Originally numbering 1,945 characters, the j y  kanji list was expanded to 2,136 in 2010. Some of the new characters were previously Jinmeiy  kanji; some are used to write prefecture names:  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,   and  .
Jinmeiy  kanji[edit]
Main article: Jinmeiy  kanji
As of September 25, 2017, the jinmeiy  kanji ( , kanji for use in personal names) consists of 863 characters. Kanji on this list are mostly used in people's names and some are traditional variants of j y  kanji. There were only 92 kanji in the original list published in 1952, but new additions have been made frequently. Sometimes the term jinmeiy  kanji refers to all 2,999 kanji from both the j y  and jinmeiy  lists combined.
Hy gai kanji[edit]
Main article: Hy gai kanji
Hy gai kanji ( , "unlisted characters") are any kanji not contained in the j y  kanji and jinmeiy  kanji lists. These are generally written using traditional characters, but extended shinjitai forms exist.
Japanese Industrial Standards for kanji[edit]
The Japanese Industrial Standards for kanji and kana define character code-points for each kanji and kana, as well as other forms of writing such as the Latin alphabet, Cyrillic script, Greek alphabet, Arabic numerals, etc. for use in information processing. They have had numerous revisions. The current standards are:
JIS X 0208,[16] the most recent version of the main standard. It has 6,355 kanji.
JIS X 0212,[17] a supplementary standard containing a further 5,801 kanji. This standard is rarely used, mainly because the common Shift JIS encoding system could not use it. This standard is effectively obsolete.
JIS X 0213,[18] a further revision which extended the JIS X 0208 set with 3,695 additional kanji, of which 2,743 (all but 952) were in JIS X 0212. The standard is in part designed to be compatible with Shift JIS encoding.
JIS X 0221:1995, the Japanese version of the ISO 10646/Unicode standard.
Gaiji[edit]
Gaiji ( , literally "external characters") are kanji that are not represented in existing Japanese encoding systems. These include variant forms of common kanji that need to be represented alongside the more conventional glyph in reference works and can include non-kanji symbols as well.
Gaiji can be either user-defined characters, system-specific characters or third-party add-on products.[19] Both are a problem for information interchange, as the code point used to represent an external character will not be consistent from one computer or operating system to another.
Gaiji were nominally prohibited in JIS X 0208-1997 where the available number of code-points was reduced to only 940.[20] JIS X 0213-2000 used the entire range of code-points previously allocated to gaiji, making them completely unusable. Most desktop and mobile systems have moved to Unicode negating the need for gaiji for most users. Nevertheless, they persist today in Japan's three major mobile phone information portals, where they are used for emoji (pictorial characters).
Unicode allows for optional encoding of gaiji in private use areas, while Adobe's SING (Smart INdependent Glyphlets)[21][22] technology allows the creation of customized gaiji.
The Text Encoding Initiative uses a  g  element to encode any non-standard character or glyph, including gaiji.[23] (The g stands for gaiji.)[24]
Total number of kanji[edit]
There is no definitive count of kanji characters, just as there is none of Chinese characters generally. The Dai Kan-Wa Jiten, which is considered to be comprehensive in Japan, contains about 50,000 characters. The Zhonghua Zihai, published in 1994 in China, contains about 85,000 characters, but the majority of them are not in common use in any country, and many are obscure variants or archaic forms.[25][26][27]
A list of 2,136 j y  kanji ( ) is regarded as necessary for functional literacy in Japanese. Approximately a thousand more characters are commonly used and readily understood by the majority in Japan and a few thousand more find occasional use, particularly in specialized fields of study but those may be obscure to most out of context. A total of 13,108 characters can be encoded in various Japanese Industrial Standards for kanji.
Readings[edit]
This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Overly verbose 'readings' section. Please help improve this section if you can. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Borrowing typology of Han characters
Meaning
Pronunciation
a) semantic on
L1
L1
b) semantic kun
L1
L2
c) phonetic on
 
L1
d) phonetic kun
 
L2
*With L1 representing the language borrowed from (Chinese) and L2 representing the borrowing language (Japanese).[28]
Because of the way they have been adopted into Japanese, a single kanji may be used to write one or more different words or, in some cases, morphemes and thus the same character may be pronounced in different ways. From the reader's point of view, kanji are said to have one or more different "readings". Although more than one reading may become activated in the brain,[29] deciding which reading is appropriate depends on recognizing which word it represents, which can usually be determined from context, intended meaning, whether the character occurs as part of a compound word or an independent word, and sometimes location within the sentence. For example,   is usually read ky , meaning "today", but in formal writing is instead read konnichi, meaning "nowadays"; this is understood from context. Nevertheless, some cases are ambiguous and require a furigana gloss, which are used to simplify difficult readings or to specify a non-standard reading.
Kanji readings are categorized as either on'yomi ( , literally "sound reading", from Chinese) or kun'yomi ( , literally "meaning reading", native Japanese), and most characters have at least two readings, at least one of each.
However, some characters have only a single reading, such as kiku ( , "chrysanthemum", an on-reading) or iwashi ( , "sardine", a kun-reading); kun-only are common for Japanese-coined kanji (kokuji).
Some common kanji have ten or more possible readings; the most complex common example is  , which is read as sei, sh , nama, ki, o-u, i-kiru, i-kasu, i-keru, u-mu, u-mareru, ha-eru, and ha-yasu, totaling eight basic readings (the first two are on, while the rest are kun), or 12 if related verbs are counted as distinct; see okurigana     for details.
Most often, a character will be used for both sound and meaning, and it is simply a matter of choosing the correct reading based on which word it represents.
On'yomi (Sino-Japanese reading) [edit]
The on'yomi ( , [o jomi], lit. "sound(-based) reading"), the Sino-Japanese reading, is the modern descendant of the Japanese approximation of the base Chinese pronunciation of the character at the time it was introduced. It was often previously referred to as translation reading, as it was recreated readings of the Chinese pronunciation but was not the Chinese pronunciation or reading itself, similar to the English pronunciation of Latin loanwords. Old Japanese scripts often stated that on'yomi readings were also created by the Japanese during their arrival and re-borrowed by the Chinese as their own. There also exist kanji created by the Japanese and given an on'yomi reading despite not being a Chinese-derived or a Chinese-originating character. Some kanji were introduced from different parts of China at different times, and so have multiple on'yomi, and often multiple meanings. Kanji invented in Japan (kokuji) would not normally be expected to have on'yomi, but there are exceptions, such as the character   "to work", which has the kun'yomi "hatara(ku)" and the on'yomi "d ", and   "gland", which has only the on'yomi "sen" in both cases these come from the on'yomi of the phonetic component, respectively   "d " and   "sen".
Generally, on'yomi are classified into four types according to their region and time of origin:
Go-on ( , "Wu sound") readings derive from the pronunciation used in the Northern and Southern dynasties of China during the 5th and 6th centuries, primarily from the speech of the capital Jiankang (today's Nanjing). They are related to Wu Chinese and the Shanghainese language.
Kan-on ( , "Han sound") readings come from the pronunciation utilized during the Tang dynasty of China in the 7th to 9th centuries, primarily from the standard speech of the capital, Chang'an (modern Xi'an). Here, Kan refers to Han Chinese people or China proper.
T -on ( , "Tang sound") readings are based on the pronunciations of later dynasties of China, such as the Song and Ming. They cover all readings adopted from the Heian era to the Edo period. This is also known as T s -on ( , Tang and Song sound).
 Kan'y -on ( , "customary sound") readings, which are mistaken or changed readings of the kanji that have become accepted into the Japanese language. In some cases, they are the actual readings that accompanied the character's introduction to Japan but do not match how the character "should" (is prescribed to) be read according to the rules of character construction and pronunciation.
Examples (rare readings in parentheses)
Kanji
Meaning
Go-on
Kan-on
T -on
Kan'y -on
 
bright
my 
mei
(min)
 
 
go
gy g 
k k 
(an)
 
 
extreme
goku
kyoku
 
 
 
pearl
shu
shu
ju
(zu)
 
degree
do
(to)
 
 
 
transport
(shu)
(shu)
 
yu
 
masculine
 
 
 
y 
 
bear
 
 
 
y 
 
child
shi
shi
su
 
 
clear
sh 
sei
(shin)
 
 
capital
ky 
kei
(kin)
 
 
soldier
hy 
hei
 
 
 
strong
g 
ky 
 
 
The most common form of readings is the kan-on one, and use of a non-kan-on reading in a word where the kan-on reading is well known is a common cause of reading mistakes or difficulty, such as in ge-doku ( , detoxification, anti-poison) (go-on), where   is usually instead read as kai. The go-on readings are especially common in Buddhist terminology such as gokuraku ( , paradise), as well as in some of the earliest loans, such as the Sino-Japanese numbers. The t -on readings occur in some later words, such as isu ( , chair), futon ( , mattress), and andon ( , a kind of paper lantern). The go-on, kan-on, and t -on readings are generally cognate (with rare exceptions of homographs; see below), having a common origin in Old Chinese, and hence form linguistic doublets or triplets, but they can differ significantly from each other and from modern Chinese pronunciation.
In Chinese, most characters are associated with a single Chinese sound, though there are distinct literary and colloquial readings. However, some homographs (  pinyin: du y nz ) such as   (h ng or x ng) (Japanese: an, g , gy ) have more than one reading in Chinese representing different meanings, which is reflected in the carryover to Japanese as well. Additionally, many Chinese syllables, especially those with an entering tone, did not fit the largely consonant-vowel (CV) phonotactics of classical Japanese. Thus most on'yomi are composed of two morae (beats), the second of which is either a lengthening of the vowel in the first mora (to ei,  , or  ), the vowel i, or one of the syllables ku, ki, tsu, chi, fu (historically, later merged into   and  ), or moraic n, chosen for their approximation to the final consonants of Middle Chinese. It may be that palatalized consonants before vowels other than i developed in Japanese as a result of Chinese borrowings, as they are virtually unknown in words of native Japanese origin, but are common in Chinese.
On'yomi primarily occur in multi-kanji compound words ( , jukugo), many of which are the result of the adoption, along with the kanji themselves, of Chinese words for concepts that either did not exist in Japanese or could not be articulated as elegantly using native words. This borrowing process is often compared to the English borrowings from Latin, Greek, and Norman French, since Chinese-borrowed terms are often more specialized, or considered to sound more erudite or formal, than their native counterparts (occupying a higher linguistic register). The major exception to this rule is family names, in which the native kun'yomi are usually used (though on'yomi are found in many personal names, especially men's names).
Kun'yomi (native reading) [edit]
The kun'yomi ( , [k jomi], lit. "meaning reading"), the native reading, is a reading based on the pronunciation of a native Japanese word, or yamato kotoba, that closely approximated the meaning of the Chinese character when it was introduced. As with on'yomi, there can be multiple kun'yomi for the same kanji, and some kanji have no kun'yomi at all.
For instance, the character for east,  , has the on'yomi t , from Middle Chinese tung. However, Japanese already had two words for "east": higashi and azuma. Thus the kanji   had the latter readings added as kun'yomi. In contrast, the kanji  , denoting a Chinese unit of measurement (about 30 mm or 1.2 inch), has no native Japanese equivalent; it only has an on'yomi, sun, with no native kun'yomi. Most kokuji, Japanese-created Chinese characters, only have kun'yomi, although some have back-formed a pseudo-on'yomi by analogy with similar characters, such as   d , from   d , and there are even some, such as   sen "gland", that have only an on'yomi.
Kun'yomi are characterized by the strict (C)V syllable structure of yamato kotoba. Most noun or adjective kun'yomi are two to three syllables long, while verb kun'yomi are usually between one and three syllables in length, not counting trailing hiragana called okurigana. Okurigana are not considered to be part of the internal reading of the character, although they are part of the reading of the word. A beginner in the language will rarely come across characters with long readings, but readings of three or even four syllables are not uncommon. This contrasts with on'yomi, which are monosyllabic, and is unusual in the Chinese family of scripts, which generally use one character per syllable not only in Chinese, but also in Korean, Vietnamese, and Zhuang; polysyllabic Chinese characters are rare and considered non-standard.
  uketamawaru,   kokorozashi, and   mikotonori have five syllables represented by a single kanji, the longest readings in the j y  character set. These unusually long readings are due to a single character representing a compound word:
  is a single character for a compound verb, one component of which has a long reading.
It has an alternative spelling as   u(ke)-tamawa(ru), hence (1+1)+3=5.
Compare common   u(ke)-tsu(keru).
  is a nominalization of the verb   which has a long reading kokoroza(su).
This is due to its being derived from a noun-verb compound,   kokoro-za(su).
The nominalization removes the okurigana, hence increasing the reading by one mora, yielding 4+1=5.
Compare common   hanashi 2+1=3, from   hana(su).
  is a triple compound.
It has an alternative spelling   mi-koto-nori, hence 1+2+2=5.
Further, some J y  characters have long non-J y  readings (students learn the character, but not the reading), such as omonpakaru for  .
In a number of cases, multiple kanji were assigned to cover a single Japanese word. Typically when this occurs, the different kanji refer to specific shades of meaning. For instance, the word  , naosu, when written  , means "to heal an illness or sickness". When written   it means "to fix or correct something". Sometimes the distinction is very clear, although not always. Differences of opinion among reference works are not uncommon; one dictionary may say the kanji are equivalent, while another dictionary may draw distinctions of use. As a result, native speakers of the language may have trouble knowing which kanji to use and resort to personal preference or by writing the word in hiragana. This latter strategy is frequently employed with more complex cases such as   moto, which has at least five different kanji:  ,  ,  ,  , and  , the first three of which have only very subtle differences. Another notable example is sakazuki "sake cup", which may be spelt as at least five different kanji:  ,  ,  / , and  ; of these, the first two are common formally   is a small cup and   a large cup.
Local dialectical readings of kanji are also classified under kun'yomi, most notably readings for words in Ryukyuan languages. Further, in rare cases gairaigo (borrowed words) have a single character associated with them, in which case this reading is formally classified as a kun'yomi, because the character is being used for meaning, not sound.
Ateji[edit]
Main article: Ateji
Ateji ( ,   or  ) are characters used only for their sounds. In this case, pronunciation is still based on a standard reading, or used only for meaning (broadly a form of ateji, narrowly jukujikun). Therefore, only the full compound not the individual character has a reading. There are also special cases where the reading is completely different, often based on a historical or traditional reading.
The analogous phenomenon occurs to a much lesser degree in Chinese varieties, where there are literary and colloquial readings of Chinese characters borrowed readings and native readings. In Chinese these borrowed readings and native readings are etymologically related, since they are between Chinese varieties (which are related), not from Chinese to Japanese (which are not related). They thus form doublets and are generally similar, analogous to different on'yomi, reflecting different stages of Chinese borrowings into Japanese.
Gairaigo[edit]
Longer readings exist for non-J y  characters and non-kanji symbols, where a long gairaigo word may be the reading (this is classed as kun'yomi see single character gairaigo, below) the character   has the seven kana reading   senchim toru "centimeter", though it is generally written as "cm" (with two half-width characters, so occupying one space); another common example is '%' (the percent sign), which has the five kana reading   p sento.
Mixed readings [edit]
 A j bako ( ), which has a mixed on-kun reading
 A yut  ( ), which has a mixed kun-on reading
There are many kanji compounds that use a mixture of on'yomi and kun'yomi, known as j bako yomi ( , multi-layered food box) or yut  ( , hot liquid pail) words (depending on the order), which are themselves examples of this kind of compound (they are autological words): the first character of j bako is read using on'yomi, the second kun'yomi (on-kun,  ). 
It is the other way around with yu-t  (kun-on,  ).
Formally, these are referred to as j bako-yomi ( , j bako reading) and yut -yomi ( , yut  reading). Note that in both these words, the on'yomi has a long vowel; long vowels in Japanese generally are derived from sound changes common to loans from Chinese, hence distinctive of on'yomi. These are the Japanese form of hybrid words. Other examples include basho ( , "place", kun-on,  ), kin'iro ( , "golden", on-kun,  ) and aikid  ( , the martial art Aikido", kun-on-on,  ).
Ateji often use mixed readings. For instance the city of Sapporo ( ), whose name derives from the Ainu language and has no meaning in Japanese, is written with the on-kun compound   (which includes sokuon as if it were a purely on compound).
Special readings[edit]
Gikun ( ) and jukujikun ( ) are readings of kanji combinations that have no direct correspondence to the characters' individual on'yomi or kun'yomi. From the point of view of the character, rather than the word, this is known as a   (nankun, "difficult reading"), and these are listed in kanji dictionaries under the entry for the character.
Gikun are other readings assigned to a character instead of its standard readings. An example is reading   (meaning "cold") as fuyu ("winter") rather than the standard readings samu or kan, and instead of the usual spelling for fuyu of  . Another example is using   (lit. "smoke grass") with the reading tabako ("tobacco") rather than the otherwise-expected readings of kemuri-gusa or ens . Some of these, such as for tabako, have become lexicalized, but in many cases this kind of use is typically non-standard and employed in specific contexts by individual writers. Aided with furigana, gikun could be used to convey complex literary or poetic effect (especially if the readings contradict the kanji), or clarification if the referent may not be obvious.
Jukujikun are when the standard kanji for a word are related to the meaning, but not the sound. The word is pronounced as a whole, not corresponding to sounds of individual kanji. For example,   ("this morning") is jukujikun. This word is not read as *ima'asa, the expected kun'yomi of the characters, and only infrequently as konch , the on'yomi of the characters. The most common reading is kesa, a native bisyllabic Japanese word that may be seen as a single morpheme, or as a compound of ke ( this , as in kefu, the older reading for  ,  today ), and asa,  morning .[30] Likewise,   ("today") is also jukujikun, usually read with the native reading ky ; its on'yomi, konnichi, does occur in certain words and expressions, especially in the broader sense "nowadays" or "current", such as   ("present-day"), although in the phrase konnichi wa ("good day"), konnichi is typically spelled wholly with hiragana rather than with the kanji  .
Jukujikun are primarily used for some native Japanese words, such as Yamato (  or  , the name of the dominant ethnic group of Japan, a former Japanese province as well as ancient name for Japan), and for some old borrowings, such as   (shishamo, literally "willow leaf fish") from Ainu,   (tabako, literally  smoke grass ) from Portuguese, or   (b ru, literally  wheat alcohol ) from Dutch, especially if the word was borrowed before the Meiji period. Words whose kanji are jukujikun are often usually written as hiragana (if native), or katakana (if borrowed); some old borrowed words are also written as hiragana, especially Portuguese loanwords such as   (karuta) from Portuguese "carta" (English  card ) or   (tempura) from Portuguese "tempora" (English  times, season ),[citation needed] as well as   (tabako).
Sometimes, jukujikun can even have more kanji than there are syllables, examples being kera ( ,  woodpecker ), gumi ( ,  silver berry, oleaster ),[31] and Hozumi ( , a surname).[32] This phenomenon is observed in animal names that are shortened and used as suffixes for zoological compound names, for example when  , normally read as koganemushi, is shortened to kogane in   kurokogane, although zoological names are commonly spelled with katakana rather than with kanji. Outside zoology, this type of shortening only occurs on a handful of words, for example   daigen(sui), or the historical male name suffix   -emon, which was shortened from the word uemon.
Jukujikun are quite varied. Often the kanji compound for jukujikun is idiosyncratic and created for the word, and there is no corresponding Chinese word with that spelling. In other cases a kanji compound for an existing Chinese word is reused, where the Chinese word and on'yomi may or may not be used in Japanese. For example,   ( reindeer ) is jukujikun for tonakai, from Ainu, but the on'yomi reading of junroku is also used. In some cases, Japanese coinages have subsequently been borrowed back into Chinese, such as   (ank ,  monkfish ).
The underlying word for jukujikun is a native Japanese word or foreign borrowing, which either does not have an existing kanji spelling (either kun'yomi or ateji) or for which a new kanji spelling is produced. Most often the word is a noun, which may be a simple noun (not a compound or derived from a verb), or may be a verb form or a fusional pronunciation. For example, the word   (sum ,  sumo ) is originally from the verb   (sumau,  to vie, to compete ), while   (ky ,  today ) is fusional (from older ke,  this  + fu,  day ).
In rare cases jukujikun is also applied to inflectional words (verbs and adjectives), in which case there is frequently a corresponding Chinese word. The most common example of an inflectional jukujikun is the adjective   (kawai-i,  cute ), originally kawafayu-i; the word ( ) is used in Chinese, but the corresponding on'yomi is not used in Japanese. By contrast, "appropriate" can be either   (fusawa-shii, as jukujikun) or   (s , as on'yomi). Which reading to use can be discerned by the presence or absence of the -shii ending (okurigana). A common example of a verb with jukujikun is   (haya-ru,  to spread, to be in vogue ), corresponding to on'yomi   (ry k ). A sample jukujikun deverbal (noun derived from a verb form) is   (yusuri,  extortion ), from   (yusu-ru,  to extort ), spelling from   (ky sei,  extortion ). See the   and   articles in the Japanese Wikipedia for many more examples. Note that there are also compound verbs and, less commonly, compound adjectives, and while these may have multiple kanji without intervening characters, they are read using the usual kun'yomi. Examples include   (omo-shiro-i,  interesting , literally  face + white ) and   (zuru-gashiko-i,  sly , literally  cunning, crafty + clever, smart ).
Typographically, the furigana for jukujikun are often written so they are centered across the entire word, or for inflectional words over the entire root corresponding to the reading being related to the entire word rather than each part of the word being centered over its corresponding character, as is often done for the usual phono-semantic readings.
Broadly speaking, jukujikun can be considered a form of ateji, though in narrow usage "ateji" refers specifically to using characters for sound and not meaning (sound-spelling), whereas "jukujikun" refers to using characters for their meaning and not sound (meaning-spelling).
Many jukujikun (established meaning-spellings) began life as gikun (improvised meaning-spellings). Occasionally a single word will have many such kanji spellings. An extreme example is hototogisu (lesser cuckoo), which may be spelt in a great many ways, including  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , ,  , and  many of these variant spellings are particular to haiku poems.
Single character gairaigo[edit]
In some rare cases, an individual kanji has a reading that is borrowed from a modern foreign language (gairaigo), though most often these words are written in katakana. Notable examples include p ji ( , page), botan ( , button), zero ( , zero), and m toru ( , meter). See list of single character gairaigo for more. These are classed as kun'yomi of a single character, because the character is being used for meaning only (without the Chinese pronunciation), rather than as ateji, which is the classification used when a gairaigo term is written as a compound (2 or more characters). However, unlike the vast majority of other kun'yomi, these readings are not native Japanese, but rather borrowed, so the "kun'yomi" label can be misleading. The readings are also written in katakana, unlike the usual hiragana for native kun'yomi. Note that most of these characters are for units, particularly SI units, in many cases using new characters (kokuji) coined during the Meiji period, such as kirom toru ( , kilometer,   "meter" +   "thousand").
Nanori[edit]
Main article: Nanori
Some kanji also have lesser-known readings called nanori ( ), which are mostly used for names (often given names) and, in general, are closely related to the kun'yomi. Place names sometimes also use nanori or, occasionally, unique readings not found elsewhere.
When to use which reading[edit]
Although there are general rules for when to use on'yomi and when to use kun'yomi, the language is littered with exceptions, and it is not always possible for even a native speaker to know how to read a character without prior knowledge (this is especially true for names, both of people and places); further, a given character may have multiple kun'yomi or on'yomi. When reading Japanese, one primarily recognizes words (multiple characters and okurigana) and their readings, rather than individual characters, and only guess readings of characters when trying to "sound out" an unrecognized word.
Homographs exist, however, which can sometimes be deduced from context, and sometimes cannot, requiring a glossary. For example,   may be read either as ky  "today (informal)" (special fused reading for native word) or as konnichi "these days (formal)" (on'yomi); in formal writing this will generally be read as konnichi.
In some cases multiple readings are common, as in   "pork soup", which is commonly pronounced both as ton-jiru (mixed on-kun) and buta-jiru (kun-kun), with ton somewhat more common nationally. Inconsistencies abound for example   gy -niku "beef" and   y -niku "mutton" have on-on readings, but   buta-niku "pork" and   tori-niku "poultry" have kun-on readings.
The main guideline is that a single kanji followed by okurigana (hiragana characters that are part of the word) as used in native verbs and adjectives always indicates kun'yomi, while kanji compounds (kango) usually use on'yomi, which is usually kan-on; however, other on'yomi are also common, and kun'yomi are also commonly used in kango.
For a kanji in isolation without okurigana, it is typically read using their kun'yomi, though there are numerous exceptions. For example,   "iron" is usually read with the on'yomi tetsu rather than the kun'yomi kurogane. Chinese on'yomi which are not the common kan-on reading are a frequent cause of difficulty or mistakes when encountering unfamiliar words or for inexperienced readers, though skilled natives will recognize the word; a good example is ge-doku ( , detoxification, anti-poison) (go-on), where ( ) is usually instead read as kai.
Okurigana ( ) are used with kun'yomi to mark the inflected ending of a native verb or adjective, or by convention. Note that Japanese verbs and adjectives are closed class, and do not generally admit new words (borrowed Chinese vocabulary, which are nouns, can form verbs by adding -suru ( , to do) at the end, and adjectives via   -no or   -na, but cannot become native Japanese vocabulary, which inflect). For example:   aka-i "red",   atara-shii "new",   mi-ru "(to) see". Okurigana can be used to indicate which kun'yomi to use, as in   ta-beru versus   ku-u (casual), both meaning "(to) eat", but this is not always sufficient, as in  , which may be read as a-ku or hira-ku, both meaning "(to) open".   is a particularly complicated example, with multiple kun and on'yomi see okurigana:   for details. Okurigana is also used for some nouns and adverbs, as in   nasake "sympathy",   kanarazu "invariably", but not for   kane "money", for instance. Okurigana is an important aspect of kanji usage in Japanese; see that article for more information on kun'yomi orthography
Kanji occurring in compounds (multi-kanji words) ( , jukugo) are generally read using on'yomi, especially for four-character compounds (yojijukugo). Though again, exceptions abound, for example,   j h  "information",   gakk  "school", and   shinkansen "bullet train" all follow this pattern. This isolated kanji versus compound distinction gives words for similar concepts completely different pronunciations.   "north" and   "east" use the kun'yomi kita and higashi, being stand-alone characters, but   "northeast", as a compound, uses the on'yomi hokut . This is further complicated by the fact that many kanji have more than one on'yomi:   is read as sei in   sensei "teacher" but as sh  in   issh  "one's whole life". Meaning can also be an important indicator of reading;   is read i when it means "simple", but as eki when it means "divination", both being on'yomi for this character.
These rules of thumb have many exceptions. Kun'yomi compound words are not as numerous as those with on'yomi, but neither are they rare. Examples include   tegami "letter",   higasa "parasol", and the famous   kamikaze "divine wind". Such compounds may also have okurigana, such as   (also written  ) karaage "Chinese-style fried chicken" and   origami, although many of these can also be written with the okurigana omitted (for example,   or  ). In general, compounds coined in Japan using Japanese roots will be read in kun'yomi while those imported from China will be read in on'yomi.
Similarly, some on'yomi characters can also be used as words in isolation:   ai "love",   Zen,   ten "mark, dot". Most of these cases involve kanji that have no kun'yomi, so there can be no confusion, although exceptions do occur. Alone   may be read as kin "gold" or as kane "money, metal"; only context can determine the writer's intended reading and meaning.
Multiple readings have given rise to a number of homographs, in some cases having different meanings depending on how they are read. One example is  , which can be read in three different ways: j zu (skilled), uwate (upper part), or kamite (stage left/house right). In addition,   has the reading umai (skilled). More subtly,   has three different readings, all meaning "tomorrow": ashita (casual), asu (polite), and my nichi (formal). Furigana (reading glosses) is often used to clarify any potential ambiguities.
Conversely, in some cases homophonous terms may be distinguished in writing by different characters, but not so distinguished in speech, and hence potentially confusing. In some cases when it is important to distinguish these in speech, the reading of a relevant character may be changed. For example,   (privately established, esp. school) and   (city established) are both normally pronounced shi-ritsu; in speech these may be distinguished by the alternative pronunciations watakushi-ritsu and ichi-ritsu. More informally, in legal jargon   "preamble" and   "full text" are both pronounced zen-bun, so   may be pronounced mae-bun for clarity, as in "Have you memorized the preamble [not 'whole text'] of the constitution?". As in these examples, this is primarily using a kun'yomi for one character in a normally on'yomi term.
As stated above, j bako and yut  readings are also not uncommon. Indeed, all four combinations of reading are possible: on-on, kun-kun, kun-on and on-kun.
Legalese[edit]
Certain words take different readings depending on whether the context concerns legal matters or not. For example:
Word
Common reading
Legalese reading
  ("negligence")[33]
ketai
kaitai
  ("auction")[33]
ky bai
keibai
  ("siblings")
ky dai shimai
keitei shimai
  ("metes and bounds")
ky kai
keikai
  ("acquisition at an auction")[33]
ky raku
keiraku
  ("will")[33]
yuigon
igon
For legal contexts where distinction must be made for homophonous words such as baishun and kary , see Ambiguous readings below.
Ambiguous readings[edit]
In some instances where even context cannot easily provide clarity for homophones, alternative readings or mixed readings can be used instead of regular readings to avoid ambiguity. For example:
Ambiguous reading
Disambiguated readings
baishun
baishun ( , "selling sex", on)
kaishun ( , "buying sex", yut )[34]
itoko
j keitei ( , "male cousin", on)
j shimai ( , "female cousin", on)
j kei ( , "older male cousin", on)
j shi ( , "older female cousin", on)
j tei ( , "younger male cousin", on)
j mai ( , "younger female cousin", on)
jiten
kotobaten ( , "word dictionary", yut )[34]
kototen ( , "encyclopedia", yut )[34][33]
mojiten ( , "character dictionary", irregular, from moji ( , "character"))[34]
kagaku
kagaku ( , "science", on)
bakegaku ( , "chemistry", yut )[34][33]
kary 
ayamachiry  ( , "administrative fine", yut )[34][33]
togary  ( , "misdemeanor fine", yut )[34][33]
K shin
Kinoesaru ( , "Greater-Wood-Monkey year", kun)
Kinoetatsu ( , "Greater-Wood-Dragon year", kun)
Kanoesaru ( , "Greater-Fire-Monkey year", kun)
Kanoetatsu ( , "Greater-Fire-Dragon year", kun)
Shin
Hatashin ( , "Qin", irregular, from the alternative reading Hata used as a family name)[34][33]
Susumushin ( , "Jin", irregular, from the alternative reading Susumu used as a personal name)[34][33]
shiritsu
ichiritsu ( , "municipal", yut )[34][33]
watakushiritsu ( , "private", yut )[34][33]
Place names[edit]
Several famous place names, including those of Japan itself (  Nihon or sometimes Nippon), those of some cities such as Tokyo (  T ky ) and Kyoto (  Ky to), and those of the main islands Honshu (  Honsh ), Kyushu (  Ky sh ), Shikoku (  Shikoku), and Hokkaido (  Hokkaid ) are read with on'yomi; however, the majority of Japanese place names are read with kun'yomi:    saka,   Aomori,   Hakone. Names often use characters and readings that are not in common use outside of names. When characters are used as abbreviations of place names, their reading may not match that in the original. The Osaka ( ) and Kobe ( ) baseball team, the Hanshin ( ) Tigers, take their name from the on'yomi of the second kanji of  saka and the first of K be. The name of the Keisei ( ) railway line linking Tokyo ( ) and Narita ( ) is formed similarly, although the reading of   from   is kei, despite ky  already being an on'yomi in the word T ky .
Japanese family names are also usually read with kun'yomi:   Yamada,   Tanaka,   Suzuki. Japanese given names often have very irregular readings. Although they are not typically considered j bako or yut , they often contain mixtures of kun'yomi, on'yomi and nanori, such as   Daisuke [on-kun],   Natsumi [kun-on]. Being chosen at the discretion of the parents, the readings of given names do not follow any set rules, and it is impossible to know with certainty how to read a person's name without independent verification. Parents can be quite creative, and rumours abound of children called    su ("Earth") and   Enjeru ("Angel"); neither are common names, and have normal readings chiky  and tenshi respectively. Some common Japanese names can be written in multiple ways, e.g. Akira can be written as  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,   and many other characters and kanji combinations not listed,[35] Satoshi can be written as  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , etc.,[36] and Haruka can be written as  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , and several other possibilities.[37] Common patterns do exist, however, allowing experienced readers to make a good guess for most names. To alleviate any confusion on how to pronounce the names of other Japanese people, most official Japanese documents require Japanese to write their names in both kana and kanji.[32]
Chinese place names and Chinese personal names appearing in Japanese texts, if spelled in kanji, are almost invariably read with on'yomi. Especially for older and well-known names, the resulting Japanese pronunciation may differ widely from that used by modern Chinese speakers. For example, Mao Zedong's name is pronounced as M  Takut  ( ) in Japanese, and the name of the legendary Monkey King, Sun Wukong, is pronounced Son Gok  ( ) in Japanese.
Today, Chinese names that are not well known in Japan are often spelled in katakana instead, in a form much more closely approximating the native Chinese pronunciation. Alternatively, they may be written in kanji with katakana furigana. Many such cities have names that come from non-Chinese languages like Mongolian or Manchu. Examples of such not-well-known Chinese names include:
English name
Japanese name
R maji
Katakana
Kanji
Harbin
Harubin
 
 
 r mqi
Urumuchi
 
 
Qiqihar
Chichiharu
 
 
Lhasa
Rasa
 
 
Internationally renowned Chinese-named cities tend to imitate the older English pronunciations of their names, regardless of the kanji's on'yomi or the Mandarin or Cantonese pronunciation, and can be written in either katakana or kanji. Examples include:
English name
Mandarin name (Pinyin)
Hokkien name (T i-l )
Cantonese name (Yale)
Japanese name
Kanji
Katakana
R maji
Hong Kong
Xianggang
Hiong-k ng / Hiang-k ng
H ung G ng
 
 
Honkon
Macao/Macau
Ao'men
 -mn g /  -b n
Ou M hn
 
 
Makao
Shanghai
Shanghai
Si ng-h i / Si ng-h i
Seuhng H i
 
 
Shanhai
Beijing/Peking
Beijing
Pak-kiann
B k G ng
 
 
Pekin
Nanjing/Nanking
Nanjing
L m-kiann
N ahm G ng
 
 
Nankin
Taipei
Taibei
T i-pak
T ih B k
 
  /  
Taipei / Taihoku
Kaohsiung
Gaoxiong / Dagou
Ko-hi ng
G u H hng
  /  
  /  
Kaoshun / Takao
Notes: 
Guangzhou, the city, is pronounced K sh , while Guangdong, its province, is pronounced Kanton, not K t  (in this case, opting for a T -on reading rather than the usual Kan-on reading).
Kaohsiung was originally pronounced Takao (or similar) in Hokkien and Japanese. It received this written name (kanji/Chinese) from Japanese, and later its spoken Mandarin name from the corresponding characters. The English name "Kaohsiung" derived from its Mandarin pronunciation. Today it is pronounced either   or   in Japanese.
Taipei is generally pronounced   in Japanese.
In some cases the same kanji can appear in a given word with different readings. Normally this occurs when a character is duplicated and the reading of the second character has voicing (rendaku), as in   hito-bito "people" (more often written with the iteration mark as  ), but in rare cases the readings can be unrelated, as in tobi-haneru ( , "hop around", more often written  ).
Pronunciation assistance[edit]
Because of the ambiguities involved, kanji sometimes have their pronunciation for the given context spelled out in ruby characters known as furigana, (small kana written above or to the right of the character) or kumimoji (small kana written in-line after the character). This is especially true in texts for children or foreign learners. It is also used in newspapers and manga for rare or unusual readings, or for situations like the first time a character's name is given, and for characters not included in the officially recognized set of essential kanji. Works of fiction sometimes use furigana to create new "words" by giving normal kanji non-standard readings, or to attach a foreign word rendered in katakana as the reading for a kanji or kanji compound of the same or similar meaning.
Spelling words[edit]
Conversely, specifying a given kanji, or spelling out a kanji word whether the pronunciation is known or not can be complicated, due to the fact that there is not a commonly used standard way to refer to individual kanji (one does not refer to "kanji #237"), and that a given reading does not map to a single kanji indeed there are many homophonous words, not simply individual characters, particularly for kango (with on'yomi). Easiest is to write the word out either on paper or tracing it in the air or look it up (given the pronunciation) in a dictionary, particularly an electronic dictionary; when this is not possible, such as when speaking over the phone or writing implements are not available (and tracing in air is too complicated), various techniques can be used. These include giving kun'yomi for characters these are often unique using a well-known word with the same character (and preferably the same pronunciation and meaning), and describing the character via its components. For example, one may explain how to spell the word k shinry  ( , spice) via the words kao-ri ( , fragrance), kara-i ( , spicy), and in-ry  ( , beverage) the first two use the kun'yomi, the third is a well-known compound saying "kaori, karai, ry  as in inry ."
Dictionaries[edit]
In dictionaries, both words and individual characters have readings glossed, via various conventions. Native words and Sino-Japanese vocabulary are glossed in hiragana (for both kun and on readings), while borrowings (gairaigo) including modern borrowings from Chinese are glossed in katakana; this is the standard writing convention also used in furigana. By contrast, readings for individual characters are conventionally written in katakana for on readings, and hiragana for kun readings. Kun readings may further have a separator to indicate which characters are okurigana, and which are considered readings of the character itself. For example, in the entry for  , the reading corresponding to the basic verb eat ( , taberu) may be written as  .  (ta.beru), to indicate that ta is the reading of the character itself. Further, kanji dictionaries often list compounds including irregular readings of a kanji.
Local developments and divergences from Chinese[edit]
Since kanji are essentially Chinese hanzi used to write Japanese, the majority of characters used in modern Japanese still retain their Chinese meaning, physical resemblance with some of their modern traditional Chinese characters counterparts, and a degree of similarity with Classical Chinese pronunciation imported to Japan from 5th to 9th century.[38] Nevertheless, after centuries of development, there is a notable number of kanji used in modern Japanese which have different meaning from hanzi used in modern Chinese. Such differences are the result of:
the use of characters created in Japan,
characters that have been given different meanings in Japanese, and
post-World War II simplifications (shinjitai) of the character.
Likewise, the process of character simplification in mainland China since the 1950s has resulted in the fact that Japanese speakers who have not studied Chinese may not recognize some simplified characters.
Kokuji [edit]
See also: Gukja, Ch  N m, and Chinese family of scripts  Adaptations for other languages
In Japanese, Kokuji ( , "national characters") refers to Chinese characters made outside of China. Specifically, kanji made in Japan are referred to as Wasei kanji ( ). They are primarily formed in the usual way of Chinese characters, namely by combining existing components, though using a combination that is not used in China. The corresponding phenomenon in Korea is called gukja ( ), a cognate name; there are however far fewer Korean-coined characters than Japanese-coined ones. Other languages using the Chinese family of scripts sometimes have far more extensive systems of native characters, most significantly Vietnamese ch  N m, which comprises over 20,000 characters used throughout traditional Vietnamese writing, and Zhuang sawndip, which comprises over 10,000 characters, which are still in use.
Since kokuji are generally devised for existing native words, these usually only have native kun readings. However, they occasionally have a Chinese on reading, derived from a phonetic, as in  , d , and in rare cases only have an on reading, as in  , sen, from  , which was derived for use in technical compounds (  means "gland", hence used in medical terminology).
The majority of kokuji are ideogrammatic compounds ( ), meaning that they are composed of two (or more) characters, with the meaning associated with the combination. For example,   is composed of   (person radical) plus   (action), hence "action of a person, work". This is in contrast to kanji generally, which are overwhelmingly phono-semantic compounds. This difference is because kokuji were coined to express Japanese words, so borrowing existing (Chinese) readings could not express these combining existing characters to logically express the meaning was the simplest way to achieve this. Other illustrative examples (below) include   sakaki tree, formed as   "tree" and   "god", literally "divine tree", and   tsuji "crossroads, street" formed as   ( ) "road" and   "cross", hence "cross-road".
In terms of meanings, these are especially for natural phenomena (esp. flora and fauna species), including a very large number of fish, such as   (sardine),   (codfish),   (seaperch), and   (sillago), and trees, such as   (evergreen oak),   (Japanese cedar),   (birch, maple) and   (spindle tree).[39] In other cases they refer to specifically Japanese abstract concepts, everyday words (like  , "crossroads", see above), or later technical coinages (such as  , "gland", see above).
There are hundreds of kokuji in existence.[40] Many are rarely used, but a number have become commonly used components of the written Japanese language. These include the following:
J y  kanji has about nine kokuji; there is some dispute over classification, but generally includes these:
    d ,  ( ) hatara(ku) "work", the most commonly used kokuji, used in the fundamental verb hatara(ku) ( , "work"), included in elementary texts and on the Proficiency Test N5.
   ( ) ko(mu), used in the fundamental verb komu ( , "to be crowded")
   ( ) nio(u), used in common verb niou ( , "to smell, to be fragrant")
    hatake "field of crops"
    sen, "gland"
    t ge "mountain pass"
    waku, "frame"
    hei, "wall"
   ( ) shibo(ru), "to squeeze" (disputed; see below);
jinmeiy  kanji
    sakaki "tree, genus Cleyera"
    tsuji "crossroads, street"
    monme (unit of weight)
Hy gaiji:
    shitsuke "training, rearing (an animal, a child)"
Some of these characters (for example,  , "gland")[41] have been introduced to China. In some cases the Chinese reading is the inferred Chinese reading, interpreting the character as a phono-semantic compound (as in how on readings are sometimes assigned to these characters in Chinese), while in other cases (such as  ), the Japanese on reading is borrowed (in general this differs from the modern Chinese pronunciation of this phonetic). Similar coinages occurred to a more limited extent in Korea and Vietnam.
Historically, some kokuji date back to very early Japanese writing, being found in the Man'y sh , for example  iwashi "sardine" dates to the Nara period (8th century) while they have continued to be created as late as the late 19th century, when a number of characters were coined in the Meiji era for new scientific concepts. For example, some characters were produced as regular compounds for some (but not all) SI units, such as   (  "meter" +   "thousand, kilo-") for kilometer,   (  "liter" +   "thousand, kilo-") for kiloliter, and   (  "gram" + "thousand, kilo-") for kilogram. However, SI units in Japanese today are almost exclusively written using r maji or katakana such as   or   for km,   for kl, and   or   for kg.[42]
In Japan, the kokuji category is strictly defined as characters whose earliest appearance is in Japan.[43] If a character appears earlier in the Chinese literature, it is not considered a kokuji even if the character was independently coined in Japan and unrelated to the Chinese character (meaning "not borrowed from Chinese"). In other words, kokuji are not simply characters that were made in Japan, but characters that were first made in Japan. An illustrative example is ank  ( , monkfish). This spelling was created in Edo period Japan from the ateji (phonetic kanji spelling)   for the existing word ank  by adding the   radical to each character the characters were "made in Japan". However,   is not considered kokuji, as it is found in ancient Chinese texts as a corruption of   ( ).   is considered kokuji, as it has not been found in any earlier Chinese text. Casual listings may be more inclusive, including characters such as  .[note 1] Another example is  , which is sometimes not considered kokuji due to its earlier presence as a corruption of Chinese  .
Kokkun[edit]
In addition to kokuji, there are kanji that have been given meanings in Japanese that are different from their original Chinese meanings. These are not considered kokuji but are instead called kok kun ( ) and include characters such as the following:
Char.
Japanese
Chinese
Reading
Meaning
Pinyin
Meaning
 
fuji
wisteria
t ng
rattan, cane, vine[note 2]
 
oki
offing, offshore
ch ng
rinse, minor river (Cantonese)
 
tsubaki
Camellia japonica
ch n
Toona spp.
 
ayu
sweetfish
ni n
catfish (rare, usually written  )
 
saki
blossom
xi o
smile (rare, usually written  )
Types of kanji by category[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: Chinese character classification
Han-dynasty scholar Xu Shen in his 2nd-century dictionary Shuowen Jiezi classified Chinese characters into six categories (Chinese:   li sh , Japanese:   rikusho). The traditional classification is still taught but is problematic and no longer the focus of modern lexicographic practice, as some categories are not clearly defined, nor are they mutually exclusive: the first four refer to structural composition, while the last two refer to usage.[44]
Sh kei moji ( )[edit]
Sh kei (Mandarin: xi ngx ng) characters are pictographic sketches of the object they represent. For example,   is an eye, while   is a tree. The current forms of the characters are very different from the originals, though their representations are more clear in oracle bone script and seal script. These pictographic characters make up only a small fraction of modern characters.
Shiji moji ( )[edit]
Shiji (Mandarin: zh sh ) characters are ideographs, often called "simple ideographs" or "simple indicatives" to distinguish them and tell the difference from compound ideographs (below). They are usually simple graphically and represent an abstract concept such as   "up" or "above" and   "down" or "below". These make up a tiny fraction of modern characters.
Kaii moji ( )[edit]
Kaii (Mandarin: hu y ) characters are compound ideographs, often called "compound indicatives", "associative compounds", or just "ideographs". These are usually a combination of pictographs that combine semantically to present an overall meaning. An example of this type is   (rest) from   (person radical) and   (tree). Another is the kokuji   (mountain pass) made from   (mountain),   (up) and   (down). These make up a tiny fraction of modern characters.
Keisei moji ( )[edit]
Keisei (Mandarin: x ngsh ng) characters are phono-semantic or radical-phonetic compounds, sometimes called "semantic-phonetic", "semasio-phonetic", or "phonetic-ideographic" characters, are by far the largest category, making up about 90% of the characters in the standard lists; however, some of the most frequently used kanji belong to one of the three groups mentioned above, so keisei moji will usually make up less than 90% of the characters in a text. Typically they are made up of two components, one of which (most commonly, but by no means always, the left or top element) suggests the general category of the meaning or semantic context, and the other (most commonly the right or bottom element) approximates the pronunciation. The pronunciation relates to the original Chinese, and may now only be distantly detectable in the modern Japanese on'yomi of the kanji; it generally has no relation at all to kun'yomi. The same is true of the semantic context, which may have changed over the centuries or in the transition from Chinese to Japanese. As a result, it is a common error in folk etymology to fail to recognize a phono-semantic compound, typically instead inventing a compound-indicative explanation.
Tench  moji ( )[edit]
Tench  (Mandarin: zhu nzh ) characters have variously been called "derivative characters", "derivative cognates", or translated as "mutually explanatory" or "mutually synonymous" characters; this is the most problematic of the six categories, as it is vaguely defined. It may refer to kanji where the meaning or application has become extended. For example,   is used for 'music' and 'comfort, ease', with different pronunciations in Chinese reflected in the two different on'yomi, gaku 'music' and raku 'pleasure'.
Kasha moji ( )[edit]
Kasha (Mandarin: ji ji ) are rebuses, sometimes called "phonetic loans". The etymology of the characters follows one of the patterns above, but the present-day meaning is completely unrelated to this. A character was appropriated to represent a similar-sounding word. For example,   in ancient Chinese was originally a pictograph for "wheat". Its syllable was homophonous with the verb meaning "to come", and the character is used for that verb as a result, without any embellishing "meaning" element attached. The character for wheat  , originally meant "to come", being a keisei moji having 'foot' at the bottom for its meaning part and "wheat" at the top for sound. The two characters swapped meaning, so today the more common word has the simpler character. This borrowing of sounds has a very long history.
Related symbols[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
See also: Japanese typographic symbols
The iteration mark ( ) is used to indicate that the preceding kanji is to be repeated, functioning similarly to a ditto mark in English. It is pronounced as though the kanji were written twice in a row, for example iroiro ( , "various") and tokidoki ( , "sometimes"). This mark also appears in personal and place names, as in the surname Sasaki ( ). This symbol is a simplified version of the kanji  , a variant of d  ( , "same").
Another abbreviated symbol is  , in appearance a small katakana "ke", but actually a simplified version of the kanji  , a general counter. It is pronounced "ka" when used to indicate quantity (such as  , rokkagetsu "six months") or "ga" if used as a genitive (as in   sekigahara "Sekigahara").
The way how these symbols may be produced on a computer depends on the operating system. In macOS, typing   will reveal the symbol   as well as  ,   and  . To produce  , type  . Under Windows, typing   will reveal some of these symbols, while in Google IME,   may be used.
Collation[edit]
Kanji, whose thousands of symbols defy ordering by conventions such as those used for the Latin script, are often collated using the traditional Chinese radical-and-stroke sorting method. In this system, common components of characters are identified; these are called radicals. Characters are grouped by their primary radical, then ordered by number of pen strokes within radicals. For example, the kanji character  , meaning "cherry", is sorted as a ten-stroke character under the four-stroke primary radical   meaning "tree". When there is no obvious radical or more than one radical, convention governs which is used for collation.
Other kanji sorting methods, such as the SKIP system, have been devised by various authors.
Modern general-purpose Japanese dictionaries (as opposed to specifically character dictionaries) generally collate all entries, including words written using kanji, according to their kana representations (reflecting the way they are pronounced). The goj on ordering of kana is normally used for this purpose.
Kanji education[edit]
 An image that lists most joyo-kanji, according to Halpern's KKLD indexing system, with kyo-iku kanji color-coded by grade level
Japanese schoolchildren are expected to learn 1,026 basic kanji characters, the ky iku kanji, before finishing the sixth grade. The order in which these characters are learned is fixed. The ky iku kanji list is a subset of a larger list, originally of 1,945 kanji characters and extended to 2,136 in 2010, known as the j y  kanji characters required for the level of fluency necessary to read newspapers and literature in Japanese. This larger list of characters is to be mastered by the end of the ninth grade.[45] Schoolchildren learn the characters by repetition and radical.
Students studying Japanese as a foreign language are often required by a curriculum to acquire kanji without having first learned the vocabulary associated with them. Strategies for these learners vary from copying-based methods to mnemonic-based methods such as those used in James Heisig's series Remembering the Kanji. Other textbooks use methods based on the etymology of the characters, such as Mathias and Habein's The Complete Guide to Everyday Kanji and Henshall's A Guide to Remembering Japanese Characters. Pictorial mnemonics, as in the text Kanji Pict-o-graphix by Michael Rowley, are also seen.
The Japan Kanji Aptitude Testing Foundation provides the Kanji kentei (  Nihon kanji n ryoku kentei shiken; "Test of Japanese Kanji Aptitude"), which tests the ability to read and write kanji. The highest level of the Kanji kentei tests about six thousand kanji.[46]
See also[edit]
Chinese influence on Japanese culture
Braille kanji
Hanja (Korean equivalent)
Ch  H n (Vietnamese equivalent)
Han unification
Chinese family of scripts
Japanese script reform
Japanese typefaces (shotai)
Japanese writing system
Kanji of the year
List of kanji by stroke count
Radical (Chinese character)
Stroke order
Table of kanji radicals
R maji
Cangjie
Notes[edit]
^   at   demonstrates this, listing both   and   as kokuji, but starring   and stating that dictionaries do not consider it to be a kokuji.
^ the word for wisteria being " ", with the addition of " ", "purple"
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ Matsunaga, Sachiko (1996). "The Linguistic Nature of Kanji Reexamined: Do Kanji Represent Only Meanings?". The Journal of the Association of Teachers of Japanese. 30 (2): 1 22. doi:10.2307/489563. ISSN 0885-9884. JSTOR 489563.
^ Taylor, Insup; Taylor, Maurice Martin (1995). Writing and literacy in Chinese, Korean, and Japanese. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 305. ISBN 90-272-1794-7.
^ McAuley, T. E.; Tranter, Nicolas (2001). Language change in East Asia. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon. pp. 180 204.
^ Suski, P.M. (2011). The Phonetics of Japanese Language: With Reference to Japanese Script. p. 1. ISBN 9780203841808.
^ Malatesha Joshi, R.; Aaron, P.G. (2006). Handbook of orthography and literacy. New Jersey: Routledge. pp. 481 2. ISBN 0-8058-4652-2.
^ a b c d Miyake (2003), 8.
^ a b Yamazaki, Kento (October 5, 2001). "Tawayama find hints kanji introduced in Yayoi Period". The Japan Times. Retrieved February 15, 2022.
^ Chen, Haijing (2014). "A Study of Japanese Loanwords in Chinese". University of Oslo.
^ Mathieu (November 19, 2017). "The History of Kanji  ". It's Japan Time. Retrieved September 12, 2021.
^ "Gold Seal (Kin-in)". Fukuoka City Museum. Retrieved September 1, 2014.
^ a b Miyake (2003), 9.
^ Hadamitzky, Wolfgang and Spahn, Mark (2012), Kanji and Kana:  A Complete Guide to the Japanese Writing System,  Third Edition, Rutland, VT:  Tuttle Publishing. ISBN 4805311169. p. 14.
^ Berger, Gordon M. (1975). "Review of Ishiwara Kanji and Japan's Confrontation with the West". Journal of Japanese Studies. 2 (1): 156 169. doi:10.2307/132045. ISSN 0095-6848.
^ "   82   ". Sanseid . Retrieved August 14, 2015.
^ Tamaoka, K., Makioka, S., Sanders, S. & Verdonschot, R. G. (2017). "www.kanjidatabase.com: a new interactive online database for psychological and linguistic research on Japanese kanji and their compound words". Psychological Research 81, 696-708.
^ JIS X 0208:1997.
^ JIS X 0212:1990.
^ JIS X 0213:2000.
^ Lunde, Ken (1999). CJKV Information Processing. "O'Reilly Media, Inc.". ISBN 978-1-56592-224-2.
^ Lunde, Ken (1999). CJKV Information Processing. "O'Reilly Media, Inc.". ISBN 978-1-56592-224-2.
^ Introducing the SING Gaiji architecture, Adobe.
^ OpenType Technology Center, Adobe.
^ "Representation of Non-standard Characters and Glyphs", P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, TEI-C.
^ "TEI element g (character or glyph)", P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange, TEI-C.
^ Kuang-Hui Chiu, Chi-Ching Hsu (2006). Chinese Dilemmas : How Many Ideographs are Needed Archived July 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, National Taipei University
^ Shouhui Zhao, Dongbo Zhang, The Totality of Chinese Characters A Digital Perspective
^ Daniel G. Peebles, SCML: A Structural Representation for Chinese Characters Archived March 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, May 29, 2007
^ Rogers, Henry (2005). Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0631234640
^ Verdonschot, R. G.; La Heij, W.; Tamaoka, K.; Kiyama, S.; You, W. P.; Schiller, N. O. (2013). "The multiple pronunciations of Japanese kanji: A masked priming investigation". The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. 66 (10): 2023 38. doi:10.1080/17470218.2013.773050. PMID 23510000. S2CID 13845935.
^ "Gogen Yurai Jiten"   [Etymology Derivation Dictionary] (in Japanese). Lookvise, Inc. March 26, 2006. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Kefu" no "ke" wa, "kesa" to onaji "ke" de, "ko" no imi.   [The ke in kefu is the same ke as in kesa, meaning "this".]
^ "How many possible phonological forms could be represented by a randomly chosen single character?". japanese.stackexchange.com. Retrieved July 15, 2017.
^ a b "How do Japanese names work?". www.sljfaq.org. Retrieved November 14, 2017.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Daijirin
^ a b c d e f g h i j k K jien
^ "ateji Archives". Tofugu. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2016.
^ "Satoshi". jisho.org. Retrieved March 5, 2016.
^ "Haruka". jisho.org. Retrieved March 5, 2016.
^ SHIMIZU, HIDEKO (2010). "Review of Remembering the Kanji 2: A Systematic Guide to Reading the Japanese Characters. 3rd ed.; Remembering the Kanji 3: Writing and Reading Japanese Characters for Upper-Level Proficiency. 2nd ed., JAMES W. HEISIG". The Modern Language Journal. 94 (3): 519 521. ISSN 0026-7902.
^ Koichi (August 21, 2012). "Kokuji: "Made In Japan," Kanji Edition". Tofugu. Retrieved March 5, 2017.
^ "Kokuji list", SLJ FAQ.
^ Buck, James H. (October 15, 1969) "Some Observations on kokuji" in The Journal-Newsletter of the Association of Teachers of Japanese, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 45 9.
^ "A list of kokuji ( )". www.sljfaq.org. Retrieved March 5, 2017.
^ Buck, James H. (1969). "Some Observations on kokuji". The Journal-Newsletter of the Association of Teachers of Japanese. 6 (2): 45 49. doi:10.2307/488823. ISSN 0004-5810.
^ Yamashita, Hiroko; Maru, Yukiko (2000). "Compositional Features of Kanji for Effective Instruction". The Journal of the Association of Teachers of Japanese. 34 (2): 159 178. doi:10.2307/489552. ISSN 0885-9884. JSTOR 489552.
^ Halpern, J. (2006) The Kodansha Kanji Learner's Dictionary. ISBN 1568364075. p. 38a.
^ Rose, Heath (June 5, 2017). The Japanese Writing System: Challenges, Strategies and Self-regulation for Learning Kanji. Multilingual Matters. pp. 129 130. ISBN 978-1-78309-817-0.
Sources[edit]
DeFrancis, John (1990). The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1068-6.
Hadamitzky, W., and Spahn, M., (1981) Kanji and Kana, Boston: Tuttle.
Hannas, William. C. (1997). Asia's Orthographic Dilemma. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1892-X (paperback); ISBN 0-8248-1842-3 (hardcover).
Kaiser, Stephen (1991). "Introduction to the Japanese Writing System". In Kodansha's Compact Kanji Guide. Tokyo: Kondansha International. ISBN 4-7700-1553-4.
Miyake, Marc Hideo (2003). Old Japanese: A Phonetic Reconstruction. New York, NY; London, England: RoutledgeCurzon.
Morohashi, Tetsuji.   Dai Kan-Wa Jiten (Comprehensive Chinese Japanese Dictionary) 1984 1986. Tokyo: Taishukan.
Mitamura, Joyce Yumi and Mitamura, Yasuko Kosaka (1997). Let's Learn Kanji. Tokyo: Kondansha International. ISBN 4-7700-2068-6.
Unger, J. Marshall (1996). Literacy and Script Reform in Occupation Japan: Reading Between the Lines. ISBN 0-19-510166-9.
External links[edit]
The Wikibook Japanese has a page on the topic of: Kanji
Look up kanji in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kanji.
Jim Breen's WWWJDIC server used to find Kanji from English or romanized Japanese
Change in Script Usage in Japanese: A Longitudinal Study of Japanese Government White Papers on Labor, discussion paper by Takako Tomoda in the Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies, August 19, 2005.
Jisho Online Japanese dictionary
Glyph conversion[edit]
A simple Shinjitai Ky jitai converter
A practical Shinjitai Ky jitai Simplified Chinese character converter
A complex Shinjitai Ky jitai converter
A downloadable Shinjitai Ky jitai Simplified Chinese character converter Archived February 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
vteJapanese languageEarlier forms
Old
Early Middle
Late Middle
Early Modern
DialectsEastern
Hokkaid 
T hoku
Northern
Nanbu
Tsugaru
Akita
Southern
Kesen
Nairiku
Kant 
Western
Gunma
Kanagawa
Tokyo
Eastern
Ibaraki
Tochigi
Northern Izu Islands
T kai T san
Nagano-Yamanashi-Shizuoka
Shizuoka
Narada
Echigo
Nagaoka
Gifu-Aichi
Nagoya
Mikawa
Mino
Hida
Western
Hokuriku
Kaga
Kanazawa
Shiramine
Kansai
Awaji
Bansh 
Kish 
Okuyoshino
Shikoku
Iyo
Tosa
Sanuki
Ch goku
San'y 
Bingo
East San'in
Insh 
Umpaku
Ky sh 
H nichi
 ita
Hichiku
Chikuzen
Hakata
Nagasaki
Saga
Tsushima
Satsug 
Other
Amami Japanese
Okinawan Japanese
Pidgins and creoles
Bamboo English
Bonin English
Hawaiian Creole
Kyowa-go
Pseudo-Chinese
Yilan Creole Japanese
Yokohama Pidgin Japanese
Japonic languages
Hachij 
grammar
Ryukyuan
Northern
Amami  shima
Southern Amami  shima
Kikai
Kunigami
Okinawan
Okinoerabu
Tokunoshima
Yoron
Southern
Miyako
Tarama
Yaeyama
Yonaguni
Writing systemLogograms
Script reform
Kanbun
Kanji
by stroke count
Kanji radicals
by frequency
by stroke count
Ryakuji
Ateji
Kana
Hiragana
Katakana
Furigana
Okurigana
Goj on
Man'y gana
Hentaigana
S gana
Kana ligature
Orthography
Braille
Kanji
Punctuation
Kanazukai
Historical kana
Modern kana
J dai Tokushu Kanazukai
Yotsugana
Transcription into Japanese
Encoding
EUC
EUC-JP
ISO\EIC
2022
JIS
0201
0208
0211
0212
0213
Shift JIS
Unicode
Hiragana
Kana Extended-A
Kana Extended-B
Kana Supplement
Small Kana Extension
Katakana
Katakana Phonetic Extensions
Other
ARIB STD B24
Enclosed
EIS
Extended shinjitai
Half/Full
Grammar andvocabulary
Japanese grammar
Verb conjugations
Godan and ichidan verbs
Irregular verbs
Pronouns
Adjectives
Possessives
Particles
Topic marker
Counter words
Numerals
Native words (yamato kotoba)
Sino-Japanese vocabulary
Loan words (gairaigo)
from Dutch
from Portuguese
Wasei-eigo
Wasei-kango
Engrish
Honorific speech
Honorifics
Court lady language (ny b  kotoba)
Role language (yakuwarigo)
Gender differences
Dictionaries
Phonology
Pitch accent
Rendaku
Sound symbolism
Kanji pronunciation sources
Go-on
Kan-on
T -on
Transliteration
Romanization
Hepburn
Nihon-shiki
Kunrei
JSL
W puro r maji
In Esperanto
Cyrillization
Polivanov system
Literature
Books
Poetry
Writers
Speculative fiction writers
Classical Japanese
texts
vteChinese radicals according to the Kangxi Dictionary1 stroke
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
2 strokes
7  
8  
9  
10  
11  
12  
13  
14  
15  
16  
17  
18  
19  
20  
21  
22  
23  
24  
25  
26  
27  
28  
29  
3 strokes
30  
31  
32  
33  
34  
35  
36  
37  
38  
39  
40  
41  
42  
43  
44  
45  
46  
47  
48  
49  
50  
51  
52  
53  
54  
55  
56  
57  
58  
59  
60  
4 strokes
61  
62  
63  
64  
65  
66  
67  
68  
69  
70  
71  
72  
73  
74  
75  
76  
77  
78  
79  
80  
81  
82  
83  
84  
85  
86  
87  
88  
89  
90  
91  
92  
93  
94  
5 strokes
95  
96  
97  
98  
99  
100  
101  
102  
103  
104  
105  
106  
107  
108  
109  
110  
111  
112  
113  
114  
115  
116  
117  
6 strokes
118  
119  
120  
121  
122  
123  
124  
125  
126  
127  
128  
129  
130  
131  
132  
133  
134  
135  
136  
137  
138  
139  
140  
141  
142  
143  
144  
145  
146  
7 strokes
147  
148  
149  
150  
151  
152  
153  
154  
155  
156  
157  
158  
159  
160  
161  
162  
163  
164  
165  
166  
8 strokes
167  
168  
169  
170  
171  
172  
173  
174  
175  
9 strokes
176  
177  
178  
179  
180  
181  
182  
183  
184  
185  
186  
10 strokes
187  
188  
189  
190  
191  
192  
193  
194  
11 strokes
195  
196  
197  
198  
199  
200  
12 strokes
201  
202  
203  
204  
13 strokes
205  
206  
207  
208  
14 strokes
209  
210  
15 strokes
211  
16 strokes
212  
213  
17 strokes
214  
See also: Kangxi radicals
vteTypes of writing systemsOverview
History of writing
Grapheme
Hieroglyph
Lists
Writing systems
undeciphered
inventors
constructed
Languages by writing system / by first written accounts
TypesAbjads
Numerals
Aramaic
Hatran
Arabic
Elifba
Egyptian hieroglyphs
Elymaic
Hebrew
Ashuri
Cursive
Rashi
Solitreo
Tifinagh
Mandaic
Manichaean
Nabataean
Old North Arabian
Pahlavi
Book
Inscriptional
Inscriptional Parthian
Psalter
Pegon
Phoenician
Paleo-Hebrew
Pitman shorthand
Proto-Sinaitic
Punic
Samaritan
South Arabian
Zabur
Musnad
Sogdian
Syriac
 Es rang l 
Ser 
Ma n y 
Teeline Shorthand
Ugaritic
AbugidasBrahmicNorthern
Bengali Assamese
Bhaiksuki
Br hm 
Devan gar 
Dogri
Gujarati
Gupta
Gurmukh 
Kaithi
Kalinga
Khema
Khojki
Khudabadi
La 
Lepcha
Mahajani
Marchen
Meitei
Modi
Multani
Nagari
Nandinagari
Nepalese scripts
Bhujimol
Golmol
Himmol
Kummol
Kvemmol
Pachumol
Pracalit (Newar)
Ranjana
Tamyig
Tirhuta
Limbu
Litumol
Odia
Karani
 Phags-pa
Sharada
Siddha 
Soyombo
Sylheti Nagri
Takri
Tibetan
Uchen
Um 
Tocharian
Zanabazar Square
Southern
Ahom
Balinese
Batak
Baybayin
Bhattiprolu
Buda
Buhid
Chakma
Cham
Fakkham
Grantha
Goykanadi
Hanunuo (Hanun 'o)
Javanese
Kadamba
Kannada
Karen
Kawi
Khmer
Khom Thai
Kulitan
Lanna
Langdi
Lao
Leke
Lampung
Lontara
Bilang-bilang
Makasar
Malayalam
Old Maldivian
Dhives Akuru
Eveyla Akuru
Mon Burmese
Pallava
Pyu
Rejang
Rencong
Saurashtra
Shan
Sinhala
Sukhothai
Sundanese
Old Sundanese
Tagbanwa
Tai Le
New Tai Lue
Tai Noi
Tai Tham
Tai Viet
Lai Tay
Tamil
Tamil-Brahmi
Tanchangya
Telugu
Thai
Tigalari
Vatteluttu
Kolezhuthu
Malayanma
Others
Boyd's syllabic shorthand
Canadian syllabics
Blackfoot
D n  syllabics
Dham
Fox I
Ge ez
Gunjala Gondi
Japanese Braille
Sarati
Jenticha
Kharosthi
Mandombe
Masaram Gondi
Meroitic
Miao
Mwangwego
Pahawh Hmong
Sorang Sompeng
Tengwar
Thaana
Thomas Natural Shorthand
Warang Citi
AlphabetsLinear
Adlam
Ariyaka
Armenian
Avestan
Pazend
Avoiuli
Bassa Vah
Borama
Carian
Caucasian Albanian
Cirth
Coelbren
Coorgi Cox alphabet
Coptic
Cyrillic
Early
Deseret
Duployan shorthand
Chinook writing
Eclectic shorthand
Elbasan
Enochian
Etruscan
Evenki
Formosan
Fox II
Fraser
Gabelsberger shorthand
Garay
Georgian
Asomtavruli
Nuskhuri
Mkhedruli
Gjirokast r
Glagolitic
Gothic
Gregg shorthand
Greek (archaic forms)
Greco-Iberian alphabet
Hangul
Hanifi
Jenticha
Kaddare
Kayah Li
Klingon
Latin
Beneventan
Blackletter
Carolingian minuscule
Fraktur
Gaelic
Insular
Interlac
IPA
Kurrent
Merovingian
Sigla
S tterlin
Tironian notes
Visigothic
Luo
Lycian
Lydian
Manchu
Medefaidrin
Molodtsov
Mongolian
Mru
Mundari Bani
Neo-Tifinagh
N'Ko
Ogham
Oirat
Ol Chiki
Old Hungarian
Old Italic
Old Permic
Orkhon
Old Uyghur
Ol Onal
Osage
Osmanya
Pau Cin Hau
Runic
Anglo-Saxon
Cipher
Dalecarlian
Elder Futhark
Younger Futhark
Gothic
Marcomannic
Medieval
Staveless
Shavian
Sidetic
Sorang Sompeng
Sunuwar
Tifinagh
Todhri
Tolong Siki
Vagindra
Vellara
Visible Speech
Vithkuqi
Wancho
Warang Citi
Yezidi
Zaghawa
Non-linear
Braille
Maritime flags
Telegraph code
New York Point
Flag semaphore
Moon type
Ideograms and pictograms
Adinkra
Aztec
Blissymbol
Dongba
Ersu Shaba
Emoji
IConji
Isotype
Kaid 
Mi kmaw
Mixtec
New Epoch Notation Painting
Nsibidi
Ojibwe Hieroglyphs
Olmec
Siglas poveiras
Testerian
Yerkish
Zapotec
LogogramsChinese family of scriptsChinese Characters
Simplified
Traditional
Oracle bone script
Bronze Script
Seal Script
large
small
bird-worm
Hanja
Idu
Kanji
Ch  N m
Zhuang
Chinese-influenced
Jurchen
Khitan large script
Sui
Tangut
Cuneiform
Akkadian
Assyrian
Elamite
Hittite
Luwian
Sumerian
Other logo-syllabic
Anatolian
Bagam
Cretan
Isthmian
Maya
Proto-Elamite
Yi (Classical)
Logo-consonantal
Demotic
Hieratic
Hieroglyphs
Numerals
Hindu-Arabic
Abjad
Attic (Greek)
Muisca
Roman
Semi-syllabariesFull
Linear Elamite
Celtiberian
Northeastern Iberian
Southeastern Iberian
Khom
Dunging
Redundant
Espanca
Pahawh Hmong
Khitan small script
Southwest Paleohispanic
Zhuyin fuhao
Sign languages
ASLwrite
SignWriting
si5s
Stokoe Notation
Syllabaries
Afaka
Bamum
B t 
Byblos
Canadian Aboriginal
Cherokee
Cypriot
Cypro-Minoan
Ditema tsa Dinoko
Eskayan
Geba
Great Lakes Algonquian
Iban
Idu
Japanese
Hiragana
Katakana
Man'y gana
Hentaigana
S gana
Jindai moji
Kikakui
Kpelle
Linear B
Linear Elamite
Lisu
Loma
N shu
Nwagu Aneke script
Old Persian Cuneiform
Sumerian
Vai
Woleai
Yi (Modern)
Yugtun
vteBraille Braille cell
1829 braille
International uniformity
ASCII braille
Unicode braille patterns
Braille scriptsFrench-ordered
Albanian
Azerbaijani
Cantonese
Catalan
Chinese (mainland Mandarin) (largely reassigned)
Czech
Dutch
English (Unified English)
Esperanto
French
German
Ghanaian
Guarani
Hawaiian
Hungarian
I upiaq
IPA
Irish
Italian
Latvian
Lithuanian
Luxembourgish (extended to 8-dot)
Maltese
M ori
Navajo
Nigerian
Philippine
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Samoan
Slovak
South African
Spanish
Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned)
Turkish
Vietnamese
Welsh
Yugoslav
Zambian
Nordic family
Estonian
Faroese
Icelandic
Northern Sami
Scandinavian
Danish
Finnish
Greenlandic
Norwegian
Swedish
Russian lineage familyi.e. Cyrillic-mediated scripts
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Kazakh
Kyrgyz
Mongolian
Russian
Tatar
Ukrainian
Egyptian lineage familyi.e. Arabic-mediated scripts
Arabic
Persian
Urdu (Pakistan)
Indian lineage familyi.e. Bharati Braille
Devanagari (Hindi / Marathi / Nepali)
Bengali (Bangla / Assamese)
Gujarati
Kannada
Malayalam
Odia
Punjabi
Sinhala
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu (India)
Other scripts
Amharic
Armenian
Burmese
Dzongkha (Bhutanese)
Georgian
Greek
Hebrew
Inuktitut (reassigned vowels)
Khmer
Thai and Lao (Japanese vowels)
Tibetan
Reordered
Algerian Braille (obsolete)
Frequency-based
American Braille (obsolete)
Independent
Chinese semi-syllabaries
Cantonese
Mainland Chinese Mandarin
Taiwanese Mandarin
Two-cell Chinese (Shuangpin)
Japanese
Korean
Eight-dot
Luxembourgish
Kanji
Gardner Salinas braille codes (GS8)
Symbols in braille
Braille music
Canadian currency marks
Computer Braille Code
Gardner Salinas braille codes (science; GS8/GS6)
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
Nemeth braille code
Braille technology
Braille e-book
Braille embosser
Braille translator
Braille watch
Mountbatten Brailler
Optical braille recognition
Perforation
Perkins Brailler
Refreshable braille display
Slate and stylus
Braigo
People
Louis Braille
Charles Barbier
R a Czacka
Valentin Ha y
Harris Mowbray
Thakur Vishva Narain Singh
Sabriye Tenberken
William Bell Wait
Organisations
Braille Institute of America
Braille Without Borders
Japan Braille Library
National Braille Association
Blindness organizations
Schools for the blind
American Printing House for the Blind
Other tactile alphabets
Decapoint
Moon type
New York Point
Night writing
Vibratese
Related topics
Accessible publishing
Braille literacy
RoboBraille
vteElectronic writing systems
Emoticons
Emoji
Kaomoji
iConji
Unicode
vteInternet slang variants
3arabizi
Alay (Indonesia)
Denglisch
Doge
DoggoLingo
Fingilish (Persian)
Greeklish
Gyaru-moji (Japan)
Jejemon (Philippines)
Leet ("1337")
Lolspeak / LOLspeak / Kitteh
Martian language (Chinese)
Migux s (Portuguese)
Padonkaffsky jargon (Russian)
Pseudo-Chinese
SMS language (used in phones)
Translit
Volapuk
Yaminjeongeum (Korean)
Portals: China Japan Language
Authority control: National 
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kanji&oldid=1149358383"