1438 1533 empire in South America
"Inca", "Incan", and "Incas" redirect here. For a general view of Inca civilization, people and culture, see Andean civilizations. For the Carolina parakeet, see Incas (Carolina parakeet). For other uses, see Inca (disambiguation) and Incan (disambiguation).
Realm of the Four PartsTawantinsuyu (Quechua)1438 1533/1572
Reconstructed royal emblem
The Inca Empire at its greatest extent c. 1525CapitalCuscoOfficial languagesQuechuaCommon languagesAymara, Puquina, Jaqi family, Muchik and scores of smaller languages.Religion Inca religionGovernmentDivine, absolute monarchySapa Inca 1438 1471 Pachacuti 1471 1493 T pac Inca Yupanqui 1493 1527 Huayna Capac 1527 1532 Hu scar 1532 1533 Atahualpa
Historical eraPre-Columbian era Pachacuti created the Tawantinsuyu 1438 Civil war between Hu scar and Atahualpa 1529 1532 Spanish conquest led by Francisco Pizarro 1533/1572 End of the last Inca resistance 1572
Area1527[1][2]2,000,000 km2 (770,000 sq mi)
 Preceded by
Succeeded by
Kingdom of Chimor
Kingdom of Cusco
Aymara kingdoms
New Castile
New Toledo
New Andalusia
Neo-Inca State
Inca Empire
Inca society
Education  Religion  Mythology
Architecture  Engineering  Roads
Army  Agriculture  Ayllu  Cuisine
Inca history
Kingdom of Cusco  Inca Empire  History of Cusco
(Chimor Inca War  Invasion of Chile  Civil War  Spanish conquest)
Neo-Inca State
vte
The Inca Empire (also known as the Incan Empire and the Inka Empire), called Tawantinsuyu by its subjects, (Quechua for the "Realm of the Four Parts"[a]) was the largest empire in pre-Columbian America.[4] The administrative, political and military center of the empire was in the city of Cusco. The Inca civilization arose from the Peruvian highlands sometime in the early 13th century. The Spanish began the conquest of the Inca Empire in 1532 and by 1572, the last Inca state was fully conquered.
From 1438 to 1533, the Incas incorporated a large portion of western South America, centered on the Andean Mountains, using conquest and peaceful assimilation, among other methods. At its largest, the empire joined modern-day Peru, what are now western Ecuador, western and south central Bolivia, northwest Argentina, the southwesternmost tip of Colombia and a large portion of modern-day Chile into a state comparable to the historical empires of Eurasia. Its official language was Quechua.[5]
The Inca Empire was unique in that it lacked many of the features associated with civilization in the Old World. Anthropologist Gordon McEwan wrote that the Incas were able to construct "one of the greatest imperial states in human history" without the use of the wheel, draft animals, knowledge of iron or steel, or even a system of writing.[6] Notable features of the Inca Empire included its monumental architecture, especially stonework, extensive road network reaching all corners of the empire, finely-woven textiles, use of knotted strings (quipu) for record keeping and communication, agricultural innovations and production in a difficult environment, and the organization and management fostered or imposed on its people and their labor.
The Inca Empire functioned largely without money and without markets. Instead, exchange of goods and services was based on reciprocity between individuals and among individuals, groups, and Inca rulers. "Taxes" consisted of a labour obligation of a person to the Empire. The Inca rulers (who theoretically owned all the means of production) reciprocated by granting access to land and goods and providing food and drink in celebratory feasts for their subjects.[7]
Many local forms of worship persisted in the empire, most of them concerning local sacred Huacas, but the Inca leadership encouraged the sun worship of Inti   their sun god   and imposed its sovereignty above other cults such as that of Pachamama.[8] The Incas considered their king, the Sapa Inca, to be the "son of the sun".[9]
The Incan economy is a subject of scholarly debate. Darrell E. La Lone, in his work The Inca as a Nonmarket Economy, noted that scholars have described it as "feudal, slave, [or] socialist," as well as "a system based on reciprocity and redistribution; a system with markets and commerce; or an Asiatic mode of production."[10]
Etymology
The Inca referred to their empire as Tawantinsuyu,[3] "the four suyu". In Quechua, tawa is four and -ntin is a suffix naming a group, so that a tawantin is a quartet, a group of four things taken together, in this case the four suyu ("regions" or "provinces") whose corners met at the capital. The four suyu were: Chinchaysuyu (north), Antisuyu (east; the Amazon jungle), Qullasuyu (south) and Kuntisuyu (west). The name Tawantinsuyu was, therefore, a descriptive term indicating a union of provinces. The Spanish transliterated the name as Tahuatinsuyo or Tahuatinsuyu.
While the term Inka nowaydays is translated as "ruler" or "lord" in Quechua, this term does not simply refer to the "King" of the Tawantinsuyu or Sapa Inka but also to the Inca nobles, and some theorize its meaning could be broader.[11][12] In that sense, the Inca nobles were a small percentage of the total population of the empire, probably numbering only 15,000 to 40,000, but ruling a population of around 10 million people.[13]
When the Spanish arrived to the Empire of the Incas they gave the name "Peru" to what the natives knew as Tawantinsuyu.[14] The name "Inca Empire" (Imperio de los Incas) originated from the Chronicles of the 16th Century.[15]
History
Further information: History of Cusco
Antecedents
The Inca Empire was the last chapter of thousands of years of Andean civilizations. The Andean civilization is one of at least five civilizations in the world deemed by scholars to be "pristine." The concept of a "pristine" civilization refers to a civilization that has developed independently from external influences and is not a derivative of other civilizations.[16]
The Inca Empire was preceded by two large-scale empires in the Andes: the Tiwanaku (c. 300 1100 AD), based around Lake Titicaca, and the Wari or Huari (c. 600 1100 AD), centered near the city of Ayacucho. The Wari occupied the Cuzco area for about 400 years. Thus, many of the characteristics of the Inca Empire derived from earlier multi-ethnic and expansive Andean cultures.[17] To those earlier civilizations may be owed some of the accomplishments cited for the Inca Empire: "thousands of miles of roads and dozens of large administrative centers with elaborate stone construction...terraced mountainsides and filled in valleys", and the production of "vast quantities of goods".[18]
Carl Troll has argued that the development of the Inca state in the central Andes was aided by conditions that allow for the elaboration of the staple food chu o. Chu o, which can be stored for long periods, is made of potato dried at the freezing temperatures that are common at nighttime in the southern Peruvian highlands. Such a link between the Inca state and chu o may be questioned, as other crops such as maize can also be dried with only sunlight.[19]
Troll also argued that llamas, the Incas' pack animal, can be found in their largest numbers in this very same region.[19] The maximum extent of the Inca Empire roughly coincided with the distribution of llamas and alpacas, the only large domesticated animals in Pre-Hispanic America.[20]
As a third point Troll pointed out irrigation technology as advantageous to Inca state-building.[21] While Troll theorized concerning environmental influences on the Inca Empire, he opposed environmental determinism, arguing that culture lay at the core of the Inca civilization.[21]
Origin
 Manco C pac and Mama Ocllo, children of the Inti, Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala, El primer nueva cor nica y buen gobierno, circa 1615
The Inca people were a pastoral tribe in the Cusco area around the 12th century. Indigenous Peruvian oral history tells an origin story of three caves. The center cave at Tampu T'uqu (Tambo Tocco) was named Qhapaq T'uqu ("principal niche", also spelled Capac Tocco). The other caves were Maras T'uqu (Maras Tocco) and Sutiq T'uqu (Sutic Tocco).[22] Four brothers and four sisters stepped out of the middle cave. They were: Ayar Manco, Ayar Cachi, Ayar Awqa (Ayar Auca) and Ayar Uchu; and Mama Ocllo, Mama Raua, Mama Huaco and Mama Qura (Mama Cora). Out of the side caves came the people who were to be the ancestors of all the Inca clans.
 Manco C pac, First Inca, 1 of 14 Portraits of Inca Kings, Probably mid-18th century. Oil on canvas. Brooklyn Museum
Ayar Manco carried a magic staff made of the finest gold. Where this staff landed, the people would live. They traveled for a long time. On the way, Ayar Cachi boasted about his strength and power. His siblings tricked him into returning to the cave to get a sacred llama. When he went into the cave, they trapped him inside to get rid of him.
Ayar Uchu decided to stay on the top of the cave to look over the Inca people. The minute he proclaimed that, he turned to stone. They built a shrine around the stone and it became a sacred object. Ayar Auca grew tired of all this and decided to travel alone. Only Ayar Manco and his four sisters remained.
Finally, they reached Cusco. The staff sank into the ground. Before they arrived, Mama Ocllo had already borne Ayar Manco a child, Sinchi Roca. The people who were already living in Cusco fought hard to keep their land, but Mama Huaca was a good fighter. When the enemy attacked, she threw her bolas (several stones tied together that spun through the air when thrown) at a soldier (gualla) and killed him instantly. The other people became afraid and ran away.
After that, Ayar Manco became known as Manco C pac, the founder of the Inca. It is said that he and his sisters built the first Inca homes in the valley with their own hands. When the time came, Manco C pac turned to stone like his brothers before him. His son, Sinchi Roca, became the second emperor of the Inca.[23]
Kingdom of Cusco
Main article: Kingdom of Cusco
 Inca expansion (1438 1533)
Under the leadership of Manco C pac, the Inca formed the small city-state Kingdom of Cusco (Quechua Qusqu', Qosqo). In 1438, they began a far-reaching expansion under the command of Sapa Inca (paramount leader) Pachacuti-Cusi Yupanqui, whose name meant "earth-shaker". The name of Pachacuti was given to him after he conquered the Tribe of Chancas (modern Apur mac). During his reign, he and his son Tupac Yupanqui brought much of the modern-day territory of Peru under Inca control.[24]
Reorganization and formation
Pachacuti reorganized the kingdom of Cusco into the Tahuantinsuyu, which consisted of a central government with the Inca at its head and four provincial governments with strong leaders: Chinchasuyu (NW), Antisuyu (NE), Kuntisuyu (SW) and Qullasuyu (SE).[25] Pachacuti is thought to have built Machu Picchu, either as a family home or summer retreat, although it may have been an agricultural station.[26]
Pachacuti sent spies to regions he wanted in his empire and they brought to him reports on political organization, military strength and wealth. He then sent messages to their leaders extolling the benefits of joining his empire, offering them presents of luxury goods such as high quality textiles and promising that they would be materially richer as his subjects.
Most accepted the rule of the Inca as a fait accompli and acquiesced peacefully. Refusal to accept Inca rule resulted in military conquest. Following conquest the local rulers were executed. The ruler's children were brought to Cusco to learn about Inca administration systems, then return to rule their native lands. This allowed the Inca to indoctrinate them into the Inca nobility and, with luck, marry their daughters into families at various corners of the empire.
Expansion and consolidation
See also: Chimor Inca War
Traditionally the son of the Inca ruler led the army. Pachacuti's son T pac Inca Yupanqui began conquests to the north in 1463 and continued them as Inca ruler after Pachacuti's death in 1471. T pac Inca's most important conquest was the Kingdom of Chimor, the Inca's only serious rival for the Peruvian coast. T pac Inca's empire then stretched north into what are today Ecuador and Colombia.
T pac Inca's son Huayna C pac added a small portion of land to the north in what is today Ecuador. At its height, the Inca Empire included modern-day Peru, what are today western and south central Bolivia, southwest Ecuador and Colombia and a large portion of modern-day Chile, at the north of the Maule River. Traditional historiography claims the advance south halted after the Battle of the Maule where they met determined resistance from the Mapuche.[27]
This view is challenged by historian Osvaldo Silva who argues instead that it was the social and political framework of the Mapuche that posed the main difficulty in imposing imperial rule.[27] Silva does accept that the battle of the Maule was a stalemate, but argues the Incas lacked incentives for conquest they had had when fighting more complex societies such as the Chim  Empire.[27]
Silva also disputes the date given by traditional historiography for the battle: the late 15th century during the reign of Topa Inca Yupanqui (1471 93).[27] Instead, he places it in 1532 during the Inca Civil War.[27] Nevertheless, Silva agrees on the claim that the bulk of the Incan conquests were made during the late 15th century.[27] At the time of the Incan Civil War an Inca army was, according to Diego de Rosales, subduing a revolt among the Diaguitas of Copiap  and Coquimbo.[27]
The empire's push into the Amazon Basin near the Chinchipe River was stopped by the Shuar in 1527.[28] The empire extended into corners of what are today the north of Argentina and part of the southern Colombia. However, most of the southern portion of the Inca empire, the portion denominated as Qullasuyu, was located in the Altiplano.
The Inca Empire was an amalgamation of languages, cultures and peoples. The components of the empire were not all uniformly loyal, nor were the local cultures all fully integrated. The Inca empire as a whole had an economy based on exchange and taxation of luxury goods and labour. The following quote describes a method of taxation:
For as is well known to all, not a single village of the highlands or the plains failed to pay the tribute levied on it by those who were in charge of these matters. There were even provinces where, when the natives alleged that they were unable to pay their tribute, the Inca ordered that each inhabitant should be obliged to turn in every four months a large quill full of live lice, which was the Inca's way of teaching and accustoming them to pay tribute.[29]
Inca Civil War and Spanish conquest
Main articles: Inca Civil War and Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire
 The first image of the Inca in Europe, Pedro Cieza de Le n, Cr nica del Per , 1553
Spanish conquistadors led by Francisco Pizarro and his brothers explored south from what is today Panama, reaching Inca territory by 1526.[30] It was clear that they had reached a wealthy land with prospects of great treasure, and after another expedition in 1529 Pizarro traveled to Spain and received royal approval to conquer the region and be its viceroy. This approval was received as detailed in the following quote: "In July 1529 the Queen of Spain signed a charter allowing Pizarro to conquer the Incas. Pizarro was named governor and captain of all conquests in Peru, or New Castile, as the Spanish now called the land".[31]
When the conquistadors returned to Peru in 1532, a war of succession between the sons of Sapa Inca Huayna Capac, Hu scar and Atahualpa, and unrest among newly conquered territories weakened the empire. Perhaps more importantly, smallpox, influenza, typhus and measles had spread from Central America. The first epidemic of European disease in the Inca Empire was probably in the 1520s, killing Huayna Capac, his designated heir, and an unknown, probably large, number of other Incan subjects.[32]
The forces led by Pizarro consisted of 168 men, one cannon, and 27 horses. Conquistadors ported lances, arquebuses, steel armor and long swords. In contrast, the Inca used weapons made out of wood, stone, copper and bronze, while using an Alpaca fiber based armor, putting them at significant technological disadvantage none of their weapons could pierce the Spanish steel armor. In addition, due to the absence of horses in Peru, the Inca did not develop tactics to fight cavalry. However, the Inca were still effective warriors, being able to successfully fight the Mapuche, who later would strategically defeat the Spanish as they expanded further south.
The first engagement between the Inca and the Spanish was the Battle of Pun , near present-day Guayaquil, Ecuador, on the Pacific Coast; Pizarro then founded the city of Piura in July 1532. Hernando de Soto was sent inland to explore the interior and returned with an invitation to meet the Inca, Atahualpa, who had defeated his brother in the civil war and was resting at Cajamarca with his army of 80,000 troops, that were at the moment armed only with hunting tools (knives and lassos for hunting llamas).
Pizarro and some of his men, most notably a friar named Vincente de Valverde, met with the Inca, who had brought only a small retinue. The Inca offered them ceremonial chicha in a golden cup, which the Spanish rejected. The Spanish interpreter, Friar Vincente, read the "Requerimiento" that demanded that he and his empire accept the rule of King Charles I of Spain and convert to Christianity. Atahualpa dismissed the message and asked them to leave. After this, the Spanish began their attack against the mostly unarmed Inca, captured Atahualpa as hostage, and forced the Inca to collaborate.
Atahualpa offered the Spaniards enough gold to fill the room he was imprisoned in and twice that amount of silver. The Inca fulfilled this ransom, but Pizarro deceived them, refusing to release the Inca afterwards. During Atahualpa's imprisonment Hu scar was assassinated elsewhere. The Spaniards maintained that this was at Atahualpa's orders; this was used as one of the charges against Atahualpa when the Spaniards finally executed him, in August 1533.[33]
Although "defeat" often implies an unwanted loss in battle, many of the diverse ethnic groups ruled by the Inca "welcomed the Spanish invaders as liberators and willingly settled down with them to share rule of Andean farmers and miners".[34] Many regional leaders, called Kurakas, continued to serve the Spanish overlords, called encomenderos, as they had served the Inca overlords. Other than efforts to spread the religion of Christianity, the Spanish benefited from and made little effort to change the society and culture of the former Inca Empire until the rule of Francisco de Toledo as viceroy from 1569 to 1581.[35]
End of the Inca Empire
Main article: Neo-Inca State
See also: Society in the Spanish Colonial Americas
 Atahualpa, the last Sapa Inca of the empire, was executed by the Spanish on 29 August 1533.
 Facade of the Convent of Santo Domingo in Cusco, built on the base of the Coricancha
The Spanish installed Atahualpa's brother Manco Inca Yupanqui in power; for some time Manco cooperated with the Spanish while they fought to put down resistance in the north. Meanwhile, an associate of Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, attempted to claim Cusco. Manco tried to use this intra-Spanish feud to his advantage, recapturing Cusco in 1536, but the Spanish retook the city afterwards. Manco Inca then retreated to the mountains of Vilcabamba and established the small Neo-Inca State, where he and his successors ruled for another 36 years, sometimes raiding the Spanish or inciting revolts against them. In 1572 the last Inca stronghold was conquered and the last ruler, T pac Amaru, Manco's son, was captured and executed.[36] This ended resistance to the Spanish conquest under the political authority of the Inca state.
After the fall of the Inca Empire many aspects of Inca culture were systematically destroyed, including their sophisticated farming system, known as the vertical archipelago model of agriculture.[37] Spanish colonial officials used the Inca mita corv e labor system for colonial aims, sometimes brutally. One member of each family was forced to work in the gold and silver mines, the foremost of which was the titanic silver mine at Potos . When a family member died, which would usually happen within a year or two, the family was required to send a replacement.[citation needed]
Although smallpox is usually presumed to have spread through the Empire before the arrival of the Spaniards, the devastation is also consistent with other theories.[38] Beginning in Colombia, smallpox spread rapidly before the Spanish invaders first arrived in the empire. The spread was probably aided by the efficient Inca road system. Smallpox was only the first epidemic.[39] Other diseases, including a probable typhus outbreak in 1546, influenza and smallpox together in 1558, smallpox again in 1589, diphtheria in 1614, and measles in 1618, all ravaged the Inca people.
There would be periodic attempts by indigenous leaders to expel the Spanish colonists and re-create the Inca Empire until the late 18th century. See Juan Santos Atahualpa and T pac Amaru II.
Society
Main articles: Inca society and Inca education
Population
The number of people inhabiting Tawantinsuyu at its peak is uncertain, with estimates ranging from 4 37 million. Most population estimates are in the range of 6 to 14 million. In spite of the fact that the Inca kept excellent census records using their quipus, knowledge of how to read them was lost as almost all fell into disuse and disintegrated over time or were destroyed by the Spaniards.[40]
Languages
Main article: Quechua languages
The empire was extremely linguistically diverse. Some of the most important languages were Quechua, Aymara, Puquina and Mochica, respectively mainly spoken in the Central Andes, the Altiplano or (Qullasuyu), the south Peruvian coast (Kuntisuyu), and the area of the north Peruvian coast (Chinchaysuyu) around Chan Chan, today Trujillo. Other languages included Quignam, Jaqaru, Leco, Uru-Chipaya languages, Kunza, Humahuaca, Cac n, Mapudungun, Culle, Chachapoya, Catacao languages, Manta, and Barbacoan languages, as well as numerous Amazonian languages on the frontier regions. The exact linguistic topography of the pre-Columbian and early colonial Andes remains incompletely understood, owing to the extinction of several languages and the loss of historical records.
In order to manage this diversity, the Inca lords promoted the usage of Quechua, especially the variety of what is now Lima[41] as the Qhapaq Runasimi ("great language of the people"), or the official language/lingua franca. Defined by mutual intelligibility, Quechua is actually a family of languages rather than one single language, parallel to the Romance or Slavic languages in Europe. Most communities within the empire, even those resistant to Inca rule, learned to speak a variety of Quechua (forming new regional varieties with distinct phonetics) in order to communicate with the Inca lords and mitma colonists, as well as the wider integrating society, but largely retained their native languages as well. The Incas also had their own ethnic language, referred to as Qhapaq simi ("royal language"), which is thought to have been closely related to or a dialect of Puquina. The split between Qhapaq simi and Qhapaq Runasimi exemplifies the larger split between hatun and hunin (high and low) society in general.
There are several common misconceptions about the history of Quechua, as it is frequently identified as the "Inca language". Quechua did not originate with the Incas, had been a lingua franca in multiple areas before the Inca expansions, was diverse before the rise of the Incas, and it was not the native or original language of the Incas. However, the Incas left an impressive linguistic legacy, in that they introduced Quechua to many areas where it is still widely spoken today, including Ecuador, southern Bolivia, southern Colombia, and parts of the Amazon basin. The Spanish conquerors continued the official usage of Quechua during the early colonial period, and transformed it into a literary language.[42]
The Incas were not known to develop a written form of language; however, they visually recorded narratives through paintings on vases and cups (qirus).[43] These paintings are usually accompanied by geometric patterns known as toqapu, which are also found in textiles. Researchers have speculated that toqapu patterns could have served as a form of written communication (e.g.: heraldry, or glyphs), however this remains unclear.[44] The Incas also kept records by using quipus.
Age and defining gender
 "The Maiden", one of the Llullaillaco mummies. Inca human sacrifice, Salta province (Argentina).
The high infant mortality rates that plagued the Inca Empire caused all newborn infants to be given the term 'wawa' when they were born. Most families did not invest very much into their child until they reached the age of two or three years old. Once the child reached the age of three, a "coming of age" ceremony occurred, called the rutuchikuy. For the Incas, this ceremony indicated that the child had entered the stage of "ignorance". During this ceremony, the family would invite all relatives to their house for food and dance, and then each member of the family would receive a lock of hair from the child. After each family member had received a lock, the father would shave the child's head. This stage of life was categorized by a stage of "ignorance, inexperience, and lack of reason, a condition that the child would overcome with time".[45] For Incan society, in order to advance from the stage of ignorance to development the child must learn the roles associated with their gender.
The next important ritual was to celebrate the maturity of a child. Unlike the coming of age ceremony, the celebration of maturity signified the child's sexual potency. This celebration of puberty was called warachikuy for boys and qikuchikuy for girls. The warachikuy ceremony included dancing, fasting, tasks to display strength, and family ceremonies. The boy would also be given new clothes and taught how to act as an unmarried man. The qikuchikuy signified the onset of menstruation, upon which the girl would go into the forest alone and return only once the bleeding had ended. In the forest she would fast, and, once returned, the girl would be given a new name, adult clothing, and advice. This "folly" stage of life was the time young adults were allowed to have sex without being a parent.[45]
Between the ages of 20 and 30, people were considered young adults, "ripe for serious thought and labor".[45] Young adults were able to retain their youthful status by living at home and assisting in their home community. Young adults only reached full maturity and independence once they had married.
At the end of life, the terms for men and women denote loss of sexual vitality and humanity. Specifically, the "decrepitude" stage signifies the loss of mental well-being and further physical decline.
Table 7.1 from R. Alan Covey's Article[45]
Age
Social Value of Life Stage
Female Term
Male Term
<  3
Conception
Wawa
Wawa
3 7
Ignorance (not speaking)
Warma
Warma
7 14
Development
Thaski (or P'as a)
Maqt'a
14 20
Folly (sexually active)
Sipas (unmarried)
Wayna (unmarried)
20+
Maturity (body and mind)
Warmi
Qhari
70
Infirmity
Paya
Machu
90
Decrepitude
Ruku
Ruku
Marriage
In the Incan Empire, the age of marriage differed for men and women: men typically married at the age of 20, while women usually got married about four years earlier at the age of 16.[46] Men who were highly ranked in society could have multiple wives, but those lower in the ranks could only take a single wife.[47] Marriages were typically within classes and resembled a more business-like agreement. Once married, the women were expected to cook, collect food and watch over the children and livestock.[46] Girls and mothers would also work around the house to keep it orderly to please the public inspectors.[48] These duties remained the same even after wives became pregnant and with the added responsibility of praying and making offerings to Kanopa, who was the god of pregnancy.[46] It was typical for marriages to begin on a trial basis with both men and women having a say in the longevity of the marriage. If the man felt that it wouldn't work out or if the woman wanted to return to her parents' home the marriage would end. Once the marriage was final, the only way the two could be divorced was if they did not have a child together.[46] Marriage within the Empire was crucial for survival. A family was considered disadvantaged if there was not a married couple at the center because everyday life centered around the balance of male and female tasks.[49]
Gender roles
According to some historians, such as Terence N. D'Altroy, male and female roles were considered equal in Inca society. The "indigenous cultures saw the two genders as complementary parts of a whole".[49] In other words, there was not a hierarchical structure in the domestic sphere for the Incas. Within the domestic sphere, women came to be known as weavers, although there is significant evidence to suggest that this gender role did not appear until colonizing Spaniards realized women's productive talents in this sphere and used it to their economic advantage. There is evidence to suggest that both men and women contributed equally to the weaving tasks in pre-Hispanic Andean culture.[50] Women's everyday tasks included: spinning, watching the children, weaving cloth, cooking, brewing chichi, preparing fields for cultivation, planting seeds, bearing children, harvesting, weeding, hoeing, herding, and carrying water.[51] Men on the other hand, "weeded, plowed, participated in combat, helped in the harvest, carried firewood, built houses, herded llama and alpaca, and spun and wove when necessary".[51] This relationship between the genders may have been complementary. Unsurprisingly, onlooking Spaniards believed women were treated like slaves, because women did not work in Spanish society to the same extent, and certainly did not work in fields.[52]  Women were sometimes allowed to own land and herds because inheritance was passed down from both the mother's and father's side of the family.[53] Kinship within the Inca society followed a parallel line of descent. In other words, women descended from women and men descended from men. Due to the parallel descent, a woman had access to land and other assets through her mother.[51]
Burial customs
Due to the dry climate that extends from modern-day Peru to what is now Chile's Norte Grande, mummification occurred naturally by desiccation. It is believed that the ancient Incas learned to mummify their dead to show reverence to their leaders and representatives.[54] Mummification was chosen to preserve the body and to give others the opportunity to worship them in their death. The ancient Inca believed in reincarnation, so preservation of the body was vital for passage into the afterlife.[55] Since mummification was reserved for royalty, this entailed preserving power by placing the deceased's valuables with the body in places of honor. The bodies remained accessible for ceremonies where they would be removed and celebrated with.[56] The ancient Inca mummified their dead with various tools. Chicha corn beer was used to delay decomposition and the effects of bacterial activity on the body. The bodies were then stuffed with natural materials such as vegetable matter and animal hair. Sticks were to used to maintain their shape and poses.[57] In addition to the mummification process, the Inca would bury their dead in the fetal position inside a vessel intended to mimic the womb for preparation of their new birth. A ceremony would be held that included music, food, and drink for the relatives and loved ones of the deceased.[58]
Religion
See also: Religion in the Inca Empire and Inca mythology
 Diorite Viracocha Inca sculpture from Amarucancha archeological site, Cusco
Inca myths were transmitted orally until early Spanish colonists recorded them; however, some scholars claim that they were recorded on quipus, Andean knotted string records.[59]
The Inca believed in reincarnation.[60] After death, the passage to the next world was fraught with difficulties. The spirit of the dead, camaquen, would need to follow a long road and during the trip the assistance of a black dog that could see in the dark was required. Most Incas imagined the after world to be like an earthly paradise with flower-covered fields and snow-capped mountains.
It was important to the Inca that they not die as a result of burning or that the body of the deceased not be incinerated. Burning would cause their vital force to disappear and threaten their passage to the after world. The Inca nobility practiced cranial deformation.[61] They wrapped tight cloth straps around the heads of newborns to shape their soft skulls into a more conical form, thus distinguishing the nobility from other social classes.
The Incas made human sacrifices. As many as 4,000 servants, court officials, favorites and concubines were killed upon the death of the Inca Huayna Capac in 1527.[62] The Incas performed child sacrifices around important events, such as the death of the Sapa Inca or during a famine. These sacrifices were known as qhapaq hucha.[63]
Deities
The Incas were polytheists who worshipped many gods. These included:
Viracocha (also Pachacamac)   Created all living things
Apu Illapu   Rain god, prayed to when they need rain
Ayar Cachi   Hot-tempered god, causes earthquakes
Illapa   Goddess of lightning and thunder (also Yakumama, goddess of water)
Inti   Sun god and patron deity of the holy city of Cusco (home of the sun)
Kuychi   Rainbow god, connected with fertility
Mama Killa   Means "Mother Moon", wife of Inti
Mama Occlo   Created wisdom to civilize the people, taught women to weave cloth and build houses
Manco C pac   Known for his courage and sent to Earth to become first king of the Incas. Taught people how to grow plants, make weapons, work together, share resources and worship the other gods
Pachamama   Goddess of earth and wife of Viracocha. People give her offerings of coca leaves and beer and pray to her for major agricultural occasions
Quchamama   Goddess of the sea
Sachamama   Means "Mother Tree", represented as a snake with two heads
Yacumama   Means "Mother Water", represented as a snake, transformed into a great river (also Illapa) when she came to Earth
Economy
Main article: Economy of the Inca Empire
Further information: Incan agriculture, Vertical archipelago, Mit'a, and Qullqa
 Illustration of Inca farmers using a chakitaqlla (Andean foot plough), Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala, El primer nueva cor nica y buen gobierno, circa 1615
The Inca Empire employed central planning. The Inca Empire traded with outside regions, although they did not operate a substantial internal market economy. While axe-monies were used along the northern coast, presumably by the provincial mindal e trading class,[64] most households in the empire lived in a traditional economy in which households were required to pay taxes, usually in the form of the mit'a corv e labor, and military obligations,[65] though barter (or trueque) was present in some areas.[66] In return, the state provided security, food in times of hardship through the supply of emergency resources, agricultural projects (e.g. aqueducts and terraces) to increase productivity, and occasional feasts hosted by Inca officials for their subjects. While mit'a was used by the state to obtain labor, individual villages had a pre-inca system of communal work, known as mink'a. This system survives to the modern day, known as mink'a or faena. The economy rested on the material foundations of the vertical archipelago, a system of ecological complementarity in accessing resources[67] and the cultural foundation of ayni, or reciprocal exchange.[68][69]
Government
Main article: Government of the Inca Empire
Beliefs
 Inti, as represented by Jos  Bernardo de Tagle of Peru
The Sapa Inca was conceptualized as divine and was effectively head of the state religion. The Willaq Umu (or Chief Priest) was second to the emperor. Local religious traditions continued and in some cases such as the Oracle at Pachacamac on the Peruvian coast, were officially venerated. Following Pachacuti, the Sapa Inca claimed descent from Inti, who placed a high value on imperial blood; by the end of the empire, it was common to incestuously wed brother and sister. He was "son of the sun", and his people the intip churin, or "children of the sun", and both his right to rule and mission to conquer derived from his holy ancestor. The Sapa Inca also presided over ideologically important festivals, notably during the Inti Raymi, or "Sunfest" attended by soldiers, mummified rulers, nobles, clerics and the general population of Cusco beginning on the June solstice and culminating nine days later with the ritual breaking of the earth using a foot plow by the Inca. Moreover, Cusco was considered cosmologically central, loaded as it was with huacas and radiating ceque lines as the geographic center of the Four-Quarters; Inca Garcilaso de la Vega called it "the navel of the universe".[70][71][72][73]
Organization of the empire
The Inca Empire was a federalist system consisting of a central government with the Inca at its head and four regional quarters, or suyu: Chinchay Suyu (NW), Anti Suyu (NE), Kunti Suyu (SW) and Qulla Suyu (SE). The four corners of these quarters met at the center, Cusco. These suyu were likely created around 1460 during the reign of Pachacuti before the empire reached its largest territorial extent. At the time the suyu were established they were roughly of equal size and only later changed their proportions as the empire expanded north and south along the Andes.[74]
Cusco was likely not organized as a wamani, or province. Rather, it was probably somewhat akin to a modern federal district, like Washington, DC or Mexico City. The city sat at the center of the four suyu and served as the preeminent center of politics and religion. While Cusco was essentially governed by the Sapa Inca, his relatives and the royal panaqa lineages, each suyu was governed by an Apu, a term of esteem used for men of high status and for venerated mountains. Both Cusco as a district and the four suyu as administrative regions were grouped into upper hanan and lower hurin divisions. As the Inca did not have written records, it is impossible to exhaustively list the constituent wamani. However, colonial records allow us to reconstruct a partial list. There were likely more than 86 wamani, with more than 48 in the highlands and more than 38 on the coast.[75][76][77]
Suyu
 The four suyus or quarters of the empire
The most populous suyu was Chinchaysuyu, which encompassed the former Chimu empire and much of the northern Andes. At its largest extent, it extended through much of what are now Ecuador and Colombia.
The largest suyu by area was Qullasuyu, named after the Aymara-speaking Qulla people. It encompassed what is now the Bolivian Altiplano and much of the southern Andes, reaching what is now Argentina and as far south as the Maipo or Maule river in modern Central Chile.[78] Historian Jos  Bengoa singled out Quillota as likely being the foremost Inca settlement in Chile.[79]
The second smallest suyu, Antisuyu, was northwest of Cusco in the high Andes. Its name is the root of the word "Andes".[80]
Kuntisuyu was the smallest suyu, located along the southern coast of modern Peru, extending into the highlands towards Cusco.[81]
Laws
The Inca state had no separate judiciary or codified laws. Customs, expectations and traditional local power holders governed behavior. The state had legal force, such as through tokoyrikoq (lit. "he who sees all"), or inspectors. The highest such inspector, typically a blood relative to the Sapa Inca, acted independently of the conventional hierarchy, providing a point of view for the Sapa Inca free of bureaucratic influence.[82]
The Inca had three moral precepts that governed their behavior:
Ama sua: Do not steal
Ama llulla: Do not lie
Ama quella: Do not be lazy
Administration
Colonial sources are not entirely clear or in agreement about Inca government structure, such as exact duties and functions of government positions. But the basic structure can be broadly described. The top was the Sapa Inca. Below that may have been the Willaq Umu, literally the "priest who recounts", the High Priest of the Sun.[83] However, beneath the Sapa Inca also sat the Inkap rantin, who was a confidant and assistant to the Sapa Inca, perhaps similar to a Prime Minister.[84] Starting with Topa Inca Yupanqui, a "Council of the Realm" was composed of 16 nobles: 2 from hanan Cusco; 2 from hurin Cusco; 4 from Chinchaysuyu; 2 from Cuntisuyu; 4 from Collasuyu; and 2 from Antisuyu. This weighting of representation balanced the hanan and hurin divisions of the empire, both within Cusco and within the Quarters (hanan suyukuna and hurin suyukuna).[85]
While provincial bureaucracy and government varied greatly, the basic organization was decimal. Taxpayers   male heads of household of a certain age range   were organized into corv e labor units (often doubling as military units) that formed the state's muscle as part of mit'a service. Each unit of more than 100 tax-payers were headed by a kuraka, while smaller units were headed by a kamayuq, a lower, non-hereditary status. However, while kuraka status was hereditary and typically served for life, the position of a kuraka in the hierarchy was subject to change based on the privileges of superiors in the hierarchy; a pachaka kuraka could be appointed to the position by a waranqa kuraka. Furthermore, one kuraka in each decimal level could serve as the head of one of the nine groups at a lower level, so that a pachaka kuraka might also be a waranqa kuraka, in effect directly responsible for one unit of 100 tax-payers and less directly responsible for nine other such units.[86][87][88]
Kuraka in Charge[89][90]
Number of Taxpayers
Hunu kuraka
10,000
Pichkawaranqa kuraka
5,000
Waranqa kuraka
1,000
Pichkapachaka kuraka
500
Pachaka kuraka
100
Pichkachunka kamayuq
50
Chunka kamayuq
10
Arts and technology
Monumental architecture
We can assure your majesty that it is so beautiful and has such fine buildings that it would even be remarkable in Spain.
Francisco Pizarro
Architecture was the most important of the Incan arts, with textiles reflecting architectural motifs. The most notable example is Machu Picchu, which was constructed by Inca engineers. The prime Inca structures were made of stone blocks that fit together so well that a knife could not be fitted through the stonework. These constructs have survived for centuries, with no use of mortar to sustain them.
This process was first used on a large scale by the Pucara (c. 300 BC AD 300) peoples to the south in Lake Titicaca and later in the city of Tiwanaku (c. AD 400 1100) in what is now Bolivia. The rocks were sculpted to fit together exactly by repeatedly lowering a rock onto another and carving away any sections on the lower rock where the dust was compressed. The tight fit and the concavity on the lower rocks made them extraordinarily stable, despite the ongoing challenge of earthquakes and volcanic activity.
Measures, calendrics and mathematics
See also: Mathematics of the Incas
 Quipu, 15th century. Brooklyn Museum
Physical measures used by the Inca were based on human body parts. Units included fingers, the distance from thumb to forefinger, palms, cubits and wingspans. The most basic distance unit was thatkiy or thatki, or one pace. The next largest unit was reported by Cobo to be the topo or tupu, measuring 6,000 thatkiys, or about 7.7 km (4.8 mi); careful study has shown that a range of 4.0 to 6.3 km (2.5 to 3.9 mi) is likely. Next was the wamani, composed of 30 topos (roughly 232 km or 144 mi). To measure area, 25 by 50 wingspans were used, reckoned in topos (roughly 3,280 km2 or 1,270 sq mi). It seems likely that distance was often interpreted as one day's walk; the distance between tambo way-stations varies widely in terms of distance, but far less in terms of time to walk that distance.[91][92]
Inca calendars were strongly tied to astronomy. Inca astronomers understood equinoxes, solstices and zenith passages, along with the Venus cycle. They could not, however, predict eclipses. The Inca calendar was essentially lunisolar, as two calendars were maintained in parallel, one solar and one lunar. As 12 lunar months fall 11 days short of a full 365-day solar year, those in charge of the calendar had to adjust every winter solstice. Each lunar month was marked with festivals and rituals.[93] Apparently, the days of the week were not named and days were not grouped into weeks. Similarly, months were not grouped into seasons. Time during a day was not measured in hours or minutes, but in terms of how far the sun had travelled or in how long it had taken to perform a task.[94]
The sophistication of Inca administration, calendrics and engineering required facility with numbers. Numerical information was stored in the knots of quipu strings, allowing for compact storage of large numbers.[95][96] These numbers were stored in base-10 digits, the same base used by the Quechua language[97] and in administrative and military units.[87] These numbers, stored in quipu, could be calculated on yupanas, grids with squares of positionally varying mathematical values, perhaps functioning as an abacus.[98] Calculation was facilitated by moving piles of tokens, seeds or pebbles between compartments of the yupana. It is likely that Inca mathematics at least allowed division of integers into integers or fractions and multiplication of integers and fractions.[99]
According to mid-17th-century Jesuit chronicler Bernab  Cobo,[100] the Inca designated officials to perform accounting-related tasks. These officials were called quipo camayos. Study of khipu sample VA 42527 (Museum f r V lkerkunde, Berlin)[101] revealed that the numbers arranged in calendrically significant patterns were used for agricultural purposes in the "farm account books" kept by the khipukamayuq (accountant or warehouse keeper) to facilitate the closing of accounting books.[102]
Tunics
 Tunic worn by an Inca of high rank, in vicu a wool and cotton (1450-1540 CE), kept at the Washington Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection[103]
Tunics were created by skilled Incan textile-makers as a piece of warm clothing, but they also symbolized cultural and political status and power. Cumbi was the fine, tapestry-woven woolen cloth that was produced and necessary for the creation of tunics. Cumbi was produced by specially-appointed women and men. Generally, textile-making was practiced by both men and women. As emphasized by certain historians, only with European conquest was it deemed that women would become the primary weavers in society, as opposed to Incan society where specialty textiles were produced by men and women equally.[50]
Complex patterns and designs were meant to convey information about order in Andean society as well as the Universe. Tunics could also symbolize one's relationship to ancient rulers or important ancestors. These textiles were frequently designed to represent the physical order of a society, for example, the flow of tribute within an empire. Many tunics have a "checkerboard effect" which is known as the collcapata. According to historians Kenneth Mills, William B. Taylor, and Sandra Lauderdale Graham, the collcapata patterns "seem to have expressed concepts of commonality, and, ultimately, unity of all ranks of people, representing a careful kind of foundation upon which the structure of Inkaic universalism was built." Rulers wore various tunics throughout the year, switching them out for different occasions and feasts.
The symbols present within the tunics suggest the importance of "pictographic expression" within Inkan and other Andean societies far before the iconographies of the Spanish Christians.[104]
Uncu
Uncu was a men's garment similar to a tunic. It was an upper-body garment of knee-length; Royals wore it with a mantle cloth called ''yacolla.''[105][106]
Ceramics, precious metals and textiles
 Camelid Conopa, 1470 1532, Brooklyn Museum, Small stone figurines, or conopas, of llamas and alpacas were the most common ritual effigies used in the highlands of modern-day Peru and what is now Bolivia. These devotional objects were often buried in the animals' corrals to bring protection and prosperity to their owners and fertility to the herds. The cylindrical cavities in their backs were filled with offerings to the gods in the form of a mixture including animal fat, coca leaves, maize kernels and seashells.
Ceramics were painted using the polychrome technique portraying numerous motifs including animals, birds, waves, felines (popular in the Chavin culture) and geometric patterns found in the Nazca style of ceramics. In a culture without a written language, ceramics portrayed the basic scenes of everyday life, including the smelting of metals, relationships and scenes of tribal warfare. The most distinctive Inca ceramic objects are the Cusco bottles or "aryballos".[107] Many of these pieces are on display in Lima in the Larco Archaeological Museum and the National Museum of Archaeology, Anthropology and History.
Almost all of the gold and silver work of the Incan empire was melted down by the conquistadors, and shipped back to Spain.[108]
Communication and medicine
The Inca recorded information on assemblages of knotted strings, known as Quipu, although they can no longer be decoded. Originally it was thought that Quipu were used only as mnemonic devices or to record numerical data. Quipus are also believed to record history and literature.[109]
The Inca made many discoveries in medicine.[110] They performed successful skull surgery, by cutting holes in the skull to alleviate fluid buildup and inflammation caused by head wounds. Many skull surgeries performed by Inca surgeons were successful. Survival rates were 80 90%, compared to about 30% before Inca times.[111]
Coca
 Coca leaves
The Incas revered the coca plant as sacred/magical. Its leaves were used in moderate amounts to lessen hunger and pain during work, but were mostly used for religious and health purposes.[112] The Spaniards took advantage of the effects of chewing coca leaves.[112] The Chasqui, messengers who ran throughout the empire to deliver messages, chewed coca leaves for extra energy. Coca leaves were also used as an anaesthetic during surgeries.
Weapons, armor and warfare
Main article: Inca army
 Sacsayhuam n, the largest Inca pukara (largest Inca fortresses)
 Copper heads for maces
The Inca army was the most powerful at that time, because any ordinary villager or farmer could be recruited as a soldier as part of the mit'a system of mandatory public service. Every able bodied male Inca of fighting age had to take part in war in some capacity at least once and to prepare for warfare again when needed. By the time the empire reached its largest size, every section of the empire contributed in setting up an army for war.
The Incas had no iron or steel and their weapons were not much more effective than those of their opponents so they often defeated opponents by sheer force of numbers, or else by persuading them to surrender beforehand by offering generous terms.[113] Inca weaponry included "hardwood spears launched using throwers, arrows, javelins, slings, the bolas, clubs, and maces with star-shaped heads made of copper or bronze".[113][114] Rolling rocks downhill onto the enemy was a common strategy, taking advantage of the hilly terrain.[115] Fighting was sometimes accompanied by drums and trumpets made of wood, shell or bone.[116][117] Armor included:[113][118]
Helmets made of wood, cane, or animal skin, often lined with copper or bronze; some were adorned with feathers
Round or square shields made from wood or hide
Cloth tunics padded with cotton and small wooden planks to protect the spine
Ceremonial metal breastplates, of copper, silver, and gold, have been found in burial sites, some of which may have also been used in battle.[119][120]
Roads allowed quick movement (on foot) for the Inca army and shelters called tambo and storage silos called qullqas were built one day's travelling distance from each other, so that an army on campaign could always be fed and rested. This can be seen in names of ruins such as Ollantay Tambo, or My Lord's Storehouse. These were set up so the Inca and his entourage would always have supplies (and possibly shelter) ready as they traveled.
Banner of the Inca
See also: Wiphala and Rainbow flag  Andean indigenism
Chronicles and references from the 16th and 17th centuries support the idea of a banner. However, it represented the Inca (emperor), not the empire.
Francisco L pez de Jerez[121] wrote in 1534:
... todos ven an repartidos en sus escuadras con sus banderas y capitanes que los mandan, con tanto concierto como turcos.(... all of them came distributed into squads, with their flags and captains commanding them, as well-ordered as Turks.) 
Chronicler Bernab  Cobo wrote:
The royal standard or banner was a small square flag, ten or twelve spans around, made of cotton or wool cloth, placed on the end of a long staff, stretched and stiff such that it did not wave in the air and on it each king painted his arms and emblems, for each one chose different ones, though the sign of the Incas was the rainbow and two parallel snakes along the width with the tassel as a crown, which each king used to add for a badge or blazon those preferred, like a lion, an eagle and other figures.
(... el gui n o estandarte real era una banderilla cuadrada y peque a, de diez o doce palmos de ruedo, hecha de lienzo de algod n o de lana, iba puesta en el remate de una asta larga, tendida y tiesa, sin que ondease al aire, y en ella pintaba cada rey sus armas y divisas, porque cada uno las escog a diferentes, aunque las generales de los Incas eran el arco celeste y dos culebras tendidas a lo largo paralelas con la borda que le serv a de corona, a las cuales sol a a adir por divisa y blas n cada rey las que le parec a, como un le n, un  guila y otras figuras.)-Bernab  Cobo, Historia del Nuevo Mundo (1653)
Guaman Poma's 1615 book, El primer nueva cor nica y buen gobierno, shows numerous line drawings of Inca flags.[122] In his 1847 book A History of the Conquest of Peru, "William H. Prescott ... says that in the Inca army each company had its particular banner and that the imperial standard, high above all, displayed the glittering device of the rainbow, the armorial ensign of the Incas."[123] A 1917 world flags book says the Inca "heir-apparent ... was entitled to display the royal standard of the rainbow in his military campaigns."[124]
In modern times the rainbow flag has been wrongly associated with the Tawantinsuyu and displayed as a symbol of Inca heritage by some groups in Peru and Bolivia. The city of Cusco also flies the Rainbow Flag, but as an official flag of the city. The Peruvian president Alejandro Toledo (2001 2006) flew the Rainbow Flag in Lima's presidential palace. However, according to Peruvian historiography, the Inca Empire never had a flag. Peruvian historian Mar a Rostworowski said, "I bet my life, the Inca never had that flag, it never existed, no chronicler mentioned it".[125] Also, to the Peruvian newspaper El Comercio, the flag dates to the first decades of the 20th century,[126] and even the Congress of the Republic of Peru has determined that the flag is a fake by citing the conclusion of the National Academy of Peruvian History:
"The official use of the wrongly called 'Tawantinsuyu flag' is a mistake. In the Pre-Hispanic Andean World there did not exist the concept of a flag, it did not belong to their historic context".[126]
National Academy of Peruvian History
Adaptations to altitude
The people of the Andes, including the Incas, were able to adapt to high-altitude living through successful acclimatization, which is characterized by increasing oxygen supply to the blood tissues. For the native living in the Andean highlands, this was achieved through the development of a larger lung capacity, and an increase in red blood cell counts, hemoglobin concentration, and capillary beds.[127]
Compared to other humans, the Andeans had slower heart rates, almost one-third larger lung capacity, about 2 L (4 pints) more blood volume and double the amount of hemoglobin, which transfers oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. While the Conquistadors may have been taller, the Inca had the advantage of coping with the extraordinary altitude.[128] The Tibetans in Asia living in the Himalayas are also adapted to living in high-altitudes, although the adaptation is different from that of the Andeans.[129]
See also
Civilizations portal
Incan archeological sites
Choquequirao
Cojitambo
El Fuerte de Samaipata
Hu nuco Pampa
Huchuy Qosqo
Inca-Caranqui
Llaqtapata
Moray
Ollantaytambo
Oroncota
Pambamarca Fortress Complex
P sac
Pukara of La Compa ia
Quispiguanca
Rumicucho
Tampukancha
Tumebamba
Vitcos
Vilcabamba
Incan-related
History of Cusco
Atahualpa, last Inca Emperor
Aclla, the "chosen women"
Amauta, Inca teachers
Amazonas before the Inca Empire
Anden, agricultural terrace
Inca army
Inca cuisine
Incan aqueducts
Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala
Paria, Bolivia
Religion in the Inca Empire
Tampukancha, Inca religious site
Society of the Spanish-Americans in the Spanish Colonial Americas
General
Ancient Peru
Cultural periods of Peru
Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
History of Peru
History of smallpox   Epidemics in the Americas
Muisca Confederation
Notes
^ Quechua: Tawantinsuyu, lit. "four parts together"[3]
References
^ Turchin, Peter; Adams, Jonathan M.; Hall, Thomas D (December 2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires". Journal of World-Systems Research. 12 (2): 222. ISSN 1076-156X. Retrieved 16 September 2016.
^ Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 497. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. JSTOR 2600793. Retrieved 7 September 2018.
^ a b McEwan 2008, p. 221.
^ Schwartz, Glenn M.; Nichols, John J. (2010). After Collapse: The Regeneration of Complex Societies. University of Arizona Press. ISBN 978-0-8165-2936-0.
^ "Quechua, the Language of the Incas". 11 November 2013.
^ McEwan, Gordon F. (2006). The Incas: New Perspectives. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. p. 5.
^ Morris, Craig and von Hagen, Adrianna (2011), The Incas, London: Thames & Hudson, pp. 48 58
^ "The Inca   All Empires".
^ "The Inca". The National Foreign Language Center at the University of Maryland. 29 May 2007. Retrieved 10 September 2013.
^ La Lone, Darrell E. (1982). "The Inca as a Nonmarket Economy: Supply on Command versus Supply and Demand". Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange: 292. Retrieved 10 August 2017.
^ Pease, Franklin (2011). The Incas (1st ed.). Lima, Per : Fondo Editorial de la Pontificia Universidad Cat lica del Per . pp. 95 121. ISBN 978-9972-42-949-1.
^ "Inca". American Heritage Dictionary. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2009.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 93.
^ Prescott, William Hickling (1847). History of the Conquest of Peru. Retrieved 12 July 2022.
^ Pease, Franklin (2011). The Incas (1st ed.). Lima, Per : Fondo Editorial de la Pontificia Universidad Cat lica del Per . p. 31. ISBN 978-9972-42-949-1.
^ Upton, Gary and von Hagen, Adriana (2015), Encyclopedia of the Incas, New York: Rowand & Littlefield, p. 2. Some scholars cite 6 or 7 pristine civilizations. ISBN 0804715165.
^ McEwan, Gordon F. (2006), The Incas: New Perspectives Archived 11 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine, New York: W. W. Norton & Company, p. 65
^ Spalding, Karen (1984), Huarococh  Stanford University Press: Stanford, page 77
^ a b Gade, Daniel (2016). "Urubamba Verticality: Reflections on Crops and Diseases". Spell of the Urubamba: Anthropogeographical Essays on an Andean Valley in Space and Time. p. 86. ISBN 978-3-319-20849-7.
^ Hardoy, Jorge Henr que (1973). Pre-Columbian Cities. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-8027-0380-4.
^ a b Gade, Daniel W. (1996). "Carl Troll on Nature and Culture in the Andes (Carl Troll  ber die Natur und Kultur in den Anden)". Erdkunde. 50 (4): 301 16. doi:10.3112/erdkunde.1996.04.02.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 57.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 69.
^ Demarest, Arthur Andrew; Conrad, Geoffrey W. (1984). Religion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 57 59. ISBN 0-521-31896-3.
^ The three laws of Tawantinsuyu are still referred to in Bolivia these days as the three laws of the Qullasuyu.
^ Weatherford, J. McIver (1988). Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Transformed the World. New York: Fawcett Columbine. pp. 60 62. ISBN 0-449-90496-2.
^ a b c d e f g Silva Galdames, Osvaldo (1983). " Detuvo la batalla del Maule la expansi n inca hacia el sur de Chile?". Cuadernos de Historia (in Spanish). 3: 7 25. Retrieved 10 January 2019.
^ Ernesto Salazar (1977). An Indian federation in lowland Ecuador (PDF). International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. p. 13. Retrieved 16 February 2013.
^ Starn, Orin; Kirk, Carlos Iv n; Degregori, Carlos Iv n (2009). The Peru Reader: History, Culture, Politics. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-8750-3.
^ *Juan de Samano (9 October 2009). "Relacion de los primeros descubrimientos de Francisco Pizarro y Diego de Almagro, 1526". bloknot.info (A. Skromnitsky). Retrieved 10 October 2009.
^ Somervill, Barbara (2005). Francisco Pizarro: Conqueror of the Incas. Compass Point Books. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-7565-1061-9.
^ D'Altroy, Terence N. (2003). The Incas. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing. p. 76. ISBN 9780631176770.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 79.
^ Raudzens, George, ed. (2003). Technology, Disease, and Colonial Conquest. Boston: Brill Academic. p. xiv.
^ Mumford, Jeremy Ravi (2012), Vertical Empire, Duke University Press: Durham, pages 19-30, 56-57. ISBN 9780822353102.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 31.
^ Sanderson 1992, p. 76.
^ "El Ni o, Catastrophism, and Culture Change in Ancient America   Daniel H. Sandweiss, Jeffrey Quilter". www.hup.harvard.edu. Retrieved 7 August 2022.
^ Millersville University Silent Killers of the New World Archived 3 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 93 96. The 10 million population estimate in the info box is a mid-range estimate of the population..
^ Torero Fern ndez de C rdoba, Alfredo. (1970) "Ling stica e historia de la Sociedad Andina", Anales Cient ficos de la Universidad Agraria, VIII, 3-4, p gs. 249-251. Lima: UNALM.
^ "Origins And Diversity of Quechua".
^ "Comparing chronicles and Andean visual texts. Issues for analysis" (PDF). Chungara, Revista de Antropolog a Chilena. 46, N  1, 2014: 91 113.
^ Eeckhout, Peter (11 April 2004). "Royal Tocapu in Guacan Poma: An Inca Heraldic?". Boletin de Arqueologia PUCP. N  8, 2004 (8): 305 23.
^ a b c d Covey, R. Alan (1947). "Inca Gender Relations: from household to empire". In Brettell, Caroline; Sargent, Carolyn F. (eds.) Gender in cross-cultural perspective   (7th ed.). Abingdon, Oxfordshire. ISBN 978-0-415-78386-6. OCLC 962171839.
^ a b c d Incas : lords of gold and glory. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books. 1992. ISBN 0-8094-9870-7. OCLC 25371192.
^ Gouda, F. (2008). Colonial Encounters, Body Politics, and Flows of Desire. Journal of Women's History, 20(3), 166 80.
^ Gerard, K. (1997). Ancient Lives. New Moon, 4(4), 44.
^ a b D'Altroy, Terence N. (2002). The Incas. Malden, MA: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-17677-2. OCLC 46449340.
^ a b Karen B. Graubart (2000). "Weaving and the Construction of a Gender Division of Labor in Early Colonial Peru". The American Indian Quarterly 24, no. 4: 537 561.
^ a b c Silverblatt, Irene (1987). Moon, sun, and witches : gender ideologies and class in Inca and colonial Peru. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-07726-6. OCLC 14165734.
^ Cobo, Bernab  (1979). History of the Inca Empire : an account of the Indians' customs and their origin, together with a treatise on Inca legends, history, and social institutions. Hamilton, Roland. Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-73008-X. OCLC 4933087.
^ Malpass, Michael Andrew (1996). Daily life in the Inca empire. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-29390-2. OCLC 33405288.
^ Magazine, Smithsonian; Heaney, Christopher. "The Fascinating Afterlife of Peru's Mummies". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 31 July 2022.
^ Tom Garlinghouse (15 July 2020). "Mummification: The lost art of embalming the dead". livescience.com. Retrieved 31 July 2022.
^ Magazine, Smithsonian; Heaney, Christopher. "The Fascinating Afterlife of Peru's Mummies". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 2 August 2022.
^ Williams, Emma J. (22 May 2018). "Comparing Mummification Processes: Egyptian & Inca". EXARC Journal (EXARC Journal Issue 2018/2). ISSN 2212-8956.
^ Morveli, Fidelus Coraza (14 August 2018). "Funeral Rites in Inca Times". Cuzco Eats. Retrieved 4 August 2022.
^ Urton, Gary (2009). Signs of the Inka Khipu: Binary Coding in the Andean Knotted-String Records. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-77375-2.
^ "The Incas of Peru". Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 15 October 2007.
^ Burger, Richard L.; Salazar, Lucy C. (2004). Machu Picchu: Unveiling the Mystery of the Incas. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-09763-4.
^ Davies, Nigel (1981). Human sacrifice: in history and today. Morrow. pp. 261 62. ISBN 978-0-688-03755-0.
^ Reinhard, Johan (November 1999). "A 6,700 metros ni os incas sacrificados quedaron congelados en el tiempo". National Geographic, Spanish version: 36 55.
^ Salomon, Frank (1 January 1987). "A North Andean Status Trader Complex under Inka Rule". Ethnohistory. 34 (1): 63 77. doi:10.2307/482266. JSTOR 482266.
^ Earls, J. The Character of Inca and Andean Agriculture. pp. 1 29
^ Moseley 2001, p. 44.
^ Murra, John V.; Rowe, John Howland (1 January 1984). "An Interview with John V. Murra". The Hispanic American Historical Review. 64 (4): 633 53. doi:10.2307/2514748. JSTOR 2514748. S2CID 222285111.
^ Maffie, J. (5 March 2013). "Pre-Columbian Philosophies".  In Nuccetelli, Susana; Schutte, Ofelia; Bueno, Ot vio (eds.). A Companion to Latin American Philosophy. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 137 38. ISBN 978-1-118-61056-5.
^ Newitz, Annalee (3 January 2012), The greatest mystery of the Inca Empire was its strange economy, io9, retrieved 4 January 2012
^ Willey, Gordon R. (1966). An Introduction to American Archaeology: South America. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall. pp. 173 75.
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 86 89, 111, 154 55.
^ Moseley2001, pp. 81 85.
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 138 39.
^ Rowe in Steward, Ed., p. 262
^ Rowe in Steward, ed., pp. 185 92
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 42 43, 86 89.
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 113 14.
^ Dillehay, T.; Gordon, A. (1998). "La actividad prehisp nica y su influencia en la Araucan a".  In Dillehay, Tom; Netherly, Patricia (eds.). La frontera del estado Inca. Editorial Abya Yala. ISBN 978-9978-04-977-8.
^ Bengoa 2003, pp. 37 38.
^ D'Altroy 2014, p. 87.
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 87 88.
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 235 36.
^ D'Altroy 2014, p. 99.
^ R. T. Zuidema, Hierarchy and Space in Incaic Social Organization. Ethnohistory, Vol. 30, No. 2. (Spring, 1983), p. 97
^ Zuidema 1983, p. 48. sfn error: no target: CITEREFZuidema1983 (help)
^ Julien 1982, pp. 121 27.
^ a b D'Altroy 2014, pp. 233 34.
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 114 15.
^ Julien 1982, p. 123.
^ D'Altroy 2014, p. 233.
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 246 47.
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 179 80.
^ D'Altroy 2014, pp. 150 54.
^ McEwan 2008, pp. 185 87.
^ Neuman, William (2 January 2016). "Untangling an Accounting Tool and an Ancient Incan Mystery". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2016.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 183-185.
^ "Supplementary Information for: Heggarty 2008". Arch.cam.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 12 March 2013. Retrieved 24 September 2012.
^ "Inca mathematics". History.mcs.st-and.ac.uk. Retrieved 24 September 2012.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 185.
^ Cobo, B. (1983 [1653]). Obras del P. Bernab  Cobo. Vol. 1. Edited and preliminary study By Francisco Mateos. Biblioteca de Autores Espa oles, vol. 91. Madrid: Ediciones Atlas.
^ S ez-Rodr guez, A. (2012). "An Ethnomathematics Exercise for Analyzing a Khipu Sample from Pachacamac (Per )". Revista Latinoamericana de Etnomatem tica. 5 (1): 62 88.
^ S ez-Rodr guez, A. (2013). "Knot numbers used as labels for identifying subject matter of a khipu". Revista Latinoamericana de Etnomatem tica. 6 (1): 4 19.
^ "All T'oqapu Tunic". Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection website.
^ Mills, Kenneth, Taylor, William B., and Graham, Sandra Lauderdale, eds. Colonial Latin America : A Documentary History. Denver: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2002, 14-18.
^ Cummins, Thomas B. F.; Anderson, Barbara (23 September 2008). The Getty Murua: Essays on the Making of Martin de Murua's "Historia General del Piru", J. Paul Getty Museum Ms. Ludwig XIII 16. Getty Publications. p. 127. ISBN 978-0-89236-894-5.
^ Feltham, Jane (1989). Peruvian textiles. Internet Archive. Aylesbury : Shire. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-7478-0014-9.
^ Berrin, Kathleen (1997). The Spirit of Ancient Peru: Treasures from the Museo Arqueol gico Rafael Larco Herrera. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-01802-6.
^ Minster, Christopher. "What Happened to the Treasure Hoard of the Inca Emperor?". ThoughtCo. Retrieved 13 February 2019.
^ McEwan 2008, p. 183.
^ Somervill, Barbara A. (2005). Empire of the Inca. New York: Facts on File, Inc. pp. 101 03. ISBN 0-8160-5560-2.
^ "Incan skull surgery". Science News. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2009.
^ a b "Cocaine's use: From the Incas to the U.S." Boca Raton News. 4 April 1985. Retrieved 2 February 2014.
^ a b c Cartwright, Mark (19 May 2016). "Inca Warfare". World History Encyclopedia.
^ Kim MacQuarrie (17 June 2008). The Last Days of the Incas. Simon and Schuster. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-7432-6050-3.
^ Geoffrey Parker (29 September 2008). The Cambridge Illustrated History of Warfare: The Triumph of the West. Cambridge University Press. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-521-73806-4.
^ Robert Stevenson (1 January 1968). Music in Aztec & Inca Territory. University of California Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-520-03169-2.
^ Father Bernabe Cobo; Roland Hamilton (1 May 1990). Inca Religion and Customs. University of Texas Press. p. 218. ISBN 978-0-292-73861-4.
^ Cottie Arthur Burland (1968). Peru Under the Incas. Putnam. p. 101. The sling was the most deadly projectile weapon. Spear, long-handled axe and bronze-headed mace were the effective weapons. Protection was afforded by a wooden helmet covered with bronze, long quilted tunic and flexible quilted shield.
^ Peter Von Sivers; Charles Desnoyers; George B. Stow (2012). Patterns of World History. Oxford University Press. p. 505. ISBN 978-0-19-533334-3.
^ Maestro, Carmen P rez (1999). "Armas de metal en el Per  prehisp nico". Espacio, Tiempo y Forma, Se e I, Prehistoria y Arqueolog a (in Spanish): 319 346.
^ Francisco L pez de Jerez,Verdadera relaci n de la conquista del Peru y provincia de Cusco, llamada la Nueva Castilla, 1534.
^ Guaman Poma, El primer nueva cor nica y buen gobierno, (1615/1616), pp. 256, 286, 344, 346, 400, 434, 1077, this pagination corresponds to the Det Kongelige Bibliotek search engine pagination of the book. Additionally Poma shows both well drafted European flags and coats of arms on pp. 373, 515, 558, 1077. On pp. 83, 167 71 Poma uses a European heraldic graphic convention, a shield, to place certain totems related to Inca leaders.
^ Preble, George Henry; Charles Edward Asnis (1917). Origin and History of the American Flag and of the Naval and Yacht-Club Signals... Vol. 1. N. L. Brown. p. 85.
^ McCandless, Byron (1917). Flags of the world. National Geographic Society. p. 356.
^ " Bandera gay o del Tahuantinsuyo?". Terra. 19 April 2010. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 16 December 2013.
^ a b "La Bandera del Tahuantisuyo" (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2009.
^ Frisancho, A. Roberto (2013), "Developmental Functional Adaptation to High Altitude: Review" (PDF), American Journal of Human Biology, 25 (2): 151 68, doi:10.1002/ajhb.22367, hdl:2027.42/96751, PMID 24065360, S2CID 33055072
^ Kellog, RH (1968). "Altitude acclimatization, A historical introduction emphasizing the regulation of breathing". Physiologist. 11 (1): 37 57. PMID 4865521.
^ Gibbons, Ann. "Tibertans inherited high-altitude gene from ancient humans". Science.org. Retrieved 18 June 2021.
Bibliography
Library resources about  Inca Empire 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
 ,   (2013).   XVI XVII        :  ,  ,  . Kyiv:      . ISBN 978-617-7085-03-3.
Bengoa, Jos  (2003). Historia de los antiguos mapuches del sur: desde antes de la llegada de los espa oles hasta las paces de Quil n : siglos XVI y XVII (in Spanish). BPR Publishers. ISBN 978-956-8303-02-0.
de la Vega, Garcilaso (2006). The Royal Commentaries of the Incas and General History of Peru, Abridged. Hackett Publishing. pp. 32 . ISBN 978-1-60384-856-5.
Hemming, John (2003). The Conquest of the Incas. Harvest Press. ISBN 0-15-602826-3.
MacQuarrie, Kim (2007). The Last Days of the Incas. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-6049-7.
Mann, Charles C. (2005). 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus. Knopf. pp. 64 105. ISBN 978-0-307-27818-0.
McEwan, Gordon F. (2008). The Incas: New Perspectives. W.W. Norton, Incorporated. pp. 221 . ISBN 978-0-393-33301-5.
Morales, Edmundo (1995). The guinea pig: healing, food, and ritual in the Andes. University of Arizona Press.
Popenoe, Hugh; Steven R. King; Jorge Leon; Luis Sumar Kalinowski; Noel D. Vietmeyer (1989). Lost Crops of the Incas: Little-Known Plants of the Andes with Promise for Worldwide Cultivation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. ISBN 0-309-04264-X.
Sanderson, Steven E. (1992). The Politics of Trade in Latin American Development. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2021-2.
D'Altroy, Terence N. (2014). The Incas. Wiley. ISBN 978-1-118-61059-6.
Steward, Julian H., ed. (1946). The Handbook of South American Indians: The Andean Civilizations. no. 143 v. 2 Bulletin / Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology. Vol. 2. Biodiversity Heritage Library / Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution. p. 1935.
Julien, Catherine J. (1982). Inca Decimal Administration in the Lake Titicaca Region in The Inca and Aztec States: 1400 1800. New York: Academic Press.
Moseley, Michael Edward (2001). The Incas and Their Ancestors: The Archaeology of Peru. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28277-9.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Inca (category)
"Guaman Poma   El Primer Nueva Cor nica Y Buen Gobierno"  A high-quality digital version of the Cor nica, scanned from the original manuscript.
Conquest nts.html Inca Land by Hiram Bingham (published 1912 1922).
Inca Artifacts, Peru and Machu Picchu 360-degree movies of inca artifacts and Peruvian landscapes.
Ancient Civilizations   Inca
"Ice Treasures of the Inca" National Geographic site.
"The Sacred Hymns of Pachacutec", poetry of an Inca emperor.
Incan Religion
Engineering in the Andes Mountains, lecture on Inca suspension bridges
A Map and Timeline of Inca Empire events
Ancient Peruvian art: contributions to the archaeology of the empire of the Incas, a four volume work from 1902 (fully available online as PDF)
vtePre-Columbian civilizations and culturesAmericas
Paleo-Indians
Genetic history
Archaeology of the Americas
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
North America
North American pre-Columbian cultures
Ancestral Puebloans
Caddoan Mississippian
Chichimeca
Hopewell tradition
Coles Creek
Fremont
Hohokam
Marksville
Mississippian
Mogollon
Plaquemine
Plum Bayou
Poverty Point
Sinagua
Troyville
Weeden Island
Mesoamerica
Mesoamerican pre-Columbian chronology
Acolhua
Capacha
Chalcatzingo
Cholula
Chup cuaro
Diquis
Cocl 
Epi-Olmec
Huastec
Izapa
Mezcala
Mixtec
Olmecs
Pipil
Pur pecha
Quelepa
Shaft tomb tradition
Teuchitl n
Teotihuacan
Tepanec
Tlatilco
Tlaxcaltec
Toltec
Totonac
Veracruz
Xochipala
Zapotec
South America
Andean civilizations
South American Indigenous people
Cultures of Pre-Columbian Colombia
Cultures Pre-Columbian Ecuador
Cultural Periods of Peru
El Abra
Aymara
Ca aris
Caral-Supe
Casma Sechin
Chachapoya
Chancay
Chav n
Chim 
Chinchorro
Chiripa
Gran Chaco
Kuhikugu
Hydraulic Culture of Mounds (Bolivia)
Las Vegas
Lima
La Tolita (Tumaco)
Mante o-Huancavilca
Marajoara
Mapuche
Moche
Mollo
Monte Verde
Nari o
Nazca
Piaroa
Pucar 
Quimbaya
San Agust n
Shuar
Sican
Ta no
Tairona
Tierradentro
Timoto Cuica
Tiwanaku
Valdivia
Wankarani
Wari
Zen 
AztecMayaMuiscaInca Language Nahuatl Mayan languages Muysccubun Quechua Writing Script Script Numerals Quipu Religion Religion Religion Religion Religion Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Calendar Calendar Calendar Calendar Society Society Society Economy (Women) Society Infrastructure Chinampas Architecture Architecture  Agriculture Architecture (road system) Agriculture History History History History Inca history Neo-Inca State People Moctezuma I Moctezuma II Cuitl huac Cuauht moc  K inich Janaab  Pakal Uaxaclajuun Ub aah K awiil Jasaw Chan K awiil I NemequeneQuemuenchatochaTisquesusaTundamaZoratama Manco C pac Pachacuti Atahualpa Manco Inca Yupanqui T pac Amaru  Conquest Spanish conquest (Hern n Cort s) Spanish conquest Spanish conquest of Yucat n (Francisco de Montejo) Spanish conquest of Guatemala (Pedro de Alvarado) Spanish conquest(Gonzalo Jim nez de Quesada)(Hern n P rez de Quesada)(List of conquistadors) Spanish conquest (Francisco Pizarro)See also
Aztecs
Portal:Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Portal:Mesoamerica
Columbian exchange
Mesoamerican writing systems
Native American cuisine
Native American pottery
Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Pre Columbian art
Painting in the Americas before European colonization
 Civilizations portal
vtePeru articlesHistoryTimeline
Ancient cultures
Inca Empire
Spanish conquest
Neo-Inca State
Viceroyalty
War of Independence
Guano Era
War of the Pacific
Colombia Peru War
Ecuadorian Peruvian War
Internal conflict
Political conflict
By topic
Demographic
Economic
Geography
Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Flora
Mountains
Natural regions
Protected areas
Rivers
Wildlife
World Heritage Sites
Politics
Constitution
Elections
Government
Foreign relations
Human rights
LGBT
Law
enforcement
Military
Political parties
Regions and provinces
Economy
Agriculture
Central Bank
Companies
Sol (currency)
Electricity
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Society
Crime
Demographics
Education
Irrigation
Languages
List of Peruvians
Public holidays
Religion
Squatting
Water resources management
Water supply and sanitation
Culture
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Llama
Literature
Machu Picchu
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteEmpiresAncient(Colonies)
Akkadian
Neo-Sumerian
Assyrian
Middle Assyrian
Neo-Assyrian
Babylonian
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Babylonian
Egyptian
Old Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
New Kingdom
Phoenician
Carthaginian
Chinese
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Qin
Han
Jin
North and South
Kush
Hellenistic
Macedonian
Seleucid
Ptolemaic
Bactrian
Indo-greek
Hittite
Hunnic
White
Xiongnu
Indian
Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha
Iranian
Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian
Kushan
Roman
Western
Eastern
Teotihuacan
Xianbei
Nirun
Post-classical
Aksum
Aragonese
Angevin
Ayyubid
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian
First
Second
Burmese
First
Calakmul
Caliphate
Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Chinese
Sui
Tang
Liao
Song
J n
Yuan
Ethiopian
Zagwe
Solomonic
Genoese
Georgian
Huetar
Inca
Indian
Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Vijayanagara
Indo-Persian
Delhi
Iranian
Tahirid
Saffarid
Samanid
Buyid
Japanese
Yamato
Kamakura
Muromachi
Edo
Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mamluk
Mongol
Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate
Moroccan
Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid
North Sea
Oyo
Hellenic Roman
Byzantine
Nicaea
Thessalonica
Trebizond
Epirus
Morea
Romano-Germanic
Carolingian
Holy-Roman
Russian
Kievan Rus'
Vladimir-Suzdal
Muscovite
Serbian
Singhasari
Somali
Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Tunni
Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Tikal
Tiwanku
Toltec
Turco-Persian
Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid
Turkic
First
Western
Eastern
Second
Venetian
Vietnamese
Dai Viet
Wagadou
Wari
Modern
Afghan
Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Burmese
Second
Third
Central African
Chinese
Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo
Ethiopian
Haitian
First
Second
French
First
Second
German
German
Nazi
Indian
Mysorean
Maratha
British Raj
Indo-Persian
Mughal
Sikh
Iranian
Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi
Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mamluk
Mexican
First
Second
Mongol
Oirat
Khoshut
Dzungar
Kalmyk
Bogd
Moroccan
Saadi
'Alawi
Ottoman
Russian
Tsarist
Imperial
Somali
Geledi
Habr Yunis
Hobyo
Isaaq
Majeerteen
Swedish
Tongan
Vietnamese
Dainam
Vietnam
Colonial
American
Belgian
British
English
Scottish
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Polish Lithuanian
Couronian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish
Lists
Empires
largest
Ancient great powers
Medieval great powers
Modern great powers
European colonialism
African empires
Miscellaneous
"Empire" as a description of foreign policy
American Empire
Soviet Empire
vteMonarchies in the AmericasCurrentSovereign states
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Belize
Canada
Grenada
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
European monarchieswith territories in the Americas
Denmark
Netherlands
United Kingdom
FormerIndigenous monarchies
Araucania and Patagonia
Aymara
Colla
Lupaca
Aztec
Huetar
Eastern Huetar
Garabito
Pacaca
Western Huetar
Inca
Cusco
Inca
Neo-Inca
Maya
Miskito
Nicoya
Talamanca
European monarchieswith colonies in the Americas
Courland and Semigallia
France
Hospitaller
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Sovereign states
Barbados (1966 2021)
Brazil (1822 89)
Guyana (1966 70)
Haiti
1804 06
1811 20
1849 59
Mexico
1822 23
1864 67
Trinidad and Tobago (1962 76)
Related
List of monarchs in the Americas
List of the last monarchs in the Americas
Kingdom of Redonda
Afro-Bolivian monarchy
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inca_Empire&oldid=1144753173"