Cut of beef
This article is about the cut of meat or other dishes made with it. For the traditional Ashkenazi Jewish dish, see Brisket (Jewish dish). For the smoked brisket dish popular in Texas, see Texas smoked brisket.
 A pan of beef brisket
Brisket is a cut of meat from the breast or lower chest of beef or veal. The beef brisket is one of the nine beef primal cuts, though the definition of the cut differs internationally. The brisket muscles include the superficial and deep pectorals. As cattle do not have collar bones, these muscles support about 60% of the body weight of standing or moving cattle. This requires a significant amount of connective tissue, so the resulting meat must be cooked correctly to tenderise it.
According to the Random House Dictionary of the English Language, Second Edition, the term derives from the Middle English brusket which comes from the earlier Old Norse brj sk, meaning cartilage. The cut overlies the sternum, ribs, and connecting costal cartilages.
Method of cooking[edit]
 American cuts of beef, highlighting the brisket
 British cuts of beef including the brisket
Briskets can be cooked in many ways, including baking, boiling and roasting. Basting of the meat is often done during the cooking. This normally tough cut of meat, due to the collagen fibers that make up the significant connective tissue in the cut, is tenderized when the collagen gelatinises, resulting in a more tender brisket. The fat cap, which is often left attached to the brisket, helps to keep the meat from drying during the prolonged cooking necessary to break down the connective tissue in the meat.  Water is necessary for the conversion of collagen to gelatine, which is the hydrolysis product of collagen.
Popular methods in the United States include rubbing with a spice rub or marinating the meat, and then cooking slowly over indirect heat from charcoal or wood. This is a form of smoking the meat. A hardwood, such as oak, pecan, hickory or mesquite is sometimes added, alone or in combination with other hardwoods, to the main heat source. Sometimes, they make up all of the heat sources, with chefs often prizing characteristics of certain woods. The smoke from the woods and from burnt dripping juices further enhances the flavor. The finished meat is a variety of barbecue. Smoked brisket done this way is popular in Texas barbecue. Once finished, pieces of brisket can be returned to the smoker to make burnt ends. Burnt ends are most popular in Kansas City-style barbecue, where they are traditionally served open-faced on white bread. The traditional New England boiled dinner features brisket as a main-course option. 
In the United States, the whole boneless brisket, based on the Institutional Meat Purchase Specifications (IMPS), as promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), has the meat-cutting classification IMPS 120. The North American Meat Processors Association publishes a photographic version of IMPS called the Meat Buyer's Guide.[1] The brisket muscles are sometimes separated for retail cutting: the lean "first cut" or "flat cut" is the deep pectoral, while the fattier "second cut", "point", "fat end", or "triangular cut" is the superficial pectoral. For food service use, they are IMPS 120A and 120B, respectively.
Other variations[edit]
Brisket has a long history in the United States.[2] Brisket is the meat of choice for slow smoking barbecue in Texas, and is often considered the "National Dish of Texas".[3]
In Britain, it is generally not smoked, but is one of a number of low-cost cuts which historically may have been boiled with root vegetables and mild spices, or cooked very slowly in a lidded casserole dish with gravy. The dish, known as a pot roast in the United States, but more commonly as braised or stewed beef in Britain, is often accompanied by root and tuber vegetables; for example, boiled beef and carrots (as mentioned in the song of the same name) is a well-known traditional dish emblematic of working class cockney culture. Good results may also be achieved in a slow cooker. Cooked brisket, being boneless, carves well after refrigeration, and is a versatile, cheaper cut.
In Germany, brisket is braised in dark beer and cooked with celery, carrots, onions, bay leaves and a small bundle of thyme.
In traditional Jewish cooking,  brisket is most often braised as a pot roast, especially as a holiday main course, usually served at Rosh Hashanah, Passover and on the Sabbath. For reasons of economics and kashrut, it was historically one of the more popular cuts of beef among Ashkenazi Jews. Brisket is also the most popular cut for corned beef, which can be further spiced and smoked to make pastrami. The Jewish community in Montreal also makes Montreal-style smoked meat, a close relative of pastrami, from brisket.[4]
 Kansas City-style beef brisket and burnt ends
 Beef brisket noodles (Philippines)
In Hong Kong, it is cooked with spices over low heat until tender, and is commonly served with noodles in soup or curry.[5]
In Korean cuisine, traditionally it is first boiled at low temperature with aromatic vegetables, then pressed with a heavy object in a container full of a soy sauce-based marinade. The ensuing preserved meat is served in match-length strips as an accompaniment (banchan) to a meal. This is called jang jorim. Brisket is also the main ingredient in a spicy soup called yuk ke jang, part of the class of soups that are complete meals in Korean cuisine. Nowadays, it is also popular to cook thin slices of it quickly over a hot plate.[citation needed]
In Thai cuisine, it is used to prepare suea rong hai, a popular grilled dish originally from Isan in northeastern  Thailand.[6]
In New Zealand cuisine, it is used in a boil-up. Boiled in seasoned water with green vegetables and potatoes, it is popular amongst Maori people.[citation needed]
It is a common cut of meat used in Vietnamese ph  soup.[7]
In Italian cuisine, brisket is used to prepare bollito misto, a typical Northern Italy recipe.[citation needed]
On the Indian subcontinent, it is used in nihari, a popular dish.[citation needed]
In Mexican cuisine, brisket is used to prepare suadero tacos.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Food portal
List of steak dishes
References[edit]
^ "Meat Buyers Guide". Chefs-Resources.com. Retrieved 2011-06-08.
^ "Brisket History". hopscotchbrickovenmi. May 10, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2020.
^ "Smoked Brisket Recipe - How To Smoke A Brisket". whatscookingamerica.net. 27 May 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2020.
^ Rabinovitch, Lara (2009), "Montreal-Style Smoked Meat:An interview with Eiran Harris conducted by Lara Rabinovitch, with the co-operation of the Jewish Public Library Archives of Montreal", Cuizine: The Journal of Canadian Food Cultures / Cuizine: Revue des cultures culinaires au Canada, 1 (2)
^ Christopher DeWolf; Izzy Ozawa; Tiffany Lam; Virginia Lau; Zoe Li (July 13, 2010). "40 Hong Kong foods we can't live without". cnngo.com. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2011.
^ "Suea hong hai". tasteatlas.com. Retrieved April 27, 2020.
^ Diana My Tran (2003). The Vietnamese Cookbook. Capital Lifestyles (illustrated ed.). Capital Books. pp. 53 54. ISBN 1-931868-38-7. Retrieved April 27, 2020.
Further reading[edit]
Moskin, Julia (August 19, 2014). "Brisket Is Worth the Wait". The New York Times. Retrieved March 17, 2015.
Green, Aliza (2005). Field Guide to Meat. Philadelphia: Quirk Books. ISBN 1-931686-79-3.
External links[edit]
 Media related to Brisket of beef at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of brisket at Wiktionary
vteBeef and vealProduction
Argentine beef
Beef cattle
Cow calf operation
Feeder cattle
Kobe beef
Organic beef
Osorno Steer
ProductsCuts
Baseball steak
Blade steak
Brisket
Chateaubriand steak
Chuck steak
Fajita
Filet mignon
Flank steak
Flap steak
Hanger steak
Plate
Ranch steak
Restructured steak
Rib eye
Rib steak
Round
Rump
Short loin
Short ribs
Shoulder tender
Sirloin
Top sirloin
Skirt steak
Standing rib roast
Strip
Shank
T-bone
Tenderloin
Tri-tip
Trotters
Tail
Processed
Jerky
Aged
Bresaola
Cabeza
Corned beef
Frankfurter Rindswurst
Ground
Montreal smoked
Pastrami
Meat extract
Offal
Brain
Heart
Tongue
Tendon
Tripas
Tripe
Testicles
Dishes
Beefsteak
List of steak dishes
Balbacua
Blanquette de veau
Beef Wellington
Beef bourguignon
Beef bun
Beef Manhattan
Beef noodle soup
Beef on weck
Beef Stroganoff
Boiled beef
Bulgogi
Bulalo
Cachopo
Calf's liver and bacon
Cansi
Chateaubriand (dish)
Cheesesteak
Chicken fried steak
Cordon bleu
Dendeng
Feu
French dip
Ginger beef
Galbi
Gored gored
Gy don
Hamburg steak
Hortob gyi palacsinta
Iga penyet
Italian beef
Jellied veal
Kalio
Kara or eva  nicla
Kitfo
London broil
Mongolian beef
Neobiani
Ossobuco
Pares
Pho
Pot roast
Pozharsky cutlet
P'tcha
Ragout fin
Rawon
Rendang
Roast beef
Roast beef sandwich
Salisbury steak
Saltimbocca
Selat solo
Sha cha beef
Suea rong hai
Shooter's sandwich
Steak and kidney pudding
Steak Diane
Steak and eggs
Steak and oyster pie
Steak au poivre
Tartare
Tafelspitz
Tongseng
Veal Milanese
Veal Orloff
Veal Oscar
Vitello tonnato
Wallenbergare
Related meats
American bison
Beefalo
Water buffalo
 ubro 
Other
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Beef hormone controversy
Beef ring
Carcass grade
Darkcutter
Meat on the bone
Ractopamine - Beef
USA beef imports
Japan
Taiwan
South Korea (2008 US beef protest in South Korea)
vteCuts of beefUpper
Chuck
Rib
Rib eye
Short loin
Sirloin
Filet mignon
Tenderloin
Top sirloin
Bottom sirloin
Round
Lower
Brisket
Plate
Flank
Shank
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brisket&oldid=1137591042"