Social science
For other uses, see Economics (disambiguation).
 The supply and demand model describes how prices vary as a result of a balance between product availability and demand.
Part of a series onEconomics
History
Outline
Index
Branches and classifications
Schools of economics
Mainstream economics
Heterodox economics
Economic methodology
Economic theory
Political economy
Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
International economics
Applied economics
Mathematical economics
Econometrics
JEL classification codes
Concepts, theory and techniques
Economic systems
Economic growth
Market
National accounting
Experimental economics
Computational economics
Game theory
Operations research
Middle income trap
Industrial complex
By application
Agricultural
Behavioral
Business
Cultural
Demographic
Development
Digitization
Ecological
Economic geography
Economic history
Economic planning
Economic policy
Economic sociology
Economic statistics
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Evolutionary
Expeditionary
Feminist
Financial
Happiness economics
Health
Human capital
Humanistic economics
Industrial organization
Information
Institutional
Knowledge
Labour
Law
Managerial
Monetary
Natural resource
Organizational
Participation
Personnel
Public economics
Public / Social choice
Regional
Rural
Service
Socioeconomics
Solidarity economy
Urban
Welfare
Welfare economics
Notable economists
Fran ois Quesnay
Adam Smith
David Ricardo
Thomas Robert Malthus
John Stuart Mill
Karl Marx
William Stanley Jevons
L on Walras
Alfred Marshall
Irving Fisher
John Maynard Keynes
Friedrich Hayek
Arthur Cecil Pigou
John Hicks
Wassily Leontief
Paul Samuelson
more
Lists
Glossary
Economists
Publications (journals)
 Business and Economics portal
 Money portalvte
Economics (/ k n m ks,  i k -/)[1] is a social science that studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.[2][3]
Economics focuses on the behaviour and interactions of economic agents and how economies work. Microeconomics analyzes what's viewed as basic elements in the economy, including individual agents and markets, their interactions, and the outcomes of interactions. Individual agents may include, for example, households, firms, buyers, and sellers. Macroeconomics analyzes the economy as a system where production, consumption, saving, and investment interact, and factors affecting it: employment of the resources of labour, capital, and land, currency inflation, economic growth, and public policies that have impact on these elements.
Other broad distinctions within economics include those between positive economics, describing "what is", and normative economics, advocating "what ought to be";[4] between economic theory and applied economics; between rational and behavioural economics; and between mainstream economics and heterodox economics.[5]
Economic analysis can be applied throughout society, including business,[6] finance, cybersecurity,[7] health care,[8] engineering[9] and government.[10] It is also applied to such diverse subjects as crime,[11] education,[12] the family,[13] feminism,[14] law,[15] philosophy,[16] politics, religion,[17] social institutions, war,[18] science,[19] and the environment.[20]
Definitions of economics over time
The earlier term for the discipline was 'political economy', but since the late 19th century, it has commonly been called 'economics'.[21] The term is ultimately derived from Ancient Greek   (oikonomia) which is a term for the "way (nomos) to run a household (oikos)", or in other words the know-how of an   (oikonomikos), or "household or homestead manager". Derived terms such as "economy" can therefore often mean "frugal" or "thrifty".[22][23][24][25] By extension then, "political economy" was the way to manage a polis or state.
There are a variety of modern definitions of economics; some reflect evolving views of the subject or different views among economists.[26][27] Scottish philosopher Adam Smith (1776) defined what was then called political economy as "an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations", in particular as:
a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator [with the twofold objectives of providing] a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people ... [and] to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue for the publick services.[28]
Jean-Baptiste Say (1803), distinguishing the subject matter from its public-policy uses, defined it as the science of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth.[29] On the satirical side, Thomas Carlyle (1849) coined "the dismal science" as an epithet for classical economics, in this context, commonly linked to the pessimistic analysis of Malthus (1798).[30] John Stuart Mill (1844) delimited the subject matter further:
The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society as arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of wealth, in so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of any other object.[31]
Alfred Marshall provided a still widely cited definition in his textbook Principles of Economics (1890) that extended analysis beyond wealth and from the societal to the microeconomic level:
Economics is a study of man in the ordinary business of life. It enquires how he gets his income and how he uses it. Thus, it is on the one side, the study of wealth and on the other and more important side, a part of the study of man.[32]
Lionel Robbins (1932) developed implications of what has been termed "[p]erhaps the most commonly accepted current definition of the subject":[27]
Economics is the science which studies human behaviour as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses.[33]
Robbins described the definition as not classificatory in "pick[ing] out certain kinds of behaviour" but rather analytical in "focus[ing] attention on a particular aspect of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of scarcity."[34] He affirmed that previous economists have usually centred their studies on the analysis of wealth: how wealth is created (production), distributed, and consumed; and how wealth can grow.[35] But he said that economics can be used to study other things, such as war, that are outside its usual focus.  This is because war has as the goal winning it (as a sought after end), generates both cost and benefits; and, resources (human life and other costs) are used to attain the goal.  If the war is not winnable or if the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the deciding actors (assuming they are rational) may never go to war (a decision) but rather explore other alternatives. We cannot define economics as the science that studies wealth, war, crime, education, and any other field economic analysis can be applied to; but, as the science that studies a particular common aspect of each of those subjects (they all use scarce resources to attain a sought after end).
Some subsequent comments criticized the definition as overly broad in failing to limit its subject matter to analysis of markets. From the 1960s, however, such comments abated as the economic theory of maximizing behaviour and rational-choice modelling expanded the domain of the subject to areas previously treated in other fields.[36] There are other criticisms as well, such as in scarcity not accounting for the macroeconomics of high unemployment.[37]
Gary Becker, a contributor to the expansion of economics into new areas, described the approach he favoured as "combin[ing the] assumptions of maximizing behaviour, stable preferences, and market equilibrium, used relentlessly and unflinchingly."[38] One commentary characterizes the remark as making economics an approach rather than a subject matter but with great specificity as to the "choice process and the type of social interaction that [such] analysis involves." The same source reviews a range of definitions included in principles of economics textbooks and concludes that the lack of agreement need not affect the subject-matter that the texts treat. Among economists more generally, it argues that a particular definition presented may reflect the direction toward which the author believes economics is evolving, or should evolve.[27]
Many economists including nobel prize winners James M. Buchanan and Ronald Coase reject the method-based definition of Robbins and continue to prefer definitions like those of Say, in terms of its subject matter.[36] Ha-Joon Chang has for example argued that the definition of Robbins would make economics very peculiar because all other sciences define themselves in terms of the area of inquiry or object of inquiry rather than the methodology. In the biology department, they don't say that all biology should be studied with DNA analysis. People study living organisms in many different ways, so some people will do DNA analysis, others might do anatomy, and still others might build game theoretic models of animal behavior. But they are all called biology because they all study living organisms. According to Ha Joon Chang, this view that you can and should study the economy in only one way (for example by studying only rational choices), and going even one step further and basically redefining economics as a theory of everything, is very peculiar.[39]
History of economic thought
Main articles: History of economic thought and History of macroeconomic thought
This section is missing information about information and behavioural economics, contemporary microeconomics. Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (September 2020)
From antiquity through the physiocrats
Questions regarding distribution of resources are found throughout the writings of the Boeotian poet Hesiod and several economic historians have described Hesiod himself as the "first economist".[40] However, the word Oikos, the Greek word from which the word economy derives, was used for issues regarding how to manage a household (which was understood to be the landowner, his family, and his slaves[41]) rather than to refer to some normative societal system of distribution of resources, which is a much more recent phenomenon.[42][43][44] Xenophon, the author of the Oeconomicus, is credited by philologues for being the source of the word economy.[45] Other notable writers from Antiquity through to the Renaissance which wrote on include Aristotle, Chanakya (also known as Kautilya), Qin Shi Huang, Ibn Khaldun, and Thomas Aquinas. Joseph Schumpeter described 16th and 17th century scholastic writers, including Tom s de Mercado, Luis de Molina, and Juan de Lugo, as "coming nearer than any other group to being the 'founders' of scientific economics" as to monetary, interest, and value theory within a natural-law perspective.[46]
 A 1638 painting of a French seaport during the heyday of mercantilism
Two groups, who later were called "mercantilists" and "physiocrats", more directly influenced the subsequent development of the subject. Both groups were associated with the rise of economic nationalism and modern capitalism in Europe. Mercantilism was an economic doctrine that flourished from the 16th to 18th century in a prolific pamphlet literature, whether of merchants or statesmen. It held that a nation's wealth depended on its accumulation of gold and silver. Nations without access to mines could obtain gold and silver from trade only by selling goods abroad and restricting imports other than of gold and silver. The doctrine called for importing cheap raw materials to be used in manufacturing goods, which could be exported, and for state regulation to impose protective tariffs on foreign manufactured goods and prohibit manufacturing in the colonies.[47]
Physiocrats, a group of 18th-century French thinkers and writers, developed the idea of the economy as a circular flow of income and output. Physiocrats believed that only agricultural production generated a clear surplus over cost, so that agriculture was the basis of all wealth.[48] Thus, they opposed the mercantilist policy of promoting manufacturing and trade at the expense of agriculture, including import tariffs. Physiocrats advocated replacing administratively costly tax collections with a single tax on income of land owners. In reaction against copious mercantilist trade regulations, the physiocrats advocated a policy of laissez-faire, which called for minimal government intervention in the economy.[49]
Adam Smith (1723 1790) was an early economic theorist.[50] Smith was harshly critical of the mercantilists but described the physiocratic system "with all its imperfections" as "perhaps the purest approximation to the truth that has yet been published" on the subject.[51]
Classical political economy
Main article: Classical economics
 The publication of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations in 1776 is considered to be the first formalisation of economic thought.
The publication of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations in 1776, has been described as "the effective birth of economics as a separate discipline."[52] The book identified land, labour, and capital as the three factors of production and the major contributors to a nation's wealth, as distinct from the physiocratic idea that only agriculture was productive.
Smith discusses potential benefits of specialization by division of labour, including increased labour productivity and gains from trade, whether between town and country or across countries.[53] His "theorem" that "the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market" has been described as the "core of a theory of the functions of firm and industry" and a "fundamental principle of economic organization."[54] To Smith has also been ascribed "the most important substantive proposition in all of economics" and foundation of resource-allocation theory   that, under competition, resource owners (of labour, land, and capital) seek their most profitable uses, resulting in an equal rate of return for all uses in equilibrium (adjusted for apparent differences arising from such factors as training and unemployment).[55]
In an argument that includes "one of the most famous passages in all economics,"[56] Smith represents every individual as trying to employ any capital they might command for their own advantage, not that of the society,[a] and for the sake of profit, which is necessary at some level for employing capital in domestic industry, and positively related to the value of produce.[58] In this:
He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it.[59] 
The Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus (1798) used the concept of diminishing returns to explain low living standards. Human population, he argued, tended to increase geometrically, outstripping the production of food, which increased arithmetically. The force of a rapidly growing population against a limited amount of land meant diminishing returns to labour. The result, he claimed, was chronically low wages, which prevented the standard of living for most of the population from rising above the subsistence level.[60][non-primary source needed] Economist Julian Lincoln Simon has criticized Malthus's conclusions.[61]
While Adam Smith emphasized the production of income, David Ricardo (1817) focused on the distribution of income among landowners, workers, and capitalists. Ricardo saw an inherent conflict between landowners on the one hand and labour and capital on the other. He posited that the growth of population and capital, pressing against a fixed supply of land, pushes up rents and holds down wages and profits. Ricardo was the first to state and prove the principle of comparative advantage, according to which each country should specialize in producing and exporting goods in that it has a lower relative cost of production, rather relying only on its own production.[62] It has been termed a "fundamental analytical explanation" for gains from trade.[63]
Coming at the end of the classical tradition, John Stuart Mill (1848) parted company with the earlier classical economists on the inevitability of the distribution of income produced by the market system. Mill pointed to a distinct difference between the market's two roles: allocation of resources and distribution of income. The market might be efficient in allocating resources but not in distributing income, he wrote, making it necessary for society to intervene.[64]
Value theory was important in classical theory. Smith wrote that the "real price of every thing ... is the toil and trouble of acquiring it". Smith maintained that, with rent and profit, other costs besides wages also enter the price of a commodity.[65] Other classical economists presented variations on Smith, termed the 'labour theory of value'. Classical economics focused on the tendency of any market economy to settle in a final stationary state made up of a constant stock of physical wealth (capital) and a constant population size.
 The Marxist critique of political economy comes from the work of German philosopher Karl Marx.
Marxian economics
Main article: Marxian economics
Marxist (later, Marxian) economics descends from classical economics and it derives from the work of Karl Marx. The first volume of Marx's major work, Das Kapital, was published in German in 1867. In it, Marx focused on the labour theory of value and the theory of surplus value which, he believed, explained the exploitation of labour by capital.[66] The labour theory of value held that the value of an exchanged commodity was determined by the labour that went into its production and the theory of surplus value demonstrated how the workers only got paid a proportion of the value their work had created.[67][dubious    discuss]
Marxian economics was further developed by Karl Kautsky (1854-1938)'s The Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx and The Class Struggle (Erfurt Program), Rudolf Hilferding's (1877-1941) Finance Capital, Vladimir Lenin (1870-1924)'s The Development of Capitalism in Russia and Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, and Rosa Luxemburg (1871-1919)'s The Accumulation of Capital.
Neoclassical economics
Main article: Neoclassical economics
At the dawn as a social science, economics was defined and discussed at length as the study of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth by Jean-Baptiste Say in his Treatise on Political Economy or, The Production, Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth (1803). These three items are considered by the science only in relation to the increase or diminution of wealth, and not in reference to their processes of execution.[b] Say's definition has prevailed up to our time, saved by substituting the word "wealth" for "goods and services" meaning that wealth may include non-material objects as well. One hundred and thirty years later, Lionel Robbins noticed that this definition no longer sufficed,[c] because many economists were making theoretical and philosophical inroads in other areas of human activity. In his Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science, he proposed a definition of economics as a study of a particular aspect of human behaviour, the one that falls under the influence of scarcity,[d] which forces people to choose, allocate scarce resources to competing ends, and economize (seeking the greatest welfare while avoiding the wasting of scarce resources). For Robbins, the insufficiency was solved, and his definition allows us to proclaim, with an easy conscience, education economics, safety and security economics, health economics, war economics, and of course, production, distribution and consumption economics as valid subjects of the economic science."  Citing Robbins: "Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses".[34] After discussing it for decades, Robbins' definition became widely accepted by mainstream economists, and it has opened way into current textbooks.[68] Although far from unanimous, most mainstream economists would accept some version of Robbins' definition, even though many have raised serious objections to the scope and method of economics, emanating from that definition.[69] Due to the lack of strong consensus, and that production, distribution and consumption of goods and services is the prime area of study of economics, the old definition still stands in many quarters.
A body of theory later termed "neoclassical economics" or "marginalism" formed from about 1870 to 1910. The term "economics" was popularized by such neoclassical economists as Alfred Marshall and Mary Paley Marshall as a concise synonym for "economic science" and a substitute for the earlier "political economy".[24][25] This corresponded to the influence on the subject of mathematical methods used in the natural sciences.[70]
Neoclassical economics systematized supply and demand as joint determinants of price and quantity in market equilibrium, affecting both the allocation of output and the distribution of income. It dispensed with the labour theory of value inherited from classical economics in favour of a marginal utility theory of value on the demand side and a more general theory of costs on the supply side.[71] In the 20th century, neoclassical theorists moved away from an earlier notion suggesting that total utility for a society could be measured in favour of ordinal utility, which hypothesizes merely behaviour-based relations across persons.[72][73]
In microeconomics, neoclassical economics represents incentives and costs as playing a pervasive role in shaping decision making. An immediate example of this is the consumer theory of individual demand, which isolates how prices (as costs) and income affect quantity demanded.[72] In macroeconomics it is reflected in an early and lasting neoclassical synthesis with Keynesian macroeconomics.[74][72]
Neoclassical economics is occasionally referred as orthodox economics whether by its critics or sympathizers. Modern mainstream economics builds on neoclassical economics but with many refinements that either supplement or generalize earlier analysis, such as econometrics, game theory, analysis of market failure and imperfect competition, and the neoclassical model of economic growth for analysing long-run variables affecting national income.
Neoclassical economics studies the behaviour of individuals, households, and organizations (called economic actors, players, or agents), when they manage or use scarce resources, which have alternative uses, to achieve desired ends. Agents are assumed to act rationally, have multiple desirable ends in sight, limited resources to obtain these ends, a set of stable preferences, a definite overall guiding objective, and the capability of making a choice. There exists an economic problem, subject to study by economic science, when a decision (choice) is made by one or more resource-controlling players to attain the best possible outcome under bounded rational conditions. In other words, resource-controlling agents maximize value subject to the constraints imposed by the information the agents have, their cognitive limitations, and the finite amount of time they have to make and execute a decision. Economic science centres on the activities of the economic agents that comprise society.[75] They are the focus of economic analysis.[e]
An approach to understanding these processes, through the study of agent behaviour under scarcity, may go as follows:
The continuous interplay (exchange or trade) done by economic actors in all markets sets the prices for all goods and services which, in turn, make the rational managing of scarce resources possible. At the same time, the decisions (choices) made by the same actors, while they are pursuing their own interest, determine the level of output (production), consumption, savings, and investment, in an economy, as well as the remuneration (distribution) paid to the owners of labour (in the form of wages), capital (in the form of profits) and land (in the form of rent).[f] Each period, as if they were in a giant feedback system, economic players influence the pricing processes and the economy, and are in turn influenced by them until a steady state (equilibrium) of all variables involved is reached or until an external shock throws the system toward a new equilibrium point. Because of the autonomous actions of rational interacting agents, the economy is a complex adaptive system.[g]
Keynesian economics
Main articles: Keynesian economics and Post-Keynesian economics
 John Maynard Keynes (right) was a key theorist in economics.
Keynesian economics derives from John Maynard Keynes, in particular his book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936), which ushered in contemporary macroeconomics as a distinct field.[76] The book focused on determinants of national income in the short run when prices are relatively inflexible. Keynes attempted to explain in broad theoretical detail why high labour-market unemployment might not be self-correcting due to low "effective demand" and why even price flexibility and monetary policy might be unavailing. The term "revolutionary" has been applied to the book in its impact on economic analysis.[77]
Keynesian economics has two successors. Post-Keynesian economics also concentrates on macroeconomic rigidities and adjustment processes. Research on micro foundations for their models is represented as based on real-life practices rather than simple optimizing models. It is generally associated with the University of Cambridge and the work of Joan Robinson.[78]
New-Keynesian economics is also associated with developments in the Keynesian fashion. Within this group researchers tend to share with other economists the emphasis on models employing micro foundations and optimizing behaviour but with a narrower focus on standard Keynesian themes such as price and wage rigidity. These are usually made to be endogenous features of the models, rather than simply assumed as in older Keynesian-style ones.
Chicago school of economics
Main article: Chicago school of economics
The Chicago School of economics is best known for its free market advocacy and monetarist ideas. According to Milton Friedman and monetarists, market economies are inherently stable if the money supply does not greatly expand or contract. Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, is among the economists today generally accepting Friedman's analysis of the causes of the Great Depression.[79]
Milton Friedman effectively took many of the basic principles set forth by Adam Smith and the classical economists and modernized them. One example of this is his article in the 13 September 1970 issue of The New York Times Magazine, in which he claims that the social responsibility of business should be "to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits ... (through) open and free competition without deception or fraud."[80]
Austrian School of economics
Main article: Austrian School
The Austrian School emphasizes human action, property rights and the freedom to contract and transact to have a thriving and successful economy.[81] It also emphasizes that the state should play an infinitesimally small role (if any role) in the regulation of economic activity between two transacting parties.[82] A key component of Austrian economics is the principle of sound money. As Ludwig Von Mises, one of the most prominent 20th century Austrian economists, stated, "Ideologically it (sound money) belongs in the same class with political constitutions and bills of rights."[83] Austrian economists assert that sound money prevents government actors from debasing the currency, disrupting the savings rate of the population and artificially distorting the economic choices of individual actors.
Other schools and approaches
Main article: Schools of economic thought
Other well-known schools or trends of thought referring to a particular style of economics practised at and disseminated from well-defined groups of academicians that have become known worldwide, include the Freiburg School, the School of Lausanne, post-Keynesian economics and the Stockholm school. Contemporary mainstream economics is sometimes separated[by whom?] into the Saltwater approach of those universities along the Eastern and Western coasts of the US, and the Freshwater, or Chicago school approach.[citation needed]
Within macroeconomics there is, in general order of their historical appearance in the literature; classical economics, neoclassical economics, Keynesian economics, the neoclassical synthesis, monetarism, new classical economics, New Keynesian economics[84] and the new neoclassical synthesis.[85] In general, alternative developments include ecological economics, constitutional economics, institutional economics, evolutionary economics, dependency theory, structuralist economics, world systems theory, econophysics, econodynamics, feminist economics and biophysical economics.[86]
Methodology
Theoretical research
Main articles: Microeconomics, Macroeconomics, and Mathematical economics
"Economic theory" redirects here. For the publication, see Economic Theory (journal).
Mainstream economic theory relies upon a priori quantitative economic models, which employ a variety of concepts. Theory typically proceeds with an assumption of ceteris paribus, which means holding constant explanatory variables other than the one under consideration. When creating theories, the objective is to find ones which are at least as simple in information requirements, more precise in predictions, and more fruitful in generating additional research than prior theories.[87] While neoclassical economic theory constitutes both the dominant or orthodox theoretical as well as methodological framework, economic theory can also take the form of other schools of thought such as in heterodox economic theories.
In microeconomics, principal concepts include supply and demand, marginalism, rational choice theory, opportunity cost, budget constraints, utility, and the theory of the firm.[88] Early macroeconomic models focused on modelling the relationships between aggregate variables, but as the relationships appeared to change over time macroeconomists, including new Keynesians, reformulated their models in microfoundations.[89]
The aforementioned microeconomic concepts play a major part in macroeconomic models  for instance, in monetary theory, the quantity theory of money predicts that increases in the growth rate of the money supply increase inflation, and inflation is assumed to be influenced by rational expectations. In development economics, slower growth in developed nations has been sometimes predicted because of the declining marginal returns of investment and capital, and this has been observed in the Four Asian Tigers. Sometimes an economic hypothesis is only qualitative, not quantitative.[90]
Expositions of economic reasoning often use two-dimensional graphs to illustrate theoretical relationships. At a higher level of generality, mathematical economics is the application of mathematical methods to represent theories and analyze problems in economics. Paul Samuelson's treatise Foundations of Economic Analysis (1947) exemplifies the method, particularly as to maximizing behavioral relations of agents reaching equilibrium. The book focused on examining the class of statements called operationally meaningful theorems in economics, which are theorems that can conceivably be refuted by empirical data.[91]
Empirical research
Main articles: Econometrics and Experimental economics
Economic theories are frequently tested empirically, largely through the use of econometrics using economic data.[92] The controlled experiments common to the physical sciences are difficult and uncommon in economics,[93] and instead broad data is observationally studied; this type of testing is typically regarded as less rigorous than controlled experimentation, and the conclusions typically more tentative. However, the field of experimental economics is growing, and increasing use is being made of natural experiments.
Statistical methods such as regression analysis are common. Practitioners use such methods to estimate the size, economic significance, and statistical significance ("signal strength") of the hypothesized relation(s) and to adjust for noise from other variables. By such means, a hypothesis may gain acceptance, although in a probabilistic, rather than certain, sense. Acceptance is dependent upon the falsifiable hypothesis surviving tests. Use of commonly accepted methods need not produce a final conclusion or even a consensus on a particular question, given different tests, data sets, and prior beliefs.
Criticisms based on professional standards and non-replicability of results serve as further checks against bias, errors, and overgeneralization,[94][95] although much economic research has been accused of being non-replicable, and prestigious journals have been accused of not facilitating replication through the provision of the code and data.[96] Like theories, uses of test statistics are themselves open to critical analysis,[97] although critical commentary on papers in economics in prestigious journals such as the American Economic Review has declined precipitously in the past 40 years. This has been attributed to journals' incentives to maximize citations in order to rank higher on the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI).[98]
In applied economics, input output models employing linear programming methods are quite common. Large amounts of data are run through computer programs to analyse the impact of certain policies; IMPLAN is one well-known example.
Experimental economics has promoted the use of scientifically controlled experiments. This has reduced the long-noted distinction of economics from natural sciences because it allows direct tests of what were previously taken as axioms.[99] In some cases these have found that the axioms are not entirely correct; for example, the ultimatum game has revealed that people reject unequal offers.
In behavioural economics, psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in economics in 2002 for his and Amos Tversky's empirical discovery of several cognitive biases and heuristics. Similar empirical testing occurs in neuroeconomics. Another example is the assumption of narrowly selfish preferences versus a model that tests for selfish, altruistic, and cooperative preferences.[100] These techniques have led some to argue that economics is a "genuine science".[101]
Branches of economics
Microeconomics
Main articles: Microeconomics and Market (economics)
 Economists study trade, production and consumption decisions, such as those that occur in a traditional marketplace.
 Electronic trading brings together buyers and sellers through an electronic trading platform and network to create virtual market places. Pictured: S o Paulo Stock Exchange, Brazil.
Microeconomics examines how entities, forming a market structure, interact within a market to create a market system. These entities include private and public players with various classifications, typically operating under scarcity of tradable units and light government regulation.[clarification needed] The item traded may be a tangible product such as apples or a service such as repair services, legal counsel, or entertainment.
In theory, in a free market the aggregates (sum of) of quantity demanded by buyers and quantity supplied by sellers may reach economic equilibrium over time in reaction to price changes; in practice, various issues may prevent equilibrium, and any equilibrium reached may not necessarily be morally equitable. For example, if the supply of healthcare services is limited by external factors, the equilibrium price may be unaffordable for many who desire it but cannot pay for it.
Various market structures exist. In perfectly competitive markets, no participants are large enough to have the market power to set the price of a homogeneous product. In other words, every participant is a "price taker" as no participant influences the price of a product. In the real world, markets often experience imperfect competition.
Forms include monopoly (in which there is only one seller of a good), duopoly (in which there are only two sellers of a good), oligopoly (in which there are few sellers of a good), monopolistic competition (in which there are many sellers producing highly differentiated goods), monopsony (in which there is only one buyer of a good), and oligopsony (in which there are few buyers of a good). Unlike perfect competition, imperfect competition invariably means market power is unequally distributed. Firms under imperfect competition have the potential to be "price makers", which means that, by holding a disproportionately high share of market power, they can influence the prices of their products.
Microeconomics studies individual markets by simplifying the economic system by assuming that activity in the market being analysed does not affect other markets. This method of analysis is known as partial-equilibrium analysis (supply and demand). This method aggregates (the sum of all activity) in only one market. General-equilibrium theory studies various markets and their behaviour. It aggregates (the sum of all activity) across all markets. This method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards equilibrium.[102]
Production, cost, and efficiency
Main articles: Production (economics), Opportunity cost, Economic efficiency, and Production possibility frontier
In microeconomics, production is the conversion of inputs into outputs. It is an economic process that uses inputs to create a commodity or a service for exchange or direct use. Production is a flow and thus a rate of output per period of time. Distinctions include such production alternatives as for consumption (food, haircuts, etc.) vs. investment goods (new tractors, buildings, roads, etc.), public goods (national defence, smallpox vaccinations, etc.) or private goods (new computers, bananas, etc.), and "guns" vs "butter".
Opportunity cost is the economic cost of production: the value of the next best opportunity foregone. Choices must be made between desirable yet mutually exclusive actions. It has been described as expressing "the basic relationship between scarcity and choice".[103] For example, if a baker uses a sack of flour to make pretzels one morning, then the baker cannot use either the flour or the morning to make bagels instead.  Part of the cost of making pretzels is that neither the flour nor the morning are available any longer, for use in some other way.  The opportunity cost of an activity is an element in ensuring that scarce resources are used efficiently, such that the cost is weighed against the value of that activity in deciding on more or less of it. Opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or financial costs but could be measured by the real cost of output forgone, leisure, or anything else that provides the alternative benefit (utility).[104]
Inputs used in the production process include such primary factors of production as labour services, capital (durable produced goods used in production, such as an existing factory), and land (including natural resources). Other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of final goods, such as the steel in a new car.
Economic efficiency measures how well a system generates desired output with a given set of inputs and available technology. Efficiency is improved if more output is generated without changing inputs, or in other words, the amount of "waste" is reduced. A widely accepted general standard is Pareto efficiency, which is reached when no further change can make someone better off without making someone else worse off.
 An example production possibility frontier with illustrative points marked.
The production possibility frontier (PPF) is an expository figure for representing scarcity, cost, and efficiency. In the simplest case an economy can produce just two goods (say "guns" and "butter"). The PPF is a table or graph (as at the right) showing the different quantity combinations of the two goods producible with a given technology and total factor inputs, which limit feasible total output. Each point on the curve shows potential total output for the economy, which is the maximum feasible output of one good, given a feasible output quantity of the other good.
Scarcity is represented in the figure by people being willing but unable in the aggregate to consume beyond the PPF (such as at X) and by the negative slope of the curve.[105] If production of one good increases along the curve, production of the other good decreases, an inverse relationship. This is because increasing output of one good requires transferring inputs to it from production of the other good, decreasing the latter.
The slope of the curve at a point on it gives the trade-off between the two goods. It measures what an additional unit of one good costs in units forgone of the other good, an example of a real opportunity cost. Thus, if one more Gun costs 100 units of butter, the opportunity cost of one Gun is 100 Butter. Along the PPF, scarcity implies that choosing more of one good in the aggregate entails doing with less of the other good. Still, in a market economy, movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents.
By construction, each point on the curve shows productive efficiency in maximizing output for given total inputs. A point inside the curve (as at A), is feasible but represents production inefficiency (wasteful use of inputs), in that output of one or both goods could increase by moving in a northeast direction to a point on the curve. Examples cited of such inefficiency include high unemployment during a business-cycle recession or economic organization of a country that discourages full use of resources. Being on the curve might still not fully satisfy allocative efficiency (also called Pareto efficiency) if it does not produce a mix of goods that consumers prefer over other points.
Much applied economics in public policy is concerned with determining how the efficiency of an economy can be improved. Recognizing the reality of scarcity and then figuring out how to organize society for the most efficient use of resources has been described as the "essence of economics", where the subject "makes its unique contribution."[106]
Specialization
Main articles: Division of labour, Comparative advantage, and Gains from trade
 A map showing the main trade routes for goods within late medieval Europe
Specialization is considered key to economic efficiency based on theoretical and empirical considerations. Different individuals or nations may have different real opportunity costs of production, say from differences in stocks of human capital per worker or capital/labour ratios. According to theory, this may give a comparative advantage in production of goods that make more intensive use of the relatively more abundant, thus relatively cheaper, input.
Even if one region has an absolute advantage as to the ratio of its outputs to inputs in every type of output, it may still specialize in the output in which it has a comparative advantage and thereby gain from trading with a region that lacks any absolute advantage but has a comparative advantage in producing something else.
It has been observed that a high volume of trade occurs among regions even with access to a similar technology and mix of factor inputs, including high-income countries. This has led to investigation of economies of scale and agglomeration to explain specialization in similar but differentiated product lines, to the overall benefit of respective trading parties or regions.[107]
The general theory of specialization applies to trade among individuals, farms, manufacturers, service providers, and economies. Among each of these production systems, there may be a corresponding division of labour with different work groups specializing, or correspondingly different types of capital equipment and differentiated land uses.[108]
An example that combines features above is a country that specializes in the production of high-tech knowledge products, as developed countries do, and trades with developing nations for goods produced in factories where labour is relatively cheap and plentiful, resulting in different in opportunity costs of production. More total output and utility thereby results from specializing in production and trading than if each country produced its own high-tech and low-tech products.
Theory and observation set out the conditions such that market prices of outputs and productive inputs select an allocation of factor inputs by comparative advantage, so that (relatively) low-cost inputs go to producing low-cost outputs. In the process, aggregate output may increase as a by-product or by design.[109] Such specialization of production creates opportunities for gains from trade whereby resource owners benefit from trade in the sale of one type of output for other, more highly valued goods. A measure of gains from trade is the increased income levels that trade may facilitate.[110]
Supply and demand
Main article: Supply and demand
 The supply and demand model describes how prices vary as a result of a balance between product availability and demand. The graph depicts an increase (that is, right-shift) in demand from D1 to D2 along with the consequent increase in price and quantity required to reach a new equilibrium point on the supply curve (S).
Prices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy.[111] The theory of supply and demand is an organizing principle for explaining how prices coordinate the amounts produced and consumed. In microeconomics, it applies to price and output determination for a market with perfect competition, which includes the condition of no buyers or sellers large enough to have price-setting power.
For a given market of a commodity, demand is the relation of the quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price of the good. Demand is often represented by a table or a graph showing price and quantity demanded (as in the figure). Demand theory describes individual consumers as rationally choosing the most preferred quantity of each good, given income, prices, tastes, etc. A term for this is "constrained utility maximization" (with income and wealth as the constraints on demand). Here, utility refers to the hypothesized relation of each individual consumer for ranking different commodity bundles as more or less preferred.
The law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related. That is, the higher the price of a product, the less of it people would be prepared to buy (other things unchanged). As the price of a commodity falls, consumers move toward it from relatively more expensive goods (the substitution effect). In addition, purchasing power from the price decline increases ability to buy (the income effect). Other factors can change demand; for example an increase in income will shift the demand curve for a normal good outward relative to the origin, as in the figure. All determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors of demand and supply.
Supply is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity available for sale at that price. It may be represented as a table or graph relating price and quantity supplied. Producers, for example business firms, are hypothesized to be profit maximizers, meaning that they attempt to produce and supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest profit. Supply is typically represented as a function relating price and quantity, if other factors are unchanged.
That is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it producers will supply, as in the figure. The higher price makes it profitable to increase production. Just as on the demand side, the position of the supply can shift, say from a change in the price of a productive input or a technical improvement. The "Law of Supply" states that, in general, a rise in price leads to an expansion in supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in supply. Here as well, the determinants of supply, such as price of substitutes, cost of production, technology applied and various factors inputs of production are all taken to be constant for a specific time period of evaluation of supply.
Market equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the figure above. At a price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This is posited to bid the price up. At a price above equilibrium, there is a surplus of quantity supplied compared to quantity demanded. This pushes the price down. The model of supply and demand predicts that for given supply and demand curves, price and quantity will stabilize at the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded. Similarly, demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a shift in demand (as to the figure), or in supply.
Firms
Main articles: Theory of the firm, Industrial organization, Business economics, and Managerial economics
People frequently do not trade directly on markets. Instead, on the supply side, they may work in and produce through firms. The most obvious kinds of firms are corporations, partnerships and trusts. According to Ronald Coase, people begin to organize their production in firms when the costs of doing business becomes lower than doing it on the market.[112] Firms combine labour and capital, and can achieve far greater economies of scale (when the average cost per unit declines as more units are produced) than individual market trading.
In perfectly competitive markets studied in the theory of supply and demand, there are many producers, none of which significantly influence price. Industrial organization generalizes from that special case to study the strategic behaviour of firms that do have significant control of price. It considers the structure of such markets and their interactions. Common market structures studied besides perfect competition include monopolistic competition, various forms of oligopoly, and monopoly.[113]
Managerial economics applies microeconomic analysis to specific decisions in business firms or other management units. It draws heavily from quantitative methods such as operations research and programming and from statistical methods such as regression analysis in the absence of certainty and perfect knowledge. A unifying theme is the attempt to optimize business decisions, including unit-cost minimization and profit maximization, given the firm's objectives and constraints imposed by technology and market conditions.[114]
Uncertainty and game theory
Main articles: Information economics, Game theory, and Financial economics
Uncertainty in economics is an unknown prospect of gain or loss, whether quantifiable as risk or not. Without it, household behaviour would be unaffected by uncertain employment and income prospects, financial and capital markets would reduce to exchange of a single instrument in each market period, and there would be no communications industry.[115] Given its different forms, there are various ways of representing uncertainty and modelling economic agents' responses to it.[116]
Game theory is a branch of applied mathematics that considers strategic interactions between agents, one kind of uncertainty. It provides a mathematical foundation of industrial organization, discussed above, to model different types of firm behaviour, for example in a solipsistic industry (few sellers), but equally applicable to wage negotiations, bargaining, contract design, and any situation where individual agents are few enough to have perceptible effects on each other. In behavioural economics, it has been used to model the strategies agents choose when interacting with others whose interests are at least partially adverse to their own.[117]
In this, it generalizes maximization approaches developed to analyse market actors such as in the supply and demand model and allows for incomplete information of actors. The field dates from the 1944 classic Theory of Games and Economic Behavior by John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. It has significant applications seemingly outside of economics in such diverse subjects as the formulation of nuclear strategies, ethics, political science, and evolutionary biology.[118]
Risk aversion may stimulate activity that in well-functioning markets smooths out risk and communicates information about risk, as in markets for insurance, commodity futures contracts, and financial instruments. Financial economics or simply finance describes the allocation of financial resources. It also analyses the pricing of financial instruments, the financial structure of companies, the efficiency and fragility of financial markets,[119] financial crises, and related government policy or regulation.[120]
Some market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with uncertainty. Based on George Akerlof's "Market for Lemons" article, the paradigm example is of a dodgy second-hand car market. Customers without knowledge of whether a car is a "lemon" depress its price below what a quality second-hand car would be.[121] Information asymmetry arises here, if the seller has more relevant information than the buyer but no incentive to disclose it. Related problems in insurance are adverse selection, such that those at most risk are most likely to insure (say reckless drivers), and moral hazard, such that insurance results in riskier behaviour (say more reckless driving).[122]
Both problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving otherwise willing transactors from the market ("incomplete markets"). Moreover, attempting to reduce one problem, say adverse selection by mandating insurance, may add to another, say moral hazard. Information economics, which studies such problems, has relevance in subjects such as insurance, contract law, mechanism design, monetary economics, and health care.[122] Applied subjects include market and legal remedies to spread or reduce risk, such as warranties, government-mandated partial insurance, restructuring or bankruptcy law, inspection, and regulation for quality and information disclosure.[123][124]
Market failure
Main articles: Market failure, Government failure, Information economics, Environmental economics, Ecological economics, and Agricultural economics
 Pollution can be a simple example of market failure. If costs of production are not borne by producers but are by the environment, accident victims or others, then prices are distorted.
 Environmental scientist sampling water
The term "market failure" encompasses several problems which may undermine standard economic assumptions. Although economists categorize market failures differently, the following categories emerge in the main texts.[h]
Authors critical of economics tend to view the talk of "market failiures", as a term which is used when economic theories don't correspond with reality, making these theories and paradigms in which these terms are used unfalsifiable.[125][clarification needed]
Information asymmetries and incomplete markets may result in economic inefficiency but also a possibility of improving efficiency through market, legal, and regulatory remedies, as discussed above.
Natural monopoly, or the overlapping concepts of "practical" and "technical" monopoly, is an extreme case of failure of competition as a restraint on producers. Extreme economies of scale are one possible cause.
Public goods are goods which are under-supplied in a typical market. The defining features are that people can consume public goods without having to pay for them and that more than one person can consume the good at the same time.
Externalities occur where there are significant social costs or benefits from production or consumption that are not reflected in market prices. For example, air pollution may generate a negative externality, and education may generate a positive externality (less crime, etc.). Governments often tax and otherwise restrict the sale of goods that have negative externalities and subsidize or otherwise promote the purchase of goods that have positive externalities in an effort to correct the price distortions caused by these externalities.[126] Elementary demand-and-supply theory predicts equilibrium but not the speed of adjustment for changes of equilibrium due to a shift in demand or supply.[127]
In many areas, some form of price stickiness is postulated to account for quantities, rather than prices, adjusting in the short run to changes on the demand side or the supply side. This includes standard analysis of the business cycle in macroeconomics. Analysis often revolves around causes of such price stickiness and their implications for reaching a hypothesized long-run equilibrium. Examples of such price stickiness in particular markets include wage rates in labour markets and posted prices in markets deviating from perfect competition.
Some specialized fields of economics deal in market failure more than others. The economics of the public sector is one example. Much environmental economics concerns externalities or "public bads".
Policy options include regulations that reflect cost-benefit analysis or market solutions that change incentives, such as emission fees or redefinition of property rights.[128]
Welfare
Main article: Welfare economics
Welfare economics uses microeconomics techniques to evaluate well-being from allocation of productive factors as to desirability and economic efficiency within an economy, often relative to competitive general equilibrium.[129] It analyzes social welfare, however measured, in terms of economic activities of the individuals that compose the theoretical society considered.  Accordingly, individuals, with associated economic activities, are the basic units for aggregating to social welfare, whether of a group, a community, or a society, and there is no "social welfare" apart from the "welfare" associated with its individual units.
Macroeconomics
Main article: Macroeconomics
 The circulation of money in an economy in a macroeconomic model. In this model the use of natural resources and the generation of waste (like greenhouse gases) is not included.
Macroeconomics examines the economy as a whole to explain broad aggregates and their interactions "top down", that is, using a simplified form of general-equilibrium theory.[130] Such aggregates include national income and output, the unemployment rate, and price inflation and subaggregates like total consumption and investment spending and their components. It also studies effects of monetary policy and fiscal policy.
Since at least the 1960s, macroeconomics has been characterized by further integration as to micro-based modelling of sectors, including rationality of players, efficient use of market information, and imperfect competition.[131] This has addressed a long-standing concern about inconsistent developments of the same subject.[132]
Macroeconomic analysis also considers factors affecting the long-term level and growth of national income. Such factors include capital accumulation, technological change and labour force growth.[133]
Growth
Main article: Economic growth
Growth economics studies factors that explain economic growth  the increase in output per capita of a country over a long period of time. The same factors are used to explain differences in the level of output per capita between countries, in particular why some countries grow faster than others, and whether countries converge at the same rates of growth.
Much-studied factors include the rate of investment, population growth, and technological change. These are represented in theoretical and empirical forms (as in the neoclassical and endogenous growth models) and in growth accounting.[134]
Business cycle
Main article: Business cycle
See also: Circular flow of income, Aggregate supply, Aggregate demand, and Unemployment
 A basic illustration of economic/business cycles
The economics of a depression were the spur for the creation of "macroeconomics" as a separate discipline. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, John Maynard Keynes authored a book entitled The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money outlining the key theories of Keynesian economics. Keynes contended that aggregate demand for goods might be insufficient during economic downturns, leading to unnecessarily high unemployment and losses of potential output.
He therefore advocated active policy responses by the public sector, including monetary policy actions by the central bank and fiscal policy actions by the government to stabilize output over the business cycle.[135]
Thus, a central conclusion of Keynesian economics is that, in some situations, no strong automatic mechanism moves output and employment towards full employment levels. John Hicks' IS/LM model has been the most influential interpretation of The General Theory.
Over the years, understanding of the business cycle has branched into various research programmes, mostly related to or distinct from Keynesianism. The neoclassical synthesis refers to the reconciliation of Keynesian economics with neoclassical economics, stating that Keynesianism is correct in the short run but qualified by neoclassical-like considerations in the intermediate and long run.[74]
New classical macroeconomics, as distinct from the Keynesian view of the business cycle, posits market clearing with imperfect information. It includes Friedman's permanent income hypothesis on consumption and "rational expectations" theory,[136] led by Robert Lucas, and real business cycle theory.[137]
In contrast, the new Keynesian approach retains the rational expectations assumption, however it assumes a variety of market failures. In particular, New Keynesians assume prices and wages are "sticky", which means they do not adjust instantaneously to changes in economic conditions.[89]
Thus, the new classicals assume that prices and wages adjust automatically to attain full employment, whereas the new Keynesians see full employment as being automatically achieved only in the long run, and hence government and central-bank policies are needed because the "long run" may be very long.
Unemployment
Main article: Unemployment
 US unemployment rate, 1990 2022.
The amount of unemployment in an economy is measured by the unemployment rate, the percentage of workers without jobs in the labour force. The labour force only includes workers actively looking for jobs. People who are retired, pursuing education, or discouraged from seeking work by a lack of job prospects are excluded from the labour force. Unemployment can be generally broken down into several types that are related to different causes.[138]
Classical models of unemployment occurs when wages are too high for employers to be willing to hire more workers. Consistent with classical unemployment, frictional unemployment occurs when appropriate job vacancies exist for a worker, but the length of time needed to search for and find the job leads to a period of unemployment.[138]
Structural unemployment covers a variety of possible causes of unemployment including a mismatch between workers' skills and the skills required for open jobs.[139] Large amounts of structural unemployment can occur when an economy is transitioning industries and workers find their previous set of skills are no longer in demand. Structural unemployment is similar to frictional unemployment since both reflect the problem of matching workers with job vacancies, but structural unemployment covers the time needed to acquire new skills not just the short term search process.[140]
While some types of unemployment may occur regardless of the condition of the economy, cyclical unemployment occurs when growth stagnates. Okun's law represents the empirical relationship between unemployment and economic growth.[141] The original version of Okun's law states that a 3% increase in output would lead to a 1% decrease in unemployment.[142]
Monetary policy
Main article: Monetary policy
See also: Quantity theory of money and History of money
Money is a means of final payment for goods in most price system economies, and is the unit of account in which prices are typically stated. Money has general acceptability, relative consistency in value, divisibility, durability, portability, elasticity in supply, and longevity with mass public confidence. It includes currency held by the nonbank public and checkable deposits. It has been described as a social convention, like language, useful to one largely because it is useful to others. In the words of Francis Amasa Walker, a well-known 19th-century economist, "Money is what money does" ("Money is that money does" in the original).[143]
As a medium of exchange, money facilitates trade. It is essentially a measure of value and more importantly, a store of value being a basis for credit creation. Its economic function can be contrasted with barter (non-monetary exchange). Given a diverse array of produced goods and specialized producers, barter may entail a hard-to-locate double coincidence of wants as to what is exchanged, say apples and a book. Money can reduce the transaction cost of exchange because of its ready acceptability. Then it is less costly for the seller to accept money in exchange, rather than what the buyer produces.[144]
At the level of an economy, theory and evidence are consistent with a positive relationship running from the total money supply to the nominal value of total output and to the general price level. For this reason, management of the money supply is a key aspect of monetary policy.[145]
Fiscal policy
Main articles: Fiscal policy, Government spending, and Tax
Governments implement fiscal policy to influence macroeconomic conditions by adjusting spending and taxation policies to alter aggregate demand. When aggregate demand falls below the potential output of the economy, there is an output gap where some productive capacity is left unemployed. Governments increase spending and cut taxes to boost aggregate demand. Resources that have been idled can be used by the government.
For example, unemployed home builders can be hired to expand highways. Tax cuts allow consumers to increase their spending, which boosts aggregate demand. Both tax cuts and spending have multiplier effects where the initial increase in demand from the policy percolates through the economy and generates additional economic activity.
The effects of fiscal policy can be limited by crowding out. When there is no output gap, the economy is producing at full capacity and there are no excess productive resources. If the government increases spending in this situation, the government uses resources that otherwise would have been used by the private sector, so there is no increase in overall output. Some economists think that crowding out is always an issue while others do not think it is a major issue when output is depressed.
Sceptics of fiscal policy also make the argument of Ricardian equivalence. They argue that an increase in debt will have to be paid for with future tax increases, which will cause people to reduce their consumption and save money to pay for the future tax increase. Under Ricardian equivalence, any boost in demand from tax cuts will be offset by the increased saving intended to pay for future higher taxes.
Inequality
Main article: Economic inequality
Economic inequality includes income inequality, measured using the distribution of income (the amount of money people receive), and wealth inequality measured using the distribution of wealth (the amount of wealth people own), and other measures such as consumption, land ownership, and human capital. Inequality exists at different extents between countries or states, groups of people, and individuals.[146] There are many methods for measuring inequality,[147] the Gini coefficient being widely used for income differences among individuals. An example measure of inequality between countries is the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index, a composite index that takes inequality into account.[148] Important concepts of equality include equity, equality of outcome, and equality of opportunity.
Research has linked economic inequality to political and social instability, including revolution, democratic breakdown and civil conflict.[149][150][151][152] Research suggests that greater inequality hinders economic growth and macroeconomic stability, and that land and human capital inequality reduce growth more than inequality of income.[149][153] Inequality is at the center stage of economic policy debate across the globe, as government tax and spending policies have significant effects on income distribution.[149] In advanced economies, taxes and transfers decrease income inequality by one-third, with most of this being achieved via public social spending (such as pensions and family benefits.)[149]
Public economics
Main article: Public economics
Public economics is the field of economics that deals with economic activities of a public sector, usually government. The subject addresses such matters as tax incidence (who really pays a particular tax), cost-benefit analysis of government programmes, effects on economic efficiency and income distribution of different kinds of spending and taxes, and fiscal politics. The latter, an aspect of public choice theory, models public-sector behaviour analogously to microeconomics, involving interactions of self-interested voters, politicians, and bureaucrats.[154]
Much of economics is positive, seeking to describe and predict economic phenomena. Normative economics seeks to identify what economies ought to be like.
Welfare economics is a normative branch of economics that uses microeconomic techniques to simultaneously determine the allocative efficiency within an economy and the income distribution associated with it. It attempts to measure social welfare by examining the economic activities of the individuals that comprise society.[155]
International economics
Main article: International economics
 List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita in April 2022.
International trade studies determinants of goods-and-services flows across international boundaries. It also concerns the size and distribution of gains from trade. Policy applications include estimating the effects of changing tariff rates and trade quotas. International finance is a macroeconomic field which examines the flow of capital across international borders, and the effects of these movements on exchange rates. Increased trade in goods, services and capital between countries is a major effect of contemporary globalization.[156]
Labor economics
Main article: Labor economics
Labor economics seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for wage labor. Labor markets function through the interaction of workers and employers. Labor economics looks at the suppliers of labor services (workers), the demands of labor services (employers), and attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages, employment, and income.  In economics, labor  is a measure of the work done by human beings. It is conventionally contrasted with such other factors of production as land and capital. There are theories which have developed a concept called human capital (referring to the skills that workers possess, not necessarily their actual work), although there are also counter posing macro-economic system theories that think human capital is a contradiction in terms.[citation needed]
Development economics
Main article: Development economics
Development economics examines economic aspects of the economic development process in relatively low-income countries focusing on structural change, poverty, and economic growth. Approaches in development economics frequently incorporate social and political factors.[157]
Criticism
Economics has historically been subject to criticism that it relies on unrealistic, unverifiable, or highly simplified assumptions, in some cases because these assumptions simplify the proofs of desired conclusions.[158][better source needed]  For example, the economist Friedrich Hayek claimed that economics (at least historically) used a scientistic approach which he claimed was "decidedly unscientific in the true sense of the word, since it involves a mechanical and uncritical application of habits of thought to fields different from those in which they have been formed".[159] Latter-day examples of such assumptions include perfect information, profit maximization and rational choices, axioms of neoclassical economics.[160] Such criticisms often conflate neoclassical economics with all of contemporary economics.[161][162] The field of information economics includes both mathematical-economical research and also behavioural economics, akin to studies in behavioural psychology, and confounding factors to the neoclassical assumptions are the subject of substantial study in many areas of economics.[163][164][165]
Prominent historical mainstream economists such as Keynes[166] and Joskow observed that much of the economics of their time was conceptual rather than quantitative, and difficult to model and formalize quantitatively. In a discussion on oligopoly research, Paul Joskow pointed out in 1975 that in practice, serious students of actual economies tended to use "informal models" based upon qualitative factors specific to particular industries. Joskow had a strong feeling that the important work in oligopoly was done through informal observations while formal models were "trotted out ex post". He argued that formal models were largely not important in the empirical work, either, and that the fundamental factor behind the theory of the firm, behaviour, was neglected.[167] Deirdre McCloskey has argued that many empirical economic studies are poorly reported, and she and Stephen Ziliak argue that although her critique has been well-received, practice has not improved.[168] The extent to which practice has improved since the early 2000s is contested: although economists have noted the discipline's adoption of increasingly rigorous modeling,[169][170] other have criticized the field's focus on creating computer simulations detached from reality, as well as noting the loss of prestige suffered by the field for failing to anticipate the Great Recession.[171]
Economics has been derogatorily dubbed "the dismal science", first coined by the Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle in the 19th century. It is often stated that Carlyle gave it this nickname as a response to the work of Thomas Robert Malthus, who predicted widespread starvation resulting from projections that population growth would exceed the rate of increase in the food supply. However, the actual phrase was coined by Carlyle in the context of a debate with John Stuart Mill on slavery, in which Carlyle argued for slavery; the "dismal" nature of economics in Carlyle's view was that it "[found] the secret of this Universe in 'supply and demand', and reduc[ed] the duty of human governors to that of letting men alone"."[30]
Related subjects
Main articles: Law and economics, Natural resource economics, Philosophy and economics, and Political economy
Economics is one social science among several and has fields bordering on other areas, including economic geography, economic history, public choice, energy economics, cultural economics, family economics and institutional economics.
Law and economics, or economic analysis of law, is an approach to legal theory that applies methods of economics to law. It includes the use of economic concepts to explain the effects of legal rules, to assess which legal rules are economically efficient, and to predict what the legal rules will be.[172] A seminal article by Ronald Coase published in 1961 suggested that well-defined property rights could overcome the problems of externalities.[173]
Political economy is the interdisciplinary study that combines economics, law, and political science in explaining how political institutions, the political environment, and the economic system (capitalist, socialist, mixed) influence each other. It studies questions such as how monopoly, rent-seeking behaviour, and externalities should impact government policy.[174] Historians have employed political economy to explore the ways in the past that persons and groups with common economic interests have used politics to effect changes beneficial to their interests.[175]
Energy economics is a broad scientific subject area which includes topics related to energy supply and energy demand. Georgescu-Roegen reintroduced the concept of entropy in relation to economics and energy from thermodynamics, as distinguished from what he viewed as the mechanistic foundation of neoclassical economics drawn from Newtonian physics. His work contributed significantly to thermoeconomics and to ecological economics. He also did foundational work which later developed into evolutionary economics.[176]
The sociological subfield of economic sociology arose, primarily through the work of  mile Durkheim, Max Weber and Georg Simmel, as an approach to analysing the effects of economic phenomena in relation to the overarching social paradigm (i.e. modernity).[177] Classic works include Max Weber's The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905) and Georg Simmel's The Philosophy of Money (1900). More recently, the works of James S. Coleman,[178] Mark Granovetter, Peter Hedstrom and Richard Swedberg have been influential in this field.
Gary Becker in 1974 presented an economic theory of social interactions, whose applications included the family, charity, merit goods and multiperson interactions, and envy and hatred.
[179] He and Kevin Murphy authored a book in 2001 that analyzed market behavior in a social environment.[180]
Profession
Main article: Economist
The professionalization of economics, reflected in the growth of graduate programmes on the subject, has been described as "the main change in economics since around 1900".[181] Most major universities and many colleges have a major, school, or department in which academic degrees are awarded in the subject, whether in the liberal arts, business, or for professional study.
See Bachelor of Economics and Master of Economics.
In the private sector, professional economists are employed as consultants and in industry, including banking and finance. Economists also work for various government departments and agencies, for example, the national treasury, central bank or National Bureau of Statistics. See Economic analyst.
There are dozens of prizes awarded to economists each year for outstanding intellectual contributions to the field, the most prominent of which is the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, though it is not a Nobel Prize.
Contemporary economics uses mathematics. Economists draw on the tools of calculus, linear algebra, statistics, game theory, and computer science.[182] Professional economists are expected to be familiar with these tools, while a minority specialize in econometrics and mathematical methods.
Women in economics
Harriet Martineau (1802-1876) was a widely-read populariser of classical economic thought. Mary Paley Marshall (1850-1944), the first women lecturer at a British economics faculty, wrote The Economics of Industry with her husband Alfred Marshall. Joan Robinson (1903-1983) was an important post-Keynesian economist. The economic historian Anna Schwartz (1915-2012) coauthored A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 1960 with Milton Friedman.[183] Two women have received the Nobel Prize in Economics: Elinor Ostrom (2009) and Esther Duflo (2019). Five have received the John Bates Clark Medal: Susan Athey (2007), Esther Duflo (2010), Amy Finkelstein (2012), Emi Nakamura (2019) and Melissa Dell (2020).
Women's authorship share in prominent economic journals reduced from 1940 to the 1970s, but has subsequently risen, with different patterns of gendered coauthorship.[184] Women remain globally under-represented in the profession (19% of authors in the RePEc database in 2018), with national variation.[185]
See also
Business and economics portal
Critical juncture theory
Economics terminology that differs from common usage
Economic ideology
Economic policy
Economic union
Free trade
Happiness economics
Humanistic economics
List of academic fields  Economics
List of economics films
List of economics awards
Socioeconomics
General
Glossary of economics
Index of economics articles
JEL classification codes for classifying articles in economics journals and books on economics by subject matter from 1886 to the present.
Outline of economics
Notes
^ "Capital" in Smith's usage includes fixed capital and circulating capital. The latter includes wages and labour maintenance, money, and inputs from land, mines, and fisheries associated with production.[57]
^ "This science indicates the cases in which commerce is truly productive, where whatever is gained by one is lost by another, and where it is profitable to all; it also teaches us to appreciate its several processes, but simply in their results, at which it stops. Besides this knowledge, the merchant must also understand the processes of his art. He must be acquainted with the commodities in which he deals, their qualities and defects, the countries from which they are derived, their markets, the means of their transportation, the values to be given for them in exchange, and the method of keeping accounts. The same remark is applicable to the agriculturist, to the manufacturer, and to the practical man of business; to acquire a thorough knowledge of the causes and consequences of each phenomenon, the study of political economy is essentially necessary to them all; and to become expert in his particular pursuit, each one must add thereto a knowledge of its processes." (Say 1803, p. XVI) 
^ "And when we submit the definition in question to this test, it is seen to possess deficiencies which, so far from being marginal and subsidiary, amount to nothing less than a complete failure to exhibit either the scope or the significance of the most central generalisations of all."(Robbins 2007, p. 5) 
^ "The conception we have adopted may be described as analytical. It does not attempt to pick out certain kinds of behaviour, but focuses attention on a particular aspect of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of scarcity. (Robbins 2007, p. 17) 
^ See Agent-based computational economics
^ Interest payments are considered a form of rent on credit money.
^ See Complex adaptive system and Dynamic network analysis
^ Compare with Nicholas Barr (2004), whose list of market failures is melded with failures of economic assumptions, which are (1) producers as price takers (i.e. presence of oligopoly or monopoly; but why is this not a product of the following?) (2) equal power of consumers (what labour lawyers call an imbalance of bargaining power) (3) complete markets (4) public goods (5) external effects (i.e. externalities?) (6) increasing returns to scale (i.e. practical monopoly) (7) perfect information (in The Economics of the Welfare State (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004. pp. 72 79. ISBN 978-0-19-926497-1.).    Joseph E. Stiglitz (2015) classifies market failures as from failure of competition (including natural monopoly), information asymmetries, incomplete markets, externalities, public good situations, and macroeconomic disturbances (in "Chapter 4: Market Failure". Economics of the Public Sector: Fourth International Student Edition (4th ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. 2015. pp. 81 100. ISBN 978-0-393-93709-1.).
References
^ "economics". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.)
^ Krugman, Paul; Wells, Robin (2012). Economics (3rd ed.). Worth Publishers. p. 2. ISBN 978-1464128738.
^ Backhouse, Roger (2002). The Penguin history of economics. London. ISBN 0-14-026042-0. OCLC 59475581. The boundaries of what constitutes economics are further blurred by the fact that economic issues are analysed not only by 'economists' but also by historians, geographers, ecologists, management scientists, and engineers.
^ Friedman, Milton (1953). "The Methodology of Positive Economics". Essays in Positive Economics. University of Chicago Press. p. 5.
^ Caplin, Andrew; Schotter, Andrew, eds. (2008). The Foundations of Positive and Normative Economics: A Handbook. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-532831-8.
^ Dielman, Terry E. (2001). Applied regression analysis for business and economics. Duxbury/Thomson Learning. ISBN 0-534-37955-9. OCLC 44118027.
^ Kianpour, Mazaher; Kowalski, Stewart;  verby, Harald (2021). "Systematically Understanding Cybersecurity Economics: A Survey". Sustainability. 13 (24): 13677. doi:10.3390/su132413677.
^ Tarricone, Rosanna (2006). "Cost-of-illness analysis". Health Policy. 77 (1): 51 63. doi:10.1016/j.healthpol.2005.07.016. PMID 16139925.
^ Dharmaraj, E. (2010). Engineering Economics. Mumbai: Himalaya Publishing House. ISBN 9789350432471. OCLC 1058341272. 
^ King, David (2018). Fiscal Tiers: the economics of multi-level government. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-64813-5. OCLC 1020440881.
^ Becker, Gary S (January 1974). "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach" (PDF).  In Becker, Gary S.; Landes, William M. (eds.). Essays in the Economics of Crime and Punishment. National Bureau of Economic Research. pp. 1 54. ISBN 0-87014-263-1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Hanushek, Eric A.; Woessmannr, Ludger (2007). "Economics of Education". Policy Research Working Papers. The World Bank. doi:10.1596/1813-9450-4122. hdl:20.500.12323/2954. S2CID 13912607. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2020. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Becker, Gary S. (1991) [1981]. A Treatise on the Family (Enlarged ed.). Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-90698-5. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Nelson, Julie A. (1995). "Feminism and Economics". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 9 (2): 131 148. doi:10.1257/jep.9.2.131. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
Ferber, Marianne A.; Nelson, Julie A., eds. (October 2003) [1993]. Feminist Economics Today: Beyond Economic Man. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226242071. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Posner, Richard A. (2007) [1972]. Economic Analysis of Law (7 ed.). Wolters Kluwer   Aspen Publishers. ISBN 978-0735563544. Retrieved 1 July 2022.Posner, Richard A. (1983). The Economics of Justice. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674235267. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Smith, Adam (1982) [1759].  Raphael, D. D.; Macfie, A. L. (eds.). The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics 1976. ISBN 978-0-86597-012-0. Introduction only.Boulding, Kenneth E. (1969). "Economics as a Moral Science" (PDF). American Economic Review. 59 (1): 1 12. JSTOR 1811088. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2022.Heilbroner, Robert L. (1999) [1953]. The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Times, and Ideas of the Great Economic Thinkers (7 ed.). Touchstone. ISBN 0-684-86214-X. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.Sen, Amartya (2009). The Idea of Justice. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674036130.
^ Iannaccone, Laurence R. (September 1998). "Introduction to the Economics of Religion" (PDF). Journal of Economic Literature. 36 (3): 1465 1495. JSTOR 2564806. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 February 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Nordhaus WD (2002). "The Economic Consequences of a War with Iraq" (PDF).  In Kaysen C, Miller SE, Malin MB, Nordhaus WD, Steinbruner JD (eds.). War with Iraq: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives. Cambridge, Massachusetts: American Academy of Arts and Sciences. pp. 51 85. ISBN 978-0-87724-036-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 21 October 2007.
^ Diamond, Arthur M. Jr. (2008). "Science, economics of".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). pp. 328 334. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1491. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. (Note the page is broken in some browsers but is still readable through the source.)
^ Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication (PDF) (Report). United Nations Environment Programme. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Backhouse, Roger (2002). The Penguin history of economics. London. p. 117. ISBN 0-14-026042-0. OCLC 59475581.
^ The terms derive ultimately from   (oikos "house") and   (nomos, "custom" or "law"). Harper, Douglas (February 2007). "Economy". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2007.
^ Free, Rhona C., ed. (2010). 21st Century Economics: A Reference Handbook. Vol. 1. SAGE Publications. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4129-6142-4.
^ a b Marshall, Alfred; Marshall, Mary Paley (1888) [1879]. The Economics of Industry. Macmillan. p. 2.
^ a b Jevons, William Stanley (1879). The Theory of Political Economy (second ed.). Macmillan and Co. p. XIV.
^ Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven (2008). "Economics, definition of".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 720 722. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0442. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 23 December 2011.
^ a b c Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven (Winter 2009). "Retrospectives: On the Definition of Economics". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 23 (1): 221 233. doi:10.1257/jep.23.1.221. JSTOR 27648302.
^ Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. and Book IV, as quoted in Groenwegen, Peter (2008). "Political Economy".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 476 480. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1300. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ Say, Jean Baptiste (1803). A Treatise on Political Economy. Grigg and Elliot.
^ a b Carlyle, Thomas (1849). "Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question". Fraser's Magazine.Malthus, Thomas Robert (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. Johnson.Persky, Joseph (Autumn 1990). "Retrospectives: A Dismal Romantic". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 4 (4): 165 172. doi:10.1257/jep.4.4.165. JSTOR 1942728.
^ Mill, John Stuart (2007) [1844]. "On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of Investigation Proper to It". Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. Cosimo. ISBN 978-1-60206-978-7. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ Marshall, Alfred (1890). Principles of Economics. Macmillan and Company. pp. 1 2.
^ Robbins, Lionel (2007) [1932]. An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. Ludwig von Mises Institute. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-61016-039-1.
^ a b Robbins (2007), p. 16.
^ Robbins (2007), pp. 4 7.
^ a b Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven G. (October 2009). "Defining Economics: The Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition". Economica. 76 (s1): 805 820. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.2009.00789.x. S2CID 148506444.Stigler, George J. (1984). "Economics   The Imperial Science?". Scandinavian Journal of Economics. 86 (3): 301 313. doi:10.2307/3439864. JSTOR 3439864.
^ Blaug, Mark (15 September 2017). "Economics". Encyclop dia Britannica. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ Becker, Gary S. (1976). The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. University of Chicago Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-226-04112-4.
^ Seung-Yoon Lee (4 September 2014). "Ha-Joon Chang: Economics Is A Political Argument". huffpost.com. Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021.
^ Rothbard, Murray N. (1995). Economic Thought Before Adam Smith: Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought. Vol. I. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-945466-48-2.Gordan, Barry J. (1975). Economic analysis before Adam Smith: Hesiod to Lessius. MacMillan. p. 3. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-02116-1. ISBN 978-1-349-02116-1.Brockway, George P. (2001). The End of Economic Man: An Introduction to Humanistic Economics (fourth ed.). p. 128. ISBN 978-0-393-05039-4. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2020.
^ Backhouse, Roger (2002). The Penguin history of economics. London. ISBN 0-14-026042-0. OCLC 59475581. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022.
^ Cameron, Gregory. (2008). Oikos and Economy: The Greek Legacy in Economic Thought.
^ "Oikos Meaning in Bible   New Testament Greek Lexicon   New American Standard". biblestudytools.com. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021.
^ Jameson, Michael H. (22 December 2015). "houses, Greek". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Classics. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.3169. ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021.
^ Lowry, S. Todd (1998). Xenophons Oikonomikos,  ber einen Klassiker der Haushalts konomie (in German). D sseldorf: Verlag Wirtschaft und Finanzen. p. 77. ISBN 3878811276.
^ Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1954). History of Economic Analysis. Routledge. pp. 97, 101, 112. ISBN 978-0-415-10888-1.
^ "Mercantilism". Encyclop dia Britannica. 26 August 2016. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017.Blaug (2017), p. 343
^ Bertholet, Auguste (2021). "Constant, Sismondi et la Pologne". Annales Benjamin Constant. 46: 78 81. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022.
^ "Physiocrat". Encyclop dia Britannica Online. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017.Blaug, Mark (1997). Economic Theory in Retrospect (5 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 24 29, 82 84. ISBN 978-0-521-57701-4.
^ Hunt, E. K. (2002). History of Economic Thought: A Critical Perspective. M.E. Sharpe. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7656-0606-8.
^ Skousen, Mark (2001). The Making of Modern Economics: The Lives and Ideas of the Great Thinkers. M.E. Sharpe. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7656-0479-8.
^ Blaug (2017), p. 343.
^ Deardorff, Alan V. (2016). "Division of labor". Deardorffs' Glossary of International Economics. University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 16 March 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2012.
^ Stigler, George J. (June 1951). "The Division of Labor Is Limited by the Extent of the Market" (PDF). Journal of Political Economy. 59 (3): 185 193. doi:10.1086/257075. JSTOR 1826433. S2CID 36014630. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2016. Retrieved 26 August 2017.
^ Stigler, George J. (December 1976). "The Successes and Failures of Professor Smith". Journal of Political Economy. 84 (6): 1199 1213. doi:10.1086/260508. JSTOR 1831274. S2CID 41691663. Also published as The Successes and Failures of Professor Smith (PDF). Selected Papers, No. 50 (Report). Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2016. Retrieved 16 August 2010.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), p. 30, ch. 2, "Markets and Government in a Modern Economy", The Invisible Hand.
^ Smith 1776, Bk. II: ch. 1, 2, and 5.
^ Smith (1776), Bk. IV: Of Systems of political  conomy, ch. II, "Of Restraints upon the Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at Home", IV.2.3 para. 3 5 and 8 9.
^ Smith (1776), Bk. IV: Of Systems of political  conomy, ch. II, "Of Restraints upon the Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at Home", para. 9.
^ Malthus, Thomas (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Population. J. Johnson Publisher.
^ Simon, Julian Lincoln (1981). The Ultimate Resource. Princeton University Press.; and Simon, Julian Lincoln (1996). The Ultimate Resource 2. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00381-8.
^ Ricardo, David (1817). On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. John Murray.
^ Findlay, Ronald (2008). "Comparative advantage".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 28 33. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0274. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2010.
^ Mill, John Stuart (1848). Principles of Political Economy. John W. Parker Publisher.
^ Smith (1776), Bk. 1, Ch. 5, 6.
^ Roemer, J. E. (1987). "Marxian value analysis".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 383. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3052. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017.Mandel, Ernest (1987). "Marx, Karl Heinrich (1818 1883)".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 372, 376. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3051. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017.
^ Fuller, Thomas (17 September 2009). "Communism and Capitalism Are Mixing in Laos". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
^ Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven G. (10 December 2007). Defining Economics: the Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition (PDF). Lionel Robbins's essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science, 75th anniversary conference proceedings. pp. 209 230. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2014. also published in Backhouse, Roger E; Medema, Steve G (October 2009). "Defining Economics: The Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition". Economica. 76 (Supplement 1): 805 820. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.2009.00789.x. JSTOR 40268907. S2CID 148506444.
^ Backhouse & Medema (2007), p. 223: "There remained division over whether economics was defined by a method or a subject matter but both sides in that debate could increasingly accept some version of the Robbins definition."
^ Clark, Barry (1998). Political Economy: A Comparative Approach (second ed.). Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-95869-5.
^ Campus, Antonietta (1987). "Marginalist economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. III (first ed.). p. 320. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3031. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
^ a b c Hicks, J.R. (April 1937). "Mr. Keynes and the "Classics": A Suggested Interpretation". Econometrica. 5 (2): 147 159. doi:10.2307/1907242. JSTOR 1907242.
^ Black, R.D. Collison (2008). "Utility".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 577 581. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1781. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
^ a b Blanchard, Olivier Jean (2008). "Neoclassical synthesis".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). pp. 896 899. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1172. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 17 November 2012.
^ Tesfatsion, Leigh (Winter 2002). "Agent-Based Computational Economics: Growing Economies from the Bottom Up" (PDF). Artificial Life. 8 (1): 55 82. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.194.4605. doi:10.1162/106454602753694765. PMID 12020421. S2CID 1345062. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 24 June 2020.
^ Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-57392-139-8.Blaug (2017), p. 347
^ Tarshis, L. (1987). "Keynesian Revolution".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. III (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 47 50. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2888. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), p. 5Blaug (2017), p. 346
^ Harcourt, G.C. (1987). "Post-Keynesian economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. Vol. III (first ed.). pp. 47 50. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3307. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2020.
^ Bernanke, Ben (8 November 2002). "Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke". The Federal Reserve Board. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2009.
^ Friedman, Milton (13 September 1970). "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2017.
^ "WHAT IS AUSTRIAN ECONOMICS?". Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2022.
^ "The Austrian Theory of Efficiency and the Role of Government". 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022.
^ "Ludwig von Mises argues that sound money is an instrument for the protection of civil liberties and a means of limiting government power (1912)". Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2022.
^ Gali, Jordi (2015). Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications (2 ed.). Princeton University Press. pp. 5 6. ISBN 978-0-691-16478-6.
^ Woodford, Michael (January 2008). "Convergence in Macroeconomics: Elements of the New Synthesis" (PDF). The New Consensus. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2021.
^ Greenwolde, Nathanial (23 October 2009). "New School of Thought Brings Energy to 'the Dismal Science'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 November 2016. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
^ Friedman 1953, p. 10.
^ Boland, Lawrence A. (1987). "Methodology".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. III (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 455 458. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3083. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.Frey, Bruno S.; Pommerehne, Werner W.; Schneider, Friedrich; Gilbert, Guy (December 1984). "Consensus and Dissension among Economists: An Empirical Inquiry". The American Economic Review. 74 (5): 986 994. ISSN 0002-8282. JSTOR 557.
^ a b Dixon, Huw David (2008). "New Keynesian macroeconomics".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 40 45. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1184. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 17 November 2012.
^ Quirk, James (1987). "Qualitative economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. Vol. IV (first ed.). pp. 1 3. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3369. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.
^ Samuelson, Paul A. (1983) [1947]. Foundations of Economic Analysis, Enlarged Edition. Boston: Harvard University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-674-31301-9.
^ Hashem, M. Pesaren (1987). "Econometrics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. Vol. II (first ed.). p. 8. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2430. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.
^ Keuzenkamp, Hugo A. (2000). Probability, Econometrics and Truth: The Methodology of Econometrics. Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-55359-9. ... in economics, controlled experiments are rare and reproducible controlled experiments even more so ...
^ Frey et al. (1984), pp. 986 994.
^ Blaug (2017), p. 247.
^ McCullough, B.D. (September 2007). "Got Replicability? The Journal of Money, Banking and Credit Archive" (PDF). Econ Journal Watch. 4 (3): 326 337. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2008. Retrieved 7 August 2008.
^ Kennedy, Peter (2003). "21.2 The Ten Commandments of Applied Econometrics". A Guide to Econometrics (fifth ed.). MIT Press. pp. 390 396. ISBN 978-0-262-61183-1. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2017.McCloskey, Deirdre N.; Ziliak, Stephen T. (March 1996). "The Standard Error of Regressions" (PDF). Journal of Economic Literature. 34 (1): 97 114. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2008. Retrieved 5 April 2008.Hoover, Kevin D.; Siegler, Mark V. (20 March 2008). "Sound and Fury: McCloskey and Significance Testing in Economics". Journal of Economic Methodology. 15 (1): 1 37. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.533.7658. doi:10.1080/13501780801913298. S2CID 216137286.McCloskey, Deirdre N.; Ziliak, Stephen T. (20 March 2008). "Signifying nothing: reply to Hoover and Siegler". Journal of Economic Methodology. 15 (1): 39 55. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.337.4058. doi:10.1080/13501780801913413. S2CID 145577576.
^ Whaples, R. (May 2006). "The Costs of Critical Commentary in Economics Journals". Econ Journal Watch. 3 (2): 275 282. Archived from the original on 29 January 2008.
^ Bastable, C.F. (2008). "Experimental methods in economics (i)".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. II (1 ed.). p. 241. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2512. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.Smith, Vernon L. (2008). "Experimental methods in economics (ii)".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. II (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 241 242. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2513. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.
^ Fehr, Ernst; Fischbacher, Urs (23 October 2003). "The Nature of Human Altruism". Nature. 425 (6960): 785 791. Bibcode:2003Natur.425..785F. doi:10.1038/nature02043. PMID 14574401. S2CID 4305295.Sigmund, Karl; Fehr, Ernst; Nowak, Martin A. (January 2002). "The Economics of Fair Play". Scientific American. 286 (1): 82 7. Bibcode:2002SciAm.286a..82S. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0102-82. PMID 11799620.
^ Lazear, Edward P. (1 February 2000). "Economic Imperialism". Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115 (1): 99 146. doi:10.1162/003355300554683. JSTOR 2586936.
^ Blaug (2017), pp. 347 349Varian, Hal R. (1987). "Microeconomics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3086. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ Buchanan, James M. (1987). "Opportunity cost".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3206. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ "Opportunity Cost". The Economist Economics A-Z. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 3 August 2010.
^ Montani, Guido (1987). "Scarcity".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3485. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 1, p. 5 (quotation) and sect. C,"The Production-Possibility Frontier", pp. 9 15; ch. 2, "Efficiency" sect.; ch. 8, sect. D, "The Concept of Efficiency.
^ Krugman, Paul (December 1980). "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade" (PDF). American Economic Review. 70 (5): 950 959. JSTOR 1805774. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 16 August 2010.Strange, William C. (2008). "Urban agglomeration".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 533 536. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1769. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2010.
^ Groenewegen, Peter (2008). "Division of labour".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). pp. 517 526. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0401. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2010.Johnson, Paul M. (2005). "Specialization". A Glossary of Political Economy Terms. Department of Political Science, Auburn University. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2008.Yang, Xiaokai; Ng, Yew-Kwang (1993). Specialization and Economic Organization: A New Classical Microeconomic Framework. North-Holland. ISBN 978-0-444-88698-9.
^ Cameron, Rondo E. (1993). A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic Times to the Present (second ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 25 25, 32, 276 280. ISBN 978-0-19-507445-1. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2017.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), pp. 37, 433, 435Findlay, Ronald (2008). "Comparative advantage".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 28 33. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0274. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2010.Kemp, Murray C. (1987). "Gains from trade".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2613. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.
^ Brody, A. (1987). "Prices and quantities".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3325. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.
^ Coase, Ronald (1937). "The Nature of the Firm". Economica. 4 (16): 386 405. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x. JSTOR 2626876.
^ Schmalensee, Richard (1987). "Industrial organization".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). Chicago. p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2788. hdl:2027/uc1.$b37792. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.
^ "Managerial Economics". Encyclop dia Britannica Online. 5 May 2013. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.Hughes, Alan (1987). "Managerial capitalism".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3017. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.
^ Machina, Mark J.; Rothschild, Michael (2008). "Risk".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 190 197. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1442. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Wakker, Peter P. (2008). "Uncertainty".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). pp. 428 439. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1753. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 11, "Uncertainty and Game Theory" and [end] Glossary of Terms, "Economics of information", "Game theory", and "Regulation"Camerer, Colin F. (2003). "Chapter 1: Introduction" (PDF). Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-4088-5.
^ Aumann, R.J. (2008). "Game Theory".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). Archived from the original on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Bernanke, Ben; Gertler, Mark (February 1990). "Financial Fragility and Economic Performance" (PDF). Quarterly Journal of Economics. 105 (1): 87 114. doi:10.2307/2937820. JSTOR 2937820. S2CID 155048192. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 November 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.
^ Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E., eds. (2008). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.).:  Ross, Stephen A. Finance.  Burnside, Craig; Eichenbaum, Martin; Rebelo, Sergio. Currency Crises Models. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 2 March 2011.  Kaminsky, Graciela Laura. Currency Crises. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 2 March 2011.  Calomiris, Charles W. Banking Crises. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Akerlof, George A. (August 1970). "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism" (PDF). Quarterly Journal of Economics. 84 (3): 488 500. doi:10.2307/1879431. JSTOR 1879431. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2011.
^ a b Lippman, S.S.; McCall, J.J. (2001). "Information, Economics of". International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier. pp. 7480 7486. doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02244-0. ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 11, "Uncertainty and Game Theory" and [end] Glossary of Terms, "Economics of information", "Game theory", and "Regulation"
^ Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E., eds. (2008). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.:  Wilson, Charles. Adverse Selection. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 2 March 2011.  Kotowitz, Y. Moral Hazard. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 2 March 2011.  Myerson, Roger B. Revelation Principle. Archived from the original on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2011.
^ Ankarloo, Bengt Daniel (2015) [2010]. "Nationalekonomiskr et En insider-outsiderteori om den nationalekonomiska disciplinen".  In Johnsdotter, Sara; Carlbom, Aje (eds.). Goda sanningar: debattklimatet och den kritiska forskningens villkor (EBook) (in Swedish). Nordic Academic Press. ISBN 9789187351846. SELIBR 18429586.
^ Laffont, J.J. (1987). "Externalities".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). pp. 263 265. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2520. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017.
^ Blaug 2017, p. 347.
^ Kneese, Allen V.; Russell, Clifford S. (1987). "Environmental economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). pp. 159 164. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2480. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010. Retrieved 16 October 2017.Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 18, "Protecting the Environment."
^ Deardorff, Alan V. (2016) [2006]. "Welfare economics". Deardorffs' Glossary of International Economics. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017   via Alan Deardorff at University of Michigan.
^ Blaug (2017), p. 345.
^ Ng, Yew-Kwang (May 1992). "Business Confidence and Depression Prevention: A Mesoeconomic Perspective". The American Economic Review. 82 (2): 365 371. ISSN 0002-8282. JSTOR 2117429.
^ Howitt, Peter M. (1987). "Macroeconomics: Relations with microeconomics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). pp. 273 276. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3008. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017.
^ Blaug (2017), p. 349.
^ Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 27, "The Process of Economic Growth"Uzawa, H. (1987). "Models of growth".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). pp. 483 489. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3097. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017.
^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 396. ISBN 978-0-13-063085-8.
^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (May 2006). "The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer" (PDF). Harvard University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012.
^ Fischer, Stanley (2008). "New classical macroeconomics".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). pp. 17 22. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1180. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 17 November 2012.
^ a b Dwivedi, D. N. (2005). Macroeconomics: Theory and Policy. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07-058841-7.
^ Freeman, C. (2008). "Structural unemployment".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (second ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 64 66. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1641. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2012.
^ Dwivedi (2005), pp. 444 445.
^ Dwivedi (2005), pp. 445 446.
^ Neely, Christopher J. (2010). "Okun's Law: Output and Unemployment" (PDF). Economic Synopses. Number 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 December 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2012.
^ Francis Amasa Walker (1878). Money. New York: Henry Holt and Company. p. 405. Retrieved 5 November 2017.
^ Tobin, James (1992). "Money (Money as a Social Institution and Public Good)".  In Newman, Peter K.; Milgate, Murray; Eatwell, John (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Finance and Money. Vol. 2. pp. 770 771. ISBN 978-1-5615-9041-4.
^ Friedman, Milton (1987). "Quantity theory of money".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter K. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). pp. 1 31. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3371. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017.Samuelson & Nordhaus (2010), ch. 2, "Money: The Lubricant of Exchange" section, ch. 33, Fig. 33 3
^ Ventura, Luca. "World Wealth Distribution And Income Inequality 2022". Global Finance Magazine.
^ Trapeznikova, Ija (2019). "Measuring income inequality". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.462.
^ Human Development Reports. Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI) Archived July 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. United Nations Development Programme. Retrieved: March 3, 2019.
^ a b c d "Introduction to Inequality". IMF. Retrieved 9 May 2022.
^ MacCulloch, Robert (2005). "Income Inequality and the Taste for Revolution". The Journal of Law and Economics. 48 (1): 93 123. doi:10.1086/426881. JSTOR 10.1086/426881. S2CID 154993058.
^ Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A. (2005). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/cbo9780511510809. ISBN 978-0521855266.
^ Cederman, Lars-Erik; Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede; Buhaug, Halvard (2013). Inequality, Grievances, and Civil War. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/cbo9781139084161. ISBN 978-1107017429.
^ Neves, Pedro Cunha; Afonso,  scar; Silva, Sandra Tavares (2016). "A Meta-Analytic Reassessment of the Effects of Inequality on Growth". World Development. 78: 386 400. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.10.038.
^ Musgrave, Richard A. (1987). "Public finance".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). pp. 1055 1060. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3360. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017.
^ Feldman, Allan M. (1987). "Welfare economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (1 ed.). pp. 889 095. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3785. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017.
^ Anderson, James E. (2008). "International trade theory".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 516 522. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0839. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2008.Venables, A. (2001). "International Trade: Economic Integration". International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences: 7843 7848. doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02259-2. ISBN 9780080430768.Obstfeld, Maurice (2008). "International finance".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 439 451. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0828. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2008.
^ Bell, Clive (1987). "Development economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. 1 (1 ed.). pp. 818 826. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2366. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017.Blaug (2017), p. 351
^ Hausman, Daniel M. (4 September 2018) [2003-09-12]. "Philosophy of Economics".  In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 28 August 2022. 
^ Hayek, Friedrich A. von (2008) [1974]. A free-market monetary system. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig Von Mises Institute. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-933550-37-4. OCLC 502635266. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. p. 30: On the other hand, the economists are at this moment called upon to say how to extricate the free world from the serious threat of accelerating inflation which, it must be admitted, has been brought about by policies which the majority of economists recommended and even urged governments to pursue. We have indeed at the moment little cause for pride: as a profession we have made a mess of things. It seems to me that this failure of the economists to guide policy more successfully is closely connected with their propensity to imitate as closely as possible the procedures of the brilliantly successful physical sciences an attempt which in our field may lead to outright error. It is an approach which has come to be described as the "scientistic" attitude an attitude which, as I defined it some thirty years ago, is decidedly unscientific in the true sense of the word, since it involves a mechanical and uncritical application of habits of thought to fields different from those in which they have been formed.
^ Rappaport, Steven (28 July 1996). "Abstraction and Unrealistic Assumptions in Economics". Journal of Economic Methodology. 3 (2): 215 236. doi:10.1080/13501789600000016.Rappaport, Steven (1998). "Chapter 6: Economic Models". Models and Reality in Economics. Edward Elgar. ISBN 978-1-85898-575-6.Friedman (1953), pp. 14 15, 22, 31Boland, Lawrence A. (2008). "Assumptions controversy".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 267 270. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0067. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2008.
^ Auld, Chris (23 October 2013). "18 signs you're reading bad criticism of economics". Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020.
^ Colander, David (June 2000). "The Death of Neoclassical Economics". Journal of the History of Economic Thought. 22 (2): 127 143. doi:10.1080/10427710050025330. ISSN 1053-8372. S2CID 154275191. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2020.
^ Foss, Nicolai J.; Weber, Libby (2016). "Moving Opportunism to the Back Seat: Bounded Rationality, Costly Conflict, and Hierarchical Forms". Academy of Management Review. 41: 61 79. doi:10.5465/amr.2014.0105. hdl:10398/616e0458-d27d-42b3-8c74-6777f4731e0f. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2020.
^ Bilbiie, Florian O. (December 2017). "A Catch-22 for HANK Models: No Puzzles, No Amplification" (PDF). columbia.edu. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2021.
^ Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (December 2007). "Evolutionary and Institutional Economics as the New Mainstream". Evolutionary and Institutional Economics Review. 4 (1): 7 25. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.454.8088. doi:10.14441/eier.4.7. S2CID 37535917.
^ Keynes, J. M. (September 1924). "Alfred Marshall 1842 1924". The Economic Journal. 34 (135): 311 72. doi:10.2307/2222645. JSTOR 2222645.
^ Joskow, Paul (May 1975). "Firm Decision-making Policy and Oligopoly Theory". The American Economic Review. 65 (2, Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association): 270 279, esp. 271. JSTOR 1818864.
^ Ziliak, Stephen T.; McCloskey, Deirdre N. (April 2004). "Size Matters: The Standard Error of Regressions in the American Economic Review" (PDF). Econ Journal Watch. 1 (2): 331 358. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2008. Retrieved 7 August 2008.
^ Hoover & Siegler (2008).
^ Woodford, Michael (January 2009). "Convergence in Macroeconomics: Elements of the New Synthesis". American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 1 (1): 267 279. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.469.7362. doi:10.1257/mac.1.1.267. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022.
^ Kay, John (1 March 2012). "The Map Is Not the Territory: Models, Scientists, and the State of Modern Macroeconomics". Critical Review. 24 (1): 87 99. doi:10.1080/08913811.2012.684476. ISSN 0891-3811. S2CID 144850996.
^ Friedman, David (1987). "Law and economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Vol. III (1 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 1 8. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2937. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.Posner, Richard A. (2007). Economic Analysis of Law (7th ed.). Aspen. ISBN 978-0-7355-6354-4.[page needed]
^ Coase, Ronald (October 1960). "The Problem of Social Cost". The Journal of Law and Economics. 3 (1): 1 44. doi:10.1086/466560. JSTOR 724810. S2CID 222331226.
^ Groenewegen, Peter (2008). "Political Economy".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2 ed.). pp. 476 480. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1300. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017.Krueger, Anne O. (June 1974). "The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society". American Economic Review. 64 (3): 291 303. JSTOR 1808883.
^ McCoy, Drew R. (1980). The Elusive Republic: Political Economy in Jeffersonian America. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-1416-1.
^ Cleveland, Cutler J.; Ruth, Matthius (September 1997). "When, where, and by how much do biophysical limits constrain the economic process? A survey of Georgescu-Roegen's contribution to ecological economics". Ecological Economics. 22 (3): 203 223. doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(97)00079-7.Daly, Herman E. (June 1995). "On Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen's Contributions to Economics: An Obituary essay". Ecological Economics. 13 (3): 149 154. doi:10.1016/0921-8009(95)00011-W.Mayumi, Kozo (August 1995). "Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1906 1994): an admirable epistemologist". Structural Change and Economic Dynamics. 6 (3): 115 120. doi:10.1016/0954-349X(95)00014-E.Mayumi, Kozo; Gowdy, John M., eds. (1999). Bioeconomics and Sustainability: Essays in Honor of Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen. Edward Elgar Publishering. ISBN 978-1-85898-667-8.Mayumi, Kozo (2001). The Origins of Ecological Economics: The Bioeconomics of Georgescu-Roegen. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-23523-5.
^ Swedberg, Richard (2003). Principles of Economic Sociology. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-07439-9.
^ Coleman, James S. (1998). Foundations of Social Theory. Belknap   Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674312265. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2021.Frank, Robert H. (1992). "Melding Sociology and Economics: James Coleman's Foundations of Social Theory". Journal of Economic Literature. 30 (1): 147 170. JSTOR 2727881.
^ Becker, Gary S. (1974). "A Theory of Social Interactions" (PDF). Journal of Political Economy. 82 (6). See pp. 1074 90. doi:10.1086/260265. JSTOR 1830662. S2CID 17052355. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2005.
^ Becker, Gary S.; Murphy, Kevin M. (2003). Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social Environment. Belknap   Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674011212. 
^ Ashenfelter, Orley (2001). "Economics: Overview, The Profession of Economics".  In Smelser, N.J.; Baltes, P.B. (eds.). International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. Vol. VI (first ed.). Pergamon. p. 4159. ISBN 978-0-0804-3076-8.
^ Debreu, G rard (1987). "Mathematical economics".  In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (first ed.). pp. 401 403. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3059. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017.
^ Bird, Mike (27 November 2015). "13 women who transformed the world of economics". World Economic Forum. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016.
^ Hengel, Erin; Phythian-Adams, Sarah Louisa (August 2022). "A historical portrait of female economists' co-authorship networks" (PDF). History of Political Economy. 54: 17 41. doi:10.1215/00182702-10085601. S2CID 251532686. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
^ Boring, Anne; Zignago, Soledad (6 March 2018). "Economics, where are the women?". Banque de France. Retrieved 30 August 2022.
Further reading
Anderson, David A. (2019). Survey of Economics. New York: Worth. ISBN 978-1-4292-5956-9.
Blaug, Mark (1985). Economic Theory in Retrospect (4th ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521316446.
McCann, Charles Robert Jr. (2003). The Elgar Dictionary of Economic Quotations. Edward Elgar. ISBN 9781840648201.
Samuelson, Paul A; Nordhaus, William D. (2010). Economics. Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill. ISBN 9780073511290. OCLC 751033918.
 Economics public domain audiobook at LibriVox
External links
Economics  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityData from Wikidata
Library resources about  Economics 
Resources in your library
General information
Economics at Curlie
Economic journals on the web. Archived 10 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine
Economics Archived 25 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine at Encyclop dia Britannica
Economics A-Z. Archived 14 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine Definitions from The Economist.
Economics Online Archived 28 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine (UK-based), with drop-down menus at top, incl. Definitions.
Intute: Economics: Internet directory of UK universities.
Research Papers in Economics (RePEc) Archived 16 August 2000 at the Wayback Machine
Resources For Economists Archived 11 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine: American Economic Association-sponsored guide to 2,000+ Internet resources from "Data" to "Neat Stuff", updated quarterly.
Institutions and organizations
Economics Departments, Institutes and Research Centers in the World Archived 30 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine
Organization For Co-operation and Economic Development (OECD) Statistics
United Nations Statistics Division Archived 24 January 2002 at the Wayback Machine
World Bank Data Archived 27 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine
American Economic Association Archived 20 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Study resources
Anderson, David; Ray, Margaret (2019). Krugman's Economics for the AP Course (3rd ed.). New York: BFW. ISBN 978-1-319-11327-8. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2021.
McConnell, Campbell R.;  et al. (2009). Economics. Principles, Problems and Policies (PDF) (18th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-337569-4. Archived from the original (PDF contains full textbook) on 6 October 2016.
Economics at About.com Archived 2 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine
Economics textbooks on Wikibooks
MERLOT Learning Materials: Economics Archived 14 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine: US-based database of learning materials
Online Learning and Teaching Materials Archived 9 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine UK Economics Network's database of text, slides, glossaries and other resources
vteEconomicsTheoretical economics
Microeconomics
Decision theory
Price theory
Game theory
Contract theory
Mechanism design
Macroeconomics
Mathematical economics
Computational economics
Behavioral economics
Empirical economics
Econometrics
Economic statistics
Experimental economics
Economic history
Applied economics
Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic geography
Education
Environmental
Ecological
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Participation
Economic policy
Public economics
Public choice
Regional
Socioeconomics
Transportation
Urban
Welfare
Schools (history)of economic thought
Mainstream
Heterodox
American (National)
Ancient thought
Anarchist
Mutualism
Austrian
Behavioral
Buddhist
Chartalism
Modern Monetary Theory
Chicago
Classical
Critique of political economy
Disequilibrium
Ecological
Evolutionary
Feminist
Georgism
Historical
Institutional
Keynesian
Neo- (neoclassical Keynesian synthesis)
New
Post-
Circuitism
Malthusianism
Marginalism
Marxian
Neo-
Mercantilism
Neoclassical
Lausanne
New classical
Real business-cycle theory
New institutional
Physiocracy
Socialist
Stockholm
Supply-side
Thermoeconomics
Notable economistsand thinkerswithin economics
Fran ois Quesnay
Adam Smith
David Ricardo
Thomas Robert Malthus
Johann Heinrich von Th nen
Friedrich List
Hermann Heinrich Gossen
Jules Dupuit
Antoine Augustin Cournot
John Stuart Mill
Karl Marx
William Stanley Jevons
Henry George
L on Walras
Alfred Marshall
Georg Friedrich Knapp
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Vilfredo Pareto
Friedrich von Wieser
John Bates Clark
Thorstein Veblen
John R. Commons
Irving Fisher
Wesley Clair Mitchell
John Maynard Keynes
Joseph Schumpeter
Arthur Cecil Pigou
Frank Knight
John von Neumann
Alvin Hansen
Jacob Viner
Edward Chamberlin
Ragnar Frisch
Harold Hotelling
Micha  Kalecki
Oskar R. Lange
Jacob Marschak
Gunnar Myrdal
Abba P. Lerner
Roy Harrod
Piero Sraffa
Simon Kuznets
Joan Robinson
E. F. Schumacher
Friedrich Hayek
John Hicks
Tjalling Koopmans
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen
Wassily Leontief
John Kenneth Galbraith
Hyman Minsky
Herbert A. Simon
Milton Friedman
Paul Samuelson
Kenneth Arrow
William Baumol
Gary Becker
Elinor Ostrom
Robert Solow
Amartya Sen
Robert Lucas Jr.
Joseph Stiglitz
Richard Thaler
Paul Krugman
Thomas Piketty
more
Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business portal
vteSocial sciences
Outline
History
Index
Primary
Anthropology (archaeology
cultural
social
physical/biological)
Economics (microeconomics
macroeconomics
econometrics
mathematical)
Geography (physical
human
integrated
geomatics
regional)
History
cultural
auxiliary sciences
economic
human
military
political
social
Law (jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems
public law
private law)
Linguistics (semiotics)
Political science (international relations
comparative
theory
public policy)
Psychology (abnormal
cognitive
developmental
personality
social)
Sociology (criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban)
Interdisciplinary
Administration (business
public)
Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
Historical sociology
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Linguistics
Media studies
Philosophy of science (economics
history
psychology
social science)
Planning (land use
regional
urban)
Political ecology
Political economy
Political sociology
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies
historical
Quantum social science
Social work
Vegan studies
List
List of social science journals
Other categorizations
Behavioral sciences
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science
Humanities
 Category
 Commons
 Society portal
 Wikiversity
Authority control International
FAST
National
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Korea
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economics&oldid=1149666169"