Legislative branch of the state government of Florida
Florida LegislatureTypeTypeBicameral ChambersSenateHouse of RepresentativesHistoryFoundedMay 26, 1845Preceded byLegislative Council of the Territory of FloridaLeadershipPresident of the SenateKathleen Passidomo (R) since Nov. 22, 2022 Senate Majority LeaderBen Albritton (R) since Nov. 14, 2022 Senate Minority LeaderLauren Book (D) since Apr. 28, 2021 Speaker of the HousePaul Renner (R) since Nov. 22, 2022 House Majority LeaderMichael J. Grant (R) since Nov. 16, 2020 House Minority LeaderFentrice Driskell (D) since Nov. 21, 2022 StructureSeats160 voting members
40 senators
120 representatives
State Senate political groupsMajority
  Republican (28)
Minority
  Democratic (12)
House of Representatives political groupsMajority
  Republican (84)
Minority
  Democratic (35)
Vacant (1)Salary$18,000/year + per diem (Subsistence & Travel)[1]ElectionsState Senate last electionNovember 8, 2022House of Representatives last electionNovember 8, 2022State Senate next electionNovember 5, 2024House of Representatives next electionNovember 5, 2024RedistrictingLegislative controlMottoIn God We TrustMeeting placeFlorida Capitol (Old Capitol in foreground), TallahasseeWebsiteOfficial Website
The Florida Legislature is the legislature of the U.S. State of Florida. It is organized as a bicameral body composed of an upper chamber, the Senate, and a lower chamber, the House of Representatives. Article III, Section 1 of the Florida Constitution, adopted in 1968, defines the role of the legislature and how it is to be constituted.[2] The legislature is composed of 160 state legislators (120 in the House and 40 in the Senate). The primary purpose of the legislature is to enact new laws and amend or repeal existing laws. It meets in the Florida State Capitol building in Tallahassee.[3]
Titles[edit]
Members of the Senate are referred to as senators and members of the House of Representatives are referred to as representatives. Because this shadows the terminology used to describe members of Congress, constituents and the news media, using  The Associated Press Stylebook, often refer to legislators as state senators or state representatives to avoid confusion with their federal counterparts.
Florida Senate[edit]
Main article: Florida Senate
The Senate is the upper house of the state legislature. It consists of 40 members elected from single-member districts. Senators are elected on a partisan basis, typically to four-year staggered terms, with half of the Senate elected every two years. Senate districts are drawn based on population figures from the federal decennial census. In the first election after the redistricting, all seats are up for election. Senators' terms begin immediately upon their election. The Senate Chamber is located in the State Capitol building. As of 2022, Republicans hold the majority in the Senate with 28 seats; Democrats are in the minority with 12 seats.
Florida House of Representatives[edit]
Main article: Florida House of Representatives
The House of Representatives is the lower house of the state legislature. It consists of 120 members elected from single-member districts, on a partisan basis, to two-year terms. Districts are drawn based on population figures from the federal decennial census. House districts are drawn independently of Senate districts; some representatives have districts that include parts of multiple Senate districts. Representatives' terms begin immediately upon their election. The House of Representatives Chamber is located in the State Capitol building. As of 2022, Republicans hold the majority in the House of Representatives with 84 seats, and Democrats hold 35 seats. One seat is vacant.
Terms[edit]
Article III of the Florida Constitution defines the terms for state legislators. Legislators take office immediately upon election.
Senate[edit]
The Constitution requires state senators from odd-numbered districts to be elected in the years that end in numbers which are multiples of four. Senators from even-numbered districts are required to be elected in even-numbered years the numbers of which are not multiples of four.
To reflect the results of the U.S. Census and the redrawing of district boundaries, all seats are up for election in redistricting years, with some terms truncated as a result. Thus, senators in even-numbered districts were elected to two-year terms in 2012 (following the 2010 Census), and senators in odd-numbered districts will be elected to two-year terms in 2022 (following the 2020 Census).
All terms were truncated again in 2016, with all 40 Senate seats up for election, due to court-ordered redistricting.[4]
House of Representatives[edit]
Members of the House of Representatives are elected for terms of two years in each even-numbered year.[4]
Term limits[edit]
On November 3, 1992, almost 77 percent of Florida voters backed Amendment 9, the Florida Term Limits Amendment, which amended the State Constitution, to enact eight-year term limits on federal and state officials. Under the amendment, former members can be elected again after a two-year break.[5] In 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states could not enact congressional term limits, but ruled that the state-level term limits remain.[6]
Qualifications[edit]
Florida legislators must be at least twenty-one years old, an elector and resident of their district, and must have resided in Florida for at least two years before an election.[7]
Legislative session[edit]
Each year during which the Legislature meets constitutes a new Legislative Session.
Committee weeks[edit]
Legislators start Committee activity in September of the year before the Regular Legislative Session. Because Florida is a part-time legislature, this is necessary to allow legislators time to work their bills through the Committee process, before the Regular Legislative Session.[8]
Regular legislative session[edit]
The Florida Legislature meets in a 60-day Regular Legislative Session each year. Regular Legislative Sessions in odd-numbered years must begin on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March and on the second Tuesday after the first Monday in January of each even-numbered year.[9]
Before 1991, the Regular Legislative Session began in April. Senate Joint Resolution 380 (1989) proposed to the voters a Constitutional Amendment (approved November 1990) that shifted the starting date of Regular Legislative Session from April to February. Subsequently, Senate Joint Resolution 2606 (1994) proposed to the voters a Constitutional Amendment (approved November 1994) shifting the start date to March, where it remains. In recent years, the Legislature has opted to start in January to allow lawmakers to be home with their families during school spring breaks, and to give more time ahead of the legislative elections in the Fall.[10]
Organizational session[edit]
On the fourteenth day following each General Election, the Legislature meets for an Organizational Session to organize and select officers.
Special session[edit]
Special Legislative Sessions may be called by the governor, by a joint proclamation of the Senate president and House speaker, or by a three-fifths vote of all Legislators. During any Special Session, the Legislature may only address legislative business that is within the purview of the purpose or purposes stated in the Special Session Proclamation.[11]
Powers and process[edit]
Politics of Florida
Constitution and law
United States Constitution
Florida Constitution
Florida law
Executive
Governor: Ron DeSantis (R)
Lieutenant Governor: Jeanette N ez (R)
Cabinet
Attorney General: Ashley Moody (R)
Chief Financial Officer: Jimmy Patronis (R)
Commissioner of Agriculture: Wilton Simpson (R)
State Agencies
Legislature
Senate
President: Kathleen Passidomo (R)
President pro Tempore: Dennis Baxley (R)
Majority Leader: Ben Albritton (R)
Minority Leader: Lauren Book (D)
House
Speaker: Paul Renner (R)
Speaker pro Tempore: Chuck Clemons (R)
Majority Leader: Michael J. Grant (R)
Minority Leader: Fentrice Driskell (D)
Judiciary
Supreme Court
Chief Justice: Carlos G.  Mu iz
District courts of appeal
Circuit courts
Elections
Political parties
Democratic Party
Republican Party
Constitution Party
Ecology Party
Green Party
Independent Party
Libertarian Party
Party for Socialism and Liberation
National minor parties
Political party strength
Administrative divisions
Counties
Municipalities
Congressional delegation
U.S. Senate
Marco Rubio (R)
Rick Scott (R)
U.S. House of Representatives
1: Matt Gaetz (R)
2: Neal Dunn (R)
3: Kat Cammack (R)
4: John Rutherford (R)
5: Al Lawson (D)
6: Michael Waltz (R)
7: Stephanie Murphy (D)
8: Bill Posey (R)
9: Darren Soto (D)
10: Val Demings (D)
11: Daniel Webster (R)
12: Gus Bilirakis (R)
13: Charlie Crist (D)
14: Kathy Castor (D)
15: Scott Franklin (R)
16: Vern Buchanan (R)
17: Greg Steube (R)
18: Brian Mast (R)
19: Byron Donalds (R)
20: Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick (D)
21: Lois Frankel (D)
22: Ted Deutch (D)
23: Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D)
24: Frederica Wilson (D)
25: Mario D az-Balart (R)
26: Carlos Gimenez (R)
27: Maria Elvira Salazar (R)
Politics of the United States
 Politics portal Florida portal
vte
The Florida Legislature is authorized by the Florida Constitution to create and amend the laws of the U.S. state of Florida, subject to the Governor's power to veto legislation. To do so, Legislators propose legislation in the forms of bills drafted by a nonpartisan, professional staff. Successful legislation must undergo Committee review, three readings on the floor of each house, with appropriate voting majorities, as required, and either be signed into law by the Governor or enacted through a veto override approved by two-thirds of the membership of each legislative house.[12]
Its statutes, called "chapter laws" or generically as "slip laws" when printed separately, are compiled into the Laws of Florida and are called "session laws".[13] The Florida Statutes are the codified statutory laws of the state.[13]
In 2009, legislators filed 2,138 bills for consideration. On average, the Legislature has passed about 300 bills into law annually.[14]
In 2013, the legislature filed about 2000 bills. About 1000 of these are "member bills." The remainder are bills by committees responsible for certain functions, such as budget. In 2016, about 15% of the bills were passed.[15]
In 2017, 1,885 lobbyists registered to represent  3,724 entities.[15]
The Legislature also has the power to propose amendments to the Florida Constitution.
Leadership[edit]
The House of Representatives is headed by the speaker of the House, while the Senate is headed by the Senate president. The House speaker and Senate president control the assignment of committees and leadership positions, along with control of the agenda in their chambers. The two leaders, along with the governor of Florida, control most of the agenda of state business in Florida.[16]
President of the Senate: Kathleen Passidomo (R)
President Pro Tempore of the Florida Senate: Dennis Baxley (R)
Majority Leader of the Florida Senate: Ben Albritton (R)
Minority Leader of the Florida Senate: Lauren Book (D)
Speaker of the Florida House: Paul Renner (R)
Speaker Pro Tempore of the Florida House: Chuck Clemons (R)
Majority Leader of the Florida House: Michael J. Grant (R)
Minority Leader of the Florida House: Fentrice Driskell (D)
See also[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Government of Florida.
Florida House of Representatives
Florida Senate
Florida Senate Majority Office
Florida State Capitol
Government of Florida
List of presidents of the Florida Senate
List of speakers of the Florida House of Representatives
List of Florida state legislatures
The Florida Channel
References[edit]
^ "The 2017 Florida Statutes F.S. 11.13 Compensation of members". Florida Legislature.
^ "CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA". Florida Legislature. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved June 14, 2011.
^ "FAQ". Florida Senate.
^ a b "CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA". Florida Legislature.
^ "Vote Yes On Amendment No. 9 To Begin Limiting Political Terms". Sun-Sentinel.
^ "Florida Backs Article V Convention for Constitutional Amendment on Congressional Term Limits". Sunshine State News. February 11, 2016.
^ "CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA". Florida Legislature.
^ "Editorial:Advice to Legislature: Pursue limited agenda". Florida Today.
^ "CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF FLORIDA". Florida Legislature.
^ Buzzacco-Foerster, Jenna (February 18, 2016). "Proposal to move 2018 session to January heads House floor". Florida Politics. Retrieved February 18, 2016.
^ "The Florida Constitution". Florida Legislature.
^ "The Florida Senate Handbook" (PDF). Florida Senate.
^ a b "Statutes & Constitution: Online Sunshine". Florida Legislature. Retrieved September 26, 2013.
^ Flemming, Paul (March 8, 2009). Capital Ideas: Lawmakers face 2,138 proposals. Florida Today.
^ a b Cotterell, Bill (March 7, 2017). "Legislative session by the numbers". Florida Today. Melbourne, Florida. pp. 5A.
^ "Welcome : Online Sunshine". www.leg.state.fl.us.
External links[edit]
Florida Legislature
vteCurrent members of the Florida Senate
President
Kathleen Passidomo (R)
President pro tempore
Dennis Baxley (R)
Majority Leader
Ben Albritton (R)
Minority Leader
Lauren Book (D)
 Doug Broxson (R)
 Jay Trumbull (R)
 Corey Simon (R)
 Clay Yarborough (R)
 Tracie Davis (D)
 Jennifer Bradley (R)
 Travis Hutson (R)
 Tom A. Wright (R)
 Keith Perry (R)
 Jason Brodeur (R)
 Blaise Ingoglia (R)
 Colleen Burton (R)
 Dennis Baxley (R)
 Jay Collins (R)
 Geraldine Thompson (D)
 Darryl Rouson (D)
 Linda Stewart (D)
 Nick DiCeglie (R)
 Debbie Mayfield (R)
 Jim Boyd (R)
 Ed Hooper (R)
 Joe Gruters (R)
 Danny Burgess (R)
 Bobby Powell (D)
 Victor M. Torres Jr. (D)
 Lori Berman (D)
 Ben Albritton (R)
 Kathleen Passidomo (R)
 Erin Grall (R)
 Tina Polsky (D)
 Gayle Harrell (R)
 Rosalind Osgood (D)
 Jonathan Martin (R)
 Shevrin Jones (D)
 Lauren Book (D)
 Ileana Garcia (R)
 Jason Pizzo (D)
 Alexis Calatayud (R)
 Bryan Avila (R)
 Ana Maria Rodriguez (R)
 Republican (28)
 Democratic (12)
Florida Legislature
Florida House of Representatives
Florida Senate
vteCurrent members of the Florida House of Representatives
Speaker
 Paul Renner (R)
Speaker pro tempore
 Chuck Clemons (R)
Majority Leader
 Michael J. Grant (R)
Minority Leader
 Fentrice Driskell (D)
 Michelle Salzman (R)
 Alex Andrade (R)
 Joel Rudman (R)
 Patt Maney (R)
 Shane Abbott (R)
 Philip Griffitts (R)
 Jason Shoaf (R)
 Gallop Franklin (D)
 Allison Tant (D)
 Chuck Brannan (R)
 Sam Garrison (R)
 Wyman Duggan (R)
 Angie Nixon (D)
 Kimberly Daniels (D)
 Dean Black (R)
 Kiyan Michael (R)
 Jessica Baker (R)
 Cyndi Stevenson (R)
 Paul Renner (R)
 Bobby Payne (R)
 Yvonne Hayes Hinson (D)
 Chuck Clemons (R)
 Ralph Massullo (R)
 Vacant
 Taylor Yarkosky (R)
 Keith Truenow (R)
 Stan McClain (R)
 Tom Leek (R)
 Webster Barnaby (R)
 Chase Tramont (R)
 Tyler Sirois (R)
 Thad Altman (R)
 Randy Fine (R)
 Robbie Brackett (R)
 Fred Hawkins (R)
 Rachel Plakon (R)
 Susan Plasencia (R)
 David Smith (R)
 Doug Bankson (R)
 LaVon Bracy (D)
 Bruce Antone (D)
 Anna Eskamani (D)
 Johanna L pez (D)
 Rita Harris (D)
 Carolina Amesty (R)
 Kristen Arrington (D)
 Paula Stark (R)
 Sam Killebrew (R)
 Melony Bell (R)
 Jennifer Canady (R)
 Josie Tomkow (R)
 John Temple (R)
 Jeff Holcomb (R)
 Randy Maggard (R)
 Kevin Steele (R)
 Brad Yeager (R)
 Adam Anderson (R)
 Kim Berfield (R)
 Berny Jacques (R)
 Lindsay Cross (D)
 Linda Chaney (R)
 Michele Rayner (D)
 Dianne Hart (D)
 Susan Valdes (D)
 Karen Gonzalez Pittman (R)
 Traci Koster (R)
 Fentrice Driskell (D)
 Lawrence McClure (R)
 Danny Alvarez (R)
 Mike Beltran (R)
 Will Robinson (R)
 Tommy Gregory (R)
 Fiona McFarland (R)
 James Buchanan (R)
 Michael J. Grant (R)
 Spencer Roach (R)
 Tiffany Esposito (R)
 Jenna Persons (R)
 Mike Giallombardo (R)
 Adam Botana (R)
 Bob Rommel (R)
 Lauren Melo (R)
 Kaylee Tuck (R)
 Dana Trabulsy (R)
 Toby Overdorf (R)
 John Snyder (R)
 Mike Caruso (R)
 Jervonte Edmonds (D)
 David Silvers (D)
 Joseph Casello (D)
 Peggy Gossett-Seidman (R)
 Kelly Skidmore (D)
 Katherine Waldron (D)
 Rick Roth (R)
 Christine Hunschofsky (D)
 Dan Daley (D)
 Lisa Dunkley (D)
 Patricia Hawkins-Williams (D)
 Daryl Campbell (D)
 Chip LaMarca (R)
 Hillary Cassel (D)
 Michael Gottlieb (D)
 Robin Bartleman (D)
 Felicia Robinson (D)
 Marie Woodson (D)
 Fabi n Basabe (R)
 Christopher Benjamin (D)
 Dotie Joseph (D)
 Ashley Gantt (D)
 Tom Fabricio (R)
 David Borrero (R)
 Alex Rizo (R)
 Vicki Lopez (R)
 Demi Busatta Cabrera (R)
 Alina Garcia (R)
 Daniel Perez (R)
 Kevin Chambliss (D)
 Juan Fernandez-Barquin (R)
 Juan Carlos Porras (R)
 Jim Mooney (R)
 Republican (84)
 Democratic (35)
 Vacant (1)
Florida State Legislature
Florida House of Representatives
Florida Senate
vteLegislatures of the United StatesUnited States Congress
United States House of Representatives
United States Senate
State legislatures
Alabama (H, S)
Alaska (H, S)
Arizona (H, S)
Arkansas (H, S)
California (A, S)
Colorado (H, S)
Connecticut (H, S)
Delaware (H, S)
Florida (H, S)
Georgia (H, S)
Hawaii (H, S)
Idaho (H, S)
Illinois (H, S)
Indiana (H, S)
Iowa (H, S)
Kansas (H, S)
Kentucky (H, S)
Louisiana (H, S)
Maine (H, S)
Maryland (H, S)
Massachusetts (H, S)
Michigan (H, S)
Minnesota (H, S)
Mississippi (H, S)
Missouri (H, S)
Montana (H, S)
Nebraska
Nevada (A, S)
New Hampshire (H, S)
New Jersey (GA, S)
New Mexico (H, S)
New York (A, S)
North Carolina (H, S)
North Dakota (H, S)
Ohio (H, S)
Oklahoma (H, S)
Oregon (H, S)
Pennsylvania (H, S)
Rhode Island (H, S)
South Carolina (H, S)
South Dakota (H, S)
Tennessee (H, S)
Texas (H, S)
Utah (H, S)
Vermont (H, S)
Virginia (H, S)
Washington (H, S)
West Virginia (H, S)
Wisconsin (A, S)
Wyoming (H, S)
Other legislatures
District of Columbia
American Samoa (H, S)
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands (H, S)
Puerto Rico (H, S)
U.S. Virgin Islands
Legislative elections
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
List of U.S. state legislators
Authority control International
VIAF
Other
SNAC
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Florida_Legislature&oldid=1138960168"