Lean meat dried to prevent spoilage
"Beef jerky" redirects here. For other uses, see Beef jerky (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Jerk (cooking).
 Jerky
 Orange-marinated beef jerky
 Meat drying to make jerky. Gandhola Monastery, Lahaul, India
Jerky is lean trimmed meat cut into strips and dried (dehydrated) to prevent spoilage. Normally, this drying includes the addition of salt to prevent bacteria growth before the meat has finished the dehydrating process. It originated in the Andes mountains in what is modern day Peru[1][2] and the word "jerky" derives from the Quechua word ch'arki which means "dried, salted meat".[3][4][5] All that is needed to produce basic "jerky" is a low-temperature drying method, and salt to inhibit bacterial growth.
Modern manufactured jerky is often marinated, prepared with a seasoned spice rub or liquid, or smoked with low heat (usually under 70 C/160 F). Store-bought jerky commonly includes sweeteners such as brown sugar.
Jerky is ready-to-eat, needs no additional preparation and can be stored for months without refrigeration. To ensure maximum shelf-life, a proper protein-to-moisture content is required in the final cured product.[6]
Many products which are sold as jerky consist of highly processed, chopped and formed meat rather than traditional sliced whole-muscle meat.[citation needed] These products may contain more fat, but moisture content, as in the whole-muscle product, must meet a 0.75 to 1 moisture-to protein ratio in the US.[7][full citation needed]
Chemical preservatives can prevent oxidative spoilage, but the moisture-to-protein ratio prevents microbial spoilage by low water activity. Some jerky products are very high in sugar and  therefore taste very sweet   unlike biltong, which rarely contains added sugars.
Preparation[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Jerky" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Beef jerky being dried
 Chinese bakkwa jerky
Jerky is made from domesticated animals as well as game animals. Jerky from domesticated animals includes beef, pork, goat and mutton or lamb and game animals such as deer, kudu, springbok, kangaroo, and bison are also used.[8] Recently, other animals such as turkey, salmon, and earthworm have entered the market.[9]
Most fat must be trimmed from the meat prior to drying, as fat increases the chances of spoilage (modern vacuum packing and chemical preservatives have served to help prevent these risks). The meat must be dried quickly to limit bacterial growth during the critical period where the meat is not yet dry. To accomplish drying quickly without the use of high temperature, which would cook the meat, the meat must be sliced or pressed thin.
In industrial settings, large low-temperature drying ovens with many heater elements and fans make use of exhaust ports to remove the moisture-laden air. The combination of fast-moving air and low heat dries the meat to the desired moisture content within a few hours. The raw, marinated jerky strips are placed on racks of nylon-coated metal screens which have been sprayed with a light vegetable oil to allow the meat to be removed easily. The screen trays are placed closely in layers on rolling carts which are then put in the drying oven.
Chemical preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, are often used in conjunction with the historical salted drying procedure to prepare jerky. Smoking is the most traditional method, as it preserves, flavors, and dries the meat simultaneously. Salting is the most common method used today, as it both provides seasoning to improve the flavor as well as preserve the meat. While some methods involve applying the seasonings with a marinade, this can increase the drying time by adding moisture to the meat.
Packaging[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Jerky" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Raw meat before dehydration into jerky
After the jerky is dried to the proper moisture content to prevent spoilage, it is cooled, then packaged in (often resealable) plastic bags, either nitrogen gas flushed or vacuumed packed. To prevent the oxidation of the fat, the sealed packages often contain small pouches of oxygen absorber. These small packets are filled with iron particles which react with oxygen, removing the oxygen from the sealed jerky package, and from an opened and resealed unfinished packet.
Because of the necessary low fat and moisture content, jerky is high in protein. A 30 g (about 1 oz) portion of lean meat, for example, contains about 7 g of protein. By removing 15 g of water from the meat, the protein ratio is doubled to nearly 15 g of protein per 30 g portion. In some low moisture varieties, a 30 g serving will contain 21 g of protein, and only one g of fat. The price per unit weight of this type of jerky is higher than less-dried forms, as it takes 90 g of 99% lean meat to generate 30 g of jerky.
Unpackaged fresh jerky made from sliced, whole muscle meat has been available in specialty stores in Hong Kong at least since the 1970s. The products are purchased by kilograms, and customers choose from 10 to 20 types of meat used to make the product. Some are sold in strands instead of slices. Macau has opened numerous specialty shops also, many of which are franchise extensions of stores from Hong Kong. Compared to the sealed packaged versions, unpackaged jerky has a relatively short shelf life.
This type of jerky has also become very popular in convenience stores in the United States under the name "slab" jerky; it is usually sold in plexiglass containers.
Regulation[edit]
Most nations have regulations pertaining to the production of dried meat products. There are strict requirements to ensure safe and wholesome production of jerky products. Factories are required to have inspectors and sanitation plans. In the United States, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is responsible for that oversight. To comply with USDA regulations, poultry jerky must be heated to an internal temperature of 160 F (71 C) for uncured poultry or 155 F (68 C) for cured poultry to be considered safe[10] Many European Union countries presently prohibit the importation of meat products, including jerky, without additional and extensive customs documentation, and further inspections.[11]
Availability[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Jerky" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (August 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Venison jerky strips prior to drying
Traditional jerky, made from sliced, whole muscle meat, is readily available in the United States, Mexico, and Canada in varying meats, brands and qualities, both as packaged and unpackaged. These products are available in nearly every convenience store, gas station, supermarket, and variety shop in those countries, where there is a long history of jerky as a food of the pioneers. A similar, less expensive product is made with finely ground meat, mixed with flavors, then the mush is processed into thin dried strips. The finished item may be labeled as jerky, but with the qualifier "ground and formed". This product is widely available in general interest stores, such as supermarkets and convenience stores.
Also popular is shredded dry jerky (meat floss) sold in containers resembling snuff or dip. Jerky made in the traditional style is also a ubiquitous staple of farmers' markets in rural areas all over North America.
In addition to being common in the United States, Mexico, and Canada, jerky is also gaining popularity in supermarkets, convenience stores and online retailers in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and Germany. They are carried by some major supermarkets, and now also smaller stores. In China, in addition to the more traditional forms of jerky, there is also a similar product which is usually made from pork called pork chip. A similar product is quite popular in Rome and its hinterland: it is called coppiette and was originally made with horse or donkey[12] meat, but it is now generally made with pork. Coppiette are seasoned with red pepper and fennel seeds. Coppiette were usually eaten while drinking wine (mostly white) in Roman restaurants.
In Tamil Nadu, India, the dish is known as uppu kandam which forms part of authentic non-vegetarian cuisine. In kerala (India), it is known as "idi irachi", 'idi'=shredded since the dried meat strip is normally shredded before frying and 'irachi'=meat. It is normally eaten after deep frying rather than having it as it is. In Ethiopia, jerky is called qwant'a. In addition to salt, it is seasoned with black pepper and either berbere or awaze.[13] A similar product, biltong, is common in South African cuisine; however, it differs very much in production process and taste. In Hausa cuisine, kilishi is a form of dried meat, similar to jerky, that is heavily spiced with peppers.
 Jerky carried to ISS aboard STS-118, Endeavour Space Shuttle flight with Earth visible out the big window
Jerky (or products closely related to it) is commonly included in military field rations. It is particularly attractive to militaries because of its light weight, high level of nutrition, long shelf life and edibility without further preparation. Since 1996, jerky has been selected by astronauts as space food several times for space flight due to its light weight and high level of nutrition.[14][15]
Nutrition[edit]
A typical 30 g portion of fresh jerky contains 10 15 g of protein, 1 g of fat, and 0 3 g of carbohydrates, although some beef jerky can have a protein content above 65%.[16] Since traditional jerky recipes use a basic salt cure, sodium can be a concern for some people. A 30 g serving of jerky could contain more than 600 mg of sodium, which would be about 30% of the recommended USRDA.
Ch'arki[edit]
 Ch'arki
 Peruvian olluquito with charqui
Ch'arki (Quechua for dried, salted meat,[3] Hispanicized spellings charque, charqui, charqu ) is a dried, salted meat product. Andean charqui, made in Peru, Bolivia and Chile, is from alpaca, llama or alpaca-llama cross-breeds. Peru is the world's largest producer with approximately 450 tons produced per year. Brazilian charque is made from beef.[17]
The manufacture of charqui principally consists of salting and sun-drying. In some regions, such as in Puno, the meat is sliced before drying; in others, like Cusco, the meat is dried from whole bone-in carcass pieces, known as 'charqui completo'.[17]
It was industrialized in charqueadas (in Brazil) or saladeros (in Argentina and Uruguay). In the United States ch'arki was Anglicised as jerky.[18][19]
When encountered by the Spanish, the Inca Empire supplied tampu (inns) along the Inca road system with llama ch'arki for travelers. The Inca used a freeze drying process that took advantage of their cold dry mountain air and strong sun.[citation needed]
See also[edit]
Food portal
Bakkwa  Salty-sweet dried meat product
Biltong  Form of dried, cured meat from southern Africa
Borts  Mongolian air-dried meat
Carne seca  Mexican dried beef
Cecina  cured meat (beef, goat , but not porc)Pages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
Dendeng  Indonesian spicy meat dish
Kilishi  Hausa dish of spiced dried beef, chicken, mutton or goat meat
Mojama  Andalusian cured tuna delicacy
Pastirma  Spiced dried beef from the Middle East
Pemmican  Food mix with long shelf life, sometimes used as survival food
Salt pork  Salt-cured pork usually made from pork belly
Sukuti  Dried meat product from the Himalayas
References[edit]
^ HISTORY OF BEEF JERKY
^ History of Jerky
^ a b Teofilo Laime Ajacopa, Diccionario Biling e Iskay simipi yuyayk'ancha, La Paz, 2007 (Quechua-Spanish dictionary)
^ "Globe trotting: Ecuador". Taipei Times. 15 July 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2015.
^ "Feet in the Trough: Cured Meat". The Economist. 2006-12-19. Retrieved 2007-12-19.
^ Richard J. Epley and Paul B. Addis. "Processing Meat in the Home" (PDF). Minnesota Extension Service. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ 
USDA Food Standards and Labeling Policy Book, p. 83.
^ Delong, Deanna (1992). How to Dry Foods. Penguin Group. p. 79. ISBN 1-55788-050-6.
^ Waters, Theopolis. "Slumping U.S. meat prices help feed appetite for jerky". U.S. Retrieved 2018-09-18.
^ https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/wcm/connect/67432999-95e4-4360-a9c9-ddd63276631a/Seminar_Jerky_Guidelines.pdf?MOD=AJPERES[bare URL PDF]
^ For example The UK department for food and agriculture and food ban all meat imports for personal consumption from the USA. Their data can be searched:Defra search
^ "Cucina & Cantina". Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2010-10-20.
^ D.J. Mesfin. Exotic Ethiopian Cooking. Ethiopian Cookbook Enterprises, Falls Church, MD, 2006. p. 31
^ "I'd Like to See a Menu, Please". NASA. 2004-05-13. Archived from the original on 2004-11-09. Retrieved 2007-01-08.
^ "Space Food". NASA. 2004-05-27. Archived from the original on 2004-11-03. Retrieved 2007-01-03.
^ "Billy Franks Beef Jerky - Roast Beef and Mustard (40g)". MeatSnacker. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2015.
^ a b Salv , Bettit K.; Fern ndez-Diez, Ana; Ramos, Daphne D.; Caro, Irma; Mateo, Javier (January 2012). "Chemical composition of alpaca (Vicugna pacos) charqui". Food Chemistry. 130 (2): 329 334. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.07.046.
^ "CHARQUI". Etimolog as de Chile - Diccionario que explica el origen de las palabras. Retrieved Aug 27, 2020.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-07-01. Retrieved 2012-03-29.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
External links[edit]
Look up ch'arki in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Commercial Item Description (CID): Cured Meat Snacks Archived 2008-10-07 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Dept. of Agriculture specification
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture: Jerky and food safety fact sheet
Authentic Beef Jerky from Outback Australia (Nive Beef)
vteBeef and vealProduction
Argentine beef
Beef cattle
Cow calf operation
Feeder cattle
Kobe beef
Organic beef
Osorno Steer
ProductsCuts
Baseball steak
Blade steak
Brisket
Chateaubriand steak
Chuck steak
Fajita
Filet mignon
Flank steak
Flap steak
Hanger steak
Plate
Ranch steak
Restructured steak
Rib eye
Rib steak
Round
Rump
Short loin
Short ribs
Shoulder tender
Sirloin
Top sirloin
Skirt steak
Standing rib roast
Strip
Shank
T-bone
Tenderloin
Tri-tip
Trotters
Tail
Processed
Jerky
Aged
Bresaola
Cabeza
Corned beef
Frankfurter Rindswurst
Ground
Montreal smoked
Pastrami
Meat extract
Offal
Brain
Heart
Tongue
Tendon
Tripas
Tripe
Testicles
Dishes
Beefsteak
List of steak dishes
Balbacua
Blanquette de veau
Beef Wellington
Beef bourguignon
Beef bun
Beef Manhattan
Beef noodle soup
Beef on weck
Beef Stroganoff
Boiled beef
Bulgogi
Bulalo
Cachopo
Calf's liver and bacon
Cansi
Chateaubriand (dish)
Cheesesteak
Chicken fried steak
Cordon bleu
Dendeng
Feu
French dip
Ginger beef
Galbi
Gored gored
Gy don
Hamburg steak
Hortob gyi palacsinta
Iga penyet
Italian beef
Jellied veal
Kalio
Kara or eva  nicla
Kitfo
London broil
Mongolian beef
Neobiani
Ossobuco
Pares
Pho
Pot roast
Pozharsky cutlet
P'tcha
Ragout fin
Rawon
Rendang
Roast beef
Roast beef sandwich
Salisbury steak
Saltimbocca
Selat solo
Sha cha beef
Suea rong hai
Shooter's sandwich
Steak and kidney pudding
Steak Diane
Steak and eggs
Steak and oyster pie
Steak au poivre
Tartare
Tafelspitz
Tongseng
Veal Milanese
Veal Orloff
Veal Oscar
Vitello tonnato
Wallenbergare
Related meats
American bison
Beefalo
Water buffalo
 ubro 
Other
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Beef hormone controversy
Beef ring
Carcass grade
Darkcutter
Meat on the bone
Ractopamine - Beef
USA beef imports
Japan
Taiwan
South Korea (2008 US beef protest in South Korea)
vteCuisine of ChileMeat
Asado
Cecina
Charqui
Charquic n
Chicharr n
Chorip n
Guatitas
Churrasco
Longaniza
Milanesa
Osobuco
Fish and seafood
Caldillo de congrio
Curanto
Ceviche
Machas a la parmesana
Paila marina
Sandwiches
Barros Jarpa
Barros Luco
Chorip n
Chacarero
Churrasco
Completo
Crudo alem n
Breads and bakery
Alfajor
Berl n
Churro
Conejito
Empanada
Hallulla
Kuchen
Marraqueta
Pan de Pascua
Sopaipilla
Tortilla de rescoldo
Cheeses
Chanco
Panquehue
Quesillo
Other dishes
Cazuela
Chupe
Ensalada chilena
 achi
Pastel de choclo
Pichanga
Porotos con rienda
Porotos granados
Valdiviano
Desserts
Murta con membrillo
Picarones
Drinks
Aguardiente (Cola de mono, Licor de oro, Murtado)
Mate (Mate con malicia)
Chilean beer
Caf  con leche
Mote con huesillo
Pisco (Pisco sour, Piscola, Serena libre)
Vaina
Chilean wine (Jote, Navegado)
Condiments
Aj  chileno
Chancaca
Dulce de membrillo
Manjar
Manjar blanco
Merk n
Pebre
Salsa Americana
Sauerkraut
Other
Asado
Chupe
Chupilca del diablo
Las once
Ingredients
Paila
Merken
 Category: Chilean cuisine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jerky&oldid=1148461446"