Organism that eats mostly or exclusively animal tissue
This article is about the general concept of a meat-eating animal. For the mammal order, see Carnivora. For other uses, see Carnivore (disambiguation).
 Lions are obligate carnivores consuming only animal flesh for their nutritional requirements
A carnivore / k rn v r/, or meat-eater (Latin, caro, genitive carnis, meaning meat or "flesh" and vorare meaning "to devour"), is an animal or plant whose food and energy requirements derive from animal tissues (mainly muscle, fat and other soft tissues) whether through hunting or scavenging.[1][2]
Nomenclature[edit]
Mammal order[edit]
The technical term for mammals in the order Carnivora is carnivoran, and they are so-named because most member species in the group have a carnivorous diet, but the similarity of the name of the order and the name of the diet causes confusion.
Many but not all carnivorans are meat eaters; a few, such as the large and small cats (felidae) are obligate carnivores (see below). Other classes of carnivore are highly variable. The Ursids, for example: While the Arctic polar bear eats meat almost exclusively (more than 90% of its diet is meat), almost all other bear species are omnivorous, and one species, the giant panda, is nearly exclusively herbivorous.[3]
Dietary carnivory is not a distinguishing trait of the order: Many mammals with highly carnivorous diets are not members of the order Carnivora. Cetaceans, for example, all eat other animals, but are paradoxically members of the almost exclusively plant-eating hooved mammals.
Carnivorous diet[edit]
Animals that depend solely on animal flesh for their nutrient requirements are called hypercarnivores or obligate carnivores, while those that also consume non-animal food are called mesocarnivores, or facultative carnivores, or omnivores (there are no clear distinctions).[2] A carnivore at the top of the food chain (adults not preyed upon by other animals) is termed an apex predator, regardless of whether it is an obligate or facultative carnivore.
 Members of the plant kingdom can live on meat too, such as the Venus flytrap, a carnivorous plant
Outside the animal kingdom, there are several genera containing carnivorous plants (predominantly insectivores) and several phyla containing carnivorous fungi (preying mostly on microscopic invertebrates, such as nematodes, amoebae, and springtails).
Subcategories of carnivory[edit]
Carnivores are sometimes characterized by their type of prey. For example, animals that eat mainly insects and similar invertebrates are called insectivores, while those that eat mainly fish are called piscivores.
Carnivores may alternatively be classified according to the percentage of meat in their diet. The diet of a hypercarnivore consists of more than 70% meat, that of a mesocarnivore 30 70%, and that of a hypocarnivore less than 30%, with the balance consisting of non-animal foods, such as fruits, other plant material, or fungi.
Omnivores also consume both animal and non-animal food, and apart from their more general definition, there is no clearly defined ratio of plant vs. animal material that distinguishes a facultative carnivore from an omnivore.[4]
Obligate carnivores[edit]
 The Bengal tiger's large canines and strong jaws reveal its place as an apex predator
 Lions are voracious carnivores; they require more than 7 kilograms of meat daily. A major component of their diet is the meat of large mammals, such as this buffalo.
Obligate or "true" carnivores are those whose diet requires nutrients found only in animal flesh. While obligate carnivores might be able to ingest small amounts of plant matter, they lack the necessary physiology required to fully digest it. Some obligate carnivorous mammals will ingest vegetation as an emetic, to self-induce vomiting the food that upset their stomachs.[5]
Obligate carnivores are diverse. The amphibian axolotl consumes mainly worms and larvae in its environment, but if necessary will consume algae. All felids, including the domestic cat, require a diet of primarily animal flesh and organs.[6] Specifically, cats have high protein requirements and their metabolisms appear unable to synthesize essential nutrients such as retinol, arginine, taurine, and arachidonic acid; thus, in nature, they must consume flesh to supply these nutrients.[7]
Characteristics of carnivores[edit]
Characteristics commonly associated with carnivores include strength, speed, and keen senses for hunting, as well as teeth and claws for capturing and tearing prey. However, some carnivores do not hunt and are scavengers, lacking the physical characteristics to bring down prey; in addition, most hunting carnivores will scavenge when the opportunity arises. Carnivores have comparatively short digestive systems, as they are not required to break down the tough cellulose found in plants.
Many hunting animals have evolved eyes facing forward, enabling depth perception. This is almost universal among mammalian predators, while most reptile and amphibian predators have eyes facing sideways.
Prehistory of carnivory[edit]
Main articles: Predation  Evolutionary history, and Evolutionary history of life
Predation (the eating of one living creature by another for nutrition) predates the rise of commonly recognized carnivores by hundreds of millions (perhaps billions) of years. Indeed: It began with single-celled organisms, before multicellular creatures, and so carnivory predates the clear distinction between plants and animals (herbivory / carnivory).
Proterozoic origin[edit]
The earliest predators were microbial organisms, which engulfed or grazed on others. Because the earliest fossil record is the poorest, these first predators could date back anywhere between 1 and over 2.7 Gya (billion years ago).[8]
The rise of eukaryotic cells at around 2.7 Gya, the rise of multicellular organisms at about 2 Gya, and the rise of mobile predators (around 600 Mya   2 Gya, probably around 1 Gya) have all been attributed to early predatory behavior,[8] and many very early remains show evidence of boreholes or other markings attributed to small predator species.[8]
Devonian land-predators[edit]
Among more familiar species, the first vertebrate carnivores were fish, and then amphibians that moved on to land. Early tetrapods were large amphibious piscivores.
The first tetrapods, or land-dwelling vertebrates, were piscivorous amphibians called labyrinthodonts. They gave rise to insectivorous vertebrates and, later, to predators of other tetrapods.[9]
Some scientists assert that Dimetrodon "was the first terrestrial vertebrate to develop the curved, serrated teeth that enable a predator to eat prey much larger than itself."[10] While amphibians continued to feed on fish and later insects, reptiles began exploring two new food types: tetrapods (carnivory) and then plants (herbivory). Carnivory was a natural transition from insectivory for medium and large tetrapods, requiring minimal adaptation; in contrast, a complex set of adaptations was necessary for feeding on highly fibrous plant materials.[9]
Mesozoic[edit]
In the Mesozoic, some theropod dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex are thought probably to have been obligate carnivores.
Though the theropods were the larger carnivores, several carnivorous mammal groups were already present. Most notable are the gobiconodontids, the triconodontid Jugulator, the deltatheroidans and Cimolestes. Many of these, such as Repenomamus, Jugulator and Cimolestes, were among the largest mammals in their faunal assemblages, capable of attacking dinosaurs.[11][12][13]
Cenozoic[edit]
In the early-to-mid-Cenozoic, the dominant predator forms were mammals: hyaenodonts, oxyaenids, entelodonts, ptolemaiidans, arctocyonids and mesonychians, representing a great diversity of eutherian carnivores in the northern continents and Africa. In South America, sparassodonts were dominant, while Australia saw the presence of several marsupial predators, such as the dasyuromorphs and thylacoleonids. From the Miocene to the present, the dominant carnivorous mammals have been carnivoramorphs.
Most carnivorous mammals, from dogs to deltatheridiums, share several dental adaptations, such as carnassialiforme teeth, long canines and even similar tooth replacement patterns.[14] Most aberrant are thylacoleonids, with a diprodontan dentition completely unlike that of any other mammal; and eutriconodonts like gobiconodontids and Jugulator, with a three-cusp anatomy which nevertheless functioned similarly to carnassials.[11][15]
See also[edit]
Mesocarnivore
Herbivore
References[edit]
^ Ullrey, Duane E. "Nutrient". Encyclopedia of Animal Science.
^ a b Ullrey, Duane E. "Carnivores". Encyclopedia of Animal Science. Mammals.
^ 
"What do pandas eat?". panda.org. World Wide Fund for Nature. Retrieved 6 December 2021.
^ Ullrey, Duane E. "Omnivores". Encyclopedia of Animal Science. Mammals.
^ 
Armstrong, P. Jane; Gross, Kathy L.; Becvarova, Iveta; Debraekeleer, Jacques (2010). "Introduction to Feeding Normal Cats" (PDF). Small Animal Clinical Nutrition. pp. 371 372. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-05-12. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Because grass is not digested within the cat's gastrointestinal (GI) tract, it acts as a local irritant and sometimes stimulates vomiting. Thus, grass eating may serve as a purgative to eliminate hair or other indigestible material.
^ 
Velegrand-Defretin, Veronique (1994). "Differences between cats and dogs: A nutritional view". Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 53 (1): 15 24. doi:10.1079/pns19940004. PMID 8029223.
^ 
Ullrey, D.E. (2004). "Carnivores".  In Pond, Wilson (ed.). Encyclopedia of Animal Science. Mammals. CRC Press. p. 591. ISBN 978-0-8247-5496-9. 
Ullrey, D.E. (2004). "Nutrient requirements: Carnivores". Encyclopedia of Animal Science. p. 670. ISBN 9780824754969.
^ a b c 
Bengtson, Stefan (October 2002). "Origins and early evolution of predation" (PDF). The Paleontological Society Papers. Cambridge University Press. 8: 289 318. doi:10.1017/S1089332600001133. ISSN 1089-3326. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2008-09-10.
^ a b 
Sahney, S.; Benton, M.J.; Falcon-Lang, H.J. (2010). "Rainforest collapse triggered Pennsylvanian tetrapod diversification in Euramerica". Geology. 38 (12): 1079 1082. Bibcode:2010Geo....38.1079S. doi:10.1130/G31182.1.
^ 
Foley, James A. (7 February 2014). "Carnivorous, pre-dinosaur predator was first to evolve steak knife-like teeth". Nature World News. Retrieved 3 May 2014.
^ a b 
Kielan-Jaworowska, Zofia; Cifelli, Richard L.; Luo, Zhe-Xi (2004). "Chapter 12: Metatherians". Mammals from the Age of Dinosaurs: Origins, evolution, and structure. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. pp. 425 262. ISBN 0-231-11918-6.
^ 
Fox, Richard C. (2015). "A revision of the late Cretaceous Paleocene eutherian mammal Cimolestes (Marsh, 1889)". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences. 52 (12): 1137 1149. Bibcode:2015CaJES..52.1137F. doi:10.1139/cjes-2015-0113.
^ 
Cifelli, Richard L.; Madsen, Scott K. (1998). "Triconodont mammals from the medial Cretaceous of Utah". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. 18 (2): 403 411. doi:10.1080/02724634.1998.10011068.
^ 
de Muizon, Christian; Lange-Badr , Brigitte (1997). "Carnivorous dental adaptations in tribosphenic mammals and phylogenetic reconstruction". Lethaia. 30 (4): 353 366. doi:10.1111/j.1502-3931.1997.tb00481.x.
^ 
"Animales carnivoros. Ejemplos, alimentacion y curiosidades". Que Come (in Spanish). Eating Encyclopedia. 2017-02-02. Archived from the original on 2019-02-24.
Further reading[edit]
Glen, Alistair & Dickman, Christopher, eds. (2014). Carnivores of Australia. Melbourne, AU: CSIRO Publishing. ISBN 978-0-643-10310-8.
vteInter-species biological interactions in ecology
Amensalism
Commensalism
Competition
Deception in animals
Inquilinism
Mimicry
Mutualism
Neutralism
Synnecrosis
Parasitism
Behavior-altering parasite
Brood parasitism
Host-parasite coevolution
Hyperparasite
Kleptoparasitism
Parasitic castration
Parasitoid
Predation
Carnivore
Intraguild
Symbiosis
Cleaning symbiosis
vteFeeding behavioursCarnivoresadult
Avivore
Egg predation
Hematophagy
Insectivore
Lepidophagy
Man-eater
Molluscivore
Mucophagy
Myrmecophagy
Ophiophagy
Piscivore
Spongivore
Vermivore
reproductive
Oophagy
Paedophagy
Placentophagy
Breastfeeding
Weaning
cannibalistic
Animal cannibalism
Human cannibalism
Self-cannibalism
Sexual cannibalism
Herbivores
Folivore
Florivore
Frugivore
Graminivore
Seed predation
Nectarivore
Mellivory
Palynivore
Xylophagy
Osteophagy
Cellular
Phagocytosis
Myzocytosis
Others
Microbivory
Bacterivore
Fungivore
Coprophagia
Detritivore
Geophagia
Omnivore
Planktivore
Saprophagy
Xenophagy
Lithotroph
Methods
Predation
Ambush predator
Apex predator
Egg predator
Intraguild predator
Pursuit predator
Aquatic predation
Lunge feeder
Pivot feeder
Ram feeder
Suction feeder
Bait balls
Bottom feeder
Feeding frenzy
Filter feeder
Browsing
Grazing
Forage
Hypercarnivore
Hypocarnivore
Mesocarnivore
Parasitism
Scavenger
Surplus killing
Trophallaxis
Predation
Antipredator adaptation
Carnivorous plant
Carnivorous fungus
Carnivorous protist
Fodder
Category:Eating behaviors
vteEcology: Modelling ecosystems: Trophic componentsGeneral
Abiotic component
Abiotic stress
Behaviour
Biogeochemical cycle
Biomass
Biotic component
Biotic stress
Carrying capacity
Competition
Ecosystem
Ecosystem ecology
Ecosystem model
Keystone species
List of feeding behaviours
Metabolic theory of ecology
Productivity
Resource
Producers
Autotrophs
Chemosynthesis
Chemotrophs
Foundation species
Mixotrophs
Myco-heterotrophy
Mycotroph
Organotrophs
Photoheterotrophs
Photosynthesis
Photosynthetic efficiency
Phototrophs
Primary nutritional groups
Primary production
Consumers
Apex predator
Bacterivore
Carnivores
Chemoorganotroph
Foraging
Generalist and specialist species
Intraguild predation
Herbivores
Heterotroph
Heterotrophic nutrition
Insectivore
Mesopredators
Mesopredator release hypothesis
Omnivores
Optimal foraging theory
Planktivore
Predation
Prey switching
Decomposers
Chemoorganoheterotrophy
Decomposition
Detritivores
Detritus
Microorganisms
Archaea
Bacteriophage
Lithoautotroph
Lithotrophy
Marine microorganisms
Microbial cooperation
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial intelligence
Microbial loop
Microbial mat
Microbial metabolism
Phage ecology
Food webs
Biomagnification
Ecological efficiency
Ecological pyramid
Energy flow
Food chain
Trophic level
Example webs
Lakes
Rivers
Soil
Tritrophic interactions in plant defense
Marine food webs
cold seeps
hydrothermal vents
intertidal
kelp forests
North Pacific Gyre
San Francisco Estuary
tide pool
Processes
Ascendency
Bioaccumulation
Cascade effect
Climax community
Competitive exclusion principle
Consumer resource interactions
Copiotrophs
Dominance
Ecological network
Ecological succession
Energy quality
Energy Systems Language
f-ratio
Feed conversion ratio
Feeding frenzy
Mesotrophic soil
Nutrient cycle
Oligotroph
Paradox of the plankton
Trophic cascade
Trophic mutualism
Trophic state index
Defense,counter
Animal coloration
Anti-predator adaptations
Camouflage
Deimatic behaviour
Herbivore adaptations to plant defense
Mimicry
Plant defense against herbivory
Predator avoidance in schooling fish
vteEcology: Modelling ecosystems: Other componentsPopulationecology
Abundance
Allee effect
Depensation
Ecological yield
Effective population size
Intraspecific competition
Logistic function
Malthusian growth model
Maximum sustainable yield
Overpopulation
Overexploitation
Population cycle
Population dynamics
Population modeling
Population size
Predator prey (Lotka Volterra) equations
Recruitment
Small population size
Stability
Resilience
Resistance
Species
Biodiversity
Density-dependent inhibition
Ecological effects of biodiversity
Ecological extinction
Endemic species
Flagship species
Gradient analysis
Indicator species
Introduced species
Invasive species
Latitudinal gradients in species diversity
Minimum viable population
Neutral theory
Occupancy abundance relationship
Population viability analysis
Priority effect
Rapoport's rule
Relative abundance distribution
Relative species abundance
Species diversity
Species homogeneity
Species richness
Species distribution
Species area curve
Umbrella species
Speciesinteraction
Antibiosis
Biological interaction
Commensalism
Community ecology
Ecological facilitation
Interspecific competition
Mutualism
Parasitism
Storage effect
Symbiosis
Spatialecology
Biogeography
Cross-boundary subsidy
Ecocline
Ecotone
Ecotype
Disturbance
Edge effects
Foster's rule
Habitat fragmentation
Ideal free distribution
Intermediate disturbance hypothesis
Insular biogeography
Land change modeling
Landscape ecology
Landscape epidemiology
Landscape limnology
Metapopulation
Patch dynamics
r/K selection theory
Resource selection function
Source sink dynamics
Niche
Ecological niche
Ecological trap
Ecosystem engineer
Environmental niche modelling
Guild
Habitat
marine habitats
Limiting similarity
Niche apportionment models
Niche construction
Niche differentiation
Ontogenetic niche shift
Othernetworks
Assembly rules
Bateman's principle
Bioluminescence
Ecological collapse
Ecological debt
Ecological deficit
Ecological energetics
Ecological indicator
Ecological threshold
Ecosystem diversity
Emergence
Extinction debt
Kleiber's law
Liebig's law of the minimum
Marginal value theorem
Thorson's rule
Xerosere
Other
Allometry
Alternative stable state
Balance of nature
Biological data visualization
Ecocline
Ecological economics
Ecological footprint
Ecological forecasting
Ecological humanities
Ecological stoichiometry
Ecopath
Ecosystem based fisheries
Endolith
Evolutionary ecology
Functional ecology
Industrial ecology
Macroecology
Microecosystem
Natural environment
Regime shift
Sexecology
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Theoretical ecology
List of ecology topics
Authority control National
Germany
Latvia
Czech Republic
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carnivore&oldid=1145345560"