Standard that defines a specific range of colors
 Comparison of some RGB and CMYK chromaticity gamuts on a CIE 1931 xy chromaticity diagram
 A comparison of the chromaticities enclosed by some color spaces.
A color space is a specific organization of colors. In combination with color profiling supported by various physical devices, it supports reproducible representations of color  whether such representation entails an analog or a digital representation. A color space may be arbitrary, i.e. with physically realized colors assigned to a set of physical color swatches with corresponding assigned color names (including discrete numbers in  for example  the Pantone collection), or structured with mathematical rigor (as with the NCS System, Adobe RGB and sRGB). A "color space" is a useful conceptual tool for understanding the color capabilities of a particular device or digital file. When trying to reproduce color on another device, color spaces can show whether shadow/highlight detail and color saturation can be retained, and by how much either will be compromised.
A "color model" is an abstract mathematical model describing the way colors can be represented as tuples of numbers (e.g. triples in RGB or quadruples in CMYK); however, a color model with no associated mapping function to an absolute color space is a more or less arbitrary color system with no connection to any globally understood system of color interpretation. Adding a specific mapping function between a color model and a reference color space establishes within the reference color space a definite "footprint", known as a gamut, and for a given color model, this defines a color space. For example, Adobe RGB and sRGB are two different absolute color spaces, both based on the RGB color model. When defining a color space, the usual reference standard is the CIELAB or CIEXYZ color spaces, which were specifically designed to encompass all colors the average human can see.
Since "color space" identifies a particular combination of the color model and the mapping function, the word is often used informally to identify a color model. However, even though identifying a color space automatically identifies the associated color model, this usage is incorrect in a strict sense. For example, although several specific color spaces are based on the RGB color model, there is no such thing as the singular RGB color space.
History[edit]
 Thomas Young and Hermann Helmholtz assumed that the eye's retina consists of three different kinds of light receptors for red, green and blue In 1802, Thomas Young postulated the existence of three types of photoreceptors (now known as cone cells) in the eye, each of which was sensitive to a particular range of visible light.[1] Hermann von Helmholtz developed the Young Helmholtz theory further in 1850: that the three types of cone photoreceptors could be classified as short-preferring (blue), middle-preferring (green), and long-preferring (red), according to their response to the wavelengths of light striking the retina. The relative strengths of the signals detected by the three types of cones are interpreted by the brain as a visible color. But it's not clear that they thought of colors as being points in color space.
The color-space concept was likely due to Hermann Grassmann, who developed it in two stages. First, he developed the idea of vector space, which allowed the algebraic representation of geometric concepts in n-dimensional space.[2] Fearnley-Sander (1979) describes Grassmann's foundation of linear algebra as follows:[2]
The definition of a linear space (vector space)... became widely known around 1920, when Hermann Weyl and others published formal definitions. In fact, such a definition had been given thirty years previously by Peano, who was thoroughly acquainted with Grassmann's mathematical work. Grassmann did not put down a formal definition the language was not available but there is no doubt that he had the concept.
With this conceptual background, in 1853, Grassmann published a theory of how colors mix; it and its three color laws are still taught, as Grassmann's law.[3] As noted first by Grassmann... the light set has the structure of a cone in the infinite-dimensional linear space. As a result, a quotient set (with respect to metamerism) of the light cone inherits the conical structure, which allows color to be represented as a convex cone in the 3- D linear space, which is referred to as the color cone.[4]
Examples[edit]
 A comparison of CMYK and RGB color models. This image demonstrates the difference between how colors will look on a computer monitor (RGB) compared to how they will reproduce in a CMYK print process.
Colors can be created in printing with color spaces based on the CMYK color model, using the subtractive primary colors of pigment (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black). To create a three-dimensional representation of a given color space, we can assign the amount of magenta color to the representation's X axis, the amount of cyan to its Y axis, and the amount of yellow to its Z axis. The resulting 3-D space provides a unique position for every possible color that can be created by combining those three pigments.
Colors can be created on computer monitors with color spaces based on the RGB color model, using the additive primary colors (red, green, and blue). A three-dimensional representation would assign each of the three colors to the X, Y, and Z axes. Note that colors generated on a given monitor will be limited by the reproduction medium, such as the phosphor (in a CRT monitor) or filters and backlight (LCD monitor).
Another way of creating colors on a monitor is with an HSL or HSV color model, based on hue, saturation, brightness (value/brightness). With such a model, the variables are assigned to cylindrical coordinates.
Many color spaces can be represented as three-dimensional values in this manner, but some have more, or fewer dimensions, and some, such as Pantone, cannot be represented in this way at all.
Conversion[edit]
Main article: Color translation
Color space conversion is the translation of the representation of a color from one basis to another. This typically occurs in the context of converting an image that is represented in one color space to another color space, the goal being to make the translated image look as similar as possible to the original.
RGB density[edit]
The RGB color model is implemented in different ways, depending on the capabilities of the system used. The most common incarnation in general use as of 2021[update] is the 24-bit implementation, with 8 bits, or 256 discrete levels of color per channel.[5] Any color space based on such a 24-bit RGB model is thus limited to a range of 256 256 256   16.7 million colors. Some implementations use 16 bits per component for 48 bits total, resulting in the same gamut with a larger number of distinct colors. This is especially important when working with wide-gamut color spaces (where most of the more common colors are located relatively close together), or when a large number of digital filtering algorithms are used consecutively. The same principle applies for any color space based on the same color model, but implemented at different bit depths.
Lists[edit]
Main article: List of color spaces and their uses
CIE 1931 XYZ color space was one of the first attempts to produce a color space based on measurements of human color perception (earlier efforts were by James Clerk Maxwell, K nig & Dieterici, and Abney at Imperial College)[6] and it is the basis for almost all other color spaces. The CIERGB color space is a linearly-related companion of CIE XYZ. Additional derivatives of CIE XYZ include the CIELUV, CIEUVW, and CIELAB.
Generic[edit]
Main article: Color model
 Additive color mixing: Three overlapping light bulbs in a vacuum, adding together to create white.
 Subtractive color mixing: Three splotches of paint on white paper, subtracting together to turn the paper black.
RGB uses additive color mixing, because it describes what kind of light needs to be emitted to produce a given color. RGB stores individual values for red, green and blue. RGBA is RGB with an additional channel, alpha, to indicate transparency. Common color spaces based on the RGB model include sRGB, Adobe RGB, ProPhoto RGB, scRGB, and CIE RGB.
CMYK uses subtractive color mixing used in the printing process, because it describes what kind of inks need to be applied so the light reflected from the substrate and through the inks produces a given color. One starts with a white substrate (canvas, page, etc.), and uses ink to subtract color from white to create an image. CMYK stores ink values for cyan, magenta, yellow and black. There are many CMYK color spaces for different sets of inks, substrates, and press characteristics (which change the dot gain or transfer function for each ink and thus change the appearance).
YIQ was formerly used in NTSC (North America, Japan and elsewhere) television broadcasts for historical reasons. This system stores a luma value roughly analogous to (and sometimes incorrectly identified as)[7][8] luminance, along with two chroma values as approximate representations of the relative amounts of blue and red in the color. It is similar to the YUV scheme used in most video capture systems[9] and in PAL (Australia, Europe, except France, which uses SECAM) television, except that the YIQ color space is rotated 33  with respect to the YUV color space and the color axes are swapped. The YDbDr scheme used by SECAM television is rotated in another way. 
YPbPr is a scaled version of YUV. It is most commonly seen in its digital form, YCbCr, used widely in video and image compression schemes such as MPEG and JPEG.
xvYCC is a new international digital video color space standard published by the IEC (IEC 61966-2-4). It is based on the ITU BT.601 and BT.709 standards but extends the gamut beyond the R/G/B primaries specified in those standards.
HSV (hue, saturation, value), also known as HSB (hue, saturation, brightness) is often used by artists because it is often more natural to think about a color in terms of hue and saturation than in terms of additive or subtractive color components. HSV is a transformation of an RGB color space, and its components and colorimetry are relative to the RGB color space from which it was derived.
HSL (hue, saturation, lightness/luminance), also known as HLS or HSI (hue, saturation, intensity) is quite similar to HSV, with "lightness" replacing "brightness". The difference is that the brightness of a pure color is equal to the brightness of white, while the lightness of a pure color is equal to the lightness of a medium gray.
Commercial[edit]
Munsell color system
Pantone Matching System (PMS)
Natural Color System (NCS)
Special-purpose[edit]
The RG Chromaticity space is used in computer vision applications. It shows the color of light (red, yellow, green etc.), but not its intensity (dark, bright).
The TSL color space (Tint, Saturation and Luminance) is used in face detection.
Obsolete[edit]
Early color spaces had two components. They largely ignored blue light because the added complexity of a 3-component process provided only a marginal increase in fidelity when compared to the jump from monochrome to 2-component color.
RG for early Technicolor film
RGK  for early color printing
Absolute color space[edit]
In color science, there are two meanings of the term absolute color space:
A color space in which the perceptual difference between colors is directly related to distances between colors as represented by points in the color space, i.e. a uniform color space.[10][11]
A color space in which colors are unambiguous, that is, where the interpretations of colors in the space are colorimetrically defined without reference to external factors.[12][13]
In this article, we concentrate on the second definition.
CIEXYZ, sRGB, and ICtCp are examples of absolute color spaces, as opposed to a generic RGB color space.
A non-absolute color space can be made absolute by defining its relationship to absolute colorimetric quantities. For instance, if the red, green, and blue colors in a monitor are measured exactly, together with other properties of the monitor, then RGB values on that monitor can be considered as absolute. The CIE 1976 L*, a*, b* color space is sometimes referred to as absolute, though it also needs a white point specification to make it so.[14]
A popular way to make a color space like RGB into an absolute color is to define an ICC profile, which contains the attributes of the RGB. This is not the only way to express an absolute color, but it is the standard in many industries. RGB colors defined by widely accepted profiles include sRGB and Adobe RGB. The process of adding an ICC profile to a graphic or document is sometimes called tagging or embedding; tagging, therefore, marks the absolute meaning of colors in that graphic or document.
Conversion errors[edit]
Main article: Color translation
A color in one absolute color space can be converted into another absolute color space, and back again, in general; however, some color spaces may have gamut limitations, and converting colors that lie outside that gamut will not produce correct results. There are also likely to be rounding errors, especially if the popular range of only 256 distinct values per component (8-bit color) is used.
One part of the definition of an absolute color space is the viewing conditions. The same color, viewed under different natural or artificial lighting conditions, will look different. Those involved professionally with color matching may use viewing rooms, lit by standardized lighting.
Occasionally, there are precise rules for converting between non-absolute color spaces. For example, HSL and HSV spaces are defined as mappings of RGB. Both are non-absolute, but the conversion between them should maintain the same color. However, in general, converting between two non-absolute color spaces (for example, RGB to CMYK) or between absolute and non-absolute color spaces (for example, RGB to L*a*b*) is almost a meaningless concept.
Arbitrary spaces[edit]
A different method of defining absolute color spaces is familiar to many consumers as the swatch card, used to select paint, fabrics, and the like. This is a way of agreeing a color between two parties. A more standardized method of defining absolute colors is the Pantone Matching System, a proprietary system that includes swatch cards and recipes that commercial printers can use to make inks that are a particular color.
See also[edit]
Color model  Mathematical model describing colors as tuples of numbers
List of color spaces and their uses
Color theory  Principles around the use of color in visual arts
Lists of colors
Primary color  Sets of colors that can be mixed to produce gamut of colors
References[edit]
^ Young, T. (1802). "Bakerian Lecture: On the Theory of Light and Colours". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 92: 12 48. doi:10.1098/rstl.1802.0004.
^ a b Hermann Grassmann and the Creation of Linear Algebra
^ Grassmann H (1853). "Zur Theorie der Farbenmischung". Annalen der Physik und Chemie. 89 (5): 69 84. Bibcode:1853AnP...165...69G. doi:10.1002/andp.18531650505.
^ Logvinenko A. D. (2015). "The geometric structure of color". Journal of Vision. 15 (1): 16. doi:10.1167/15.1.16. PMID 25589300.
^ Kyrnin, Mark (2021-08-26). "Why You Need to Know What Color Bit Depth Your Display Supports". Lifewire. Retrieved 2022-07-04.
^ William David Wright, 50 years of the 1931 CIE Standard Observer. Die Farbe, 29:4/6 (1981).
^ Charles Poynton, "YUV and 'luminance' considered harmful: a plea for precise terminology in video," online,  author-edited version of Appendix A of Charles Poynton, Digital Video and HDTV: Algorithms and Interfaces, Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. online
^ Charles Poynton, Constant Luminance, 2004
^ Dean Anderson. "Color Spaces in Frame Grabbers: RGB vs. YUV". Archived from the original on 2008-07-26. Retrieved 2008-04-08.
^ Hans G. V lz (2001). Industrial Color Testing: Fundamentals and Techniques. Wiley-VCH. ISBN 3-527-30436-3.
^ Gunter Buxbaum; Gerhard Pfaff (2005). Industrial Inorganic Pigments. Wiley-VCH. ISBN 3-527-30363-4.
^ Jonathan B. Knudsen (1999). Java 2D Graphics. O'Reilly. p. 172. ISBN 1-56592-484-3. absolute color space.
^ Bernice Ellen Rogowitz; Thrasyvoulos N Pappas; Scott J Daly (2007). Human Vision and Electronic Imaging XII. SPIE. ISBN 978-0-8194-6605-1.
^ Yud-Ren Chen; George E. Meyer; Shu-I. Tu (2005). Optical Sensors and Sensing Systems for Natural Resources and Food Safety and Quality. SPIE. ISBN 0-8194-6020-6.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Color spaces.
Color FAQ, Charles Poynton
Color Science, Dan Bruton
Color Spaces, Rolf G. Kuehni (October 2003)
Colour spaces   perceptual, historical and applicational background, Marko Tkal i  (2003)
Color formats for image and video processing   Color conversion between RGB, YUV, YCbCr and YPbPr.
C library of SSE-optimised color format conversions.
Konica Minolta Sensing: Precise Color Communication
vteColor space
List of color spaces
Color models
CAM
CIECAM02
iCAM
CIE
XYZ (1931)
RGB (1931)
YUV (1960)
UVW (1964)
CIELAB (1976)
CIELUV (1976)
CAM (2002)
RGB
RGB color spaces
sRGB
rg chromaticity
Adobe
Wide-gamut
ProPhoto
scRGB
DCI-P3
Rec. 601
SMPTE 240M/"C"
Rec. 709
Rec. 2020
Rec. 2100
YUV
YUV
PAL
YDbDr
SECAM
PAL-N
YIQ
NTSC
YCbCr
Rec. 601
Rec. 709
Rec. 2020
Rec. 2100
ICtCp
Rec. 2100
YPbPr
MAC
xvYCC
YCoCg
Other
CcMmYK
CMYK
Coloroid
LMS
Hexachrome
HSL, HSV
HCL
Imaginary color
OSA-UCS
PCCS
RG
RYB
HWB
YJK
TSL
Color systemsand standards
ACES
ANPA
Colour Index International
CI list of dyes
DIC
Federal Standard 595
HKS
ICC profile
ISCC NBS
Munsell
NCS
Ostwald
Pantone
RAL
list
For the vision capacities of organisms or machines, see  Color vision.
vteColor topicsColor scienceColor physics
Electromagnetic spectrum
Light
Rainbow
Visible
Spectral colors
Chromophore
Structural coloration
Animal coloration
Color of chemicals
Water
Spectral power distribution
Colorimetry
Color perception
Metamerism
Color blindness
Achromatopsia
Dichromacy
Evolution of color vision
Color vision test
Tetrachromacy
Opponent process
Afterimage
Unique hues
Impossible colors
Chromesthesia
Sonochromatism
Color task
Color code
Color constancy
Color temperature
The dress
Color psychology
Color symbolism
Color preferences
L scher color test
Kruithof curve
Political color
National colors
Chromophobia
Chromotherapy
Color reproduction
Color photography
Color balance
Color cast
Digital image processing
Color management
Color printing
Multi-primary color display
Quattron
Color model
additive
RGB
subtractive
CMYK
Color space
Color mapping
ColorphilosophyColor scheme
Color tool
Monochromatic colors
Complementary colors
Analogous colors
Achromatic colors (Neutral)
Polychromatic colors
Light-on-dark
Web colors
Tinctures in heraldry
Color theory
Color mixing
Primary color
Secondary color
Tertiary color
Chromaticity
Color solid
Color wheel
Color triangle
Color analysis (art)
Color realism (art style)
On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer)
Theory of Colours (Goethe)
Color termsBasic terms
Blue
Green
Red
Yellow
Pink
Purple
Orange
Black
Gray
White
Brown
Cultural differences
Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate
Blue green distinction in language
Color history
Blue in culture
Color in Chinese culture
Traditional colors of Japan
Human skin color
Color dimensions
Hue
Dichromatism
Colorfulness
Pastel colors
Luminance
Lightness
Darkness
Brightness
Iridescence
Fluorescence
Grayscale
Tint, shade and tone
Colororganizations
Pantone
Color Marketing Group
Color Association of the United States
International Colour Authority
International Commission on Illumination (CIE)
International Color Consortium
International Colour Association
Lists
List of colors: A F
List of colors: G M
List of colors: N Z
List of colors (compact)
List of colors by shade
List of color palettes
List of color spaces
List of Crayola crayon colors
history
Color chart
List of RAL colors
List of web colors
Shades of:
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Cyan
Blue
Violet
Purple
Magenta
Pink
Brown
White
Gray
Black
Related
Vision
Qualia
Lighting
 Category
 Index
vtePhotographyEquipment
Camera
light-field
digital
field
instant
pinhole
press
rangefinder
SLR
still
TLR
toy
view
Darkroom
enlarger
safelight
Film
base
format
holder
stock
available films
discontinued films
Filter
Flash
beauty dish
cucoloris
gobo
hot shoe
lens hood
monolight
Reflector
snoot
Softbox
Lens
Prime lens
Zoom lens
Wide-angle lens
Telephoto lens
Manufacturers
Monopod
Movie projector
Slide projector
Tripod
head
Zone plate
Terminology
35 mm equivalent focal length
Angle of view
Aperture
Backscatter
Black and white
Chromatic aberration
Circle of confusion
Color balance
Color temperature
Depth of field
Depth of focus
Exposure
Exposure compensation
Exposure value
Zebra patterning
F-number
Film format
Large
Medium
Film speed
Focal length
Guide number
Hyperfocal distance
Lens flare
Metering mode
Perspective distortion
Photograph
Photographer
Photographic printing
Photographic processes
Reciprocity
Red-eye effect
Science of photography
Shutter speed
Sync
Zone System
Genres
Abstract
Aerial
Aircraft
Architectural
Astrophotography
Banquet
Candid
Conceptual
Conservation
Cloudscape
Documentary
Ethnographic
Erotic
Fashion
Fine-art
Fire
Forensic
Glamour
High-speed
Landscape
Nature
Neues Sehen
Nude
Photojournalism
Pictorialism
Pornography
Portrait
Post-mortem
Selfie
Social documentary
Sports
Still life
Stock
Straight photography
Street
Toy camera
Underwater
Vernacular
Wedding
Wildlife
Techniques
Afocal
Bokeh
Brenizer
Burst mode
Contre-jour
Cyanotype
ETTR
Fill flash
Fireworks
Harris shutter
High-speed
Holography
Infrared
Intentional camera movement
Kirlian
Kite aerial
Long-exposure
Macro
Mordan age
Multiple exposure
Multi-exposure HDR capture
Night
Panning
Panoramic
Photogram
Print toning
Redscale
Rephotography
Rollout
Scanography
Schlieren photography
Sabattier effect
Slow motion
Stereoscopy
Stopping down
Strip
Slit-scan
Sun printing
Tilt shift
Miniature faking
Time-lapse
Ultraviolet
Vignetting
Xerography
Composition
Diagonal method
Framing
Headroom
Lead room
Rule of thirds
Simplicity
Golden triangle (composition)
History
Timeline of photography technology
Analog photography
Autochrome Lumi re
Box camera
Calotype
Camera obscura
Daguerreotype
Dufaycolor
Heliography
Painted photography backdrops
Photography and the law
Glass plate
Visual arts
Regional
Albania
Bangladesh
Canada
China
Denmark
Greece
India
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Norway
Philippines
Serbia
Slovenia
Sudan
Taiwan
Turkey
Ukraine
United States
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Digital photography
Digital camera
D-SLR
comparison
MILC
camera back
Digiscoping
Comparison of digital and film photography
Film scanner
Image sensor
CMOS APS
CCD
Three-CCD camera
Foveon X3 sensor
Image sharing
Pixel
Color photography
Color
Print film
Chromogenic print
Reversal film
Color management
color space
primary color
CMYK color model
RGB color model
Photographicprocessing
Bleach bypass
C-41 process
Cross processing
Developer
Digital image processing
Dye coupler
E-6 process
Fixer
Gelatin silver process
Gum printing
Instant film
K-14 process
Print permanence
Push processing
Stop bath
Lists
Most expensive photographs
Museums devoted to one photographer
Photographs considered the most important
Photographers
Norwegian
Polish
street
women
Related
Conservation and restoration of photographs
film
photographic plates
 Category
 Outline
vteData compression methodsLosslessEntropy type
Arithmetic
Asymmetric numeral systems
Golomb
Huffman
Adaptive
Canonical
Modified
Range
Shannon
Shannon Fano
Shannon Fano Elias
Tunstall
Unary
Universal
Exp-Golomb
Fibonacci
Gamma
Levenshtein
Dictionary type
Byte pair encoding
Lempel Ziv
842
Brotli
Deflate
LZ4
LZFSE
LZJB
LZMA
LZO
LZRW
LZS
LZSS
LZW
LZWL
LZX
Snappy
Zstandard
Other types
BWT
CTW
Delta
Incremental
DMC
DPCM
LDCT
MTF
PAQ
PPM
RLE
LossyTransform type
Discrete cosine transform
DCT
MDCT
DST
FFT
Wavelet
Daubechies
DWT
SPIHT
Predictive type
DPCM
ADPCM
LPC
ACELP
CELP
LAR
LSP
WLPC
Motion
Compensation
Estimation
Vector
Psychoacoustic
AudioConcepts
Bit rate
ABR
CBR
VBR
Companding
Convolution
Dynamic range
Latency
Nyquist Shannon theorem
Sampling
Sound quality
Speech coding
Sub-band coding
Codec parts
A-law
 -law
DPCM
ADPCM
DM
FT
FFT
LPC
ACELP
CELP
LAR
LSP
WLPC
MDCT
Psychoacoustic model
ImageConcepts
Chroma subsampling
Coding tree unit
Color space
Compression artifact
Image resolution
Macroblock
Pixel
PSNR
Quantization
Standard test image
Methods
Chain code
DCT
Deflate
Fractal
KLT
LP
RLE
Wavelet
Daubechies
DWT
EZW
SPIHT
VideoConcepts
Bit rate
ABR
CBR
VBR
Display resolution
Frame
Frame rate
Frame types
Interlace
Video characteristics
Video quality
Codec parts
DCT
DPCM
Deblocking filter
Lapped transform
Motion
Compensation
Estimation
Vector
Wavelet
Daubechies
DWT
Theory
Entropy
Grammar
Information theory
Timeline
Kolmogorov complexity
Quantization
Rate distortion
Redundancy
 Compression formats
 Compression software (codecs)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color_space&oldid=1147547084"