Fictional intelligence agency in the Marvel Comics Universe
This article is about the fictional agency. For other uses, see S.H.I.E.L.D. (disambiguation).
S.H.I.E.L.D.The organization's logo, as shown on  the issue of Secret War: From the Files of Nick Fury #1Publication informationPublisherMarvel ComicsFirst appearanceStrange Tales #135(August 1965)Created byStan Lee (writer)Jack Kirby (artist)In-story informationType of organizationIntelligence agencySpecial law enforcementBase(s)The HelicarrierTriskelionRosterSee:  List of S.H.I.E.L.D. members
S.H.I.E.L.D. is a fictional espionage, special law enforcement, and counter-terrorism agency appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.[1] Created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, the agency first appeared in Strange Tales #135 (August 1965). It often deals with paranormal and superhuman threats to international security.
The acronym originally stood for Supreme Headquarters, International Espionage and Law-Enforcement Division.[2] It was changed in 1991 to Strategic Hazard Intervention Espionage Logistics Directorate. Within the various films set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, as well as multiple animated and live-action television series, the backronym stands for Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement and Logistics Division.[3]
The organization has heavily appeared in media adaptations as well as films and shows that take place in the Marvel Cinematic Universe.
Publication history[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D.'s introduction in the Strange Tales featuring "Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D." occurred during a trend for action series about secret international intelligence agencies with catchy acronyms, such as television's The Man from U.N.C.L.E., which Stan Lee stated in a 2014 interview, was the basis for him to create the organization.[4] Colonel Fury (initially the lead character of Marvel Comics' World War II series Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos) was reimagined as a slightly older character with an eyepatch (which he lacked in his wartime adventures) and appointed head of the organization. Some characters from the Sgt. Fury series reappeared as agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., most notably Timothy "Dum-Dum" Dugan, Fury's bowler hat-wearing aide-de-camp.[4][5]
Its most persistent enemy is Hydra, a criminal organization founded (after some retcon) by Baron Wolfgang von Strucker.
 Strange Tales #135 (August 1965), the debut of S.H.I.E.L.D.. Cover art by Jack Kirby and Frank Giacoia.
S.H.I.E.L.D. was presented as an extant, full-blown entity in its first appearance, with Tony Stark in charge of the Special Weaponry section and Fury seeing "some of the most famous joes from every nation" (then "half the leaders of the free world" a page later) at a meeting of the Supreme International Council.[6] Much was revealed over the years to fill in its labyrinthine organizational history. Stan Lee wrote each story, abetted by artist Kirby's co-plotting or full plotting, through Strange Tales #152 (January 1967), except for two issues, one scripted by Kirby himself (#148) and one by Dennis O'Neil (#149). Following an issue scripted by Roy Thomas (#153), and one co-written by Thomas and new series artist Jim Steranko, came the sole-writer debut of soon-to-become industry legend Steranko who had begun on the feature as a penciller-inker of Kirby layouts in #151 (December 1966), taken over the every-other-issue "Nick Fury" cover art with #153 two months later, and full writing with #155 (April 1967).
Steranko quickly established the feature as one of comics history's most groundbreaking, innovative, and acclaimed. Ron Goulart wrote,
[E]ven the dullest of readers could sense that something new was happening.   Which each passing issue Steranko's efforts became more and more innovative. Entire pages would be devoted to photocollages of drawings [that] ignored panel boundaries and instead worked together on planes of depth. The first pages   became incredible production numbers similar in design to the San Francisco rock concert poster of the period.[7]
Larry Hama said Steranko "combined the figurative dynamism of Jack Kirby with modern design concepts. The graphic influences of Peter Max, Op Art, and Andy Warhol were embedded into the design of the pages   and the pages were designed as a whole, not just as a series of panels. All this, executed in a crisp, hard-edged style, seething with drama and anatomical tension".[8]
The series won 1967 and 1968 Alley Awards and was inducted in the latter year to the awards' Hall of Fame. Steranko himself was inducted into the Comic Book Hall of Fame in 2006. The 12-page feature ran through Strange Tales #168 (sharing that "split book" with the occult feature "Doctor Strange" each issue), after which it was spun off onto its own series of the same title, running 15 issues (June 1968 Nov. 1969), followed by three all-reprint issues beginning a year later (Nov. 1970 March 1971). Steranko wrote and drew issues #1 3 and #5, and drew the covers of #1 7.
New S.H.I.E.L.D. stories would not appear for nearly two decades after the first solo title. A six-issue miniseries, Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D. (June November 1988) was followed by Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.  (vol. 2). This second series lasted 47 issues (September 1989 May 1993); its pivotal story arc was "the Deltite Affair", in which many S.H.I.E.L.D. agents were replaced with Life Model Decoy androids in a takeover attempt.
A year after that series ended, the one-shot Fury (May 1994) retconned the events of those previous two series, recasting them as a series of staged events designed to distract Fury from the resurrection plans of Hydra head von Strucker. The following year, writer Howard Chaykin and penciler Corky Lehmkuhl produced the four-issue miniseries Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D. (April July 1995). Various publications have additionally focused on Nick Fury's solo adventures, such as the graphic novels and one-shots Wolverine/Nick Fury: The Scorpio Connection (1989), Wolverine/Nick Fury: Scorpio Rising (October 1994), Fury/Black Widow: Death Duty and Captain America and Nick Fury: Blood Truce (both February 1995), and Captain America and Nick Fury: The Otherworld War (October 2001).[9]
Titles[edit]
See also: List of Nick Fury titles
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. (comic book)
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book series published by Marvel Comics, that first premiered in Strange Tales and later became several ongoing series.
Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D.
Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book miniseries published by Marvel Comics, that first premiered in 1988.
Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book miniseries published by Marvel Comics, that first premiered in 1995.
Kitty Pryde, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Kitty Pryde, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Kitty Pryde, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book series published by Marvel Comics, that first premiered in 1997.
S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: S.H.I.E.L.D. (comic book)
S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book title published by Marvel Comics. The first series premiered with a first issue cover dated June 2010. It details the secret history of the occult organization S.H.I.E.L.D. aka "The Brotherhood of the Shield". The series is written by Jonathan Hickman and drawn by Dustin Weaver.[10][11][12] The second series premiered with a first issue cover dated December 2014. Loosely based on the TV series Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., it was written by Mark Waid. It was superseded by Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Howling Commandos of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Howling Commandos of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Howling Commandos of S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book series published by Marvel Comics, premiering with a first issue cover dated in 2015.
S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th anniversary[edit]
To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the organization's creation, Marvel in 2015 released five one-shots each focusing on different aspects of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Agent Carter: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary, The Cavalry: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary, Fury: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary, Mockingbird: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary and Quake: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary.
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Main article: Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (comic book)
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is a comic book series published by Marvel Comics, premiering with a first issue cover dated in 2016.
Fictional organizational history[edit]
Usually led by Nick Fury as executive director (although he reports to a twelve-member council, whose identities even he does not know), this organization often operates as much as a covert agency as a quasi-military one, initially depicted as affiliated with the United States government. Later, S.H.I.E.L.D. was depicted as under the jurisdiction of the United Nations, with vast technological resources at its disposal, with U.N. General Assembly Resolutions and legislation passed in signatory nations aiding many of their operations.[13][14] However, S.H.I.E.L.D. has been inconsistently portrayed as under U.S., rather than U.N., control - for instance, in Astonishing X-Men (vol. 3) #3, Nick Fury explains S.H.I.E.L.D.'s inaction during an incident of genocide by stating that it did not occur on American soil.[15]
S.H.I.E.L.D. started off as a top-secret international organization (Fury was unaware of them when he was in the CIA) with a Supreme International Council made up of top officials and minds from across the world, including Tony Stark.[6] Its first director was Rick Stoner, former head of the CIA, but he was quickly assassinated by Hydra,[16] and the President of the United States recommended Nick Fury take the role.[17] Later on, the ultimate authority of S.H.I.E.L.D. is revealed to be a cabal of 12 mysterious men and women who give Fury his orders and operational structure, leaving Fury to manage the actual implementation of these orders and stratagems.[18]
One of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s unique technological innovations, the LMD (Life Model Decoy)   an extremely lifelike android used to replace people in imminent danger of being killed   was the basis for two major upheavals. First, the supervillain Scorpio stole the technology and used it to create the second team of villains called the Zodiac. Later, some LMDs known as the Deltites achieved sentience and infiltrated S.H.I.E.L.D. and Hydra both, replacing key members until Fury defeated them. This led to the disbanding of the original organization and its replacement by a new task force with the same acronym under the control of the U.N. ("Strategic Hazard Intervention, Espionage and Logistics Directorate") The new S.H.I.E.L.D. was meant to be more streamlined so Fury could personally oversee it,[19][20] but would soon become a large organization again.
In the wake of a disastrous unauthorized mission in Latveria, Fury effectively resigned as executive director, with international warrants out for his arrest. His first successor was not one of his closer associates but a relatively unknown newcomer to the S.H.I.E.L.D. hierarchy, Maria Hill. A transcript of a conversation between Hill and the President of the United States[21] revealed she was chosen for the post by United Nations consensus to keep Fury loyalists out of the job and to keep relations with the superhero community to a minimum.[volume & issue needed] The President also expected Hill   an American   to be loyal first to the U.S., despite S.H.I.E.L.D. being a U.N.-chartered organization.[volume & issue needed]
The passage of the United States Superhuman Registration Act and the subsequent superhero "Civil War" created an additional political and ethical irritant between S.H.I.E.L.D. and the superhuman community, with S.H.I.E.L.D. tasked to lead enforcement and to take on registered superheroes as operatives.[22]
Toward the end of the conflict, Hill concluded she had been made director with the intent that she fails at the job, and she proposes to Tony Stark that he assume the post himself, with her as deputy.[citation needed] Stark accepts the appointment as director upon the conclusion of the superhuman Civil War and undertakes a series of initiatives, including the construction of a new gold-and-red Helicarrier in the motif of his Iron Man armor designs, the introduction of a daycare center in the Helicarrier, and an employee suggestion-box. While accused of treating S.H.I.E.L.D. as a Stark Industries subsidiary, he succeeded in streamlining the organization and raising morale.[23] S.H.I.E.L.D. fought a wave of global superhuman terrorism and was manipulated into two international incidents that almost saw Director Stark arrested until they revealed the Mandarin to be behind it and stopped him from committing genocide with an Extremis pathogen.
At the start of the Secret Invasion by the extraterrestrial shape-shifting race the Skrulls, the Helicarrier is disabled by a Skrull virus and left floating and disabled in the Bermuda Triangle.[24] The Skrulls by this point have already replaced a large number of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents, including the high-ranking Timothy "Dum-Dum" Dugan.[25] After the invasion is repelled, the President of the United States decides to dissolve S.H.I.E.L.D.,[26] and has it, the Fifty State Initiative, and the Avengers replaced by the Thunderbolts Initiative, which is placed under the supervision of Norman Osborn.[27]
Osborn uses the opportunity to transform S.H.I.E.L.D. into a new organization called "H.A.M.M.E.R.", formed by loyal agents of the Thunderbolts Initiative as well as former agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and Hydra.[28] The Thunderbolts are officially disbanded in the process as well and turned into a black-ops force that answers only to Osborn. Meanwhile, H.A.M.M.E.R. also operates alongside the newest, and only government-sponsored Avengers team, the Dark Avengers.[29]
After the Invasion, Fury discovers that S.H.I.E.L.D. itself had been under the control of the terrorist organization Hydra ostensibly from its very beginning.[26]
After the conclusion of the Secret Warriors ongoing series, S.H.I.E.L.D. was reformed with Fury leaving it under the control of its new director, Daisy Johnson.[30] The new S.H.I.E.L.D. subsequently saved US Army Ranger Marcus Johnson from mercenaries hired by the Leviathan. When he discovered he was the son of Nick Fury, Marcus (whose birth name was Nick Fury Jr.) and his army friend Phil Coulson joined S.H.I.E.L.D.[31] Maria Hill and the rest of S.H.I.E.L.D. later formed their incarnation of the Secret Avengers.[32]
During the Avengers: Standoff! storyline, S.H.I.E.L.D. establishes a gated community called Pleasant Hills to serve as a supervillain prison. Using technology derived from the Cosmic Cube called Kobik, S.H.I.E.L.D. converts the inmates into the mild-mannered residents of Pleasant Hills.[33]
Following the "Avengers: Standoff" storyline, the organization is given broad new powers under the S.H.I.E.L.D. Act,[34] including a clause that allows the Director of S.H.I.E.L.D. to gain control of the United States in the event of an emergency.  Soon after Steve Rogers is appointed the new director of S.H.I.E.L.D.,[35] however during the Secret Empire story line we learn that Steve Rogers was replaced with a Hydra sleeper agent who uses the S.H.I.E.L.D. Act to become dictator of the United States.[36] After he is defeated, S.H.I.E.L.D. is once again disbanded.[37]
S.H.I.E.L.D. has remained out of action since its disbandment,[38] though individual members have been active.[citation needed]  Its assets were divided among various U.S. government agencies such as a War Machine armor given to the Air Force and later stolen by Nick Fury Jr. and Frank Castle.[39]
Organizational structure and procedure[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Over the decades, various writers have depicted S.H.I.E.L.D.'s organizational structure in several different ways. The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe (first edition) describes an eight-level ranking structure (technician, administrator, field agent, regional officer, special officer, regional director, special director, executive director), although providing almost no detail on other aspects of the Directorate's internal makeup. Years later, the miniseries Agents of Atlas mentioned a position of "sub-director", and seemed to indicate that the administrative department of S.H.I.E.L.D. it itself referred to simply as "Directorate".
Most of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s agents are normal humans. At one point the organization attempted to set up a team of superhuman agents, composed of Marvel Man (the future Quasar), Texas Twister, Blue Streak and the Vamp but the latter two were secretly agents of the criminal organization The Corporation, and the team broke apart before it had its first official mission. A second-team organized years later also lasted only a short while.
S.H.I.E.L.D. does employ some superhumans, including in its Psi-Division, composed of telepathic agents who deal with like menaces. S.H.I.E.L.D. also obtains help from independent heroes when their special abilities are needed. It has also accepted some superheroes and supervillains as members, but not in a separate unit. (See "Membership")
Its headquarters is the Helicarrier, a massive flying aircraft carrier kept airborne at all times and, among other things, containing a squadron of jet fighters and housing an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). In addition, S.H.I.E.L.D. maintains strong ties to the superhero community, especially Captain America, the Avengers, and the Fantastic Four, and often calls upon that community for aid on particular missions.
In the 2000s, depictions of S.H.I.E.L.D. imply a hierarchy of security clearance levels used either in place of or alongside, the previously described rank structure. The security-clearance hierarchy operates on a scale ranging from "Level One", the lowest, to "Level Ten", described by Maria Hill, executive director at the time, as the highest security clearance anyone of any government can have. Hill's own clearance, cited in the New Avengers ongoing series, was Level Eight.
Prominent members[edit]
Main article: List of S.H.I.E.L.D. members
Throughout its existence, S.H.I.E.L.D. has been most prominently led by Nick Fury, with Maria Hill succeeding him in mid-2000s stories. She voluntarily stepped down in a 2007 story, becoming deputy director to Tony Stark. Other historically prominent members, who have appeared from the earliest stories to the modern-day, include Thaddeus "Dum Dum" Dugan and Gabriel "Gabe" Jones, both veterans of Fury's World War II Howling Commandos, though their youthful longevity has not, unlike Fury's, been explained in Marvel continuity; Contessa Valentina Allegra de la Fontaine;[40] Clay Quartermain (Agent 9); Jasper Sitwell (Agent 12); and Sharon Carter (Agent 13), all introduced in the 1960s; and Jimmy Woo, introduced in the 1950s comic Yellow Claw and reintroduced in the ' 60s.
Prior to the events of the Civil War, Captain America estimated there to be 3,000 agents on active duty.[41]
Bases of operation[edit]
Although the various Helicarriers built over the years have long been considered S.H.I.E.L.D.'s primary mobile home base, the Directorate also maintains a number of land bases throughout the world, most notably "S.H.I.E.L.D. Central" in New York City. While some of these bases are publicly accessible on a limited basis, most are not publicly disclosed for reasons of planetary security. There are several fully equipped S.H.I.E.L.D. fall-out shelters scattered around the world, with twenty-eight of these being known only to Nick Fury. During the events of  Civil War, Nick Fury was hiding in an American-based shelter. He also divulged the location of one to Captain America, so the Resistance to the Superhuman Registration Act could use it as a safe house.
Related organizations[edit]
The following organizations are related to S.H.I.E.L.D.:
A.R.M.O.R.[edit]
A.R.M.O.R. (Altered-Reality Monitoring and Operational Response Agency) is a sister agency to S.H.I.E.L.D. that monitors alternate reality incursions into Earth-616, and is directed by Charles Little Sky. It was introduced in the Marvel Zombies 3 limited series, written by Fred Van Lente. Van Lente stated that A.R.M.O.R. "has existed with them this whole time, but it's been so incredibly secret that no one at Marvel knew about it".[42] In the comics it is stated that A.R.M.O.R. is so secret that it 'makes S.W.O.R.D. look like S.H.I.E.L.D., and S.H.I.E.L.D. look like the Post Office'.[43] During Dark Reign, A.R.M.O.R. operates under the oversight of H.A.M.M.E.R. but Osborn wanted to fully absorb A.R.M.O.R. into H.A.M.M.E.R. They were able to keep out of Osborn's clutches when their newest agent, Lyra downloaded incriminating evidence against him.[44]
H.A.M.M.E.R.[edit]
Main article: H.A.M.M.E.R.
H.A.M.M.E.R. replaces S.H.I.E.L.D. after it is dissolved when Norman Osborn is appointed the new head following the conclusion of the Skrull attack.[29] It was not established what H.A.M.M.E.R. stands for; in Dark Avengers #1, Osborn told Victoria Hand, the new deputy director, that it does stand for something, and when she asked what it stands for, he told her, "Get to work on it for me. That is one of the many things on your 'To Do' list."[29] Former S.H.I.E.L.D. agents and members of Hydra are hired as agents. H.A.M.M.E.R. promotes Osborn's personal team of Avengers, a group composed mostly of former Thunderbolts members and former members of the Mighty Avengers. Osborn also eliminates all of Tony Stark's influence on S.H.I.E.L.D., including the Cape-Killer Armor and the Red and Gold Helicarrier. He also replaces all agents loyal to Nick Fury, Captain America, or Iron Man with agents loyal to himself. Also, in the Captain America: Reborn Prelude, when Sin, who is captured by H.A.M.M.E.R, asks what it stands for, the agent present says that it's classified and she does not have security clearance.[45]
S.P.E.A.R.[edit]
S.P.E.A.R. in the pages of Avengers World is a Chinese intelligence-gathering organization created for homeland security and has a flying headquarters called the Circle. It was created by the Chinese government to be on the same level as S.H.I.E.L.D. following Thanos' invasion of Earth. Falcon first encountered S.P.E.A.R. and their director, Xian Zheng, at the time when Gorgon planned to launch an attack on China using the giant dragon whose head is where Madripoor grows out of. When the Hand attacked the Circle, they deployed their own superhuman response team called the Ascendants which consists of Devastator III, Monkey King, Sabre III, Vector II, and Weather Witch.[46]
S.T.R.I.K.E.[edit]
Main article: S.T.R.I.K.E.
S.T.R.I.K.E. (Special Tactical Response for International Key Emergencies) was a British agency, unrelated to but run along similar lines to S.H.I.E.L.D. Disbanded after being infiltrated and taken over by a criminal organization, one of its members was the future X-Man Psylocke. It was introduced in Marvel UK's Captain Britain #17 (February 2, 1977).
EuroM.I.N.D. and S.H.A.P.E.[edit]
EuroM.I.N.D. (European Monitoring Investigation and Enforcement Division) is a European subdivision of S.H.I.E.L.D. that later fell under the control of the S.H.A.P.E. (Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe) council. EuroM.I.N.D.'s director is Fran ois Borillon.[47] Its agents include the science reconnaissance group Eurolab and the combat specialist Task Force group, who both then merged into one group known as Euroforce.
S.T.A.K.E.[edit]
Main article: S.T.A.K.E.
S.T.A.K.E. (Special Threat Assessment for Known Extranormalities) is a S.H.I.E.L.D. subsidiary that specializes in dealing with supernatural occurrences.[48]
S.W.O.R.D.[edit]
Main article: S.W.O.R.D.
S.W.O.R.D. (Sentient World Observation and Response Department), works with S.H.I.E.L.D. but specializes in extraterrestrial threats. It is first introduced in Astonishing X-Men (vol. 3) #6 (December 2004), written by Joss Whedon. Dialogue in the stories depicting both organizations has been ambiguous on whether S.W.O.R.D. is a branch of S.H.I.E.L.D. or a sister agency.
Agent Abigail Brand, the S.W.O.R.D. agent the X-Men encountered, has green hair, a trait typical of agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s archenemy, Hydra. This unusual characteristic did not go unremarked; Wolverine referred to her as "Hydra-Hair" in Astonishing X-Men (vol. 3) #6.
A similar group as S.W.O.R.D., likewise affiliated with the U.N., is Starcore, which has worked with S.H.I.E.L.D. on several projects of joint interest, including establishing and maintaining a crewed facility on Earth's Moon.
W.A.N.D.[edit]
W.A.N.D. (Wizardry, Alchemy and Necromancy Department) is a division of S.H.I.E.L.D that specializes in matters relating to magic. It is directed by Pandora Peters. First appearing in Thunderbolts Annual Vol.2 (2014), in which the Thunderbolts are recruited to assassinate Doctor Strange, who is eventually revealed as a faerie impostor called King Oberoth'm'gozz.[49]
Orchis[edit]
Orchis is an organization dedicated to stopping the rapid rise of the mutant population and prevent humanity's impending extinction scenario with their theory that humans only have a limited number of years left before they become an endangered species. Formed by a human coalition of former scientists and espionage agents from the ranks of S.H.I.E.L.D., S.T.R.I.K.E., S.W.O.R.D., A.R.M.O.R., A.I.M., Alpha Flight, H.A.M.M.E.R., Hydra, and even aspects of Damage Control, this organization truly believes itself as the only hope humanity has to keep mutants from ascending to control of the Earth within the next few generations. That belief has allowed Orchis to salvage the remains of Sol's Hammer and retrofit it into the Orchis Forge, a site for the creation of a Mother Mold. A strike force of X-Men led by Cyclops successfully destroyed the Mother Mold, which was believed to be the site of the creation of Nimrod, with heavy casualties on both sides.[50]
Reception[edit]
Critical reception[edit]
Screen Rant included S.H.I.E.L.D. in their "10 Best Teams That Captain America Has Joined In Marvel Comics" list.[51] CBR.com ranked S.H.I.E.L.D. 1st in their "10 Most Powerful Secret Organizations In Marvel Comics" list,[52] 5th in their "5 Instantly Recognizable Symbols In Marvel Comics" list,[53] 5th in their "5 Instantly Recognizable Symbols In Marvel Comics" list,[53] 5th in their "Every Marvel Superhero Team" list,[54] 6th in their "5 Best & 5 Worst Spy Organizations In Comics" list,[55] 7th in their "Avengers' 10 Best Allies In Marvel Comics" list,[56] and 9th in their "10 Most Effective Comic Book Prisons" list.[57]
Alternative versions of S.H.I.E.L.D.[edit]
Amalgam Comics[edit]
Main article: Amalgam Comics
S.H.I.E.L.D. (Strategic Hazard Intervention Espionage Logistics Directorate) is the Amalgam Comics equivalent of S.H.I.E.L.D. from Marvel Comics. They first appeared in Bruce Wayne Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. #1, though, in Amalgam continuity, they first appeared in the metafictional Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. strip. S.H.I.E.L.D. was first created by Nick Fury and Sgt. Rock after World War II in order to tackle the danger posed by Hydra. Both founders later trained and recruited Bruce Wayne into their ranks, who would become the new director of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Members
Members of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the Amalgam universe include:
Moonwing, a superheroic agent
Tony Stark, disabled and uses a wheelchair
Sgt. Rock, former leader
Nick Fury, former leader
Sue "Ace" Storm of the Challengers of the Fantastic
House of M[edit]
In an alternate reality where mutants rule over humans, S.H.I.E.L.D. was staffed completely with mutants, all serving the House of Magnus on Genosha. Sebastian Shaw is the executive director of S.H.I.E.L.D., Wolverine is in charge of the House of Magnus' Red Guard (Agents Rogue, Jessica Drew, Kurt Wagner, Mortimer Toynbee, and Raven Darkholme) and the Marauders are S.H.I.E.L.D.'s black ops unit.[volume & issue needed][58]
Mutant X[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. was mentioned briefly in the Mutant X alternate universe series as a murderous anti-mutant group. S.H.I.E.L.D. stood for Saviours of Humanity by Intervention in the Evolution of Life-form Deviants.[59] Their story is elaborated on later as one of their own gains powers.[60]
Ultimate Marvel[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. in the Ultimate Marvel parallel universe was first led by General "Thunderbolt" Ross. During the Gulf War, the Weapon X Project, headed by Colonel John Wraith, was sanctioned by S.H.I.E.L.D. and resulted in the creation of Wolverine.
After Ross stepped down and retired, Nick Fury was then selected as the organization's executive director. His first actions were to shut down Weapon X and resurrect the Super Soldier program, commissioning Richard Parker, Dr. Bruce Banner, Franklin Storm, and young intern Hank Pym to try to recreate the formula that made Captain America. This failed and resulted in the creation of the Hulk when Banner injected his serum into himself, leading to various "Hulk Outs" by Banner, yet still under Fury's service for his brilliance, as well as Pym re-hired. It was later revealed that the chemical called Oz, which turned Norman Osborn into the Green Goblin, was also created in hopes of recreating the Super-Soldier formula. Spider-Man was also a product of the Oz formula. Also, the creation of the supervillains Sandman and Electro are due to Hammer Industries attempting to recreate the Super Soldier formula for S.H.I.E.L.D. Then S.H.I.E.L.D. created its own superhero team, the Ultimates. Later still, it brought the X-Men and Spider-Man under S.H.I.E.L.D. jurisdiction. In Ultimate X-Men #65 (January 2006), S.H.I.E.L.D. severed ties with the X-Men. After the events of Ultimate Power, S.H.I.E.L.D. is under the directorship of Carol Danvers, as Nick Fury was temporarily stranded in the Supreme Power Universe. After "Ultimatum", the returned Nick Fury becomes head of the Black-Ops division in Ultimate Comics: Avengers. It is also revealed he is plotting to take back his position as director, from Danvers.[61] After a mysterious force frames Danvers for selling super-soldiers to rival nations, it was revealed to be a ploy by Gregory Stark to become Director, until Fury, the Avengers, and Ultimates stop him, resulting in Thor electrocuting Dr. Stark to death.[62] After the Death of Spider-Man, Marvin Flumm was promoted to Director by the U.S. President.[63] After an arc called "Divided We Stand", a crossover involving Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man, Ultimate Comics: X-Men, and Ultimate Comics: Ultimates, Monica Chang (one of Nick Fury's ex-wives and 2nd Black Widow) was promoted by Captain America to Director after Agent Flumm was dismissed.[64] S.H.I.E.L.D. is later disassembled after the events of Cataclysm, for although the Ultimates were able to defeat Galactus, the destruction caused by Galactus's attack and the loss of Captain America and Thor make it the last straw for the United States Government, who immediately decide to shut S.H.I.E.L.D. down, resulting in villains such as Norman Osborn (Green Goblin) and Victor Van Damme (Doctor Doom), who are revealed to be alive, being released into the custody of other federal agencies.[volume & issue needed]
In the Ultimate Marvel universe, S.H.I.E.L.D. is controlled entirely by the United States but maintains ties with the European Defense Initiative and the British-operated S.T.R.I.K.E.
Members
Main article: List of S.H.I.E.L.D. members  Ultimate S.H.I.E.L.D.
Divisions
Psi
Black-Ops
Eye
Combat-Unit
S.A.F.E.[edit]
S.A.F.E. (Strategic Action For Emergencies) introduced in Marvel's line of novels in the mid-1990s is the United States' answer to S.H.I.E.L.D. It first appeared in Spider-Man & the Incredible Hulk: Rampage (Doom's Day Book 1), and may not be part of the comics canon, although the novels it appears in have been referred to several times in Marvel's Handbooks. Whereas S.H.I.E.L.D. is a U.N.-chartered organization dealing with international incidents, S.A.F.E. is tasked with similar duties inside America's borders. It is run by Colonel Sean Morgan. A prominently featured agent is Joshua Ballard, who, among other things, survived an encounter with Doctor Doom and later Baron Zemo.
In the novel Secret of the Sinister Six, S.A.F.E. agent Clyde Fury (no relation to Nick Fury) distinguishes between espionage agencies (such as S.H.I.E.L.D.) and strategic action specialists such as S.A.F.E.
H.A.T.E.[edit]
Main article: H.A.T.E.
H.A.T.E. (Highest Anti Terrorism Effort) is a parody of S.H.I.E.L.D. created for Marvel Comics' 12-issue series Nextwave by comics author Warren Ellis. The leader of H.A.T.E., General Dirk Anger is a parody of Nick Fury. This series depicts H.A.T.E. as being a secretive organization with suspect motives led by the madman, Anger, who has self-control and sexual issues.
Depictions in translation[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
S.H.I.E.L.D. stories have been translated into several other languages, including French, Finnish and Italian. Occasionally, these translations will show S.H.I.E.L.D. with an altered name.
In the case of selected French editions, the name of the agency was depicted as S.E.R.V.O., which sounds like "brain" (cerveau) in French.[citation needed] In later editions, S.H.I.E.L.D is maintained, with the acronym translated as Strat gie, Habilit , Intervention, Ex cution et Logistique D fensive (Strategy, Empowered, Intervention, Enforcement, and Logistics Defensive).[citation needed]
In Finnish the name that applies to S.H.I.E.L.D. in mainstream Marvel continuity is Y.P.K.V.V. (Ylimm isen P majan Kansainv lisen Vakoilun Vastustamisjaos), a direct translation of the original English. In translations of the Ultimate Marvel comics, the name is K.I.L.P.I., with "kilpi" being the translation for the word (as opposed to the acronym) "shield".[citation needed]
In Greek, the organization name is  . . . . . . (pronounced ASPIDA, meaning "shield" in Greek). The initials stand for Supreme Military and Political Foundation of International Counter-espionage (           ).[citation needed]
In Portuguese, the name S.H.I.E.L.D. remains, but it is translated as "Superintend ncia Humana de Interven o, Espionagem, Log stica e Dissuas o", i. e., Human Superintendence for Intervention, Espionage, Logistics and Dissuasion.[citation needed]
In Dutch the name S.C.H.I.L.D. (schild = shield) has been used by the publisher Williams, but was dropped by Junior Press in favor of S.H.I.E.L.D.[citation needed]
In Mexico, it was translated by La Prensa and later Novedades, as C.I.D.E.L., Centro Internacional De Espionaje Legal (International Center of Legal Espionage), but later Novedades changed the acronym to C.S.E.I., Cuartel Supremo de Espionaje e Inteligencia (Supreme Headquarters of Espionage and Intelligence).[citation needed]
In Spain, the initial publisher V rtice translated S.H.I.E.L.D. as "Escudo" (always without a determinant), but never showed the meaning. Later publisher Planeta DeAgostini used the name S.H.I.E.L.D., but translating the acronym as "Organizaci n Internacional para la Ejecuci n y el Cumplimiento de la Ley" (international organisation for implementation and fulfillment of law). It has been suggested, as a joke, that the acronym does not correspond to the meaning because the acronym itself is undercover. Now, Panini translates the acronym as "Servicio Homologado de Inteligencia, Espionaje, Log stica y Defensa" (Accredited Service of Intelligence, Espionage, Logistics, and Defense) to keep the original acronym; being this the name used in the current movies or series.[citation needed]
In Danish, S.H.I.E.L.D. was originally known as S.K.J.O.L.D., "Skjold" being the Danish word for a shield, though the meaning of the abbreviation would differ.[citation needed]
In Russian, S.H.I.E.L.D. is named  . . . (pronounced SCHIT; "shield" in Russian) or  . . . . . . (ZASCHITA, meaning "protection"). This name often describes as Sixth Intervention Logistics Agency (     -     ).[citation needed]
In Poland, S.H.I.E.L.D. is known as T.A.R.C.Z.A. ("shield" in Polish). This name describes as Secret Agency of Anti-terrorist Cybernetics Applications Development (Tajna Agencja Rozwoju Cybernetycznych Zastosowa  Antyterrorystycznych).[citation needed]
In other media[edit]
Television[edit]
Animation[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D.'s first television appearance was in the Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends episode "Mission: Save the Guardstar".
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured in Season Two of the 1990s Iron Man animated series.
S.H.I.E.L.D. made several appearances in the 1990s Spider-Man animated series, beginning in the first-season episode "Day of the Chameleon". All subsequent S.H.I.E.L.D. appearances on the show included Nick Fury. Agent 1 was the only other identified agent.
S.H.I.E.L.D. made several appearances in X-Men: Evolution.
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured in The Super Hero Squad Show. Outside of Nick Fury being featured, Ms. Marvel is depicted as an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Iron Man: Armored Adventures.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the Marvel Anime: Wolverine episode "Omega Red". In a flashback, a S.H.I.E.L.D. commander sends Wolverine on a black ops mission to infiltrate and steal the carbonadium from the Russians.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Ultimate Spider-Man.[65] Nick Fury and Phil Coulson are the identified members of S.H.I.E.L.D. that appears in the show. The series itself revolves around a S.H.I.E.L.D. training program held by Nick Fury and Phil Coulson for young superheroes consisting of Spider-Man, White Tiger, Power Man, Iron Fist and Nova. At the end of the episode "Stan By Me", it is revealed that Stan the Janitor was one of the original members of S.H.I.E.L.D. and came up with the organization's acronym. In the episode, "The Parent Trap", it is revealed that Power Man's parents worked for S.H.I.E.L.D. and used their version of the Super Soldier Serum to give their son superpowers. In the episode, "Ultimate Venom", Spider-Man discovers that he has inspired a new generation of young heroes by becoming an Avenger. He convinces Fury to recruit them to form a new team, the New Warriors.
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured in Avengers Assemble.
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured in Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.
Film[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the 1998 TV film Nick Fury: Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D..[citation needed] After the retirement/exile of Nick Fury, S.H.I.E.L.D. has been under the control of rival General Director Jack Pincer.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the anime projects of Madhouse that are similar to the Marvel Anime franchise:
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Iron Man: Rise of Technovore.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Avengers Confidential: Black Widow & Punisher.[66]
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured heavily in the Marvel Cinematic Universe series of films, led by Nick Fury, who in this universe is portrayed by Samuel L. Jackson.[67]
Marvel Cinematic Universe[edit]
Films[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in several films set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe:
S.H.I.E.L.D. is first referenced in Iron Man when Agent Phil Coulson attempts to talk with Tony Stark about his escape from captivity. As a running gag, the agency is always referred to by its full name, followed by remarks to the effect that it needs something shorter; near the film's end, Coulson stops Pepper Potts midway through saying it and says, "Just call us SHIELD." In a post-credits scene, Tony Stark meets Nick Fury, played by Samuel L. Jackson, who says he wants to talk to him about the "Avengers Initiative".
S.H.I.E.L.D. is briefly referenced in The Incredible Hulk when it is shown that S.H.I.E.L.D. was aware of the experiment on which Dr. Bruce Banner was working about making humans immune to gamma radiation. Later, General Ross states that Bruce Banner's and his partner's aliases "have been added to the S.H.I.E.L.D. Operations Database". In the post-credits scene, General Ross is approached by Tony Stark (a consultant for S.H.I.E.L.D.), who reveals that they were gathering some kind of a special "team".
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Iron Man 2. Black Widow is shown to be a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent when Nick Fury sends her to keep an eye on Tony Stark. Phil Coulson was also featured, overseeing Tony Stark's S.H.I.E.L.D. style house arrest until being called away.[68] It is stated that Howard Stark is one of the founders of S.H.I.E.L.D. In the post-credits scene, Phil Coulson arrives in Albuquerque, New Mexico where he calls Nick Fury and tells him that he found the item Fury wanted him to look for, as the final shot shows Thor's hammer, Mj lnir.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Thor. In a follow-up to the post-credits scene of Iron Man 2, Phil Coulson leads a S.H.I.E.L.D. team to safeguard the area that Mj lnir landed. Jasper Sitwell (portrayed by Maximiliano Hern ndez) is also featured in the film. In the post-credits scene, Erik Selvig is brought onto S.H.I.E.L.D. by Nick Fury to study the Tesseract.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears at the end of Captain America: The First Avenger. When Steve Rogers awakens in modern times and makes his way out of a building, he is greeted by Nick Fury and some S.H.I.E.L.D. agents.
S.H.I.E.L.D. is featured in The Avengers.[69] Nick Fury, Phil Coulson, Natasha Romanoff, Jasper Sitwell, and Clint Barton appear[70] as well as S.H.I.E.L.D. Deputy Director Maria Hill (portrayed by Cobie Smulders).[71] A substantial part of the film takes place within the S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarrier.
S.H.I.E.L.D. is mentioned only once in Iron Man 3 by Tony Stark. Stark hacks into S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Mandarin investigation database (and reveals that S.H.I.E.L.D. was, in fact, working on the Mandarin threat).[72]
S.H.I.E.L.D. features prominently in Captain America: The Winter Soldier with Captain America as a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent,[73] along with Black Widow,[74] Nick Fury,[75] Maria Hill,[76] Jasper Sitwell,[77] Sharon Carter,[78][79] Brock Rumlow,[80] Jack Rollins, and Alexander Pierce.[78] The history of S.H.I.E.L.D. is further explored in the film. It is revealed that Arnim Zola was brought on board in S.H.I.E.L.D.'s inception for his scientific expertise, but he secretly regrew Hydra within the organization with the purpose of identifying and eliminating potential threats to Hydra's goals. Pierce, Rumlow, Rollins, and Sitwell are revealed to be sleeper agents of Hydra within the agency. When Rogers exposes Hydra within S.H.I.E.L.D., Fury, Romanoff, Carter, Hill, and others leave the agency as it falls apart.
In Avengers: Age of Ultron, S.H.I.E.L.D. is said to have collapsed. Fury appears to encourage the Avengers while Maria Hill now works for Stark. Fury later appears at the final battle in Sokovia with a Helicarrier pulled out of mothballs, some S.H.I.E.L.D. agents and James Rhodes to help. When asked, Steve Rogers comments that "this is what S.H.I.E.L.D. is supposed to be" as the Helicarrier is used to rescue thousands of people from their now-floating landmass before it is destroyed by Thor and Iron Man to save the world.
In Ant-Man, S.H.I.E.L.D. appears only in flashbacks. Hank Pym and Janet Van Dyne were S.H.I.E.L.D. agents who worked with Peggy Carter and Howard Stark during the Cold War.[81]
In Captain Marvel, set in 1995, Nick Fury and Phil Coulson were low ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agents who formed an alliance with Carol Danvers.[82]
An alternate version of S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Avengers: Endgame.[citation needed] When Steve Rogers, Tony Stark, and Scott Lang quantum travel to an alternate 2012, they encounter Hydra sleeper agents posing as S.H.I.E.L.D. operatives. Stark disguises himself in a S.H.I.E.L.D. uniform. Later, Rogers and Stark travel to an alternate 1970 to steal the Tesseract from S.H.I.E.L.D.'s base in Camp Lehigh.
In Spider-Man: Far From Home, a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent, on orders from Talos, provides Peter Parker with a black stealth suit in Europe.[83]
Television[edit]
In Hawkeye, it is revealed that Laura Barton was a former S.H.I.E.L.D. agent.[84]
In Ms. Marvel, S.H.I.E.L.D. is still active, as merchandise for it is marketed at the AvengerCon. Additionally, a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent's book about first hand witnessing the Battle of Earth is released.[85]
A S.H.I.E.L.D. television series was greenlit by ABC in 2012,[86] first aired as Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.,[87] on September 24, 2013, and concluded on August 12, 2020.[citation needed]
One-Shots[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. was featured in the Marvel One-Shots films (which tie into the Marvel Cinematic Universe):
The Marvel One-Shots film The Consultant featured Phil Coulson and Jasper Sitwell trying to keep the World Security Council from putting Abomination into their services.
The Marvel One-Shots film A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor's Hammer features Phil Coulson traveling to New Mexico between Iron Man 2 and Thor.
The Marvel One-Shots film Item 47 featured Agent Blake (portrayed by Titus Welliver) who helps Jasper Sitwell secure "Item 47" (a discarded Chitauri gun) which ended up in the possession of a down-on-their-luck couple named Bennie and Claire (portrayed by Jesse Bradford and Lizzy Caplan). In the aftermath, the couple joins up with S.H.I.E.L.D. where Bennie is assigned to the R&D "think-tank" to reverse engineer the Chitauri technology, and Claire becomes Blake's assistant.
The Marvel One-Shots film Agent Carter features Peggy Carter being made an offer to lead S.H.I.E.L.D. by Howard Stark.[citation needed] Timothy "Dum Dum" Dugan (portrayed by Neal McDonough) also appears.
Video games[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the 2004 video game The Punisher.[citation needed]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance.[citation needed] After the Masters of Evil attack their Helicarrier, S.H.I.E.L.D. subsequently oversees the creation of a special strike force of heroes to oppose the Masters' scheme to steal Odin's power for Doctor Doom.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the 2005 video game Ultimate Spider-Man.[citation needed]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Spider-Man: Friend or Foe.[citation needed] They work to stop Mysterio's P.H.A.N.T.O.M. invasion around the globe, recruiting several superheroes and villains such as Spider-Man, Black Cat, and Prowler to provide assistance.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Spider-Man: Web of Shadows.[citation needed] They arrive in New York to help Spider-Man fight off the symbiote invasion and set up a base at Stark Tower. S.H.I.E.L.D. agents serve as allies and can offer various missions, such as escorts and evacuations.
S.H.I.E.L.D. plays a prominent role in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2, with the passing of the Superhuman Registration Act.[citation needed]
The Ultimate Marvel incarnation of S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Spider-Man: Shattered Dimensions.[citation needed] Carnage launches an attack on the Triskelion and uses a fragment of the Tablet of Order and Chaos to reanimate the S.H.I.E.L.D. agents it kills into zombies.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Marvel: Avengers Alliance.[citation needed] Outside of Nick Fury, Maria Hill, and Phil Coulson appearing as members, the player controls a S.H.I.E.L.D. agent when fighting villains.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Marvel Heroes.[citation needed]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Lego Marvel Super Heroes.[citation needed]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Disney Infinity: Marvel Super Heroes.[citation needed] Nick Fury is a playable character and S.H.I.E.L.D. directs the player on several missions throughout "The Avengers" and "Spider-Man" playsets.
S.H.I.E.L.D. makes a minor appearance in Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2,[citation needed] due to most of the game taking place in Chronopolis and Kang the Conqueror vaporizing the Helicarrier upon his arrival.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Marvel Strike Force.[88]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Iron Man VR.[citation needed] They used to buy weapons from Stark Industries, including the Helicarrier, before Tony Stark became Iron Man and announced that his company would stop manufacturing weapons. During the game, S.H.I.E.L.D. joins forces with Iron Man to thwart Ghost's attack on the Helicarrier.
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in Marvel's Avengers.[89][90] Following the "A-Day" tragedy, the organization was forced to go underground and surrender most of its resources to A.I.M. The S.H.I.E.L.D. remnants are commanded by Maria Hill, as Nick Fury disappeared without trace after the aforementioned events, though not before he hid copies of resources and protocols to enable the organization to rebuild itself when the right time came. After the Avengers defeat MODOK, S.H.I.E.L.D. is apparently restored and partners with the Avengers to take down A.I.M.
Theatre[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. appears in the Marvel Universe LIVE! stage show.[91]
See also[edit]
List of government agencies in Marvel Comics
References[edit]
^ Norman, Dalton (2022-07-21). "10 Best Teams That Captain America Has Joined In Marvel Comics". ScreenRant. Retrieved 2023-03-25.
^ September 24, Darren Franich; EDT, 2013 at 10:21 PM. "SHIELD: 10 Important Facts about Marvel's superspy organization". EW.com. Retrieved 2023-03-25.
^ Franich, Darren (24 September 2013). "SHIELD: 10 Important Facts about Marvel's superspy organization". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 25 September 2013.
^ a b Goldman, Eric (January 31, 2014). "Stan Lee Previews His Marvel's Agents of SHIELD Cameo". IGN. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
^ Cronin, Brian (April 15, 2010). "A Year of Cool Comics   Day 105". Comic Book Resources CSBG Archive. Retrieved September 29, 2010.
^ a b Strange Tales #135: "The Man For The Job!"
^ Goulart, Ron (1971). Comix: A History of Comic Books in America. New York City: Bonanza Books. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 75-169-104
^ Hama, Larry (2001). "Introduction". Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Who Is Scorpio?. Marvel Enterprises. ISBN 0-7851-0766-5.
^ "S.H.I.E.L.D. In Comics Members, Enemies, Powers | Marvel". Marvel Entertainment. Retrieved 2023-02-12.
^ Schedeen, Jesse (February 23, 2010). "The Secret Masters of the Marvel Universe". IGN. Retrieved April 8, 2010.
^ Mahadeo, Kevin (April 6, 2010). "Tuesday Q&A: Jonathan Hickman". Marvel.com. Retrieved April 8, 2010.
^ Arrant, Chris (April 7, 2010). "Writer Hickman Reveals the History of Marvel's S.H.I.E.L.D." Newsarama. Retrieved April 8, 2010.
^ Amazing Fantasy (vol. 2) #7 (June 2005)
^ Sanderson, Peter (2007). The Marvel Comics Guide to New York City. New York City: Pocket Books. pp. 62 63. ISBN 978-1-416-53141-8.
^ Astonishing X-Men (vol. 3) #3 (September 2004)
^ Fury #1 (1994)
^ Strange Tales #135: "The Man For The Job!" (page 2: "Spy guys like me are a dime a dozen!" "The White House thinks differently, Fury!"
^ Harras, Bob (w), Neary, Paul (p), DeMulder, Kim (i). "The Delta Equation (Nick Fury Vs S.H.I.E.L.D. Book One)" Nick Fury Vs. S.H.I.E.L.D. #1 (June 1988)
^ Harras, Bob (w), Neary, Paul (p), DeMulder, Kim (i). "Light of Truth (Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D. Book Six)" Nick Fury Vs. S.H.I.E.L.D. #6 (November 1988)
^ Harras, Bob (w), Hall, Bob (p), DeMulder, Kim (i). "The Past Still Haunts" Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. v3, #1 (September 1989)
^ Secret War #5 (December 2005)
^ Civil War #1-7 (July 2006-January 2007), and related series
^ Iron Man (vol. 4) #15 (April 2007)
^ Secret Invasion #1 (June 2008)
^ Secret Invasion Prologue
^ a b Secret Warriors #1
^ Secret Invasion #8 (December 2008)
^ Dark Avengers #2
^ a b c Dark Avengers #1
^ Battle Scars #2
^ Battle Scars #6 (June 2012)
^ Secret Avengers (vol. 2) #1
^ Avengers Standoff: Welcome to Pleasant Hills #1
^ Captain America: Steve Rogers #4 (August 2016)
^ Captain America: Steve Rogers #11 (April 2017)
^ Secret Empire #1 (May 2017)
^ Secret Empire Omega #1 (September 2017)
^ "Marvel Proved Why S.H.I.E.L.D's Worst Mistakes Were... Captain America and Iron Man?". 23 January 2022.
^ Punisher (vol. 2) #218 (November 2017)
^ As spelled officially by Marvel Comics on its S.H.I.E.L.D. page, although misspelled with a male name and spelled with different Italian article as "Valentina Allegro de Fontaine" in her name's first two mentions, in Strange Tales #159, "Spy School", 10, panel 6, and Strange Tales #162, "So Evil, the Night p.3, panel 6.
^ New Avengers #21
^ Ww Philly: Fred Van Lente on Marvel Zombies 3 by Vaneta Rogers Archived 2010-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Newsarama.com.
^ Marvel Zombies #3, #1
^ All New Savage She-Hulk #1-4
^ "Captain America: Reborn Prelude Online Preview". Marvel.com. 2009-06-30. Retrieved 2011-01-12.
^ Avengers World #7
^ Europa #0 (April 1996)
^ S.H.I.E.L.D. (vol. 3) #9
^ Thunderbolts (vol. 2) Annual #1
^ House of X #4
^ Norman, Dalton (2022-07-21). "10 Best Teams That Captain America Has Joined In Marvel Comics". ScreenRant. Retrieved 2022-11-23.
^ Avina, Anthony (2019-09-26). "10 Most Powerful Secret Organizations In Marvel Comics, Ranked". CBR. Retrieved 2022-11-14.
^ a b Allan, Scoot (2023-01-18). "5 Instantly Recognizable Symbols In Marvel Comics". CBR. Retrieved 2023-02-07.
^ Leroy, Kath (2021-02-08). "Every Marvel Superhero Team, Ranked". CBR. Retrieved 2022-11-25.
^ C. B. R. Staff (2020-05-08). "The 5 Best & 5 Worst Spy Organizations In Comics, Ranked". CBR. Retrieved 2023-03-25.
^ Eckhardt, Peter (2022-09-15). "The Avengers' 10 Best Allies In Marvel Comics". CBR. Retrieved 2022-11-14.
^ Allan, Scoot (2022-08-26). "10 Most Effective Comic Book Prisons, Ranked". CBR. Retrieved 2022-11-23.
^ House of M #1 (June 2005)
^ Mutant X #1
^ Mutant X #18 (April 2000)
^ Ultimate Avengers #6
^ Ultimate Comics: Ultimate Avengers vs New Ultimates #5-6
^ Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #6
^ Ultimate Comics: Ultimates #21
^ Ching, Albert. "SDCC 2011: Marvel Television Live!". Newsarama.
^ Busis, Hillary (2014-01-21). "'Marvel's Avengers Confidential: Black Widow & Punisher': See the trailer here! Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 2014-01-21.
^ Itzkoff, Dave (25 March 2011). "Modern Marvel". The New York Times.
^ Hirwani, Peony (March 2, 2022). "Scarlett Johansson on the biggest challenge she faced when filming Iron Man 2". The Independent. Retrieved July 20, 2022.
^ "Marvel's The Avengers Begins Production". Retrieved May 18, 2011.
^ "MARVEL-OUS STAR WATTAGE: Actors Assemble For Comic-Con Panel Including "The Avengers", "Captain America", & "Thor"". Deadline Hollywood. 2010-07-24. Archived from the original on 2011-07-17. Retrieved 2011-08-03.
^ "New "Avengers" Photo Introduces Cobie Smulders As Maria Hill". Retrieved October 25, 2011.
^ "Where Were The Avengers/SHIELD in Iron Man 3?". Retrieved October 8, 2014.
^ Marvel's Phase Two: "Thor: The Dark World", "Cap 2: Winter Soldier", "Guardians of the Galaxy" and "Avengers 2" -- EXCLUSIVE
^ Mike Fleming Jr (2 October 2012). "Five Actresses Testing For "Captain America 2" Role; Black Widow Might Drop By As Well   Deadline.com - Deadline". Deadline Hollywood.
^ Russo brothers tapped for "Captain America 2"
^ Marc Graser (29 October 2012). "Frank Grillo to play Crossbones in "Captain America" sequel". Variety.
^ Dominic Patten (21 March 2013). "Movie Castings: Seth Rogen Scores "The Interview", "Endless Love" Remake Gets Leads & "Winter Soldier" Sees Agent Return - Deadline". Deadline Hollywood.
^ a b Captain America: The Winter Soldier Begins Filming
^ "SDCC '13: Marvelreveals Avengers: Age of Ultron, Guardians Cast, More". Newsarama.com.
^ Marvel: D23 debuts new scenes for "Thor" and "Captain America" sequels
^ Nicholson, Matt (June 22, 2015). "Ant-Man Set And Edit Bay Visit: Making Marvel's Underdog Movie Page 3 of 3". IGN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.
^ Coggan, Devan (September 13, 2018). "Clark Gregg teases Coulson and Fury's "meet-cute" in Captain Marvel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 14, 2018. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
^ Perry, Kellen; Harris-King, Scott (July 8, 2019). "Easter Eggs You Missed in Spider-Man Far From Home". Looper.
^ Outlaw, Kofi (December 22, 2021). "Hawkeye: Who Is SHIELD Agent 19? Rolex Owner Confirmed". Comicbook.
^ Vaux, Robert (June 20, 2022). "Ms. Marvel May Have Confirmed SHIELD Is Still Around". CBR.
^ Andreeva, Nellie (August 28, 2012). "ABC Greenlights 'S.H.I.E.L.D' Marvel Pilot, Joss Whedon To Co-Write & Possibly Direct". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 28, 2012.
^ "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." ABC Studios. April 6, 2013. Archived from the original on April 10, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2013.
^ Wolfe, Sam (2022-02-13). "Marvel Strike Force: 10 Best Hero Teams". Game Rant. Retrieved 2023-03-26.
^ McFarlane, Mehdi (2020-09-21). "Marvel's Avengers: How to Unlock & Level up Factions". ScreenRant. Retrieved 2023-03-26.
^ Gilliam, Ryan (2020-09-04). "Marvel's Avengers guide: Avengers' Initiative War Zone mission types". Polygon. Retrieved 2023-03-26.
^ "Character Reveals for Marvel Universe LIVE! - News - Marvel.com".
External links[edit]
S.H.I.E.L.D. at Marvel Wiki
S.H.I.E.L.D. at Marvel Appendix
Marvel Directory: Nick Fury
Don Markstein's Toonopedia: Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
vteS.H.I.E.L.D.
Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
CharactersDirectors
George W. Bridge
Sharon Carter
Timothy Dugan
Nick Fury
Maria Hill
Daisy Johnson
Norman Osborn
Steve Rogers
Tony Stark
Rick Stoner
Monica Chang
Field Agents
Clay Quartermain
Victoria Hand
Jasper Sitwell
Al MacKenzie
Mitch Carson
Valentina Allegra de Fontaine
Jessica Drew
Clint Barton
Natasha Romanova
Barbara Morse
Sam Wilson
Jimmy Woo
Alexander Pierce
John Garrett
Nick Fury Jr.
Antagonists
A.I.M.
Baron Strucker
Baron Zemo
Crossbones
Doctor Doom
H.A.M.M.E.R.
Hydra
Leviathan
Loki
Maggia
Magneto
Masters of Evil
Mys-Tech
Norman Osborn
Red Skull
Secret Empire
Skrulls
Ultron
Zodiac
Affiliations
Avengers
New
Dark
Mighty
Secret
Howling Commandos
Project Livewire
Team White (Secret Warriors)
S.T.R.I.K.E.
S.T.A.K.E.
S.W.O.R.D.
Bases and facilities
Camp Hammond
Helicarrier
Stark Tower
The Vault
Technology and units
Life Model Decoy
Mandroid
Red Ronin
Superhuman Restraint Unit
Iron Patriot
S.H.I.E.L.D. Flying Car
Publications
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
1965 feature
Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D.
Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Kitty Pryde, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
S.H.I.E.L.D.
2010 series
2014 series
Howling Commandos of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Agent Carter: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary
Fury: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.
In other mediaMarvel CinematicUniverse
Item 47
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.
characters
Phil Coulson
Leo Fitz
Nick Fury
Daisy Johnson
Melinda May
Jemma Simmons
Daniel Sousa
Grant Ward
episodes
season 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Slingshot
Most Wanted
Other
Nick Fury: Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Empyre
Related
Ultimate Nick Fury
Ultimate Captain America
Peggy Carter
Howard Stark
 Category
vteNick Fury
Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
CharactersSupporting
Nick Fury Jr.
Mikel Fury
Jake Fury
Monica Chang-Fury
Valentina Allegra de Fontaine
Dum Dum Dugan
Gabe Jones
Rebel Ralston
Junior Juniper
Pinky Pinkerton
Eric Koenig
Punisher
Happy Sam Sawyer
Sharon Carter
Jasper Sitwell
Maria Hill
Iron Man
Captain America
Bucky Barnes
Black Widow
Hawkeye
Wolverine
Clay Quartermain
Falcon
Mockingbird
Avengers
Enemies
A.I.M.
Baron Strucker
Baron Zemo
Heinrich Zemo
Helmut Zemo
Centurius
Hate-Monger
Hydra
Madame Hydra
Viper
Mitchell Carson
Red Skull
Scorpio
Super-Patriot
Werner von Strucker
Teams
Howling Commandos
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Team White
ComicsOngoing
Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
1965 feature
Secret Warriors
Nick Fury's Howling Commandos
Nick Fury
Miniseries and storylines
Nick Fury vs. S.H.I.E.L.D.
Fury of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Fury/Agent 13
Ennis
Fury (2001)
Fury: Peacemaker
Fury: My War Gone By
Avengers 1959
Battle Scars
"Nick Fury, Agent of Nothing"
Original Sin
Fury's Big Week
Graphic novels and one-shots
Fury (1994)
Fury: S.H.I.E.L.D. 50th Anniversary
Wolverine/Nick Fury
The Scorpio Connection
Bloody Choices
Scorpio Rising
"Nick's World"
Fury/Black Widow: Death Duty
Captain America and Nick Fury: Blood Truce
Captain America and Nick Fury: The Otherworld War
Sgt. Fury & his Howling Commandos: Shotgun Opera
In other media
Nick Fury: Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Empyre
"For Your Eye Only"
Nick Fury (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
Related
Life Model Decoy
Dirk Anger
Jim Steranko
Strange Tales
Ultimate Nick Fury
 Category
Related topics
vteAvengers charactersFounding members
Ant-Man (Hank Pym)
Captain America
Hulk
Iron Man
Thor
Wasp (Janet van Dyne)
Recurringmembers
3-D Man
Agent Venom
Ant-Man
Scott Lang
Eric O'Grady
Ares
Beast
Black Knight
Black Panther
Black Widow
Claire Voyant
Natasha Romanova
Blade
Blue Marvel
Brother Voodoo
Cable
Cannonball
Captain Britain
Brian Braddock
Kelsey Leigh Kirkland
Captain Marvel
Carol Danvers
Monica Rambeau
Crystal
Daredevil
Doctor Druid
Doctor Strange
Echo
Falcon
Fantastic Four
Mr. Fantastic
Invisible Woman
Human Torch
Thing
Firebird
Firestar
Ghost Rider (Robbie Reyes)
Gilgamesh
Hawkeye
Clint Barton
Kate Bishop
Hellcat
Hercules
Human Torch
Iron Fist
Jack of Hearts
Jocasta
Justice
Kaluu
Luke Cage
Manifold
Mantis
Mockingbird
Moondragon
Moon Knight
Ms. Marvel
Namor
Namora
Nebula
Nova
Richard Rider
Sam Alexander
Protector
Quake
Quasar
Quicksilver
Red Hulk
Rogue
Scarlet Witch
Sentry
Sersi
Shang-Chi
She-Hulk
Spider-Man
Peter Parker
Miles Morales
Spider-Woman
Jessica Drew
Julia Carpenter
Starfox
Stingray
Storm
Sunspot
Swordsman
Thor (Jane Foster)
Tigra
Thunderstrike
U.S. Agent
Valkyrie
Vision
War Machine
Wasp (Nadia van Dyne)
Winter Soldier
White Tiger
Wolverine
Wonder Man
OthercharactersSupportingcharacters
Agent 13
Asgardians
Balder the Brave
Eitri
Frigga
Heimdall
Lady Sif
Odin
Warriors Three
Fandral
Hogun
Volstagg
Aunt May
Ben Urich
Beta Ray Bill
Betty Ross
Daily Bugle
Betty Brant
J. Jonah Jameson
Doc Samson
Dora Milaje
Nakia
Okoye
Edwin Jarvis
Erik Selvig
Fabian Stankowicz
Guardsman
Happy Hogan
H.E.R.B.I.E.
John Jameson
Marrina Smallwood
Mary Jane Watson
Pepper Potts
Rick Jones
Shuri
Wong
Allies
Alpha Flight
Champions
The Challenger
Citizen V
Deadpool
Defenders
Eternals
Ajak
Druig
Gilgamesh
Ikaris
Kingo Sunen
Makkari
Phastos
Sersi
Sprite
Thena
Fantastic Four
Mr. Fantastic
Invisible Woman
Human Torch
Thing
Guardians of the Galaxy
Drax the Destroyer
Gamora
Groot
Mantis
Nebula
Rocket Raccoon
Star-Lord
Inhumans
Black Bolt
Gorgon
Karnak
Lockjaw
Medusa
Triton
Jessica Jones
Mar-Vell
Midnight Sons
Elsa Bloodstone
Morbius, the Living Vampire
Werewolf by Night
New Warriors
Red Raven
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Maria Hill
Nick Fury
Phil Coulson
Silver Surfer
Thunderbolts
Atlas
Fixer
Ghost
MACH-I
Moonstone
Songbird
Uatu the Watcher
Ultraforce
Prime
The Whizzer
Robert Frank
The Witness
X-Men
Angel
Banshee
Beast
Colossus
Cyclops
Gambit
Havok
Iceman
Jean Grey (Phoenix)
Jubilee
Kitty Pryde
Nightcrawler
Professor X
Rogue
Storm
Wolverine
Neutral allies
Elektra
Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze)
Henry Peter Gyrich
Punisher
Ronin
Sandman
Squadron Supreme
Hyperion
Thunderbolt Ross
Venom
Yelena Belova
EnemiesCentralrogues
Baron Zemo
Heinrich Zemo
Helmut Zemo
Blood Brothers
Collector
Count Nefaria
Doctor Doom
Dracula
Enchantress
Galactus
Grandmaster
Graviton
Green Goblin
Norman Osborn
Grim Reaper
High Evolutionary
Hood
Immortus
Kang the Conqueror
Loki
Magneto
Mephisto
MODOK
Onslaught
Radioactive Man
Red Skull
Super-Adaptoid
Super-Skrull
Taskmaster
Thanos
Ultron
Other supervillains
Annihilus
Ares
Arkon
Attuma
Baron Strucker
Beyonder
Carnage
Crossbones
Doctor Octopus
Egghead
Ghaur
Grey Gargoyle
Griffin
Klaw
Knull
Korvac
Leader
Mandarin
Master Pandemonium
Maximus
Morgan le Fay
Powderkeg
Ravonna
Whirlwind
Organizations
A.I.M.
Black Order
Brotherhood of Mutants
Chitauri
Dark Avengers
Enclave
Frightful Four
H.A.M.M.E.R.
The Hand
Hydra
Kree
Legion of the Unliving
Lethal Legion
Masters of Evil
Mindless Ones
Secret Empire
Serpent Society
Sinister Six
Skrulls
Sons of the Serpent
Squadron Sinister
Symbiotes
U-Foes
Wrecking Crew
Zodiac
AlternativeversionsAlternate versionsof the Avengers
A-Force
A-Next
Agents of Atlas
Avengers A.I.
Avengers Academy
Dark Avengers
Force Works
Great Lakes Avengers
Mighty Avengers
New Avengers
Members
Secret Avengers
Ultimates
Members
Uncanny Avengers
U.S.Avengers
West Coast Avengers
Members
Young Avengers
Marvel CinematicUniverse
Bruce Banner
Clint Barton
Carol Danvers
Nick Fury
J.A.R.V.I.S.
Scott Lang
Wanda Maximoff
Nebula
Peter Parker
James Rhodes
Rocket
Natasha Romanoff
Steve Rogers
Xu Shang-Chi 
Tony Stark
Thor
Vision
Sam Wilson
Others
Captain America
Hulk
Iron Man
Thor
 Category
vteBlack Widow
Stan Lee
Don Rico
Don Heck
Characters
Claire Voyant
Natasha Romanoff
Yelena Belova
Supporting characters
Captain America
Daredevil
Hawkeye
Hulk
Iron Man
Maria Hill
Mockingbird
Nick Fury
Punisher
Red Guardian
Thor
Winter Soldier
Wolverine
Teams
Avengers
Mighty
Secret
Champions
Heroes for Hire
Lady Liberators
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Thunderbolts
Enemies
A.I.M.
Black Spectre
Crimson Dynamo
Damon Dran
Femizons
HYDRA
Iron Maiden
Taskmaster
Viper (Madame Hydra)
Publications
Amazing Adventures
Marvel Fanfare
Fury/Black Widow: Death Duty
The Twelve
Widowmaker
In other media
Avengers Confidential: Black Widow & Punisher
Natasha Romanoff (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
Iron Man 2
Avengers film series
Captain America: The Winter Soldier
Captain America: Civil War
Black Widow
soundtrack
Agent Carter
Dottie Underwood
Yelena Belova (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
Black Widow
soundtrack
Hawkeye
Thunderbolts
Marvel's Wastelanders
Alternative versions
Monica Chang
Ultimate Spider-Woman
 Category
vteCaptain America
Joe Simon
Jack Kirby
Alter egos
Steve Rogers
Isaiah Bradley
William Nasland
Jeffrey Mace
William Burnside
John Walker
Bucky Barnes
Sam Wilson
Supporting characters
Black Widow
Betsy Ross / Golden Girl
Bucky
Bucky Barnes
Jack Monroe
Rick Jones
Battlestar
Rikki Barnes
Peggy Carter
Sharon Carter
Demolition Man
Diamondback
Fabian Stankowicz
Falcon
Fantastic Four
Jack Flag
Nick Fury
Hawkeye
Maria Hill
Howling Commandos
Hulk
Invaders
Iron Man
Rick Jones
Robert Maverick
Namor
Nomad
Ian Rogers
Thunderbolt Ross
John Ryker
Spider-Man
Glenn Talbot
Thor
Wolverine
X-Men
Teams
All-Winners Squad
Avengers
New
Uncanny
Secret
Illuminati
Invaders
S.H.I.E.L.D.
EnemiesMain
Armadillo
Arnim Zola
Baron Strucker
Baron Zemo
Heinrich Zemo
Helmut Zemo
Batroc the Leaper
Crossbones
Doctor Faustus
Flag-Smasher
Grand Director
Machinesmith
Madame Hydra
MODOK
Red Skull
Sin
Taskmaster
Winter Soldier
Groups
A.I.M.
Circus of Crime
Femizons
HYDRA
Maggia
Secret Empire
Serpent Society
Serpent Squad
Watchdogs
Snake-themed
Anaconda
Asp
Bushmaster
Coachwhip
Cobra
Constrictor
Copperhead
Cottonmouth
Death Adder
Diamondback
Eel
Princess Python
Puff Adder
Rattler
Rock Python
Sidewinder
Viper
Other
Abomination
Baron Blood
Blackwing
Doughboy
Dredmund the Druid
Everyman
Flux
Hate-Monger
Jack O'Lantern
Leader
Left-Winger
Aleksander Lukin
Madman
Master Man
Mister Hyde
MODAM
Mother Night
Nefarius/Moonstone
Nightshade/Nighthawk
Nuke
Porcupine
Roxxon
Scarecrow
Scourge of the Underworld
Sleeper
Slug
Superia
Teen Abomination
Vermin
Publications
Captain America (1968 present)
Captain America (vol. 5)
Captain America: Reborn
Captain America and the Falcon
Fallen Son: The Death of Captain America
Truth: Red, White & Black
Tales of Suspense
Adventures of Captain America
Captain America and Nick Fury: Blood Truce
Captain America and Nick Fury: The Otherworld War
Captain America: White
Storylines
"Captain America: The Captain"
"Civil War"
"The Death of Captain America"
"Secret Empire"
In other mediaFilm
Captain America (1944 serial)
Captain America (1979)
Captain America II: Death Too Soon
Captain America (1990)
Captain America: The First Avenger
soundtrack
Captain America: The Winter Soldier
soundtrack
Captain America: Civil War
soundtrack
Captain America: New World Order
Television
The Falcon and the Winter Soldier
Video games
Captain America in: The Doom Tube of Dr. Megalomann
The Amazing Spider-Man and Captain America in Dr. Doom's Revenge!
Captain America and The Avengers
Captain America: Super Soldier
Untitled Captain America Black Panther video game
Alternate versions
Ultimate Captain America
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Steve Rogers
Sam Wilson
Related articles
American Dream
Captain America's shield
Iron Patriot
Rogers: The Musical
Stucky
 Category
vteFantastic Four
Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
MembersOriginal members
Mister Fantastic
Invisible Woman
Human Torch
Thing
Notable recruits
Ant-Man
Black Panther
Crystal
Devil Dinosaur
Ghost Rider
Hulk
Medusa
Moon Girl
Ms. Marvel/She-Thing
Namorita
Nova
Power Man
She-Hulk
Spider-Man
Storm
Tigra
Wolverine
SupportingSupporting cast
Agatha Harkness
Alicia Masters
Avengers
Franklin Richards
Franklin Storm
H.E.R.B.I.E.
Inhumans
Black Bolt
Medusa
Karnak
Gorgon
Triton
Crystal
Lockjaw
Lyja
Namor
Nathaniel Richards
Silver Surfer
Spider-Man
Thundra
Uatu the Watcher
Valeria Richards
Willie Lumpkin
Wyatt Wingfoot
X-Men
Yancy Street Gang
Superhero allies
Ant-Man
Hank Pym
Scott Lang
Avengers
Black Panther
Black Widow
Captain America
Daredevil
Ghost Rider/Danny Ketch
Hawkeye
Hulk
Iron Man
Nick Fury
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Spider-Man
Thor
Wolverine
X-Men
Neutral
Gladiator
Namor
Time Variance Authority
EnemiesAntagonists
Annihilus
Awesome Android
Blastaar
Brute
Devos the Devastator
Diablo
Doctor Doom
Ego the Living Planet
Galactus
Hate-Monger
Impossible Man
Kala
Kang the Conqueror
Klaw
Kristoff Vernard
Mad Thinker
Maker
Maximus
Miracle Man
Mole Man
Molecule Man
Nicholas Scratch
Occulus
Overmind
Psycho-Man
Puppet Master
Red Ghost
Ronan the Accuser
Super-Skrull
Supreme Intelligence
Terrax
Thanos
Trapster
Wizard
Other supervillains
Air-Walker
Attuma
Electro
Firelord
Graviton
Hydro-Man
Master Pandemonium
Mephisto
Paibok
Sandman
Sphinx
Stardust
Titania
Organizations
A.I.M.
Black Order
Chitauri
Doombots
Enclave
Frightful Four
Heralds of Galactus
Hydra
Kree
Salem's Seven
Sinister Six
Skrulls
Locations
Baxter Building
Four Freedoms Plaza
Latveria
Negative Zone
Subterranea
PublicationsCurrent
Fantastic Four
Previous
Fantastic Force
FF
Marvel Knights 4
Marvel Two-in-One
Super-Villain Team-Up
The Thing
Limited
Fantastic Four: 1234
Fantastic Four: The End
Spider-Man and the Fantastic Four
Othercontinuities
Doom 2099
Fantastic Five
Fantastic Four: Unstable Molecules
Fantastic Four 2099
Marvel 1602: Fantastick Four
Superman/Fantastic Four
Ultimate Fantastic Four
Storylines
"The Galactus Trilogy"
"This Man... This Monster!"
"Days of Future Present"
"Reckoning War"
Alternate versions
Invisible Woman
The Thing
Related articles
Doctor Doom's Fearfall
Fantastic Four Incorporated
Fantastic Four in popular media
Fantasticar
Future Foundation
Ultimate Fantastic Four story arcs
Unstable molecules
 Category
vteHawkeye
Stan Lee
Don Heck
Hawkeyes
Clint Barton
Goliath
Ronin
Kate Bishop
Barney Barton
Bullseye
Affiliations
Avengers
New
Secret
West Coast
Young
Cross Technological Enterprises
Defenders
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Thunderbolts
Supporting characters
Black Widow
Captain America
Dominic Fortune
Echo
Hulk
Iron Man
Jeff
Jessica Jones
Mockingbird
Patriot
Scarlet Witch
Stature
Wolverine
Enemies
Baron Zemo
Circus of Crime
Crossfire
Death-Throws
Oddball
Kingpin
Madame Masque
Maggia
Moonstone
Phantom Rider
Silencer
Spider-Bitch
Swordsman
Trick Shot
Publications
Solo Avengers
Hawkeye & Mockingbird
Widowmaker
Hawkeye: Blindspot
In other media
Marvel's Wastelanders: Hawkeye
Hawkeye (TV series)
Clint Barton (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
Kate Bishop (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
Related articles
The Hawkeye Initiative
vteThe Hulk
Stan Lee
Jack Kirby
Hulk family
Hulk/Bruce Banner
Immortal Hulk/Devil Hulk
Guilt Hulk
Maestro
Ultimate Hulk
She-Hulk/Jennifer Walters
Skaar
Red Hulk
Thunderbolt Ross
Robert Maverick
A-Bomb/Rick Jones
She-Hulk/Lyra
Hiro-Kala
Red She-Hulk/Betty Ross
Hulk/Amadeus Cho
Weapon H
Hulk 2099
Tyrone Cash
Abomination
Teen Abomination
Leader
Madman
Flux
Ravage
Sasquatch
Doc Sasquatch
Missing Link
Mister Hyde
Rhino
Man-Bull
Minotaur
Supportingcharacters
Alpha Flight
Avengers
Bereet
Betty Ross
Defenders
Doc Samson
Deadpool
Elaine Banner
Gamma Corps
Glorian
Jack McGee/Jackie McGee
Jarella
Jim Wilson
Marlo Chandler
Pantheon
Rebecca Banner
Red Hulk
Thunderbolt Ross
Robert Maverick
Spider-Man
Teen Brigade
Warbound
Caiera
Elloe Kaifi
Hiroim
Korg
Miek
No-Name
X-Men
Superhero allies
Alpha Flight
Avengers
Black Widow
Captain America
Defenders
Doctor Strange
Deadpool
Fantastic Four
Hawkeye
Iron Man
Namor
Nick Fury
Red Hulk
Thunderbolt Ross
Robert Maverick
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Silver Surfer
Spider-Man
Thor
Valkyrie
Wolverine
X-Men
EnemiesMain enemies
Abomination
Absorbing Man
Bi-Beast
Gargoyle
Glenn Talbot
Guilt Hulk (Brian Banner)
Juggernaut
Leader
Madman
Maestro
Mercy
One Below All
Red Hulk
Thunderbolt Ross
Robert Maverick
Red King
Redeemer
Rhino
Ringmaster
Tyrannus
Wendigo
Xemnu
Zzzax
Group enemies
A.I.M.
Circus of Crime
Enclave
Femizons
Hulkbusters
Hydra
Riot Squad
Secret Empire
Soviet Super-Soldiers
Thunderbolts
U-Foes
Winter Guard
Other enemies
Agamemnon
Arsenal
Constrictor
D'Spayre
Devastator
Immortal Hulk/Devil Hulk
Fin Fang Foom
Flux
Glob
Gog
Gold Bug
Gremlin
Grey Gargoyle
Guilt Hulk
Hammer and Anvil
It! The Living Colossus
John Ryker
Killer Shrike
Klaatu
Man-Bull
Metal Master
Minotaur
Missing Link
Mister Hyde
MODOK
Moonstone
Psyklop
Puffball Collective
Ravage
Shaper of Worlds
Super-Adaptoid
Teen Abomination
Neutral rivals
Captain America
Doc Samson
Giant-Man
Femizons
Thundra
Glenn Talbot
Hulkbuster suit (Iron Man)
Namor
Sabra
Sasquatch
Scorpion
Thing
Thor
Red Hulk
Thunderbolt Ross
Robert Maverick
Thunderbolts
Wolverine
TelevisionLive action
The Incredible Hulk (1977 1982)
episodes
soundtrack
home video releases
The Incredible Hulk Returns
The Trial of the Incredible Hulk
The Death of the Incredible Hulk
She-Hulk: Attorney at Law
Animation
The Marvel Super Heroes (1966)
The Incredible Hulk (1982 1983) (characters)
The Incredible Hulk (1996 1997)
Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. (episodes)
FilmsLive action
Hulk (2003)
The Incredible Hulk (2008)
soundtrack
Animation
Marvel Animated Features
Iron Man and Hulk: Heroes United
Hulk: Where Monsters Dwell
Video games
Questprobe featuring The Hulk
The Incredible Hulk (1994)
The Pantheon Saga
Hulk
The Incredible Hulk (2003)
Ultimate Destruction
The Incredible Hulk (2008)
Nintendo DS
Titles
The Incredible Hulk
Hulk Comic
The End
The Manga
Tales to Astonish
The Rampaging Hulk
5 Ronin
Storylines
"Planet Hulk"
"World War Hulk"
"Fall of the Hulks"
"World War Hulks"
Alternative versions
Maestro
Ultimate Hulk
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Hulk 2099
Tyrone Cash
Related articles
The Incredible Hulk (comic strip)
Hulk Hands
The Incredible Hulk Coaster
The Incredible Hulks
Hulk Classics
Hysterical strength
Monsters
 Category
vteIron Man
Don Heck
Stan Lee
Larry Lieber
Jack Kirby
CharactersIron Man family
Iron Man
Rescue
War Machine
Doctor Doom
Ironheart
Supporting
Black Widow
Bethany Cabe
Captain America
Fantastic Four
F.R.I.D.A.Y.
Nick Fury
Guardsman
Maria Hill
Happy Hogan
Hawkeye
Hulk
J.A.R.V.I.S.
Edwin Jarvis
Pepper Potts
Spider-Man
Arno Stark
Howard Stark
Maria Stark
Thor
Mary Jane Watson
Wolverine
X-Men
Ho Yinsen
Teams
Avengers
New
Mighty
Force Works
Guardians of the Galaxy
Illuminati
S.H.I.E.L.D.
AntagonistsMain enemies
Black Knight
Blizzard
Controller
Crimson Dynamo
Fin Fang Foom
Firebrand
Ghost
Iron Monger
Justin Hammer
Aldrich Killian
Living Laser
Madame Masque
Mandarin
Melter
MODOK
Raiders
Spymaster
Zeke Stane
Titanium Man
Ultimo
Unicorn
Whiplash
Groups
A.I.M
Hydra
Maggia
Roxxon
Ten Rings
Other enemies
Arsenal
Crimson Cowl
Detroit Steel
Doctor Doom
Dreadknight
Firepower
Kearson DeWitt
Mauler
Norman Osborn
Morgan Stark
Sunset Bain
Sunturion
Technovore
Ultron
Whirlwind
Wong-Chu
Comic books
Iron Man and Sub-Mariner
Iron Man
Iron Man (vol. 4)
Enter the Mandarin
Infamous Iron Man
The Invincible Iron Man
Iron Man vs. Whiplash
Storylines
"Demon in a Bottle"
"Doomquest"
"Armor Wars"
"Extremis"
"Civil War"
"Civil War II"
Ultimate Marvel series
Ultimate Iron Man
Ultimate Human
Ultimate Comics: Armor Wars
Ultimate Comics: Iron Man
In other mediaFilmsMarvel Cinematic Universe
Tony Stark / Iron Man
armor
Iron Man
soundtrack
Iron Man 2
soundtrack
Iron Man 3
soundtrack
Marvel Animated Features
Iron Man: Rise of Technovore
Television
The Marvel Super Heroes
Iron Man
episodes
Iron Man: Armored Adventures
episodes
Iron Man
episodes
Video games
Iron Man / X-O Manowar in Heavy Metal
The Invincible Iron Man
Iron Man
Iron Man 2
Iron Man 3
Iron Man VR
Attractions
Iron Man Experience
Alternate versions
Iron Man 2020
Mainframe
Ultimate Iron Man
Locations
Stark Mansion
Stark Tower
Armors
Iron Spider
Iron Legion
Iron Patriot
Related articles
Iron Lad
Stark Industries
Iron Man: The Armored Avenger
War Machine in other media
James Rhodes (Marvel Cinematic Universe)
 Category
vteKitty PrydeSupporting characters
Colossus
Wolverine
Star-Lord
Teams
X-Men
Excalibur
Guardians of the Galaxy
New Mutants
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Publications
Kitty Pryde and Wolverine
Kitty Pryde, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Related articles
X-Men: Pryde of the X-Men
Alternative versions of Kitty Pryde
vteNew Avengers
Brian Michael Bendis
David Finch
Founding members
Luke Cage
Captain America
Echo
Iron Man
Sentry
Spider-Man
Spider-Woman
Wolverine
Later members
Bucky Barnes
Daredevil
Doctor Strange
Iron Fist
Iron Man
Jessica Jones
Mockingbird
Thing
War Machine
Enemies
A.I.M.
Yelena Belova
Collective
Crimson Cowl (Justine Hammer)
Dark Avengers
Doctor Doom
H.A.M.M.E.R.
Hand
Hood
Hydra
Madame Masque
Norman Osborn
Sauron
Savage Land Mutates
Skrulls
Super-Skrull
Thunderbolts
U-Foes
Wrecker
Headquarters
Stark Tower
Sanctum Sanctorum
Avengers Mansion
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Storylines
Avengers Disassembled
House of M
Civil War
Fallen Son: The Death of Captain America
World War Hulk
Avengers/Invaders
Secret Invasion
Dark Reign
Siege
Heroic Age
Fear Itself
Avengers vs. X-Men
Infinity
Related series
Avengers
Mighty Avengers
Dark Avengers
Avengers: The Initiative
New Avengers: Illuminati
New Avengers/Transformers
Secret Avengers
Secret War
Young Avengers
Related articles
Victoria Hand
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Superhuman Registration Act
vteShe-Hulk
Stan Lee
John Buscema
Supportingcharacters
Awesome Andy
Blonde Phantom
Doc Samson
Elaine Banner
Hellcat
Hulk/Bruce Banner
Jack of Hearts
Janet van Dyne/Wasp
John Jameson
Jazinda
Lyra
Mallory Book
Michael Morbius
Red She-Hulk/Betty Ross
Hulk/Amadeus Cho
Richard Rory
Southpaw
Thunderbolt Ross
Wyatt Wingfoot
Teams
A-Force
Avengers
Mighty
Defenders
Fantastic Force
Fantastic Four
Femizons
Heroes for Hire
Lady Liberators
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Enemies
Abomination
Absorbing Man
A.I.M.
Champion of the Universe
Circus of Crime
Headmen
Chondu the Mystic
Gorilla-Man
Ruby Thursday
Leader
Lightmaster
Mahkizmo
Man-Elephant
Silencer
Teen Abomination
Thunderbolt Ross
Thundra
Titania
Wrecking Crew
Television
The Incredible Hulk and She-Hulk
Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. (episodes)
She-Hulk: Attorney at Law
vteSpider-Man
Stan Lee
Steve Ditko
Characters
Peter Parker
Ben Reilly
Otto Octavius
Miguel O'Hara
Miles Morales
Supporting characters
Enemies
Alternative versions of Spider-Man
Incarnations of Spider-Man
Locations
Midtown High School
Daily Bugle
Oscorp
Life Foundation
Parker Industries
Alchemax
Comic books
The Amazing Spider-Man
Storylines
Other media
In film
In television
In video games
In novels
In literature 
Toys
The Amazing Spider-Man (pinball)
Spider-Man (pinball)
Spider-Man Classics
Spider-Man and Friends
Lego Spider-Man
See also
Bibliography of works on Spider-Man
"With great power comes great responsibility"
 Category
vteThor (Marvel Comics)
Stan Lee
Larry Lieber
Jack Kirby
Supportingcharacters
Angela
Avengers
Uncanny
Balder
Beta Ray Bill
Captain America
Eitri
Fantastic Four
Freya
Frigga
Guardians of the Galaxy
Heimdall
Hugin and Munin
Hulk
Hrimhari
Iron Man
Kelda
Jane Foster
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Loki
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Odin
Olympians
Hercules
Zeus
Sif
Spider-Man
Thor Girl
Thunderstrike
Tyr
Valkyrior
Valkyrie
Warriors Three
Fandral
Hogun
Volstagg
Wolverine
X-Men
Antagonists
Absorbing Man
Amatsu-Mikaboshi
Ares
Bloodaxe
Cobra
Desak
Destroyer
Ego the Living Planet
Enchanters Three
Enchantress
Executioner
Firelord
Gorr the God Butcher
Grey Gargoyle
Hela
Laufey
Loki
Lorelei
Malekith the Accursed
Man-Beast
Mangog
Midgard Serpent
Minotaur
Mister Hyde
Mongoose
Radioactive Man
Ragnarok
Serpent
Surtur
Ulik
Wrecking Crew
Bulldozer
Piledriver
Thunderball
Wrecker
Ymir
Zarrko
Items
Mjolnir
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Norn Stones
Bibliography
Journey into Mystery
Thor: Blood Oath
Thor: Son of Asgard
Thor: Vikings
Ultimate Comics: Thor
War of the Realms
In other mediaTelevision
The Marvel Super Heroes
The Incredible Hulk Returns
Film
Marvel Animated Features
Thor
soundtrack
Thor: The Dark World
soundtrack
Team Thor
Thor: Ragnarok
soundtrack
Thor: Love and Thunder
soundtrack
Video games
Thor: God of Thunder
Thor: Son of Asgard
Motion comic
Thor & Loki: Blood Brothers
Alternative versions
Ultimate Thor
Marvel Cinematic Universe
Related
Thor in Norse mythology
Thor in comics
Asgardians of the Galaxy
Asgard
Dwarves
Elves
Time Variance Authority
 Category
vteWolverine
Len Wein
John Romita Sr.
Teams
X-Men
Alpha Flight
Avengers
New
Uncanny
Fantastic Four
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Team X / Weapon X
X-Force
Secret Defenders
Horsemen of Apocalypse
X-Men allies
Angel/Archangel
Armor
Banshee
Beast
Bishop
Cable
Colossus
Cyclops
Deadpool
Emma Frost
Forge
Gambit
Havok
Iceman
Jean Grey/Phoenix
Jubilee
Karma
Kwannon
Magneto
Morph
Mystique
Namor
Nightcrawler
Polaris
Professor X
Kitty Pryde
Psylocke
Rogue
Storm
X-23
Supportingcharacters
Alpha Flight
Heather Hudson (Vindicator)
James Hudson (Guardian)
Avengers
Black Cat
Black Widow
Captain America
Archie Corrigan
Daken
Agent Zero/Maverick
Deadpool
Elsie-Dee
Jessica Drew
Elektra
Fantastic Four
Feral
Hawkeye
Jimmy Hudson
Hulk
Iron Man
Moon Knight
Native
Nick Fury
Silver Fox
Spider-Man
Thor
Weapon H
John Wraith
X-23
X-Men (List)
Mariko Yashida
Yukio
Enemies
A.I.M.
Agent Zero/Maverick
Apocalypse
Arnim Zola
Bastion
Bloodscream
Bolivar Trask
Brotherhood of Mutants
Magneto
Sabretooth
Toad
Mystique
Juggernaut
Blob
Pyro
Mastermind
Avalanche
Cameron Hodge
Malcolm Colcord
Collector
Abraham Cornelius
Cyber
Genesis
Gorgon
Hand
Hellfire Club
Brent Jackson
Juggernaut
Lady Deathstrike
Lord Dark Wind
Lord Shingen
Thomas Logan
Maggia
Magneto
Mister Sinister
Mister X
Mojo
Mystique
Nitro
Nuke
Ogun
Omega Red
Phalanx
Donald Pierce
Professor Thorton
Puma
Reavers
Romulus
Roughouse
Sabretooth
Sauron
Savage Land Mutates
Sebastian Shaw
Sentinels
Shadow King
Silver Samurai
Kenuichio Harada
Shin Harada
Spiral
Sapphire Styx
Symbiotes
Taskmaster
Tiger Shark
Matsu'o Tsurayaba
Vermin
Viper
Wendigo
Wild Child
William Stryker
Comic books
5 Ronin
Astonishing Spider-Man & Wolverine
Elektra and Wolverine: The Redeemer
Kitty Pryde and Wolverine
Marvel Comics Presents
"Weapon X"
Origin
Savage Wolverine
Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk
Wolverine
Wolverine: Manifest Destiny
Wolverine: Origins
Wolverine: Snikt!
Wolverine: The Best There Is
Wolverine and the X-Men
Wolverine and Deadpool
Wolverine: Weapon X
Death of Wolverine
Wolverine/Nick Fury
The Scorpio Connection
Bloody Choices
Scorpio Rising
All-New Wolverine
Hunt for Wolverine
Return of Wolverine
X Lives of Wolverine and X Deaths of Wolverine
In other media
X-Men Origins: Wolverine
The Wolverine
soundtrack
Logan
soundtrack
Wolverine and the X-Men
Wolverine (podcast)
Marvel's Wastelanders (podcast)
Marvel Anime
Alternative versions
Ultimate Wolverine
Old Man Logan
Film Logan
Related articles
Weapon X
Weapon Plus
Madripoor
Landau, Luckman, and Lake
 Category
vteX-Men charactersMutantFounding Members
Angel
Beast
Cyclops
Iceman
Jean Grey
Professor X
Othermembers
Anole
Armor
Aurora
Banshee
Bishop
Blindfold
Blink
Boom-Boom
Box
Cable
Caliban
Cannonball
Chamber
Changeling
Cipher
Cloak and Dagger
Colossus
Cypher
Darwin
Dazzler
Deadpool
Doctor Nemesis
Domino
Dust
Elixir
Emma Frost
Fantomex
Firestar
Forge
Frenzy
Gambit
Gentle
Graymalkin
Havok
Hellion
Hepzibah
Hope
Husk
Ink
Jubilee
Karma
Krakoa
Lady Mastermind
Lifeguard
Lockheed
Longshot
M
Maggott
Magik
Magma
Magneto
Marrow
Mercury
Meggan
Mimic
Moonstar
Mystique
Namor
Nightcrawler
Northstar
Omega Sentinel
Pixie
Polaris
Psylocke
Betsy Braddock
Kwannon
Prodigy
Kitty Pryde
Rockslide
Rogue
Sage
Slipstream
Spyke
Stacy X
Storm
Rachel Summers
Squidboy
Sunfire
Sunspot
Surge
Synch
Tildie Soames
Thunderbird (John Proudstar)
Thunderbird (Neal Shaara)
Trance
Warlock
Warpath
Washout
Wolfsbane
Wolverine (Laura Kinney)
Wolverine (Logan)
X-Man
Xavier Institute students and staff
Kuan-Yi Xorn and Shen Xorn/Zorn
Secondary teams
Alpha Squadron
Excalibur
Fallen Angels
Generation X
Marauders
Morlocks
New Mutants
X-Corporation
X-Corps
X-Factor
X-Force
X-Statix
X-Terminators
X.S.E.
X-Treme Sanctions Executive
Xavier's Security Enforcers
Supporting characters
Callisto
Ka-Zar
Senator Robert Kelly
Layla Miller
Legion
Lilandra Neramani
Quicksilver
Shi'ar
Scarlet Witch
Starjammers
Ch'od
Corsair
Korvus
Raza Longknife
Hepzibah
Valerie Cooper
Superhero allies
Avengers
Black Widow
Hawkeye
Hulk
Iron Man
Captain America
Thor
Ms. Marvel/Captain Marvel
Carol Danvers
Fantastic Four
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Nick Fury
Spider-Man
S.W.O.R.D.
Antagonists
Apocalypse
Arcade
Avalanche
Azazel
Bastion
Belasco
Black Tom Cassidy
Blob
Abraham Cornelius
Fabian Cortez
Graydon Creed
Cyber
Dark Beast
Deathbird
Demon Bear
Doctor Doom
Donald Pierce
Exodus
Trevor Fitzroy
Emma Frost
Galactus
Henry Peter Gyrich
Cameron Hodge
High Evolutionary
Holocaust
Juggernaut
Kang the Conqueror
Kid Omega
Senator Robert Kelly
Krakoa
Lady Deathstrike
Steven Lang
Living Monolith
Magneto
Master Mold
Mastermind
Moira MacTaggert
Mesmero
Mikhail Rasputin
Mister Sinister
Mojo
Mystique
N'astirh
Nimrod
Cassandra Nova
Omega Red
Omega Sentinel
Onslaught
Norman Osborn
Phantazia
Predator X
Proteus
Madelyne Pryor
Pyro
Sabretooth
Saturnyne
Sauron
Selene
Shadow King
Sebastian Shaw
Shinobi Shaw
Siena Blaze
Silver Samurai
Kenuichio Harada
Spiral
Stryfe
William Stryker
Thanos
Toad
Bolivar Trask
Viper
Vulcan
Antagonistic teams
A.I.M.
Alliance of Evil
Brood
Brotherhood of Mutants
Clan Akkaba
Dark X-Men
Externals
Factor Three
Fenris
Freedom Force
Hellfire Club
Hellions
Horsemen of Apocalypse
Hounds
Humanity's Last Stand
Hydra
Marauders
Nasty Boys
Neo
Phalanx
Purifiers
Reavers
Savage Land Mutates
Sentinels
Shadow-X
U-Men
Upstarts
Weapon X
Alternative versions
Jimmy Hudson
Magician
Ultimate Wolverine
In other media
Apocalypse
Betsy Braddock
Cyclops
Gambit
Magneto
film series
Mystique
Jean Grey
film series
Professor X
film series
Peter Maximoff
Rogue
Storm
Wade Wilson
Wolverine
film series
vteJack KirbyBibliographyMarvel Comics
2001: A Space Odyssey
Absorbing Man
Adam Warlock
Agatha Harkness
Alicia Masters
Amazing Adventures
Amphibion
Annihilus
Ant-Man / Giant-Man
Hank Pym
Arnim Zola
Asgard
Astonishing Tales
Attuma
Avengers
Avengers Mansion
Awesome Android
Balder
Baron Strucker
Baron Zemo
Heinrich Zemo
Batroc the Leaper
Baxter Building
Betsy Ross
Betty Ross
Black Panther
Blastaar
Blob
Boomerang
Brother Tode
Brotherhood of Mutants
Bucky
Bucky Barnes
Burner
Captain America
shield
Celestial
Cerebro
Circus of Crime
Contemplator
Cosmic Cube
Crusaders
Cyttorak
Daily Bugle
Danger Room
Deviant
Devil Dinosaur
Destroyer
Diablo
Doctor Doom
Doctor Druid
Doctor Faustus
Doughboy
Dragon Man
Dredmund the Druid
Egghead
Ego the Living Planet
Enchantress
Enclave
Erik Josten
Eternals
Ajak
Druig
Forgotten One
Ikaris
Kingo Sunen
Makkari
Sersi
Sprite
Thena
Zuras
Executioner
Fafnir
Fantastic Four
Human Torch
Invisible Woman
Mister Fantastic
Thing
Fenris Wolf
Fin Fang Foom
Fixer
Forbush Man
Franklin Richards
Franklin Storm
Frightful Four
Galactus
Giants
Giganto
Goom
Gorgilla
Grey Gargoyle
Groot
Growing Man
H.E.R.B.I.E.
Hate-Monger
Heimdall
Hela
Helicarrier
High Evolutionary
Hippolyta
Hulk
Hulk Robot
Human Cannonball
HYDRA
Immortus
Impossible Man
Inhumans
Black Bolt
Crystal
Gorgon
Karnak
Lockjaw
Maximus
Medusa
Triton
Iron Man
armor
It! The Living Colossus
Jane Foster
Jasper Sitwell
Journey into Mystery
Juggernaut
Ka-Zar
Kala
Kang the Conqueror
Karkas
Karnilla
Klaw
Krang
Kree
Ronan the Accuser
Sentry
Supreme Intelligence
Kro
Latveria
Laufey
Lifter
Loki
Lucifer
Machine Man
Mad Thinker
Magneto
Man-Beast
Mangog
Marvel Fireside Books
Masters of Evil
Mentallo
Miracle Man
MODOK
Mole Man
Molecule Man
Monsteroso
Moon-Boy
Mastermind (Jason Wyngarde)
Mutants
Negative Zone
New Men
Nick Fury
Norn Stones
Odin
Olympians
Ares
Artemis
Athena
Hera
Hercules
Hermes
Pluto
Zeus
Orrgo
Painter
Peggy Carter
Peepers
Plunderer
Power Broker
Psycho-Man
Puppet Master
Quicksilver
Radioactive Man
Randall Darby
Rawhide Kid
Red Ghost
Red Skull
Resistants
Rick Jones
Ringmaster
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Savage Land
Scarlet Witch
Scorpion
Secret Empire
Sentinel
Master Mold
Bolivar Trask
Sharon Carter
Sif
Silver Surfer
Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos
Dino Manelli
Dum Dum Dugan
Gabe Jones
Happy Sam Sawyer
Howling Commandos
Izzy Cohen
Junior Juniper
Pinky Pinkerton
Rebel Ralston
Skrull
Dorrek VII
Morrat
Super-Skrull
Sleeper
Slither
Stark Industries
Stark Tower
Tales of Suspense
Tales to Astonish
Stranger
Subterranea
Super-Adaptoid
Surtur
T'Chaka
The Galactus Trilogy
The Incredible Hulk
This Man... This Monster!
Thor
Mjolnir
Thunderbolt Ross
Toad
Trapster
Tricephalous
Trolls
Tumbler
Tutinax
Two-Gun Kid
Tyr
Tyrannus
Ulik
Ultimate Nullifier
Uncanny X-Men
Uni-Mind
Unicorn
Unus the Untouchable
Vanisher
Vision (Timely Comics)
Volla
Wakanda
Warriors Three
Fandral
Hogun
Volstagg
Wasp
Watchers
Uatu
Whirlwind
Willie Lumpkin
Wizard
Wonder Man
Wong-Chu
Wrecker
Wyatt Wingfoot
X-Mansion
X-Men
Angel
Beast
Cyclops
Iceman
Marvel Girl
Professor X
Yancy Street Gang
Ymir
Young Allies
Yuri Topolov
Zabu
Zarrko
DC Comics
1st Issue Special
Agent Axis
Anti-Life Equation
Apokolips
Darkseid
DeSaad
Devilance
Doctor Bedlam
Female Furies
Bernadeth
Lashina
Mad Harriet
Stompa
Glorious Godfrey
Granny Goodness
Kalibak
Kanto
Mantis
Parademons
Steppenwolf
Virman Vundabar
Atlas
Black Racer
Boom tube
Boy Commandos
Bruno Mannheim
Challengers of the Unknown
Ace Morgan
Red Ryan
Crazy Quilt
Dan Turpin
Dingbats of Danger Street
Dubbilex
Etrigan the Demon
Fourth World
Funky Flashman
Global Peace Agency
OMAC
Guardian
House of Secrets
Infinity-Man
Intergang
Kamandi
Klarion the Witch Boy
Kobra
Manhunter
Paul Kirk
Mark Shaw
Manhunters
Metron
Morgan Edge
Morgaine le Fey
Mother Box
Mr. Scarlet
Newsboy Legion
New Gods
New Genesis
Bekka
Big Barda
Forager
Forever People
Highfather
Lightray
Mister Miracle
Orion
Oberon
Project Cadmus
Sandman (Garrett Sanford)
Shilo Norman
Sonny Sumo
Source
Star Spangled Comics
Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen
Super Powers
Weird Mystery Tales
Other
Black Magic
Boys' Ranch
Captain 3-D
Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers
Destroyer Duck
The Double Life of Private Strong
Fighting American
The Fly
Headline Comics (For The American Boy)
Jack Kirby's Galactic Bounty Hunters
Justice Traps the Guilty
The Kirbyverse
My Date Comics
Our Fighting Forces
Secret City Saga
Silver Star
Sky Masters
Street Code
Young Love
Young Romance
Television work
Centurions
Goldie Gold and Action Jack
Mister T
Thundarr the Barbarian
Related articles
Kirby Krackle
Stan Lee
Joe Simon
Mainline Publications
Kirby: Genesis
Kirby: King of Comics
 Category
vteStan LeeMediaTitles
Backstreet Project
Heroes for Hope
How to Draw Comics the Marvel Way
Just Imagine...
Marvel Fireside Books
Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos
Stan Lee's God Woke
The Amazing Spider-Man
The Incredible Hulk
The Sensational Spider-Man
Ultimo
Uncanny X-Men
Storylines
"Astonishing Tales"
"Epic Illustrated"
"Marvel Super-Heroes"
"Green Goblin Reborn!"
"If This Be My Destiny...!"
"Snafu"
"Stan Lee Meets..."
"The Galactus Trilogy"
"The Six Arms Saga"
"This Man... This Monster!"
"Venus"
Shows
Heroman
Stan Lee's Superhumans
Stan Lee's World of Heroes
Stan Lee's Lucky Man
Stripperella
The Reflection
Who Wants to Be a Superhero?
Who Wants to Be a Superhero? (U.K. TV series)
Films
The Comic Book Greats
Stan Lee's Mutants, Monsters & Marvels
The Condor
Lightspeed
Mosaic
Related
Joan Boocock Lee (wife)
Larry Lieber (brother)
List of cameos
Stan Lee Foundation
Stan Lee Media
productions
Stan Lee's LA Comic Con
POW! Entertainment
CreatedCharactersHeroes
Ant-Man / Giant-Man
Hank Pym
Bill Foster
Avengers
Black Knight
Sir Percy
Dane Whitman
Black Panther
Black Widow (Natasha Romanova)
Blonde Phantom
Brother Voodoo
Captain Marvel
Mar-Vell
Linda Carter
Millie Collins
Daredevil
Destroyer
Doctor Druid
Doctor Strange
Falcon
Fantastic Four
Human Torch
Invisible Woman
Mister Fantastic
Thing
Forbush Man
Frankenstein Monster
Goliath
Groot
Guardians of the Galaxy
Hawkeye
Hercules
Howling Commandos
Izzy Cohen
Dum Dum Dugan
Nick Fury
Gabe Jones
Eric Koenig
Rebel Ralston
Junior Juniper
Pinky Pinkerton
Dino Manelli
Hulk
Inhumans
Black Bolt
Crystal
Gorgon
Karnak the Shatterer
Lockjaw
Medusa
Triton
Iron Man
Ka-Zar
Kid Colt
Man-Thing
Marvel Boy (Robert Grayson)
Mimic
Prowler
Quicksilver
Ravage 2099
Rawhide Kid
Scarlet Witch
Sersi
She-Hulk
S.H.I.E.L.D.
Spider-Man
Stan Lee's Mighty 7
Starborn
Swordsman
The Guardian Project
Thor
Two-Gun Kid
Venus
Vision
Adam Warlock
Wasp
Witness
Wonder Man
X-Men
Angel
Beast
Cyclops
Iceman
Jean Grey
Professor X
Yondu
Zombie
Villains
Abomination
Absorbing Man
A.I.M.
Air-Walker
Amphibion
Annihilus
Ape-Man
Ares
Asbestos Man
Attuma
Awesome Android
Baron Mordo
Baron Strucker
Baron Zemo
Heinrich Zemo
Batroc the Leaper
Beetle
Abner Jenkins
Big Man
Frederick Foswell
Black Knight (Nathan Garrett)
Blastaar
Blizzard
Blob
Boomerang
Brotherhood of Mutants
Burglar
Cat-Man
Chameleon
Circus of Crime
Clown
Cobra
Collector
Count Nefaria
Crime Master
Crimson Dynamo
Cyttorak
Death-Stalker
Destroyer
Diablo
Doctor Doom
Doctor Faustus
Doctor Octopus
Doombot
Doomsday Man
Dormammu
Dorrek VII
Dragon Man
Dredmund the Druid
Eel
Egghead
Ego the Living Planet
Electro
Emissaries of Evil
Enchantress
Enclave
Enforcers
Fancy Dan
Montana
Ox
Executioner
Fafnir
Femizons
Fenris Wolf
Fin Fang Foom
Fixer
Richard Fisk
Freak
Frightful Four
Funky Flashman
Galactus
Galaxy Master
Gibbon
Giganto
Gladiator
Gorgilla
Green Goblin
Norman Osborn
Grey Gargoyle
Grizzly
Growing Man
Hate-Monger
Hela
High Evolutionary
Hippolyta
Human Cannonball
HYDRA
Immortus
Impossible Man
Jackal
Jester
Erik Josten
Juggernaut
Kaecilius
Kala
Kaluu
Kangaroo
Kang the Conqueror
Karnilla
Kingpin
Klaw
Krang
Kraven the Hunter
Laufey
Leader
Leap-Frog
Living Brain
Living Laser
Lizard
Loki
Looter/Meteor Man
Lucifer
Machinesmith
Madame Masque
Mad Thinker
Maggia
Magneto
Man-Beast
Mandarin
Mangog
Man Mountain Marko
Masked Marauder
Master Khan
Mastermind
Masters of Evil
Matador
Maximus
Melter
Mentallo
Mephisto
Merlin
Metal Master
Midgard Serpent
Mimic
Mindless Ones
Miracle Man
Mister Fear
Mister Hyde
MODOK
Molecule Man
Mole Man
Molten Man
Monsteroso
Mordred
Morgan le Fay
Morrat
Mother Night
Mysterio
Nightmare
Overmind
Owl
Painter
Plantman
Plunderer
Pluto
Porcupine
Princess Python
Prowler
Psycho-Man
Purple Man
Puppet Master
Radioactive Man
Ravonna
Rattler
Red Barbarian
Red Ghost
Rhino
Ringmaster
Ronan the Accuser
Sandman
Scarecrow
Scorpion
Secret Empire
Sentinel
Master Mold
Bolivar Trask
Sentry
Shocker
Silvermane
Sinister Six
Sleeper
Sons of the Serpent
Spencer Smythe
Spider-Slayer
Spymaster
Farley Stillwell
Stranger
Mendel Stromm
Strongman
Super-Adaptoid
Super-Skrull
Surtur
Swordsman
Glenn Talbot
Thunderbolt Ross
Tiboro
Tinkerer
Titanium Man
Toad
Yuri Topolov
Trapster
Tricephalous
Tumbler
Tyrannus
Ulik
Ultimo
Unicorn
Unus the Untouchable
Vanisher
Vulture
Whiplash
Whirlwind
Wizard
Wong-Chu
Wrecker
Yon-Rogg
Ymir
Zarrko
Supporting
Liz Allan
Ancient One
Artemis
Athena
Aunt May
Balder
Sally Avril
Betty Brant
Peggy Carter
Sharon Carter
Clea
Billy Connors
Martha Connors
Eternity
Vanessa Fisk
Jane Foster
Frigga
Goom
Agatha Harkness
Happy Hogan
Happy Sam Sawyer
Heimdall
Hera
H.E.R.B.I.E.
Hermes
J. Jonah Jameson
John Jameson
Edwin Jarvis
Rick Jones
Ned Leeds
Living Tribunal
Willie Lumpkin
Alicia Masters
Jack Murdock
Foggy Nelson
Neptune
Harry Osborn
Odin
Karen Page
Richard and Mary Parker
Pepper Potts
Redwing
Franklin Richards
Randy Robertson
Robbie Robertson
Betty Ross
Shalla-Bal
Sif
Jasper Sitwell
George Stacy
Gwen Stacy
Supreme Intelligence
Franklin Storm
T'Chaka
Teen Brigade
Flash Thompson
Tyr
Uatu
Uncle Ben
Anna Watson
Mary Jane Watson
Wong
Wyatt Wingfoot
Valkyrior
Volla
Warriors Three
Fandral
Hogun
Volstagg
Yancy Street Gang
Ho Yinsen
Zabu
Zeus
Species
Asgardians
Kree
Giants
Goblins
Mutants
New Men
Olympians
Skrulls
Trolls
Uranians
Watchers
Locations andbusinesses
Asgard
Avengers Mansion
Baxter Building
Daily Bugle
Latveria
Midtown High School
Negative Zone
Oscorp
Sanctum Sanctorum
Savage Land
Stark Industries
Stark Tower
Subterranea
Wakanda
X-Mansion
Objects
Cerebro
Cosmic Cube
Eye of Agamotto
Mjolnir
Norn Stones
Ultimate Nullifier
Vibranium
 Category
Authority control: National 
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=S.H.I.E.L.D.&oldid=1148863023"