Country in North America
This article is about the country. For other uses, see Mexico (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 23 N 102 W  /  23 N 102 W  / 23; -102
United Mexican StatesEstados Unidos Mexicanos (Spanish)
Flag
 Coat of arms
Motto: La Patria Es Primero (Spanish)("The Homeland is First")Anthem: Himno Nacional Mexicano("Mexican National Anthem")Capitaland largest cityMexico City19 26 N 99 8 W  /  19.433 N 99.133 W  / 19.433; -99.133Official languagesNone at federal level[b]Recognized regional languagesSpanish and 68 Amerindian languages[a]National languageSpanish (de facto)[b]Ethnic groups See belowReligion  (2022)[1]
78.3% Christianity
74% Catholicism
4.3% Protestantism
14.8% no religion6.9% otherDemonym(s)MexicanGovernmentFederal presidentialrepublic[2] President Andr s Manuel L pez Obrador President of the Senate Alejandro Armenta Mier President of the Chamber of Deputies Santiago Creel Chief Justice Norma Luc a Pi a Hern ndez
LegislatureCongress Upper houseSenate Lower houseChamber of DeputiesIndependence from Spain Declared 16 September 1810 Consummated 27 September 1821 Recognized 28 December 1836 First constitution 4 October 1824 Second constitution 5 February 1857 Current constitution 5 February 1917
Area  Total1,972,550 km2 (761,610 sq mi) (13th) Water (%)1.58 (as of 2015)[3]Population 2022 estimate129,150,971[4] (10th) 2020 census126,014,024[5] (10th) Density61/km2 (158.0/sq mi) (142nd)GDP (PPP)2022 estimate Total $2.92 trillion[6] (13th) Per capita $22,440[6] (69th)GDP (nominal)2022 estimate Total $1.42 trillion[6] (15th) Per capita $10,950[6] (71st)Gini (2018) 41.8[7]mediumHDI (2021) 0.758[8]high 86thCurrencyMexican peso (MXN)Time zoneUTC 8 to  5 (See Time in Mexico) Summer (DST)UTC 7 to  5 (varies)Driving siderightCalling code+52ISO 3166 codeMXInternet TLD.mx
^ Article 4 of the General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples[9][10]^ Spanish is de facto the official language in the Mexican federal government.
Mexico (Spanish: M xico),[a][b] officially the United Mexican States,[c] is a country in the southern portion of North America. It is bordered to the north by the United States; to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean; to the southeast by Guatemala, Belize, and the Caribbean Sea; and to the east by the Gulf of Mexico.[12] Mexico covers 1,972,550 km2 (761,610 sq mi),[13] making it the world's 13th-largest country by area; with a population of over 126 million, it is the 10th-most-populous country and has the most Spanish speakers.[5] Mexico is organized as a federal republic comprising 31 states and Mexico City, its capital. Other major urban areas include Monterrey, Guadalajara, Puebla, Toluca, Tijuana, Ciudad Ju rez, and Le n.[14]
Human presence in Pre-Columbian Mexico goes back to 8,000 BCE and it went to become one of the world's six cradles of civilization. In particular, the Mesoamerican region was home to many intertwined civilizations, including the Olmec, Maya, Zapotec, Teotihuacan, and Purepecha. Last were the Aztecs, who dominated the region in the century before European contact. In 1521, the Spanish Empire and its indigenous allies conquered the Aztec Empire from its capital Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City), establishing the colony of New Spain.[15]
Over the next three centuries, Spain and the Catholic Church played an important role, expanding the territory, enforcing Christianity and spreading the Spanish language throughout.[16] With the discovery of rich deposits of silver in Zacatecas and Guanajuato, New Spain soon became one of the most important mining centers worldwide. Wealth coming from Asia and the New World contributed to Spain's status as a major world power for the next centuries, and brought about a price revolution in Western Europe.[17] The colonial order came to an end in the early nineteenth century with the War of Independence against Spain.
Mexico's early history as an independent nation state was marked by political and socioeconomic upheaval, both domestically and in foreign affairs. The Federal Republic of Central America shortly seceded the country. Then two invasions by foreign powers took place: first, by the United States as a consequence of the Texas Revolt by American settlers, which led to the Mexican American War and huge territorial losses in 1848.[18] After the introduction of liberal reforms in the Constitution of 1857, conservatives reacted with the war of Reform and prompted France to invade the country and install an Empire, against the Republican resistance led by liberal President Benito Ju rez, which emerged victorious. The last decades of the 19th century were dominated by the dictatorship of Porfirio D az, who sought to modernize Mexico and restore order.[19] However, the Porfiriato era led to great social unrest and ended with the outbreak in 1910 of the decade-long Mexican Revolution (civil war). This conflict led to profound changes in Mexican society, including the proclamation of the 1917 Constitution, which remains in effect to this day. The remaining war generals ruled as a succession of presidents until the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) emerged in 1929. 
The PRI governed Mexico for the next 70 years, first under a set of paternalistic developmental policies of considerable economic success. During World War II Mexico also played an important role for the Allied war effort.[20][21] Nonetheless, the PRI regime resorted to repression and electoral fraud to maintain power, and moved the country to a more US-aligned neoliberal economic policy during the late 20th century. This culminated with the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994, which caused a major indigenous rebellion in the state of Chiapas. PRI lost the presidency for the first time in 2000, against the conservative party (PAN).
Mexico has the world's 15th-largest economy by nominal GDP and the 11th-largest by PPP, with the United States being its largest economic partner. As a newly industrialized[22] and developing country ranking 86th, high in the Human Development Index, its large economy and population, cultural influence, and steady democratization make Mexico a regional and middle power[23][24][25] which is also identified as an emerging power by several analysts.[26][27][28][29] Mexico ranks first in the Americas and seventh in the world for the number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.[30] It is also one of the world's 17 megadiverse countries, ranking fifth in natural biodiversity.[31] Mexico's rich cultural and biological heritage, as well as varied climate and geography, makes it a major tourist destination: as of 2018, it was the sixth most-visited country in the world, with 39 million international arrivals.[32] However, the country continues to struggle with social inequality, poverty and extensive crime. It ranks poorly on the Global Peace Index,[33] due in large part to ongoing conflict between drug trafficking syndicates, which violently compete for the US drug market and trade routes. This "drug war" has led to over 120,000 deaths since 2006.[34] Mexico is a member of United Nations, the G20, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, the Organization of American States, Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, and the Organization of Ibero-American States.
Etymology
Main article: Name of Mexico
M xihco is the Nahuatl term for the heartland of the Aztec Empire, namely the Valley of Mexico and surrounding territories, with its people being known as the Mexica. The terms are plainly linked; it is generally believed that the toponym for the valley was the origin of the primary ethnonym for the Aztec Triple Alliance, but it may have been the other way around.[35] In the colonial era (1521 1821) Mexico was called New Spain. In the eighteenth century, this central region became the Intendency of Mexico, during the reorganization of the empire, the Bourbon Reforms. After New Spain achieved independence from the Spanish Empire in 1821 and became a sovereign state, the territory came to be known as the State of Mexico, with the new country being named after its capital: Mexico City, which itself was founded in 1524 on the site of the ancient Mexica capital of Tenochtitlan. The official name of the country has changed as the form of government has changed. The declaration of independence signed on 6 November 1813 by the deputies of the Congress of An huac called the territory Am rica Septentrional (Northern America); the 1821 Plan of Iguala also used Am rica Septentrional. On two occasions (1821 1823 and 1863 1867), the country was known as Imperio Mexicano (Mexican Empire). All three federal constitutions (1824, 1857 and 1917, the current constitution) used the name Estados Unidos Mexicanos[36] or the variant Estados-Unidos Mexicanos,[37] all of which have been translated as "United Mexican States". The phrase Rep blica Mexicana, "Mexican Republic", was used in the 1836 Constitutional Laws.[38]
History
Main article: History of Mexico
See also: History of the Catholic Church in Mexico, Economic history of Mexico, History of democracy in Mexico, History of Mexico City, and Military history of Mexico
Indigenous civilizations before European contact (pre-1519)
Main articles: Pre-Columbian Mexico and Mesoamerican chronology
 Teotihuacan, the 6th largest city in the world at its peak (1 AD to 500 AD)
 Temple of Kukulc n (El Castillo) in the Maya city of Chichen Itza
 Artistic depiction of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital and  largest city in the Americas at the time. The city was completely destroyed in the 1521 siege of Tenochtitlan and rebuilt as Mexico City.
The prehistory of Mexico stretches back millennia. The earliest human artifacts in Mexico are chips of stone tools found near campfire remains in the Valley of Mexico and radiocarbon-dated to circa 10,000 years ago.[39] Mexico is the site of the domestication of maize, tomato, and beans, which produced an agricultural surplus. This enabled the transition from paleo-Indian hunter-gatherers to sedentary agricultural villages beginning around 5000 BCE.[40]
In the subsequent formative eras, maize cultivation and cultural traits such as a mythological and religious complex, and a vigesimal (base 20) numeric system, were diffused from the Mexican cultures to the rest of the Mesoamerican culture area.[41] In this period, villages became more dense in terms of population, becoming socially stratified with an artisan class, and developing into chiefdoms. The most powerful rulers had religious and political power, organizing the construction of large ceremonial centers.[42]
The earliest complex civilization in Mexico was the Olmec culture, which flourished on the Gulf Coast from around 1500 BCE. Olmec cultural traits diffused through Mexico into other formative-era cultures in Chiapas, Oaxaca and the Valley of Mexico. The formative period saw the spread of distinct religious and symbolic traditions, as well as artistic and architectural complexes.[43] The formative-era of Mesoamerica is considered one of the six independent cradles of civilization. In the subsequent pre-classical period, the Maya and Zapotec civilizations developed complex centers at Calakmul and Monte Alb n, respectively. During this period the first true Mesoamerican writing systems were developed in the Epi-Olmec and the Zapotec cultures. The Mesoamerican writing tradition reached its height in the Classic Maya Hieroglyphic script. The earliest written histories date from this era. The tradition of writing was important after the Spanish conquest in 1521, with indigenous scribes learning to write their languages in alphabetic letters, while also continuing to create pictorial texts.[44][45]
In Central Mexico, the height of the classic period saw the ascendancy of Teotihuac n, which formed a military and commercial empire whose political influence stretched south into the Maya area as well as north. Teotihuacan, with a population of more than 150,000 people, had some of the largest pyramidal structures in the pre-Columbian Americas.[46] After the collapse of Teotihuac n around 600 AD, competition ensued between several important political centers in central Mexico such as Xochicalco and Cholula. At this time, during the Epi-Classic, Nahua peoples began moving south into Mesoamerica from the North, and became politically and culturally dominant in central Mexico, as they displaced speakers of Oto-Manguean languages. During the early post-classic era (ca. 1000 1519 CE), Central Mexico was dominated by the Toltec culture, Oaxaca by the Mixtec, and the lowland Maya area had important centers at Chich n Itz  and Mayap n. Toward the end of the post-Classic period, the Mexica established dominance, establishing a political and economic empire based in the city of Tenochtitlan (modern Mexico City), extending from central Mexico to the border with Guatemala.[47] Alexander von Humboldt popularized the modern usage of "Aztec" as a collective term applied to all the people linked by trade, custom, religion, and language to the Mexica state and  xc n Tlaht l y n, the Triple Alliance.[48] In 1843, with the publication of the work of William H. Prescott, it was adopted by most of the world, including 19th-century Mexican scholars who considered it a way to distinguish present-day Mexicans from pre-conquest Mexicans. This usage has been the subject of debate since the late 20th century.[49]
The Aztec empire was an informal or hegemonic empire because it did not exert supreme authority over the conquered territories; it was satisfied with the payment of tributes from them. It was a discontinuous empire because not all dominated territories were connected; for example, the southern peripheral zones of Xoconochco were not in direct contact with the center. The hegemonic nature of the Aztec empire was demonstrated by their restoration of local rulers to their former position after their city-state was conquered. The Aztec did not interfere in local affairs, as long as the tributes were paid.[50] The Aztec of Central Mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central Mexico.[51] The Aztec were noted for practicing human sacrifice on a large scale. Along with this practice, they avoided killing enemies on the battlefield. Their warring casualty rate was far lower than that of their Spanish counterparts, whose principal objective was immediate slaughter during battle.[52] This distinct Mesoamerican cultural tradition of human sacrifice ended with the gradually Spanish conquest in the 16th century. Other Mexican indigenous cultures were conquered and gradually subjected to Spanish colonial rule.[53]
Since the colonial era and through to the twenty-first century, the indigenous roots of Mexican history and culture are essential to Mexican identity. The National Museum of Anthrology in Mexico City is the showcase of the nation's prehispanic glories. Historian Enrique Florescano calls it "a national treasure and a symbol of identity. The museum is the synthesis of an ideological, scientific, and political feat."[54] Mexican Nobel laureate Octavio Paz said of the museum that the "exaltation and glorification of Mexico-Tenochtitlan transforms the Museum of Anthropology into a temple."[55] Mexico pursued international recognition of its prehispanic heritage, and has a large number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the largest in the hemisphere. The existence of high indigenous civilization prior to the arrival of Europeans has also had an impact on European thought.[56]
Spanish conquest and colonial era (1519 1821)
Main articles: Spanish conquest of Mexico and New Spain
 Storming of the Teocalli by Cortez and his Troops (1848)
Although the Spanish Empire had established colonies in the Caribbean starting in 1493, only in the second decade of the sixteenth century did they begin exploring the east coast of Mexico. The Spanish first learned of Mexico during the Juan de Grijalva expedition of 1518. The Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire began in February 1519 when Hern n Cort s landed on the Gulf Coast and founded the Spanish city of Veracruz. Around 500 conquistadores, along with horses, cannons, swords, and long guns gave the Spanish some technological advantages over indigenous warriors, but key to the Spanish victory was making strategic alliances with disgruntled indigenous city-states (altepetl) who fought with them against the Aztec Triple Alliance. Also important to the Spanish victory was Cort s's cultural translator, Malinche, a Nahua woman enslaved in the Maya area whom the Spanish acquired as a gift. She quickly learned Spanish and gave strategic advice about how to deal with both indigenous allies and indigenous foes.[57]
The Spanish conquest is well documented from multiple points of view. There are accounts by the Spanish leader Cort s[58] and multiple other Spanish participants, including Bernal D az del Castillo.[59][60] There are indigenous accounts in Spanish, Nahuatl, and pictorial narratives by allies of the Spanish, most prominently the Tlaxcalans, as well as Texcocans[61] and Huejotzincans, and the defeated Mexica themselves, recorded in the last volume of Bernardino de Sahag n's General History of the Things of New Spain.[62][63][64]
 View of the Plaza Mayor (today Z calo) in Mexico City (ca. 1695) by Crist bal de Villalpando
The 1521 capture of Tenochtitlan and immediate founding of the Spanish capital Mexico City on its ruins was the beginning of a 300-year-long colonial era during which Mexico was known as Nueva Espa a (New Spain). Two factors made Mexico a jewel in the Spanish Empire: the existence of large, hierarchically organized Mesoamerican populations that rendered tribute and performed obligatory labor and the discovery of vast silver deposits in northern Mexico.[65] The Kingdom of New Spain was created from the remnants of the Aztec empire. The two pillars of Spanish rule were the State and the Roman Catholic Church, both under the authority of the Spanish crown. In 1493 the pope had granted sweeping powers to the Spanish monarchy for its overseas empire, with the proviso that the crown spread Christianity in its new realms. In 1524, King Charles I created the Council of the Indies based in Spain to oversee State power its overseas territories; in New Spain the crown established a high court in Mexico City, the Real Audiencia, and then in 1535 created the Viceroyalty of New Spain. The viceroy was highest official of the State. In the religious sphere, the diocese of Mexico was created in 1530 and elevated to the Archdiocese of Mexico in 1546, with the archbishop as the head of the ecclesiastical hierarchy, overseeing Roman Catholic clergy. Castilian Spanish was the language of rulers. The Catholic faith the only one permitted, with non-Catholics (Jews and Protestants) and Catholics (excluding Indians) holding unorthodox views being subject to the Mexican Inquisition, established in 1571.[66]
In the first half-century of Spanish rule, a network of Spanish cities was created, sometimes on pre-Columbian sites where there were dense indigenous populations. The capital Mexico City was and remains the premier city, but other cities founded in the sixteenth century remain important, including Puebla, Guadalajara, Guanajuato, Zacatecas, Oaxaca, and the port of Veracruz. Cities and towns were hubs of civil officials, ecclesiastics, business, Spanish elites, and mixed-race and indigenous artisans and workers. When deposits of silver were discovered in sparsely populated northern Mexico, far from the dense populations of central Mexico, the Spanish secured the region against fiercely resistant indigenous Chichimecas. The Viceroyalty at its greatest extent included the territories of modern Mexico, Central America as far south as Costa Rica, and the western United States. The Viceregal capital Mexico City also administrated the Spanish West Indies (the Caribbean), the Spanish East Indies (that is, the Philippines), and Spanish Florida. In 1819, the Spain signed the Adams-On s Treaty with the United States, setting New Spain's northern boundary.[67]
 New Spain was essential to the Spanish global trading system. White represents the route of the Spanish Manila Galleons in the Pacific and the Spanish convoys in the Atlantic (blue represents Portuguese routes).
The rich deposits of silver, particularly in Zacatecas and Guanajuato, resulted in silver extraction dominating the economy of New Spain. Mexican silver pesos became the first globally used currency. Taxes on silver production became a major source of income for the Spanish monarchy. Other important industries were the agricultural and ranching  haciendas and mercantile activities in the main cities and ports.[citation needed] As a result of its trade links with Asia, the rest of the Americas, Africa and Europe and the profound effect of New World silver, central Mexico was one of the first regions to be incorporated into a globalized economy. Being at the crossroads of trade, people and cultures, Mexico City has been called the "first world city".[68] The Nao de China (Manila Galleons) operated for two and a half centuries and connected New Spain with Asia. Silver and the red dye cochineal were shipped from Veracruz to Atlantic ports in the Americas and Spain. Veracruz was also the main port of entry in mainland New Spain for European goods, immigrants from Spain, and African slaves. The Camino Real de Tierra Adentro connected Mexico City with the interior of New Spain.
The population of Mexico was overwhelmingly indigenous and rural during the entire colonial period and beyond, despite the massive decrease in their numbers due to epidemic diseases. Diseases such as smallpox, measles, and others were introduced by Europeans and African slaves, especially in the sixteenth century. The indigenous population stabilized around one to one and a half million individuals in the 17th century from the most commonly accepted five to thirty million pre-contact population.[69] During the three hundred years of the colonial era, Mexico received between 400,000 and 500,000 Europeans,[70] between 200,000 and 250,000 African slaves.[71] and between 40,000 and 120,000 Asians.[72][73]
Under Viceroy Revillagigedo the first comprehensive census was created in 1793, with racial classifications. Although most of its original datasets have reportedly been lost, thus most of what is known about it comes from essays and field investigations made by scholars who had access to the census data and used it as reference for their works such as German scientist Alexander von Humboldt. Europeans ranged from 18% to 22% of New Spain's population, Mestizos from 21% to 25%, Indians from 51% to 61% and Africans were between 6,000 and 10,000. The total population ranged from 3,799,561 to 6,122,354. It is concluded that the population growth trends of whites and mestizos were even, while the percentage of the indigenous population decreased at a rate of 13% 17% per century, mostly due to the latter having higher mortality rates from living in remote locations and being in constant war with the colonists.[74] Independence-era Mexico eliminated the legal basis for the hierarchical system of racial classification, although the racial/ethnic labels continued to be used.
 Luis de Mena, Virgin of Guadalupe and castas, showing race mixture and hierarchy as well as fruits of the realm,[75] ca. 1750
Colonial law with Spanish roots was introduced and attached to native customs creating a hierarchy between local jurisdiction (the Cabildos) and the Spanish Crown. Upper administrative offices were closed to native-born people, even those of pure Spanish blood (criollos). Administration was based on the racial separation. Society was organized in a racial hierarchy, with whites on top, mixed-race persons and blacks in the middle, and indigenous at the bottom. There were formal legal designations of racial categories. The Republic of Spaniards (Rep blica de Espa oles) comprised European- and American-born Spaniards, mixed-race castas, and black Africans. The Republic of Indians (Rep blica de Indios) comprised the indigenous populations, which the Spanish lumped under the term Indian (indio), a Spanish colonial social construct which indigenous groups and individuals rejected as a category. Spaniards were exempt from paying tribute, Spanish men had access to higher education, could hold civil and ecclesiastical offices, were subject to the Inquisition, and liable for military service when the standing military was established in the late eighteenth century. Indigenous paid tribute, but were exempt from the Inquisition, indigenous men were excluded from the priesthood; and exempt from military service. Although the racial system appears fixed and rigid, there was some fluidity within it, and racial domination of whites was not complete.[76] Since the indigenous population of New Spain was so large, there was less labor demand for expensive black slaves than other parts of Spanish America.[77][78] In the late eighteenth century the crown instituted reforms that privileged Iberian-born Spaniards (peninsulares) over American-born (criollos), limiting their access to offices. This discrimination between the two became a sparking point of discontent for white elites in the colony.[79]
The Marian apparition of the Virgin of Guadalupe said to have appeared to the indigenous Juan Diego in 1531 gave impetus to the evangelization of central Mexico.[80][81] The Virgin of Guadalupe became a symbol for American-born Spaniards' (criollos) patriotism, seeking in her a Mexican source of pride, distinct from Spain.[82] The Virgin of Guadalupe was invoked by the insurgents for independence who followed Father Miguel Hidalgo during the War of Independence.[81]
Spanish military forces, sometimes accompanied by native allies, led expeditions to conquer territory or quell rebellions through the colonial era. Notable Amerindian revolts in sporadically populated northern New Spain include the Chichimeca War (1576 1606),[83] Tepehu n Revolt (1616 1620),[84] and the Pueblo Revolt (1680), the Tzeltal Rebellion of 1712 was a regional Maya revolt.[85] Most rebellions were small-scale and local, posing no major threat to the ruling elites.[86] To protect Mexico from the attacks of English, French, and Dutch pirates and protect the Crown's monopoly of revenue, only two ports were open to foreign trade Veracruz on the Atlantic and Acapulco on the Pacific. Among the best-known pirate attacks are the 1663 Sack of Campeche[87] and 1683 Attack on Veracruz.[88] Of greater concern to the crown was of foreign invasion, especially after Britain seized in 1762 the Spanish ports of Havana, Cuba and Manila, the Philippines in the Seven Years' War. It created a standing military, increased coastal fortifications, and expanded the northern presidios and missions into Alta California. The volatility of the urban poor in Mexico City was evident in the 1692 riot in the Z calo. The riot over the price of maize escalated to a full-scale attack on the seats of power, with the viceregal palace and the archbishop's residence attacked by the mob.[76]
Independence era (1808 1821)
Main article: Mexican War of Independence
 Siege of the Alhondiga de Granaditas, Guanajuato, 28 September 1810
The upheaval in the Spanish Empire that resulted in the independence of most of its New World territories was due to Napoleon Bonaparte's invasion of Spain in 1808. Napoleon forced the abdication of the Spanish monarch Charles IV and imposed of his brother Joseph Bonaparte as the Spanish king. Now with an alien usurper on the Spanish throne, there was a crisis of legitimacy of the monarchy, resulting in various responses in both Spain and Spanish America. In Mexico, elites argued that sovereignty now reverted to "the people" and that town councils (cabildos) were the most representative bodies.  American-born Spaniards petitioned the viceroy Jos  de Iturrigaray (1803 08) to convene a junta to determine rule in Mexico in the current political crisis. Although Peninsular-born Spaniards were opposed to the plan, the viceroy called together wealthy landowners, miners, merchants, ecclesiastics, academics, and members of cabildos. They failed to come to agreement, and in the meantime, Peninsular-born Spaniards took the initiative, arresting Iturrigaray and leading creole elites in the capital. The coup ended what could have been a peaceful process toward political autonomy in Mexico.  Creoles now sought extralegal means to achieve their political aspirations.[89]
On 16 September 1810, secular priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla declared against "bad government" in the small town of Dolores, Guanajuato. This event, known as the Cry of Dolores (Spanish: Grito de Dolores) is commemorated each year, on 16 September, as Mexico's independence day.[90] The first insurgent group was formed by Hidalgo, army captain Ignacio Allende, the militia captain Juan Aldama and the wife of the local magistrate (Corregidor) Josefa Ortiz de Dom nguez, known as La Corregidora. Hidalgo's local declaration sparked a huge revolt of the masses, an uncontrollable uprising targeting the persons and property of white elites, whether Peninsular- or American-born. Famously in Guanajuato, elites took refuge in the central grain storage (alhondiga), bringing their treasure, attempted to hold out against Hidalgo's followers, but were slaughtered. In an event emblematic of the war of independence, "Hidalgo's capture of the great silver city of Guanajuato on September 28, 1810, is the most famous single episode of the decade-long insurgency."[91] Hidalgo and some of his soldiers were eventually captured, Hidalgo was defrocked, and they were executed by firing squad in Chihuahua, on 31 July 1811. The heads of the executed rebels were subsequently displayed on the granary. Following Hidalgo's death, Ignacio L pez Ray n and then by the priest Jos  Mar a Morelos assumed the leadership, occupying key southern cities with the support of Mariano Matamoros and Nicol s Bravo. In 1813 the Congress of Chilpancingo was convened and, on 6 November, signed the "Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America". This Act also called for the abolition of slavery and the system of racial hierarchy, and Roman Catholicism the sole religion. Morelos was captured and executed on 22 December 1815.
 Flag of the Army of the Three Guarantees, the force formed by ex-royalist Iturbide and insurgent Vicente Guerrero in February 1821
In subsequent years, the insurgency was a stalemate, but in 1820 when Spanish liberals seized power in Spain, and Mexican conservatives worried about the imposition of liberal principles overseas, including curtailment of the power of the Catholic Church.  Royalist criollo general Agust n de Iturbide was to continue fighting against Vicente Guerrero and insurgents in the south. Instead of attacking Guerrero, Itubide approached Guerrero to join forces to seize power in Mexico. Iturbide issued the Plan of Iguala on 24 February 1821. Sometimes called the Act of Independence, it called for  Roman Catholicism as the nation's sole religion; the establishment of a constitutional monarchy; and the equality of those born in Spain and those born in Mexico, the "three guarantees" can be summarized as "religion, independence, and union". All were to be equal citizens in the new sovereign nation, regardless of place of birth or racial category, a requirement that Guerrero, the mixed-race leader of the insurgency, insisted on for his joining with Iturbide. The flag of the newly formed Army of the Three Guarantees has evolved into today's Mexican flag.  On 24 August 1821 in incoming Viceroy and Iturbide signed the Treaty of C rdoba and the Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire", which recognized the independence of Mexico under the terms of the Plan of Iguala. The Spanish crown repudiated the 1821 treaty and did not formally recognize the independence of Mexico until 1836.
Early Post-Independence (1821 1855)
Main articles: First Mexican Empire, First Mexican Republic, Centralist Republic of Mexico, and Mexican American War
 Map of the First Mexican Empire
The first 35 years after Mexico's independence were marked by political instability and the changing of the Mexican state from a transient monarchy to a fragile federated republic.[92] There were military coups d' tat, foreign invasions, ideological conflict between Conservatives and Liberals, and economic stagnation. Catholicism remained the only permitted religious faith and the Catholic Church as an institution retained its special privileges, prestige, and property, a bulwark of Conservatism. The army, another Conservative-dominated institution, also retained its privileges. Former Royal Army General Agust n de Iturbide, became regent, as newly independent Mexico sought a constitutional monarch from Europe. When no member of a European royal house desired the position, Iturbide himself was declared Emperor Agust n I. The young and weak United States was the first country to recognize Mexico's independence, sending an ambassador to the court of the emperor and sending a message to Europe via the Monroe Doctrine not to intervene in Mexico. The emperor's rule was short (1822 1823) and he was overthrown by army officers in the Plan of Casa Mata.[93]
After the forced abdication of the monarch, the First Mexican Republic was established. In 1824, a constitution of a federated republic was promulgated and former insurgent General Guadalupe Victoria became the first president of the republic, the first of many army generals to hold the presidency of Mexico. Central America, including Chiapas, left the union. In 1829, former insurgent general and fierce Liberal Vicente Guerrero, a signatory of the Plan de Iguala that achieved independence, became president in a disputed election. During his short term in office, April to December 1829, he abolished slavery. As a visibly mixed-race man of modest origins, Guerrero was seen by white political elites as an interloper.[94] His Conservative vice president, former Royalist General Anastasio Bustamante, led a coup against him and Guerrero was judicially murdered.[95] There was constant strife between the Liberals (also known as Federalists), who were supporters of a federal form of decentralized government, and their political rivals, the Conservatives (also known as Centralists), who proposed a hierarchical form of government.
 General Antonio L pez de Santa Anna
Mexico's ability to maintain its independence and establish a viable government was in question. Spain attempted to reconquer its former colony during the 1820s, but eventually recognized its independence. France attempted to recoup losses it claimed for its citizens during Mexico's unrest and blockaded the Gulf Coast during the so-called Pastry War of 1838 1839.[96] General Antonio L pez de Santa Anna emerged as a national hero because of his role in both these conflicts; he lost a leg in combat during the Pastry War, which he used for political purposes to show his sacrifice for the nation. Santa Anna came to dominate the politics for the next 25 years, often known as the "Age of Santa Anna", until his own overthrow in 1855.[97]
Mexico also contended with indigenous groups which controlled territory that Mexico claimed in the north. The Comanche controlled a huge territory in the sparsely populated region of central and northern Texas.[98] Wanting to stabilize and develop the frontier, the Mexican government encouraged Anglo-American immigration into present-day Texas, a region that bordered that United States. There were few settlers from central Mexico moving to this remote and hostile territory. Mexico by law was a Catholic country; the Anglo Americans were primarily Protestant English speakers from the southern United States. Some brought their black slaves, which after 1829 was contrary to Mexican law. In 1835, Santa Anna sought to centralize government rule in Mexico, suspending the 1824 constitution and promulgating the Seven Laws, which placed power in his hands. As a result, civil war spread across the country. Three new governments declared independence: the Republic of Texas, the Republic of the Rio Grande and the Republic of Yucat n.[99]: 129 137  The largest blow to Mexico was the U.S. invasion of Mexico in 1846 in the Mexican American War. Mexico lost much of its sparsely populated northern territory, sealed in the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Despite that disastrous loss, Conservative Santa Anna returned to the presidency yet again and then was ousted and exiled in the Liberal Revolution of Ayutla.
Liberal era (1855 1911)
Main articles: Second Mexican Republic, La Reforma, Second Mexican Empire, Restored Republic (Mexico), and Porfiriato
 Portrait of Liberal President Benito Ju rez
The overthrow of Santa Anna and the establishment of a civilian government by Liberals allowed them to enact laws that they considered vital for Mexico's economic development. It was a prelude to more civil wars and yet another foreign invasion. The Liberal Reform attempted to modernize Mexico's economy and institutions along liberal principles. They promulgated a new Constitution of 1857, separating Church and State, stripping the Conservative institutions of the Church and the military of their special privileges (fueros); mandating the sale of Church-owned property and sale of indigenous community lands, and secularizing education.[100] Conservatives revolted, touching off civil war between rival Liberal and Conservative governments (1858 61).
The Liberals defeated the Conservative army on the battlefield, but Conservatives sought another solution to gain power via foreign intervention by the French. Mexican conservatives asked Emperor Napoleon III to place a European monarch as head of state in Mexico. The French Army defeated the Mexican Army and placed Maximilian Hapsburg on the newly established throne of Mexico, supported by Mexican Conservatives and propped up by the French Army. The Liberal republic under Benito Ju rez was basically a government in internal exile, but with the end of the Civil War in the U.S. in April 1865, that government began aiding the Mexican Republic. Two years later, the French Army withdrew its support, Maximilian remained in Mexico rather than return to Europe. Republican forces captured him and he was executed in Quer taro, along with two Conservative Mexican generals. The "Restored Republic" saw the return of Ju rez, who was "the personification of the embattled republic,"[101] as president.
The Conservatives had been not only defeated militarily, but also discredited politically for their collaboration with the French invaders. Liberalism became synonymous with patriotism.[102] The Mexican Army that had its roots in the colonial royal army and then the army of the early republic was destroyed. New military leaders had emerged from the War of the Reform and the conflict with the French, most notably Porfirio D az, a hero of the Cinco de Mayo, who now sought civilian power. Ju rez won re-election in 1867, but was challenged by D az, who criticized him for running for re-election. D az then rebelled, crushed by Ju rez. Having won re-election, Ju rez died in office of natural causes in July 1872, and Liberal Sebasti n Lerdo de Tejada became president, declaring a "religion of state" for rule of law, peace, and order. When Lerdo ran for re-election, D az rebelled against the civilian president, issuing the Plan of Tuxtepec. D az had more support and waged guerrilla warfare against Lerdo. On the verge of D az's victory on the battlefield, Lerdo fled from office, going into exile.[103]
 The Execution of Emperor Maximilian, 19 June 1867. Gen. Tom s Mej a, left, Maximiian, center, Gen. Miguel Miram n, right. Painting by  douard Manet 1868.
After the turmoil in Mexico from 1810 to 1876, the 35-year rule of Liberal General Porfirio D az (r.1876 1911) allowed Mexico to rapidly modernize in a period characterized as one of "order and progress". The Porfiriato was characterized by economic stability and growth, significant foreign investment and influence, an expansion of the railroad network and telecommunications, and investments in the arts and sciences.[104] The period was also marked by economic inequality and political repression. D az knew the potential for army rebellions, and systematically downsized the expenditure for the force, rather expanding the rural police force under direct control of the president. D az did not provoke the Catholic Church, coming to a modus vivendi with it; but he did not remove the anticlerical articles from the 1857 Constitution. From the late nineteenth century, Protestants began to make inroads into overwhelmingly Catholic Mexico.
The government encouraged British and U.S. investment. Commercial agriculture developed in northern Mexico, with many investors from the U.S. acquiring vast ranching estates and expanding irrigated cultivation of crops. The Mexican government ordered a survey of land with the aim of selling it for development. In this period, many indigenous communities lost their lands and the men became landless wage earners on large landed enterprises (haciendas).[105] British and U.S. investors developed extractive mining of copper, lead, and other minerals, as well as petroleum on the Gulf Coast. Changes in Mexican law allowed for private enterprises to own the subsoil rights of land, rather than continuing the colonial law that gave all subsoil rights to the State. An industrial manufacturing sector also developed, particularly in textiles. At the same time, new enterprises gave rise to an industrial work force, which began organizing to gain labor rights and protections.
D az ruled with a group of advisors that became known as the cient ficos ("scientists").[106] The most influential cient fico was Secretary of Finance Jos  Yves Limantour.[107] The Porfirian regime was influenced by positivism.[108] They rejected theology and idealism in favor of scientific methods being applied towards national development. An integral aspect of the liberal project was secular education. The D az government led a protracted conflict against the Yaqui that culminated with the forced relocation of thousands of Yaqui to Yucat n and Oaxaca. D az's long success did not include planning for a political transition beyond his own presidency. He made no attempt, however, to establish a family dynasty, naming no relative as his successor. As the centennial of independence approached, D az gave an interview where he said he was not going to run in the 1910 elections, when he would be 80. Political opposition had been suppressed and there were few avenues for a new generation of leaders. But his announcement set off a frenzy of political activity, including the unlikely candidacy of the scion of a rich landowning family, Francisco I. Madero. Madero won a surprising amount of political support when D az changed his mind and ran in the election, jailing Madero. The September centennial celebration of independence was the last celebration of the Porfiriato. The Mexican Revolution starting in 1910 saw a decade of civil war, the "wind that swept Mexico."[109]
Mexican Revolution (1910 1920)
Main article: Mexican Revolution
 Francisco I. Madero, who challenged D az in the fraudulent 1910 election and was elected president when D az was forced to resign in May 1911
The Mexican Revolution was a decade-long transformational conflict in Mexico, with consequences to this day.[110] It began with scattered uprisings against President D az after the fraudulent 1910 election, his resignation in May 1911, demobilization of rebel forces and an interim presidency of a member of the old guard, and the democratic election of a rich, civilian landowner, Francisco I. Madero in fall 1911. In February 1913, a military coup d' tat overthrew Madero's government, with the support of the U.S., resulting in Madero's murder by agents of Federal Army General Victoriano Huerta. A coalition of anti-Huerta forces in the North, the Constitutional Army led by Governor of Coahuila Venustiano Carranza, and a peasant army in the South under Emiliano Zapata defeated the Federal Army.[111]
In 1914, that army was dissolved as an institution, leaving only revolutionary forces. Following the revolutionaries' victory against Huerta, they sought to broker a peaceful political solution, but the coalition splintered, plunging Mexico again into a civil war. Constitutionalist general Pancho Villa, commander of the Division of the North, broke with Carranza and allied with Zapata. Carranza's best general Alvaro Obreg n defeated Villa, his former comrade-in-arms in the Battle of Celaya in 1915, and Villa's northern forces melted away. Zapata's forces in the south reverted to guerrilla warfare. Carranza became the de facto head of Mexico, and the U.S. recognized his government.[111]
In 1916, the winners met at a constitutional convention to draft the Constitution of 1917, which was ratified in February 1917. The Constitution empowered the government to expropriate resources including land (Article 27); gave rights to labor (Article 123); and strengthened anticlerical provisions of the 1857 Constitution.[111] With amendments, it remains the governing document of Mexico. It is estimated that the war killed 900,000 of the 1910 population of 15 million.[112][113] Although often viewed as an internal conflict, the revolution had significant international elements.[114] During the Revolution, the U.S. played a significant role with the Republican administration of Taft having supported the Huerta coup against Madero, but when Democrat Woodrow Wilson was inaugurated as president in March 1913, Wilson refused to recognize Huerta's regime and allowed arms sales to the Constitutionalists. Wilson ordered troops to occupy the strategic port of Veracruz in 1914, which was lifted.[115]
 Revolutionary Generals Pancho Villa (left) and Emiliano Zapata (right)
After Pancho Villa was defeated by revolutionary forces in 1915, he led an incursion raid into Columbus, New Mexico, prompting the U.S. to send 10,000 troops led by General John J. Pershing in an unsuccessful attempt to capture Villa. Carranza pushed back against U.S. troops being in northern Mexico. The expeditionary forces withdrew as the U.S. entered World War I.[116] Germany attempted to get Mexico to side with it, sending a coded telegram in 1917 to incite war between the U.S. and Mexico, with Mexico to regain the territory it lost in the Mexican-American War.[117] Mexico remained neutral in the conflict.
Consolidating power, President Carranza had peasant-leader Emiliano Zapata assassinated in 1919. Carranza had gained support of the peasantry during the Revolution, but once in power he did little to institute land reform, which had motivated many to fight in the Revolution. Carranza in fact returned some confiscated land to their original owners. President Carranza's best general, Obreg n, served briefly in his administration, but returned to his home state of Sonora to position himself to run in the 1920 presidential election. Since Carranza could not run for re-election, he chose a civilian, political and revolutionary no-body to succeed him, intending to remain the power behind the presidency. Obreg n and two other Sonoran revolutionary generals drew up the Plan of Agua Prieta, overthrowing Carranza, who died fleeing Mexico City in 1920. General Adolfo de la Huerta became interim president, followed the election of General  lvaro Obreg n.
Political consolidation and one-party rule (1920 2000)
Further information: Institutional Revolutionary Party
 Logo of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, that was founded in 1929 and held uninterrupted power in the country for 71 years, from 1929 to 2000
The first quarter-century of the post-revolutionary period (1920 1946) was characterized by revolutionary generals serving as Presidents of Mexico, including  lvaro Obreg n (1920 24), Plutarco El as Calles (1924 28), L zaro C rdenas (1934 40), and Manuel Avila Camacho (1940 46). Since 1946, no member of the military has been President of Mexico. The post-revolutionary project of the Mexican government sought to bring order to the country, end military intervention in politics, and create organizations of interest groups. Workers, peasants, urban office workers, and even the army for a short period were incorporated as sectors of the single party that dominated Mexican politics from its founding in 1929. Obreg n instigated land reform and strengthened the power of organized labor. He gained recognition from the United States and took steps to settle claims with companies and individuals that lost property during the Revolution. He imposed his fellow former Sonoran revolutionary general, Calles, as his successor, prompting an unsuccessful military revolt. As president, Calles provoked a major conflict with the Catholic Church and Catholic guerrilla armies when he strictly enforced anticlerical articles of the 1917 Constitution. The Church-State conflict was mediated and ended with the aid of the U.S. Ambassador to Mexico and ended with an agreement between the parties in conflict, by means of which the respective fields of action were defined. Although the constitution prohibited reelection of the president, Obreg n wished to run again and the constitution was amended to allow non-consecutive re-election. Obreg n won the 1928 elections, but was assassinated by a Catholic zealot, causing a political crisis of succession. Calles could not become president again, since he has just ended his term. He sought to set up a structure to manage presidential succession, founding the party that was to dominate Mexico until the late twentieth century. Calles declared that the Revolution had moved from caudillismo (rule by strongmen) to the era institucional (institutional era).[118]
Despite not holding the presidency, Calles remained the key political figure during the period known as the Maximato (1929 1934). The Maximato ended during the presidency of L zaro C rdenas, who expelled Calles from the country and implemented many economic and social reforms. This included the Mexican oil expropriation in March 1938, which nationalized the U.S. and Anglo-Dutch oil company known as the Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company. This movement would result in the creation of the state-owned Mexican oil company Pemex. This sparked a diplomatic crisis with the countries whose citizens had lost businesses by C rdenas's radical measure, but since then the company has played an important role in the economic development of Mexico. C rdenas's successor, Manuel  vila Camacho (1940 1946) was more moderate, and relations between the U.S. and Mexico vastly improved during World War II, when Mexico was a significant ally, providing manpower and materiel to aid the war effort. From 1946 the election of Miguel Alem n, the first civilian president in the post-revolutionary period, Mexico embarked on an aggressive program of economic development, known as the Mexican miracle, which was characterized by industrialization, urbanization, and the increase of inequality in Mexico between urban and rural areas.[119]
 Students in a burned bus during the protests of 1968
With robust economic growth, Mexico sought to showcase it to the world by hosting the 1968 Summer Olympics. The government poured huge resources into building new facilities. At the same time, there was political unrest by university students and others with those expenditures, while their own circumstances were difficult. Demonstrations in central Mexico City went on for weeks before the planned opening of the games, with the government of Gustavo D az Ordaz cracking down. The culmination was the Tlatelolco Massacre,[120] which claimed the lives of around 300 protesters based on conservative estimates and perhaps as many as 800.[121] Although the economy continued to flourish for some, social inequality remained a factor of discontent. PRI rule became increasingly authoritarian and at times oppressive in what is now referred to as the Mexican Dirty War.[122]
Luis Echeverr a, Minister of the Interior under D az Ordaz, carrying out the repression during the Olympics, was elected president in 1970. His government had to contend with mistrust of Mexicans and increasing economic problems. He instituted some with electoral reforms.[123][124] Echeverr a chose Jos  L pez Portillo as his successor in 1976. Economic problems worsened in his early term, then massive reserves of petroleum were located off Mexico's Gulf Coast. Pemex did not have the capacity to develop these reserves itself, and brought in foreign firms. Oil prices had been high because of OPEC's lock on oil production, and L pez Portilla borrowed money from foreign banks for current spending to fund social programs. Those foreign banks were happy to lend to Mexico because the oil reserves were enormous and future revenues were collateral for loans denominated in U.S. dollars. When the price of oil dropped, Mexico's economy collapsed in the 1982 Crisis. Interest rates soared, the peso devalued, and unable to pay loans, the government defaulted on its debt. President Miguel de la Madrid (1982 88) resorted to currency devaluations which in turn sparked inflation.
 NAFTA signing ceremony, October 1992. From left to right: (standing) President Carlos Salinas de Gortari (Mexico), President George H. W. Bush (U.S.), and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney (Canada).
In the 1980s the first cracks emerged in the PRI's complete political dominance. In Baja California, the PAN candidate was elected as governor. When De la Madrid chose Carlos Salinas de Gortari as the candidate for the PRI, and therefore a foregone presidential victor, Cuauht moc C rdenas, son of former President L zaro C rdenas, broke with the PRI and challenged Salinas in the 1988 elections. In 1988 there was massive electoral fraud, with results showing that Salinas had won the election by the narrowest percentage ever. There were massive protests in Mexico City to the stolen election. Salinas took the oath of office on 1 December 1988.[125] In 1990 the PRI was famously described by Mario Vargas Llosa as the "perfect dictatorship", but by then there had been major challenges to the PRI's hegemony.[126][127][128]
Salinas embarked on a program of neoliberal reforms that fixed the exchange rate of the peso, controlled inflation, opened Mexico to foreign investment, and began talks with the U.S. and Canada to join their free-trade agreement. In order to do that, the Constitution of 1917 was amended in several important ways. Article 27, which had allowed the government to expropriate natural resources and distribute land, was amended to end agrarian reform and to guarantee private owners' property rights. The anti-clerical articles that muzzled religious institutions, especially the Catholic Church, were amended and Mexico reestablished of diplomatic relations with the Holy See. Signing on to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed Mexico's autonomy over trade policy. The agreement came into effect on 1 January 1994; the same day, the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN) in Chiapas began armed peasant rebellion against the federal government, which captured a few towns, but brought world attention to the situation in Mexico. The armed conflict was short-lived and has continued as a non-violent opposition movement against neoliberalism and globalization. In 1994, following the assassination of the PRI's presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio, Salinas was succeeded by a victorious substitute PRI candidate Ernesto Zedillo. Salinas left Zedillo's government to deal with the Mexican peso crisis, requiring a $50 billion IMF bailout. Major macroeconomic reforms were started by President Zedillo, and the economy rapidly recovered and growth peaked at almost 7% by the end of 1999.[129]
Contemporary Mexico
 Vicente Fox and his opposition National Action Party won the 2000 general election, ending one-party rule.
In 2000, after 71 years, the PRI lost a presidential election to Vicente Fox of the opposition conservative National Action Party (PAN). In the 2006 presidential election, Felipe Calder n from the PAN was declared the winner, with a very narrow margin (0.58%) over leftist politician Andr s Manuel L pez Obrador then the candidate of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD).[130] L pez Obrador, however, contested the election and pledged to create an "alternative government".[131]
After twelve years, in 2012, the PRI won the presidency again with the election of Enrique Pe a Nieto, the governor of the State of Mexico from 2005 to 2011. However, he won with a plurality of about 38%, and did not have a legislative majority.[132]
After founding the new political party MORENA, Andr s Manuel L pez Obrador won the 2018 presidential election with over 50% of the vote. His political coalition, led by his left-wing party founded after the 2012 elections, includes parties and politicians from all over the political spectrum. The coalition also won a majority in both the upper and lower congress chambers. AMLO's (one of his many nicknames) success is attributed to the country's other strong political alternatives exhausting their chances as well as the politician adopting a moderate discourse with a focus on conciliation.[133]
Mexico has contended with high crime rates, official corruption, narcotrafficking, and a stagnant economy. Many state-owned industrial enterprises were privatized starting in the 1990s, with neoliberal reforms, but Pemex, the state-owned petroleum company is only slowly being privatized, with exploration licenses being issued.[134] In AMLO's push against government corruption, the ex-CEO of Pemex has been arrested.[135]
Although there were fears of electoral fraud in Mexico's 2018 presidential elections,[136] the results gave a mandate to AMLO.[137] On 1 December 2018, Andr s Manuel L pez Obrador was sworn in as the new President of Mexico. After winning a landslide victory in the July 2018 presidential elections, he became the first leftwing president for decades.[138] In June 2021 midterm elections, L pez Obrador's left-leaning Morena's coalition lost seats in the lower house of Congress. However, his ruling coalition maintained a simple majority, but L pez Obrador failed to secure the two-thirds congressional supermajority. The main opposition was a coalition of Mexico's three traditional parties: the center-right Revolutionary Institutional Party, right-wing National Action Party and leftist Party of the Democratic Revolution.[139]
Geography
Main article: Geography of Mexico
Geographical characteristics
 Topographic map of Mexico
 Pico de Orizaba, the highest mountain in Mexico
Mexico is located between latitudes 14  and 33 N, and longitudes 86  and 119 W in the southern portion of North America. Almost all of Mexico lies in the North American Plate, with small parts of the Baja California peninsula on the Pacific and Cocos Plates. Geophysically, some geographers include the territory east of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (around 12% of the total) within Central America.[140] Geopolitically, however, Mexico is entirely considered part of North America, along with Canada and the United States.[141]
Mexico's total area is 1,972,550 km2 (761,606 sq mi), making it the world's 13th largest country by total area. It has coastlines on the Pacific Ocean and Gulf of California, as well as the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea, the latter two forming part of the Atlantic Ocean.[142] Within these seas are about 6,000 km2 (2,317 sq mi) of islands (including the remote Pacific Guadalupe Island and the Revillagigedo Islands). From its farthest land points, Mexico is a little over 2,000 mi (3,219 km) in length. Mexico has nine distinct regions: Baja California, the Pacific Coastal Lowlands, the Mexican Plateau, the Sierra Madre Oriental, the Sierra Madre Occidental, the Cordillera Neo-Volc nica, the Gulf Coastal Plain, the Southern Highlands, and the Yucat n Peninsula.[143] Although Mexico is large, much of its land mass is incompatible with agriculture due to aridity, soil, or terrain. In 2018, an estimated 54.9% of land is agricultural; 11.8% is arable; 1.4% is in permanent crops; 41.7% is permanent pasture; and 33.3% is forest.[144]
Mexico is crossed from north to south by two mountain ranges known as Sierra Madre Oriental and Sierra Madre Occidental, which are the extension of the Rocky Mountains from northern North America. From east to west at the center, the country is crossed by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt also known as the Sierra Nevada. A fourth mountain range, the Sierra Madre del Sur, runs from Michoac n to Oaxaca. As such, the majority of the Mexican central and northern territories are located at high altitudes, and the highest elevations are found at the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt: Pico de Orizaba (5,700 m or 18,701 ft), Popocat petl (5,462 m or 17,920 ft) and Iztaccihuatl (5,286 m or 17,343 ft) and the Nevado de Toluca (4,577 m or 15,016 ft). Three major urban agglomerations are located in the valleys between these four elevations: Toluca, Greater Mexico City and Puebla.[citation needed] An important geologic feature of the Yucat n peninsula is the Chicxulub crater. The scientific consensus is that the Chicxulub impactor was responsible for the Cretaceous Paleogene extinction event. Mexico is subject to a number of natural hazards, including hurricanes on both coasts, tsunamis on the Pacific coast, and volcanism.[145]
Mexico has few rivers and lakes. The Lerma River flows west to form Lake Chapala, the country's largest natural lake. The Santiago River flows from Lake Chapala out of the lake to the Pacific Ocean. The P nuco River flows to the Gulf of Mexico. Lake P tzcuaro and Lake Cuitzeo, west of Mexico City, are remnants of vast lakes and marshes that covered much of the southern Mesa Central before European settlement. The central lake system where the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan and surrounding communities thrived before the Spanish conquest have almost entirely been drained. There are few permanent streams in the arid Mesa del Norte, and most of these drain into the interior rather than to the ocean. By far the most important river in that part of the country is the R o Bravo del Norte (called the Rio Grande in the United States), which forms a lengthy part of the international border from Ciudad Ju rez to the Gulf Coast, 3,141 km (1,952 mi). The Balsas River provides hydroelectric power.  Grijalva river and Usumacinta river system drains most of the humid Chiapas Highlands. The Papaloapan River flows into the Gulf of Mexico south of Veracruz, the Grijalva and Usumacinta further southeast are significant Mexican rivers. Both the Baja California Peninsula and the Yucat n Peninsula are extremely arid with no surface streams.
Climate
Main article: Climate of Mexico
 Mexico map of K ppen climate classification
The climate of Mexico is quite varied due to the country's size and topography.  Tropic of Cancer effectively divides the country into temperate and tropical zones. Land north of the Tropic of Cancer experiences cooler temperatures during the winter months. South of the Tropic of Cancer, temperatures are fairly constant year-round and vary solely as a function of elevation. This gives Mexico one of the world's most diverse weather systems. Maritime air masses bring seasonal precipitation from May until August. Many parts of Mexico, particularly the north, have a dry climate with only sporadic rainfall, while parts of the tropical lowlands in the south average more than 2,000 mm (78.7 in) of annual precipitation. For example, many cities in the north like Monterrey, Hermosillo, and Mexicali experience temperatures of 40 C (104 F) or more in summer. In the Sonoran Desert temperatures reach 50 C (122 F) or more.[146]
Descriptors of regions are by temperature, with the tierra caliente (hot land) being coastal up to 900 meters; tierra templada (temperate land) being from 1,800 meters; tierra fr a (cold land) extending to 3,500 meters. Beyond the cold lands are the p ramos, alpine pastures, and the tierra helada (frozen land) (4,000-4,200 meters) in central Mexico. Areas south of the Tropic of Cancer with elevations up to 1,000 m (3,281 ft) (the southern parts of both coastal plains as well as the Yucat n Peninsula), have a yearly median temperature between 24 to 28 C (75.2 to 82.4 F). Temperatures here remain high throughout the year, with only a 5 C (9 F) difference between winter and summer median temperatures. Both Mexican coasts, except for the south coast of the Bay of Campeche and northern Baja California, are also vulnerable to serious hurricanes during the summer and fall. Although low-lying areas north of the Tropic of Cancer are hot and humid during the summer, they generally have lower yearly temperature averages (from 20 to 24 C or 68.0 to 75.2 F) because of more moderate conditions during the winter.[146]
Biodiversity
 Mexican wolf
Mexico ranks fourth[147] in the world in biodiversity and is one of the 17 megadiverse countries. With over 200,000 different species, Mexico is home of 10 12% of the world's biodiversity.[148] Mexico ranks first in biodiversity in reptiles with 707 known species, second in mammals with 438 species, fourth in amphibians with 290 species, and fourth in flora, with 26,000 different species.[149] Mexico is also considered the second country in the world in ecosystems and fourth in overall species.[150] About 2,500 species are protected by Mexican legislation.[150]
In 2002[update], Mexico had the second fastest rate of deforestation in the world, second only to Brazil.[151] It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.82/10, ranking it 63rd globally out of 172 countries.[152] The government has taken another initiative in the late 1990s to broaden the people's knowledge, interest and use of the country's esteemed biodiversity, through the Comisi n Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad.
In Mexico, 170,000 square kilometers (65,637 sq mi) are considered "Protected Natural Areas". These include 34 biosphere reserves (unaltered ecosystems), 67 national parks, 4 natural monuments (protected in perpetuity for their aesthetic, scientific or historical value), 26 areas of protected flora and fauna, 4 areas for natural resource protection (conservation of soil, hydrological basins and forests) and 17 sanctuaries (zones rich in diverse species).[148] Plants indigenous to Mexico are grown in many parts of the world and integrated into their own national cuisines. Some of Mexico's native culinary ingredients include: maize, tomato, beans, squash, chocolate, vanilla, avocado, guava, chayote, epazote, camote, j cama, nopal, zucchini, tejocote, huitlacoche, sapote, mamey sapote, and a great variety of chiles, such as the habanero and the jalape o. Most of these names come from the indigenous language of Nahuatl. Tequila, the distilled alcoholic drink made from cultivated agave cacti is a major industry. Because of its high biodiversity Mexico has also been a frequent site of bioprospecting by international research bodies.[153] The first highly successful instance being the discovery in 1947 of the tuber "Barbasco" (Dioscorea composita) which has a high content of diosgenin, revolutionizing the production of synthetic hormones in the 1950s and 1960s and eventually leading to the invention of combined oral contraceptive pills.[154]
Government and politics
Government
Main article: Federal government of Mexico
 The National Palace on the east side of Plaza de la Constituci n or Z calo, the main square of Mexico City; it was the residence of viceroys and Presidents of Mexico and now the seat of the Mexican government.
 Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Congress of Mexico
The United Mexican States are a federation whose government is representative, democratic and republican based on a presidential system according to the 1917 Constitution. The constitution establishes three levels of government: the federal Union, the state governments and the municipal governments. According to the constitution, all constituent states of the federation must have a republican form of government composed of three branches: the executive, represented by a governor and an appointed cabinet, the legislative branch constituted by a unicameral congress[155][original research?] and the judiciary, which will include a state Supreme Court of Justice. They also have their own civil and judicial codes.
The federal legislature is the bicameral Congress of the Union, composed of the Senate of the Republic and the Chamber of Deputies. The Congress makes federal law, declares war, imposes taxes, approves the national budget and international treaties, and ratifies diplomatic appointments.[156]
The federal Congress, as well as the state legislatures, are elected by a system of parallel voting that includes plurality and proportional representation.[157] The Chamber of Deputies has 500 deputies. Of these, 300 are elected by plurality vote in single-member districts (the federal electoral districts) and 200 are elected by proportional representation with closed party lists[158] for which the country is divided into five electoral constituencies.[159] The Senate is made up of 128 senators. Of these, 64 senators (two for each state and two for Mexico City) are elected by plurality vote in pairs; 32 senators are the first minority or first-runner up (one for each state and one for Mexico City), and 32 are elected by proportional representation from national closed party lists.[158]
The executive is the President of the United Mexican States, who is the head of state and government, as well as the commander-in-chief of the Mexican military forces. The President also appoints the Cabinet and other officers. The President is responsible for executing and enforcing the law, and has the power to veto bills.[160]
The highest organ of the judicial branch of government is the Supreme Court of Justice, the national supreme court, which has eleven judges appointed by the President and approved by the Senate. The Supreme Court of Justice interprets laws and judges cases of federal competency. Other institutions of the judiciary are the Federal Electoral Tribunal, collegiate, unitary and district tribunals, and the Council of the Federal Judiciary.[161]  In theory the judiciary is independent of the executive, but President L pez Obrador moved to recentralize power in the presidency, undermining the independence of a number of institutions. In the judicial realm lowering the salaries of justices, he refused to allow the independent appointment of the attorney general.[162]
Following the fraudulent 1988 Presidential election in hands of the government's Department of Interior (Gobernaci n), an independent institute to oversee the electoral agency was created, the Federal Institute of Elections, now the National Electoral Institute. In 2022, the L pez Obrador administration which has feuded with the agency, proposed sweeping changes to the structure, advocating its membership be chosen by voters. The proposal is controversial and opposed by academics, who argue the positions should be held by experts.[163]
Politics
Main article: Politics of Mexico
 Andr s Manuel L pez Obrador, President of Mexico
Three parties have historically been the dominant parties in Mexican politics: the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), a catch-all party[164] and member of the Socialist International[165] that was founded in 1929 to unite all the factions of the Mexican Revolution and held an almost hegemonic power in Mexican politics since then; the National Action Party (PAN), a conservative party founded in 1939 and belonging to the Christian Democrat Organization of America;[166] and the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) a left-wing party,[167] founded in 1989 as the successor of the coalition of socialists and liberal parties. PRD emerged after what has now been proven was a stolen election in 1988,[168] and has won numerous state and local elections since then. PAN won its first governorship in 1989, and won the presidency in 2000 and 2006.[169] A new political party, National Regeneration Movement (MORENA), a leftist-populist party, emerged after the 2012 election and dominated the 2018 Mexican general election.[170]  Unlike many Latin American countries, the military in Mexico does not participate in politics and is under civilian control,[171] the result of the concerted effort of revolutionary generals who became presidents of Mexico (1920 40) to remove the military from politics.[172]
As Mexico transitioned from one-party rule in 2000, increasingly criminal cartels have attempted to meddle in politics and have an impact on electoral outcomes.  Cartels have moved from bribing or otherwise influencing politicians and now attempt to have their preferred candidates elected.[173] A recent publication based on two decades of analysis of data contends that "electoral competition and partisan conflict were key drivers of the outbreak of Mexico's crime wars, the intensification of violence, and the expansion of war and violence to the spheres of local politics and civil society."[174]
Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Mexico
 Headquarters of the Secretariat of Foreign Affairs
The foreign relations of Mexico are directed by the President of Mexico[175] and managed through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.[176] The principles of the foreign policy are constitutionally recognized in the Article 89, Section 10, which include: respect for international law and legal equality of states, their sovereignty and independence, trend to non-interventionism in the domestic affairs of other countries, peaceful resolution of conflicts, and promotion of collective security through active participation in international organizations.[175] Since the 1930s, the Estrada Doctrine has served as a crucial complement to these principles.[177]
Mexico is founding member of several international organizations, most notably the United Nations,[178] the Organization of American States,[179] the Organization of Ibero-American States,[180] the OPANAL[181] and the CELAC.[182] In 2008, Mexico contributed over 40 million dollars to the United Nations regular budget.[183] In addition, it was the only Latin American member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development since it joined in 1994 until Chile gained full membership in 2010.[184][185]
Mexico is considered a regional power[186][187] hence its presence in major economic groups such as the G8+5 and the G-20. In addition, since the 1990s Mexico has sought a reform of the United Nations Security Council and its working methods[188] with the support of Canada, Italy, Pakistan and other nine countries, which form a group informally called the Coffee Club.[189]
Military
Main articles: Mexican Armed Forces and Military history of Mexico
 A Mexican Navy Eurocopter
The Mexican military "provides a unique example of a military leadership's transforming itself into a civilian political elite, simultaneously transferring the basis of power from the army to a civilian state."[190] The transformation was brought about by revolutionary generals in the 1920s and 1930s, following the demise of the Federal Army following its complete defeat during the decade-long Mexican Revolution.[191] The Mexican Armed Forces are administered by the Secretariat of National Defense (Secretaria de Defensa Nacional, SEDENA). There are two branches: the Mexican Army (which includes the Mexican Air Force), and the Mexican Navy. The Secretariat of Public Security and Civil Protection has jurisdiction over the National Guard, which was formed in 2019 from the disbanded Federal Police and military police of the Army and Navy. Figures vary on personnel, but as of are approximately 223,000 armed forces personnel (160,000 Army; 8,000 Air Force; 55,000 Navy, including about 20,000 marines); approximately 100,000 National Guard (2021). Government expenditures on the military are a small proportion of GDP 0.7% of GDP (2021 est.), 0.6% of GDP (2020).[192]
The Mexican Armed Forces maintain significant infrastructure, including facilities for design, research, and testing of weapons, vehicles, aircraft, naval vessels, defense systems and electronics; military industry manufacturing centers for building such systems, and advanced naval dockyards that build heavy military vessels and advanced missile technologies. Since the 1990s, when the military escalated its role in the war on drugs, increasing importance has been placed on acquiring airborne surveillance platforms, aircraft, helicopters, digital war-fighting technologies,[193] urban warfare equipment and rapid troop transport.[194] Mexico has the capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons, but abandoned this possibility with the Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1968 and pledged to only use its nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.[195]  Mexico signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.[196]
Historically, Mexico has remained neutral in international conflicts,[197] with the exception of World War II. However, in recent years some political parties have proposed an amendment of the Constitution to allow the Mexican Army, Air Force or Navy to collaborate with the United Nations in peacekeeping missions, or to provide military help to countries that officially ask for it.[198]
Law enforcement and crime
Main articles: Law enforcement in Mexico and Crime in Mexico
Further information: Mexican Drug War, Human trafficking in Mexico, and Femicide in Mexico
 Mexican Federal Police celebration
 Demonstration on 26 September 2015, in the first anniversary of the disappearance of the 43 students in the Mexican town of Iguala
The Mexican Federal Police were dissolved in 2019 by a constitutional amendment during the administration of President L pez Obrador and the Mexican National Guard established, amalgamating units of the Federal Police, Military Police, and Naval Police.[199] As of 2022, the National Guard is an estimated at 110,000. L pez Obrador has increasingly used military forces for domestic law enforcement, particularly against drug cartels.[200]  There have been serious abuses of power have been reported in security operations in the southern part of the country and in indigenous communities and poor urban neighborhoods. The National Human Rights Commission has had little impact in reversing this trend, engaging mostly in documentation but failing to use its powers to issue public condemnations to the officials who ignore its recommendations.[201]  Most Mexicans have low confidence in the police or the judicial system, and therefore, few crimes are actually reported by the citizens.[202] There have been public demonstrations of outrage against what is considered a culture of impunity.[203]
Crime and human rights violations in Mexico have been criticized, including enforced disappearances (kidnappings), abuses against migrants, extrajudicial killings, gender-based violence, especially femicide, and attacks on journalists and human rights advocatess.[204] 
A 2020 report by the BBC gives statistics on crime in Mexico, with 10.7 million households with at least one victim of crime.[205] 
As of May 2022, 100,000 people are officially listed as missing, most since 2007 when President Calder n attempted to stop the drug cartels.[206] Drug cartels remain a major issue in Mexico, with a proliferation of smaller cartels when larger ones are broken up and increasingly the use of more sophisticated military equipment and tactics.[207][208] President Felipe Calder n (2006 12) made eradicating organized crime a top priority by deploying military personnel to cities where drug cartels operate, a move criticized by the opposition parties and the National Human Rights Commission for escalating the violence.[209] Mexico's drug war, ongoing since 2006, has left over 120,000 dead and perhaps another 37,000 missing.[34] Mexican cartels have recently been identified as using the Chinese-sourced synthetic opiate fentanyl, which has caused many drug overdoses in the U.S.[210] China is identified as being involved more generally in organized crime in Mexico.[211]  Mexico's National Geography and Statistics Institute estimated that in 2014, one-fifth of Mexicans were victims of some sort of crime.[212] The mass kidnapping of 43 students in Iguala on 26 September 2014 triggered nationwide protests against the government's weak response to the disappearances and widespread corruption that gives free rein to criminal organizations.[213] More than 100 journalists and media workers have been killed or disappeared since 2000, and most of these crimes remained unsolved, improperly investigated, and with few perpetrators arrested and convicted.[214][215] Since President L pez Obrador became president in 2018, the number of journalists' murders has increased exponentially.[216][217][218] The U.S. Department of State warns its citizens to exercise increased caution when traveling in Mexico, issuing travel advisories on its website.[219]
Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Mexico
Further information: States of Mexico and Municipalities of Mexico
See also: List of Mexican state legislatures
The boundaries and constituent units of Mexico evolved over time from its colonial-era origins. Central America peacefully separated from Mexico after independence in 1821. Yucat n was briefly an independent republic. Texas separated in the Texas Revolution and when it was annexed to the U.S. in 1845, it set the stage for the Mexican American War and major territorial loss to the U.S. The sale of northern territory known in the U.S. as the Gadsden Purchase was the last loss of Mexican territory. The United Mexican States are a federation of 31 free and sovereign states, which form a union that exercises a degree of jurisdiction over Mexico City.[220] Each state has its own constitution, congress, and a judiciary, and its citizens elect by direct voting a governor for a six-year term, and representatives to their respective unicameral state congresses for three-year terms.[221]
Mexico City is a special political division that belongs to the federation as a whole and not to a particular state.[220] Formerly known as the Federal District, its autonomy was previously limited relative to that of the states.[222] It dropped this designation in 2016 and is in the process of achieving greater political autonomy by becoming a federal entity with its own constitution and congress.[223] The states are divided into municipalities, the smallest administrative political entity in the country, governed by a mayor or municipal president (presidente municipal), elected by its residents by plurality.[224]
Gulf ofMexico
PacificOcean
CentralAmerica
United States of America
Mexico City
AG
BajaCalifornia
BajaCaliforniaSur
Campeche
Chiapas
Chihuahua
Coahuila
Colima
Durango
Guanajuato
Guerrero
HD
Jalisco
EM
Michoac n
MO
Nayarit
NuevoLe n
Oaxaca
Puebla
Quer taro
QuintanaRoo
San LuisPotos 
Sinaloa
Sonora
Tabasco
Tamaulipas
TL
Veracruz
Yucat n
Zacatecas
Economy
Main article: Economy of Mexico
See also: Economic history of Mexico
 A proportional representation of Mexico's exports. The country has the most complex economy in Latin America.
 Mexican Stock Exchange building, in Mexico City
As of April 2018, Mexico has the 15th largest nominal GDP (US$1.15 trillion)[225] and the 11th largest by purchasing power parity (US$2.45 trillion). GDP annual average growth was 2.9% in 2016 and 2% in 2017.[225] Agriculture has comprised 4% of the economy over the last two decades, while industry contributes 33% (mostly automotive, oil, and electronics) and services (notably financial services and tourism) contribute 63%.[225] Mexico's GDP in PPP per capita was US$18,714.05. The World Bank reported in 2009 that the country's gross national income in market exchange rates was the second highest in Latin America, after Brazil at US$1,830.392 billion,[226] which led to the highest income per capita in the region at $15,311.[227][228] Mexico is now firmly established as an upper middle-income country. After the slowdown of 2001 the country has recovered and has grown 4.2, 3.0 and 4.8 percent in 2004, 2005 and 2006,[229] even though it is considered to be well below Mexico's potential growth.[230] The International Monetary Fund predicts growth rates of 2.3% and 2.7% for 2018 and 2019, respectively.[225] By 2050, Mexico could potentially become the world's fifth or seventh largest economy.[231][232]
Although multiple international organizations coincide and classify Mexico as an upper middle income country, or a middle class country[233][234] Mexico's National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL), which is the organization in charge to measure the country's poverty reports that a huge percentage of Mexico's population lives in poverty. According to said council, from 2006 to 2010 (year on which the CONEVAL published its first nationwide report of poverty) the portion of Mexicans who live in poverty rose from 18% 19%[235] to 46% (52 million people).[236] However, rather than Mexico's economy crashing, international economists attribute the huge increase in the percentage of population living below the country's poverty line to the CONEVAL using new standards to define it, as now besides people who lives below the economic welfare line, people who lacks at least one "social need" such as complete education, access to healthcare, access to regular food, housing services and goods, social security etc. were considered to be living in poverty (several countries do collect information regarding the persistence of said vulnerabilities on their population, but Mexico is the only one that classifies people lacking one or more of those needs as living below its national poverty line). Said economists do point out that the percentage of people living in poverty according to Mexico's national poverty line is around 40 times higher than the one reported by the World Bank's international poverty line (with said difference being the biggest in the world) and ponder if it would not be better for countries in the situation of Mexico to adopt internationalized standards to measure poverty so the numbers obtained could be used to make accurate international comparisons.[237] According to the OECD's own poverty line (defined as the percentage of a country's population who earns 60%[238] or less of the national median income) 20% of Mexico's population lives in a situation of poverty.[239]
 Skyscrapers in San Pedro Garza Garc a, Nuevo Le n
Among the OECD countries, Mexico has the second-highest degree of economic disparity between the extremely poor and extremely rich, after Chile  although it has been falling over the last decade, being one of few countries in which this is the case.[240] The bottom ten percent in the income hierarchy disposes of 1.36% of the country's resources, whereas the upper ten percent dispose of almost 36%. The OECD also notes that Mexico's budgeted expenses for poverty alleviation and social development is only about a third of the OECD average.[241] This is also reflected by the fact that infant mortality in Mexico is three times higher than the average among OECD nations whereas its literacy levels are in the median range of OECD nations. Nevertheless, according to Goldman Sachs, by 2050 Mexico will have the 5th largest economy in the world.[242] According to a 2008 UN report the average income in a typical urbanized area of Mexico was $26,654, while the average income in rural areas just miles away was only $8,403.[243] Daily minimum wages are set annually being set at $102.68 Mexican pesos (US$5.40) in 2019.[244] All of the indices of social development for the Mexican Indigenous population are considerably lower than the national average, which is motive of concern for the government.[245]
The electronics industry of Mexico has grown enormously within the last decade. Mexico has the sixth largest electronics industry in the world after China, the United States, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Mexico is the second-largest exporter of electronics to the United States where it exported $71.4 billion worth of electronics in 2011.[246] The Mexican electronics industry is dominated by the manufacture and OEM design of televisions, displays, computers, mobile phones, circuit boards, semiconductors, electronic appliances, communications equipment and LCD modules. The Mexican electronics industry grew 20% between 2010 and 2011, up from its constant growth rate of 17% between 2003 and 2009.[246] Currently electronics represent 30% of Mexico's exports.[246]
Mexico produces the most automobiles of any North American nation.[247] The industry produces technologically complex components and engages in some research and development activities.[248] The "Big Three" (General Motors, Ford and Chrysler) have been operating in Mexico since the 1930s, while Volkswagen and Nissan built their plants in the 1960s.[249] In Puebla alone, 70 industrial part-makers cluster around Volkswagen.[248] In the 2010s expansion of the sector was surging. In 2014 alone, more than $10 billion in investment was committed. In September 2016 Kia motors opened a $1 billion factory in Nuevo Le n,[250] with Audi also opening an assembling plant in Puebla the same year.[251] BMW, Mercedes-Benz and Nissan currently have plants in construction.[252] The domestic car industry is represented by DINA S.A., which has built buses and trucks since 1962,[253] and the new Mastretta company that builds the high-performance Mastretta MXT sports car.[254] In 2006, trade with the United States and Canada accounted for almost 50% of Mexico's exports and 45% of its imports.[13] During the first three quarters of 2010, the United States had a $46.0 billion trade deficit with Mexico.[255] In August 2010 Mexico surpassed France to become the 9th largest holder of US debt.[256] The commercial and financial dependence on the US is a cause for concern.[257]
The remittances from Mexican citizens working in the United States account are significant; after dipping during the after the 2008 Great Recession and again during Covid pandemic in 2021 they are topping other sources of foreign income.[258][259] Remittances are directed to Mexico by direct links from a U.S. government banking program.[260]
Communications
Main article: Telecommunications in Mexico
 Telmex Tower, Mexico City
The telecommunications industry is mostly dominated by Telmex (Tel fonos de M xico), previously a government monopoly privatized in 1990. By 2006, Telmex had expanded its operations to Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and the United States. Other players in the domestic industry are Axtel, Maxcom, Alestra, Marcatel, AT&T Mexico.[261] Because of Mexican orography, providing a landline telephone service at remote mountainous areas is expensive, and the penetration of line-phones per capita is low compared to other Latin American countries, at 40 percent; however, 82% of Mexicans over the age of 14 own a mobile phone. Mobile telephony has the advantage of reaching all areas at a lower cost, and the total number of mobile lines is almost two times that of landlines, with an estimation of 63 million lines.[262] The telecommunication industry is regulated by the government through Cofetel (Comisi n Federal de Telecomunicaciones).
The Mexican satellite system is domestic and operates 120 earth stations. There is also extensive microwave radio relay network and considerable use of fiber-optic and coaxial cable.[262] Mexican satellites are operated by Sat lites Mexicanos (Satmex), a private company, leader in Latin America and servicing both North and South America.[263] It offers broadcast, telephone and telecommunication services to 37 countries in the Americas, from Canada to Argentina. Through business partnerships Satmex provides high-speed connectivity to ISPs and Digital Broadcast Services.[264] Satmex maintains its own satellite fleet with most of the fleet being designed and built in Mexico. Major players in the broadcasting industry are Televisa, the largest Mexican media company in the Spanish-speaking world,[265] TV Azteca and Imagen Televisi n.
Energy
See also: Electricity sector in Mexico
 The Central E lica Sureste I, Fase II in Oaxaca
Energy production in Mexico is managed by the state-owned companies Federal Commission of Electricity and Pemex. Pemex, the public company in charge of exploration, extraction, transportation and marketing of crude oil and natural gas, as well as the refining and distribution of petroleum products and petrochemicals, is one of the largest companies in the world by revenue, making US$86 billion in sales a year.[266][267][268] Mexico is the sixth-largest oil producer in the world, with 3.7 million barrels per day.[269] In 1980 oil exports accounted for 61.6% of total exports; by 2000 it was only 7.3%.[248] The largest hydro plant in Mexico is the 2,400 MW Manuel Moreno Torres Dam in Chicoas n, Chiapas, in the Grijalva River. This is the world's fourth most productive hydroelectric plant.[270]
Mexico is the country with the world's third largest solar potential.[271] The country's gross solar potential is estimated at 5kWh/m2 daily, which corresponds to 50 times national electricity generation.[272] Currently, there is over 1 million square meters of solar thermal panels[273] installed in Mexico, while in 2005, there were 115,000 square meters of solar PV (photo-voltaic). It is expected that in 2012 there will be 1,8 million square meters of installed solar thermal panels.[273] The project named SEGH-CFE 1, located in Puerto Libertad, Sonora, Northwest of Mexico, will have capacity of 46.8 MW from an array of 187,200 solar panels when complete in 2013.[274] All of the electricity will be sold directly to the CFE and absorbed into the utility's transmission system for distribution throughout their existing network. At an installed capacity of 46.8 MWp, when complete in 2013, the project will be the first utility scale project of its kind in Mexico and the largest solar project of any kind in Latin America.
Science and technology
Further information: History of science and technology in Mexico
 Large Millimeter Telescope in Puebla
The National Autonomous University of Mexico was officially established in 1910,[275] and the university became one of the most important institutes of higher learning in Mexico.[276] UNAM provides world class education in science, medicine, and engineering.[277] Many scientific institutes and new institutes of higher learning, such as National Polytechnic Institute (founded in 1936),[278] were established during the first half of the 20th century. Most of the new research institutes were created within UNAM. Twelve institutes were integrated into UNAM from 1929 to 1973.[279] In 1959, the Mexican Academy of Sciences was created to coordinate scientific efforts between academics.
In 1995, the Mexican chemist Mario J. Molina shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Paul J. Crutzen and F. Sherwood Rowland for their work in atmospheric chemistry, particularly concerning the formation and decomposition of ozone.[280] Molina, an alumnus of UNAM, became the first Mexican citizen to win the Nobel Prize in science.[281]
In recent years, the largest scientific project being developed in Mexico was the construction of the Large Millimeter Telescope (Gran Telescopio Milim trico, GMT), the world's largest and most sensitive single-aperture telescope in its frequency range.[282] It was designed to observe regions of space obscured by stellar dust. Mexico was ranked 55th in the Global Innovation Index in 2021, up from 56th in 2019.[283][284][285][286]
Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Mexico
 Canc n and the Riviera Maya is the most visited region in Latin America.
As of 2017, Mexico was the 6th most visited country in the world and had the 15th highest income from tourism in the world which is also the highest in Latin America.[287] The vast majority of tourists come to Mexico from the United States and Canada followed by Europe and Asia. A smaller number also come from other Latin American countries.[288] In the 2017 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report, Mexico was ranked 22nd in the world, which was 3rd in the Americas.[289]
The coastlines of Mexico harbor many stretches of beaches that are frequented by sunbathers and other visitors. According to national law, the entirety of the coastlines are under federal ownership, that is, all beaches in the country are public. On the Yucat n peninsula, one of the most popular beach destinations is the resort town of Canc n, especially among university students during spring break. Just offshore is the beach island of Isla Mujeres, and to the east is the Isla Holbox. To the south of Cancun is the coastal strip called Riviera Maya which includes the beach town of Playa del Carmen and the ecological parks of Xcaret and Xel-H . A day trip to the south of Canc n is the historic port of Tulum. In addition to its beaches, the town of Tulum is notable for its cliff-side Mayan ruins. On the Pacific coast is the notable tourist destination of Acapulco. Once the destination for the rich and famous, the beaches have become crowded and the shores are now home to many multi-story hotels and vendors. Acapulco is home to renowned cliff divers: trained divers who leap from the side of a vertical cliff into the surf below. At the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula is the resort town of Cabo San Lucas, a town noted for its beaches and marlin fishing.[290] Further north along the Sea of Cort s is the Bah a de La Concepci n, another beach town known for its sports fishing. Closer to the United States border is the weekend draw of San Felipe, Baja California.
Transportation
Main article: Transportation in Mexico
 The Baluarte Bridge was the highest cable-stayed bridge in the world, the fifth-highest bridge overall and is the highest bridge in the Americas.
The roadway network in Mexico is extensive and all areas in the country are covered by it. The roadway network in Mexico has an extent of 366,095 km (227,481 mi),[291] of which 116,802 km (72,577 mi) are paved.[292] Of these, 10,474 km (6,508 mi) are multi-lane expressways: 9,544 km (5,930 mi) are four-lane highways and the rest have 6 or more lanes.[292]
Starting in the late nineteenth century, Mexico was one of the first Latin American countries to promote railway development,[202] and the network covers 30,952 km (19,233 mi). The Secretary of Communications and Transport of Mexico proposed a high-speed rail link that will transport its passengers from Mexico City to Guadalajara, Jalisco.[293][294] The train, which will travel at 300 kilometers per hour (190 miles per hour),[295] will allow passengers to travel from Mexico City to Guadalajara in just 2 hours.[295] The whole project was projected to cost 240 billion pesos, or about 25 billion US$[293] and is being paid for jointly by the Mexican government and the local private sector including the wealthiest man in the world, Mexico's billionaire business tycoon Carlos Slim.[296] The government of the state of Yucat n is also funding the construction of a high speed line connecting the cities of Cozumel to M rida and Chichen Itza and Canc n.[297]
Mexico has 233 airports with paved runways; of these, 35 carry 97% of the passenger traffic.[citation needed] The Mexico City International Airport remains the busiest in Latin America and the 36th busiest in the world[298] transporting 45 million passengers a year.[299]
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Mexico
 Mexican states by population density
Throughout the 19th century, the population of Mexico had barely doubled. This trend continued during the first two decades of the 20th century. The 1921 census reported a loss of about 1 million inhabitants. The Mexican Revolution (c. 1910 1920) greatly impacted population increases. The growth rate increased dramatically between the 1930s and the 1980s, when the country registered growth rates of over 3% (1950 1980). The Mexican population doubled in twenty years, and at that rate it was expected that by 2000 there would be 120 million people living in Mexico. Life expectancy increased from 36 years (in 1895) to 72 years (in the year 2000). According to estimations made by Mexico's National Geography and Statistics Institute, is estimated in 2022 to be 129,150,971[300] as of 2017 Mexico had 123.5 million inhabitants[301] making it the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world.[302]
Ethnicity and race
 Las castas. Casta painting showing 16 racial groupings, 18th century, Museo Nacional del Virreinato, Tepotzotl n, Mexico.
Mexico's population is highly diverse, but research on Mexican ethnicity has felt the impact of nationalist discourses on identity.[303][304][305] Since the 1930s, the Mexican government has promoted the view that all Mexicans are part of the Mestizo community, within which they are distinguished only by residence in or outside of an indigenous community, degree of fluency in an indigenous language, and degree of adherence to indigenous customs.[306][307] Even then, across the years the government has used different criteria to count Indigenous peoples, with each of them returning considerably different numbers ranging from 6.1%[5] to 23% of the country's population. It is not until very recently that the Mexican government began conducting surveys that consider other ethnic groups that live in the country, such as Afro-Mexicans (who comprised 2% of Mexico's population in 2020)[5] or White Mexicans (47%).[308][309] (These studies assert a view of race based on appearance rather than on self-declared ancestry).[310][311][312] Less numerous groups in Mexico such as Asians and Middle Easterners are also accounted for, with numbers of around 1% each. While Mestizos are a prominent ethnic group in contemporary Mexico, the subjective and ever-changing definition of this category have led to its estimations being imprecise, having been observed that many Mexicans do not identify as Mestizos,[313][314] favoring instead ethnoracial labels such as White or Indigenous due to having more consistent and "static" definitions.[315]
The total percentage of Mexico's indigenous peoples tends to vary depending on the criteria used by the government in its censuses: if the ability to speak an indigenous language is used as the criterion to define a person as indigenous, it is 6.1%,[5][316] if racial self-identification is used, it is 14.9%[317][d] and if people who consider themselves part indigenous are also included, it amounts to 23%.[320] Nonetheless, all the censuses conclude that the majority of Mexico's indigenous population is concentrated in rural areas of the southern and south-eastern Mexican states,[321] with the highest percentages being found in Yucat n (59% of the population), Oaxaca (48%), Quintana Roo (39%), Chiapas (28%), and Campeche (27%).[245][322]
Similarly to Mestizo and indigenous peoples, estimates of the percentage of European-descended Mexicans vary considerably depending on the criteria used: recent nationwide field surveys that account for different phenotypical traits (hair color, skin color etc.) report a percentage between 18%[323]-23%[324] if the criterion is the presence of blond hair, and of 47% if the criterion is skin color, with the later surveys having been conducted by Mexico's government itself.[310][311][312][325][326] While, during the colonial era, most of the European migration into Mexico was Spanish, in the 19th and 20th centuries, a substantial number of non-Spanish Europeans immigrated to the country,[327] with Europeans often being the most numerous ethnic group in colonial Mexican cities.[328][329] Nowadays, Mexico's northern and western regions have the highest percentages of European populations, with the majority of the people not having native admixture or being of predominantly European ancestry.[330]
The Afro-Mexican population (2,576,213 individuals as of 2020[update])[5][331] is an ethnic group made up of descendants of Colonial-era slaves and recent immigrants of sub-Saharan African descent. Mexico had an active slave trade during the colonial period, and some 200,000 Africans were taken there, primarily in the 17th century. The creation of a national Mexican identity, especially after the Mexican Revolution, emphasized Mexico's indigenous and European past; it passively eliminated the African ancestors and contributions. Most of the African-descended population was absorbed into the surrounding Mestizo (mixed European/indigenous) and indigenous populations through unions among the groups. Evidence of this long history of intermarriage with Mestizo and indigenous Mexicans is also expressed in the fact that, in the 2015 inter-census, 64.9% (896,829) of Afro-Mexicans also identified as indigenous. It was also reported that 7.4% of Afro-Mexicans speak an indigenous language.[5][332] The states with the highest self-report of Afro-Mexicans were Guerrero (8.6% of the population), Oaxaca (4.7%) and Baja California Sur (3.3%).[5][333] Afro-Mexican culture is strongest in the communities of the Costa Chica of Oaxaca and Costa Chica of Guerrero.
 Regional variation of ancestry according to a study made by Ruiz-Linares in 2014; each dot represents a volunteer, with most coming from south Mexico and Mexico City.[334]
During the early 20th century, a substantial number of Arabs (mostly Christians)[citation needed] began arriving from the crumbling Ottoman Empire. The largest group were the Lebanese and an estimated 400,000 Mexicans have some Lebanese ancestry.[335]
Smaller ethnic groups in Mexico include South and East Asians, present since the colonial era. During the colonial era, Asians were termed Chino (regardless of ethnicity), and arrived as merchants, artisans and slaves.[336] A study by Juan Esteban Rodr guez, a graduate student at the National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity, indicated that up to one third of people sampled from Guerrero state had significantly more Asian ancestry than most Mexicans, primarily Filipino or Indonesian.[337][338] Modern Asian immigration began in the late 19th century, and at one point in the early 20th century, the Chinese were the second largest immigrant group.[339]
Languages
Main article: Languages of Mexico
Spanish is the de facto national language spoken by the vast majority of the population, making Mexico the world's most populous Hispanophone country.[340][302] Mexican Spanish refers to the varieties of the language spoken in the country, which differ from one region to another in sound, structure, and vocabulary.[341] In general, Mexican Spanish does not make any phonetic distinction among the letters s and z, as well as c when preceding the vowels e and i, as opposed to Peninsular Spanish. The letters b and v have the same pronunciation as well.[341] Furthermore, the usage of vos, the second person singular pronoun, found in several Latin American varieties, is replaced by t ; whereas vosotros, the second person plural pronoun, fell out of use and was effectively replaced by ustedes.[341] In written form, the Spanish Royal Academy serves as the primary guideline for spelling, except for words of Amerindian origin that retain their original phonology such as cenzontle instead of sinzontle and M xico not M jico. Words of foreign origin also maintain their original spelling such as "whisky" and "film", as opposed to g isqui and filme as the Royal Academy suggests.[341] The letter x is distinctly used in Mexican Spanish, where it may be pronounced as [ks] (as in ox geno or taxi); as [ ], particularly in Amerindian words (e.g. mixiote, Xola and uxmal); and as the voiceless velar fricative [x] (such as Texas and Oaxaca).[341]
 Map for the year 2000 of the indigenous languages of Mexico having more than 100,000 speakers
The federal government officially recognizes sixty-eight linguistic groups and 364 varieties of indigenous languages.[342] It is estimated that around 8.3 million citizens speak these languages,[343] with Nahuatl being the most widely spoken by more than 1.7 million, followed by Yucatec Maya used daily by nearly 850,000 people. Tzeltal and Tzotzil, two other Mayan languages, are spoken by around half a million people each, primarily in the southern state of Chiapas.[343] Mixtec and Zapotec, with an estimated 500,000 native speakers each, are two other prominent language groups.[343] Since its creation in March 2003, the National Indigenous Languages Institute has been in charge of promoting and protecting the use of the country's indigenous languages, through the General Law of Indigenous Peoples' Linguistic Rights, which recognizes them de jure as "national languages" with status equal to that of Spanish.[344] That notwithstanding, in practice, indigenous peoples often face discrimination and don't have full access to public services such as education and healthcare, or to the justice system, as Spanish is the prevailing language.[345]
Aside from indigenous languages, there are several minority languages spoken in Mexico due to international migration such as Low German by the 80,000-strong Mennonite population, primarily settled in the northern states, fueled by the tolerance of the federal government towards this community by allowing them to set their own educational system compatible with their customs and traditions.[346] The Chipilo dialect, a variance of the Venetian language, is spoken in the town of Chipilo, located in the central state of Puebla, by around 2,500 people, mainly descendants of Venetians that migrated to the area in the late 19th century.[347] Furthermore, English is the most commonly taught foreign language in Mexico. It is estimated that nearly 24 million, or around a fifth of the population, study the language through public schools, private institutions or self-access channels.[348] However, a high level of English proficiency is limited to only 5% of the population.[349] Moreover, French is the second most widely taught foreign language, as every year between 200,000 and 250,000 Mexican students enroll in language courses.[350][351][352]
Emigration and immigration
Main articles: Emigration from Mexico and Immigration to Mexico
 Mexico United States barrier between San Diego's border patrol offices in California, USA (left) and Tijuana, Mexico (right)
In the early 1960s, around 600,000 Mexicans lived abroad, which increased sevenfold by the 1990s to 4.4 million.[353] At the turn of the 21st century, this figure more than doubled to 9.5 million.[353] As of 2017, it is estimated that 12.9 million Mexicans live abroad, primarily in the United States, which concentrates nearly 98% of the expatriate population.[353]
The majority of Mexicans have settled in states such as California, Texas and Illinois, particularly around the metropolitan areas of Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston and Dallas Fort Worth.[354] As a result of these major migration flows in recent decades, around 36 million U.S. residents, or 11.2% of the country's population, identified as being of full or partial Mexican ancestry.[355]
The remaining 2% of expatriates have settled in Canada (86,000), primarily in the provinces of Ontario and Quebec,[356] followed by Spain (49,000) and Germany (18,000), both European destinations represent almost two-thirds of the Mexican population living in the continent.[353] As for Latin America, it is estimated that 69,000 Mexicans live in the region, Guatemala (18,000) being the top destination for expatriates, followed by Bolivia (10,000) and Panama (5,000).[353]
As of 2017[update], it is estimated that 1.2 million foreigners have settled in Mexico,[357] up from nearly 1 million in 2010.[358] The vast majority of migrants come from the United States (900,000), making Mexico the top destination for U.S. citizens abroad.[359] The second largest group comes from neighboring Guatemala (54,500), followed by Spain (27,600).[357] Other major sources of migration are fellow Latin American countries, which include Colombia (20,600), Argentina (19,200) and Cuba (18,100).[357] Historically, the Lebanese diaspora and the German-born Mennonite migration have left a notorious impact in the country's culture, particularly in its cuisine and traditional music.[360][361] At the turn of the 21st century, several trends have increased the number of foreigners residing in the country such as the 2008 2014 Spanish financial crisis,[362] increasing gang-related violence in the Northern Triangle of Central America,[363] the ongoing political and economic crisis in Venezuela,[364][365] and the automotive industry boom led by Japanese and South Korean investment.[366][367]
Urban areas
Main article: Metropolitan areas of Mexico
 vte Largest metropolitan areas in Mexico2020 National Population Census[368]
Rank
Name
State
 Pop.
Rank
Name
State
 Pop.
Valley of MexicoMonterrey
1
Valley of Mexico
Mexico City, State of Mexico, Hidalgo
21,804,515
11
M rida
Yucat n
1,316,088
GuadalajaraPuebla Tlaxcala
2
Monterrey
Nuevo Le n
5,341,171
12
San Luis Potos 
San Luis Potos 
1,271,366
3
Guadalajara
Jalisco
5,286,642
13
Aguascalientes
Aguascalientes
1,140,916
4
Puebla Tlaxcala
Puebla, Tlaxcala
3,199,530
14
Mexicali
Baja California
1,031,779
5
Toluca
State of Mexico
2,353,924
15
Saltillo
Coahuila
1,031,779
6
Tijuana
Baja California
2,157,853
16
Cuernavaca
Morelos
1,028,589
7
Le n
Guanajuato
1,924,771
17
Culiac n
Sinaloa
1,003,530
8
Quer taro
Quer taro
1,594,212
18
Morelia
Michoac n
988,704
9
Ju rez
Chihuahua
1,512,450
19
Chihuahua
Chihuahua
988,065
10
La Laguna
Coahuila, Durango
1,434,283
20
Veracruz
Veracruz
939,046
Religion
Main article: Religion in Mexico
Religion in Mexico (2020 census)[369][370]
 Roman Catholic (72.1%) Evangelist (unspecified) (2.5%) Jehovah's Witness (1.7%) Pentecostal evangelist (1.3%) Irreligion (15.3%) Unspecified (Do not answer/Do not known) (2.7%) Baptists (0.4%) Adventists (0.4%) Mormons (0.2%) Atheist (0.9%) Agnostics (0.1%) Other (1.4%)
Although the Constitutions of 1857 and 1917 put limits on the role of the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico, Roman Catholicism remains the country's dominant religious affiliation. The 2020 census by the Instituto Nacional de Estad stica y Geograf a (National Institute of Statistics and Geography) gives Roman Catholicism as the main religion, with 77.7% (97,864,218) of the population, while 11.2% (14,095,307) belong to Protestant/Evangelical Christian denominations including Other Christians (6,778,435), Evangelicals (2,387,133), Pentecostals (1,179,415), Jehovah's Witnesses (1,530,909), Seventh-day Adventists (791,109), and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (337,998) ; 8.1% (9,488,671) declared having no religion; .4% (491,814) were unspecified.[5][371]
The 97,864,218[5] Catholics of Mexico constitute in absolute terms the second largest Catholic community in the world, after Brazil's.[372] 47% percent of them attend church services weekly.[373] The feast day of Our Lady of Guadalupe, the patron saint of Mexico, is celebrated on 12 December and is regarded by many Mexicans as the most important religious holiday of their country.[374] The denominations Pentecostal also have an important presence, especially in the cities of the border and in the indigenous communities. As of 2010, Pentecostal churches together have more than 1.3 million adherents, which in net numbers place them as the second Christian creed in Mexico. The situation changes when the different Pentecostal denominations are considered as separate entities. Migratory phenomena have led to the spread of different aspects of Christianity, including branches Protestants, Eastern Catholic Churches and Eastern Orthodox Church.[375]
In certain regions, the profession of a creed other than the Catholic is seen as a threat to community unity. It is argued that the Catholic religion is part of the ethnic identity, and that the Protestants are not willing to participate in the traditional customs and practices (the tequio or community work, participation in the festivities and similar issues). The refusal of the Protestants is because their religious beliefs do not allow them to participate in the cult of images. In extreme cases, tension between Catholics and Protestants has led to the expulsion or even murder of Protestants in several villages. The best known cases are those of San Juan Chamula,[376][377] in Chiapas, and San Nicol s, in Ixmiquilpan,[378] Hidalgo. A similar argument was presented by a committee of anthropologists to request the government of the Republic to expel the Summer Linguistic Institute (SIL), in the year 1979, which was accused of promoting the division of indigenous peoples by translating the Bible into vernacular languages and evangelizing in a Protestant creed that threatened the integrity of popular cultures. The Mexican government paid attention to the call of the anthropologists and canceled the agreement that had held with the SIL.[379]
The presence of Jews in Mexico dates back to 1521, when Hern n Cort s conquered the Aztecs, accompanied by several Conversos.[380] According to the 2020 census, there are 58,876 Jews in Mexico.[5] Islam in Mexico (with 7,982 members) is practiced mostly by Arab Mexicans.[5] In the 2010 census 36,764 Mexicans reported belonging to a spiritualist religion,[5] a category which includes a tiny Buddhist population.
According to Jacobo Grinberg (in texts edited by the National Autonomous University of Mexico), the survival of magic-religious rituals of the old indigenous groups is remarkable, not only in the current indigenous population but also in the mestizo and white population that make up the Mexican rural and urban society. There is often a syncretism between shamanism and Catholic traditions. Another religion of popular syncretism in Mexico (especially in recent years) is the Santer a. This is mainly due to the large number of Cubans who settled in the territory after the Cuban Revolution (mainly in states such as Veracruz and Yucat n). Even though Mexico was also a recipient of black slaves from Africa in the 16th century, the apogee of these cults is relatively new.[381] In general, popular religiosity is viewed with bad eyes by institutionally structured religions. One of the most exemplary cases of popular religiosity is the cult of Holy Dead (Santa Muerte). The Catholic hierarchy insists on describing it as a satanic cult. However, most of the people who profess this cult declare themselves to be Catholic believers, and consider that there is no contradiction between the tributes they offer to the Christ Child and the adoration of God. Other examples are the representations of the Passion of Christ and the celebration of Day of the Dead, which take place within the framework of the Catholic Christian imaginary, but under a very particular reinterpretation of its protagonists.[382]
Health
Main article: Healthcare in Mexico
 Secretary of Health, Mexico City, Mexico
In the 1930s, Mexico made a commitment to rural health care, mandating that mostly urban medical students receive training in it and to make them agents of the state to assess marginal areas.[383] Since the early 1990s, Mexico entered a transitional stage in the health of its population and some indicators such as mortality patterns are identical to those found in highly developed countries like Germany or Japan.[384] Mexico's medical infrastructure is highly rated for the most part and is usually excellent in major cities,[385][386] but rural communities still lack equipment for advanced medical procedures, forcing patients in those locations to travel to the closest urban areas to get specialized medical care.[202] Social determinants of health can be used to evaluate the state of health in Mexico.
State-funded institutions such as Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) and the Institute for Social Security and Services for State Workers (ISSSTE) play a major role in health and social security. Private health services are also very important and account for 13% of all medical units in the country.[387] Medical training is done mostly at public universities with much specializations done in vocational or internship settings. Some public universities in Mexico, such as the University of Guadalajara, have signed agreements with the U.S. to receive and train American students in medicine. Health care costs in private institutions and prescription drugs in Mexico are on average lower than that of its North American economic partners.[385]
Education
Main article: Education in Mexico
 Central Library of the National Autonomous University of Mexico
In 2004, the literacy rate was at 97%[388] for youth under the age of 14, and 91% for people over 15,[389] placing Mexico at 24th place in the world according to UNESCO.[390]
Nowadays, Mexico's literacy rate is high, at 94.86% in 2018, up from 82.99% in 1980,[391] with the literacy rates of males and females being relatively equal. The National Autonomous University of Mexico ranks 103rd in the QS World University Rankings, making it the best university in Mexico. After it comes the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education as the best private school in Mexico and 158th worldwide in 2019.[392]
Private business schools also stand out in international rankings. IPADE and EGADE, the business schools of Universidad Panamericana and of Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education respectively, were ranked in the top 10 in a survey conducted by The Wall Street Journal among recruiters outside the United States.[393]
Culture
Main article: Culture of Mexico
Mexican culture reflects the complexity of the country's history through the blending of indigenous cultures and the culture of Spain during Spain's 300-year colonial rule of Mexico. The Porfirian era (el Porfiriato) (1876 1911), was marked by economic progress and peace. After four decades of civil unrest and war, Mexico saw the development of philosophy and the arts, promoted by President Porfirio D az himself. Since that time, as accentuated during the Mexican Revolution, cultural identity has had its foundation in the mestizaje, of which the indigenous (i.e. Amerindian) element is the core. In light of the various ethnicities that formed the Mexican people, Jos  Vasconcelos in La Raza C smica (The Cosmic Race) (1925) defined Mexico to be the melting pot of all races (thus extending the definition of the mestizo) not only biologically but culturally as well.[394] Other Mexican intellectuals grappled with the idea of Lo Mexicano, which seeks "to discover the national ethos of Mexican culture."[395] Nobel laureate Octavio Paz explores the notion of a Mexican national character in The Labyrinth of Solitude.
Art
Main article: Mexican art
 Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo, two of the most famous Mexican artists
Painting is one of the oldest arts in Mexico. Cave painting in Mexican territory is about 7500 years old and has been found in the caves of the Baja California Peninsula. Pre-Columbian Mexico is present in buildings and caves, in Aztec codices, in ceramics, in garments, etc.; examples of this are the Maya mural paintings of Bonampak, or those of Teotihuac n, those of Cacaxtla and those of Monte Alb n.
Mural painting with Christian religious themes had an important flowering during the 16th century, early colonial era in newly constructed churches and monasteries. Examples can be found in Acolman, Actopan, Huejotzingo, Tecamachalco and Zinacantepec.
As with most art during the early modern era in the West, colonial-era Mexican art was religious during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Starting in the late seventeenth century, and, most prominently in the eighteenth century, secular portraits and images of racial types, so-called casta painting appeared.[396]  Important painters of the late colonial period were Juan Correa, Crist bal de Villalpando and Miguel Cabrera. In early post-independence Mexico, Nineteenth-century painting had a marked romantic influence; landscapes and portraits were the greatest expressions of this era. Hermenegildo Bustos is one of the most appreciated painters of the historiography of Mexican art. Other painters include Santiago Rebull, F lix Parra, Eugenio Landesio, and his noted pupil, the landscape artist Jos  Mar a Velasco.[397]
In the 20th century has achieved world renown with painters such as Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and Jos  Clemente Orozco, the so-called "Big Three" of Mexican muralism. They were commissioned by the Mexican government to paint large-scale historical murals on the walls of public buildings, which helped shape popular perceptions of the Mexican Revolution and Mexican cultural identity.[398] Frida Kahlo's largely personal portraiture has gained enormous popularity.[399]
Architecture
Main article: Architecture of Mexico
 Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of Fine Arts), with murals, other artwork, and a major performance space
In the 19th century the neoclassical movement arose as a response to the objectives of the republican nation, one of its examples are the Hospicio Caba as where the strict plastic of the classical orders are represented in their architectural elements, new religious buildings also arise, civilian and military that demonstrate the presence of neoclassicism. Romanticists from a past seen through archeology show images of medieval Europe, Islamic and pre-Columbian Mexico in the form of architectural elements in the construction of international exhibition pavilions looking for an identity typical of the national culture. The art nouveau, and the art deco were styles introduced into the design of the Palacio de Bellas Artes to mark the identity of the Mexican nation with Greek-Roman and pre-Columbian symbols.[citation needed]
The emergence of the new Mexican architecture was born as a formal order of the policies of a nationalist state that sought modernity and the differentiation of other nations. The development of a Mexican modernist architecture was perhaps mostly fully manifested in the mid-1950s construction of the Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico City, the main campus of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. Designed by the most prestigious architects of the era, including Mario Pani, Eugenio Peschard, and Enrique del Moral, the buildings feature murals by artists Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and Jos  Ch vez Morado. It has since been recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[400]
Juan O'Gorman was one of the first environmental architects in Mexico, developing the "organic" theory, trying to integrate the building with the landscape within the same approaches of Frank Lloyd Wright.[401] In the search for a new architecture that does not resemble the styles of the past, it achieves a joint manifestation with the mural painting and the landscaping. Luis Barrag n combined the shape of the space with forms of rural vernacular architecture of Mexico and Mediterranean countries (Spain-Morocco), integrating color that handles light and shade in different tones and opens a look at the international minimalism. He won the 1980 Pritzker Prize, the highest award in architecture.[402]
Cuisine
Main article: Mexican cuisineSee also: Mexican wine
 Mole sauce, which has dozens of varieties across the Republic, is seen as a symbol of Mexicanidad[403] and is considered Mexico's national dish.[403]
The origin of the current Mexican cuisine was established during the Spanish colonial era, a mixture of the foods of Spain with native indigenous ingredients.[404] Foods indigenous to Mexico include corn, pepper vegetables, calabazas, avocados, sweet potato, turkey, many beans, and other fruits and spices. Similarly, some cooking techniques used today are inherited from pre-Columbian peoples, such as the nixtamalization of corn, the cooking of food in ovens at ground level, grinding in molcajete and metate. With the Spaniards came the pork, beef and chicken meats; peppercorn, sugar, milk and all its derivatives, wheat and rice, citrus fruits and another constellation of ingredients that are part of the daily diet of Mexicans.
From this meeting of millennia old two culinary traditions, were born pozole, mole sauce, barbacoa and tamale is in its current forms, the chocolate, a large range of breads, tacos, and the broad repertoire of Mexican street foods. Beverages such as atole, champurrado, milk chocolate and aguas frescas were born; desserts such as acitr n and the full range of crystallized sweets, rompope, cajeta, jericaya and the wide repertoire of delights created in the convents of nuns in all parts of the country.
In 2005, Mexico presented the candidature of its gastronomy for World Heritage Site of UNESCO, the first time a country had presented its gastronomic tradition for this purpose.[405] The result was negative, because the committee did not place the proper emphasis on the importance of corn in Mexican cuisine.[406] On 16 November 2010 Mexican gastronomy was recognized as Intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO.[407] In addition, Daniela Soto-Innes was named the best female chef in the world by The World's Best 50 Restaurants in April 2019.[408]
Literature
Main article: Mexican literature
 Octavio Paz, the only Mexican awarded with the Nobel Prize in Literature
Mexican literature has its antecedents in the literature of the indigenous settlements of Mesoamerica. Poetry had a rich cultural tradition in pre-Columbian Mexico, being divided into two broad categories secular and religious. Aztec poetry was sung, chanted, or spoken, often to the accompaniment of a drum or a harp. While Tenochtitlan was the political capital, Texcoco was the cultural center; the Texcocan language was considered the most melodious and refined. The best well-known pre-Columbian poet is Nezahualcoyotl.[409]
There are historical chronicles of the conquest of Mexico by participants, and, later, by historians. Bernal D az del Castillo's True History of the Conquest of the New Spain is still widely read today. Spanish-born poet Bernardo de Balbuena extolled the virtues of Mexico in Grandeza mexicana (Mexican grandeur) (1604). Baroque literature flourished in the 17th century; the most notable writers of this period were Juan Ruiz de Alarc n and Juana In s de la Cruz. Sor Juana was famous in her own time, called the "Ten Muse."[410]
The late colonial-era novel by Jos  Joaqu n Fern ndez de Lizardi, whose The Mangy Parrot ("El Periquillo Sarniento"), is said to be the first Latin American novel.[410] Nineteenth-century liberal of Nahua origin Ignacio Manuel Altamirano is an important writer of the era, along with Vicente Riva Palacio, the grandson of Mexican hero of independence Vicente Guerrero, who authored a series of historical novels as well as poetry.  In the modern era, the novel of the Mexican Revolution by Mariano Azuela (Los de abajo, translated to English as The Underdogs) is noteworthy. Poet and Nobel Laureate Octavio Paz, novelist Carlos Fuentes, Alfonso Reyes, Renato Leduc, essayist Carlos Monsiv is, journalist and public intellectual Elena Poniatowska,  and Juan Rulfo (Pedro P ramo), Mart n Luis Guzm n, Nellie Campobello, (Cartucho).
Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Mexico
 Alfonso Cuar n, the first Mexican filmmaker to win the Academy Award for Best Director
Mexican films from the Golden Age in the 1940s and 1950s are the greatest examples of Latin American cinema, with a huge industry comparable to the Hollywood of those years. Mexican films were exported and exhibited in all of Latin America and Europe. Mar a Candelaria (1943) by Emilio Fern ndez, was one of the first films awarded a Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival in 1946, the first time the event was held after World War II. The famous Spanish-born director Luis Bu uel realized in Mexico between 1947 and 1965 some of his masterpieces like Los Olvidados (1949) and Viridiana (1961). Famous actors and actresses from this period include Mar a F lix, Pedro Infante, Dolores del R o, Jorge Negrete and the comedian Cantinflas.
More recently, films such as Como agua para chocolate (1992), Sex, Shame, and Tears (1999), Y tu mam  tambi n (2001), and The Crime of Father Amaro (2002) have been successful in creating universal stories about contemporary subjects, and were internationally recognized. Mexican directors Alejandro Gonz lez I rritu (Babel, Birdman, The Revenant, Bardo, False Chronicle of a Handful of Truths), Alfonso Cuar n (A Little Princess, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Gravity, Roma), Guillermo del Toro (Pan's Labyrinth, Crimson Peak, The Shape of Water, Nightmare Alley), screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga and photographer Emmanuel Lubezki are some of the most known present-day film makers.
Music and dance
Main articles: Music of Mexico and Folk dance of Mexico
 Mexican composer Carlos Ch vez
Mexico has a long tradition of music from the prehispanic era to the present.Much of the music from the colonial era was composed for religious purposes.[411][412]
Although the traditions of European opera and especially Italian opera had initially dominated the Mexican music conservatories and strongly influenced native opera composers (in both style and subject matter), elements of Mexican nationalism had already appeared by the latter part of the 19th century with operas such as Aniceto Ortega del Villar's 1871 Guatimotzin, a romanticized account of the defense of Mexico by its last Aztec ruler, Cuauht moc. The most well-known Mexican composer of the twentieth century is Carlos Ch vez (1899 1978), who composed six symphonies with indigenous themes, and rejuvenated Mexican music, founding the Orquesta Sinf nica Nacional.[413]
Traditional Mexican music includes mariachi, banda, norte o, ranchera, and corridos. Corridos were particularly popular during the Mexican Revolution (1910 20) and in the present era include narcocorridos. The embrace of rock and roll by young Mexicans in the 1960s and 1970s brought Mexico into the transnational, counterculture movement of the era. In Mexico, the native rock culture merged into the larger countercultural and political movement of the late 1960s, culminating in the 1968 protests and redirected into counterculture rebellion, La Onda (the wave).[414][415]
On an everyday basis most Mexicans listen to contemporary music such as pop, rock, and others in both English and Spanish. Folk dance of Mexico along with its music is both deeply regional and traditional.Founded in 1952, the Ballet Folkl rico de M xico performs music and dance of the prehispanic period through the Mexican Revolution in regional attire in the Palacio de Bellas Artes.[416]
Media
Further information: Mexican television, List of newspapers in Mexico, and List of Mexican magazines
 Televisa headquarters in Mexico City
There was a major reform of the telecommunications industry in 2013, with the creation of new broadcast television channels. There had been a longstanding limitation on the number of networks, with Televisa, with a virtual monopoly; TV Azteca, and Imagen Television. New technology has allowed the entry of foreign satellite and cable companies. Mexico became the first Latin American country to transition from analog to all digital transmissions.[417]
Telenovelas, or soap operas are very traditional in Mexico and are translated to many languages and seen all over the world. Mexico was a pioneer in edutainment, with TV producer Miguel Sabido creating in 1970s "soap operas for social change". The "Sabido  method" has been adopted in many other countries subsequently, including India, Peru, Kenya, and China.[418] The Mexican government successfully used a telenovela to promote family planning in the 1970s to curb the country's high birth rate.[419]
Bilingual government radio stations broadcasting in Spanish and indigenous languages were a tool for indigenous education (1958 65) and since 1979 the Instituto Nacional Indigenista has established a national network of bilingual radio stations.[420]
Sports
Main article: Sport in Mexico
 Azteca Stadium, Mexico City
Organized sport in Mexico largely dates from the late nineteenth century, with only bullfighting having a long history dating to the early colonial era. Once the political turmoil of the early republic was replaced by the stability of the Porfiriato did organized sport become public diversions, with structured and ordered play governed by rules and authorities.  Baseball was introduced from the United States and also via Cuba in the 1880s and organized teams were created. After the Mexican Revolution, the government sponsored sports to counter the international image of political turmoil and violence.[421]
The bid to host the 1968 Summer Olympics was to burnish Mexico's stature internationally, with is being the first Latin American country to host the games. The government spent abundantly on sporting facilities and other infrastructure to make the games a success, but those expenditures helped fuel public discontent with the government's lack of spending on social programs.[421] Mexico City hosted the XIX Olympic Games in 1968, making it the first Latin American city to do so.[422] The country has also hosted the FIFA World Cup twice, in 1970 and 1986.[423] Mexico's most popular sport is association football. 
 El Santo, one of the most iconic Mexican luchadores
The Mexican professional baseball league is named the Liga Mexicana de Beisbol. While usually not as strong as the United States, the Caribbean countries and Japan, Mexico has nonetheless achieved several international baseball titles.[424][425]
Other sporting activities include Bullfighting, boxing, and Lucha Libre (freestyle professional wrestling). Bullfighting (Spanish: corrida de toros) came to Mexico 500 years ago with the arrival of the Spanish. Despite efforts by animal rights activists to outlaw it, bullfighting remains a popular sport in the country, and almost all large cities have bullrings. Plaza M xico in Mexico City, which seats 45,000 people, is the largest bullring in the world.[426] Freestyle professional wrestling is a major crowd draw with national promotions such as AAA, CMLL and others.[427]
Mexico is an international power in professional boxing.[427] Thirteen Olympic boxing medals have been won by Mexico.[428]
See also
Mexico portal
Index of Mexico-related articles
Outline of Mexico
Notes
^ or Spanish: M jico, both pronounced [ mexiko] (listen); Nahuatl languages: M xihco, Yucatec Maya: Meejikoo
^ Usually, in Spanish, the name of the county is spelled M xico; however, in Peninsular (European) Spanish, the variant M jico is used alongside the usual version. According to the Diccionario panhisp nico de dudas by the Royal Spanish Academy and Association of Academies of the Spanish Language, the version with J is also correct; however, the spelling with X is recommended, as it is the one used in Mexico.[11]
^ Spanish: Estados Unidos Mexicanos, [es ta os u ni oz mexi kanos] (listen), (lit.: United Mexican States), abbreviation: EUM; Nahuatl: M xihcatl Tlacetil lli Tlahtohc y tl
^ Defined as persons who live in a household where an indigenous language is spoken by one of the adult family members or people who self-identified as indigenous ("Criteria del hogar: De esta manera, se establece, que los hogares ind genas son aquellos en donde el jefe y/o el c nyuge y/o padre o madre del jefe y/o suegro o suegra del jefe hablan una lengua ind gena y tambi n aquellos que declararon pertenecer a un grupo ind gena."[318]) AND persons who speak an indigenous language but who do not live in such a household ("Por lo antes mencionado, la Comisi n Nacional Para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Ind genas de M xico (CDI) considera poblaci n ind gena (PI) a todas las personas que forman parte de un hogar ind gena, donde el jefe(a) del hogar, su c nyuge y/o alguno de los ascendientes (madre o padre, madrastra o padrastro, abuelo(a), bisabuelo(a), tatarabuelo(a), suegro(a)) declaro ser hablante de lengua ind gena. Adem s, tambi n incluye a personas que declararon hablar alguna lengua ind gena y que no forman parte de estos hogares."[319])
References
^ "Catholicism and evangelism: the two most common religions in Latin America". Statista. Retrieved 18 November 2022.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)
^ "Political Constitution of the United Mexican States, title 2, article 40" (PDF). MX Q: SCJN. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2010.
^ "Surface water and surface water change". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Retrieved 11 October 2020.
^ "Mexico". The World Factbook (2023 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 24 September 2022.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Censo Poblaci n y Vivienda 2020". www.inegi.org.mx. INEGI. Retrieved 26 January 2021.
^ a b c d "IMF DataMapper". www.imf.org. Retrieved 27 November 2022.
^ Inequality - Income inequality - OECD Data. OECD. Retrieved 12 August 2021.
^ "Human Development Report 2021-2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 15 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020.
^ INALI (13 March 2003). "General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples" (PDF). Retrieved 7 November 2010.
^ "Cat logo de las lenguas ind genas nacionales: Variantes ling sticas de M xico con sus autodenominaciones y referencias geoestad sticas". Inali.gob.mx. Retrieved 18 July 2014.
^ "M xico" in Diccionario panhisp nico de dudas by Royal Spanish Academy and Association of Academies of the Spanish Language, Madrid: Santillana. 2005. ISBN 978-8-429-40623-8.
^ Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary, 3rd ed., Springfield, Massachusetts, United States, Merriam-Webster; p. 733
^ a b Mexico. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
^ "MEXICO: Metropolitan Areas". City Population. Retrieved 13 July 2019.
^ Brading, D.A., The First America: The Spanish Monarchy, Creole Patriots, and the Liberal State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1991. ISBN 052139130X
^ Ricard, Robert, The Spiritual Conquest of Mexico, Lesley Byrd Simpson, trans. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1966
^ Fischer, David Hackett (1996). The Great Wave: Price Revolutions and the Rhythm of History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505377-7.
^ Greenberg, Amy S. (2013). A wicked war : Polk, Clay, Lincoln, and the 1846 U.S. invasion of Mexico. New York. ISBN 978-0-307-47599-2. OCLC 818318029.
^ Garner, Paul. Porfirio D az. Routledge 2001.
^ Jones, Halbert. The War has brought Peace to Mexico: World War II and the Consolidation of the Post-Revolutionary State. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 2014.
^ Pruitt, Sarah. "The Surprising Role Mexico Played in World War II". HISTORY. Retrieved 20 May 2022.
^ Pawe  Bo yk (2006). "Newly Industrialized Countries". Globalization and the Transformation of Foreign Economic Policy. Ashgate Publishing. p. 164. ISBN 978-0-7546-4638-9.
^ James Scott; Matthias vom Hau; David Hulme. "Beyond the BICs: Strategies of influence". The University of Manchester. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2012.
^ Nolte, Detlef (October 2010). "How to compare regional powers: analytical concepts and research topics". Review of International Studies. 36 (4): 881 901. doi:10.1017/S026021051000135X. JSTOR 40961959. S2CID 13809794. ProQuest 873500719.
^ "Oxford Analytica". Archived from the original on 24 April 2007. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "G8: Despite Differences, Mexico Comfortable as Emerging Power". ipsnews.net. 5 June 2007. Archived from the original on 16 August 2008. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ Mauro F. Guill n (2003). "Multinationals, Ideology, and Organized Labor". The Limits of Convergence. Princeton University Press. p. 126 (table 5.1). ISBN 978-0-691-11633-4.
^ David Waugh (2000). "Manufacturing industries (chapter 19), World development (chapter 22)". Geography, An Integrated Approach (3rd ed.). Nelson Thornes. pp. 563, 576 579, 633, and 640. ISBN 978-0-17-444706-1.
^ N. Gregory Mankiw (2007). Principles of Economics (4th ed.). Mason, Ohio: Thomson/South-Western. ISBN 978-0-324-22472-6.
^ [1] UNESCO World Heritage sites, accessed 9 May 2022
^ "What is a mega-diverse country?". Mexican biodiversity. Archived from the original on 7 September 2019. Retrieved 13 July 2019.
^ "M xico ocupa el sexto lugar en turismo a nivel mundial". www.expansion.mx. CNN Expansi n. 28 August 2018. Retrieved 8 January 2019.
^ "Global Peace Index 2019: Measuring Peace in a Complex World" (PDF). Vision of Humanity. Sydney: Institute for Economics & Peace. June 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ a b Brianna Lee; Danielle Renwick; Rocio Cara Labrador (24 January 2019). "Mexico's Drug War". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
^ William Bright (2004). Native American Placenames of the United States. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 281. ISBN 978-0-8061-3598-4.
^ "El cambio de la denominaci n de "Estados Unidos Mexicanos" por la de "M xico" en la Constituci n Federal". ierd.prd.org.mx. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008. Retrieved 4 November 2009.
^ "Constituci n Mexicana de 1857". www.tlahui.com. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "Leyes Constitucionales de 1836". Cervantesvirtual.com. 29 November 2010. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Werner 2001, pp. 386 .
^ Susan Toby Evans; David L. Webster (2013). Archaeology of Ancient Mexico and Central America: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 54. ISBN 978-1-136-80186-0.
^ Colin M. MacLachlan (13 April 2015). Imperialism and the Origins of Mexican Culture. Harvard University Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-674-28643-6.
^ Carmack, Robert M.; Gasco, Janine L.; Gossen, Gary H. (2016). The Legacy of Mesoamerica: History and Culture of a Native American Civilization. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-34678-4.[page needed]
^ Diehl, Richard A. (2004). The Olmecs: America's First Civilization. Thames & Hudson. pp. 9 25. ISBN 978-0-500-02119-4.
^ Restall, Matthew, "A History of the New Philology and the New Philology in History", Latin American Research Review - Volume 38, Number 1, 2003, pp.113 134
^ Sampson, Geoffrey (1985). Writing Systems: A Linguistic Introduction. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-1756-4.[page needed]
^ Cowgill, George L. (21 October 1997). "State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico". Annual Review of Anthropology. 26 (1): 129 161. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.26.1.129. OCLC 202300854. S2CID 53663189.
^ "Ancient Civilizations of Mexico". Ancient Civilizations World. 12 January 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ "The word "Azteca" was NOT created by Von Humboldt!". Mexicka.org. 31 May 2014. Retrieved 13 July 2019.
^ Le n Portilla, Miguel (10 May 2009). "Los aztecas, disquisiciones sobre un gentilico". Estudios de Cultura N huatl. 31 (31).
^ Berdan, et al. (1996), Aztec Imperial Strategies. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, DC[page needed]
^ Coe, Michael D.; Rex Koontz (2002). Mexico: from the Olmecs to the Aztecs (5th edition, revised and enlarged ed.). London and New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28346-2. OCLC 50131575.
^ "The Enigma of Aztec Sacrifice". Natural History. Retrieved 16 December 2011.
^ Weaver, Muriel Porter (1993). The Aztecs, Maya, and Their Predecessors: Archaeology of Mesoamerica (3rd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-739065-9. OCLC 25832740.
^ Florescano, Enrique. "The creation of the Museo Nacional de Antropolog a and its scientific, educational, and political purposes." In Nationalism: Critical Concepts in Political Science, Vol. IV p. 1257. John Hutchinson and Anthony D. Smith, eds. London and New York: Routledge 2000.
^ Octavio Paz, Posdata, Mexico: Siglo Veintiuno 1969, quoted in Florescano, "The creation of the Museo Nacional de Antropolog a", p. 1258, footnote 9.
^ Keen, Benjamin.  The Aztec Image in Western Thought.  New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press 1971. ISBN 9780813515724
^ Townsend, Camilla (2006). Malintzin's Choices: An Indian Woman in the Conquest of Mexico. UNM Press. ISBN 978-0-8263-3406-0.[page needed]
^ Cort s, Hern n. Five Letters to the Emperor. Trans. J. Bayard Morris. New York: W.W. Norton 1969
^ D az del Castillo, Bernal. True History of the Conquest of Mexico. various editions. Abridge version translated by J.M. Cohen, The Conquest of New Spain. London: Penguin Books 1963.
^ Fuentes, Patricia de. The Conquistadors: First-Person ccounts of the Conquest of Mexico. Norman: Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 1993.
^ Alva Ixtlilxochitl, Fernando de. Ally of Cort s: Account 13 of the Coming of the Spaniards and the Beginning of Evangelical Law. Trans. Douglass K. Ballentine. El Paso: Texas Western Press 1969.
^ Altman, Ida; Cline, S. L.; Pescador, Juan Javier (2003). "Narratives of the Conquest". The Early History of Greater Mexico. Prentice Hall. pp. 73 96. ISBN 978-0-13-091543-6.
^ Le n-Portilla, Miguel. The Broken Spears: The Aztec Accounts of the Conquest of Mexico. Boston: Beacon Press 1992.
^ Lockhart, James. We People Here: Nahuatl Accounts of the Conquest of Mexico. Berkeley: University of California Press 1993.
^ Lockhart, James and Stuart B. Schwartz. Early Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1983, 59
^ Chuchiak, John F. IV, "Inquisition" in Encyclopedia of Mexico. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn 1997, pp. 704 708
^ Salvucci, Linda. "Adams-On s Treaty (1819)". Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 1, pp. 11 12.
^ Sempa, Francis P. "China, Spanish America, and the 'Birth of Globalization'". The Diplomat. Retrieved 7 February 2017. Mexico City, the authors [Peter Gordon, Juan Jose Morales] note, was the 'first world city,' the precursor to London, New York, and Hong Kong, where 'Asia, Europe, and the Americas all met, and where people intermingled and exchanged everything from genes to textiles'.
^ McCaa, Robert (8 December 1997). "The Peopling of Mexico from Origins to Revolution". University of Minnesota.edu. Retrieved 13 July 2019.
^ Sluyter, Andrew (2012). Black Ranching Frontiers: African Cattle Herders of the Atlantic World, 1500 1900. Yale University Press. p. 240. ISBN 9780300179927. Retrieved 8 October 2016.
^ Russell, James W. (2009). Class and Race Formation in North America. University of Toronto Press. p. 26. ISBN 9780802096784. Retrieved 13 December 2016.
^ Carrillo, Rub n. "Asia llega a Am rica. Migraci n e influencia cultural asi tica en Nueva Espa a (1565 1815)". www.raco.cat. Asiad mica. Retrieved 13 December 2016.
^ The Penguin Atlas of World Population History, pp. 291 92.
^ Lerner, Victoria. "Consideraciones sobre la poblaci n de la Nueva Espa a (1793 1810)" [Considerations on the population of New Spain (1793 1810)] (PDF) (in Spanish). Mexico City: El Colegio de M xico. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ Cline, Sarah (1 August 2015). "Guadalupe and the Castas". Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos. 31 (2): 218 247. doi:10.1525/mex.2015.31.2.218. S2CID 7995543.
^ a b Cope, R. Douglas. The Limits of Racial Domination: Plebeian Society in Colonial Mexico City, 1660 1720. Madison, Wis.: U of Wisconsin, 1994.
^ Vinson III, Ben (2017). Before Mestizaje: The Frontiers of Race and Caste in Colonial Mexico. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-02643-8.[page needed]
^ Sierra Silva, Pablo Miguel. Urban Slavery in Colonial Mexico: Puebla de los Angeles 1531-1706. New York: Cambridge University Press 2018.
^ Deans-Smith, Susan. "Bourbon Reforms" in Encyclopedia of Mexico. p. 156
^ "God intervened through Our Lady of Guadalupe to evangelize the Americas, explains Guadalupe expert", Catholic News Agency, 11 August 2009, retrieved 14 July 2019
^ a b "Everything You Need To Know About La Virgen De Guadalupe", Huff Post Latino Voices, 12 December 2013, retrieved 14 July 2019
^ Ortiz-Ramirez, Eduardo A. The Virgin of Guadalupe and Mexican Nationalism: Expressions of Criollo Patriotism in Colonial Images of the Virgin of Guadalupe. p. 6. ISBN 9780549596509. Retrieved 9 February 2017.[permanent dead link]
^ Schmal, John P. (17 July 2003). "The Indigenous People of Zacatecas". Latino LA: Comunidad. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ Charlotte M. Gradie (2000). "The Tepehuan Revolt of 1616: Militarism, Evangelism, and Colonialism in Seventeenth-Century Nueva Vizcaya". The Americas. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press. 58 (2): 302 303. doi:10.1353/tam.2001.0109. S2CID 144896113.
^ Wasserstrom, Robert (1980). "Ethnic Violence and Indigenous Protest: The Tzeltal (Maya) Rebellion of 1712". Journal of Latin American Studies. 12: 1 19. doi:10.1017/S0022216X00017533. S2CID 145718069.
^ Taylor, William B. (1 June 1979). Drinking, Homicide, and Rebellion in Colonial Mexican Villages (1st ed.). Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804711128.
^ White, Benjamin (31 January 2017). "Campeche, Mexico   largest pirate attack in history, now UNESCO listed". In Search of Lost Places. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ Knispel, Sandra (13 December 2017). "The mysterious aftermath of an infamous pirate raid". University of Rochester Newsletter. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ Altman, et al. The Early History of Greater Mexico, 342 43
^ "Grito de Dolores". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 12 September 2018.
^ Van Young, Eric, Stormy Passage: Mexico from Colony to Republic, 1750-1850. (2022), 127.
^ Van Young, Stormy Passage, 179 226
^ Benson, Nettie Lee. "The Plan of Casa Mata." Hispanic American Historical Review 25 (February 1945): 45 56.
^ Hale, Charles A. Mexican Liberalism in the Age of Mora. New Haven: Yale University Press 1968. p. 224
^ "Ways of ending slavery". Encyclop dia Britannica.
^ Costeloe, Michael P. "Pastry War" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 4, p. 318.
^ Van Young, Stormy Passage, "The Age of Santa Anna", 227 270
^ Weber, David J., The Mexican Frontier, 1821 1846: The American Southwest under Mexico, University of New Mexico Press, 1982
^ Angel Miranda Basurto (2002). La Evoluc on de M xico [The Evolution of Mexico] (in Spanish) (6th ed.). Mexico City: Editorial Porr a. p. 358. ISBN 970-07-3678-4.
^ Britton, John A. "Liberalism" in Encyclopedia of Mexico739
^ Hamnett, Brian. "Benito Ju rez" in Encyclopedia of Mexico, pp. 719 20
^ Britton, "Liberalism" p. 740.
^ Sullivan, Paul. "Sebasti n Lerdo de Tejada" in Encyclopedia of Mexico. pp. 736 38
^ Adela M. Olvera (2 February 2018). "El Porfiriato en Mexico" [The Porfiriato in Mexico]. Inside Mexico.com (in Spanish). Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ Hart, John Mason. Empire and Revolution: The Americans in Mexico since the Civil War. Berkeley: University of California Press Du 2002
^ Buchenau, J rgen. "Cient ficos". Encyclopedia of Mexico, pp. 260 265
^ Schmidt, Arthur, "Jos  Ives Limantour" in Encyclopedia of Mexico, pp. 746 49.
^ "cientifico". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved 7 February 2017.
^ Brenner, Anita (1 January 1984). The Wind that Swept Mexico: The History of the Mexican Revolution of 1910 1942 (New ed.). University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0292790247.
^ Benjamin, Thomas. La Revoluci n: Mexico's Great Revolution as Memory, Myth, and History. Austin: University of Texas Press 2000
^ a b c Matute, Alvaro. "Mexican Revolution: May 1917   December 1920" in Encyclopedia of Mexico, 862 864.
^ "The Mexican Revolution". Public Broadcasting Service. 20 November 1910. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Robert McCaa. "Missing millions: the human cost of the Mexican Revolution". University of Minnesota Population Center. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Katz, Friedrich. The Secret War in Mexico. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
^ "The Mexican Revolution and the United States in the Collections of the Library of Congress, U.S. Involvement Before 1913". Library of Congress. Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ "Punitive Expedition in Mexico, 1916 1917". U.S. Department of State archive. 20 January 2009. Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ "ZIMMERMANN TELEGRAM". The National WWI Museum and Memorial. 2 March 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ Rafael Hern ndez  ngeles. "85  ANIVERSARIO DE LA FUNDACI N DEL PARTIDO NACIONAL REVOLUCIONARIO (PNR)" [85th anniversary of the founding of the National Revolutionary Party (PRN)]. Instituto Nacional de Estudios Historicos de las Revoluciones de Mexico (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2019.
^ "The Mexican Miracle: 1940 1968". World History from 1500. Emayzine. Archived from the original on 3 April 2007. Retrieved 30 September 2007.
^ Elena Poniatowska (1975). Massacre in Mexico. Viking, New York. ISBN 978-0-8262-0817-0.
^ Kennedy, Duncan (19 July 2008). "Mexico's long forgotten dirty war". BBC News. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Krauze, Enrique (January February 2006). "Furthering Democracy in Mexico". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 10 January 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2007. {{cite magazine}}: Cite magazine requires |magazine= (help)
^ Schedler, Andreas (2006). Electoral Authoritarianism: The Dynamics of Unfree Competition. L. Rienner Publishers. ISBN 978-1-58826-440-4.
^ Crandall, R.; Paz and Roett (2004). "Mexico's Domestic Economy: Policy Options and Choices". Mexico's Democracy at Work. Lynne Reinner Publishers. p. 160. ISBN 978-0-8018-5655-6.
^ ""Mexico The 1988 Elections" (Sources: The Library of the Congress Country Studies, CIA World Factbook)". Photius Coutsoukis. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ Gomez Romero, Luis (5 October 2018). "Massacres, disappearances and 1968: Mexicans remember the victims of a 'perfect dictatorship'". The Conversation.
^ "Vargas Llosa: "M xico es la dictadura perfecta"". El Pa s. 1 September 1990.
^ Reding, Andrew (1991). "Mexico: The Crumbling of the "Perfect Dictatorship"". World Policy Journal. 8 (2): 255 284. JSTOR 40209208.
^ Cruz Vasconcelos, Gerardo. "Desempe o Hist rico 1914 2004" (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2006. Retrieved 17 February 2007.
^ Valles Ruiz, Rosa Mar a (June 2016). "Elecciones presidenciales 2006 en M xico. La perspectiva de la prensa escrita" [2006 presidential Elections in Mexico. The Perspective of the Press]. Revista mexicana de opini n p blica (in Spanish) (20): 31 51.
^ Res ndiz, Francisco (2006). "Rinde AMLO protesta como "presidente leg timo"". El Universal (in Spanish).
^ "Enrique Pena Nieto wins Mexican presidential election". The Telegraph. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2015.
^ Sieff, Kevin. "L pez Obrador, winner of Mexican election, given broad mandate". Washington Post.
^ Sharma, Gaurav (10 May 2018). "Mexico's Oil And Gas Industry Privatization Efforts Nearing Critical Phase". Forbes. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ Barrera Diaz, Cyntia; Villamil, Justin; Still, Amy (14 February 2020). "Pemex Ex-CEO Arrest Puts AMLO in Delicate Situation". Rigzone. Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Mexico's presidential front runner on high alert for election fraud ahead of Sunday's vote". South China Morning Post. Associated Press. 30 June 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Mexico's 2018 Elections: Results and Potential Implications" (PDF). fas.org. 17 July 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2021.
^ "Mexico's L pez Obrador sworn in as first leftist president in decades". BBC News. 2 December 2018.
^ Karol Suarez, Rafael Romo and Joshua Berlinger. "Mexico's President loses grip on power in midterm elections marred by violence". CNN.
^ "Nord-Am rica, in Gran Enciclop dia Catalana". Grec.cat. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Parsons, Alan; Jonathan Schaffer (May 2004). Geopolitics of oil and natural gas. Economic Perspectives. U.S. Department of State.
^ Vargas, Jorge A. (2011). Mexico and the Law of the Sea: Contributions and Compromises. p. 405. ISBN 9789004206205.
^ Fact Book Mexico. Accessed 4 May 2022
^ [2][dead link] Mexico Fact Book. accessed 6 May 2022
^ [3][dead link] Mexico Fact Book. accessed 5 May 2022
^ a b [4] Encyclopedia Britannica Mexico, accessed 6 May 2022
^ "Ocupa M xico cuarto lugar mundial de biodiversidad". El Economista (in Spanish). Retrieved 5 February 2017.
^ a b "Biodiversidad de M xico". SEMARNAT. Archived from the original on 7 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "Biodiversidad en M xico". CONEVYT. Archived from the original on 7 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ a b "Sistema Nacional sobre la Biodiversidad en M xico". CONABIO. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "Mexico's 'devastating' forest loss". BBC News. 4 March 2002. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (8 December 2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507.
^ Hayden, Cori. 2003. When Nature Goes Public: The Making and Unmaking of Bioproscpecting in Mexico. Princeton University Press.
^ Laveaga, Gabriela Soto (2009). Jungle Laboratories: Mexican Peasants, National Projects, and the Making of the Pill. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-9196-8.[page needed]
^ "Government of Mexico". Living Mexico. Retrieved 27 January 2019.
^ "Articles 50 to 79". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ "Third Title, First Chapter, About Electoral systems" (PDF). C digo Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures) (in Spanish). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 15 August 1990. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ a b "Third Title, First Chapter, About Electoral systems, Article 11 1" (PDF). C digo Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures) (in Spanish). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 15 August 1990. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ "Fourth Title, Second Chapter, About coalitions, Article 59 1" (PDF). C digo Federal de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales (Federal Code of Electoral Institutions and Procedures) (in Spanish). Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. 15 August 1990. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ "Articles 80 to 93". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ "Articles 90 to 107". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 3 October 2007.
^ [5] "Interamerican Dialogue", Vanda Felbab Brown. Brookings Institution, accessed 19 May 2022
^ "Mexico leader proposes electoral reforms" Los Angeles Times accessed 3 May 2022
^ Niko Vorobyov, ed. (2019). Dopeworld: Adventures in Drug Lands. Hachette UK. ISBN 9781317755098. ... Mexico spent most of the twentieth century governed by the Institutional Revolutionary Party or PRI, a bigtent, catch-all alliance that included everyone ...
^ "Entrevista a la Lic. Beatriz Paredes Rangel, Presidenta dle Comit  Ejecutivo Nacional del PRI". 17 December 2008. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "Miembros Titulares". ODCA. 14 July 2008. Archived from the original on 14 July 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "Estatuto del Partido de la Revoluci n Democr tica" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Ginger Thompson (9 March 2004). "Former Mexican President Reveals '88 Presidential Election Was Rigged". The Tech.com. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
^ "Historia del Partido Acci n Nacional". Televisa.News. 14 September 2014. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
^ " Qu  es Morena, y cu ndo se fund " [What is Morena, and when was it founded?]. Dinero en Imagen (in Spanish). 5 July 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
^ Camp, Generals in the Palacio p.6
^ Lieuwen, Edwin, Mexican Militarism: The Rise and Fall of the Revolutionary Army, 1910-1940. Westport CT: Greenwood Publishers 1981. ISBN 0313229112
^ "Crime and anti-crime policies in Mexico, a bleak outlook". Brookings Institute. 24 January 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022.
^ Trejo, Guillermo and Sandra Ley. Votes, Drugs, and Violence: The Political Logic of Criminal Wars in Mexico. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2020, publisher's summary. ISBN 978-1108841740
^ a b Political Constitution of the United Mexican States (5 February 1917). "Article 89, Section 10" (PDF) (in Spanish). Chamber of Deputies. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 August 2007. Retrieved 28 March 2009.
^ Internal Rules of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (10 August 2001). "Article 2, Section 1" (in Spanish). Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008. Retrieved 28 March 2009.
^ Palacios Trevi o, Jorge. "La Doctrina Estrada y el Principio de la No-Intervenci n" (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2009. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ UN (7 November 1945). "United Nations Member States". UN official website. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
^ Vel zquez Flores (2007), p. 145.
^ Organization of Ibero-American States. "Members" (in Spanish). OEI official website. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
^ OPANAL. "Members". OPANAL official website. Archived from the original on 14 August 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
^ Ministry of Foreign Affairs (7 March 2007). "El Presidente Felipe Calder n Hinojosa en la Ceremonia de Entrega de la Secretar a Pro T mpore del Grupo de R o" (in Spanish). Gobierno Federal. Archived from the original on 23 August 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
^ United Nations (2008). "Regular Budget Payments of Largest Payers". Global Policy. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (18 May 1994). "Members". OECD official website. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
^ "Chile joins the OECD's Economic Club". BBC News. 12 January 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
^ "Japan's Regional Diplomacy, Latin America and the Caribbean" (PDF). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ "Latin America: Region is losing ground to competitors". Oxford Analytica. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2005), p. 215.
^ Maggie Farley (22 July 2005). "Mexico, Canada Introduce Third Plan to Expand Security Council". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ Camp, Roderic Ai. Generals in the Palacio: The Military in Modern Mexico. New York: Oxford University Press 1992, p.6
^ Lieuwen, Edwin. Mexican Militarism. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1968
^ [6][dead link] World Fact Book, Mexico. accessed 4 May 2022
^ Loke. "Capacitar n a militares en combates con rifles l ser | Ediciones Impresas Milenio". Impreso.milenio.com. Archived from the original on 14 May 2010. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "Strategy on recent equipment purchases: The Mexican Armed Forces in Transition" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "Text of the Treaty of Tlatelolco". Opanal.org. 27 November 1963. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011.
^ "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament  No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons". United Nations Treaty Collection. 7 July 2017.
^ Gustavo Iruegas (27 April 2007). "Adi s a la neutralidad". La Jornada (in Spanish). Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ Ricardo G mez & Andrea Merlos (20 April 2007). "Diputados, en Favor de Derogar Neutralidad en Guerras" (in Spanish). El Universal. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
^ "A Look At Mexico's New National Guard". NPR. 13 July 2019. Retrieved 14 May 2022.
^ [7][dead link] World Fact Book accessed 14 May 2022.
^ "Big, expensive and weirdly spineless". The Economist. 14 February 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ a b c "Mexico". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 6 March 2011.
^ "A Woman's Haunting Disappearance Sparks Outrage in Mexico Over Gender Violence" New York Times accessed 17 May 2022.
^ "Mexico: Events of 2021". World Report, Mexico 2022. Human Rights Watch.org. Human Rights Watch. 10 December 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2022.
^ "Mexico crime and violence in numbers" BBC News, accessed 8 May 2022
^ "Mexico disappearances reach record high of 100,000 amid impunity" BBC News accessed 17 May 2022.
^ [8] "In Mexico, One Cartel Is Cleared, but Others Storm In" New York Times, accessed 8 May 2022
^ [9] "How Mexico's Cartels Have Learned Military Tactics", accessed 8 May 2022
^ Olivares Alonso, Emir (5 February 2018), "Gobierno de Calder n mantiene r cord en violaciones a derechos" [Government of Calderon has a record of violations of rights], La Jornada (in Spanish), Mexico City, retrieved 11 July 2019
^ [10] "Fentanyl deaths Climbing". U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency accessed 8 May 2022
^ ""How is China involved in organized crime in Mexico?"". Brookings Institute. 23 February 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022.
^ Franco, Yanira (1 October 2015). "Uno de cada cinco, v ctima de alg n delito: Inegi" [One in five, victim of a crime: Inegi]. Milenio (in Spanish). Mexico City. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ Tuckman, Jo (21 November 2014). "Mexicans in biggest protest yet over missing students". The Guardian. Mexico City. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Freedom of Expression in Mexico". PEN American Center. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013.
^ Alc zar, Jes s (17 July 2014). "M s de 100 periodistas asesinados en M xico desde el a o 2000" (in Spanish). El Mundo (Spain). EFE.
^ [11] Ninth Journalist Killed this year as Violence against Media Soars. The Guardian, accessed 7 May 2022
^ [12] "2 journalists killed in Mexico   the 10th and 11th of the year" Los Angeles Times accessed 11 May 2022
^ "Why do journalists in Mexico keep getting killed?" Washington Post accessed 11 May 2022
^ "Mexico Travel Advisory". Travel.State.Gov. U.S. Department of State   Bureau of Consular Affairs. 17 December 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ a b Amanda Briney (8 October 2018). "Mexico's 31 States and One Federal District". Thought.Co. Retrieved 15 July 2019.
^ "Article 116". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "Article 112". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "Federal District is now officially Mexico City: The change brings more autonomy for the country's capital". Mexico News Daily. 30 January 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2018.
^ "Article 115". Political Constitution of the United Mexican States. Congress of the Union of the United Mexican States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ a b c d Caleb Silver (7 June 2019). "Top 20 Economies in the World". Investopedia.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019.
^ "Total GNI Atlas Method 2009, World Bank" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 27 December 2010.
^ Andrew Jacobs; Matt Richtel (11 December 2017). "A Nasty, Nafta-Related Surprise: Mexico's Soaring Obesity". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
^ "GNI per capita 2009, Atlas method and PPP, World Bank" (PDF). Retrieved 27 December 2010.
^ "Reporte ECLAC" (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2007. Retrieved 16 February 2007.
^ Hufbauer, G.C.; Schott, J.J. (1 January 2005), "Chapter 1, Overview" (PDF), NAFTA Revisited: Achievements and Challenges, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics (published October 2005), pp. 1 78, ISBN 978-0-88132-334-4
^ "Mexico 2050: The World's Fifth Largest Economy". 17 March 2010. Archived from the original on 19 August 2010. Retrieved 12 July 2013.
^ "World in 2050   The BRICs and beyond: prospects, challenges and opportunities" (PDF). PwC Economics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "How much should you earn in Mexico to belong to the middle or upper class?". The Mazatlan Post. 11 April 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019.
^ Smith, Noah (26 August 2019). "Mexico Is Solidly Middle Class (No Matter What Trump Says)". Bloomberg.
^ "Human Development Report 2009" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. United Nations. p. 118. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "CONEVAL Informe 2011" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2012.
^ Gentilini, Ugo; Sumner, Andy (24 July 2012). "Should poverty be defined by a single international poverty line, or country by country? (and what difference does it make?)". From Poverty to Power. Oxfam. Archived from the original on 11 May 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ Michael Blastland (31 July 2009). "Just what is poor?". BBC News. Retrieved 27 August 2019. The "economic distance" concept, and a level of income set at 60% of the median household income
^ "Under Pressure: The Squeezed Middle Class" (PDF). Paris: OECD Publishing. 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ Income inequality. Society at a Glance 2011: Social Indicators. OECD. 12 April 2011. ISBN 9789264098527. Retrieved 16 March 2013.
^ "Perspectivas OCDE: M xico; Reformas para el Cambio" (PDF). OECD. January 2012. pp. 35 36. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "Goldman Sachs Paper No.153 Relevant Emerging Markets" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 March 2010. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "Sobresale Nuevo Le n por su alto nivel de vida". El Norte (in Spanish). 2006.
^ "Hoy entra en vigor el aumento en el salario m nimo" [The increase in the minimum wage starts today]. Forbes Mexico (in Spanish). 1 January 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
^ a b "La Poblaci n Indigena en M xico" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estad stica y Geograf a (INEGI). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ a b c "Mexican Consumer Electronics Industry Second Largest Supplier of Electronics to the U.S   MEXICO CITY, Oct. 6, 2011/PRNewswire-USNewswire/". PR Newswire. 6 October 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "Mexico tops U.S., Canadian car makers". Upi.com. 11 December 2008. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ a b c Gereffi, G; Mart nez, M (2005). "Mexico's Economic Transformation under NAFTA".  In Crandall, R; Paz, G; Roett, R (eds.). Mexico's Democracy at Work: Political and Economic Dynamics. Lynne Reiner Publishers (published 30 September 2004). ISBN 978-1-58826-300-1.
^ Hufbauer, G.C.; Schott, J.J . (1 January 2005). "Chapter 6, The Automotive Sector" (PDF). NAFTA Revisited: Achievements and Challenges. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics (published October 2005). pp. 1 78. ISBN 978-0-88132-334-4.
^ Garc a, Daniela (7 September 2016). "Inauguran Kia Motors en Pesquer a" [Kia Motors launched in Pesquer a]. Milenio (in Spanish). Pesquer a. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Audi inaugura planta automotriz en Puebla" [Audi opens automotive plant in Puebla]. Autoexplora (in Spanish). 30 September 2016. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Automaker Kia plans $1 bn assembly plant in Mexico". Mexico News.Net. 28 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014.
^ DINA Camiones Company. "History". Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 15 April 2009.
^ Jeremy Korzeniewski. "London 2008: Mastretta MXT will be Mexico's first homegrown car". Retrieved 30 July 2008.
^ "Korea's Balance of Payments" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011.
^ "Major Foreign Holders Of Treasury Securities". U.S. Department of the Treasury. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Thompson, Adam (20 June 2006). "Mexico, Economics: The US casts a long shadow". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012.
^ [13] "Personal Remittances Received, Mexico", World Bank accessed 11 May 2022
^ [14] "Latino Remittances from Mexico Soar". NBC News accessed 11 May 2022
^ [15] "Most of the $33 Billion in Remittances to Mexico Flow Via U.S. Govt. Banking Program", Judicial Watch, accessed 12 May 2022
^ "Mexico   Telecoms Infrastructure, Operators, Regulations   Statistics and Analyses". Budde.com. 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019.
^ a b "Communications". CIA Factbook. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ "Satmex. Linking the Americas". 15 September 2009. Archived from the original on 15 September 2009. Retrieved 17 July 2013.
^ Source: Arianespace (14 February 2002). "Mexican Operator Satmex Has Chosen Arianespace to Launch Its New Satmex 6 Satellite". Spaceref.com. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
^ "Televisa Brings 2006 FIFA World Cup to Mexico in HD With Snell & Wilcox Kahuna SD/HD Production Switcher". Snellwilcox.com. Archived from the original on 14 December 2007. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ Am rica Economia. "Top 500 Companies in Latin America" (Requires subscription). Retrieved 16 February 2007.[dead link]
^ "Fortune Global 500 2010: 64. Pemex". Fortune. Retrieved 26 July 2010.
^ "FT Non-Public 150  the full list". Financial Times. 14 December 2006. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2010.
^ Energy Information Administration. "Top World Oil Net Exporters and Producers". Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 16 February 2007.
^ "EIA". Eia.doe.gov. Archived from the original on 9 March 2006. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ Sener & GTZ 2006
^ "Perspectiva Del Mercado De La Energ a Renovable En M xico" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ a b SENER 2009b
^ Sonora Energy Group Hermosillo
^ Coerver, Don M.; Pasztor, Suzanne B.; Buffington, Robert (2004). Mexico: An Encyclopedia of Contemporary Culture and History. ABC-CLIO. p. 161. ISBN 978-1-57607-132-8.
^ Summerfield, Devine & Levi (1998), p. 285[full citation needed]
^ Summerfield, Devine & Levi (1998), p. 286[full citation needed]
^ Forest & Altbach (2006), p. 882[full citation needed]
^ Fortes & Lomnitz (1990), p. 18[full citation needed]
^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1995". Nobelprize.org. Nobel Foundation. Retrieved 2 January 2009.
^ Thomson, Elizabeth A. (18 October 1995). "Molina wins Nobel Prize for ozone work". Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Retrieved 2 January 2009.
^ Carrami ana, Alberto (2007). "Unravelling unidentified  -ray sources with the large millimeter telescope". The Multi-Messenger Approach to High-Energy Gamma-Ray Sources. pp. 527 530. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6118-9_79. ISBN 978-1-4020-6117-2.
^ "Global Innovation Index 2021". World Intellectual Property Organization. United Nations. Retrieved 5 March 2022.
^ "Global Innovation Index 2019". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ "RTD - Item". ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021.
^ UNWTO Tourism Highlights. World Tourism Organization (UNWTO). 2017. doi:10.18111/9789284419029. ISBN 978-92-844-1902-9.[page needed]
^ SECTUR (2006). "Turismo de internaci n 2001 2005, Visitantes internacionales hacia M xico" (in Spanish). Secretar a de Turismo (SECTUR). Archived from the original on 10 June 2008. Retrieved 26 July 2008. pp. 5
^ "The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2017" (PDF). World Economic Forum. April 2017.
^ "Cabo Fishing Information   Sport Fishing in Los Cabos". icabo.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2014.
^ "CIA World Factbook". CIA. Retrieved 20 December 2010.
^ a b "Infraestructura Carretera" (PDF). dgaf.sct.gob.mx. M xico: Secretar a de Comunicaciones y Transportes. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2007. Retrieved 13 January 2007.
^ a b "Mexico reviving travel by train". Azcentral.com. 6 January 2006. Retrieved 30 October 2010.[dead link]
^ "Bullet Train To Mexico City Looks To Be Back On Track ?". Guadalajara Reporter. 17 October 2003. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ a b "Project for a Mexico City  Guadalajara High Speed Line. Rail transport engineering, public transport engineering". Systra. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ "Slim to invest in Santa Cruz". The America's Intelligence Wire. 21 January 2005. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012.
^ "Mexico Real Estate In Yucatan to Benefit from New Bullet Train". Articlealley.com. 25 August 2010. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ "Acerca del AICM. Posicionamiento del Aeropuerto Internacional de la Ciudad de M xico (AICM) con los 50 aeropuertos m s importantes del mundo". AICM. Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "Statistics Mexico City airport" (PDF). Mexico City International Airport. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018.
^ [16][dead link] World Fact Book, Mexico. accessed 5 May 2022
^ "M xico cuenta con 123.5 millones de habitantes" [Mexico has 123.5 million inhabitants]. El Economista (in Spanish). Notimex. 10 July 2017. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ a b "Spanish Language History". Today Translations. Archived from the original on 17 April 2005. Retrieved 1 October 2007.
^ Knight, Alan. 1990. "Racism, Revolution and indigenismo: Mexico 1910 1940". Chapter 4 in The Idea of Race in Latin America, 1870 1940. Richard Graham (ed.) pp. 78 85
^ Wimmer, Andreas, 2002. Nationalist Exclusion and Ethnic Conflict: Shadows of Modernity, Cambridge University Press page 115
^ Hall Steckel, Richard; R. Haines, Michael (2000). A population history of North America. Cambridge University Press. p. 621. ISBN 978-0-521-49666-7.
^ "en el censo de 1930 el gobierno mexicano dej  de clasificar a la poblaci n del pa s en tres categor as raciales, blanco, mestizo e ind gena, y adopt  una nueva clasificaci n  tnica que distingu a a los hablantes de lenguas ind genas del resto de la poblaci n, es decir de los hablantes de espa ol". Archived from the original on 23 August 2013.
^ "Al respecto no debe olvidarse que en estos pa ses buena parte de las personas consideradas biol gicamente blancas son mestizas en el aspecto cultural, el que aqu  nos interesa (p. 196)" (PDF). Redalyc.org. 16 March 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013.
^ Fuentes-Nieva, Ricardo (6 July 2017). "Ser blanco" [Be white]. El Universal (in Spanish).
^ Sol s, Arturo (7 August 2018). "Comprobado con datos: en M xico te va mejor si eres blanco" [Proven with data: in Mexico you do better if you are white]. Forbes M xico (in Spanish).
^ a b "21 de Marzo D a Internacional de la Eliminaci n de la Discriminaci n Racial" pag.7, CONAPRED, Mexico, 21 March. Retrieved on 28 April 2017.
^ a b "Encuesta Nacional Sobre Discriminaci n en Mexico", "CONAPRED", Mexico DF, June 2011. Retrieved on 28 April 2017.
^ a b "DOCUMENTO INFORMATIVO SOBRE DISCRIMINACI N RACIAL EN M XICO", CONAPRED, Mexico, 21 March 2011, retrieved on 28 April 2017.
^ Schwartz-Mar n, Ernesto; Silva-Zolezzi, Irma (2010). ""The Map of the Mexican's Genome": Overlapping national identity, and population genomics". Identity in the Information Society. 3 (3): 489 514. doi:10.1007/s12394-010-0074-7. hdl:10871/33766.
^ R. Mart nez & C. De La Torre (2008): "Racial Appearance And Income In Contemporary Mexico, pag 9 note 1", Journal of Diversity Management, 2008, Retrieved 1 April 2021.
^ Navarrete Linares, Federico. "El mestizaje en Mexico" [The miscegenation in Mexico] (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017.
^ "Indicadores seleccionados sobre la poblaci n hablante de lengua ind gena, 1950 a 2005". Inegi.gob.mx. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2011.
^ "S ntesis de Resultados" (PDF). Comisi n Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Ind genas. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2010.
^ " Qu  es y c mo se determina un hogar ind gena?" [What is and how an indigenous home is determined?]. Preguntas frecuentes [Frequent questions] (in Spanish). CDI. Comisi n Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Ind genas [CDI. National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples). 23 February 2009. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011.
^ "Sistema de informaci n e indicadores sobre la poblaci n ind gena de M xico" [Information system and indicators on the indigenous population of Mexico]. Indicadores y estad sticas [Indicators and statistics] (in Spanish). CDI. Comisi n Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Ind genas [CDI. National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011.
^ "Encuesta Intercensal 2015" Archived 22 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine, "INEGI", Mexico, December 2015. Retrieved on 28 April 2017.
^ "Indicadores socioecon micos de los pueblos ind genas" [Socio-economic indicators of indigenous peoples]. Informaci n (in Spanish). Comisi n Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Ind genas. Archived from the original on 15 November 2004   via cdi.gob.mx.
^ Navarrete Linares, Federico (2008). Los pueblos ind genas de M xico [Indigenous peoples of Mexico] (in Spanish). M xico: CDI. ISBN 978-970-753-157-4. Archived from the original on 30 November 2011   via cdi.gob.mx.
^ Villarreal, Andr s (October 2010). "Stratification by Skin Color in Contemporary Mexico". American Sociological Review. American Sociological Association. 75 (5): 652 678. doi:10.1177/0003122410378232. JSTOR 20799484. S2CID 145295212.
^ Ortiz-Hern ndez, Luis; Compe n-Dard n, Sandra; Verde-Flota, Elizabeth; Flores-Mart nez, Maricela Nanet (April 2011). "Racism and mental health among university students in Mexico City". Salud P blica de M xico. 53 (2): 125 133. doi:10.1590/s0036-36342011000200005. PMID 21537803.
^ "Encuesta Nacional sobre Discriminaci n 2017", CNDH, 6 August 2018, Retrieved on 9 August 2018.
^ "Visi n INEGI 2021 Dr. Julio Santaella Castell", INEGI, 3 July 2017, Retrieved on 30 April 2018.
^ Navarrete Linares, Federico. "El mestizaje y las culturas" [Mixed race and cultures]. M xico Multicultural (in Spanish). Mexico: UNAM. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2011.
^ Sherburne Friend Cook; Woodrow Borah (1998). Ensayos sobre historia de la poblaci n. M xico y el Caribe 2. Siglo XXI. p. 223. ISBN 9789682301063. Retrieved 12 September 2017.
^ San Miguel, G. (November 2000). "Ser mestizo en la nueva Espa a a fines del siglo XVIII: Acatzingo, 1792" [To be  mestizo  in New Spain at the end of the XVIII th century. Acatzingo, 1792]. Cuadernos de la Facultad de Humanidades y Ciencias Sociales. Universidad Nacional de Jujuy (in Spanish) (13): 325 342.
^ Howard F. Cline (1963). THE UNITED STATES AND MEXICO. Harvard University Press. p. 104. ISBN 9780674497061. Retrieved 18 May 2017.
^ "Presentaci n de la Encuesta Intercensal- Principales resultados" (PDF). INEGI. Retrieved 28 September 2016.
^ "Principales resultados Encuesta Intercensal 2015" [Main results   Intercensal Survey 2015] (PDF) (in Spanish). INEGI. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2017. Retrieved 4 June 2020.
^ "Tabulados de la Encuesta Intercensal 2015". INEGI. Retrieved 24 December 2015.
^ Ruiz-Linares, Andr s; Adhikari, Kaustubh; Acu a-Alonzo, Victor; Quinto-Sanchez, Mirsha; Jaramillo, Claudia; Arias, William; Fuentes, Macarena; Pizarro, Mar a; Everardo, Paola; de Avila, Francisco; G mez-Vald s, Jorge; Le n-Mimila, Paola; Hunemeier, T bita; Ramallo, Virginia; Silva de Cerqueira, Caio C.; Burley, Mari-Wyn; Konca, Esra; de Oliveira, Marcelo Zagonel; Veronez, Mauricio Roberto; Rubio-Codina, Marta; Attanasio, Orazio; Gibbon, Sahra; Ray, Nicolas; Gallo, Carla; Poletti, Giovanni; Rosique, Javier; Schuler-Faccini, Lavinia; Salzano, Francisco M.; Bortolini, Maria-C tira; Canizales-Quinteros, Samuel; Rothhammer, Francisco; Bedoya, Gabriel; Balding, David; Gonzalez-Jos , Rolando (25 September 2014). "Admixture in Latin America: Geographic Structure, Phenotypic Diversity and Self-Perception of Ancestry Based on 7,342 Individuals". PLOS Genetics. 10 (9): e1004572. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004572. PMC 4177621. PMID 25254375.
^ Langley, William (7 July 2007). "The biggest enchilada". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2015.
^ Tatiana Seijas (2014). Asian Slaves in Colonial Mexico: From Chinos to Indian. Cambridge University Press. p. 21. ISBN 9781107063129.
^ "Latin America's lost histories revealed in modern DNA". Science | AAAS. 12 April 2018.
^ "Filipinos in Mexican History". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007.
^ Chao Romero, Robert (2011). "1. Introduction". The Chinese in Mexico, 1882 1940. University of Arizona Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780816508198. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
^ Spanish   Mexico at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) (subscription required)
^ a b c d e Werner 2001, pp. 443, 444, 445.
^ INALI [Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Ind genas] (14 January 2008). "Cat logo de las lenguas ind genas nacionales: Variantes ling sticas de M xico con sus autodenominaciones y referencias geoestad sticas" (PDF online facsimile). Diario Oficial de la Federaci n (in Spanish). Mexico City. 652 (9): 22 78 (first section), 1 96 (second section), 1 112 (third section). OCLC 46461036.
^ a b c "Indigenous Languages in Mexico: Speakers Aged Three or Older". National Institute of Statistics and Geography. 2015. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ "Ley General de Derechos Ling sticos de los Pueblos Ind genas" (PDF) (in Spanish). 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2017.
^ "Model of Accreditation and Certification of Indigenous Languages" (PDF) (in Spanish). National Indigenous Languages Institute. October 2012. p. 7. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ "The Mennonite Old Colony Vision: Under siege in Mexico and the Canadian Connection" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ Venetian (Mexico) at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) (subscription required)
^ "English in Mexico: An examination of policy, perceptions and influencing factors" (PDF). British Council. May 2015. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ Becerril, Isabel (27 April 2015). "En M xico s lo 5% de la poblaci n habla ingl s: IMCO" (in Spanish). El Financiero. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ "Une Langue Pour Apprendre" (PDF) (in French). Organisation internationale de la Francophonie. 6 September 2010. p. 132. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ "Cours de fran ais" (in French). Ambassade de France   Mexico. 19 March 2013. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ Simon-Clerc, Nathalie (2 November 2016). "Le Mexique, l'acteur qui monte dans la francophonie d'Am rique" (in French). L'Outarde Lib r e. Retrieved 11 September 2018.
^ a b c d e "Yearbook of Migration and Remittances: Mexico 2018" (PDF). BBVA Research. 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Mexican Migrants in the United States". Migration Policy Institute. 17 March 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Hispanic or Latino Origin by Specific Origin". U.S. Census Bureau. 2016. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "2011 National Household Survey". Statistics Canada. 8 May 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ a b c "Table 1: Total migrant stock at mid-year by origin and by major area, region, country or area of destination, 2017". United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Principales resultados de la Encuesta Intercensal 2015 Estados Unidos Mexicanos" (PDF). INEGI. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2015. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ Smith, Dr. Claire M. (August 2010). "These are our Numbers: Civilian Americans Overseas and Voter Turnout" (PDF). OVF Research Newsletter. Overseas Vote Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Previous research indicates that the number of U.S. Americans living in Mexico is around 1 million, with 600,000 of those living in Mexico City.
^ "Los  rabes de M xico. Asimilaci n y herencia cultural" (PDF) (in Spanish). December 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 17 April 2010.
^ "Los Menonitas en M xico". Fundaci n UNAM. 28 August 2013. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "M xico atrae a espa oles desempleados". CNN. 24 April 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Crece 580% migraci n a M xico". El Sol de M xico. 25 March 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Por la crisis, llegan a M xico m s venezolanos expulsados". Milenio. 5 May 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Una crisis migratoria en Am rica del Sur: la salida de venezolanos pone a prueba la hospitalidad de pa ses vecinos". La Patilla. 19 July 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Japoneses hacen de Guanajuato su hogar". El Sol de M xico. 4 December 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Pesquer a, el municipio de NL 'inundado' de coreanos". El Sol de M xico. 27 June 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
^ "Censo de Poblaci n y Vivienda 2020 - SCITEL" (in Spanish). INEGI. Retrieved 27 January 2021.
^ "Censo de Poblaci n y Vivienda 2020   Cuestionario b sico". INEGI. Retrieved 18 May 2022.
^ "Main religion affiliations in Mexico". Statista. Retrieved 19 May 2022.
^ Olvera, Graciela; Mart nez, Armando (25 January 2021). "Catolicismo y otras religiones pierden creyentes en M xico". Milenio (in Spanish). Retrieved 25 March 2021.
^ "The Largest Catholic Communities". Adherents.com. Archived from the original on 12 November 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2007.
^ "Church attendance". Study of worldwide rates of religiosity. University of Michigan. 1997. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2007.
^ "Our Lady of Guadalupe". Catholic Online. Retrieved 24 October 2011.
^ "Cristianismos orientales: persecuci n, muerte, migraci n y cambio   Resonancias   Instituto de Investigaciones Sociales", "UNAM", Mexico DF, 29 November 2019. Retrieved on 28 November 2020.
^ "En Chamula, cambiar religi n se considera delito". 16 June 2009. Archived from the original on 16 June 2009.
^ "pol4". www.jornada.unam.mx.
^ "mas-hilo". www.jornada.unam.mx.
^ Simons, Marlise (29 September 1979). "Mexico to End Work of U.S. Translators With Indians". The Washington Post.
^ Primack, Karen (1998). Jews in places you never thought of. KTAV Publishing House, Inc. p. 305. ISBN 978-0-88125-608-6.
^ Jacobo Grinberg Zylberbaum (1989). Los chamanes de M xico (University of Texas ed.). Mexico City: UNAM School of Psychology. ISBN 9686022015.
^ Castells Ballarin, Pilar (June 2008). "La Santa Muerte y la cultura de los derechos humanos". LiminaR. 6 (1): 13 25. doi:10.29043/liminar.v6i1.263.
^ Soto Laveaga, Gabriela. "Bringing the Revolution to| Medical School: Social Service and a Rural Health Emphasis." Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos vol. 29 (2) summer 2013, 397 427.
^ "Mexico  Health Care and Social Security". Countrystudies.us. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ a b "Health Care in Mexico". Expatforum.com. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "Health Care Issues Mexico". Kwintessential.co.uk. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 4 November 2009.
^ "Sistema Nacional de Informaci n en Salud  Infraestructura". Sinais.salud.gob.mx. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 30 May 2010.
^ "INEGI literacy report  14, 2005". Inegi.gob.mx. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
^ "INEGI literacy report 15+, 2005". Inegi.gob.mx. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011.
^ "Mexico: Youth Literacy Rate". Global Virtual University. Archived from the original on 19 July 2010. Retrieved 2 October 2007.
^ "Mexico Literacy Rate 1980-2021". www.macrotrends.net.
^ "Nombran al Tec de Monterrey como la mejor universidad privada de M xico". Telediario CDMX (in Spanish). 19 June 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019.
^ "Recruiter's scoreboard Highlights" (PDF). The Wall Street Journal/Harris Interactive survey of corporate recruiters on business schools. Retrieved 4 October 2007.
^ Vasconcelos, Jos  (1997). La Raza C smica (The Cosmic Race). Didier T. Ja n (translator). The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 160. ISBN 978-0-8018-5655-6.
^ Phelan, John Leddy (1 August 1956). "M xico y lo Mexicano". Hispanic American Historical Review. 36 (3): 309 318. doi:10.1215/00182168-36.3.309. JSTOR 2509215.
^ Katzew, Ilona. Casta Painting: Images of Race in Eighteenth-Century Mexico.  New Haven: Yale University Press 2005
^ Widdiefield, Stacie G. The Embodiment of the National in Late Nineteenth-Century Mexican Painting. Tucson: University of Arizona Press 1996
^ Anreus, Robin Ad le Greeley, and Leonard Folgarait, eds. Mexican Muralism: A Critical History. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 2012.
^ Lozano, Luis-Martin, ed. Frida Kahlo: The Complete Paintings. Taschen 2021.ISBN 9783836574204
^ UNESCO World Heritage Centre (29 June 2007). "UNESCO". Whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 17 August 2013.
^ "Arquitectura mexicana". www.arqhys.com. Archived from the original on 15 October 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018.
^ Endicott, Katherine (14 October 2006). "The Mexican garden revisited". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2009.
^ a b "El mole s mbolo de la mexicanidad" (PDF). CONACULTA. Retrieved 27 September 2016.
^ University of Puget Sound. "History and influences of Mexican food". Archived from the original on 8 December 2011.
^ La Cr nica de Hoy (20 September 2005). "Presentan en Par s candidatura de gastronom a mexicana". Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 19 January 2018.
^ esmas.com (25 November 2005). "Cocina mexicana, fuera de la UNESCO". Archived from the original on 23 October 2012.
^ Cocina, fiesta y cantos mexicanos reconocidos por UNESCO, El Universal (Mexico City) (newspaper), 16 November 2010
^ "Latina chef Daniela Soto-Innes is youngest to be named 'World's Best Female Chef'", NBC News, 26 April 2019, retrieved 12 July 2019
^ Curl, John (20 August 2009). "Aztec Poetry (1): Introduction". Aztecs at Mexicolore. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
^ a b Gonz lez Echevarr a, Roberto; Hill, Ruth, "Latin American literature", Encyclopaedia Britannica, retrieved 14 July 2019
^ Stevenson, Robert M. Music in Mexico: A Historical Survey. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell 1952
^ Russell, Craig. "Music: Mesoamerica through Seventeenth Century", Encyclopedia of Mexico, 976 980
^ Hess, Carol A. "Carlos Antonio de Padua Ch vez y Ram rez", Encyclopedia of Mexico, 242 43
^ Zolov, Eric. "Counterculture", Encyclopedia of Mexico, 363 368
^ Zolov, Eric. Refried Elvis: The Rise of Mexican Counterculture. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1999.
^ "An Introduction to the Ballet Folkl rico de M xico".[17]  accessed 15 May 2022
^ [18][dead link] World Fact Book, Mexico. accessed 4 May 2022
^ Hanna Rosin, "Life Lessons: How Soap Operas Can Change the World", The New Yorker, 5 June 2006, pp. 40 45.
^ Soto Laveaga, Gabriela, "'Let's become fewer': Soap operas, contraception, and nationalizing the Mexican family in an overpopulated world." Sexuality Research and Social Policy. September 2007, vol. 4,, no. 3 pp. 19 33.
^ Dillingham, A.S. Oaxaca Resurgent: Indigeneity, Development, and Inequality in Twentieth-Century Mexico. Stanford: Stanford University Press 2021, 47 49, 69 70. ISBN 9781503627840
^ a b Baker, Shannon L. and William H. Beezley, "Sports", Encyclopedia of Mexico, 1370-1372
^ "2016 Binational Olympics". San Diego Metropolitan. December 2003. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "About CONCACAF". The Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF). Archived from the original on 6 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007.
^ "M xico, una historia de  xito en la Serie Mundial de Ligas Menores" [Mexico, a history of success in the Minor League World Series], Medio Tiempo (in Spanish), 25 August 2010, retrieved 12 July 2019
^ "M xico es Campe n en el Mundial Sub-23 de beisbol" [Mexico is the World Baseball Champion in the Under-23 bracket], Medio Tiempo (in Spanish), 29 October 2018, retrieved 12 July 2019
^ "LOS TOROS EN M XICO" [Bullfighting in Mexico], Don Quijote (in Spanish), retrieved 11 July 2019
^ a b "Los mejores deportistas mexicanos de la historia" [The best Mexican athletes in history], Marca Claro (in Spanish), 12 October 2018, retrieved 11 July 2019
^ "Los medallistas que ha tenido el Box Ol mpico mexicano" [The Mexican Olympic boxing medal winners], Caliente.mx (in Spanish), 15 August 2016, retrieved 11 July 2019
Further reading
Anna, Timothy. Forging Mexico, 1821-1835. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press 1998.
Adams, Richard E.W. Prehispanic Mesoamerica. 3rd. ed. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 2005.
Beezley, William H., ed. A Companion to Mexican History and Culture. Blackwell 2011. ISBN 9781405190572
Bulmer-Thomas, Victor, John H. Coatsworth, and Roberto Cort s Conde, eds. The Cambridge Economic History of Latin America. Vol. 1, The Colonial Era and the Short Nineteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2006.
Camp, Roderic Ai. Politics in Mexico: Democratic Consolidation or Decline? (Oxford University Press, 2014)
Coerver, Don M., Suzanne B. Pasztor, and Robert M. Buffington. Mexico: An Encyclopedia of Contemporary Culture and History. Santa Barbara: ABCClio 2004. ISBN 1-57607-132-4
Davis, Diane. Urban Leviathan: Mexico City in the Twentieth Century (Temple University Press, 2010)
Hale, Charles A. The Transformation of Mexican Liberalism in Late Nineteenth-Century Mexico. Princeton: Princeton University Press 1989.
Hamnett, Brian R. Roots of Insurgency: Mexican Regions 1750-1824. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1985.
Kirkwood, Burton. The History of Mexico (Greenwood, 2000) online edition
Knight, Alan. The Mexican Revolution. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1986.
Krauze, Enrique (1998). Mexico: Biography of Power: A history of Modern Mexico 1810 1996. New York: Harper Perennial. p. 896. ISBN 978-0-06-092917-6.
Levy, Santiago. Good intentions, bad outcomes: Social policy, informality, and economic growth in Mexico (Brookings Institution Press, 2010).
Merrill, Tim and Ram n Mir . Mexico: a country study (Library of Congress. Federal Research Division, 1996) US government document; not copyright online free
Meyer, Michael C.; Beezley, William H., eds. (2000). The Oxford History of Mexico. Oxford University Press. p. 736. ISBN 978-0-19-511228-3.
Meyer, Michael C., William L. Sherman, and Susan M. Deeds. The Course of Mexican History (7th ed.) (Oxford University Press, 2002) online edition
Rugeley, Terry. Epic Mexico: A History from Earliest Times. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 2020. ISBN 9780806167077
Van Young, Eric. Stormy Passage: Mexico from Colony to Republic, 1750-1850. Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield 2022. ISBN 9781442209015
Vinson, Ben, III. Before Mestizaje: The Frontiers of Race and Caste in Colonial Mexico. New York: Cambridge University Press 2018.
Werner, Michael S. ed. Encyclopedia of Mexico: History, Society & Culture (2 vol 1997) 1440pp online edition
Werner, Michael S. (January 2001). Concise Encyclopedia of Mexico. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-57958-337-8.
External links
Mexico  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from Wikivoyage
Government
The Government of Mexico
Official tourism website | VisitMexico. Archived 3 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine.
General information
The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Mexico.
U.S. Agency for International Development. Mexico.[permanent dead link]
U.S.-Mexico foreign trade balance. Mexico.
Mexico from BBC News
Mexico at Encyclop dia Britannica
 Wikimedia Atlas of Mexico
Key Development Forecasts for Mexico from International Futures
vteMexico articlesHistory
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era
War of Independence
First Mexican Empire
Control of Central America
Supreme Executive Power
First Mexican Republic
Spanish reconquest attempts
Centralist Republic of Mexico
Texas Revolution
Pastry War
Mexican American War
Second Mexican Republic
La Reforma
Second French intervention
Second Mexican Empire
Restored Republic
Caste War
Yaqui Wars
Porfiriato
Mexican Revolution
Second American intervention
Cristero War
Maximato
Institutional Revolutionary Party
Mexican miracle
Lost Decade
Peso crisis
Chiapas conflict
War on drugs
Geography
Borders
Cities
Climate (Climate change)
Earthquakes
Environmental issues
Extreme points
Forests
Islands
Lakes
Metropolitan areas
Mountains
Protected natural areas
Rivers
States
Municipalities
Territorial evolution
Time
Volcanos
Water resources
Wettest-known tropical cyclones
Wildlife
Politics
Administrative divisions
Congress
Senate
Chamber of Deputies
Constitution
Elections
Federal government
Foreign relations
Human rights
Intersex
LGBT
Law
Law enforcement
Military
Political parties
President
Cabinet
State legislatures
Supreme Court
Economy
Agriculture
Automotive industry
Central bank
Companies
Economic history
Energy
Renewable energy
Institutional stock exchange
Irrigation
Labor law
Land reform
Manufacturing
National stock exchange
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Oil
Pension system
Peso (currency)
Petroleum
Science and technology
States by GDP
States by unemployment
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Water scarcity
Society
Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Flags
Healthcare
Immigration
Nationality law
People
Indigenous peoples
Women
Poverty
Public holidays
States by HDI
Water supply and sanitation
Welfare
Prostitution
Culture
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Folklore
Handcrafts and folk art
Languages
Literature
Monuments
Music
National symbols
Radio
Religion
Our Lady of Guadalupe
Sports
Television
World Heritage Sites
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteWorld Heritage Sites in MexicoNorth West
Archaeological Zone of Paquim , Casas Grandes
El Pinacate y Gran Desierto de Altar Biosphere Reserve
Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California1
Rock Paintings of Sierra de San Francisco
Whale Sanctuary of El Vizcaino
North Central
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Franciscan Missions in the Sierra Gorda of Quer taro
Historic Centre of Zacatecas
Historic Monuments Zone of Quer taro
Historic Town of Guanajuato and Adjacent Mines
Protected town of San Miguel de Allende and the Sanctuary of Jes s Nazareno de Atotonilco
West
Agave Landscape and Ancient Industrial Facilities of Tequila
Revillagigedo Archipelago
Historic Centre of Morelia
Hospicio Caba as, Guadalajara
Islands and Protected Areas of the Gulf of California1
Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve1
East
Earliest 16th-century monasteries on the slopes of Popocat petl1
Pre-Hispanic City of El Taj n
Historic Centre of Puebla
Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan
South West
Historic Centre of Oaxaca and Archaeological Site of Monte Alb n
Prehistoric Caves of Yagul and Mitla in the Central Valley of Oaxaca
Pre-Hispanic City and National Park of Palenque
South Central
Archaeological Monuments Zone of Xochicalco
Aqueduct of Padre Tembleque Hydraulic System
Central University City Campus of the UNAM
Earliest 16th-century monasteries on the slopes of Popocat petl1
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Historic Centre of Mexico City and Xochimilco
Luis Barrag n House and Studio
Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve1
Tehuac n-Cuicatl n Valley
Pre-Hispanic City of Teotihuac n
South East
Ancient Maya City and Protected Tropical Forests of Calakmul,
Historic Fortified Town of Campeche
Pre-Hispanic City of Chich n Itz 
Sian Ka an Biosphere Reserve
Pre-Hispanic Town of Uxmal
1 Shared by more one region
vteCountries and dependencies of North AmericaSovereign statesEntire
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
In part
Colombia
San Andr s and Providencia
France
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Caribbean Netherlands
Bonaire
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Venezuela
Nueva Esparta
Federal Dependencies
DependenciesDenmark
Greenland
France
Clipperton Island
St. Barth lemy
St. Martin
St. Pierre and Miquelon
Netherlands
Aruba
Cura ao
Sint Maarten
United Kingdom
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Montserrat
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands
 North America portal
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
2
National
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Portugal
Geographic
MusicBrainz area
Academics
CiNii
People
Trove
Other
Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
NARA
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mexico&oldid=1148927409"