Lower house of the United States Congress
For the United States Congress in session, see 118th United States Congress. For state-level houses of representatives in the United States, see List of United States state legislatures.
United States House of Representatives118th United States CongressSeal of the HouseFlag of the United States House of RepresentativesTypeTypeLower house of the United States Congress Term limitsNoneHistoryNew session startedJanuary 3, 2023 (2023-01-03)LeadershipSpeakerKevin McCarthy (R) since January 7, 2023 Majority LeaderSteve Scalise (R) since January 3, 2023 Minority LeaderHakeem Jeffries (D) since January 3, 2023 Majority WhipTom Emmer (R) since January 3, 2023 Minority WhipKatherine Clark (D) since January 3, 2023 StructureSeats435 voting members6 non-voting members218 for a majorityPolitical groupsMajority (222)
  Republican (222)
Minority (213)
  Democratic (213)
Length of term2 yearsElectionsVoting systemPlurality voting in 46 states[a]
Varies in 4 states
Alaska & Maine: Instant-runoff voting
Georgia & Louisiana[b]: Two-round system
Last electionNovember 8, 2022Next electionNovember 5, 2024RedistrictingState legislatures or redistricting commissions, varies by stateMeeting placeHouse of Representatives ChamberUnited States CapitolWashington, D.C.United States of AmericaWebsitewww.house.govRulesRules of the House of Representatives
This article is part of a series on thePolitics of the United States
Federal government
Constitution of the United States
Law
Taxation
Policy
Legislature
United States Congress
 
House of Representatives
Speaker Kevin McCarthy (R)
Majority Leader Steve Scalise (R)
Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D)
Congressional districts (List of congressional districts)
Senate
President Kamala Harris (D)
President Pro Tempore Patty Murray (D)
Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D)
Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R)
Executive
President of the United States
Joe Biden (D)
Vice President of the United States
Kamala Harris (D)
Cabinet
Federal agencies
Executive Office
Judiciary
Supreme Court of the United States
Chief Justice John Roberts
Thomas
Alito
Sotomayor
Kagan
Gorsuch
Kavanaugh
Barrett
Jackson
Courts of appeals
District courts (list)
Other tribunals
Elections
 National Elections
Presidential elections
Midterm elections
Off-year elections
Primary elections
Presidential primary
 Elections by State and Territory
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
 Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
 Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands
Washington, D.C.
(List of Elections)
Political parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Libertarian
Green
List of political parties
Political ideologies
Conservatism
history
Black
Neo-
Paleo-
Social
Traditionalist
Liberalism
Modern
Progressivism
Abolitionism
Constitutionalism
Environmentalism
Feminism
Libertarianism
Monarchism
Populism
Protectionism
Republicanism
Socialism
Anarchism
Individualist anarchism
Political culture
Political polarization
Federalism
State
State government
Political ideology of states in the United States
Governors
Legislatures (list)
State courts
local government
Foreign relations
Department of State
Secretary of State: Antony Blinken
Diplomatic missions of / in the United States
Nationality law
Passports
Visa requirements
Visa policy
United States and the United Nations
United Nations Security Council
P5
NATO
G20
G7
Russia
China
India
Japan
Canada
United Kingdom
European Union
Latin America
Arab League
Greece
 United States portal Politics portalvte
The United States House of Representatives is the lower chamber of the United States Congress, with the Senate being the upper chamber. Together, they comprise the national bicameral legislature of the United States.
The House's composition was established by Article One of the United States Constitution. The House is composed of representatives who, pursuant to the Uniform Congressional District Act, sit in single member congressional districts allocated to each state on the basis of population as measured by the United States Census, with each district having one representative, provided that each state is entitled to at least one. Since its inception in 1789, all representatives have been directly elected, although universal suffrage did not come to effect until after the passage of the 19th Amendment and the Civil Rights Movement. Since 1913, the number of voting representatives has been at 435 pursuant to the Apportionment Act of 1911.[1] The Reapportionment Act of 1929 capped the size of the House at 435. However, the number was temporarily increased in 1959 until 1963 to 437 when Alaska and Hawaii were admitted to the Union.[2]
In addition, five non-voting delegates represent the District of Columbia and the U.S. territories of Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa. A non-voting Resident Commissioner, serving a four-year term, represents the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. As of the 2020 census, the largest delegation was California, with 52 representatives. Six states have only one representative: Alaska, Delaware, North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming.[3]
The House is charged with the passage of federal legislation, known as bills; those that are also passed by the Senate are sent to the president for consideration. The House also has exclusive powers: it initiates all revenue bills, impeaches federal officers, and elects the president if no candidate receives a majority of votes in the Electoral College.[4][5]
The House meets in the south wing of the United States Capitol. The presiding officer is the Speaker of the House, who is elected by the members thereof. Other floor leaders are chosen by the Democratic Caucus or the Republican Conference, depending on whichever party has more voting members.
History
Main article: History of the United States House of Representatives
Under the Articles of Confederation, the Congress of the Confederation was a unicameral body with equal representation for each state, any of which could veto most actions. After eight years of a more limited confederal government under the Articles, numerous political leaders such as James Madison and Alexander Hamilton initiated the Constitutional Convention in 1787, which received the Confederation Congress's sanction to "amend the Articles of Confederation". All states except Rhode Island agreed to send delegates.
 Representation of all political parties as percentage in House of Representatives over time
 Historical graph of party control of the Senate and House as well as the presidency[6]
Congress's structure was a contentious issue among the founders during the convention. Edmund Randolph's Virginia Plan called for a bicameral Congress: the lower house would be "of the people", elected directly by the people of the United States and representing public opinion, and a more deliberative upper house, elected by the lower house, that would represent the individual states, and would be less susceptible to variations of mass sentiment.[7]
The House is commonly referred to as the lower house and the Senate the upper house, although the United States Constitution does not use that terminology. Both houses' approval is necessary for the passage of legislation. The Virginia Plan drew the support of delegates from large states such as Virginia, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, as it called for representation based on population. The smaller states, however, favored the New Jersey Plan, which called for a unicameral Congress with equal representation for the states.[7]
Eventually, the Convention reached the Connecticut Compromise or Great Compromise, under which one house of Congress (the House of Representatives) would provide representation proportional to each state's population, whereas the other (the Senate) would provide equal representation amongst the states.[7] The Constitution was ratified by the requisite number of states (nine out of the 13) in 1788, but its implementation was set for March 4, 1789. The House began work on April 1, 1789, when it achieved a quorum for the first time.
During the first half of the 19th century, the House was frequently in conflict with the Senate over regionally divisive issues, including slavery. The North was much more populous than the South, and therefore dominated the House of Representatives. However, the North held no such advantage in the Senate, where the equal representation of states prevailed.
Regional conflict was most pronounced over the issue of slavery. One example of a provision repeatedly supported by the House but blocked by the Senate was the Wilmot Proviso, which sought to ban slavery in the land gained during the Mexican American War. Conflict over slavery and other issues persisted until the Civil War (1861 1865), which began soon after several southern states attempted to secede from the Union. The war culminated in the South's defeat and in the abolition of slavery. All southern senators except Andrew Johnson resigned their seats at the beginning of the war, and therefore the Senate did not hold the balance of power between North and South during the war.
The years of Reconstruction that followed witnessed large majorities for the Republican Party, which many Americans associated with the Union's victory in the Civil War and the ending of slavery. The Reconstruction period ended in about 1877; the ensuing era, known as the Gilded Age, was marked by sharp political divisions in the electorate. The Democratic Party and Republican Party each held majorities in the House at various times.
 Republican speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed (1895 1899)
The late 19th and early 20th centuries also saw a dramatic increase in the power of the speaker of the House. The rise of the speaker's influence began in the 1890s, during the tenure of Republican Thomas Brackett Reed. "Czar Reed," as he was nicknamed, attempted to put into effect his view that "The best system is to have one party govern and the other party watch." The leadership structure of the House also developed during approximately the same period, with the positions of majority leader and minority leader being created in 1899. While the minority leader was the head of the minority party, the majority leader remained subordinate to the speaker. The speakership reached its zenith during the term of Republican Joseph Gurney Cannon, from 1903 to 1911. The speaker's powers included chairmanship of the influential Rules Committee and the ability to appoint members of other House committees. However, these powers were curtailed in the "Revolution of 1910" because of the efforts of Democrats and dissatisfied Republicans who opposed Cannon's heavy-handed tactics.
The Democratic Party dominated the House of Representatives during the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945), often winning over two-thirds of the seats. Both Democrats and Republicans were in power at various times during the next decade. The Democratic Party maintained control of the House from 1955 until 1995. In the mid-1970s, members passed major reforms that strengthened the power of sub-committees at the expense of committee chairs and allowed party leaders to nominate committee chairs. These actions were taken to undermine the seniority system, and to reduce the ability of a small number of senior members to obstruct legislation they did not favor. There was also a shift from the 1990s to greater control of the legislative program by the majority party; the power of party leaders (especially the speaker) grew considerably. According to historian Julian E. Zelizer, the majority Democrats minimized the number of staff positions available to the minority Republicans, kept them out of decision-making, and gerrymandered their home districts. Republican Newt Gingrich argued American democracy was being ruined by the Democrats' tactics and that the GOP had to destroy the system before it could be saved. Cooperation in governance, says Zelizer, would have to be put aside until they deposed Speaker Wright and regained power. Gingrich brought an ethics complaint which led to Wright's resignation in 1989. Gingrich gained support from the media and good government forces in his crusade to persuade Americans that the system was, in Gingrich's words,  morally, intellectually and spiritually corrupt . Gingrich followed Wright's successor, Democrat Tom Foley, as speaker after the Republican Revolution of 1994 gave his party control of the House.[8]
Gingrich attempted to pass a major legislative program, the Contract with America and made major reforms of the House, notably reducing the tenure of committee chairs to three two-year terms. Many elements of the Contract did not pass Congress, were vetoed by President Bill Clinton, or were substantially altered in negotiations with Clinton. However, after Republicans held control in the 1996 election, Clinton and the Gingrich-led House agreed on the first balanced federal budget in decades, along with a substantial tax cut.[9] The Republicans held on to the House until 2006, when the Democrats won control and Nancy Pelosi was subsequently elected by the House as the first female speaker. The Republicans retook the House in 2011, with the largest shift of power since the 1930s.[10] However, the Democrats retook the house in 2019, which became the largest shift of power to the Democrats since the 1970s. In the 2022 elections, Republicans took back control of the House, winning a slim majority.
Membership, qualifications, and apportionment
This article is part of a series on theUnited States Houseof Representatives
History of the House
Members
Current members (by senioritynon-votingwomen)
Former members
Hill committees (DCCCNRCC)
Speaker of the House
(list of speakerslist of elections)
Party leaders
Democratic Caucus
Republican Conference
Congressional districts
Apportionment (Huntington Hill method)
RedistrictingGerrymandering
General ticketPlural district
Politics and procedure
Committee of the Whole
Closed session (list)Saxbe fix
Committees (list)Procedures
Origination ClauseQuorum call
Unanimous consentSalaries
Articles of impeachment
Self-executing ruleRules suspension
Places
United States Capitol
House office buildings (CannonFordLongworthO'NeillRayburn)
 United States portalvte
Apportionments
Main article: United States congressional apportionment
Under Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution, seats in the House of Representatives are apportioned among the states by population, as determined by the census conducted every ten years. Each state is entitled to at least one representative, however small its population.
The only constitutional rule relating to the size of the House states: "The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand, but each State shall have at Least one Representative."[11] Congress regularly increased the size of the House to account for population growth until it fixed the number of voting House members at 435 in 1911.[1] In 1959, upon the admission of Alaska and Hawaii, the number was temporarily increased to 437 (seating one representative from each of those states without changing existing apportionment), and returned to 435 four years later, after the reapportionment consequent to the 1960 census.
The Constitution does not provide for the representation of the District of Columbia or of territories. The District of Columbia and the territories of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands are each represented by one non-voting delegate. Puerto Rico elects a resident commissioner, but other than having a four-year term, the resident commissioner's role is identical to the delegates from the other territories. The five delegates and resident commissioner may participate in debates; before 2011,[12] they were also allowed to vote in committees and the Committee of the Whole when their votes would not be decisive.[13]
Redistricting
Main article: Redistricting in the United States
States entitled to more than one representative are divided into single-member districts. This has been a federal statutory requirement since 1967 pursuant to the act titled An Act For the relief of Doctor Ricardo Vallejo Samala and to provide for congressional redistricting.[14] Before that law, general ticket representation was used by some states.
States typically redraw district boundaries after each census, though they may do so at other times, such as the 2003 Texas redistricting. Each state determines its own district boundaries, either through legislation or through non-partisan panels. "Malapportionment" is unconstitutional and districts must be approximately equal in population (see Wesberry v. Sanders). Additionally, Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 prohibits redistricting plans that are intended to, or have the effect of, discriminating against racial or language minority voters.[15] Aside from malapportionment and discrimination against racial or language minorities, federal courts have allowed state legislatures to engage in gerrymandering to benefit political parties or incumbents.[16][17] In a 1984 case, Davis v. Bandemer, the Supreme Court held that gerrymandered districts could be struck down based on the Equal Protection Clause, but the Court did not articulate a standard for when districts are impermissibly gerrymandered. However, the Court overruled Davis in 2004 in Vieth v. Jubelirer, and Court precedent holds gerrymandering to be a political question. According to calculations made by Burt Neuborne using criteria set forth by the American Political Science Association, about 40 seats, less than 10% of the House membership, are chosen through a genuinely contested electoral process, given partisan gerrymandering.[18][19]
Qualifications
Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution sets three qualifications for representatives. Each representative must: (1) be at least twenty-five (25) years old; (2) have been a citizen of the United States for the past seven years; and (3) be (at the time of the election) an inhabitant of the state they represent. Members are not required to live in the districts they represent, but they traditionally do.[20] The age and citizenship qualifications for representatives are less than those for senators. The constitutional requirements of Article I, Section 2 for election to Congress are the maximum requirements that can be imposed on a candidate.[21] Therefore, Article I, Section 5, which permits each House to be the judge of the qualifications of its own members does not permit either House to establish additional qualifications. Likewise a State could not establish additional qualifications. William C. C. Claiborne served in the House below the minimum age of 25.[22]
Disqualification: under the Fourteenth Amendment, a federal or state officer who takes the requisite oath to support the Constitution, but later engages in rebellion or aids the enemies of the United States, is disqualified from becoming a representative. This post Civil War provision was intended to prevent those who sided with the Confederacy from serving. However, disqualified individuals may serve if they gain the consent of two-thirds of both houses of Congress.
Elections
 Population per U.S. representative allocated to each of the 50 states and D.C., ranked by population. Since D.C. (ranked 49th) receives no voting seats in the House, its bar is absent.
 U.S. congressional districts for the 115th Congress
Elections for representatives are held in every even-numbered year, on Election Day the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. Pursuant to the Uniform Congressional District Act, representatives must be elected from single-member districts. After a census is taken (in a year ending in 0), the year ending in 2 is the first year in which elections for U.S. House districts are based on that census (with the Congress based on those districts starting its term on the following January 3). As there is no legislation at the federal level mandating one particular system for elections to the House, systems are set at the state level. As of 2022, first-past-the-post or plurality voting is adopted in 46 states, ranked-choice or instant-runoff voting in two states (Alaska and Maine), and two-round system in two states (Georgia and Mississippi). Elected representatives serve a two-year term, with no term limit.
In most states, major party candidates for each district are nominated in partisan primary elections, typically held in spring to late summer. In some states, the Republican and Democratic parties choose their candidates for each district in their political conventions in spring or early summer, which often use unanimous voice votes to reflect either confidence in the incumbent or the result of bargaining in earlier private discussions. Exceptions can result in so-called floor fights convention votes by delegates, with outcomes that can be hard to predict. Especially if a convention is closely divided, a losing candidate may contend further by meeting the conditions for a primary election. The courts generally do not consider ballot access rules for independent and third party candidates to be additional qualifications for holding office and no federal statutes regulate ballot access. As a result, the process to gain ballot access varies greatly from state to state, and in the case of a third party in the United States may be affected by results of previous years' elections.
In 1967, Congress passed the Uniform Congressional District Act, which requires all representatives to be elected from single-member-districts.[23][24] Following the Wesberry v. Sanders decision, Congress was motivated by fears that courts would impose at-large plurality districts on states that did not redistrict to comply with the new mandates for districts roughly equal in population, and Congress also sought to prevent attempts by southern states to use such voting systems to dilute the vote of racial minorities.[25] Several states have used multi-member districts in the past, although only two states (Hawaii and New Mexico) used multi-member districts in 1967.[24] Louisiana is unique in that it holds an all-party primary election on the general Election Day with a subsequent runoff election between the top two finishers (regardless of party) if no candidate received a majority in the primary. The states of Washington and California use a similar (though not identical) system to that used by Louisiana.
Seats vacated during a term are filled through special elections, unless the vacancy occurs closer to the next general election date than a pre-established deadline. The term of a member chosen in a special election usually begins the next day, or as soon as the results are certified.
Non-voting delegates
Main article: Non-voting members of the United States House of Representatives
Historically, many territories have sent non-voting delegates to the House. While their role has fluctuated over the years, today they have many of the same privileges as voting members, have a voice in committees, and can introduce bills on the floor, but cannot vote on the ultimate passage of bills. Presently, the District of Columbia and the five inhabited U.S. territories each elect a delegate. A seventh delegate, representing the Cherokee Nation, has been formally proposed but has not yet been seated.[26] An eighth delegate, representing the Choctaw Nation is guaranteed by treaty but has not yet been proposed. Additionally, some territories may choose to also elect shadow representatives, though these are not official members of the House and are separate individuals from their official delegates.
Terms
Representatives and delegates serve for two-year terms, while a resident commissioner (a kind of delegate) serves for four years. A term starts on January 3 following the election in November. The U.S. Constitution requires that vacancies in the House be filled with a special election. The term of the replacement member expires on the date that the original member's would have expired.
The Constitution permits the House to expel a member with a two-thirds vote. In the history of the United States, only five members have been expelled from the House; in 1861, three were removed for supporting the Confederate states' secession: Democrats John Bullock Clark of Missouri, John William Reid of Missouri, and Henry Cornelius Burnett of Kentucky. Democrat Michael Myers of Pennsylvania was expelled after his criminal conviction for accepting bribes in 1980, and Democrat James Traficant of Ohio was expelled in 2002 following his conviction for corruption.[27]
The House also has the power to formally censure or reprimand its members; censure or reprimand of a member requires only a simple majority, and does not remove that member from office.
Comparison to the Senate
As a check on the regional, popular, and rapidly changing politics of the House, the Senate has several distinct powers. For example, the "advice and consent" powers (such as the power to approve treaties and confirm members of the Cabinet) are a sole Senate privilege.[28] The House, however, has the exclusive power to initiate bills for raising revenue, to impeach officials, and to choose the president if a presidential candidate fails to get a majority of the Electoral College votes.[29] Both House and Senate confirmation is now required to fill a vacancy in the vice presidency is vacant, according to the provisions of the Twenty-fifth Amendment.[30][31] The Senate and House are further differentiated by term lengths and the number of districts represented: the Senate has longer terms of six years, fewer members (currently one hundred, two for each state), and (in all but seven delegations) larger constituencies per member. The Senate is referred to as the "upper" house, and the House of Representatives as the "lower" house.
Salary and benefits
 House of Representatives salaries
Salaries
As of December 2014[update], the annual salary of each representative is $174,000,[32][33] the same as it is for each member of the Senate.[34] The speaker of the House and the majority and minority leaders earn more: $223,500 for the speaker and $193,400 for their party leaders (the same as Senate leaders).[33] A cost-of-living-adjustment (COLA) increase takes effect annually unless Congress votes not to accept it. Congress sets members' salaries; however, the Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits a change in salary (but not COLA[35]) from taking effect until after the next election of the whole House. Representatives are eligible for retirement benefits after serving for five years.[36] Outside pay is limited to 15% of congressional pay, and certain types of income involving a fiduciary responsibility or personal endorsement are prohibited. Salaries are not for life, only during active term.[33]
Titles
Representatives use the prefix "The Honorable" before their names. A member of the House is referred to as a representative, congressman, or congresswoman.
Representatives are usually identified in the media and other sources by party and state, and sometimes by congressional district, or a major city or community within their district. For example, Democratic House speaker Nancy Pelosi, who represents California's 12th congressional district within San Francisco, may be identified as "D California," "D California 12" or "D San Francisco."
A small number of representatives have elected to use the post nominal "MC" (for "member of Congress") after their names, a reflection of the Westminster system s usage of "MP".[citation needed]
Pension
All members of Congress are automatically enrolled in the Federal Employees Retirement System, a pension system also used for federal civil servants, except the formula for calculating Congress members' pension results in a 70% higher pension than other federal employees based on the first 20 years of service.[37] They become eligible to receive benefits after five years of service (two and one-half terms in the House). The FERS is composed of three elements:
Social Security
The FERS basic annuity, a monthly pension plan based on the number of years of service and the average of the three highest years of basic pay (70% higher pension than other federal employees based on the first 20 years of service)
The Thrift Savings Plan, a 401(k)-like defined contribution plan for retirement account into which participants can deposit up to a maximum of $19,000 in 2019. Their employing agency matches employee contributions up to 5% of pay.
Members of Congress may retire with full benefits at age 62 after five years of service, at age 50 after twenty years of service, and at any age after twenty-five years of service.[37]
Tax deductions
Members of Congress are permitted to deduct up to $3,000 of living expenses per year incurred while living away from their district or home state.[38]
Health benefits
Before 2014, members of Congress and their staff had access to essentially the same health benefits as federal civil servants; they could voluntarily enroll in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP), an employer-sponsored health insurance program, and were eligible to participate in other programs, such as the Federal Flexible Spending Account Program (FSAFEDS).[39]
However, Section 1312(d)(3)(D) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) provided that the only health plans that the federal government can make available to members of Congress and certain congressional staff are those created under the ACA or offered through a health care exchange. The Office of Personnel Management promulgated a final rule to comply with Section 1312(d)(3)(D).[39] Under the rule, effective January 1, 2014, members and designated staff are no longer able to purchase FEHBP plans as active employees.[39] However, if members enroll in a health plan offered through a Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchange, they remain eligible for an employer contribution toward coverage, and members and designated staff eligible for retirement may enroll in a FEHBP plan upon retirement.[39]
The ACA and the final rule do not affect members' or staffers' eligibility for Medicare benefits.[39] The ACA and the final rule also do not affect members' and staffers' eligibility for other health benefits related to federal employment, so members and staff are eligible to participate in FSAFEDS (which has three options within the program), the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program, and the Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program.[39]
The Office of the Attending Physician at the U.S. Capitol provides members with health care for an annual fee.[39] The attending physician provides routine exams, consultations, and certain diagnostics, and may write prescriptions (although the office does not dispense them).[39] The office does not provide vision or dental care.[39]
Members (but not their dependents, and not former members) may also receive medical and emergency dental care at military treatment facilities.[39] There is no charge for outpatient care if it is provided in the National Capital Region, but members are billed at full reimbursement rates (set by the Department of Defense) for inpatient care.[39] (Outside the National Capital Region, charges are at full reimbursement rates for both inpatient and outpatient care).[39]
Personnel, mail and office expenses
House members are eligible for a Member's Representational Allowance (MRA) to support them in their official and representational duties to their district.[40] The MRA is calculated based on three components: one for personnel, one for official office expenses and one for official or franked mail. The personnel allowance is the same for all members; the office and mail allowances vary based on the members' district's distance from Washington, D.C., the cost of office space in the member's district, and the number of non-business addresses in their district. These three components are used to calculate a single MRA that can fund any expense even though each component is calculated individually, the franking allowance can be used to pay for personnel expenses if the member so chooses. In 2011 this allowance averaged $1.4 million per member, and ranged from $1.35 to $1.67 million.[41]
The Personnel allowance was $944,671 per member in 2010. Each member may employ no more than 18 permanent employees. Members' employees' salary is capped at $168,411 as of 2009.[41]
Travel allowance
Before being sworn into office each member-elect and one staffer can be paid for one round trip between their home in their congressional district and Washington, D.C. for organization caucuses.[41] Members are allowed "a sum for travel based on the following formula: 64 times the rate per mile ... multiplied by the mileage between Washington, DC, and the furthest point in a Member's district, plus 10%."[41] As of January 2012[update] the rate ranges from $0.41 to $1.32 per mile ($0.25 to $0.82/km) based on distance ranges between D.C. and the member's district.[41]
Officers
Member officials
The party with a majority of seats in the House is known as the majority party. The next-largest party is the minority party. The speaker, committee chairs, and some other officials are generally from the majority party; they have counterparts (for instance, the "ranking members" of committees) in the minority party.
The Constitution provides that the House may choose its own speaker.[42] Although not explicitly required by the Constitution, every speaker has been a member of the House. The Constitution does not specify the duties and powers of the speaker, which are instead regulated by the rules and customs of the House. Speakers have a role both as a leader of the House and the leader of their party (which need not be the majority party; theoretically, a member of the minority party could be elected as speaker with the support of a fraction of members of the majority party). Under the Presidential Succession Act (1947), the speaker is second in the line of presidential succession after the vice president.
The speaker is the presiding officer of the House but does not preside over every debate. Instead, they delegate the responsibility of presiding to other members in most cases. The presiding officer sits in a chair in the front of the House chamber. The powers of the presiding officer are extensive; one important power is that of controlling the order in which members of the House speak. No member may make a speech or a motion unless they have first been recognized by the presiding officer. Moreover, the presiding officer may rule on a "point of order" (a member's objection that a rule has been breached); the decision is subject to appeal to the whole House.
Speakers serve as chairs of their party's steering committee, which is responsible for assigning party members to other House committees. The speaker chooses the chairs of standing committees, appoints most of the members of the Rules Committee, appoints all members of conference committees, and determines which committees consider bills.
Each party elects a floor leader, who is known as the majority leader or minority leader. The minority leader heads their party in the House, and the majority leader is their party's second-highest-ranking official, behind the speaker. Party leaders decide what legislation members of their party should either support or oppose.
Each party also elects a Whip, who works to ensure that the party's members vote as the party leadership desires. The majority whip in the House of Representatives is Tom Emmer, who is a member of the Republican Party. The minority whip is Katherine Clark, who is a member of the Democratic Party. The whip is supported by chief deputy whips
After the whips, the next ranking official in the House party's leadership is the party conference chair (styled as the Republican conference chair and Democratic caucus chair).
After the conference chair, there are differences between each party's subsequent leadership ranks. After the Democratic caucus chair is the campaign committee chair (Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee), then the co-chairs of the Steering Committee. For the Republicans it is the chair of the House Republican Policy Committee, followed by the campaign committee chairman (styled as the National Republican Congressional Committee).
The chairs of House committees, particularly influential standing committees such as Appropriations, Ways and Means, and Rules, are powerful but not officially part of the House leadership hierarchy. Until the post of majority leader was created, the chair of Ways and Means was the de facto majority leader.
Leadership and partisanship
When the presidency and Senate are controlled by a different party from the one controlling the House, the speaker can become the de facto "leader of the opposition." Some notable examples include Tip O'Neill in the 1980s, Newt Gingrich in the 1990s, John Boehner in the early 2010s, and Nancy Pelosi in the late 2000s and again in the late 2010s and early 2020s. Since the speaker is a partisan officer with substantial power to control the business of the House, the position is often used for partisan advantage.
In the instance when the presidency and both Houses of Congress are controlled by one party, the speaker normally takes a low profile and defers to the president. For that situation the House minority leader can play the role of a de facto "leader of the opposition," often more so than the Senate minority leader, due to the more partisan nature of the House and the greater role of leadership.
Non-member officials
The House is also served by several officials who are not members. The House's chief such officer is the clerk, who maintains public records, prepares documents, and oversees junior officials, including pages until the discontinuation of House pages in 2011. The clerk also presides over the House at the beginning of each new Congress pending the election of a speaker. Another officer is the chief administrative officer, responsible for the day-to-day administrative support to the House of Representatives. This includes everything from payroll to foodservice.
The position of chief administrative officer (CAO) was created by the 104th Congress following the 1994 mid-term elections, replacing the positions of doorkeeper and director of non-legislative and financial services (created by the previous congress to administer the non-partisan functions of the House). The CAO also assumed some of the responsibilities of the House Information Services, which previously had been controlled directly by the Committee on House Administration, then headed by Representative Charlie Rose of North Carolina, along with the House "Folding Room."
The chaplain leads the House in prayer at the opening of the day. The sergeant at arms is the House's chief law enforcement officer and maintains order and security on House premises. Finally, routine police work is handled by the United States Capitol Police, which is supervised by the Capitol Police Board, a body to which the sergeant at arms belongs, and chairs in even-numbered years.
Procedure
Main article: Procedures of the United States House of Representatives
Daily procedures
Like the Senate, the House of Representatives meets in the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. At one end of the chamber of the House is a rostrum from which the speaker, Speaker pro tempore, or (when in the Committee of the Whole) the chair presides.[43] The lower tier of the rostrum is used by clerks and other officials. Members' seats are arranged in the chamber in a semicircular pattern facing the rostrum and are divided by a wide central aisle.[44] By tradition, Democrats sit on the left of the center aisle, while Republicans sit on the right, facing the presiding officer's chair.[45] Sittings are normally held on weekdays; meetings on Saturdays and Sundays are rare. Sittings of the House are generally open to the public; visitors must obtain a House Gallery pass from a congressional office.[46] Sittings are broadcast live on television and have been streamed live on C-SPAN since March 19, 1979,[47] and on HouseLive, the official streaming service operated by the Clerk, since the early 2010s.
The procedure of the House depends not only on the rules, but also on a variety of customs, precedents, and traditions. In many cases, the House waives some of its stricter rules (including time limits on debates) by unanimous consent.[48] A member may block a unanimous consent agreement, but objections are rare. The presiding officer, the speaker of the House enforces the rules of the House, and may warn members who deviate from them. The speaker uses a gavel to maintain order.[49] Legislation to be considered by the House is placed in a box called the hopper.[50]
In one of its first resolutions, the U.S. House of Representatives established the Office of the Sergeant at Arms. In an American tradition adopted from English custom in 1789 by the first speaker of the House, Frederick Muhlenberg of Pennsylvania, the Mace of the United States House of Representatives is used to open all sessions of the House. It is also used during the inaugural ceremonies for all presidents of the United States. For daily sessions of the House, the sergeant at arms carries the mace ahead of the speaker in procession to the rostrum. It is placed on a green marble pedestal to the speaker's right. When the House is in committee, the mace is moved to a pedestal next to the desk of the Sergeant at Arms.[51]
The Constitution provides that a majority of the House constitutes a quorum to do business.[52] Under the rules and customs of the House, a quorum is always assumed present unless a quorum call explicitly demonstrates otherwise. House rules prevent a member from making a point of order that a quorum is not present unless a question is being voted on. The presiding officer does not accept a point of order of no quorum during general debate, or when a question is not before the House.[53]
During debates, a member may speak only if called upon by the presiding officer. The presiding officer decides which members to recognize, and can therefore control the course of debate.[54] All speeches must be addressed to the presiding officer, using the words "Mr. Speaker" or "Madam Speaker." Only the presiding officer may be directly addressed in speeches; other members must be referred to in the third person. In most cases, members do not refer to each other only by name, but also by state, using forms such as "the gentleman from Virginia," "the distinguished gentlewoman from California," or "my distinguished friend from Alabama."
There are 448 permanent seats on the House Floor and four tables, two on each side. These tables are occupied by members of the committee that have brought a bill to the floor for consideration and by the party leadership. Members address the House from microphones at any table or "the well," the area immediately in front of the rostrum.[55]
Passage of legislation
Per the Constitution, the House of Representatives determines the rules according to which it passes legislation. Any of the rules can be changed with each new Congress, but in practice each new session amends a standing set of rules built up over the history of the body in an early resolution published for public inspection.[56] Before legislation reaches the floor of the House, the Rules Committee normally passes a rule to govern debate on that measure (which then must be passed by the full House before it becomes effective). For instance, the committee determines if amendments to the bill are permitted. An "open rule" permits all germane amendments, but a "closed rule" restricts or even prohibits amendment. Debate on a bill is generally restricted to one hour, equally divided between the majority and minority parties. Each side is led during the debate by a "floor manager," who allocates debate time to members who wish to speak. On contentious matters, many members may wish to speak; thus, a member may receive as little as one minute, or even thirty seconds, to make their point.[57]
When debate concludes, the motion is put to a vote.[58] In many cases, the House votes by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the question, and members respond either "yea!" or "aye!" (in favor of the motion) or "nay!" or "no!" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote. A member may, however, challenge the presiding officer's assessment and "request the yeas and nays" or "request a recorded vote." The request may be granted only if it is seconded by one-fifth of the members present. Traditionally, however, members of Congress second requests for recorded votes as a matter of courtesy. Some votes are always recorded, such as those on the annual budget.[59]
A recorded vote may be taken in one of three different ways. One is electronically. Members use a personal identification card to record their votes at 46 voting stations in the chamber. Votes are usually held in this way. A second mode of recorded vote is by teller. Members hand in colored cards to indicate their votes: green for "yea," red for "nay," and orange for "present" (i.e., to abstain). Teller votes are normally held only when electronic voting breaks down. Finally, the House may conduct a roll call vote. The Clerk reads the list of members of the House, each of whom announces their vote when their name is called. This procedure is only used rarely (and usually for ceremonial occasions, such as for the election of a speaker) because of the time consumed by calling over four hundred names.[59]
Voting traditionally lasts for, at most, fifteen minutes, but it may be extended if the leadership needs to "whip" more members into alignment.[59] The 2003 vote on the prescription drug benefit was open for three hours, from 3:00 to 6:00 a.m., to receive four additional votes, three of which were necessary to pass the legislation.[60] The 2005 vote on the Central American Free Trade Agreement was open for one hour, from 11:00 p.m. to midnight.[61] An October 2005 vote on facilitating refinery construction was kept open for forty minutes.[62]
Presiding officers may vote like other members. They may not, however, vote twice in the event of a tie; rather, a tie vote defeats the motion.[63]
Committees
Further information: United States congressional committee and List of United States House of Representatives committees
The House uses committees and their subcommittees for a variety of purposes, including the review of bills and the oversight of the executive branch. The appointment of committee members is formally made by the whole House, but the choice of members is actually made by the political parties. Generally, each party honors the preferences of individual members, giving priority on the basis of seniority. Historically, membership on committees has been in rough proportion to the party's strength in the House, with two exceptions: on the Rules Committee, the majority party fills nine of the thirteen seats;[64] and on the Ethics Committee, each party has an equal number of seats.[65] However, when party control in the House is closely divided, extra seats on committees are sometimes allocated to the majority party. In the 109th Congress, for example, the Republicans controlled about 53% of the House, but had 54% of the Appropriations Committee members, 55% of the members on the Energy and Commerce Committee, 58% of the members on the Judiciary Committee, and 69% of the members on the Rules Committee.
The largest committee of the House is the Committee of the Whole, which, as its name suggests, consists of all members of the House. The Committee meets in the House chamber; it may consider and amend bills, but may not grant them final passage. Generally, the debate procedures of the Committee of the Whole are more flexible than those of the House itself. One advantage of the Committee of the Whole is its ability to include otherwise non-voting members of Congress.
Most committee work is performed by twenty standing committees, each of which has jurisdiction over a specific set of issues, such as Agriculture or Foreign Affairs. Each standing committee considers, amends, and reports bills that fall under its jurisdiction. Committees have extensive powers with regard to bills; they may block legislation from reaching the floor of the House. Standing committees also oversee the departments and agencies of the executive branch. In discharging their duties, standing committees have the power to hold hearings and to subpoena witnesses and evidence.
The House also has one permanent committee that is not a standing committee, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and occasionally may establish temporary or advisory committees, such as the Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming. This latter committee, created in the 110th Congress and reauthorized for the 111th, has no jurisdiction over legislation and must be chartered anew at the start of every Congress. The House also appoints members to serve on joint committees, which include members of the Senate and House. Some joint committees oversee independent government bodies; for instance, the Joint Committee on the Library oversees the Library of Congress. Other joint committees serve to make advisory reports; for example, there exists a Joint Committee on Taxation. Bills and nominees are not referred to joint committees. Hence, the power of joint committees is considerably lower than those of standing committees.
Each House committee and subcommittee is led by a chairman (always a member of the majority party). From 1910 to the 1970s, committee chairs were powerful. Woodrow Wilson in his classic study,[66] suggested:Power is nowhere concentrated; it is rather deliberately and of set policy scattered amongst many small chiefs. It is divided up, as it were, into forty-seven seigniories, in each of which a Standing Committee is the court-baron and its chairman lord-proprietor. These petty barons, some of them not a little powerful, but none of them within the reach of the full powers of rule, may at will exercise almost despotic sway within their own shires, and may sometimes threaten to convulse even the realm itself.
From 1910 to 1975 committee and subcommittee chairmanship was determined purely by seniority; members of Congress sometimes had to wait 30 years to get one, but their chairship was independent of party leadership. The rules were changed in 1975 to permit party caucuses to elect chairs, shifting power upward to the party leaders. In 1995, Republicans under Newt Gingrich set a limit of three two-year terms for committee chairs. The chairman's powers are extensive; he controls the committee/subcommittee agenda, and may prevent the committee from dealing with a bill. The senior member of the minority party is known as the Ranking Member. In some committees like Appropriations, partisan disputes are few.
Legislative functions
Most bills may be introduced in either House of Congress. However, the Constitution states, "All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives." Because of the Origination Clause, the Senate cannot initiate bills imposing taxes. This provision barring the Senate from introducing revenue bills is based on the practice of the British Parliament, in which only the House of Commons may originate such measures. Furthermore, congressional tradition holds that the House of Representatives originates appropriation bills.
Although it cannot originate revenue bills, the Senate retains the power to amend or reject them. Woodrow Wilson wrote the following about appropriations bills:[67]
[T]he constitutional prerogative of the House has been held to apply to all the general appropriations bills, and the Senate's right to amend these has been allowed the widest possible scope. The upper house may add to them what it pleases; may go altogether outside of their original provisions and tack to them entirely new features of legislation, altering not only the amounts but even the objects of expenditure, and making out of the materials sent them by the popular chamber measures of an almost totally new character.
The approval of the Senate and the House of Representatives is required for a bill to become law. Both Houses must pass the same version of the bill; if there are differences, they may be resolved by a conference committee, which includes members of both bodies. For the stages through which bills pass in the Senate, see Act of Congress.
The president may veto a bill passed by the House and Senate. If they do, the bill does not become law unless each House, by a two-thirds vote, votes to override the veto.
Checks and balances
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Constitution provides that the Senate's "advice and consent" is necessary for the president to make appointments and to ratify treaties. Thus, with its potential to frustrate presidential appointments, the Senate is more powerful than the House.
The Constitution empowers the House of Representatives to impeach federal officials for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" and empowers the Senate to try such impeachments. The House may approve "articles of impeachment" by a simple majority vote; however, a two-thirds vote is required for conviction in the Senate. A convicted official is automatically removed from office and may be disqualified from holding future office under the United States. No further punishment is permitted during the impeachment proceedings; however, the party may face criminal penalties in a normal court of law.
In the history of the United States, the House of Representatives has impeached seventeen officials, of whom seven were convicted. (Another, Richard Nixon, resigned after the House Judiciary Committee passed articles of impeachment but before a formal impeachment vote by the full House.) Only three presidents of the United States have ever been impeached: Andrew Johnson in 1868, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Donald Trump in 2019 and in 2021. The trials of Johnson, Clinton and Trump all ended in acquittal; in Johnson's case, the Senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for conviction.
Under the Twelfth Amendment, the House has the power to elect the president if no presidential candidate receives a majority of votes in the Electoral College. The Twelfth Amendment requires the House to choose from the three candidates with the highest numbers of electoral votes. The Constitution provides that "the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote." It is rare for no presidential candidate to receive a majority of electoral votes. In the history of the United States, the House has only had to choose a president twice. In 1800, which was before the adoption of the Twelfth Amendment, it elected Thomas Jefferson over Aaron Burr. In 1824, it elected John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson and William H. Crawford. (If no vice-presidential candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes, the Senate elects the vice president from the two candidates with the highest numbers of electoral votes.)
Latest election results and party standings
See also: 2022 United States House of Representatives elections and 118th United States Congress
As of March 2023[update]
 
222
213
Republican
Democratic
Affiliation
Members
Delegates/residentcommissioner(non-voting)
Statemajorities
Republican
222
3
29
Democratic
213
3
25
Vacant
0
Total
435
6
56
Majority[c]
4
Source:[68]
See also
2022 United States House of Representatives elections
List of current members of the United States House of Representatives
Third-party members of the United States House of Representatives
U.S. representative bibliography (congressional memoirs)
Women in the United States House of Representatives
References
Footnotes
^ Alaska (for its primary elections only), California, and Washington additionally utilize a nonpartisan blanket primary, and Mississippi uses the two-round system, for their respective primary elections.
^ Louisiana uses a Louisiana primary.
^ The number of the majority party's voting representatives in the House in excess of the minimum number required to have an absolute majority of voting representatives.
Citations
^ a b See Public Law 62-5 of 1911, though Congress has the authority to change that number.
^ "Explainer: Why Does The U.S. House Have 435 Members?". NPR. April 20, 2021. Archived from the original on March 29, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2022.
^ United States House of Representatives Archived June 24, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Ballotpedia. Accessed November 23, 2016. "There are six states with only one representative: Alaska, Delaware, North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont and Wyoming."
^ Section 7 of Article 1 of the Constitution
^ Article 1, Section 2, and in the 12th Amendment
^ "Party In Power   Congress and Presidency   A Visual Guide To The Balance of Power In Congress, 1945 2008". Uspolitics.about.com. Archived from the original on November 1, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012.
^ a b c "Delegates of the Continental Congress Who Signed the United States Constitution" Archived January 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, United States House of Representatives. Accessed February 19, 2017. "While some believed the Articles should be 'corrected and enlarged as to accomplish the objects proposed by their institution,' the Virginia Plan called for completely replacing it with a strong central government based on popular consent and proportional representation.... The Virginia Plan received support from states with large populations such as Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and South Carolina. A number of smaller states, however, proposed the 'New Jersey Plan,' drafted by William Paterson, which retained the essential features of the original Articles: a unicameral legislature where all states had equal representation, the appointment of a plural executive, and a supreme court of limited jurisdiction.... The committee's report, dubbed the Great Compromise, ironed out many contentious points. It resolved the delegates  sharpest disagreement by prescribing a bicameral legislature with proportional representation in the House and equal state representation in the Senate. After two more months of intense debates and revisions, the delegates produced the document we now know as the Constitution, which expanded the power of the central government while protecting the prerogatives of the states."
^ Julian E. Zelizer, Burning Down the House: Newt Gingrich, the Fall of a Speaker, and the Rise of the New Republican Party (2020).
^ Balanced Budget: HR 2015, FY 1998 Budget Reconciliation / Spending; Tax Cut: HR 2014, FY 1998 Budget Reconciliation   Revenue
^ Neuman, Scott (November 3, 2010). "Obama, GOP Grapple With power shift". NPR. Archived from the original on June 10, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
^ Article I, Section 2.
^ "New House Majority Introduces Rules Changes". NPR. January 5, 2011. Archived from the original on February 6, 2011. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
^ See H.Res. 78, passed January 24, 2007. On April 19, 2007, the House of Representatives passed the DC House Voting Rights Act of 2007, a bill "to provide for the treatment of the District of Columbia as a Congressional district for purposes of representation in the House of Representatives, and for other purposes" by a vote of 241 177. That bill proposes to increase the House membership by two, making 437 members, by converting the District of Columbia delegate into a member, and (until the 2010 census) grant one membership to Utah, which is the state next in line to receive an additional district based on its population after the 2000 Census. The bill was under consideration in the U.S. Senate during the 2007 session.
^ 2 U.S.C. 2c "no district to elect more than one Representative"
^ "Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act". Civil Rights Division Voting FAQ. US Dept. of Justice. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
^ Bazelon, Emily (November 9, 2012). "The Supreme Court may gut the Voting Rights Act and make gerrymandering much worse". Slate. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2013.
^ Eaton, Whitney M. (May 2006). "Where Do We Draw the Line? Partisan Gerrymandering and the State of Texas". University of Richmond Law Review. Archived from the original on October 9, 2013.
^ Burt Neuborne Madison's Music: On Reading the First Amendment, Archived December 14, 2019, at the Wayback Machine The New Press 2015
^ David Cole, 'Free Speech, Big Money, Bad Elections,' Archived March 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine in New York Review of Books, November 5, 2015, pp.24 25 p.24.
^ "Qualifications of Members of Congress". Onecle Inc. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ See Powell v. McCormack, a U.S. Supreme Court case from 1969
^ "The Youngest Representative in House History, William Charles Cole Claiborne | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. Archived from the original on October 3, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020.
^ 2 U.S.C. 2c
^ a b Schaller, Thomas (March 21, 2013). "Multi-Member Districts: Just a Thing of the Past?". University of Virginia Center for Politics. Archived from the original on October 8, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
^ "The 1967 Single-Member District Mandate". fairvote.org. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
^ Krehbiel-Burton, Lenzy (August 23, 2019). "Citing treaties, Cherokees call on Congress to seat delegate from tribe". Tulsa World. Tulsa, Oklahoma. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2019.
^ "Expulsion, Censure, Reprimand, and Fine: Legislative Discipline in the House of Representatives" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 7, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2010.
^ Senate Legislative Process Archived April 4, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Senate . Retrieved February 3, 2010.
^ The Legislative Branch Archived January 20, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, The White House. Retrieved February 3, 2010.
^ Section 2 reads: "whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress."
^ Feerick, John. "Essays on Amendment XXV: Presidential Succession". The Heritage Guide to the Constitution. The Heritage Foundatio. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020.
^ "Salaries and Benefits of U.S. Congress Members". Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 24, 2014.
^ a b c Brudnick, Ida A. (January 4, 2012). "Congressional Salaries and Allowances" (PDF). CRS Report for Congress. United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 12, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2012.
^ "Senate Salaries since 1789". United States Senate. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2020.
^ Schaffer v. Clinton
^ Brudnick, Ida A. (June 28, 2011). "Congressional Salaries and Allowances". Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2011.
^ a b Congressional Research Service (August 8, 2019). "Retirement Benefits for Members of Congress". CRS Report for Congress. United States Senate.
^ Congressional Research Service. "Congressional Salaries and Allowances" (PDF). CRS Report for Congress. United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 12, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Annie L. Mach & Ada S. Cornell, Health Benefits for Members of Congress and Certain Congressional Staff Archived January 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Congressional Research Service, February 18, 2014.
^ Brudnick, Ida A. (September 27, 2017). Members' Representational Allowance: History and Usage (PDF). Washington D.C.: Congressional Research Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2017.
^ a b c d e Brudnick, Ida. "Congressional Salaries and Allowances" (PDF). Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 10, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
^ Article I Archived January 28, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School . Retrieved February 3, 2010.
^ "The Rostrum". U.S. House of Representatives. Office of the Historian. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "Explore Capitol Hill: House Chamber". Architect of the Capitol. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Ritchie, Donald A. (2006). The Congress of the United States: A Student Companion (3 ed.). New York, New York: Oxford University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-19-530924-9. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2015.Lowenthal, Alan. "Congress U". U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015."What's in the House Chamber". Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2013.
^ "Access to Congress". Digital Media Law Project. Berkman Center for Internet and Society. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015."U.S. House of Representatives". The District. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Davis, Susan (March 19, 2014). "Not everyone is a fan of C-SPAN cameras in Congress". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "Basic Training: Roadblocks at the Final Legislative Stages". House of Representatives. Republican Committee on Rules. Archived from the original on April 1, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Larchuk, Travis (January 5, 2011). "Passing One Of Many, Many Gavels". NPR. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "Bill Hopper". U.S. House of Representatives. Office of the Historian. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2015."Legislative FAQ: 7. How do Representatives introduce bills?". U.S. House of Representatives. Office of the Clerk. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Bedini, Silvio (1997). The Mace and the Gavel: Symbols of Government in America, Volume 87, Part 4. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. pp. 23 26. ISBN 978-0-87169-874-2. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2015.
^ "CRS Annotated Constitution". Cornell University Law School. Legal Information Institute. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "House Practice: A Guide to the Rules, Precedents and Procedures of the House, Chapter 43: Quorums" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 743. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2019.
^ "Legislative FAQ: 6. How do Representatives obtain permission to speak?". U.S. House of Representatives. Office of the Clerk. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives The House Floor". Clerk.house.gov. Archived from the original on July 2, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2010.
^ "The House Explained". House.gov. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2011.
^ Sessions, Pete. "About the Committee on Rules History and Processes". U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Rules. Archived from the original on January 16, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Hudiburg, Jane A. (July 23, 2018). House Voting Procedures: Forms and Requirements (PDF). Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2018.
^ a b c House Practice: A Guide to the Rules, Precedents and Procedures of the House, Chapter 58. Voting. U.S. Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2015."The Legislative Process: House Floor". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Singer, Michelle (March 29, 2007). "Under the Influence". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Henry, Ed; Barrett, Ted (July 28, 2005). "House narrowly approves CAFTA". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ "Refinery Bill Passes Amid Partisan Split". FOX News. Associated Press. October 8, 2005. Archived from the original on February 28, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.
^ Sidlow, Edward; Henschen, Beth (2009). America at Odds, Alternate Edition (6 ed.). Belmont, California: Wadsworth Cengage Learning. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-495-50370-5. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2015.
^ "Committee on Rules   A History". Archived from the original on July 30, 2008.
^ "Rules   Committee on Standards of Official Conduct" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 7, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2010.
^ Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics (1885, Boston: Houghton, Mifflin)
^ Wilson, Woodrow. Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics Archived February 12, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, pp. 155 156 (Transaction Publishers 2002) (quotation marks omitted).
^ "Party Breakdown". Archived from the original on August 5, 2022. Retrieved September 3, 2022.
Sources and further reading
Abramowitz, Alan I.; Saunders, Kyle L. (1998). Ideological Realignment in the US Electorate. Vol. 60. Journal of Politics. pp. 634 652.
Adler, E. Scott (2002). Why Congressional Reforms Fail: Reelection and the House Committee System. . Univ. of Chicago Press.
Albert, Carl; Goble, Danney (1990). Little Giant: The Life and Times of Speaker Carl Albert. Univ. of Oklahoma Press., Speaker in the 1970s
Barone, Michael; Ujifusa, Grant (2005). The Almanac of American Politics 2006: The Senators, the Representatives and the Governors: Their Records and Election Results, Their States and Districts., Published every two years since 1975; enormous detail on every state and district and member.
Barry, John M. (1989). The Ambition and the Power: The Fall of Jim Wright. A True Story of Washington. Viking. ISBN 9780670819249., Speaker in the 1980s
Berard, Stanley P. (2001). Southern Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives. Univ. of Oklahoma Press.
Berman, Daniel M. (1964). In Congress Assembled: The Legislative Process in the National Government. London: The Macmillan Company.,
Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774 2005. Washington: Government Printing Office. 2005., Prepared by the Office of the Clerk, Office of History and Preservation, United States House of Representatives. Contains biographical entries for every Member of Congress. Also online at Biographical Directory Archived November 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
Brady, David W. (1973). Congressional Voting in a Partisan Era: A Study of the McKinley Houses and a Comparison to the Modern House of Representatives. Univ. Press of Kansas.
Brady, David W.; McCubbins, Mathew D. (2002). Party, Process, and Political Change in Congress: New Perspectives on the History of Congress.
Congressional Quarterly, massive, highly detailed summary of Congressional activity, and major executive and judicial decisions; based on Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report and the annual CQ almanac.
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1945 1964 (1965)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1965 1968 (1969)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1969 1972 (1973)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1973 1976 (1977)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1977 1980 (1981)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1981 1984 (1985)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1985 1988 (1989)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1989 1992 (1993)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1993 1996 (1998)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1997 2001 (2002)
Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 2001 2004: A Review of Government and Politics: 107th and 108th Congresses (2005)
Congressional Quarterly's Guide to Congress (5th ed.). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press. 2000.,
Cooper, Joseph (1970). The Origins of the Standing Committees and the Development of the Modern House. Rice Univ. Press.
Cox, Gary W.; McCubbins, Mathew D. (1993). Legislative Leviathan: Party Government in the House. Univ. of California Press.
DeGregorio, Christine A. (1997). Networks of Champions: Leadership, Access, and Advocacy in the U.S. House of Representatives. Univ. of Michigan Press.
Dierenfield, Bruce J. (1987). Keeper of the Rules: Congressman Howard W. Smith of Virginia. Univ. Press of Virginia. ISBN 9780813910680., leader of Conservative coalition 1940 66
Farrell, John A. (2001). Tip O'Neill and the Democratic Century. Little, Brown. ISBN 9780316260497., Democratic Speaker in the 1980s
Gertzog, Irwin J. (1984). Congressional Women: Their Recruitment, Treatment, and Behavior. Praeger.
Hardeman, D. B.; Bacon, Donald C. (1987). Rayburn: A Biography. Texas Monthly Press.
Hatzenbuehler, Ronald L. (1972). "Party Unity and the Decision for War in the House of Representatives in 1812". William and Mary Quarterly. 29 (3): 367 90. doi:10.2307/1923870. JSTOR 1923870.
Hechler, Ken (1980). Toward the Endless Frontier: History of the Committee on Science and Technology, 1959 79. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Henig, Gerald S. (1973). Henry Winter Davis: Antebellum and Civil War Congressman from Maryland., Radical leader in Civil War era
Hibbing, John R. (1991). Congressional Careers: Contours of Life in the U.S. House of Representatives. Univ. of North Carolina Press.
Jacobs, John (1995). A Rage for Justice: The Passion and Politics of Phillip Burton. Univ. of California Press., leader of liberal Democrats in the 1970s
Jacobson, Gary C. (1990). The Electoral Origins of Divided Government: Competition in U.S. House Elections, 1946 1988. Westview.
Kiewiet, D. Roderick; McCubbins, Mathew D. (1991). The Logic of Delegation: Congressional Parties and the Appropriations Process. Univ. of Chicago Press.
Klingman, Peter D. (1976). Josiah Walls: Florida's Black Congressman of Reconstruction. Univ. Press of Florida.
Grant de Pauw, Linda; Bickford, Charlene Bangs; Bowling, Kenneth R., eds. (1992 2006). Documentary History of the First Federal Congress of the United States of America, March 4, 1789   March 3, 1791., 14 volumes of primary documents
Lowitt, Richard (1963). George W. Norris: The Making of a Progressive, 1861 1912. Vol. 1. Syracuse Univ. Press., leader of Republican insurgents in 1910
Margulies, Herbert F. (1996). Reconciliation and Revival: James R. Mann and the House Republicans in the Wilson Era. . Greenwood.
Merriner, James L. (1999). Mr. Chairman: Power in Dan Rostenkowski's America. Southern Illinois Univ. Press.
Patterson, James (1967). Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal: The Growth of the Conservative Coalition in Congress, 1933 39.
Price, David E. (1992). The Congressional Experience: A View from the Hill. Westview., Political scientist who served in House.
Remini, Robert V. (1992). Henry Clay: Statesman for the Union.. Speaker for most of 1811 1825
Rohde, David W. (1991). Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. Univ. of Chicago Press.
Rohde, David W.; Shepsle, Kenneth A. (1987). "Leaders and Followers in the House of Representatives: Reflections on Woodrow Wilson's Congressional Government". Congress & the Presidency. 14 (2): 111 133. doi:10.1080/07343468709507958.
Schickler, Eric (2001). Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional Innovation and the Development of the U.S. Congress.
Schooley, C. Herschel (1977). Missouri's Cannon in the House. Marceline, Missouri: Walsworth., Chaired Appropriations in the 1960s
Shelley II, Mack C. (1983). The Permanent Majority: The Conservative Coalition in the United States Congress.
Sinclair, Barbara (1982). Congressional Realignment, 1925 1978. Univ. of Texas Press.
Sinclair, Barbara (1995). Legislators, Leaders, and Lawmaking: The U.S. House of Representatives in the Postreform Era. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. ISBN 9780801849558.
Steinberg, Alfred (1975). Sam Rayburn: A Biography. Hawthorn. ISBN 9780801552106., popular biography
Stewart, Charles H., III (1989). Budget Reform Politics: The Design of the Appropriations Process in the House of Representatives, 1865 1921. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Story, Joseph (1891). Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States (2 vol.). Boston: Brown & Little.
Strahan, Randall; Moscardelli, Vincent G. (2000). "The Clay Speakership Revisited". Polity. 32 (4): 561 593. doi:10.2307/3235293. JSTOR 3235293. S2CID 155152645., uses roll call analysis
Strahan, Randall (1990). New Ways and Means: Reform and Change in a Congressional Committee. Univ. of North Carolina Press.
Trefousse, Hans L. (1997). Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century Egalitarian., majority leader in the 1860s
Valelly, Richard M.,  The Reed Rules and Republican Party Building A New Look,  Studies in American Political Development, 23 (Oct. 2009), 115 42. online[dead link]
VanBeek, Stephen D. (1995). Post-Passage Politics: Bicameral Resolution in Congress. Univ. of Pittsburgh Press.
Waller, Robert A. (1977). Rainey of Illinois: A Political Biography, 1903 34. Univ. of Illinois Press., Democratic Speaker 1932 1934
Wilson, Woodrow (1885). Congressional Government. New York: Houghton Mifflin.,
Zelizer, Julian E. (2006). On Capitol Hill : The Struggle to Reform Congress and its Consequences, 1948 2000.
Surveys
Currie, James T. The United States House of Representatives. Krieger, 1988.
MacNeil, Neil (1963). Forge of Democracy: The House of Representatives. New York: D. McKay.
Peters, Ronald M., Jr (1997). The American Speakership: The Office in Historical Perspective (2nd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-5758-4.
Polsby, Nelson W. (2004). How Congress Evolves: Social Bases of Institutional Change. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516195-3.
Poole, Keith T.; Rosenthal, Howard (1997). Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514242-6.
Remini, Robert V. (2006). The House: The History of the House of Representatives. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-088434-5.
Sinclair, Barbara (1983). Majority Leadership in the U.S. House. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-2933-8.
Julian E. Zelizer, ed. (2004). The American Congress: The Building of Democracy. New York: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-17906-0.
Zelizer, Julian E. Burning Down the House: Newt Gingrich, the Fall of a Speaker, and the Rise of the New Republican Party (Penguin, 2020), focus on Jim Wright and Newt Gingrich in 1990s.
External links
Listen to this article (32 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 4 August 2006 (2006-08-04), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
Official website 
Clerk of the House of Representatives
Chief Administrative Office of the House
Office of the majority leader
Office of the speaker of the House
Official list of current members
Rules of the House
Legislative information and archives for US House and Senate, via Congress.gov
Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774 to Present
A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787 1825 Archived July 25, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
Complete Downloadable List of U.S. Representative Contact Information, via AggData LLC
Information about U.S. Congressional Bills and Resolutions
vteUnited States Congress
House of Representatives
Senate
Joint session
(117th 118th 119th)
Lists of United States Congress
Members and leadersMembershipMembers
By length of service
By shortness of service
Youngest members
Non-voting members
Unseated members
New members
98th (1983)
99th (1985)
100th (1987)
101st (1989)
102nd (1991)
103rd (1993)
104th (1995)
105th (1997)
106th (1999)
107th (2001)
108th (2003)
109th (2005)
110th (2007)
111th (2009)
112th (2011)
113th (2013)
114th (2015)
115th (2017)
116th (2019)
117th (2021)
118th (2023)
Senate
Members
seniority
Dean
Former
Expelled or censured
Classes
Born outside the U.S.
Resigned
Appointed
Switched parties
House
Members
seniority
Dean
Former
Expelled, censured, and reprimanded
Served a single term
Switched parties
Elected but did not serve
LeadersSenate
President
list
President pro tempore
list
Leaders
Democratic Caucus
Chair
Secretary
Policy Committee Chair
Republican Conference
Chair
Vice-Chair
Policy Committee Chair
House
Speaker
list
Leaders
Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group
Democratic Caucus
Republican Conference
Districts
List
Apportionment
Gerrymandering
GroupsCongressional caucus
Caucuses of the United States Congress
Ethnic and racial
African-American members
Senate
House
Black Caucus
Arab and Middle Eastern members
Asian Pacific American members
Asian Pacific American Caucus
Hispanic and Latino members
list
Hispanic Caucus
Hispanic Conference
Native American members
Gender and sexual identity
LGBT members
Equality Caucus
Women
Senate
House
Issues Caucus
current House
Occupation
Physicians
Religion
Buddhist members
Hindu members
Jewish members
Mormon (LDS) members
Muslim members
Quaker members
Related
By length of service historically
Current members by wealth
From multiple states
Died in office
1790 1899
1900 1949
1950 1999
2000 present
Killed or wounded in office
Party switchers
Slave owners
Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, mediaPowers
Article I
Copyright
Commerce (Dormant)
Contempt of Congress
Declaration of war
Impeachment
Inquiries
Trial
Naturalization
"Necessary and Proper"
Power of enforcement
Taxing/spending
Privileges
Salaries
Franking
Immunity
Procedure
Act of Congress
list
Appropriation bill
Bill
Blue slip
Budget process
Censure
Closed sessions
House
Senate
Cloture
Concurrent resolution
Continuing resolution
Dear Colleague letter
Discharge petition
Enrolled bill
Expulsion
Joint resolution
Joint session
list
Lame-duck session
Magic minute
Majority of the majority (Hastert Rule)
Multiple referral
House procedures
Quorum call
Reconciliation
Rider
Saxbe fix
Sponsorship
Suspension of the rules
Unanimous consent
Veto
Line-item veto
Pocket veto
Senate-specific
Advice and consent
Classes
Executive communication
Executive session
Filibuster
Jefferson's Manual
Senate Journal
Morning business
Nuclear option
Presiding Officer
Recess appointment
Reconciliation
Riddick's Senate Procedure
Senate hold
Senatorial courtesy
Seniority
Standing Rules
Tie-breaking votes
Traditions
Treaty Clause
Committees
Chairman and ranking member
Of the Whole
Conference
Discharge petition
Hearings
Markup
Oversight
List (Joint)
List (House)
List (Senate)
Select and special
Standing
Subcommittees
Items
Gavels
Mace of the House
Seal of the Senate
History
House history
Memoirs
Speaker elections
Senate history
Election disputes
Memoirs
Continental Congress
Federal Hall (1789 1790)
Congress Hall (1790 1800)
Old Brick Capitol (1815 1819)
Biographical Directory
Divided government
Party divisions
Media
C-SPAN
Congressional Quarterly
The Hill
Politico
Roll Call
Capitol Complex (Capitol Hill)Legislativeoffices
Congressional staff
Gov. Accountability Office (GAO)
Comptroller General
Architect of the Capitol
Cap. Police
Board
Cap. Guide Service
Cap. Guide Board
Congr. Budget Office (CBO)
Compliance
Library of Congress
Gov. Publishing Office (GPO)
Technology Assessment
OfficesSenate
Curator
Historical
Library
House
Congr. Ethics
Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations
Interparliamentary Affairs
Law Revision Counsel
Legislative Counsel
Library
EmployeesSenate
Secretary
Chaplain
Curator
Historian
Librarian
Pages
Parliamentarian
Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper
House
Chaplain
Chief Administrative Officer
Clerk
Doorkeeper
Floor Operations
Floor Services Chief
Historian
Pages
Board
Parliamentarian
Postmaster
Reading Clerk
Sergeant at Arms
Library ofCongress
Congressional Research Service
reports
Copyright Office
Register of Copyrights
Law Library
Poet Laureate
THOMAS
Adams Building
Jefferson Building
Madison Building
Gov.Publishing Office
Public Printer
Congressional Pictorial Directory
Congressional Record
Official Congressional Directory
U.S. Gov. Manual
Serial Set
Statutes at Large
United States Code
Capitol Building
Brumidi Corridors
Congressional Prayer Room
Crypt
Dome
Statue of Freedom
Rotunda
Hall of Columns
Statuary Hall
Visitor Center
The Apotheosis of Washington
Statue of Freedom
Declaration of Independence painting
Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States
Apotheosis of Democracy
Progress of Civilization Pediment
First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln
Surrender of General Burgoyne
Surrender of Lord Cornwallis
George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door
Revolutionary War Door
Columbus Doors
Washington at Princeton
Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way
VP's Room
VP Bust Collection
OfficebuildingsSenate
Dirksen
Hart
Mountains and Clouds
Russell
House
Building Commission
Cannon
Ford
Longworth
O'Neill
Rayburn
Otherfacilities
Botanic Garden
Health and Fitness Facility
House Recording Studio
Senate chamber
Old Senate Chamber
Old Supreme Court Chamber
Power Plant
Webster Page Residence
Subway
Related
Capitol Hill
United States Capitol cornerstone laying
vteLegislatures of the United StatesUnited States Congress
United States House of Representatives
United States Senate
State legislatures
Alabama (H, S)
Alaska (H, S)
Arizona (H, S)
Arkansas (H, S)
California (A, S)
Colorado (H, S)
Connecticut (H, S)
Delaware (H, S)
Florida (H, S)
Georgia (H, S)
Hawaii (H, S)
Idaho (H, S)
Illinois (H, S)
Indiana (H, S)
Iowa (H, S)
Kansas (H, S)
Kentucky (H, S)
Louisiana (H, S)
Maine (H, S)
Maryland (H, S)
Massachusetts (H, S)
Michigan (H, S)
Minnesota (H, S)
Mississippi (H, S)
Missouri (H, S)
Montana (H, S)
Nebraska
Nevada (A, S)
New Hampshire (H, S)
New Jersey (GA, S)
New Mexico (H, S)
New York (A, S)
North Carolina (H, S)
North Dakota (H, S)
Ohio (H, S)
Oklahoma (H, S)
Oregon (H, S)
Pennsylvania (H, S)
Rhode Island (H, S)
South Carolina (H, S)
South Dakota (H, S)
Tennessee (H, S)
Texas (H, S)
Utah (H, S)
Vermont (H, S)
Virginia (H, S)
Washington (H, S)
West Virginia (H, S)
Wisconsin (A, S)
Wyoming (H, S)
Other legislatures
District of Columbia
American Samoa (H, S)
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands (H, S)
Puerto Rico (H, S)
U.S. Virgin Islands
Legislative elections
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
List of U.S. state legislators
vteUnited States articlesHistoryBy period
1776 1789
1789 1849
1849 1865
1865 1918
1918 1945
1945 1964
1964 1980
1980 1991
1991 2008
2008 present
By event
Pre-colonial era
Colonial era
Stamp Act Congress
Thirteen Colonies
Continental Congress
Continental Association
United Colonies
military history
Founding Fathers
Halifax Resolves
Lee Resolution
Declaration of Independence
American Revolution
War
Treaty of Paris
Articles of Confederation
Perpetual Union
Confederation period
American frontier
Constitution
drafting and ratification
Bill of Rights
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial evolution
Mexican American War
Civil War
Reconstruction era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
Women's suffrage
Civil rights movement
1865 1896
1896 1954
1954 1968
Spanish American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II
home front
American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
LGBT Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991 2008)
September 11 attacks
War on Terror
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Great Recession
COVID-19 pandemic
By topic
Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic
debt ceiling
Inventions
before 1890
1890 1945
1946 1991
after 1991
Military
Postal
Technological and industrial
Geography
Territory
Contiguous United States
counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains
peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky
Sierra Nevada
National Park Service
National Parks
Regions
East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western
Longest rivers
Arkansas
Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Red (South)
Rio Grande
Yukon
Time
Water supply and sanitation
World Heritage Sites
PoliticsFederalExecutive
Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
powers
Public policy
Legislative
House of Representatives
current members
Speaker
Senate
current members
President pro tempore
Vice President
Judicial
District courts
Courts of appeals
Supreme Court
Law
Bill of Rights
civil liberties
Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution
federalism
preemption
separation of powers
civil rights
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports
Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Uniformed
Armed Forces
Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Space Force
Coast Guard
National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps
51st state
Political status of Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico statehood movement
District of Columbia statehood movement
Elections
Electoral College
Foreign relations
foreign policy
Secession movements
(Hawaiian sovereignty movement)
Ideologies
Anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism
Local government
Parties
Democratic
Republican
Third parties
Red states and blue states
Scandals
State government
governor
state legislature
state court
Imperial presidency
Corruption
Economy
By sector
Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Science and technology
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
by state
Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street
SocietyCulture
Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Death care
Cremation
Women
Demographics
Economic issues
affluence
eviction
home-ownership
household income
income inequality
labor unions
middle class
personal income
poverty
standard of living
wealth
Education
attainment
literacy
Family
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Great American Novel
Health
healthcare
health insurance
Holidays
Homelessness
Housing
Human rights
Languages
American English
Indigenous languages
ASL
Black American Sign Language
HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish
Literature
Media
journalism
internet
newspapers
radio
television
Music
Names
National symbols
Columbia
Mount Rushmore
Statue of Liberty
Uncle Sam
People
Philosophy
Political ideologies
Race
Religion
Sexuality
adolescent
Social class
Society
Sports
Theater
Transportation
Video games
Visual art
Social class
Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Standard of living
Issues
Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime
incarceration
Criticism of government
Discrimination
affirmative action
antisemitism
hair texture
intersex rights
Islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental issues
Environmental movement
Climate change
Environmental education
Gun politics
Healthcare
abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking
Human rights
Immigration
illegal
International rankings
National security
Mass surveillance
Terrorism
Separation of church and state
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteLower houses of national legislaturesFederal
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Canada
Ethiopia
India
Malaysia
Mexico
Nepal
Nigeria
Pakistan
Russia
Somalia
South Sudan
Sudan
Switzerland
United States
Unitary
Algeria
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belarus
Belize
Bhutan
Bolivia
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chile
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eswatini
France
Gabon
Grenada
Haiti
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Mauritania
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Netherlands
Oman
Palau
Paraguay
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Tajikistan
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Yemen
Zimbabwe
Dependent andother territories
American Samoa
Bermuda
Isle of Man
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Non-UN states
Somaliland
Defunct
Cuba
Fiji
Guyana
Hungary
Kingdom of Ireland
Irish Free State
South Korea
Nicaragua
Northern Ireland
Peru
Portugal (Kingdom)
Portugal (Republic)
Sweden
Venezuela
Related
Bicameralism
Unicameralism
Tricameralism
Tetracameralism
List of legislatures by country
National upper houses
National bicameral legislatures
National unicameral legislatures
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
2
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Australia
Korea
Croatia
Portugal
Academics
CiNii
2
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Trove
Other
SNAC
IdRef
Coordinates: 38 53 20 N 77 0 32 W  /  38.88889 N 77.00889 W  / 38.88889; -77.00889
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_House_of_Representatives&oldid=1149620897"