Cheese made from the milk of goats
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Goat cheese" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 Various Goat cheeses
 Goat cheese on bread
Goat cheese, goat's cheese, or ch vre (/ vr / or / v/; from French fromage de ch vre 'goat cheese'),[1] is cheese made from goat's milk. Goats were among the first animals to be domesticated for producing food.[2] Goat cheese is made around the world with a variety of recipes, giving many different styles of cheese, from fresh and soft to aged and hard.[3]
Properties[edit]
History[edit]
Goats produce high quality, nutrition-rich milk under even the most difficult environments making them valuable to arid or mountainous areas where cows and sheep can not survive.[4] Goats were one of the earliest animals domesticated to suit human needs- more specifically milk production- going back to 8,000 B.C., 10,000 years ago.[2] Goat cheese has been made for at least as far back as 5,000 B.C.[5] Meanwhile, the first documented proof of humans making cheese is 7,500 years ago in Poland.
Nutritional value[edit]
Goat milk has a higher proportion of medium-chain fatty acids such as caproic and caprylic which contributes to the characteristic tart flavor of the cheese.[6] It also makes goat milk and cheeses more easily digestible.[7]
Goat milk and, therefore, cheeses contain anti-inflammatory enzymes, probiotics, antioxidants, proteins, and lipids and help maintain a healthy metabolism. These fatty acids take their name from the Latin for "goat": capra.[8] It is also high in calcium, vitamins A and K, phosphororus, thiamin and niacin.[4] Overall, the consumption of 60 g/day of cheese (both control and enriched), within the context of a balanced hypocaloric diet and recommendations for physical activity, was effective for the reduction of body weight, BMI and waist circumference[9]
Process[edit]
Goat cheese is made like other cheeses. The milk is filtered to remove unwanted bacteria or deposits. A curdling starter agent is added, which can be rennet, or one or more starter bacteria that will affect the curds' size and eventually the cheese's consistency. Some examples of starters are Lactococcus Lactis, Lactis, Lactococcus Lactis subsp. cremoris, and Streptococcus thermophilus. Next, the cheese is molded and separated from the whey (the uncurdled liquid part of the milk). The curds are then molded, dried, flavored and cured. Any variations- the type of starter, the time or pressure of the draining, the temperature and duration of the curing process- will change the texture (soft, semi-hard, hard) and the flavor.[10]
Regional varieties[edit]
See also: List of goat cheeses
Asia[edit]
China[edit]
Rubing is a fresh goat cheese from Yunnan Province, resembling the Indian paneer, a cow's cheese.
Shosha   a pungent cheese and staple food in Tibetan cuisine of the Tibet Autonomous Region that is often made from animals suited to the climate such as goat and yak.
Japan[edit]
Yagi Cheese is a goat cheese made in Japan. Yagi is the Japanese word for goat.[11]
Philippines[edit]
 Kesong puti cheese. Moisture content can also vary, ranging from almost gelatinous to pressed and firm. It can be eaten as is, paired with bread (usually pandesal), or used in various dishes in Filipino cuisine
Kesong puti is a Filipino soft, unaged, white cheese made from unskimmed carabao milk and salt curdled with vinegar, citrus juices, or sometimes rennet. It can also be made with goat or cow milk. It has a mild salty and tart flavor. When an acidifying agent is used, it resembles queso blanco or paneer. When rennet is used, it resembles buffalo mozzarella. The name, also spelled (Quesong Puti, is Tagalog for "white cheese") and is its name in the provinces of Laguna and Bulacan. In Cavite it is known as kesilyo (also kasilyo or quesillo); while in northern Cebu it is known as queseo or kiseyo.
Middle East[edit]
Akkawi cheese ((Arabic: :   )), romanized: jubna  akk w , also Akawi, Akawieh and Ackawi) is a white brine cheese named after the city of Akka (Acre, present-day Israel).[3]
Darfyieh is a flavorful cheese that comes specifically from baladi goats and is treated as a delicacy in Dargyieh.[3]
Djamid or Jameed is an unripened, hard cheese with a salt encrusted rind popular in Jordan and Syria.[3]
Jibneh Arabieh (Arabic:    ) (also jibni) is a soft white cheese found all over the Middle East. It is particularly popular in the Persian Gulf region. The cheese has a mild taste similar to feta but less salty. The heritage of the product started with Bedouins using goat or sheep milk; however, current practice is to use cow's milk to make the cheese. Jibneh Arabieh is used for cooking, or simply as a table cheese.[3]
Labneh is consumed in many parts of the world. It is primarily produced in Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Jordan but also throughout much of the Middle-east. It can be served with olive-oil, or seasoned with mint, eaten with salad or as dessert.[3]
Nabulsi cheese Nabulsi or naboulsi is one of a number of Palestinian white brined cheeses made in the Middle East and Palestine. Its name refers to its place of origin, Nablus and it is well known throughout the West Bank and surrounding regions. Nabulsi, along with Akkawi cheese, is one of the principal cheeses consumed in Jordan. It is produced primarily from sheep milk; alternatively, goat's milk may be used.
Europe[edit]
Armenia[edit]
 Goat cheese from Yeghegnadzor, Armenia
Yeghegnadzor goat cheese from Armenia.
Balkans[edit]
 Sirene cheese
Sirene cheese (Albanian: djath  i bardh ; Bulgarian:   [ sir n ]; Macedonian:  ; Serbian:  /sir) also known as "white brine sirene" (Bulgarian:      ) is a type of brined cheese made in the Balkans (South-Eastern Europe), especially popular in Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, North Macedonia, Romania, Albania, Greece and also in Israel and Lebanon. It is made of the milk of goats, sheep, or cows, or a mixture of these.
North Caucasia[edit]
Circassian cheese (Adyghe:     Adyghe pronunciation: [a d a q a ja], Russian:     adygeyskiy syr, is a cheese found across the North Caucasus, the Levant and other areas with a Circassian diaspora. The cheese is prepared with raw cow, sheep and/or goats milk (Adyghean cheese - only with cow milk) and molded into a wooden basket.
Circassian smoked cheese is a smoked low-fat Circassian cheese, especially produced in the eastern Marmara region of Turkey. It is light yellow or cream-colored with a thick crust. After curdling and straining, the bottom and top of the cheese are salted and it is smoked with pinewood or thick pitch pine in smoking rooms. This process makes the cheese both more flavorful and more long-lasting.
Cyprus[edit]
Anari (Greek:  , Turkish: nor) is a fresh mild whey cheese produced in Cyprus. Although much less known than other Cypriot cheeses (e.g. halloumi), it gained popularity following publicity.
Halloumi or haloumi (/h lu mi/, Greek:  , romanized: halo mi) is a traditional Cypriot cheese made from a mixture of goat's and sheep's milk, and sometimes also cow's milk.
Denmark[edit]
Rosa mundo.
Fenna mundo, Flora mundo, Geta mundo, Vita mundo.
Cumulu blue.
There are many different goat cheeses made in Denmark.
Finland[edit]
Leip juusto (bread cheese) or juustoleip  (Me nkieli: kahvijuusto; Swedish: kaffeost or br dost), also known in the United States as Finnish squeaky cheese, is a Finnish fresh cheese traditionally made from cow's beestings, rich milk from a cow that has recently calved. Reindeer or even goat milk can also be used. Commercially available versions are typically made from cow's milk, and they lack some of the colour and flavour because of this. The cheese originally comes from Southern Ostrobothnia, Northern Finland, and Kainuu.
France[edit]
 Chevre with lavender and wild fennel
France produces a great number of goat milk cheeses, especially in the Loire Valley and Poitou.
Chevre is a soft, creamy, melt-in-mouth cheese that can have a fruity taste to it. It is usually covered in a light colored rind or skin. It is not aged for very long.[3] It is sometimes served hot as ch vre chaud.
Banon cheese, Bucheron, Cab cou, Cathare, Chabis, Chaubier, Chavroux, Chabichou, Chevrotin, Clochette, Couronne Lochoise, Crottin de Chavignol, Faisselle, Montrachet (Burgundy), Montrachet Bourgogne, P lardon, Picodon, Pouligny Saint-Pierre, Pouligny-Saint-Pierre cheese, Rigotte de Condrieu, Rocamadour, Sainte-Maure de Touraine, Selles-sur-Cher cheese, Chabichou du Poitou, Valen ay, and Pyramide.
Greece[edit]
Feta is made primarily of ewe's milk, with up to 30% of goat milk. Sheep ( 70%) and goat per PDO; similar cheeses may contain cow or buffalo milk.[3]
Mizithra or myzithra is a whey cheese which can produced from the whey left over from goat cheeses. It is served either fresh or dried.[3]
Anthotyros (Greek:  ) or (Anthotyro in modern Greek, "flowery cheese") is a traditional fresh cheese is a whey cheese using the whey from Kefalotyri or Graviera production and can be made from milk from goats, sheep or a combination. There are dry Anthotyros and fresh Anthotyros. Dry Anthotyros is a matured cheese similar to Mizithra. Anthotyros is made with milk and whey milk. It is served fresh or dried. Anthotyros is produced in Greece, commonly in Thrace, Macedonia, the Ionian Islands and Crete.[3]
Manouri (Greek:  ) is a Greek semi-soft, fresh white mixed milk-whey cheese made from goat or sheep milk. It is produced primarily in Thessalia and Macedonia in central and northern Greece.[3]
Formaela (Greek:  ) is a hard cheese produced exclusively in Arachova, Greece. It is famous throughout Greece and has been registered in the European Union as a protected designation of origin since 1996. Formaela is prepared mainly from sheep's milk or goat's milk, has a hard and cohesive shell and is a light yellow color, without holes.
Kasseri or Ka ar (Greek:  , Turkish: ka ar is a medium-hard or hard pale yellow cheese made from pasteurised or unpasteurised sheep milk and at most 20% goat's milk. Kasseri is of semi-hard to hard consistency, smooth rather than crumbly, chewy, and with a hard rind. It belongs to the pasta filata family of cheeses, which includes fresh cheeses like mozzarella and aged ones like Provolone or Caciocavallo. Kasseri is a protected designation of origin, according to which the cheese must be made in the Greek provinces of Thessaly, Macedonia, Lesbos, or Xanthi, but a similar type of cheese is found in Turkey, Romania, and the Balkans, where it is known as kashkaval. The same cheese is made with cow's milk, but in that case it cannot be legally sold as kasseri in the EU and is instead sold under names that are particular to each producer.[3]
Kefalotyri or kefalotiri (Greek:  , Turkish: talar peyniri) is a hard, salty white cheese made from sheep milk or goat's milk (or both) in Greece and Cyprus.  A similar cheese Kefalograviera, also made from sheep or goat milk (or both), is sometimes sold outside Greece and Cyprus as Kefalotyri. Depending on the mixture of milk used in the process the color can vary between yellow and white.[3]
Xynomizithra or xynomyzithra (Greek:  ) is a Greek whey cheese with some added milk; it is a sour variant of Mizithra, and made from ewes' and/or goats' milk. The proportion of full-cream milk is about 15%.[3]
Xynotyro or Xynotyri is an unpasteurized whey cheese from Greece made from sheep's milk or goat's milk, with a hard and flaky consistency, a pungent aroma and a yogurt-like sweet and sour taste. "Xynotyri" means "sour cheese" in Greek. Traditionally, the cheese is drained and cured in reed baskets or allowed to mature in bags made of animal skin. Cow's milk is not utilized in the production.[3]
Ireland[edit]
Ardagh Castle.
Ardsallagh Goat Farm a lot of different Irish cheese.
Clonmore Cheese.
Cooleeney Farmhouse Cheese.
Corleggy Cheese.
Gleann Gabhra.
Glyde Farm Produce Irish cheese.
St Tola.
Tullyboy.
Italy[edit]
 Ricotta cheese
Caprino is a term encompassing at least 33 different goat milk cheeses produced in Italy, equivalent to the French ch vre[12]
Acidino (tr. slightly acid), produced in Veneto
Agr  di Valtorta, produced in Lombardy
Formaggio di capra di Lagundo (or Algunder Ziegenk se), produced in South Tyrol
Canestrato di Moliterno Stagionato in Fondaco, produced mixing sheep and goat milk in Apulia and Basilicata
Casu axedu (also called Frughe, Frue or Merca) produced in Sardinia
Cavrin (or Cevrin) di Coazze, produced in Piedmont
Ircano, produced in Sardinia
Salignon, a smoked cheese produced in the lower Aosta Valley
Mozzarella made of Italian Mediterranean buffalo traditionally; cattle cows in all 167 Italian regions; in some areas also sheep and goat
Ricotta is produced from the whey that from cheesemaking and whey cheese made from sheep, cow, goat, or Italian water buffalo milk whey left over from the production of other cheeses. Ricotta means 're-cooked', and is made by reheating the whey, until the clotted cheese curds rise to the top, where they are skimmed and molded.
Robiola is an Italian soft-ripened cheese of the Stracchino family.  It is from the Langhe region and made with varying proportions of cow's, goat's, and sheep's milk.  One theory is that the cheese gets its name from the town of Robbio in the province of Pavia; another that the name comes from the word rubeole (ruddy) because of the color of the seasoned rind. Varieties of Robiola are produced across Piedmont from the provinces of Cuneo, Asti and Alessandria and into Lombardy. It is one of the specialties of the Aosta Valley.
Caciotta, from the Tuscan cacciola, is a type of cheese produced in Italy from the milk of cows, sheep, goats, or water buffalo. Cacciotta has more than a dozen variations.
Caciotta marchigiana.
Bastardo del Grappa is a traditional cheese produced in the foothills of Monte Grappa massif and in the provinces of Treviso, Belluno, and Vicenza, in Italy. Bastardo del Grappa is a product related genuinely to the area of Monte Grappa massif and around Borso del Grappa, Crespano del Grappa, Paderno del Grappa, Possagno, Cavaso del Tomba, Alano di Piave, Quero, Feltre, Seren del Grappa, Arsi , Cismon del Grappa, San Nazario, Solan, Pove del Grappa, and Romano d'Ezzelino.[3]
Malta[edit]
 A selection of fresh and cured  bejniet
A  bejna is a small goat's- or sheep's-milk cheese. Various types are found which include; fresh (friski or tal-ilma), sundried (moxxa, bajda or ta' G awdex), salt cured (ma sula), peppered (tal-b ar) and seasoned (im awra).
Gbejna friska - a fresh cheeselet similar to ricotta in texture - native to Maltese Islands.
Gbejna tal bzar - same as above but aged and coated in black pepper - native to Maltese Islands.
Gbejna mghoxxa - same as the fresh cheeslet but left to air dry - native to Maltese Islands.
Netherlands[edit]
The Westerkwartier, the region west of the city of Groningen, has a relatively large concentration of organic goat-cheese farms. Well known goat cheeses from this region are Machedoux and Quiorio, brie-like cheeses served in restaurants all over the Netherlands and in Belgium and northern Germany. In other parts of the Netherlands, goat cheese is usually made in the Gouda style.
Norway[edit]
Geitost, which means goat cheese, is brown and made from goat milk and whey. Other brown cheeses, such as Brunost ("Brown cheese"), may also be made from cow milk whey, goat milk whey or a combination.
Sn frisk is a fresh goat milk cheese, often made with added flavorings.
Portugal[edit]
Castelo Branco is a Portuguese goat milk cheese. Castelo Branco (Portuguese: Queijo de Castelo Branco) is a cheese named after the city of the same name in Portugal, the main city of the district where it is produced. Since 1996 Castelo Branco cheese has had a Protected designation of origin (PDO), being one of the three Beira Baixa cheeses (PDO) (Portuguese: Queijos da Beira Baixa DOP). The cheese is made from goat or sheep milk, and has a soft texture. Typically, the cheese takes 40 days to mature when made with goat's milk, and 50 days when made with ewe's milk. The fat content is around 45% and the cheese is usually a close-to-white colour.
Tr s-os-Montes, (Portuguese: Queijo de Cabra Transmontano) is a goat milk cheese from Alto Tr s-os-Montes, Norte Region, Portugal.
Santar m cheese is a goat cheese from Portugal produced in several different regions, most notably in the Santar m district and in Serra de Santo Ant nio in the Ribatejo province of Portugal.
Russia[edit]
Adygeisky cheese is made from sheep's, goat's, or cow's whole milk.
Serbia[edit]
Pule cheese or magare i sir, is a Serbian cheese made from 60% Balkan donkey milk and 40% goat milk.
Spain[edit]
Mat  is a Catalan fresh cheese made from cow's or goat's milk.
Garrotxa is a firm goat cheese originally from Garrotxa in northern Catalonia.
Nevat, a soft-ripened goat cheese from Catalonia.
Cabrales cheese (Spanish: Queso de Cabrales) is a blue cheese made in the artisan tradition by rural dairy farmers in Asturias, Spain. This cheese can be made from pure, unpasteurized cow s milk or blended in the traditional manner with goat and/or sheep milk, which lends the cheese a stronger, spicier flavor. All of the milk used in the production of Cabrales must come exclusively from herds raised in a small zone of production in Asturias, in the mountains of the Picos de Europa.
Manchego (officially Spanish: queso manchego, pronounced [ keso ma t ego]) is a cheese made in the La Mancha region of Spain from the milk of sheep of the Manchega breed. It is aged between 60 days and 2 years. Manchego has a firm and compact consistency and a buttery texture, often containing small, unevenly distributed air pockets. The colour of the cheese varies from white to ivory-yellow, and the inedible rind from yellow to brownish-beige. The cheese has a distinctive flavour, well developed but not too strong, creamy with a slight piquancy, and leaves an aftertaste that is characteristic of sheep's milk.
Majorero cheese is a goat milk cheese from the Canary Island of Fuerteventura.
Payoyo cheese (Spanish: queso payoyo or queso de cabra payoya) is a type of cheese made from the milk of Payoya goats and Merina grazaleme a sheep in Villaluenga del Rosario and other areas of the Sierra de Grazalema, Spain. It began production in 1997 and has become a staple of Spanish delicatessen.
Pic n Bejes-Tresviso is a blue cheese from Cantabria, in the north of Spain. It has been protected under Denominaci n de Origen (DO) legislation since 1994, prior to which it was traditionally known as Pic n de Tresviso and Queso Pic n de Bejes. The designated area centers in the Li bana valley and production is restricted to the municipalities of Potes, Pesaguero, Cabez n de Li bana, Camale o, Cillorigo de Li bana, Pe arrubia, Tresviso and Vega de Li bana.
Turkey[edit]
 Varieties of tulum, center "Otlu tulum peyniri", or Tulum with herbs, in Ankara
Tulum cheese is a goat cheese made in Turkey. (Turkish: tulum peyniri) is a traditional Turkish goat cheese ripened in a goatskin casing, called tulum in Turkish. Due to its unique flavor, it is preferred as meze to rak  in Turkey.
Sepet cheese and Ka ar cheese are produced from goat milk and marketed as Goat Sepet cheese and Goat Ka ar cheese.
Sutdiyari 'white cheese' is a cheese produced from sheep, cow, or goat milk.
Beyaz peynir 'white cheese' is a brined cheese produced from sheep, cow, or goat milk.
Ezine Cheese, originating from Ezine,  anakkale, is a type of Beyaz Peynir including at least 40% goat milk according to the geographical protection rules.[13]
Dolaz cheese is a traditional cheese produced from whey by nomad (Karakoyunlu, Hayta, Honaml , Sar ke ili Y r ks) in the Lakes region (Isparta, Afyon and Antalya) in Turkey. It is generally made from ewe's and goat's milk.
Kars gravyer cheese is a Turkish cheese similar to Gruy re. It is usually made with pure cow's milk or a mixture of cow and goat's milk.
Van herbed cheese (Turkish: Van otlu peyniri) is a type of cheese made out of sheep's or cow's milk. Ripened cheese varieties containing herbs are traditional in Turkey and have been manufactured for more than 200 years in the east and southeast of the country.
Ukraine[edit]
 Bryndza cheese
 Bryndza cheese on a piece of bread
Bryndza (from Romanian br nz     cheese) is a sheep milk cheese made across much of East-Central Europe, primarily in or around the Carpathian Mountains of Slovakia, Ukraine, Romania and southern Poland.[14] Bryndza cheese is creamy white in appearance, known for its characteristic strong smell and taste. The cheese is white, tangy, crumbly and slightly moist. It has characteristic odor and flavor with a notable taste of butyric acid. The overall flavor sensation begins slightly mild, then goes strong and finally fades to a salty finish. Recipes differ slightly across countries. This cheese can also be made with goat milk or cow milk.
United Kingdom[edit]
Harbourne Blue.
Pantysgawn is a Welsh goat milk cheese.
Capricorn is a Somerset goat milk cheese.
Gevrik is a goat's milk cheese from Cornwall. The word gevrik means 'little goat' in Cornish.
Tesyn is a smoked goat's milk cheese from Cornwall. Tesyn means 'cake' in Cornish.
Americas[edit]
Canada[edit]
Bouq  missaire.
Ch vre noir.
North and South America[edit]
Mexico[edit]
A ejo cheese (Queso A ejo).
Asadero cheese.
Cotija cheese.
Fresco cheese (Queso Fresco).
Manchego cheese.
Quesillo Oaxaca cheese.
United States[edit]
 Humboldt Fog
Capricious (cheese) is an aged goat's milk cheese made by the Achadinha Cheese Company in Petaluma, California.
Humboldt Fog is a mold-ripened goat cheese with a central line of edible white ash made in California by Cypress Grove Chevre.
Kunik is produced at Nettle Meadow Goat Farm in Thurman, New York, and made from goat and Jersey cow milk blend, mold-ripened with similar properties to Brie.
Venezuela[edit]
In Venezuela, specifically in the states of Falc n, Lara and the population of San Jose de Turgua in Miranda state, many types of goat cheese are produced using traditional methods. A variety of artisanal cheeses are manufactured by smaller producers.[15]
Australian and Oceanian[edit]
Australia[edit]
Buche Noir is freshly pressed curd from the Sydney region.
Africa[edit]
Egypt[edit]
 Domiati cheese
Domiati cheese, also referred to as white cheese (Egyptian Arabic:     gebna b a  [ ebn   be d ]), is a soft white salty cheese made primarily in Egypt, but also in Sudan and other Middle Eastern countries. Typically made from buffalo milk, cow milk, or a mixture, it can also be made from other milks, such as sheep, goat or camel milk. It is the most common Egyptian cheese. Unlike feta and other white cheeses, salt is added directly to the milk, before rennet is added. It is named after the seaport city of Damietta ( ).
Testouri cheese is a cheese made from sheep milk or goat milk.  It is often shaped like an orange, and is eaten fresh and lightly salted.  Testouri cheese is popular in North Africa and the Near East. Testouri is popular in East Africa and was introduced by the Ottomans after the 15th century.
South Africa[edit]
Bettie Bok an African cheese from South Africa.
Assegai is an Asiago-type cheese from South Africa. It originates from Foxenburg, South Africa. It is commonly eaten as a table cheese with crackers.
See also[edit]
Food portal
List of goat milk cheeses
List of cheeses
List of goat dishes
White cheese
References[edit]
^ ""goat" in French | Lingopolo". lingopolo.org. Retrieved 2021-09-29.
^ a b Sepe, Lucia; Arg ello, Anastasio (2019-07-18). "Recent advances in dairy goat products". Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences. 32 (8): 1306 1320. doi:10.5713/ajas.19.0487. ISSN 1011-2367. PMC 6668858. PMID 31357271.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Rubino, R., Morand-Fehr, P., Sepe, L. (2004). Atlas of goat products. Italy: La Biblioteca di Caseus. ISBN 88-900631-4-9.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b Zsolt, Csapo; Adam, Pentek; Tunde, Csapone Risko (2019). "Perception And Acceptance Of Goat Cheese In Comparision [sic] With Sheep And Cow Cheese  " An Empirical Study". Annals of Faculty of Economics. 1 (2): 248 260.
^ "NATIONAL GOAT CHEESE MONTH - August". National Day Calendar. 16 July 2018. Retrieved 2021-09-29.
^ "Goaty - Cheese Science Toolkit". www.cheesescience.org. Retrieved 2021-09-29.
^ Meira, Qu nia Gramile Silva; Magnani, Marciane; de Medeiros J nior, Francisco Cesino; Queiroga, Rita de C ssia Ramos do Egito; Madruga, Marta Suely; Gull n, Beatriz; Gomes, Ana Maria Pereira; Pintado, Maria Manuela Estevez; de Souza, Evandro Leite (2015-10-01). "Effects of added Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis probiotics on the quality characteristics of goat ricotta and their survival under simulated gastrointestinal conditions". Food Research International. 76 (Pt 3): 828 838. doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2015.08.002. ISSN 0963-9969. PMID 28455069.
^ "Capric acid" Archived 2011-06-07 at the Wayback Machine, Chemical LAND21.com. Accessed 26 June 2008.
^ Santurino, L pez-Plaza, Fontecha, Calvo, Bermejo, G mez-Andr s, and G mez-Candela, Cristina, Bricia, Javier, Mar a V., Laura M., David, and Carmen (May 5, 2020). "Consumption of Goat Cheese Naturally Rich in Omega-3 and Conjugated Linoleic Acid Improves the Cardiovascular and Inflammatory Biomarkers of Overweight and Obese Subjects: A Randomized Controlled Trial".{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Nayik, Gulzar Ahmad; Jagdale, Yash D.; Gaikwad, Sailee A.; Devkatte, Anupama N.; Dar, Aamir Hussain; Dezmirean, Daniel Severus; Bobis, Otilia; Ranjha, Muhammad Modassar A. N.; Ansari, Mohammad Javed; Hemeg, Hassan A.; Alotaibi, Saqer S. (2021). "Recent Insights Into Processing Approaches and Potential Health Benefits of Goat Milk and Its Products: A Review". Frontiers in Nutrition. 8: 789117. doi:10.3389/fnut.2021.789117. ISSN 2296-861X. PMC 8685332. PMID 34938763.
^ "A Comprehensive Guide to Goat Cheese". The Manual. 2021-04-14. Retrieved 2021-09-29.
^ "Goat cheese   Cheese for you". cheeseforyou.com. Retrieved 2022-05-08.
^ Archived Copy T rk Patent Kurumu. (in Turkish) Archived 2021-05-01 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Cheese Description: Bryndza". Cheese.com. Retrieved 11 June 2008.
^ Idalia De Le n. "Estampas" (in Spanish). El Universal. Archived from the original on 2016-03-05.
External links[edit]
Goat Dairy Foods from the University of California, Davis Dairy Research and Information Center
vteCheeseTypes
Acid-set
Blue
Brined
Cream
Goat
Green
Pasta filata
Processed
Smear-ripened
Smoked
Washed-rind
Whey
Animal milk
Cow
Goat
Moose
Reindeer
Sheep
Water buffalo
Yak
Camel
Regions
Argentina
Cornwall
Egypt
France
Germany
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Serbia
Spain
Switzerland
list
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Special designations
European cheeses with protected geographical status
Greek
Italian
Organizations
American Cheese Society
International Cheese Awards
Lucerne Cheese Festival
Mountain Cheese Olympics
National Cheese Exchange
Swiss Cheese Union
The Great British Cheese Festival
List articles
Cheese dishes
Cheesemakers
Cheese soups
Cheeses
Blue cheeses
Goat milk cheeses
Sheep milk cheeses
Stretch-curd cheeses
Water buffalo cheeses
Miscellaneous
Cheese ripening
Dairy salt
 Category: Cheese
Cheese dishes
Cheesemakers
List of cheeses
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goat_cheese&oldid=1149264282"