President of the United States from 1861 to 1865
This article is about the president of the United States. For other uses, see Abraham Lincoln (disambiguation).
Abraham LincolnPortrait by Alexander Gardner, 186316th President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1861  April 15, 1865Vice President
Hannibal Hamlin(1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson(March April 1865)
Preceded byJames BuchananSucceeded byAndrew JohnsonMember of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Illinois's 7th districtIn officeMarch 4, 1847  March 3, 1849Preceded byJohn HenrySucceeded byThomas L. HarrisMember of theIllinois House of Representativesfrom Sangamon CountyIn officeDecember 1, 1834  December 4, 1842
Personal detailsBorn(1809-02-12)February 12, 1809Hodgenville, Kentucky, U.S.DiedApril 15, 1865(1865-04-15) (aged 56)Washington, D.C., U.S.Manner of deathAssassination (gunshot wound to the head)Resting placeLincoln TombPolitical party
Republican (1856 1865)
Whig (before 1856)
Other politicalaffiliationsNational Union (1864 1865)Height6 ft 4 in (193 cm)[1]SpouseMary Todd  (m. 1842) ChildrenRobertEdwardWillieTadParentsThomas LincolnNancy HanksRelativesLincoln familyOccupationPoliticianlawyerSignatureMilitary serviceBranch/serviceIllinois MilitiaYears of service1832Rank
Captain[a]
Private[a]
Battles/wars
American Indian Wars
Black Hawk War
Battle of Stillman's Run
Battle of Kellogg's Grove
Abraham Lincoln (/ l k n/ LINK- n; February 12, 1809  April 15, 1865) was an American lawyer, politician and statesman who served as the 16th president of the United States from 1861 until his assassination in 1865. Lincoln led the Union through the American Civil War to defend the nation as a constitutional union and succeeded in abolishing slavery, bolstering the federal government, and modernizing the U.S. economy.
Lincoln was born into poverty in a log cabin in Kentucky and was raised on the frontier, primarily in Indiana. He was self-educated and became a lawyer, Whig Party leader, Illinois state legislator, and U.S. Congressman from Illinois. In 1849, he returned to his successful law practice in central Illinois.  In 1854, he was angered by the Kansas Nebraska Act, which opened the territories to slavery, and he re-entered politics. He soon became a leader of the new Republican Party. He reached a national audience in the 1858 Senate campaign debates against Stephen A. Douglas. Lincoln ran for president in 1860, sweeping the North to gain victory. Pro-slavery elements in the South viewed his election as a threat to slavery, and Southern states began seceding from the nation. During this time, the newly formed Confederate States of America began seizing federal military bases in the south. Just over one month after Lincoln assumed the presidency, the Confederate States attacked Fort Sumter, a U.S. fort in South Carolina. Following the bombardment, Lincoln mobilized forces to suppress the rebellion and restore the union.
Lincoln, a moderate Republican, had to navigate a contentious array of factions with friends and opponents from both the Democratic and Republican parties. His allies, the War Democrats and the Radical Republicans, demanded harsh treatment of the Southern Confederates. Anti-war Democrats (called "Copperheads") despised Lincoln, and irreconcilable pro-Confederate elements plotted his assassination. He managed the factions by exploiting their mutual enmity, carefully distributing political patronage, and by appealing to the American people. His Gettysburg Address came to be seen as one of the greatest and most influential statements of American national purpose. Lincoln closely supervised the strategy and tactics in the war effort, including the selection of generals, and implemented a naval blockade of the South's trade. He suspended habeas corpus in Maryland and elsewhere, and averted British intervention by defusing the Trent Affair. In 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared the slaves in the states "in rebellion" to be free. It also directed the Army and Navy to "recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons" and to receive them "into the armed service of the United States." Lincoln also pressured border states to outlaw slavery, and he promoted the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which upon its ratification abolished slavery.
Lincoln managed his own successful re-election campaign. He sought to heal the war-torn nation through reconciliation. On April 14, 1865, just five days after the war's end at Appomattox, he was attending a play at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C., with his wife, Mary, when he was fatally shot by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth. Lincoln is remembered as a martyr and a national hero for his wartime leadership and for his efforts to preserve the Union and abolish slavery. Lincoln is often ranked in both popular and scholarly polls as the greatest president in American history.
Family and childhood
Early life
Main article: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, the second child of Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln, in a log cabin on Sinking Spring Farm near Hodgenville, Kentucky.[2] He was a descendant of Samuel Lincoln, an Englishman who migrated from Hingham, Norfolk, to its namesake, Hingham, Massachusetts, in 1638. The family then migrated west, passing through New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.[3] Lincoln was also a descendant of the Harrison family of Virginia; his paternal grandfather and namesake, Captain Abraham Lincoln and wife Bathsheba (n e Herring) moved the family from Virginia to Jefferson County, Kentucky.[b] The captain was killed in an Indian raid in 1786.[5] His children, including eight-year-old Thomas, Abraham's father, witnessed the attack.[6][c] Thomas then worked at odd jobs in Kentucky and Tennessee before the family settled in Hardin County, Kentucky, in the early 1800s.[6]
The heritage of Lincoln's mother Nancy remains unclear, but it is widely assumed that she was the daughter of Lucy Hanks.[8] Thomas and Nancy married on June 12, 1806, in Washington County, and moved to Elizabethtown, Kentucky.[9] They had three children: Sarah, Abraham, and Thomas, who died as an infant.[10]
Thomas Lincoln bought or leased farms in Kentucky before losing all but 200 acres (81 ha) of his land in court disputes over property titles.[11] In 1816, the family moved to Indiana where the land surveys and titles were more reliable.[12] Indiana was a "free" (non-slaveholding) territory, and they settled in an "unbroken forest"[13] in Hurricane Township, Perry County, Indiana.[14][d] In 1860, Lincoln noted that the family's move to Indiana was "partly on account of slavery", but mainly due to land title difficulties.[16]
 The farm site where Lincoln grew up in Spencer County, Indiana
In Kentucky and Indiana, Thomas worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter.[17] At various times, he owned farms, livestock, and town lots, paid taxes, sat on juries, appraised estates, and served on county patrols. Thomas and Nancy were members of a Separate Baptists church, which forbade alcohol, dancing, and slavery.[18]
Overcoming financial challenges, Thomas in 1827 obtained clear title to 80 acres (32 ha) in Indiana, an area which became the Little Pigeon Creek Community.[19]
Mother's death
On October 5, 1818, Nancy Lincoln died from milk sickness, leaving 11-year-old Sarah in charge of a household including her father, 9-year-old Abraham, and Nancy's 19-year-old orphan cousin, Dennis Hanks.[20] Ten years later, on January 20, 1828, Sarah died while giving birth to a stillborn son, devastating Lincoln.[21]
On December 2, 1819, Thomas married Sarah Bush Johnston, a widow from Elizabethtown, Kentucky, with three children of her own.[22] Abraham became close to his stepmother and called her "Mother".[23] Lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with farm life. His family even said he was lazy, for all his "reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing Poetry, etc.".[24] His stepmother acknowledged he did not enjoy "physical labor", but loved to read.[25]
Education and move to Illinois
Lincoln was largely self-educated.[26] His formal schooling was from itinerant teachers. It included two short stints in Kentucky, where he learned to read but probably not to write, at age seven,[27] and in Indiana, where he went to school sporadically due to farm chores, for a total of fewer than 12 months in aggregate by the age of 15.[28] He persisted as an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning.[29] Family, neighbors, and schoolmates recalled that his reading included the King James Bible, Aesop's Fables, John Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress, Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, and The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin.[30]
 New Salem, Illinois
As a teen, Lincoln took responsibility for chores and customarily gave his father all earnings from work outside the home until he was 21.[31] Lincoln was tall, strong, and athletic, and became adept at using an ax.[32] He was an active wrestler during his youth and trained in the rough catch-as-catch-can style (also known as catch wrestling). He became county wrestling champion at the age of 21.[33] He gained a reputation for strength and audacity after winning a wrestling match with the renowned leader of ruffians known as "the Clary's Grove Boys".[34]
In March 1830, fearing another milk sickness outbreak, several members of the extended Lincoln family, including Abraham, moved west to Illinois, a free state, and settled in Macon County.[35][e] Abraham then became increasingly distant from Thomas, in part due to his father's lack of education.[37] In 1831, as Thomas and other family prepared to move to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois, Abraham struck out on his own.[38] He made his home in New Salem, Illinois, for six years.[39] Lincoln and some friends took goods by flatboat to New Orleans, Louisiana, where he was first exposed to slavery.[40]
Marriage and children
Further information: Lincoln family, Health of Abraham Lincoln, and Sexuality of Abraham Lincoln
1864 photo of President Lincoln with youngest son, TadMary Todd Lincoln, wife of Abraham Lincoln, in 1861
Speculation persists that Lincoln's first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge, whom he met when he moved to New Salem. Witness testimony, given decades afterward, showed a lack of any specific recollection of a romance between the two.[41] Rutledge died on August 25, 1835, most likely of typhoid fever; saying that he couldn't bear the idea of rain falling on Ann's grave, Lincoln sunk into a serious episode of depression, and this gave rise to speculation that he had been in love with her.[42][43][44]
In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky.[45] Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Owens if she returned to New Salem. Owens arrived that November and he courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts. On August 16, 1837, he wrote Owens a letter saying he would not blame her if she ended the relationship, and she never replied.[46]
In 1839, Lincoln met Mary Todd in Springfield, Illinois, and the following year they became engaged.[47] She was the daughter of Robert Smith Todd, a wealthy lawyer and businessman in Lexington, Kentucky.[48] A wedding set for January 1, 1841, was canceled at Lincoln's request, but they reconciled and married on November 4, 1842, in the Springfield mansion of Mary's sister.[49] While anxiously preparing for the nuptials, he was asked where he was going and replied, "To hell, I suppose."[50] In 1844, the couple bought a house in Springfield near his law office. Mary kept house with the help of a hired servant and a relative.[51]
Lincoln was an affectionate husband and father of four sons, though his work regularly kept him away from home. The oldest, Robert Todd Lincoln, was born in 1843 and was the only child to live to maturity. Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie), born in 1846, died February 1, 1850, probably of tuberculosis. Lincoln's third son, "Willie" Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died of a fever at the White House on February 20, 1862. The youngest, Thomas "Tad" Lincoln, was born on April 4, 1853, and survived his father but died of heart failure at age 18 on July 16, 1871.[52][f] Lincoln "was remarkably fond of children"[54] and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own.[55] In fact, Lincoln's law partner William H. Herndon would grow irritated when Lincoln brought his children to the law office. Their father, it seemed, was often too absorbed in his work to notice his children's behavior. Herndon recounted, "I have felt many and many a time that I wanted to wring their little necks, and yet out of respect for Lincoln I kept my mouth shut. Lincoln did not note what his children were doing or had done."[56]
The deaths of their sons, Eddie and Willie, had profound effects on both parents. Lincoln suffered from "melancholy", a condition now thought to be clinical depression.[43] Later in life, Mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons, and Robert committed her for a time to an asylum in 1875.[57]
Early career and militia service
Further information: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln and Abraham Lincoln in the Black Hawk War
During 1831 and 1832, Lincoln worked at a general store in New Salem, Illinois. In 1832, he declared his candidacy for the Illinois House of Representatives, but interrupted his campaign to serve as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War.[58]  When Lincoln returned home from the Black Hawk War, he planned to become a blacksmith, but instead formed a partnership with William Berry, 21, with whom he purchased a New Salem general store on credit. Because a license was required to sell customers single beverages, Berry obtained bartending licenses for $7 each for Lincoln and himself, and in 1833 the Lincoln-Berry General Store became a tavern as well. As licensed bartenders, Lincoln and Berry were able to sell spirits, including liquor, for 12 cents a pint. They offered a wide range of alcoholic beverages as well as food, including takeout dinners. But Berry became an alcoholic, was often too drunk to work, and Lincoln ended up running the store by himself.[59] Although the economy was booming, the business struggled and went into debt, causing Lincoln to sell his share.
In his first campaign speech after returning from his military service, Lincoln observed a supporter in the crowd under attack, grabbed the assailant by his "neck and the seat of his trousers", and tossed him.[35] In the campaign, Lincoln advocated for navigational improvements on the Sangamon River. He could draw crowds as a raconteur, but lacked the requisite formal education, powerful friends, and money, and lost the election.[60] Lincoln finished eighth out of 13 candidates (the top four were elected), though he received 277 of the 300 votes cast in the New Salem precinct.[61]
Lincoln served as New Salem's postmaster and later as county surveyor, but continued his voracious reading and decided to become a lawyer.[62] Rather than studying in the office of an established attorney, as was the custom, Lincoln borrowed legal texts from attorneys John Todd Stuart and Thomas Drummond, purchased books including Blackstone's Commentaries and Chitty's Pleadings, and read law on his own.[62] He later said of his legal education that "I studied with nobody."[63]
Illinois state legislature (1834 1842)
 Lincoln's home in Springfield, Illinois
Lincoln's second state house campaign in 1834, this time as a Whig, was a success over a powerful Whig opponent.[64] Then followed his four terms in the Illinois House of Representatives for Sangamon County.[65] He championed construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, and later was a Canal Commissioner.[66] He voted to expand suffrage beyond white landowners to all white males, but adopted a "free soil" stance opposing both slavery and abolition.[67] In 1837, he declared, "[The] Institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy, but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils."[68] He echoed Henry Clay's support for the American Colonization Society which advocated a program of abolition in conjunction with settling freed slaves in Liberia.[69]
He was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1836,[70] and moved to Springfield and began to practice law under John T. Stuart, Mary Todd's cousin.[71] Lincoln emerged as a formidable trial combatant during cross-examinations and closing arguments. He partnered several years with Stephen T. Logan, and in 1844 began his practice with William Herndon, "a studious young man".[72]
U.S. House of Representatives (1847 1849)
 Lincoln in his late 30s as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives. Photo taken by one of Lincoln's law students around 1846.
True to his record, Lincoln professed to friends in 1861 to be "an old line Whig, a disciple of Henry Clay".[73] Their party favored economic modernization in banking, tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads, and urbanization.[74]
In 1843, Lincoln sought the Whig nomination for Illinois' 7th district seat in the U.S. House of Representatives; he was defeated by John J. Hardin though he prevailed with the party in limiting Hardin to one term. Lincoln not only pulled off his strategy of gaining the nomination in 1846 but also won the election. He was the only Whig in the Illinois delegation, but as dutiful as any participated in almost all votes and made speeches that toed the party line.[75] He was assigned to the Committee on Post Office and Post Roads and the Committee on Expenditures in the War Department.[76] Lincoln teamed with Joshua R. Giddings on a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia with compensation for the owners, enforcement to capture fugitive slaves, and a popular vote on the matter. He dropped the bill when it eluded Whig support.[77][78]
Political views
On foreign and military policy, Lincoln spoke against the Mexican American War, which he imputed to President James K. Polk's desire for "military glory that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood".[79] He supported the Wilmot Proviso, a failed proposal to ban slavery in any U.S. territory won from Mexico.[80]
Lincoln emphasized his opposition to Polk by drafting and introducing his Spot Resolutions. The war had begun with a Mexican slaughter of American soldiers in territory disputed by Mexico, and Polk insisted that Mexican soldiers had "invaded our territory and shed the blood of our fellow-citizens on our own soil."[81] Lincoln demanded that Polk show Congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on American soil.[82] The resolution was ignored in both Congress and the national papers, and it cost Lincoln political support in his district. One Illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him "spotty Lincoln".[83] Lincoln later regretted some of his statements, especially his attack on presidential war-making powers.[84]
Lincoln had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the House. Realizing Clay was unlikely to win the presidency, he supported General Zachary Taylor for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election.[85] Taylor won and Lincoln hoped in vain to be appointed Commissioner of the General Land Office.[86] The administration offered to appoint him secretary or governor of the Oregon Territory as consolation.[87] This distant territory was a Democratic stronghold, and acceptance of the post would have disrupted his legal and political career in Illinois, so he declined and resumed his law practice.[88]
Prairie lawyer
See also: List of cases involving Abraham Lincoln
 Lincoln in 1857
In his Springfield practice, Lincoln handled "every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer".[89] Twice a year he appeared for 10 consecutive weeks in county seats in the Midstate county courts; this continued for 16 years.[90] Lincoln handled transportation cases in the midst of the nation's western expansion, particularly river barge conflicts under the many new railroad bridges. As a riverboat man, Lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him.[91] He later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company, a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge.[92] In 1849, he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water. The idea was never commercialized, but it made Lincoln the only president to hold a patent.[93]
Lincoln appeared before the Illinois Supreme Court in 175 cases; he was sole counsel in 51 cases, of which 31 were decided in his favor.[94] From 1853 to 1860, one of his largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad.[95] His legal reputation gave rise to the nickname "Honest Abe".[96]
Lincoln argued in an 1858 criminal trial, defending William "Duff" Armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker.[97] The case is famous for Lincoln's use of a fact established by judicial notice to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. After an opposing witness testified to seeing the crime in the moonlight, Lincoln produced a Farmers' Almanac showing the moon was at a low angle, drastically reducing visibility. Armstrong was acquitted.[97]
Leading up to his presidential campaign, Lincoln elevated his profile in an 1859 murder case, with his defense of Simeon Quinn "Peachy" Harrison who was a third cousin;[g] Harrison was also the grandson of Lincoln's political opponent, Rev. Peter Cartwright.[99] Harrison was charged with the murder of Greek Crafton who, as he lay dying of his wounds, confessed to Cartwright that he had provoked Harrison.[100] Lincoln angrily protested the judge's initial decision to exclude Cartwright's testimony about the confession as inadmissible hearsay. Lincoln argued that the testimony involved a dying declaration and was not subject to the hearsay rule. Instead of holding Lincoln in contempt of court as expected, the judge, a Democrat, reversed his ruling and admitted the testimony into evidence, resulting in Harrison's acquittal.[97]
Republican politics (1854 1860)
Main article: Abraham Lincoln in politics, 1849 1861
Emergence as Republican leader
Further information: Slave states and free states and Abraham Lincoln and slavery
 Lincoln in 1858, the year of his debates with Stephen Douglas over slavery
The debate over the status of slavery in the territories failed to alleviate tensions between the slave-holding South and the free North, with the failure of the Compromise of 1850, a legislative package designed to address the issue.[101] In his 1852 eulogy for Clay, Lincoln highlighted the latter's support for gradual emancipation and opposition to "both extremes" on the slavery issue.[102] As the slavery debate in the Nebraska and Kansas territories became particularly acrimonious, Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise; the measure would allow the electorate of each territory to decide the status of slavery. The legislation alarmed many Northerners, who sought to prevent the spread of slavery that could result, but Douglas's Kansas Nebraska Act narrowly passed Congress in May 1854.[103]
Lincoln did not comment on the act until months later in his "Peoria Speech" of October 1854. Lincoln then declared his opposition to slavery, which he repeated en route to the presidency.[104] He said the Kansas Act had a "declared indifference, but as I must think, a covert real zeal for the spread of slavery. I cannot but hate it. I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world...."[105] Lincoln's attacks on the Kansas Nebraska Act marked his return to political life.[106]
Nationally, the Whigs were irreparably split by the Kansas Nebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. Reflecting on the demise of his party, Lincoln wrote in 1855, "I think I am a Whig, but others say there are no Whigs, and that I am an abolitionist.... I do no more than oppose the extension of slavery."[107] The new Republican Party was formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery, drawing from the antislavery wing of the Whig Party and combining Free Soil, Liberty, and antislavery Democratic Party members,[108] Lincoln resisted early Republican entreaties, fearing that the new party would become a platform for extreme abolitionists.[109] Lincoln held out hope for rejuvenating the Whigs, though he lamented his party's growing closeness with the nativist Know Nothing movement.[110]
In 1854, Lincoln was elected to the Illinois legislature but declined to take his seat. The year's elections showed the strong opposition to the Kansas Nebraska Act, and in the aftermath, Lincoln sought election to the United States Senate.[106] At that time, senators were elected by the state legislature.[111] After leading in the first six rounds of voting, he was unable to obtain a majority. Lincoln instructed his backers to vote for Lyman Trumbull. Trumbull was an antislavery Democrat, and had received few votes in the earlier ballots; his supporters, also antislavery Democrats, had vowed not to support any Whig. Lincoln's decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbull's antislavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate, Joel Aldrich Matteson.[112]
1856 campaign
Violent political confrontations in Kansas continued, and opposition to the Kansas Nebraska Act remained strong throughout the North. As the 1856 elections approached, Lincoln joined the Republicans and attended the Bloomington Convention, which formally established the Illinois Republican Party. The convention platform endorsed Congress's right to regulate slavery in the territories and backed the admission of Kansas as a free state. Lincoln gave the final speech of the convention supporting the party platform and called for the preservation of the Union.[113] At the June 1856 Republican National Convention, though Lincoln received support to run as vice president, John C. Fr mont and William Dayton comprised the ticket, which Lincoln supported throughout Illinois. The Democrats nominated former Secretary of State James Buchanan and the Know-Nothings nominated former Whig President Millard Fillmore.[114] Buchanan prevailed, while Republican William Henry Bissell won election as Governor of Illinois, and Lincoln became a leading Republican in Illinois.[115][h]
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Dred Scott was a slave whose master took him from a slave state to a territory that was free as a result of the Missouri Compromise. After Scott was returned to the slave state he petitioned a federal court for his freedom. His petition was denied in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857).[i] In his opinion, Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney wrote that black people were not citizens and derived no rights from the Constitution, and that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional for infringing upon slave owners' "property" rights. While many Democrats hoped that Dred Scott would end the dispute over slavery in the territories, the decision sparked further outrage in the North.[118] Lincoln denounced it as the product of a conspiracy of Democrats to support the Slave Power.[119] He argued the decision was at variance with the Declaration of Independence; he said that while the founding fathers did not believe all men equal in every respect, they believed all men were equal "in certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness".[120]
Lincoln Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech
Further information: Lincoln Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech
In 1858, Douglas was up for re-election in the U.S. Senate, and Lincoln hoped to defeat him. Many in the party felt that a former Whig should be nominated in 1858, and Lincoln's 1856 campaigning and support of Trumbull had earned him a favor.[121] Some eastern Republicans supported Douglas for his opposition to the Lecompton Constitution and admission of Kansas as a slave state.[122] Many Illinois Republicans resented this eastern interference. For the first time, Illinois Republicans held a convention to agree upon a Senate candidate, and Lincoln won the nomination with little opposition.[123]
 Abraham Lincoln, a portrait by Mathew Brady taken February 27, 1860, the day of Lincoln's Cooper Union speech
Lincoln accepted the nomination with great enthusiasm and zeal. After his nomination he delivered his House Divided Speech, with the biblical reference Mark 3:25, "A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved I do not expect the house to fall but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other."[124] The speech created a stark image of the danger of disunion.[125] The stage was then set for the election of the Illinois legislature which would, in turn, select Lincoln or Douglas.[126] When informed of Lincoln's nomination, Douglas stated, "[Lincoln] is the strong man of the party ... and if I beat him, my victory will be hardly won."[127]
The Senate campaign featured seven debates between Lincoln and Douglas. These were the most famous political debates in American history; they had an atmosphere akin to a prizefight and drew crowds in the thousands.[128] The principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically. Lincoln warned that Douglas' "Slave Power" was threatening the values of republicanism, and accused Douglas of distorting the Founding Fathers' premise that all men are created equal. Douglas emphasized his Freeport Doctrine, in which he said local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery within their territory, and accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists.[129] Lincoln's argument assumed a moral tone, as he claimed Douglas represented a conspiracy to promote slavery. Douglas's argument was more legal in nature, claiming that Lincoln was defying the authority of the U.S. Supreme Court as exercised in the Dred Scott decision.[130]
Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature re-elected Douglas. However, Lincoln's articulation of the issues had given him a national political presence.[131] In May 1859, Lincoln purchased the Illinois Staats-Anzeiger, a German-language newspaper that was consistently supportive; most of the state's 130,000 German Americans voted for Democrats, but the German-language paper mobilized Republican support.[132] In the aftermath of the 1858 election, newspapers frequently mentioned Lincoln as a potential Republican presidential candidate, rivaled by William H. Seward, Salmon P. Chase, Edward Bates, and Simon Cameron. While Lincoln was popular in the Midwest, he lacked support in the Northeast and was unsure whether to seek the office.[133] In January 1860, Lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the presidential nomination if offered and, in the following months, several local papers endorsed his candidacy.[134]
Over the coming months, Lincoln was tireless, making nearly fifty speeches along the campaign trail. By the quality and simplicity of his rhetoric, he quickly became the champion of the Republican party. However, despite his overwhelming support in the Midwestern United States, he was less appreciated in the east. Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, at that time wrote up an unflattering account of Lincoln's compromising position on slavery and his reluctance to challenge the court's Dred-Scott ruling, which was promptly used against him by his political rivals.[135][136]
On February 27, 1860, powerful New York Republicans invited Lincoln to give a speech at Cooper Union, in which he argued that the Founding Fathers of the United States had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery. He insisted that morality required opposition to slavery, and rejected any "groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong".[137] Many in the audience thought he appeared awkward and even ugly.[138] But Lincoln demonstrated intellectual leadership that brought him into contention. Journalist Noah Brooks reported, "No man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a New York audience."[139]
Historian David Herbert Donald described the speech as "a superb political move for an unannounced presidential aspirant. Appearing in Seward's home state, sponsored by a group largely loyal to Chase, Lincoln shrewdly made no reference to either of these Republican rivals for the nomination".[140] In response to an inquiry about his ambitions, Lincoln said, "The taste is in my mouth a little."[141]
1860 presidential election
Main article: 1860 United States presidential election
The Rail Candidate Lincoln's 1860 platform, portrayed as being held up by a slave and his partyIn 1860, northern and western electoral votes (shown in red) put Lincoln into the White House.
On May 9 10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur.[142] Lincoln's followers organized a campaign team led by David Davis, Norman Judd, Leonard Swett, and Jesse DuBois, and Lincoln received his first endorsement.[143] Exploiting his embellished frontier legend (clearing land and splitting fence rails), Lincoln's supporters adopted the label of "The Rail Candidate".[144] In 1860, Lincoln described himself: "I am in height, six feet, four inches, nearly; lean in flesh, weighing, on an average, one hundred and eighty pounds; dark complexion, with coarse black hair, and gray eyes."[145] Michael Martinez wrote about the effective imaging of Lincoln by his campaign. At times he was presented as the plain-talking "Rail Splitter" and at other times he was "Honest Abe", unpolished but trustworthy.[146]
On May 18, at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Lincoln won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as Seward and Chase. A former Democrat, Hannibal Hamlin of Maine, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket. Lincoln's success depended on his campaign team, his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue, and his strong support for internal improvements and the tariff.[147]
Pennsylvania put him over the top, led by the state's iron interests who were reassured by his tariff support.[148] Lincoln's managers had focused on this delegation while honoring Lincoln's dictate to "Make no contracts that will bind me".[149]
As the Slave Power tightened its grip on the national government, most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party. Throughout the 1850s, Lincoln had doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession.[150] When Douglas was selected as the candidate of the Northern Democrats, delegates from eleven slave states walked out of the Democratic convention; they opposed Douglas's position on popular sovereignty, and selected incumbent Vice President John C. Breckinridge as their candidate.[151] A group of former Whigs and Know Nothings formed the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John Bell of Tennessee. Lincoln and Douglas competed for votes in the North, while Bell and Breckinridge primarily found support in the South.[121]
Prior to the Republican convention, the Lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide youth organization, the Wide Awakes, which it used to generate popular support throughout the country to spearhead voter registration drives, thinking that new voters and young voters tended to embrace new parties.[152] People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln and rallied supporters for Lincoln.[153]
As Douglas and the other candidates campaigned, Lincoln gave no speeches, relying on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party. The party did the leg work that produced majorities across the North and produced an abundance of campaign posters, leaflets, and newspaper editorials. Republican speakers focused first on the party platform, and second on Lincoln's life story, emphasizing his childhood poverty. The goal was to demonstrate the power of "free labor", which allowed a common farm boy to work his way to the top by his own efforts.[154] The Republican Party's production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition; a Chicago Tribune writer produced a pamphlet that detailed Lincoln's life and sold 100,000 200,000 copies.[155] Though he did not give public appearances, many sought to visit him and write him. In the runup to the election, he took an office in the Illinois state capitol to deal with the influx of attention. He also hired John George Nicolay as his personal secretary, who would remain in that role during the presidency.[156]
On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected the 16th president. He was the first Republican president and his victory was entirely due to his support in the North and West. No ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 15 Southern slave states, and he won only two of 996 counties in all the Southern states, an omen of the impending Civil War.[157][158] Lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, or 39.8% of the total in a four-way race, carrying the free Northern states, as well as California and Oregon.[159] His victory in the Electoral College was decisive: Lincoln had 180 votes to 123 for his opponents.[160]
Presidency (1861 1865)
Main article: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln
Secession and inauguration
Main article: Presidential transition of Abraham Lincoln
Further information: Secession winter and Baltimore Plot
Lincoln's first inaugural at the United States Capitol, March 4, 1861. The Capitol dome above the rotunda was still under construction.New York Times headlines for Lincoln's first inauguration portended imminent hostilities: less than six weeks later, the South attacked Fort Sumter, launching the American Civil War.[161]
The South was outraged by Lincoln's election, and in response secessionists implemented plans to leave the Union before he took office in March 1861.[162] On December 20, 1860, South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession; by February 1, 1861, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas followed.[163] Six of these states declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the Confederate States of America, and adopted a constitution.[164] The upper South and border states (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) initially rejected the secessionist appeal.[165] President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy, declaring secession illegal.[166] The Confederacy selected Jefferson Davis as its provisional president on February 9, 1861.[167]
Attempts at compromise followed but Lincoln and the Republicans rejected the proposed Crittenden Compromise as contrary to the Party's platform of free-soil in the territories.[168] Lincoln said, "I will suffer death before I consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right".[169]
Lincoln tacitly supported the Corwin Amendment to the Constitution, which passed Congress and was awaiting ratification by the states when Lincoln took office. That doomed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed.[170] A few weeks before the war, Lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them Congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the Constitution.[171]
On February 11, 1861, Lincoln gave a particularly emotional farewell address upon leaving Springfield; he would never again return to Springfield alive.[172][173]  Lincoln traveled east in a special train.  Due to secessionist plots, a then-unprecedented attention to security was given to him and his train.  En route to his inauguration, Lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the North.[174] The president-elect evaded suspected assassins in Baltimore. On February 23, 1861, he arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C., which was placed under substantial military guard.[175] Lincoln directed his inaugural address to the South, proclaiming once again that he had no inclination to abolish slavery in the Southern states:
Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the Southern States, that by the accession of a Republican Administration, their property, and their peace, and personal security, are to be endangered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such apprehension. Indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed, and been open to their inspection. It is found in nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. I do but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that "I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do so." First inaugural address, 4 March 1861[176][177] Lincoln cited his plans for banning the expansion of slavery as the key source of conflict between North and South, stating "One section of our country believes slavery is right and ought to be extended, while the other believes it is wrong and ought not to be extended. This is the only substantial dispute." The president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the South: "We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies.... The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature."[178] The failure of the Peace Conference of 1861 signaled that legislative compromise was impossible. By March 1861, no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. Meanwhile, Lincoln and the Republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the Union could not be tolerated.[179] In his second inaugural address, Lincoln looked back on the situation at the time and said: "Both parties deprecated war, but one of them would make war rather than let the Nation survive, and the other would accept war rather than let it perish, and the war came."
Civil War
Main articles: American Civil War and Battle of Fort Sumter
 President Lincoln in 1861
Major Robert Anderson, commander of the Union's Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, sent a request for provisions to Washington, and Lincoln's order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war. On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter and began the fight. Historian Allan Nevins argued that the newly inaugurated Lincoln made three miscalculations: underestimating the gravity of the crisis, exaggerating the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South, and overlooking Southern Unionist opposition to an invasion.[180]
William Tecumseh Sherman talked to Lincoln during inauguration week and was "sadly disappointed" at his failure to realize that "the country was sleeping on a volcano" and that the South was preparing for war.[181] Donald concludes that, "His repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on Ft. Sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. But he also vowed not to surrender the forts. The only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot; they did just that."[182]
On April 15, Lincoln called on the states to send a total of 75,000 volunteer troops to recapture forts, protect Washington, and "preserve the Union", which, in his view, remained intact despite the seceding states. This call forced states to choose sides. Virginia seceded and was rewarded with the designation of Richmond as the Confederate capital, despite its exposure to Union lines. North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas followed over the following two months. Secession sentiment was strong in Missouri and Maryland, but did not prevail; Kentucky remained neutral.[183] The Fort Sumter attack rallied Americans north of the Mason-Dixon line to defend the nation.
As States sent Union regiments south, on April 19, Baltimore mobs in control of the rail links attacked Union troops who were changing trains. Local leaders' groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital and the Army responded by arresting local Maryland officials. Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus where needed for the security of troops trying to reach Washington.[184] John Merryman, one Maryland official hindering the U.S. troop movements, petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney to issue a writ of habeas corpus. In June, in Ex parte Merryman, Taney, not ruling on behalf of the Supreme Court,[185] issued the writ, believing that Article I, section 9 of the Constitution authorized only Congress and not the president to suspend it. But Lincoln persisted with the policy of suspension in select areas.[186][187]
Union military strategy
Lincoln took executive control of the war and shaped the Union military strategy. He responded to the unprecedented political and military crisis as commander-in-chief by exercising unprecedented authority. He expanded his war powers, imposed a blockade on Confederate ports, disbursed funds before appropriation by Congress, suspended habeas corpus, and arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected Confederate sympathizers. Lincoln gained the support of Congress and the northern public for these actions. Lincoln also had to reinforce Union sympathies in the border slave states and keep the war from becoming an international conflict.[188]
 Running the Machine: an 1864 political cartoon satirizing Lincoln's administration   featuring William Fessenden, Edwin Stanton, William Seward, Gideon Welles, Lincoln, and others
It was clear from the outset that bipartisan support was essential to success, and that any compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle, such as the appointment of Republicans and Democrats to command positions. Copperheads criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on slavery. The Radical Republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery.[189] On August 6, 1861, Lincoln signed the Confiscation Act that authorized judicial proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the Confederates. The law had little practical effect, but it signaled political support for abolishing slavery.[190]
In August 1861, General John C. Fr mont, the 1856 Republican presidential nominee, without consulting Washington, issued a martial edict freeing slaves of the rebels. Lincoln canceled the illegal proclamation as politically motivated and lacking military necessity.[191] As a result, Union enlistments from Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri increased by over 40,000.[192]
Internationally, Lincoln wanted to forestall foreign military aid to the Confederacy.[193] He relied on his combative Secretary of State William Seward while working closely with Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman Charles Sumner.[194] In the 1861 Trent Affair which threatened war with Great Britain, the U.S. Navy illegally intercepted a British mail ship, the Trent, on the high seas and seized two Confederate envoys; Britain protested vehemently while the U.S. cheered. Lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats. Biographer James G. Randall dissected Lincoln's successful techniques:[195]
his restraint, his avoidance of any outward expression of truculence, his early softening of State Department's attitude toward Britain, his deference toward Seward and Sumner, his withholding of his paper prepared for the occasion, his readiness to arbitrate, his golden silence in addressing Congress, his shrewdness in recognizing that war must be averted, and his clear perception that a point could be clinched for America's true position at the same time that satisfaction was given to a friendly country.
Lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraph reports coming into the War Department. He tracked all phases of the effort, consulting with governors, and selecting generals based on their success, their state, and their party. In January 1862, after complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the War Department, Lincoln replaced War Secretary Simon Cameron with Edwin Stanton. Stanton centralized the War Department's activities, auditing and canceling contracts, saving the federal government $17,000,000.[196] Stanton was a staunch Unionist, pro-business, conservative Democrat who gravitated toward the Radical Republican faction. He worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than any other senior official. "Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together", say Thomas and Hyman.[197]
Lincoln's war strategy embraced two priorities: ensuring that Washington was well-defended and conducting an aggressive war effort for a prompt, decisive victory.[j] Twice a week, Lincoln met with his cabinet in the afternoon. Occasionally Mary prevailed on him to take a carriage ride, concerned that he was working too hard.[199] For his edification Lincoln relied upon a book by his chief of staff General Henry Halleck entitled Elements of Military Art and Science; Halleck was a disciple of the European strategist Antoine-Henri Jomini. Lincoln began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the Mississippi River.[200] Lincoln saw the importance of Vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemy's army, rather than merely capturing territory.[201]
In directing the Union's war strategy, Lincoln valued the advice of Gen. Winfield Scott, even after his retirement as Commanding General of the United States Army. On June 23 24, 1862, President Lincoln made an unannounced visit to West Point, where he spent five hours consulting with Scott regarding the handling of the Civil War and the staffing of the War Department.[202][203]
General McClellan
After the Union rout at Bull Run and Winfield Scott's retirement, Lincoln appointed Major General George B. McClellan general-in-chief.[204] McClellan then took months to plan his Virginia Peninsula Campaign. McClellan's slow progress frustrated Lincoln, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend Washington. McClellan, in turn, blamed the failure of the campaign on Lincoln's reservation of troops for the capital.[205]
The image on the left shows Lincoln with officers after the Battle of Antietam. Notable figures (from left) are 1. Col. Delos Sackett; 4. Gen. George W. Morell; 5. Alexander S. Webb, Chief of Staff, V Corps; 6. McClellan;. 8. Dr. Jonathan Letterman; 10. Lincoln; 11. Henry J. Hunt; 12. Fitz John Porter; 15. Andrew A. Humphreys; 16. Capt. George Armstrong Custer. The image on the right shows Lincoln and McClellan on October 3, 1862.
In 1862, Lincoln removed McClellan for the general's continued inaction. He elevated Henry Halleck in July and appointed John Pope as head of the new Army of Virginia.[206] Pope satisfied Lincoln's desire to advance on Richmond from the north, thus protecting Washington from counterattack.[207] But Pope was then soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run in the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac back to defend Washington.[208]
Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellan's failure to reinforce Pope, Lincoln restored him to command of all forces around Washington.[209] Two days after McClellan's return to command, General Robert E. Lee's forces crossed the Potomac River into Maryland, leading to the Battle of Antietam.[210] That battle, a Union victory, was among the bloodiest in American history; it facilitated Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation in January.[211]
McClellan then resisted the president's demand that he pursue Lee's withdrawing army, while General Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee. Lincoln replaced Buell with William Rosecrans; and after the 1862 midterm elections he replaced McClellan with Ambrose Burnside. The appointments were both politically neutral and adroit on Lincoln's part.[212]
Burnside, against presidential advice, launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December. Desertions during 1863 came in the thousands and only increased after Fredericksburg, so Lincoln replaced Burnside with Joseph Hooker.[213]
In the 1862 midterm elections the Republicans suffered severe losses due to rising inflation, high taxes, rumors of corruption, suspension of habeas corpus, military draft law, and fears that freed slaves would come North and undermine the labor market. The Emancipation Proclamation gained votes for Republicans in rural New England and the upper Midwest, but cost votes in the Irish and German strongholds and in the lower Midwest, where many Southerners had lived for generations.[214]
In the spring of 1863 Lincoln was sufficiently optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to think the end of the war could be near; the plans included attacks by Hooker on Lee north of Richmond, Rosecrans on Chattanooga, Grant on Vicksburg, and a naval assault on Charleston.[215]
Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May, then resigned and was replaced by George Meade.[216] Meade followed Lee north into Pennsylvania and beat him in the Gettysburg Campaign, but then failed to follow up despite Lincoln's demands. At the same time, Grant captured Vicksburg and gained control of the Mississippi River, splitting the far western rebel states.[217]
Emancipation Proclamation
Main articles: Abraham Lincoln and slavery and Emancipation Proclamation
 First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln by Francis Bicknell Carpenter (1864) (clickable image use cursor to identify)
The Federal government's power to end slavery was limited by the Constitution, which before 1865 was understood to reserve the issue to the individual states. Lincoln believed that slavery would be rendered obsolete if its expansion into new territories were prevented, because these territories would be admitted to the Union as free states, and free states would come to outnumber slave states. He sought to persuade the states to agree to compensation for emancipating their slaves.[218] Lincoln rejected Major General John C. Fr mont's August 1861 emancipation attempt, as well as one by Major General David Hunter in May 1862, on the grounds that it was not within their power and might upset loyal border states enough for them to secede.[219]
In June 1862, Congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory, which Lincoln signed. In July, the Confiscation Act of 1862 was enacted, providing court procedures to free the slaves of those convicted of aiding the rebellion; Lincoln approved the bill despite his belief that it was unconstitutional. He felt such action could be taken only within the war powers of the commander-in-chief, which he planned to exercise. Lincoln at this time reviewed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet.[220]
Privately, Lincoln concluded that the Confederacy's slave base had to be eliminated. Copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification; Republican editor Horace Greeley of the New York Tribune agreed.[221] In a letter of August 22, 1862, Lincoln said that while he personally wished all men could be free, his first obligation as president was to preserve the Union:[222]
My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because I believe it helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union ... [ ] I have here stated my purpose according to my view of official duty; and I intend no modification of my oft-expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.[223]
On September 22, 1862, Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation,[224] which announced that, in states still in rebellion on January 1, 1863, the slaves would be freed. He kept his word and, on January 1, 1863, issued the Emancipation Proclamation,[225] freeing the slaves in 10 states not then under Union control,[226] with exemptions specified for areas under such control.[227] Lincoln's comment on signing the Proclamation was: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper."[228] He spent the next 100 days preparing the army and the nation for emancipation, while Democrats rallied their voters by warning of the threat that freed slaves posed to northern whites.[229]
With the abolition of slavery in the rebel states now a military objective, Union armies advancing south liberated all three million slaves in the Confederacy.[230] The Emancipation Proclamation having stated that freedmen would be "received into the armed service of the United States," enlisting these freedmen became official policy. By the spring of 1863, Lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers. In a letter to Tennessee military governor Andrew Johnson encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops, Lincoln wrote, "The bare sight of 50,000 armed and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the Mississippi would end the rebellion at once".[231] By the end of 1863, at Lincoln's direction, General Lorenzo Thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the Mississippi Valley.[232]
Gettysburg Address (1863)
Main article: Gettysburg Address
 Lincoln (absent his usual top hat and highlighted in red) at Gettysburg on November 19, 1863. Roughly three hours later, he delivered the Gettysburg Address, one of the best known speeches in American history.[233][234]
Lincoln spoke at the dedication of the Gettysburg battlefield cemetery on November 19, 1863.[235] In 272 words, and three minutes, Lincoln asserted that the nation was born not in 1789, but in 1776, "conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal". He defined the war as dedicated to the principles of liberty and equality for all. He declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain, that slavery would end, and the future of democracy would be assured, that "government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth".[236]
Defying his prediction that "the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here", the Address became the most quoted speech in American history.[237]
Promoting General Grant
 The Peacemakers, an 1868 painting by George P.A. Healy of events aboard the River Queen in March 1865 (clickable image use cursor to identify)
General Ulysses Grant's victories at the Battle of Shiloh and in the Vicksburg campaign impressed Lincoln. Responding to criticism of Grant after Shiloh, Lincoln had said, "I can't spare this man. He fights."[238] With Grant in command, Lincoln felt the Union Army could advance in multiple theaters, while also including black troops. Meade's failure to capture Lee's army after Gettysburg and the continued passivity of the Army of the Potomac persuaded Lincoln to promote Grant to supreme commander. Grant then assumed command of Meade's army.[239]
Lincoln was concerned that Grant might be considering a presidential candidacy in 1864. He arranged for an intermediary to inquire into Grant's political intentions, and once assured that he had none, Lincoln promoted Grant to the newly revived rank of Lieutenant General, a rank which had been unoccupied since George Washington.[240] Authorization for such a promotion "with the advice and consent of the Senate" was provided by a new bill which Lincoln signed the same day he submitted Grant's name to the Senate. His nomination was confirmed by the Senate on March 2, 1864.[241]
Grant in 1864 waged the bloody Overland Campaign, which exacted heavy losses on both sides.[242] When Lincoln asked what Grant's plans were, the persistent general replied, "I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer."[243] Grant's army moved steadily south. Lincoln traveled to Grant's headquarters at City Point, Virginia, to confer with Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman.[244] Lincoln reacted to Union losses by mobilizing support throughout the North.[245] Lincoln authorized Grant to target infrastructure plantations, railroads, and bridges hoping to weaken the South's morale and fighting ability. He emphasized defeat of the Confederate armies over destruction (which was considerable) for its own sake.[246] Lincoln's engagement became distinctly personal on one occasion in 1864 when Confederate general Jubal Early raided Washington, D.C. Legend has it that while Lincoln watched from an exposed position, Union Captain (and future Supreme Court Justice) Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. shouted at him, "Get down, you damn fool, before you get shot!"[247]
As Grant continued to weaken Lee's forces, efforts to discuss peace began. Confederate Vice President Stephens led a group meeting with Lincoln, Seward, and others at Hampton Roads. Lincoln refused to negotiate with the Confederacy as a coequal; his objective to end the fighting was not realized.[248] On April 1, 1865, Grant nearly encircled Petersburg in a siege. The Confederate government evacuated Richmond and Lincoln visited the conquered capital. On April 9, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, officially ending the war.[249]
Reelection
Main article: 1864 United States presidential election
 An electoral landslide for Lincoln (in red) in the 1864 election; southern states (brown) and territories (gray) not in play
 A poster of the 1864 election campaign with Andrew Johnson as the candidate for vice president
Lincoln ran for reelection in 1864, while uniting the main Republican factions, along with War Democrats Edwin M. Stanton and Andrew Johnson. Lincoln used conversation and his patronage powers greatly expanded from peacetime to build support and fend off the Radicals' efforts to replace him.[250] At its convention, the Republicans selected Johnson as his running mate. To broaden his coalition to include War Democrats as well as Republicans, Lincoln ran under the label of the new Union Party.[251]
Grant's bloody stalemates damaged Lincoln's re-election prospects, and many Republicans feared defeat. Lincoln confidentially pledged in writing that if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House;[252] Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope. The pledge read as follows:This morning, as for some days past, it seems exceedingly probable that this Administration will not be re-elected. Then it will be my duty to so co-operate with the President elect, as to save the Union between the election and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterward.[253]
The Democratic platform followed the "Peace wing" of the party and called the war a "failure"; but their candidate, McClellan, supported the war and repudiated the platform. Meanwhile, Lincoln emboldened Grant with more troops and Republican party support. Sherman's capture of Atlanta in September and David Farragut's capture of Mobile ended defeatism.[254] The Democratic Party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln. The National Union Party was united by Lincoln's support for emancipation. State Republican parties stressed the perfidy of the Copperheads.[255] On November 8, Lincoln carried all but three states, including 78 percent of Union soldiers.[256]
 Lincoln's second inaugural address at the almost completed Capitol building, March 4, 1865
On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address. In it, he deemed the war casualties to be God's will. Historian Mark Noll places the speech "among the small handful of semi-sacred texts by which Americans conceive their place in the world;" it is inscribed in the Lincoln Memorial.[257] Lincoln said:
Fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond-man's 250 years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said 3,000 years ago, so still it must be said, "the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether". With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.[258]
Reconstruction
Main article: Reconstruction era
Reconstruction preceded the war's end, as Lincoln and his associates considered the reintegration of the nation, and the fates of Confederate leaders and freed slaves. When a general asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates were to be treated, Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy."[259] Lincoln was determined to find meaning in the war in its aftermath, and did not want to continue to outcast the southern states. His main goal was to keep the union together, so he proceeded by focusing not on whom to blame, but on how to rebuild the nation as one.[260] Lincoln led the moderates in Reconstruction policy and was opposed by the Radicals, under Rep. Thaddeus Stevens, Sen. Charles Sumner and Sen. Benjamin Wade, who otherwise remained Lincoln's allies. Determined to reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office and had not mistreated Union prisoners, if they were willing to sign an oath of allegiance.[261]
 A political cartoon of Vice President Andrew Johnson (a former tailor) and Lincoln, 1865, entitled The 'Rail Splitter' At Work Repairing the Union. The caption reads (Johnson): "Take it quietly Uncle Abe and I will draw it closer than ever." (Lincoln): "A few more stitches Andy and the good old Union will be mended."
As Southern states fell, they needed leaders while their administrations were restored. In Tennessee and Arkansas, Lincoln respectively appointed Johnson and Frederick Steele as military governors. In Louisiana, Lincoln ordered General Nathaniel P. Banks to promote a plan that would reestablish statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed, and only if the reconstructed states abolished slavery. Democratic opponents accused Lincoln of using the military to ensure his and the Republicans' political aspirations. The Radicals denounced his policy as too lenient, and passed their own plan, the 1864 Wade Davis Bill, which Lincoln vetoed. The Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat elected representatives from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee.[262]
Lincoln's appointments were designed to harness both moderates and Radicals. To fill Chief Justice Taney's seat on the Supreme Court, he named the Radicals' choice, Salmon P. Chase, who Lincoln believed would uphold his emancipation and paper money policies.[263]
After implementing the Emancipation Proclamation, Lincoln increased pressure on Congress to outlaw slavery throughout the nation with a constitutional amendment. He declared that such an amendment would "clinch the whole matter" and by December 1863 an amendment was brought to Congress.[264] This first attempt fell short of the required two-thirds majority in the House of Representatives. Passage became part of Lincoln's reelection platform, and after his successful reelection, the second attempt in the House passed on January 31, 1865.[265] With ratification, it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution on December 6, 1865.[266]
Lincoln believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen. He signed Senator Charles Sumner's Freedmen's Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate needs of former slaves. The law opened land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen. Lincoln announced a Reconstruction plan that involved short-term military control, pending readmission under the control of southern Unionists.[267]
Historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly how Reconstruction would have proceeded had Lincoln lived. Biographers James G. Randall and Richard Current, according to David Lincove, argue that:[268]
It is likely that had he lived, Lincoln would have followed a policy similar to Johnson's, that he would have clashed with congressional Radicals, that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred, and that his political skills would have helped him avoid Johnson's mistakes.
Eric Foner argues that:[269]
Unlike Sumner and other Radicals, Lincoln did not see Reconstruction as an opportunity for a sweeping political and social revolution beyond emancipation. He had long made clear his opposition to the confiscation and redistribution of land. He believed, as most Republicans did in April 1865, that the voting requirements should be determined by the states. He assumed that political control in the South would pass to white Unionists, reluctant secessionists, and forward-looking former Confederates. But time and again during the war, Lincoln, after initial opposition, had come to embrace positions first advanced by abolitionists and Radical Republicans. ... Lincoln undoubtedly would have listened carefully to the outcry for further protection for the former slaves ... It is entirely plausible to imagine Lincoln and Congress agreeing on a Reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage, along the lines Lincoln proposed just before his death.
Native Americans
This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Section contents need to be reviewed for due-weight, sourcing, tone, original research, and editorializing. Please help improve this section if you can. (February 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Lincoln's experience with Native Americans started early with their killing of his grandfather in front of the family.[270]  Later he served as a Captain in the state militia during the Black Hawk War seeing no combat.[271]  During his presidency, his policy toward Indians was based on politics. He used appointments to the Indian Bureau as a reward to supporters from Minnesota and Wisconsin.  While in office his administration faced difficulties guarding Western settlers, railroads, and telegraphs, from Indian attacks.[272]
On August 17, 1862, the Sioux or Dakota uprising broke out in Minnesota. Hundreds of settlers were killed, 30,000 were displaced from their homes, and Washington was deeply alarmed.[273] Some feared incorrectly that it might represent a Confederate conspiracy to start a war on the Northwestern frontier.[274] Lincoln ordered thousands of Confederate prisoners of war sent by railroad to put down the uprising.[275] When the Confederates protested forcing Confederate prisoners to fight Indians, Lincoln revoked the policy and none set foot in Minnesota.  Lincoln sent General John Pope to Minnesota as commander of the new Department of the Northwest a couple of weeks into the hostilities.[276][277]  Before he arrived, the Fond Du Lac band of Chippewa sent Lincoln a letter begging to go to war for the United States against the Sioux, so Lincoln could send Minnesota's troops to fight the South.[278][279] Shortly after, a Mille Lacs Band Chief offered the same at St. Cloud, Minnesota.[280][281] In it the Chippewa specified that they wanted to use the indigenous rules of warfare.[282] That meant there would be no prisoners of war, no surrender, no peace agreement.[283] Lincoln did not accept the Chippewa offer, as he had no means to control the outcome and women and children were considered legitimate casualties in native American warfare.[284] Once word reached the other bands of Chippewa, he had no way of knowing how they would react to his sending the Fond Du Lac on the warpath.[citation needed]  One of the Chippewa signing the letter, Chief Naw-Gaw-Nub, had received a Presidential medal from Lincoln earlier in the year.[285]
Serving under Gen. Pope was Minnesota Congressman Henry H. Sibley. Minnesota's Governor had made Sibley a Colonel United States Volunteers to command the US force tasked with fighting the war and that eventually defeated Little Crow's forces at the Battle of Wood Lake.[277]  
The day the Mdewakanton force surrendered at Camp Release, a Chippewa war council met at Minnesota's capitol with another Chippewa offer to Lincoln, to fight the Sioux.[286][additional citation(s) needed] Sibley ordered a military commission to review that actions of the captured to try those that had committed war crimes. The legitimacy of military commissions trying opposing combatants had been established during the Mexican War.[287] Sibley thought he had 16 to 20 of men he wanted for trial while Gen. Pope ordered that all detained warriors be tried. When it was done, 303 had been given death sentences that were subject to Presidential review. Lincoln ordered Gen Pope send all of the trial transcripts to Washington where he and two of his staff pored over the trials. The lawyer in Lincoln saw issues. He slowly realized that the trials could be divided into two groups: combat between combatants and combat against civilians. The groups could be identified by their transcripts, the first group were all just three pages in length while the second group had more pages, some up to twelve. He placed 263 cases into the first group and commuted their sentences for the largest mass commutation in history.  Into the second group went forty.  One he commuted for turning state's witness. Sibley dismissed another when overwhelming proof surfaced exonerating the man. The remaining 38 were executed in the largest mass hanging in U.S. history. Very quickly questions arose concerning three of the executions that have not been answered.[288] Less than four months after the executions, Lincoln issued General Order 100 that relates more to the Minnesota War than the Civil War.  Now a congressman, Alexander Ramsey told Lincoln, in 1864, that he would have gotten more re-election support in Minnesota had he executed all 303 of the Mdewakanton. Lincoln responded, "I could not afford to hang men for votes."[289] The men whose sentences he commuted were sent to a military prison at Davenport, Iowa. A few of those he had released due to the efforts of Bishop Henry Whipple.
Whig theory of a presidency
Lincoln adhered to the Whig theory of a presidency focused on executing laws while deferring to Congress' responsibility for legislating. Lincoln vetoed only four bills, including the Wade-Davis Bill with its harsh Reconstruction program.[290] The 1862 Homestead Act made millions of acres of Western government-held land available for purchase at low cost. The 1862 Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States' first transcontinental railroad, which was completed in 1869.[291] The passage of the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railway Acts was enabled by the absence of Southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the 1850s.[292]
In the selection and use of his cabinet, Lincoln employed the strengths of his opponents in a manner that emboldened his presidency. Lincoln commented on his thought process, "We need the strongest men of the party in the Cabinet. We needed to hold our own people together. I had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men. Then I had no right to deprive the country of their services."[293] Goodwin described the group in her biography as a Team of Rivals.[294]
The Lincoln cabinet[295]OfficeNameTermPresidentAbraham Lincoln1861 1865Vice PresidentHannibal Hamlin1861 1865Andrew Johnson1865Secretary of StateWilliam H. Seward1861 1865Secretary of the TreasurySalmon P. Chase1861 1864William P. Fessenden1864 1865Hugh McCulloch1865Secretary of WarSimon Cameron1861 1862Edwin M. Stanton1862 1865Attorney GeneralEdward Bates1861 1864James Speed1864 1865Postmaster GeneralMontgomery Blair1861 1864William Dennison Jr.1864 1865Secretary of the NavyGideon Welles1861 1865Secretary of the InteriorCaleb Blood Smith1861 1862John Palmer Usher1863 1865
There were two measures passed to raise revenues for the Federal government: tariffs (a policy with long precedent), and a Federal income tax. In 1861, Lincoln signed the second and third Morrill Tariffs, following the first enacted by Buchanan. He also signed the Revenue Act of 1861, creating the first U.S. income tax a flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above $800 (equivalent to $24,100 in 2021[296]).[297] The Revenue Act of 1862 adopted rates that increased with income.[298]
The Lincoln Administration presided over the expansion of the federal government's economic influence in other areas. The National Banking Act created the system of national banks. The US issued paper currency for the first time, known as greenbacks printed in green on the reverse side.[299] In 1862, Congress created the Department of Agriculture.[297]
In response to rumors of a renewed draft, the editors of the New York World and the Journal of Commerce published a false draft proclamation that created an opportunity for the editors and others to corner the gold market. Lincoln attacked the media for such behavior, and ordered a military seizure of the two papers which lasted for two days.[300]
Lincoln is largely responsible for the Thanksgiving holiday.[301] Thanksgiving had become a regional holiday in New England in the 17th century. It had been sporadically proclaimed by the federal government on irregular dates. The prior proclamation had been during James Madison's presidency 50 years earlier. In 1863, Lincoln declared the final Thursday in November of that year to be a day of Thanksgiving.[301]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Thanksgiving Proclamation (1863)
In June 1864, Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant enacted by Congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park.[302]
Supreme Court appointments
Supreme Court Justices
Justice
Nominated
Appointed
Noah Haynes Swayne
January 21, 1862
January 24, 1862
Samuel Freeman Miller
July 16, 1862
July 16, 1862
David Davis
December 1, 1862
December 8, 1862
Stephen Johnson Field
March 6, 1863
March 10, 1863
Salmon Portland Chase (Chief Justice)
December 6, 1864
December 6, 1864
Lincoln's philosophy on court nominations was that "we cannot ask a man what he will do, and if we should, and he should answer us, we should despise him for it. Therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known."[301] Lincoln made five appointments to the Supreme Court. Noah Haynes Swayne was an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the Union. Samuel Freeman Miller supported Lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist. David Davis was Lincoln's campaign manager in 1860 and had served as a judge in the Illinois court circuit where Lincoln practiced. Democrat Stephen Johnson Field, a previous California Supreme Court justice, provided geographic and political balance. Finally, Lincoln's Treasury Secretary, Salmon P. Chase, became Chief Justice. Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist, would support Reconstruction legislation, and that his appointment united the Republican Party.[303]
Foreign policy
Main articles: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln  Foreign policy, and Diplomacy of the American Civil War
Lincoln named his main political rival William H. Seward as Secretary of State, and left most diplomatic issues in his portfolio. However Lincoln did select some of the top diplomats as part of his patronage policy.[304]  He also closely watched the handling of the Trent Affair in late 1861 to make sure there was no escalation into a war with Britain.[305] Seward's main role was to keep Britain and France from supporting the Confederacy. He was successful after indicating to London and Paris that Washington would declare war on them if they supported Richmond.[306]
Assassination
Main article: Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
 Shown in the presidential booth of Ford's Theatre, from left to right, are assassin John Wilkes Booth, Abraham Lincoln, Mary Todd Lincoln, Clara Harris, and Henry Rathbone.
John Wilkes Booth was a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland; though he never joined the Confederate army, he had contacts with the Confederate secret service.[307] After attending an April 11, 1865 speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, Booth hatched a plot to assassinate the President.[308] When Booth learned of the Lincolns' intent to attend a play with General Grant, he planned to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at Ford's Theatre. Lincoln and his wife attended the play Our American Cousin on the evening of April 14, just five days after the Union victory at the Battle of Appomattox Courthouse. At the last minute, Grant decided to go to New Jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play.[309]
On April 14, 1865, hours before he was assassinated, Lincoln signed legislation establishing the United States Secret Service,[310] and, at 10:15 in the evening, Booth entered the back of Lincoln's theater box, crept up from behind, and fired at the back of Lincoln's head, mortally wounding him. Lincoln's guest, Major Henry Rathbone, momentarily grappled with Booth, but Booth stabbed him and escaped.[311] After being attended by Doctor Charles Leale and two other doctors, Lincoln was taken across the street to Petersen House. After remaining in a coma for eight hours, Lincoln died at 7:22 in the morning on April 15.[312][k] Stanton saluted and said, "Now he belongs to the ages."[317][l] Lincoln's body was placed in a flag-wrapped coffin, which was loaded into a hearse and escorted to the White House by Union soldiers.[318] President Johnson was sworn in later that same day.[319]
Two weeks later, Booth, refusing to surrender, was tracked to a farm in Virginia, and was mortally shot by Sergeant Boston Corbett and died on April 26. Secretary of War Stanton had issued orders that Booth be taken alive, so Corbett was initially arrested to be court martialed. After a brief interview, Stanton declared him a patriot and dismissed the charge.[320]
Funeral and burial
Main article: Funeral and burial of Abraham Lincoln
The late President lay in state, first in the East Room of the White House, and then in the Capitol Rotunda from April 19 through April 21. The caskets containing Lincoln's body and the body of his son Willie traveled for three weeks on the Lincoln Special funeral train.[321] The train followed a circuitous route from Washington D.C. to Springfield, Illinois, stopping at many cities for memorials attended by hundreds of thousands. Many others gathered along the tracks as the train passed with bands, bonfires, and hymn singing[322] or in silent grief. Poet Walt Whitman composed "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd" to eulogize him, one of four poems he wrote about Lincoln.[323] African Americans were especially moved; they had lost their "Moses".[324] In a larger sense, the reaction was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war.[325] Historians emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but noted that some Lincoln haters celebrated his death.[326] Lincoln's body was buried at Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield and now lies within the Lincoln Tomb.[327]
Religious and philosophical beliefs
Further information: Religious views of Abraham Lincoln
 Abraham Lincoln, painting by George Peter Alexander Healy in 1869
As a young man, Lincoln was a religious skeptic.[328] He was deeply familiar with the Bible, quoting and praising it.[329] He was private about his position on organized religion and respected the beliefs of others.[330] He never made a clear profession of Christian beliefs.[331] Throughout his public career, Lincoln often quoted Scripture.[332] His three most famous speeches the House Divided Speech, the Gettysburg Address, and his second inaugural each contain direct allusions to Providence and quotes from Scripture.
In the 1840s, Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity, a belief that the human mind was controlled by a higher power.[333] With the death of his son Edward in 1850 he more frequently expressed a dependence on God.[334] He never joined a church, although he frequently attended First Presbyterian Church with his wife beginning in 1852.[335][m]
In the 1850s, Lincoln asserted his belief in "providence" in a general way, and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals; he regarded the republicanism of the Founding Fathers with an almost religious reverence.[336] The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused him to look toward religion for solace.[337] After Willie's death, he questioned the divine necessity of the war's severity. He wrote at this time that God "could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest. Yet the contest began. And having begun, He could give the final victory to either side any day. Yet the contest proceeds."[338]
Lincoln did believe in an all-powerful God that shaped events and by 1865 was expressing that belief in major speeches.[331] By the end of the war, he increasingly appealed to the Almighty for solace and to explain events, writing on April 4, 1864, to a newspaper editor in Kentucky: I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me. Now, at the end of three years struggle the nation's condition is not what either party, or any man devised, or expected. God alone can claim it. Whither it is tending seems plain. If God now wills the removal of a great wrong, and wills also that we of the North as well as you of the South, shall pay fairly for our complicity in that wrong, impartial history will find therein new cause to attest and revere the justice and goodness of God.[339]This spirituality can best be seen in his second inaugural address, considered by some scholars[340] as the greatest such address in American history, and by Lincoln himself as his own greatest speech, or one of them at the very least.[n][341] Lincoln explains therein that the cause, purpose, and result of the war was God's will.[342] Lincoln's frequent use of religious imagery and language toward the end of his life may have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to reach his audiences, who were mostly evangelical Protestants.[343] On the day Lincoln was assassinated, he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the Holy Land.[344]
Health
Main article: Health of Abraham Lincoln
 Lincoln in February 1865, two months before his death
Lincoln is believed to have had depression, smallpox, and malaria.[345] He took blue mass pills, which contained mercury,[346] to treat constipation.[347] It is unknown to what extent this may have resulted in mercury poisoning.[348]
Several claims have been made that Lincoln's health was declining before the assassination. These are often based on photographs of Lincoln appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting.[349] It is also suspected that he might have had a rare genetic disease such as Marfan syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B.[349]
Legacy
See also: Cultural depictions of Abraham Lincoln
Republican values
Lincoln's redefinition of republican values has been stressed by historians such as John Patrick Diggins, Harry V. Jaffa, Vernon Burton, Eric Foner, and Herman J. Belz.[350] Lincoln called the Declaration of Independence which emphasized freedom and equality for all the "sheet anchor" of republicanism beginning in the 1850s. He did this at a time when the Constitution, which "tolerated slavery", was the focus of most political discourse.[351] Diggins notes, "Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself" in the 1860 Cooper Union speech.[352] Instead of focusing on the legality of an argument, he focused on the moral basis of republicanism.[353]
His position on war was founded on a legal argument regarding the Constitution as essentially a contract among the states, and all parties must agree to pull out of the contract. Furthermore, it was a national duty to ensure the republic stands in every state.[354] Many soldiers and religious leaders from the north, though, felt the fight for liberty and freedom of slaves was ordained by their moral and religious beliefs.[355]
As a Whig activist, Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, infrastructure improvements, and railroads, in opposition to Jacksonian democrats.[356] Lincoln shared the sympathies that the Jacksonians professed for the common man, but he disagreed with the Jacksonian view that the government should be divorced from economic enterprise.[357] Nevertheless, Lincoln admired Andrew Jackson's steeliness as well as his patriotism.[358] According to historian Sean Wilentz:[358]
Just as the Republican Party of the 1850s absorbed certain elements of Jacksonianism, so Lincoln, whose Whiggery had always been more egalitarian than that of other Whigs, found himself absorbing some of them as well. And some of the Jacksonian spirit resided inside the Lincoln White House.
William C. Harris found that Lincoln's "reverence for the Founding Fathers, the Constitution, the laws under it, and the preservation of the Republic and its institutions strengthened his conservatism."[359] James G. Randall emphasizes his tolerance and moderation "in his preference for orderly progress, his distrust of dangerous agitation, and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform." Randall concludes that "he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of so-called 'radicalism' which involved abuse of the South, hatred for the slaveholder, thirst for vengeance, partisan plotting, and ungenerous demands that Southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders."[360]
Reunification of the states
 Bureau of Engraving and Printing portrait of Lincoln as president
In Lincoln's first inaugural address, he explored the nature of democracy. He denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints. He said "A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people."[361]
The successful reunification of the states had consequences for how people viewed the country. The term "the United States" has historically been used sometimes in the plural ("these United States") and other times in the singular. The Civil War was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 19th century.[362]
Historical reputation
In his company, I was never reminded of my humble origin, or of my unpopular color.[363] Frederick Douglass
In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents conducted since 1948, the top three presidents are Lincoln, Washington, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, although the order varies.[364][o] Between 1999 and 2011, Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, and Ronald Reagan have been the top-ranked presidents in eight public opinion surveys, according to Gallup.[366] A 2004 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked Lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after George Washington.[367]
Lincoln's assassination left him a national martyr. He was viewed by abolitionists as a champion of human liberty. Republicans linked Lincoln's name to their party. Many, though not all, in the South considered Lincoln as a man of outstanding ability.[368] Historians have said he was "a classical liberal" in the 19th-century sense. Allen C. Guelzo states that Lincoln was a "classical liberal democrat an enemy of artificial hierarchy, a friend to trade and business as ennobling and enabling, and an American counterpart to Mill, Cobden, and Bright", whose portrait Lincoln hung in his White House office.[369][370]
Sociologist Barry Schwartz argues that Lincoln's American reputation grew slowly from the late 19th century until the Progressive Era (1900 1920s), when he emerged as one of America's most venerated heroes, even among white Southerners. The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.[371]
Union nationalism, as envisioned by Lincoln, "helped lead America to the nationalism of Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt."[372] In the New Deal era, liberals honored Lincoln not so much as the self-made man or the great war president, but as the advocate of the common man who they claimed would have supported the welfare state.[373]
Lincoln has been also admired by political figures outside the US. German political theorist Karl Marx praised Lincoln for leading his "country through the matchless struggle for the rescue of enchained race and the reconstruction of a social world".[374] Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi said Lincoln was "the greatest President of America. It may safely be said that Lincoln sacrificed his life in order to put an end to the sufferings of others."[375] Former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf hailed Lincoln as a "defender of liberty" and inspiring her country's transition to democracy following a civil war.[376] Libyan revolutionary Muammar Gaddafi said "Lincoln was a man who created himself from nothing without any help from outside or other people. I followed his struggles." [377]
Schwartz argues that in the 1930s and 1940s the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with "a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life." During the Great Depression, he argues, Lincoln served "as a means for seeing the world's disappointments, for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful." Franklin D. Roosevelt, preparing America for war, used the words of the Civil War president to clarify the threat posed by Germany and Japan. Americans asked, "What would Lincoln do?"[378] However, Schwartz also finds that since World War II Lincoln's symbolic power has lost relevance, and this "fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness." He suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept.[379]
In the Cold War years, Lincoln's image shifted to a symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by Communist regimes.[373] He had long been known as the Great Emancipator,[380] but, by the late 1960s, some African American intellectuals, led by Lerone Bennett Jr., denied that Lincoln deserved that title.[381][382] Bennett won wide attention when he called Lincoln a white supremacist in 1968.[383] He noted that Lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks. Bennett argued that Lincoln opposed social equality and proposed that freed slaves voluntarily move to another country. The emphasis shifted away from Lincoln the emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery, or at least were responsible for pressuring the government to emancipate them.[384] Defenders of Lincoln, such as authors Dirck and Cashin, retorted that he was not as bad as most politicians of his day[385] and that he was a "moral visionary" who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause, as fast as politically possible.[386] Dirck stated that few Civil War scholars take Bennett seriously, pointing to his "narrow political agenda and faulty research".[387]
By the 1970s, Lincoln had become a hero to political conservatives[388] apart from neo-Confederates such as Mel Bradford, who denounced his treatment of the white South for his intense nationalism, his support for business, his insistence on stopping the spread of slavery, his acting on Lockean and Burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition, and his devotion to the principles of the Founding Fathers.[389] Lincoln became a favorite of liberal intellectuals across the world.[390]
Barry Schwartz wrote in 2009 that Lincoln's image suffered "erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule" in the late 20th century.[391] On the other hand, Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability, defined by the poet John Keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were "content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts, and not compelled toward fact or reason".[392]
In the 21st century, President Barack Obama named Lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using the Lincoln Bible for his inaugural ceremonies.[393][394][395] Lincoln has often been portrayed by Hollywood, almost always in a flattering light.[396][397]
Memory and memorials
Main article: Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Lincoln's portrait appears on two denominations of United States currency, the penny and the $5 bill. His likeness also appears on many postage stamps.[398] While he is usually portrayed bearded, he did not grow a beard until 1860 at the suggestion of 11-year-old Grace Bedell. He was the first of five presidents to do so.[399]
He has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names,[400] including the capital of Nebraska.[401] The United States Navy Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) is named after Lincoln, the second Navy ship to bear his name.[402] The Lincoln Memorial is one of the most visited monuments in the nation's capital[403] and is one of the top five most visited National Park Service sites in the country.[404] Ford's Theatre, among the most visited sites in Washington, D.C.,[404] is across the street from Petersen House, where Lincoln died.[405] Memorials in Springfield, Illinois, include the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, Lincoln's home, and his tomb.[406] A portrait carving of Lincoln appears with those of three other presidents on Mount Rushmore, which receives about 3 million visitors a year.[407]  An influential statue of Lincoln stands in Lincoln Park, Chicago, with recastings given as diplomatic gifts standing in Parliament Square, London, and Parque Lincoln, Mexico City.[408][409][410]
In 2019, Congress officially dedicated room H-226 in the US Capitol to Abraham Lincoln.[411]  The room is located off of National Statuary Hall and previously served as the post office of the House while then-Representative Abraham Lincoln served in Congress from 1847-1849.[412][413]
Lincoln's image carved into the stone of Mount Rushmore
Abraham Lincoln, a 1909 bronze statue by Adolph Weinman, sits before a historic church in Hodgenville, Kentucky.
The Lincoln memorial postage stamp of 1866 was issued by the U.S. Post Office exactly one year after Lincoln's death.
Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.
The Lincoln cent, an American coin portraying Lincoln
See also
Biography portalAmerican Civil War portalPolitics portalLaw portalKentucky portalIllinois portalUnited States portal
Outline of Abraham Lincoln
Grace Bedell
Lincoln Tower
List of civil rights leaders
List of photographs of Abraham Lincoln
Lincoln (film): 2012 film by Steven Spielberg.
Linconia, a proposed colony in Central America named for Lincoln
Notes
^ a b Discharged from command-rank of Captain and re-enlisted at rank of Private.
^ The identity of Lincoln's grandmother Bathsheba Herring, though without certainty, is the consensus of multiple Lincoln biographers. She was the daughter of Alexander and Abigail Herring (n e Harrison).[4]
^ Thomas, born January 1778, would have been 8 at the attack, May 1786. Older sources use six.[7]
^ Their land eventually became part of Space, when the county was established in 1818.[15]
^ Historians disagree on who initiated the move; Thomas Lincoln had no obvious reason to do so. One possibility is that other members of the family, including Dennis Hanks, may not have matched Thomas's stability and steady income.[36]
^ The Lincolns' last descendant, great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith, died in 1985.[53]
^ Lincoln was a descendant of the Harrisons through his grandmother, Bathsheba Herring.[98]
^ Eric Foner contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast, who saw slavery as a sin, with the conservative Republicans, who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress. Foner argues that Lincoln was in the middle, opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers, especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the Declaration of Independence.[116]
^ Although the name of the Supreme Court case is Dred Scott v. Sandford, the respondent's surname was actually "Sanford". A clerk misspelled the name, and the court never corrected the error.[117]
^ Major Northern newspapers, however, demanded more they expected victory within 90 days.[198]
^ At the moment of death some observers said his face seemed to relax into a smile.[313][314][315][316]
^ Other versions of the quotation have been offered, including "He now belongs to the ages," "He is a man for the ages," and "Now he belongs to the angels." Gopnik, Adam, "Angels and Ages: Lincoln's language and its legacy," The New Yorker, May 21, 2007.
^ On claims that Lincoln was baptized by an associate of Alexander Campbell, see Martin, Jim (1996). "The secret baptism of Abraham Lincoln". Restoration Quarterly. 38 (2). Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012.
^ Lincoln wrote to Thurlow Weed on March 4, 1865, "on the recent Inaugeral [sic] Address. I expect the latter to wear as well as perhaps better than any thing I have produced...."
^ While the book Rating The Presidents: A Ranking of U.S. Leaders, From the Great and Honorable to the Dishonest and Incompetent acknowledges that polls have rated Lincoln among the top presidents since 1948, the authors find him to be among the two best presidents, along with Franklin Delano Roosevelt.[365]
References
^ Carpenter, Francis B. (1866). Six Months in the White House: The Story of a Picture. Hurd and Houghton. p. 217.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 20 22.
^ Warren 2017, p. 3 4.
^ Harrison 1935, p. 276.
^ Warren 2017, p. 4.
^ a b Donald 1996, p. 21.
^ Wilson et al. 1998, pp. 35 36.
^ Bartelt 2008, p. 79.
^ Warren 2017, p. 9.
^ Warren 2017, p. 9 10.
^ Sandburg 1926, p. 20.
^ Warren 2017, p. 13.
^ Warren 2017, p. 26.
^ Warren 2017, p. 16, 43.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 3, 5, 16.
^ Sandburg 1926, p. 20; Donald 1996, pp. 23 24.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 34, 156.
^ Donald 1996, p. 22 24.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 24, 104.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 22 23, 77.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 34, 116.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 23, 83.
^ Donald 1996, p. 26 27.
^ White 2009, pp. 25, 31, 47.
^ Bartelt 2008, p. 66.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 10, 33.
^ Donald 1996, p. 23.
^ Donald 1996, p. 29.
^ Madison 2014, p. 110.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 29 31, 38 43.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 30 33.
^ Warren 2017, p. 134 135.
^ Dellinger, Bob. "Wrestling in the USA". National Wrestling Hall of Fame. Retrieved April 9, 2021.
^ Donald 1996, p. 41.
^ a b Donald 1996, p. 36.
^ Bartelt 2008, pp. 38 40.
^ Bartelt 2008, p. 71.
^ Oates 1974, pp. 15 17.
^ Thomas 2008, pp. 23 53.
^ Sandburg 1926, pp. 22 23; Donald 1996, p. 38.
^ Gannett, Lewis (Winter 2005). "'Overwhelming Evidence' of a Lincoln-Ann Rutledge Romance?: Reexamining Rutledge Family Reminiscences". Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association. Springfield, IL: The Abraham Lincoln Association. pp. 28 41. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 55 58.
^ a b Shenk, Joshua Wolf (October 2005). "Lincoln's Great Depression". The Atlantic. The Atlantic Monthly Group. Archived from the original on October 9, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2009.
^ Siegel, Robert (October 26, 2005). "Exploring Abraham Lincoln's 'Melancholy'". Retrieved February 17, 2023.
^ Thomas 2008, pp. 56 57, 69 70.
^ Donald 1996, p. 67.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 80 86.
^ Lamb & Swain 2008, p. 3.
^ Sandburg 1926, pp. 46 51.
^ Donald 1996, p. 93.
^ Baker 1989, p. 142.
^ White 2009, pp. 179 181, 476.
^ Emerson, Jason (2012). Giant in the Shadows: The Life of Robert T. Lincoln. SIU Press. p. 420. ISBN 978-0-8093-3055-3. Retrieved June 27, 2015.
^ White 2009, p. 126.
^ Baker 1989, p. 120.
^ Hertz, Emanuel (1938). The Hidden Lincoln. The Viking Press. p. 105.
^ Steers 2010, p. 341.
^ Winkle 2001, pp. 86 95.
^ Blazeski, Goran (October 15, 2016). "Abraham Lincoln was the only President who was also a licensed bartender". The Vintage News. Retrieved March 4, 2022.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (1832). "The Improvement of Sangamon River".  In Miller, Marion Mills (ed.). Life and Works of Abraham Lincoln Volume 3. Wildside Press. ISBN 978-1-4344-2497-6. WP article
^ Winkle 2001, pp. 114 116.
^ a b Stone, Zofia (2016). Abraham Lincoln: A Biography. Alpha Editions. p. 16. ISBN 978-9-3863-6727-3   via Google Books.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 53 55.
^ White 2009, p. 59.
^ Simon 1990, p. 283.
^ Weik, Jesse William. "Abraham Lincoln and Internal Improvements". Abraham Lincoln's Classroom. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved February 12, 2015.
^ Simon 1990, p. 130.
^ Donald 1996, p. 134.
^ Foner 2010, p. 17 19, 67.
^ Donald 1996, p. 64.
^ White 2009, pp. 71, 79, 108.
^ Donald 1996, p. 17.
^ Donald 1996, p. 222.
^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002, pp. 137 153.
^ Oates 1974, p. 79.
^ "US Congressman Lincoln   Abraham Lincoln Historical Society". Abraham-lincoln-history.org. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2019.
^ Harris 2007, p. 54; Foner 2010, p. 57.
^ "LINCOLN, Abraham | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. Retrieved July 1, 2022.
^ Heidler & Heidler 2006, pp. 181 183.
^ Holzer 2004, p. 63.
^ Oates 1974, pp. 79 80.
^ Graebner 1959, pp. 199 202.
^ "Lincoln's Spot Resolutions". National Archives. Archived from the original on September 20, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2009.
^ Donald 1996, p. 128.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 124 126.
^ Donald 1996, p. 140.
^ Arnold, Isaac Newton (1885). The Life of Abraham Lincoln. Vol. 2. Chicago, IL: Janses, McClurg, & Company. p. 81.
^ Harris 2007, pp. 55 57.
^ Donald 1996, p. 96.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 105 106, 158.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 142 143.
^ McGinty, Brian (February 9, 2015). Lincoln's Greatest Case: The River, the Bridge, and the Making of America. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-87140-785-6.
^ "Abraham Lincoln's Patent Model: Improvement for Buoying Vessels Over Shoals". Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2017.
^ Richards 2015, p. 440.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 155 156, 196 197.
^ Library, Philosophical (November 9, 2010). The Wisdom of Abraham Lincoln. Open Road Media. ISBN 978-1-4532-0281-4.
^ a b c Donald 1996, pp. 150 151.
^ Harrison 1935, pp. 280 286, 350 351.
^ Harrison 1935.
^ Mitgang, Herbert; Times, Special To the New York (February 10, 1989). "THE LAW; Lincoln as Lawyer: Transcript Tells Murder Story". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 13, 2022.
^ White 2009, pp. 175 176.
^ White 2009, pp. 182 185.
^ White 2009, pp. 188 190.
^ Thomas 2008, pp. 148 152.
^ Graebner 1959, p. 255.
^ a b White 2009, pp. 203 205.
^ White 2009, pp. 215 216.
^ McGovern 2009, pp. 38 39.
^ White 2009, pp. 203 204.
^ White 2009, pp. 191 194.
^ Oates 1974, p. 119.
^ White 2009, pp. 205 208.
^ White 2009, pp. 216 221.
^ White 2009, pp. 224 228.
^ White 2009, pp. 229 230.
^ Foner 2010, pp. 84 88.
^ Vishneski, John (1988). "What the Court Decided in Dred Scott v. Sandford". The American Journal of Legal History. Temple University. 32 (4): 373 390. doi:10.2307/845743. JSTOR 845743.
^ White 2009, pp. 236 238.
^ Zarefsky 1993, pp. 69 110.
^ Jaffa 2000, pp. 299 300.
^ a b White 2009, pp. 247 248.
^ Oates 1974, pp. 138 139.
^ White 2009, pp. 247 250.
^ White 2009, p. 251.
^ Harris 2007, p. 98.
^ Donald 1996, p. 209.
^ White 2009, pp. 257 258.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 214 218.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 214 224.
^ Donald 1996, p. 223.
^ Carwardine 2003, pp. 89 90.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 242, 412.
^ White 2009, pp. 291 293.
^ White 2009, pp. 307 308.
^ Donald 1996, p. 200.
^ Morse 1893, p. 112.
^ Jaffa 2000, p. 473.
^ Holzer 2004, pp. 108 111.
^ Carwardine 2003, p. 97; Holzer 2004, p. 157.
^ Donald 1996, p. 240.
^ Donald 1996, p. 241.
^ Donald 1996, p. 244.
^ Oates 1974, pp. 175 176.
^ Donald 1996, p. 245.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (December 20, 1859). "Herewith is a little sketch, as you requested". Letter to Jesse W. Fell. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017.
^ Martinez, J. Michael (2011). Coming for to Carry Me Home: Race in America from Abolitionism to Jim Crow. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-4422-1500-9.
^ Luthin 1944, pp. 609 629.
^ Hofstadter 1938, pp. 50 55.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 247 250.
^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002, pp. 10, 13, 18.
^ Donald 1996, p. 253.
^ Chadwick, Bruce (2009). Lincoln for President: An Unlikely Candidate, An Audacious Strategy, and the Victory No One Saw Coming. Naperville, Illinois: Sourcebooks. pp. 147 149. ISBN 978-1-4022-4756-9. Retrieved April 1, 2017.
^ Murrin, John (2006). Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People. Belmont: Clark Baxter. p. 464. ISBN 978-0-495-91588-1
^ Donald 1996, pp. 254 256.
^ Donald 1996, p. 254.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 251 252.
^ Mansch 2005, p. 61.
^ Donald 1996, p. 256.
^ White 2009, p. 350.
^ Nevins 1947, p. 4:312.
^ "Affairs of the Nation / The Change of Administration To-Day". The New York Times. March 4, 1861. p. 1.
^ Edgar 1998, p. 350.
^ Donald 1996, p. 267; Potter 1977.
^ Donald 1996, p. 267.
^ White 2009, p. 362.
^ Potter 1977, pp. 520, 569 570.
^ White 2009, p. 369.
^ White 2009, pp. 360 361.
^ Donald 1996, p. 268.
^ Vorenberg 2001, p. 22; Vile 2003, pp. 280 281.
^ Lupton 2006, p. 34.
^ "Broadside, "President Lincoln's Farewell Address to His Old Neighbors, Springfield, February 12, 1861"   The Henry Ford". www.thehenryford.org. Retrieved December 5, 2020.
^ "Lincoln's Farewell Address   Illinois History & Lincoln Collections". Retrieved December 5, 2020.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 273 277.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 277 279.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (March 8, 2001). "Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 4".
^ Sandburg 2002, p. 212.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 283 284.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 268, 279.
^ Nevins 1959, p. 5:29.
^ Sherman 1990, pp. 185 186.
^ Donald 1996, p. 293.
^ Oates 1974, p. 226.
^ Heidler, Heidler & Coles 2002, p. 174.
^ "One significant point of disagreement among historians and political scientists is whether Roger Taney heard Ex parte Merryman as a U.S. circuit judge or as a Supreme Court justice in chambers." White, Jonathan W., Abraham Lincoln and Treason in the Civil War: The Trials of John Merryman, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2011, pp. 38-39.
^ Harris 2011, pp. 59 71.
^ Neely 1992, pp. 3 31.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 303 304; Carwardine 2003, pp. 163 164.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 315 339, 417.
^ Donald 1996, p. 314; Carwardine 2003, p. 178.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 314 317.
^ Carwardine 2003, p. 181.
^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002, pp. 213 214.
^ Donald 1996, p. 322.
^ Randall, James Garfield (1946). Lincoln the President: Springfield to Gettysburg. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-306-80754-1. quoted in Peraino, Kevin (2013) Lincoln in the World: The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power. pp. 160 61. ISBN 978-0-307-88720-7
^ Oates 1974, p. 115.
^ Thomas, Benjamin Platt; Hyman, Harold Melvin (1962). Stanton: The Life and Times of Lincoln's Secretary of War. Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 71, 87, 229 30, 385 (quote).
^ Donald 1996, pp. 295 296.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 391 392.
^ Ambrose 1996, pp. 7, 66, 159.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 432 436.
^ "The President at West Point". The New York Times. New York. June 26, 1862. p. 8. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022   via Newspapers.com. the President and Gen. Scott spent several hours in discussing the state of military affairs, the doings and misdoings of certain Generals, the desirability of continuing the existing Departmental divisions, the necessity of further enlistments, the prospect of the armies of the Potomac and of the Virginia valleys . . . .
^ "The President at West Point". Brooklyn Evening Star. New York. Copy from N.Y. Express. June 25, 1862. p. 3. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022   via Newspapers.com. they were in earnest conversation for five hours
^ Donald 1996, pp. 318 319.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 349 352.
^ "Henry W. Halleck". American Battlefield Trust. June 15, 2011. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 7, 2018.
^ Nevins 1947, pp. 159 162.
^ Nevins 1959, pp. 159 162.
^ Goodwin 2005, pp. 478 479.
^ Goodwin 2005, pp. 478 480.
^ Goodwin 2005, p. 481.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 389 390.
^ Nevins 1947, pp. 433 444; Donald 1996, pp. 429 431.
^ Nevins 1947, p. 322.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 422 423.
^ Nevins 1947, pp. 432 450.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 444 447.
^ Mackubin, Thomas Owens (March 25, 2004). "The Liberator". National Review. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2008.
^ Guelzo 1999, pp. 290 291.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 364 365.
^ McPherson 1992, p. 124.
^ Guelzo 2004, pp. 147 153.
^ Graebner 1959, p. 388.
^ "The Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, 1862". www.archives.gov.
^ "Transcript of the Proclamation". National Archives. October 6, 2015.
^ Address, Mailing; Greeneville, rew Johnson National Historic Site 121 Monument Ave; Us, TN 37743 Phone: 423 638-3551 Contact. "Andrew Johnson and Emancipation in Tennessee - Andrew Johnson National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov.
^ Donald 1996, p. 379.
^ Donald 1996, p. 407.
^ Louis P. Masur (2012). Lincoln's Hundred Days: The Emancipation Proclamation and the War for the Union. Harvard University Press.
^ James M. McPherson, "Who Freed the Slaves?" Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 139.1 (1995): 1-10.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 430 431.
^ Donald 1996, p. 431.
^ Conant, Sean (2015). The Gettysburg Address: Perspectives on Lincoln's Greatest Speech. New York: Oxford University Press. p. ix. ISBN 978-0-19-022745-6.
^ Holsinger, M. Paul (1999). War and American Popular Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-313-29908-7.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 453 460.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 460 466; Wills 2012, pp. 20, 27, 105, 146.
^ Bulla & Borchard 2010, p. 222.
^ Thomas 2008, p. 315.
^ Nevins 1947, pp. 4:6 17.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 490 492.
^ "Message of President Abraham Lincoln Nominating Ulysses S. Grant to Be Lieutenant General of the Army". National Archives. August 15, 2016.
^ McPherson 2009, p. 113.
^ Donald 1996, p. 501.
^ "The Peacemakers". The White House Historical Association. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2009.
^ Thomas 2008, pp. 422 424.
^ Neely 2004, pp. 434 458.
^ Thomas 2008, p. 434.
^ Donald 1996, p. 565.
^ Donald 1996, p. 589.
^ Fish 1902, pp. 53 69; Tegeder 1948, pp. 77 90.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 494 507.
^ Grimsley & Simpson 2001, p. 80.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (2001) [1953]. "Memorandum Concerning His Probable Failure of Re-election". Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 7. p. 514.
^ Donald 1996, p. 531.
^ Randall & Current 1955, p. 307.
^ Grimsley & Simpson 2001, p. 80; Paludan 1994, pp. 274 293.
^ Noll 2002, p. 426.
^ Lincoln, Abraham Abraham Lincoln: Selected Speeches and Writings (Library of America edition, 2009) p 450
^ Thomas 2008, pp. 509 512.
^ Koehn, Nancy (2017). Forged in Crisis: The Making of Five Legendary Leaders. NY: Scribner. p. 191. ISBN 978-1-5011-7444-5.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 471 472.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 485 486.
^ Nevins 1947, p. 4:206.
^ Donald 1996, p. 561.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 562 563.
^ "Primary Documents in American History: 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 10, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2011.
^ Carwardine 2003, pp. 242 243.
^ Lincove, David A. (2000). Reconstruction in the United States: An Annotated Bibliography. Greenwood. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-313-29199-9.
^ Foner 2010, p. 335.
^ 
Abraham Lincoln Sr.(1744-1786), Kentucky's Abraham Lincoln, Kentucky Historical Society, 100 West Broadway, Frankfort, Kentucky [1]
^  
Captain Abraham Lincoln of the Illinois militia, Renee Hylton, National Guard Bureau, 111 S. George Mason Dr.
Arlington, VA 22204, Feb. 12, 2009 [2]
^ Nichols 1974, pp. 3, 4.
^ Bulla & Borchard 2010, p. 480.
^ Nichols 1974, pp. 4 5, 7.
^ Burlingame 2008, p. 481; Nichols 1974, p. 7.
^ Nichols 1974, p. 7.
^ a b Bulla & Borchard 2010, p. 481.
^ Mille Lacs Band letter, The Weekly Pioneer and Democrat Sept 19, 1862 in St Paul, p. 3 [3]
^ Burlingame 2008, p. 702.
^ Mille Lacs Band offer to fight Sioux,  Goodhue Republican Vol. 6 No. 3, Sept 12, 1863,  [4]
^ Carley, Kenneth (2001). The Dakota War of 1862. Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 209.
^ Carley, Kenneth (1976). The Sioux Uprising of 1862. Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 175.
^ Perman, Michael; Taylor, Amy Murrell, eds. (2013). The Civil War and Reconstruction: A Documentary Reader. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 105.
^ Nichols, David A. (1978). Lincoln and the Indians: Civil War Policy and Politics. University of Missouri Press. p. 121.
^ Armstrong and a delegation of Chippewa chiefs meet with Lincoln, Travis Armstrong,  Leech Lake (Pillager) Reservation Band of Ojibwe Indians of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe [5]
^ Chippewa Chiefs held a war council with Gov. Ramsey to fight the Sioux on September 26, 1862 [6]
^ Difference Between Court-Martial and Military Tribunal, Ernesto Gapasin, Military Trial Lawyers, Gapasin Law Group, LLC Blog,  1736 E Sunshine St Suite 713, Springfield, MO., Oct 26, 2015, [7]
^ Carley, Kenneth (2001). The Dakota War of 1862. Minnesota Historical Society Press.
^ Burlingame, Michael, Abraham Lincoln: A Life, Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press, vol. 2, p. 483.
^ Donald 1996, p. 137.
^ Paludan 1994, p. 116.
^ McPherson 2009, pp. 450 452.
^ Goodwin 2005, p. 319.
^ Goodwin 2005.
^ Summers, Robert. "Abraham Lincoln". Internet Public Library 2 (IPL2). U. Michigan and Drexel U. Archived from the original on October 2, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2012.
^ 1634 1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700 1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800 present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800 ". Retrieved April 16, 2022.
^ a b Donald 1996, p. 424.
^ Paludan 1994, p. 111.
^ Brands, H. W. (2011). Greenback Planet: How the Dollar Conquered the World and Threatened Civilization as We Know It. University of Texas Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-292-73933-8.
^ Donald 1996, p. 501 502.
^ a b c Donald 1996, p. 471.
^ Schaffer, Jeffrey P. (1999). Yosemite National Park: A Natural History Guide to Yosemite and Its Trails. Berkeley: Wilderness Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-89997-244-2.
^ Blue 1987, p. 245.
^ Neill F. Sanders, " 'When A House Is on Fire': The English Consulates and Lincoln's Patronage Policy." Lincoln Herald (1981) 83#4 pp 579-59.
^ Kevin Peraino, Lincoln in the World: The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power (2014). pp 138 169.
^ Peraino, Lincoln in the World pp 3 16.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 586 587.
^ Harrison 2010, pp. 3 4.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 594 597.
^ "The United States Secret Service in History". The White House. January March 1998. Retrieved November 13, 2022.
^ Donald 1996, p. 597; Martin 2010.
^ Steers 2010, p. 153.
^ Fox, Richard (2015). Lincoln's Body: A Cultural History. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-24724-4.
^ Abel, E. Lawrence (2015). A Finger in Lincoln's Brain: What Modern Science Reveals about Lincoln, His Assassination, and Its Aftermath. ABC-CLIO. Chapter 14. ISBN 978-1-4408-3118-8.
^ "OUR GREAT LOSS; The Assassination of President Lincoln". The New York Times. April 17, 1865. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 13, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2016.
^ Hay, John (1915). The Life and Letters of John Hay Volume 1. Houghton Mifflin Company. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2018. Quote's original source is Hay's diary which is quoted in "Abraham Lincoln: A History", Volume 10, Page 292 by John G. Nicolay and John Hay
^ Donald 1996, pp. 598 599, 686.
^ Hoch, Bradley R. (September 4, 2001). The Lincoln Trail in Pennsylvania: A History and Guide. Penn State Press. pp. 121 123. ISBN 978-0-271-07222-7.
^ Trefousse, Hans L. (1989). Andrew Johnson: A Biography. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 194.
^ Steers 2010, p. 153; Donald 1996, p. 599.
^ Trostel 2002, pp. 31 58.
^ Trostel 2002, pp. 31 58; Goodrich 2005, pp. 231 238.
^ Peck, Garrett (2015). Walt Whitman in Washington, D.C.: The Civil War and America's Great Poet. Charleston, SC: The History Press. pp. 118 23. ISBN 978-1-62619-973-6.
^ Hodes 2015, p. 164.
^ Hodes 2015, pp. 197 199.
^ Hodes 2015, pp. 84, 86, 96 97.
^ "Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings   Lincoln Tomb, Illinois". National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 30, 2009.
^ Carwardine 2003, p. 4; Wilson 1999, p. 84.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 48 49, 514 515.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (2001) [1953]. "Handbill Replying to Charges of Infidelity". Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 1. p. 383.
^ a b Noll 1992.
^ "Religious Quotations by Abraham Lincoln". www.abrahamlincolnonline.org. Retrieved March 14, 2020.
^ Donald 1996, pp. 48 49.
^ Parrillo 2000, pp. 227 253.
^ White 2009, p. 180.
^ Brodrecht, Grant R. (2008). "Our Country": Northern Evangelicals and the Union During the Civil War and Reconstruction. University of Notre Dame.
^ Wilson 1999, pp. 251 254.
^ Wilson 1999, p. 254.
^ "Letter by Abraham Lincoln to Albert Hodges". www.abrahamlincolnonline.org. Retrieved March 14, 2020.
^ Wills, Garry (September 1, 1999). "Lincoln's Greatest Speech". The Atlantic. Retrieved March 14, 2020.; White Jr., Ronald C., Lincoln's Greatest Speech: The Second Inaugural, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2002.
^ Lincoln, Abraham (2001) [1953]. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 8.
^ "Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States: from George Washington 1789 to George Bush 1989". avalon.law.yale.edu. Retrieved March 14, 2020.
^ Carwardine 2003, pp. 27 55.
^ Guelzo 1999, p. 434.
^ "What Can Lincoln's DNA Tell Us?". February 13, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2020.
^ Hirschhorn, Norbert; Feldman, Robert G.; Greaves, Ian (Summer 2001). "Abraham Lincoln's Blue Pills: Did Our 16th President Suffer from Mercury Poisoning?". Perspectives in Biology and Medicine. Johns Hopkins University Press. 44 (3): 315 322. doi:10.1353/pbm.2001.0048. PMID 11482002. S2CID 37918186. Retrieved September 10, 2021.
^ Sotos, John G. (2008). The Physical Lincoln Sourcebook. Mt. Vernon Book Systems. ISBN 978-0-9818193-3-4.
^ Mayell, Hillary (July 17, 2001). "Did Mercury in 'Little Blue Pills' Make Abraham Lincoln Erratic?". National Geographic News. Retrieved October 12, 2009.
^ a b Verghese, Abraham (May 20, 2009). "Was Lincoln Dying Before He Was Shot?". The Atlantic. Palo Alto, California. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014.
^ Thomas 2008, p. 61.
^ Jaffa 2000, p. 399; Thomas 2008, p. 61.
^ Diggins 1986, p. 307; Thomas 2008, p. 61.
^ Foner 2010, p. 215; Thomas 2008, p. 61.
^ Jaffa 2000, p. 263; Thomas 2008, p. 61.
^ Burton, Orville Vernon (2008). The Age of Lincoln: A History. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-1-4299-3955-3.
^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002, pp. 196 198, 229 231, 301.
^ Current 1999.
^ a b Wilentz 2012.
^ Harris 2007, p. 2.
^ Randall 1962, p. 175.
^ Belz 1998, p. 86.
^ Burt, Andrew (May 13, 2013). "'These United States': How Obama's Vocal Tic Reveals a Polarized America". The Atlantic. Retrieved February 14, 2020.
^ Douglass 2008, pp. 259 260.
^ Lindgren, James (November 16, 2000). "Rating the Presidents of the United States, 1789 2000". The Federalist Society. Retrieved February 14, 2020.
^ Densen, John V., ed. (2001). Reassessing The Presidency, The Rise of the Executive State and the Decline of Freedom. Auburn, Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute. pp. ix, 1 32. ISBN 978-0-945466-29-1.
^ Newport, Frank (February 28, 2011). "Americans Say Reagan Is the Greatest U.S. President". Gallup.com. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2019.
^ Taranto & Leo 2004, p. 264.
^ Chesebrough 1994, pp. 76, 79, 106, 110.
^ Fornieri, Joseph R.; Gabbard, Sara Vaughn (2008). Lincoln's America: 1809 1865. Carbondale, Illinois: SIU Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-8093-8713-7.
^ Randall 1962, pp. 65 87.
^ Schwartz 2000, p. 109.
^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002, p. 222.
^ a b Schwartz 2008, pp. 23, 91 98.
^ Samuels, Shirley (2012). The Cambridge Companion to Abraham Lincoln. Cambridge Companions to American Studies. Cambridge University Press. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-521-19316-0.
^ John Avlon (2023). Lincoln and the Fight for Peace. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781982108137.
^ Gaines, Kevin (September 8, 2011). "From Colonization to Anti-colonialism". The Global Lincoln. Oxford University Press. pp. 259 271. doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780195379112.003.0015. ISBN 978-0-19-537911-2.
^  ,  . (2022).    :     (in Russian). Litres. p. 93. ISBN 978-5-04-333255-4. Retrieved March 24, 2023.
^ Schwartz 2008, pp. xi, 9, 24.
^ Schwartz 2008, pp. xi, 9.
^ The origin of the nickname is unknown. "A Civil War Mystery: Who Named Lincoln the 'Great Emancipator'?" Wheeler, Linda, The Washington Post, May 17, 2001.
^ Zilversmit, Arthur (1980). "Lincoln and the Problem of Race: A Decade of Interpretations". Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association. Springfield, Illinois: Abraham Lincoln Association. 2 (1): 22 24. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2018.
^ Barr, John M. (Winter 2014). "Holding Up a Flawed Mirror to the American Soul: Abraham Lincoln in the Writings of Lerone Bennett Jr". Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association. Springfield, Illinois: Abraham Lincoln Association. 35 (1): 43 65.
^ Bennett 1968, pp. 35 42.
^ Cashin 2002, p. 61; Kelley & Lewis 2005, p. 228.
^ Dirck 2008, p. 31.
^ Striner 2006, pp. 2 4.
^ Dirck 2009, p. 382.
^ Havers, Grant N. (November 13, 2009). Lincoln and the Politics of Christian Love. University of Missouri Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-8262-1857-5.
^ Belz 2014, pp. 514 518; Graebner 1959, pp. 67 94; Smith 2010, pp. 43 45.
^ Carwardine, Richard; Sexton, Jay, eds. (2011). The Global Lincoln. Oxford, England: Oxford UP. pp. 7, 9 10, 54. ISBN 978-0-19-537911-2.
^ Schwartz 2008, p. 146.
^ Donald 1996, p. 15.
^ Hirschkorn, Phil (January 17, 2009). "The Obama-Lincoln Parallel: A Closer Look". CBS News. New York City: CBS Corporation. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2017.
^ Jackson, David (January 10, 2013). "Obama to be sworn in with Lincoln, King Bibles". USA Today. Mclean, Virginia. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2016.
^ Hornick, Ed (January 18, 2009). "For Obama, Lincoln was model president". CNN. Atlanta, Georgia: Turner Broadcasting Systems. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2018.
^ Spielberg, Steven; Kushner, Tony; Kearns Goodwin, Doris (2012). "Mr. Lincoln Goes to Hollywood". Smithsonian. Vol. 43, no. 7. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. pp. 46 53.
^ Stokes, Melvyn (2011). "Abraham Lincoln and the Movies". American Nineteenth Century History. 12 (2): 203 231. doi:10.1080/14664658.2011.594651. S2CID 146375501.
^ Houseman, Donna; Kloetzel, James E.; Snee, Chad (October 2018). Scott Specialized Catalogue of United States Stamps & Covers 2019. Amos Media Company. ISBN 978-0-89487-559-5.
^ Collea 2018, pp. 13 14.
^ Dennis 2018, p. 194.
^ Dennis 2018, p. 197.
^ "History of USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN 72)". United States Department of the Navy. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2020.
^ Pearson, Michael (February 16, 2016). "$18.5 million gift to help refurbish Lincoln Memorial". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2020.
^ a b Nyce, Caroline Mimbs (May 21, 2015). "15 Most Visited National Landmarks in Washington, D.C." The Atlantic. Retrieved February 13, 2020.
^ "The Petersen House   Ford's Theatre". U.S. National Park Service. Retrieved February 13, 2020.
^ "Abraham Lincoln Historical Tours in Springfield, Illinois". lincolnlibraryandmuseum.com. Retrieved February 13, 2020.
^ "Mount Rushmore National Memorial". U.S. National Park Service. Archived from the original on October 1, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2010.
^ "Abraham Lincoln in Cornish". nps.gov. April 18, 2016.
^ Katz, Jamie. "Why Abraham Lincoln Was Revered in Mexico". Smithsonian. Retrieved December 24, 2018.
^ Tolles, Thayer (2013). "Abraham Lincoln: The Man (Standing Lincoln): a bronze statuette by Augustus Saint-Gaudens". Metropolitan Museum Journal. 48: 223 37. doi:10.1086/675325. S2CID 192203987.
^ "Congress Dedicates Lincoln Room | U.S. Capitol Historical Society". United States Capitol Historical Society. June 12, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2022.
^ "Legislation to Name Room in US Capitol "Lincoln Room" Passes House". Congressman Darin LaHood. December 21, 2018. Retrieved June 12, 2022.
^ "LINCOLN, Abraham | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. Retrieved June 12, 2022.
Bibliography
See also: Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1996). Halleck: Lincoln's Chief of Staff. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: LSU Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-5539-4.
Baker, Jean H. (1989). Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography. New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-30586-9.
Bartelt, William E. (2008). There I Grew Up: Remembering Abraham Lincoln's Indiana Youth. Indianapolis, Indiana: Indiana Historical Society Press. ISBN 978-0-87195-263-9.
Belz, Herman (1998). Abraham Lincoln, constitutionalism, and equal rights in the Civil War era. New York, New York: Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-1768-7.
Belz, Herman (2014). "Lincoln, Abraham".  In Frohnen, Bruce; Beer, Jeremy; Nelson, Jeffrey O (eds.). American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia. Open Road Media. ISBN 978-1-932236-43-9.
Bennett, Lerone Jr. (1968). "Was Abe Lincoln a White Supremacist?". Ebony. Vol. 23, no. 4. ISSN 0012-9011.
Blue, Frederick J. (1987). Salmon P. Chase: A Life in Politics. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-340-0.
Boritt, Gabor S.; Pinsker, Matthew (2002). "Abraham Lincoln".  In Graff, Henry (ed.). The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). ISBN 978-0-684-80551-1.
Bulla, David W.; Borchard, Gregory A. (2010). Journalism in the Civil War Era. New York, New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0722-1.
Burlingame, Michael (2008). Abraham Lincoln: A Life. (2 vols.)
Carwardine, Richard J. (2003). Lincoln. London, England: Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-03279-8.
Cashin, Joan E. (2002). The War was You and Me: Civilians in the American Civil War. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09174-7.
Chesebrough, David B. (1994). No Sorrow Like Our Sorrow: Northern Protestant Ministers and the Assassination of Lincoln. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-491-9.
Collea, Joseph D. Collea Jr. (September 20, 2018). New York and the Lincoln Specials: The President's Pre-Inaugural and Funeral Trains Cross the Empire State. McFarland. pp. 13 14. ISBN 978-1-4766-3324-4.
Cox, Hank H. (2005). Lincoln and the Sioux Uprising of 1862. Nashville, Tennessee: Cumberland House. ISBN 978-1-58182-457-5.[permanent dead link]
Current, Richard N. (July 28, 1999). "Abraham Lincoln - Early political career". Encyclopedia Britannica.
Dennis, Matthew (2018). Red, White, and Blue Letter Days: An American Calendar. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-2370-4.
Diggins, John P. (1986). The Lost Soul of American Politics: Virtue, Self-Interest, and the Foundations of Liberalism. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-14877-9.
Dirck, Brian (September 2009). "Father Abraham: Lincoln's Relentless Struggle to End Slavery, and: Act of Justice: Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation and the Law of War, and: Lincoln and Freedom: Slavery, Emancipation, and the Thirteenth Amendment (review)". Civil War History. 55 (3): 382 385. doi:10.1353/cwh.0.0090.
Dirck, Brian R. (2008). Lincoln the Lawyer. Champaign, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07614-5.
Donald, David Herbert (1996). Lincoln. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-82535-9.
Douglass, Frederick (2008). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass. New York, New York: Cosimo Classics. ISBN 978-1-60520-399-7.
Edgar, Walter B. (1998). South Carolina: A History. Columbia, South Carolina: University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-57003-255-4.
Ellenberg, Jordan (May 23, 2021). "What Honest Abe Learned from Geometry". Wall Street Journal. 278 (119): C3. Ellenberg's essay is adapted from his 2021 book, Shape: The Hidden Geometry of Information, Biology, Strategy, Democracy, and Everything Else, Penguin Press. ISBN 9781984879059
Fish, Carl Russell (1902). "Lincoln and the Patronage". The American Historical Review. 8 (1): 53 69. doi:10.2307/1832574. JSTOR 1832574.
Foner, Eric (2010). The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery. New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06618-0.
Goodrich, Thomas (2005). The Darkest Dawn: Lincoln, Booth, and the Great American Tragedy. Indianapolis, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-34567-7.
Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2005). Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-82490-1.
Graebner, Norman (1959). "Abraham Lincoln: Conservative Statesman".  In Basler, Roy Prentice (ed.). The enduring Lincoln: Lincoln sesquicentennial lectures at the University of Illinois. Champaign, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. OCLC 428674.
Grimsley, Mark; Simpson, Brooks D. (2001). The Collapse of the Confederacy. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2170-3.
Guelzo, Allen C. (1999). Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-3872-8.. Second edition, 2022. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-7858-8
Guelzo, Allen C. (2004). Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation: The End of Slavery in America. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-2182-5.
Harrison, J. Houston (1935). Settlers by the Long Grey Trail. Joseph K. Ruebush Co.
Harrison, Lowell (2010). Lincoln of Kentucky. Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2940-2.
Harris, William C. (2007). Lincoln's Rise to the Presidency. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1520-9.
Harris, William C. (2011). Lincoln and the Border States: Preserving the Union. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.
Heidler, David Stephen; Heidler, Jeanne T.; Coles, David J., eds. (2002). Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History. New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04758-5.
Heidler, David Stephen; Heidler, Jeanne T. (2006). The Mexican War. Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-32792-6.
Hodes, Martha (2015). Mourning Lincoln. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-21356-0.
Hofstadter, Richard (1938). "The Tariff Issue on the Eve of the Civil War". The American Historical Review. 44 (1): 50 55. doi:10.2307/1840850. JSTOR 1840850.
Holzer, Harold (2004). Lincoln at Cooper Union: The Speech That Made Abraham Lincoln President. New York, New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-9964-0.
Jaffa, Harry V. (2000). A New Birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9952-0.
Kelley, Robin D. G.; Lewis, Earl (2005). To Make Our World Anew: Volume I: A History of African Americans to 1880. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-804006-4.
Lamb, Brian P.; Swain, Susan, eds. (2008). Abraham Lincoln: Great American Historians on Our Sixteenth President. New York, New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-676-1.
Lupton, John A. (2006). "Abraham Lincoln and the Corwin Amendment". Illinois Heritage. 9 (5): 34. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016.
Luthin, Reinhard H. (1944). "Abraham Lincoln and the Tariff". The American Historical Review. 49 (4): 609 629. doi:10.2307/1850218. JSTOR 1850218.
Madison, James H. (2014). Hoosiers: A New History of Indiana. Indianapolis, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-01308-8.
Mansch, Larry D. (2005). Abraham Lincoln, President-elect: The Four Critical Months from Election to Inauguration. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-2026-1.
Martin, Paul (April 8, 2010). "Lincoln's Missing Bodyguard". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved October 15, 2010.
McGovern, George S. (2009). Abraham Lincoln: The American Presidents Series: The 16th President, 1861 1865. New York, New York: Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-8345-3.
McPherson, James M. (1992). Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-507606-6.
McPherson, James M. (2009). Abraham Lincoln. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-537452-0.
Morse, John Torrey (1893). Abraham Lincoln. Vol. I. Cambridge, Mass., Riverside Press.
Morse, John Torrey (1893). Abraham Lincoln. Vol. II. Cambridge, Mass. Riverside Press.
Neely, Mark E. Jr. (1992). The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, USA. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014.
Neely, Mark E. Jr. (2004). "Was the Civil War a Total War?". Civil War History. 50 (4): 434 458. doi:10.1353/cwh.2004.0073.
Nevins, Allan (1959). The War for the Union. New York, New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-10416-4.[permanent dead link]
Nevins, Allan (1947). The War for the Union and Ordeal of the Union, and the Emergence of Lincoln. New York, New York: Scribner.
Nichols, David A. (1974). "The Other Civil War Lincoln and the Indians" (PDF). Minnesota History. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.
Noll, Mark A. (1992). A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-0651-2.
Noll, Mark A. (2002). America's God: From Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-515111-4.
Oates, Stephen B. (1974). "Abraham Lincoln 1861 1865".  In Woodward, Comer Vann (ed.). Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. New York, New York: Dell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-440-05923-3.
Paludan, Phillip Shaw (1994). The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0671-9.
Parrillo, Nicholas (2000). "Lincoln's Calvinist Transformation: Emancipation and War". Civil War History. 46 (3): 227 253. doi:10.1353/cwh.2000.0073. ISSN 1533-6271.
Potter, David M. (1977). The Impending Crisis: America Before the Civil War, 1848 1861. New York, New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-131929-7.
Randall, James Garfield (1962). Lincoln: The Liberal Statesman. New York, New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. ASIN B0051VUQXO.
Randall, James Garfield; Current, Richard Nelson (1955). Lincoln the President: Last Full Measure. Lincoln the President. Vol. IV. New York, New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. OCLC 950556947.
Richards, John T. (2015). Abraham Lincoln: The Lawyer-Statesman (Classic Reprint). London, England: Fb&c Limited. ISBN 978-1-331-28158-0.
Sandburg, Carl (1926). Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years. San Diego, California: Harcourt. OCLC 6579822.
Sandburg, Carl (2002). Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-15-602752-6.
Schwartz, Barry (2000). Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National Memory. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-74197-0.
Schwartz, Barry (2008). Abraham Lincoln in the Post-Heroic Era: History and Memory in Late Twentieth-Century America. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-74188-8.
Sherman, William T. (1990). Memoirs of General W.T. Sherman. Charleston, South Carolina: BiblioBazaar. ISBN 978-1-174-63172-6.
Simon, Paul (1990). Lincoln's Preparation for Greatness: The Legislative Years. Champaign, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-00203-8.
Smith, Robert C. (2010). Conservatism and Racism, and Why in America They Are the Same. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-1-4384-3233-5.
Steers, Edward Jr. (2010). The Lincoln Assassination Encyclopedia. New York, New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-178775-1.
Striner, Richard (2006). Father Abraham: Lincoln's Relentless Struggle to End Slavery. England, London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518306-1.
Taranto, James; Leo, Leonard, eds. (2004). Presidential Leadership: Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House. New York, New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-5433-5.
Tegeder, Vincent G. (1948). "Lincoln and the Territorial Patronage: The Ascendancy of the Radicals in the West". The Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 35 (1): 77 90. doi:10.2307/1895140. JSTOR 1895140.
Thomas, Benjamin P. (2008). Abraham Lincoln: A Biography. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-2887-1.
Trostel, Scott D. (2002). The Lincoln Funeral Train: The Final Journey and National Funeral for Abraham Lincoln. Fletcher, Ohio: Cam-Tech Publishing. ISBN 978-0-925436-21-4. Archived from the original on 2013.
Vile, John R. (2003). "Lincoln, Abraham (1809 1865)". Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments: Proposed Amendments, and Amending Issues 1789 2002 (2nd ed.). ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-428-8.
Vorenberg, Michael (2001). Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65267-4.
Warren, Louis A. (2017). Lincoln's Youth: Indiana Years, Seven to Twenty-One, 1816 1830 (Classic Reprint). London, England: Fb&c Limited. ISBN 978-0-282-90830-0.
White, Ronald C. (2009). A. Lincoln: A Biography. New York, New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-58836-775-4.[permanent dead link]
Wilentz, Sean (2012). "Abraham Lincoln and Jacksonian Democracy". Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016.
Wills, Garry (2012). Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words that Remade America. New York, New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-2645-5.
Wilson, Douglas Lawson; Davis, Rodney O.; Wilson, Terry; Herndon, William Henry; Weik, Jesse William (1998). Herndon's Informants: Letters, Interviews, and Statements about Abraham Lincoln. Univ of Illinois Press. pp. 35 36. ISBN 978-0-252-02328-6.
Wilson, Douglas L. (1999). Honor's Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln. New York: A. A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-76581-9.
Winkle, Kenneth J. (2001). The Young Eagle: The Rise of Abraham Lincoln. Lanham, Maryland: Taylor Trade Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4617-3436-9.
Zarefsky, David (1993). Lincoln, Douglas, and Slavery: In the Crucible of Public Debate. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-97876-5.
External links
Abraham Lincoln  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Library resources about  Abraham Lincoln 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Abraham Lincoln
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Official
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum
The Lincoln Presidential Library's ongoing digitization of all documents written by or to Abraham Lincoln during his lifetime
Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln   complete collected works as edited by Basler et al. (1958)   an online edition available through University of Michigan Library Digital Collections
Organizations
Abraham Lincoln Association Archived April 28, 2020, at the Wayback Machine
Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Foundation
Media coverage
Abraham Lincoln collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Other
United States Congress. "Abraham Lincoln (id: L000313)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Abraham Lincoln: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
"Life Portrait of Abraham Lincoln", from C-SPAN's American presidents: Life Portraits, June 28, 1999
"Writings of Abraham Lincoln" from C-SPAN's American Writers: A Journey Through History
Abraham Lincoln: Original Letters and Manuscripts   Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Lincoln/Net: Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project   Northern Illinois University Libraries
Teaching Abraham Lincoln Archived December 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine   National Endowment for the Humanities
Works by Abraham Lincoln at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Abraham Lincoln at Internet Archive
Works by Abraham Lincoln at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
In Popular Song: Our Noble Chief Has Passed Away by Cooper/Thomas
Abraham Lincoln Recollections and Newspaper Articles Collection Archived November 13, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, McLean County Museum of History
Digitized items in the Alfred Whital Stern Collection of Lincolniana in the Rare Book and Special Collections Division in the Library of Congress
vteAbraham Lincoln
16th President of the United States (1861 1865)
U.S. Representative for IL 7 (1847 1849)
Presidency
Transition
First inauguration
Perpetual Union
Lincoln Bible
Second inauguration
Civil War
Confiscation Acts
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
War based income tax
Seaports blockade
RMS Trent Affair
Habeas Corpus suspended
Emancipation Proclamation
West Virginia statehood
Overland Campaign strategy
Hampton Roads Conference
Tour of Richmond
Ten percent plan
Reconstruction
13th Amendment abolishing slavery
Dakota War of 1862
Department of the Northwest
Homestead Act of 1862
National Banking Acts
Thanksgiving Day
Fanny McCullough letter
Birchard Letter
Bixby letter
National Academy of Sciences
Department of Agriculture
Pardons
State of the Union Address, 1863
1864
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Speeches
Lyceum address (1838)
Peoria speech (1854)
"Lost Speech" (1856)
House Divided speech (1858)
Lincoln Douglas debates (1858)
Cooper Union Address (1860)
Farewell Address (1861)
First inaugural address (1861)
Gettysburg Address (1863, event)
Second inaugural address (1865)
Lifeand views
Early life and career
Black Hawk War
Matson Trial
Spot Resolutions
Boat lifting patent
Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Co.
Baltimore Plot
Lincoln's beard
Medical and mental health
Poetry
Political career, 1849 1861
Religious views
Sexuality
Slavery
Homesand places
Lincoln Birthplace
Knob Creek Farm
Lincoln Boyhood Memorial
Lincoln State Park
Little Pigeon Creek Community
Lincoln Trail Homestead State Memorial
Lincoln's New Salem
Lincoln-Berry General Store
Lincoln Home
Cottage at the Soldier's Home
Lincoln Bedroom
Lincoln Sitting Room
Lincoln Pioneer Village
Lincoln Log Cabin State Historic Site
Elections
Republican National Convention, 1856
1860
1864
National Union Party
1860 United States presidential election
1864
1860 campaign song
Assassination
Ford's Theater
Our American Cousin
opera
John Wilkes Booth
"Sic semper tyrannis"
Petersen House
Funeral and burial
Lincoln Catafalque
Lincoln Tomb
"O Captain! My Captain!"
"When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd"
Legacy andMemorials
Presidential Library and Museum
Papers
Lincoln/Net
Artifacts and relics
Bibliography
Birthday
Photographs of Lincoln
Cultural depictions
films
Art
Currency
Illinois Centennial half dollar
Lincoln penny
Five-dollar bill
Postage stamps
Abraham Lincoln Association
Abraham Lincoln Institute
Association of Lincoln Presenters
USS Abraham Lincoln (1960,
1988)
Here I Grew Up mosaic
Lincoln Highway
Lincoln, Nebraska
Lincoln Park
Lincoln Prize
Lincoln Heritage Trail
Lincoln Trail State Memorial
Lincoln Kennedy coincidences
Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln
White House ghost
Statues
Lincoln Memorial
statue
reflecting pool
Mount Rushmore
Abraham Lincoln: The Man
Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State
Lincoln the Lawyer
Young Abe Lincoln
Emancipation Memorial
Brooklyn relief
D.C. City Hall
Hodgenville, Kentucky
Indianapolis relief
Laramie, Wyoming
Lincoln, Nebraska
Los Angeles
Louisville, Kentucky
Newark, New Jersey
Parliament Square, London
Philadelphia
U.S. Capitol bust
U.S. Capitol statue
Wabash, Indiana
Family
Family tree
Mary Todd Lincoln (wife)
Robert Todd Lincoln (son)
Edward Baker Lincoln (son)
William Wallace Lincoln (son)
Thomas "Tad" Lincoln III (son)
Mary Todd "Mamie" Lincoln (granddaughter)
Jessie Harlan Lincoln (granddaughter)
Thomas Lincoln (father)
Nancy Hanks Lincoln (mother)
Sarah Bush Lincoln (stepmother)
Sarah Lincoln Grigsby (sister)
Abraham Lincoln (grandfather)
Mordecai Lincoln (uncle)
Mary Lincoln Crume (aunt)
John Hanks (cousin)
Joseph Hanks (great-grandfather)
Samuel Lincoln (17th-century ancestor)
Mary Lincoln Beckwith (great-granddaughter)
Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith (great-grandson)
Old Bob (horse)
Fido (dog)
  James Buchanan
Andrew Johnson  
 Category
 Outline
Offices and distinctions
U.S. House of Representatives
Preceded byJohn Henry
 Member of the U.S. House of Representativesfrom Illinois's 7th congressional district 1847 1849
Succeeded byThomas Harris
Party political offices
Preceded byJohn Fr mont
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1860, 1864
Succeeded byUlysses Grant
Political offices
Preceded byJames Buchanan
 President of the United States 1861 1865
Succeeded byAndrew Johnson
Honorary titles
Preceded byHenry Clay
 Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1865
Succeeded byThaddeus Stevens
Articles related to Abraham Lincoln
vteLincoln Douglas debatesParticipants
Abraham Lincoln
Stephen A. Douglas
Other
1858 United States Senate elections
Freeport Doctrine
1994 reenactments
Lincoln Douglas debate format
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteRepublican Party
History
National Union Party
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Presidentialticketsandnationalconventions
1856 (Philadelphia): Fr mont/Dayton
1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin
1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson
1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax
1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson
1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler
1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur
1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan
1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton
1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid
1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart
1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt
1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks
1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman
1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler
1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks
1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge
1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes
1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis
1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis
1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox
1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary
1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker
1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren
1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon
1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon
1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge
1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller
1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole
1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp
2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin
2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan
2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence
2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence
2024 (Milwaukee)
Presidentialadministrations
Lincoln (1861 1865)
Johnson (1865 1868)
Grant (1869 1877)
Hayes (1877 1881)
Garfield (1881)
Arthur (1881 1885)
Harrison (1889 1893)
McKinley (1897 1901)
Roosevelt (1901 1909)
Taft (1909 1913)
Harding (1921 1923)
Coolidge (1923 1929)
Hoover (1929 1933)
Eisenhower (1953 1961)
Nixon (1969 1974)
Ford (1974 1977)
Reagan (1981 1989)
G. H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
G. W. Bush (2001 2009)
Trump (2017 2021)
U.S. SenateleadersandConferencechairs
J. P. Hale (1859 1862)
Anthony (1862 1884)
Sherman (1884 1885)
Edmunds (1885 1891)
Sherman (1891 1897)
Allison (1897 1908)
E. Hale (1908 1911)
Cullom (1911 1913)
Gallinger (1913 1918)
Lodge (1918 1924)
Curtis (1924 1929)
Watson (1929 1933)
McNary (1933 1940)
Austin (1940 1941)
McNary (1941 1944)
White (1944 1949)
Wherry (1949 1952)
Bridges (1952 1953)
Taft (1953)
Knowland (1953 1959)
Dirksen (1959 1969)
Scott (1969 1977)
Baker (1977 1979)
Stevens (1979 1980)
Baker (1980 1985)
Dole (1985 1996)
Lott (1996 2003)
Frist (2003 2007)
McConnell (2007 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andConferencechairs
Pennington (1860 1861)
Grow (1861 1863)
Colfax (1863 1869)
Pomeroy (1869)
Blaine (1869 1875)
McCrary (1875 1877)
Hale (1877 1879)
Frye (1879 1881)
Keifer (1881 1883)
Cannon (1883 1889)
Reed (1889 1891)
T. J. Henderson (1891 1895)
Reed (1895 1899)
D. B. Henderson (1899 1903)
Cannon (1903 1911)
Mann (1911 1919)
Gillett (1919 1925)
Longworth (1925 1931)
Snell (1931 1939)
Martin (1939 1959)
Halleck (1959 1965)
Ford (1965 1973)
Rhodes (1973 1981)
Michel (1981 1995)
Gingrich (1995 1999)
Hastert (1999 2007)
Boehner (2007 2015)
Ryan (2015 2019)
McCarthy (2019 )
RNCChairs
Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Campbell
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Mart nez/Duncan
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
McDaniel
Chair elections
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Parties bystate andterritoryState
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Territory
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Affiliated  organizationsFundraisinggroups
National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Redistricting Trust
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Governors Association
Sectionalgroups
College Republicans
Chairmen
Congressional Hispanic Conference
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans
Republicans Overseas
Factionalgroups
Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
Republican Governance Group
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List
Related
Primaries
Debates
Bibliography
International Democrat Union
Timeline of modern American conservatism
Trumpism
vteIllinois's delegation(s) to the 30th United States Congress (ordered by seniority)
30th
Senate:  S. Breese (D)   S. Douglas (D)
House: 
 O. Ficklin (D)
 J. McClernand (D)
 R. Smith (ID)
 J. Wentworth (D)
 A. Lincoln (W)
 T. Turner (D)
 W. Richardson (D)
vteHistorical anti-slavery parties in the United StatesPresidential ticketsLiberty Party
James G. Birney/Thomas Earle (1840)
James G. Birney/Thomas Morris (1844)
Free Soil Party
Martin Van Buren/Charles F. Adams (1848)
John P. Hale/George W. Julian (1852)
Republican Party
John C. Fr mont/William L. Dayton (1856)
Abraham Lincoln/Hannibal Hamlin (1860)
National Union Party
Abraham Lincoln/Andrew Johnson (1864)
National conventions
1848 Free Soil
1856 Republican
1860 Republican
1864 National Union
Other party leaders
Gerrit Smith
Salmon P. Chase
Charles Sumner
William H. Seward
Simon Cameron
Edward Bates
Francis P. Blair
Related groups
American Anti-Slavery Society
Anti-Nebraska movement
Barnburners
Conscience Whigs
North American Party
Radical Democracy Party
vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright
vteCabinet of President Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)Secretary of State
William H. Seward (1861 1865)
Secretary of the Treasury
Salmon P. Chase (1861 1864)
William P. Fessenden (1864 1865)
Hugh McCulloch (1865)
Secretary of War
Simon Cameron (1861 1862)
Edwin Stanton (1862 1865)
Attorney General
Edward Bates (1861 1864)
James Speed (1864 1865)
Postmaster General
Montgomery Blair (1861 1864)
William Dennison Jr. (1864 1865)
Secretary of the Navy
Gideon Welles (1861 1865)
Secretary of the Interior
Caleb Blood Smith (1861 1862)
John Palmer Usher (1863 1865)
Related
Team of Rivals (2005 book)
vte(  1852)   1856 United States presidential election   (1860  )Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
 President: James Buchanan
 Vice President: John C. Breckinridge
Other candidates
Lewis Cass
Stephen A. Douglas
Franklin Pierce (incumbent)
Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
 President: John C. Fr mont
 Vice President: William L. Dayton
Other candidates
Nathaniel P. Banks
Abraham Lincoln
John McLean
Robert F. Stockton
American PartyNominees
 President: Millard Fillmore
 Vice President: Andrew J. Donelson
Other candidates
George Law
Other 1856 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1856)   1860 United States presidential election   (1864  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Abraham Lincoln
Vice President: Hannibal Hamlin
Other candidates
Edward Bates
Simon Cameron
Salmon P. Chase
William L. Dayton
John McLean
William H. Seward
Benjamin Wade
Democratic Party (Southern)(Convention)Nominees
President: John C. Breckinridge (incumbent VP)
Vice President: Joseph Lane
Other candidates
Daniel S. Dickinson
Constitutional Union Party(Convention)Nominees
President: John Bell
Vice President: Edward Everett
Other candidates
John J. Crittenden
William A. Graham
Sam Houston
William C. Rives
Democratic Party (Northern)(Conventions)Nominees
President: Stephen A. Douglas
Vice President: Herschel V. Johnson
Other candidates
Daniel S. Dickinson
James Guthrie
Robert M. T. Hunter
Andrew Johnson
Other 1860 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1860)   1864 United States presidential election   (1868  )National Union Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Abraham Lincoln (incumbent)
Vice President: Andrew Johnson
Other candidates
President: Ulysses S. Grant
Vice President: Benjamin Butler
Daniel S. Dickinson
Hannibal Hamlin (incumbent)
Lovell Rousseau
Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: George B. McClellan
Vice President: George H. Pendleton
Other candidates
President: Thomas H. Seymour
Vice President: George W. Cass
Augustus C. Dodge
Daniel W. Voorhees
Other 1864 elections: House
Senate
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
vteReconstruction eraParticipantsFederal government
Presidents
Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
Rutherford B. Hayes
Congress
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
Radical Republicans
Moderate Republicans
Conservative Republicans
African-American senators
African-American representatives
Reconstruction Amendments
United States Congress Joint Committee on Reconstruction
United States House Select Committee on Reconstruction
Federal judiciary
Taney Court
Chase Court
Waite Court
Federal bureaucracy
Edwin Stanton
Freedmen's Bureau
Justice Department
State governments
Southern United States
Confederate States of America
Others
African Americans
Free people of color
Freedman
Politicians
Carpetbaggers
Ku Klux Klan
Scalawag
Redeemers
White League
Red Shirts
Democratic Party
Bourbon Democrat
Horatio Seymour
Samuel J. Tilden
Republican Party
Stalwart
Charles Sumner
Thaddeus Stevens
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin Wade
John Bingham
James Mitchell Ashley
Freedman's Savings Bank
ElectionsPresidential
1864
DNC
National Union Convention
Radical Democracy Party
1868
DNC
RNC
1872
DNC
RNC
Liberal Republican Party
Straight-Out Democratic Party
Victoria Woodhull
1876
DNC
RNC
Greenback Convention
Prohibition Convention
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
U.S. Senate
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
U.S. House
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
Gubernatorial
1863
CA
CT
MA
MN
NH
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
WV
1864
CT
IL
IN
LA
MD
MA
MI
MO
NH
VT
WV
1865
CT
FL
LA
MA
MN
NJ
OH
SC
VT
WI
1866
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
NC
OR
PA
TX
VT
WV
1867
CA
CT
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
VT
WI
1868
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
NJ
SC
VT
WV
1869
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
1870
AL
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
MO
OR
SC
VT
WV
1871
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
NJ
OH
WI
1872
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
PA
SC
VT
WV
1873
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
VA
WI
1874
AL
CT
DE
KS
MA
ME
MI
MO
DE
OR
SC
VT
1875
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
OH
WI
1876
AL
CO
CT Apr.
CT Nov.
FL
IL
IN
KS
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
RI
SC
VT
WV
1864 elections
1866 elections
1868 elections
1870 elections
1872 elections
1874 elections
1876 electionsKey eventsPrelude
American Indian Wars
Slavery in the United States
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792)
The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women (1838)
Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1839)
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
National Women's Rights Convention (1850)
American Civil War
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act (1862)
Militia Act of 1862
1863
Emancipation Proclamation
General Order No. 143
Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction
Ten Percent Plan
National Bank Act
Women's Loyal National League
New York City draft riots
1863 State of the Union Address
1864
Wade Davis Bill
1864 elections
1864 State of the Union Address
1865
13th Amendment
Second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln
Address
Black Codes
Special Field Orders No. 15 
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedmen's Bureau bills
Confederates surrender at Appomattox
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Shaw University
New Departure
1865 State of the Union Address
Founding of the Ku Klux Klan
1866
Civil Rights Act of 1866
Memphis riots of 1866
New Orleans massacre of 1866
Swing Around the Circle
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Fort Smith Conference and Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866
Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866
Tennessee readmitted to Union
Petition for Universal Freedom
National Labor Union
Ex parte Garland
Ex parte Milligan
Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866
1866 elections
1867
Tenure of Office Act
Command of Army Act
Indian Peace Commission
Knights of the White Camelia
Pulaski riot
Reconstruction Acts
Constitutional conventions of 1867
Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Peonage Act of 1867
First impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
1867 State of the Union Address
1868
14th Amendment
Second impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Timeline
Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson
Impeachment managers investigation
Articles of impeachment
Arkansas readmitted to Union
Florida readmitted to Union
North Carolina readmitted to Union
South Carolina readmitted to Union
Louisiana readmitted to Union
Alabama readmitted to Union
Opelousas massacre
Fourth Reconstruction Act
Georgia v. Stanton
1868 elections
1868 State of the Union Address
1869
National Woman Suffrage Association
American Woman Suffrage Association
Alabama Claims
Annexation of Santo Domingo
Board of Indian Commissioners
Public Credit Act of 1869
Black Friday (1869)
Ex parte McCardle
First transcontinental railroad
1869 State of the Union Address
1870
15th Amendment
Enforcement Act of 1870
Justice Department
Naturalization Act of 1870
Kirk-Holden War
Shoffner Act
1870 elections
1870 State of the Union Address
1871
Ku Klux Klan hearings
First Enforcement Act of 1871
Second Enforcement Act of 1871
Alcorn State University
Meridian race riot of 1871
Treaty of Washington
New York custom house ring
Civil service commission
United States expedition to Korea
1871 State of the Union Address
1872
General Mining Act of 1872
Cr dit Mobilier Scandal
Modoc War
Star route scandal
Salary Grab Act
Amnesty Act
1872 elections
1872 State of the Union Address
1873
Panic of 1873
Colfax Massacre
Timber Culture Act
Slaughter-House Cases
Virginius Affair
Coinage Act of 1873
Long Depression
Comstock laws
1873 State of the Union Address
1874
Brooks Baxter War
Battle of Liberty Place
Coushatta Massacre
Red River War
Timber Culture Act
White League
Election Massacre of 1874
Vicksburg Riot of 1874
Black Hills Gold Rush
Sanborn incident
Anti-Moiety Acts
1874 elections
1874 State of the Union Address
1875
United States v. Cruikshank
Civil Rights Act of 1875
Red Shirts
Mississippi Plan
Clifton Riot of 1875
Yazoo City Riot of 1875
Specie Payment Resumption Act
Whiskey Ring
Wheeler Compromise
Delano affair
Pratt & Boyd
1875 State of the Union Address
1876
Hamburg Massacre
South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876
Ellenton massacre
Great Sioux War of 1876
Battle of the Little Bighorn
United States v. Reese
Trader post scandal
Centennial Exposition
Cattellism
Safe burglary conspiracy
1876 elections
1876 State of the Union Address
1877
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
Nez Perce War
Desert Land Act
Great Railroad Strike of 1877
Aftermath
Posse Comitatus Act (1878)
Civil Rights Cases (1883)
United States v. Harris (1883)
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Williams v. Mississippi (1898)
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Giles v. Harris (1903)
Disenfranchisement
AspectsHistoriography
Bibliography of the Reconstruction Era
James Shepherd Pike
The Prostrate State (1874)
James Bryce
The American Commonwealth (1888)
Claude Bowers
The Tragic Era (1929)
Columbia University
John Burgess
Walter Lynwood Fleming
Dunning School
William Archibald Dunning
Charles A. Beard
Howard K. Beale
W. E. B. Du Bois
Black Reconstruction (1935)
C. Vann Woodward
Joel Williamson
William R. Brock
American Crisis (1963)
John Hope Franklin
From Slavery to Freedom (1947)
After Slavery (1965)
Leon Litwack
Been in the Storm So Long (1979)
Eric Foner
Reconstruction (1988)
Kenneth M. Stampp
Steven Hahn
A Nation Under Our Feet (2003)
The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution (2019)
Memory
Winslow Homer
A Visit from the Old Mistress (1876)
Thomas Dixon, Jr.
The Leopard's Spots (1902)
The Clansman (1905)
D. W. Griffith
The Birth of a Nation (1915)
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Gone with the Wind (1939)
David W. Blight
Race and Reunion (2001)
Legacy
Women's suffrage in the United States
Labor history of the United States
Gilded Age
Jim Crow era
Civil rights movement
American frontier
Other topics
History of the United States (1865 1918)
African American founding fathers of the United States
Industrialization
Suffrage
Habeas corpus
Race (human categorization)
White supremacy
Paramilitary
Forty acres and a mule
Reconstruction Treaties
Whitecapping
Category
vteLain in state (United States)Lain in stateUS Capitol rotunda
Clay (1852)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
Stevens (1868)
Sumner (1874)
Wilson (1875)
Garfield (1881)
Logan (1886)
McKinley (1901)
L'Enfant (1909)
Dewey (1917)
Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921)
Harding (1923)
W. H. Taft (1930)
Pershing (1948)
R. A. Taft (1953)
Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
MacArthur (1964)
H. Hoover (1964)
Eisenhower (1969)
Dirksen (1969)
J. E. Hoover (1972)
Johnson (1973)
Humphrey (1978)
Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984)
Pepper (1989)
Reagan (2004, funeral)
Ford (2006 07, funeral)
Inouye (2012)
McCain (2018)
Bush (2018, funeral)
Lewis (2020)
Dole (2021)
Reid (2022)
National Statuary Hall
Cummings (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Young (2022)
House Chamber
Hooper (1875)
Herbert C. Hoover Building
Brown (1996)
Old Senate Chamber
Chase (1873)
Lain in honorUS Capitol rotunda
Chestnut and Gibson (1998)
Parks (2005)
Graham (2018)
Sicknick (2021)
Evans (2021)
Williams (2022)
Lain in reposeEast Room
Harrison (1841)
Taylor (1850)
Lincoln (1865, funeral)
McKinley (1901)
Harding (1923)
Roosevelt (1945)
Kennedy (1963, funeral)
Great Hall of theUS Supreme Court
Warren (1974)
Marshall (1993)
Burger (1995)
Brennan (1997)
Blackmun (1999)
Rehnquist (2005)
Scalia (2016)
Stevens (2019)
Ginsburg (2020, funeral)
Senate Chamber
Byrd (2010)
Lautenberg (2013)
Bold: Presidents and chief justices
vteAppalachiaPeople of the Appalachian Mountains in the Eastern United StatesEthnic groups
Black-Dutch
Cherokee (Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians)
Chestnut Ridge people
Melungeon
Scotch-Irish
formerly Kanawha Valley people, Koasati, Shawnee, and Yuchi
History
Battle of Blair Mountain
Coal Creek War
Coal strike of 1902
French Eversole feud
Hatfield McCoy feud (Battle of the Grapevine Creek)
Lincoln County feud
Hillbilly Highway (Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit)
Kentucky County, Virginia
Overmountain Men
Paint Creek Cabin Creek strike of 1912
Southwest Territory
Trans-Appalachia
Wilderness Road
West Virginia coal wars
1920 Alabama coal strike
Society
Appalachia
Social and economic stratification in Appalachia
Appalachian Americans
Appalachian English
Childbirth in rural Appalachia
Settlement school
Urban Appalachians
Cuisine
apple butter
chicken fried steak
chow-chow
country ham
Goo Goo Clusters
Shucky beans
sorghum syrup
soup beans
Traditional music
Appalachian music
Appalachian dulcimer
Blackberry Blossom (tune)
Bluegrass fiddle
Bluegrass music
Clogging
Cripple Creek (folk song)
Cumberland Gap (folk song)
East Tennessee Blues
Hootenanny
In the Pines
Nottamun Town
Shady Grove (song)
Tom Dooley (song)
Historical individuals
Francis Asbury
Daniel Boone
Davy Crockett
John Gordon (militia captain)
Devil Anse Hatfield
Abraham Lincoln
Belle Starr
In popular culture
Appalachian stereotypes
Appalachian studies
The Beverly Hillbillies
Deliverance
Hillbilly
Moonshine in popular culture
Mountain white
Poor White
Redneck
Redneck joke
The Hatfields and the McCoys
Part of a series on hill people around the world
Authority control International
FAST
2
ISNI
2
VIAF
2
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Taiwan
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
2
Greece
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
Poland
2
Portugal
Russia
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
KulturNav
MusicBrainz
ULAN
People
Netherlands
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Lincoln&oldid=1148911178"