Carbonated soft drink
This article is about the beverage. For its manufacturer, see The Coca-Cola Company.
"Coca-Cola Classic" redirects here. For the college football game, see Coca-Cola Classic (college football). For the golf tournament, see Coca-Cola Classic (golf).
Not to be confused with Coca Colla.
Coca-ColaCoca-Cola has retained many of its historical design features in modern glass bottles.TypeColaManufacturerThe Coca-Cola CompanyCountry of origin United StatesRegion of originAtlanta, Georgia, USIntroducedMay 8, 1886; 136 years ago (1886-05-08)ColorCaramel E-150dVariants
Diet Coke
Diet Coke Caffeine-Free
Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola
Coca-Cola Zero Sugar
Coca-Cola Cherry
Coca-Cola Vanilla
Coca-Cola Citra
Coca-Cola Lime
Coca-Cola Mango
Related productsPepsiRC ColaAfri-ColaPostob nInca KolaKola RealCavan ColaWebsitecoca-cola.com
Coca-Cola, or Coke, is a carbonated soft drink manufactured by the Coca-Cola Company. In 2013, Coke products were sold in over 200 countries worldwide, with consumers drinking more than 1.8 billion company beverage servings each day.[1] Coca-Cola ranked No. 87 in the 2018 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue.[2] Based on Interbrand's "best global brand" study of 2020, Coca-Cola was the world's sixth most valuable brand.[3]
Originally marketed as a temperance drink and intended as a patent medicine, it was invented in the late 19th century by John Stith Pemberton in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1888, Pemberton sold Coca-Cola's ownership rights  to Asa Griggs Candler, a businessman, whose marketing tactics led Coca-Cola to its dominance of the global soft-drink market throughout the 20th and 21st century.[4] The drink's name refers to two of its original ingredients: coca leaves and kola nuts (a source of caffeine).[5] The current formula of Coca-Cola remains a closely guarded trade secret; however, a variety of reported recipes and experimental recreations have been published. The secrecy around the formula has been used by Coca-Cola in its marketing as only a handful of anonymous employees know the formula.[6] The drink has inspired imitators and created a whole classification of soft drink: colas.
The Coca-Cola Company produces concentrate, which is then sold to licensed Coca-Cola bottlers throughout the world. The bottlers, who hold exclusive territory contracts with the company, produce the finished product in cans and bottles from the concentrate, in combination with filtered water and sweeteners. A typical 12-US-fluid-ounce (350 ml) can contains 38 grams (1.3 oz) of sugar (usually in the form of high-fructose corn syrup in North America). The bottlers then sell, distribute, and merchandise Coca-Cola to retail stores, restaurants, and vending machines throughout the world. The Coca-Cola Company also sells concentrate for soda fountains of major restaurants and foodservice distributors.
The Coca-Cola Company has on occasion introduced other cola drinks under the Coke name. The most common of these is Diet Coke, along with others including Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola, Diet Coke Caffeine-Free, Coca-Cola Zero Sugar, Coca-Cola Cherry, Coca-Cola Vanilla, and special versions with lemon, lime, and coffee. Coca-Cola was called Coca-Cola Classic from July 1985 to 2009, to distinguish it from "New Coke".
History
19th century historical origins
 John Pemberton, the original creator of Coca-Cola
 Believed to be the first coupon ever, this ticket for a free glass of Coca-Cola was first distributed in 1888 to help promote the drink. By 1913, the company had redeemed 8.5 million tickets.[7]
 This refurbished Coca-Cola advertisement from 1943 is still displayed in Minden, Louisiana.
 Early Coca-Cola vending machine at Biedenharn Museum and Gardens in Monroe, Louisiana
Confederate Colonel John Pemberton, wounded in the American Civil War and addicted to morphine, also had a medical degree and began a quest to find a substitute for the problematic drug.[8] In 1885 at Pemberton's Eagle Drug and Chemical House, his drugstore in Columbus, Georgia, he registered Pemberton's French Wine Coca nerve tonic.[9][10][11][12] Pemberton's tonic may have been inspired by the formidable success of Vin Mariani, a French-Corsican coca wine,[13] but his recipe additionally included the African kola nut, the beverage's source of caffeine.[14] A Spanish drink called "Kola Coca" was presented at a contest in Philadelphia in 1885, a year before the official birth of Coca-Cola. The rights for this Spanish drink were bought by Coca-Cola in 1953.[15]
In 1886, when Atlanta and Fulton County passed prohibition legislation, Pemberton responded by developing Coca-Cola, a nonalcoholic version of Pemberton's French Wine Coca.[16] It was marketed as "Coca-Cola: The temperance drink", which appealed to many people as the temperance movement enjoyed wide support during this time.[4] The first sales were at Jacob's Pharmacy in Atlanta, Georgia, on May 8, 1886,[17] where it initially sold for five cents a glass.[18] Drugstore soda fountains were popular in the United States at the time due to the belief that carbonated water was good for the health,[19] and Pemberton's new drink was marketed and sold as a patent medicine, Pemberton claiming it a cure for many diseases, including morphine addiction, indigestion, nerve disorders, headaches, and impotence. Pemberton ran the first advertisement for the beverage on May 29 of the same year in the Atlanta Journal.[20]
By 1888, three versions of Coca-Cola   sold by three separate businesses   were on the market. A co-partnership had been formed on January 14, 1888, between Pemberton and four Atlanta businessmen: J.C. Mayfield, A.O. Murphey, C.O. Mullahy, and E.H. Bloodworth. Not codified by any signed document, a verbal statement given by Asa Candler years later asserted under testimony that he had acquired a stake in Pemberton's company as early as 1887.[21] John Pemberton declared that the name "Coca-Cola" belonged to his son, Charley, but the other two manufacturers could continue to use the formula.[22]
Charley Pemberton's record of control over the "Coca-Cola" name was the underlying factor that allowed for him to participate as a major shareholder in the March 1888 Coca-Cola Company incorporation filing made in his father's place.[23] Charley's exclusive control over the "Coca-Cola" name became a continual thorn in Asa Candler's side. Candler's oldest son, Charles Howard Candler, authored a book in 1950 published by Emory University. In this definitive biography about his father, Candler specifically states: "on April 14, 1888, the young druggist Asa Griggs Candler purchased a one-third interest in the formula of an almost completely unknown proprietary elixir known as Coca-Cola."[24] The deal was actually between John Pemberton's son Charley and Walker, Candler & Co.   with John Pemberton acting as cosigner for his son. For $50 down and $500 in 30 days, Walker, Candler & Co. obtained all of the one-third interest in the Coca-Cola Company that Charley held, all while Charley still held on to the name. After the April 14 deal, on April 17, 1888, one-half of the Walker/Dozier interest shares were acquired by Candler for an additional $750.[25]
Company
In 1892, Candler set out to incorporate a second company, the Coca-Cola Company (the current corporation). When Candler had the earliest records of the "Coca-Cola Company" destroyed in 1910, the action was claimed to have been made during a move to new corporation offices around this time.[26]
After Candler had gained a better foothold on Coca-Cola in April 1888, he nevertheless was forced to sell the beverage he produced with the recipe he had under the names "Yum Yum" and "Koke". This was while Charley Pemberton was selling the elixir, although a cruder mixture, under the name "Coca-Cola", all with his father's blessing. After both names failed to catch on for Candler, by the middle of 1888, the Atlanta pharmacist was quite anxious to establish a firmer legal claim to Coca-Cola, and hoped he could force his two competitors, Walker and Dozier, completely out of the business, as well.[25]
John Pemberton died suddenly on August 16, 1888. Asa Candler then decided to move swiftly forward to attain full control of the entire Coca-Cola operation.
Charley Pemberton, an alcoholic and opium addict, unnerved Asa Candler more than anyone else. Candler is said to have quickly maneuvered to purchase the exclusive rights to the name "Coca-Cola" from Pemberton's son Charley immediately after he learned of Dr. Pemberton's death. One of several stories states that Candler approached Charley's mother at John Pemberton's funeral and offered her $300 in cash for the title to the name. Charley Pemberton was found on June 23, 1894, unconscious, with a stick of opium by his side. Ten days later, Charley died at Atlanta's Grady Hospital at the age of 40.[27]
In Charles Howard Candler's 1950 book about his father, he stated: "On August 30 [1888], he [Asa Candler] became the sole proprietor of Coca-Cola, a fact which was stated on letterheads, invoice blanks and advertising copy."[24]
With this action on August 30, 1888, Candler's sole control became technically all true. Candler had negotiated with Margaret Dozier and her brother Woolfolk Walker a full payment amounting to $1,000, which all agreed Candler could pay off with a series of notes over a specified time span. By May 1, 1889, Candler was now claiming full ownership of the Coca-Cola beverage, with a total investment outlay by Candler for the drink enterprise over the years amounting to $2,300.[28]
In 1914, Margaret Dozier, as co-owner of the original Coca-Cola Company in 1888, came forward to claim that her signature on the 1888 Coca-Cola Company bill of sale had been forged. Subsequent analysis of other similar transfer documents had also indicated John Pemberton's signature had most likely been forged as well, which some accounts claim was precipitated by his son Charley.[22]
On September 12, 1919, Coca-Cola Co. was purchased by a group of investors led by Ernest Woodruff's Trust Company for $25 million and reincorporated under Delaware General Corporation Law. The company publicly offered 500,000 shares of the company for $40 a share.[29][30]
During its first several decades, Coca-Cola officially wanted to be known by its full-name despite being commonly known as "Coke". This was due to company fears that the term "coke" would eventually become a generic trademark, which to an extent became true in the Southern United States where "coke" is used even for non Coca-Cola products. The company also didn't want to confuse its drink with the similary-named coal byproduct that clearly wasn't safe to consume. Eventually, out for fears that another company may claim the trademark for "Coke", Coca-Cola finally embraced it and officially endorsed the name "Coke" in 1941. "Coke" eventually became a registered trademark of the Coca-Cola Company in 1945.[31]
In 1986, the Coca-Cola Company merged with two of their bottling operators (owned by JTL Corporation and BCI Holding Corporation) to form Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (CCE).[32]
In December 1991, Coca-Cola Enterprises merged with the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group, Inc.[32]
Origins of bottling
 Bottling plant of Coca-Cola Canada Ltd. January 8, 1941. Montreal, Canada.
The first bottling of Coca-Cola occurred in Vicksburg, Mississippi, at the Biedenharn Candy Company on March 12, 1894.[33] The proprietor of the bottling works was Joseph A. Biedenharn.[34] The original bottles were Hutchinson bottles, very different from the much later hobble-skirt design of 1915 now so familiar.
A few years later two entrepreneurs from Chattanooga, Tennessee, namely Benjamin F. Thomas and Joseph B. Whitehead, proposed the idea of bottling and were so persuasive that Candler signed a contract giving them control of the procedure for only one dollar. Candler later realized that he had made a grave mistake.[35] Candler never collected his dollar, but in 1899, Chattanooga became the site of the first Coca-Cola bottling company. Candler remained very content just selling his company's syrup.[36] The loosely termed contract proved to be problematic for the Coca-Cola Company for decades to come. Legal matters were not helped by the decision of the bottlers to subcontract to other companies, effectively becoming parent bottlers.[37] This contract specified that bottles would be sold at 5  each and had no fixed duration, leading to the fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959.
20th century
The first outdoor wall advertisement that promoted the Coca-Cola drink was painted in 1894 in Cartersville, Georgia.[38] Cola syrup was sold as an over-the-counter dietary supplement for upset stomach.[39][40] By the time of its 50th anniversary, the soft drink had reached the status of a national icon in the US. In 1935, it was certified kosher by Atlanta rabbi Tobias Geffen. With the help of Harold Hirsch, Geffen was the first person outside the company to see the top-secret ingredients list after Coke faced scrutiny from the American Jewish population regarding the drink's kosher status.[41] Consequently, the company made minor changes in the sourcing of some ingredients so it could continue to be consumed by America's Jewish population, including during Passover.[42]
 Original framed Coca-Cola artist's drawn graphic presented by the Coca-Cola Company on July 12, 1944, to Charles Howard Candler on the occasion of Coca-Cola's "1 Billionth Gallon of Coca-Cola Syrup"
 Claimed to be the first installation anywhere of the 1948 model "Boat Motor" styled Coca-Cola soda dispenser, Fleeman's Pharmacy, Atlanta, Georgia. The "Boat Motor" soda dispenser was introduced in the late 1930s and manufactured until the late 1950s. Photograph c. 1948.
The longest running commercial Coca-Cola soda fountain anywhere was Atlanta's Fleeman's Pharmacy, which first opened its doors in 1914.[43] Jack Fleeman took over the pharmacy from his father and ran it until 1995; closing it after 81 years.[44] On July 12, 1944, the one-billionth gallon of Coca-Cola syrup was manufactured by the Coca-Cola Company. Cans of Coke first appeared in 1955.[45]
Sugar replaced with high-fructose corn syrup
See also: 1970s commodities boom
Sugar prices spiked in the 1970s because of Soviet demand/hoarding and possible futures contracts market manipulation.  The Soviet Union was the largest producer of sugar at the time.  In 1974 Coca-Cola switched over to high-fructose corn syrup because of the elevated prices.[46][47]
 Sugar prices 1962-2022
New Coke
Main article: New Coke
 The Las Vegas Strip World of Coca-Cola museum in 2003
On April 23, 1985, Coca-Cola, amid much publicity, attempted to change the formula of the drink with "New Coke". Follow-up taste tests revealed most consumers preferred the taste of New Coke to both Coke and Pepsi[48] but Coca-Cola management was unprepared for the public's nostalgia for the old drink, leading to a backlash. The company gave in to protests and returned to the old formula under the name Coca-Cola Classic, on July 10, 1985. "New Coke" remained available and was renamed Coke II in 1992; it was discontinued in 2002.
21st century
On July 5, 2005, it was revealed that Coca-Cola would resume operations in Iraq for the first time since the Arab League boycotted the company in 1968.[49]
In April 2007, in Canada, the name "Coca-Cola Classic" was changed back to "Coca-Cola". The word "Classic" was removed because "New Coke" was no longer in production, eliminating the need to differentiate between the two.[citation needed] The formula remained unchanged. In January 2009, Coca-Cola stopped printing the word "Classic" on the labels of 16-US-fluid-ounce (470 ml) bottles sold in parts of the southeastern United States.[50] The change was part of a larger strategy to rejuvenate the product's image.[50] The word "Classic" was removed from all Coca-Cola products by 2011.
In November 2009, due to a dispute over wholesale prices of Coca-Cola products, Costco stopped restocking its shelves with Coke and Diet Coke for two months; a separate pouring rights deal in 2013 saw Coke products removed from Costco food courts in favor of Pepsi.[51] Some Costco locations (such as the ones in Tucson, Arizona) additionally sell imported Coca-Cola from Mexico with cane sugar instead of corn syrup from separate distributors.[52] Coca-Cola introduced the 7.5-ounce mini-can in 2009, and on September 22, 2011, the company announced price reductions, asking retailers to sell eight-packs for $2.99. That same day, Coca-Cola announced the 12.5-ounce bottle, to sell for 89 cents. A 16-ounce bottle has sold well at 99 cents since being re-introduced, but the price was going up to $1.19.[53]
In 2012, Coca-Cola resumed business in Myanmar after 60 years of absence due to US-imposed investment sanctions against the country.[54][55] Coca-Cola's bottling plant is located in Yangon and is part of the company's five-year plan and $200 million investment in Myanmar.[56] Coca-Cola with its partners is to invest US$5 billion in its operations in India by 2020.[57]
In February 2021, as a plan to combat plastic waste, Coca-Cola said that it would start selling its sodas in bottles made from 100% recycled plastic material in the United States, and by 2030 planned to recycle one bottle or can for each one it sold.[58] Coca-Cola started by selling 2000 paper bottles to see if they held up due to the risk of safety and of changing the taste of the drink.[59]
Production
Listed ingredients
Carbonated water
Sugar (sucrose or high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) depending on country of origin)
Caffeine
Phosphoric acid
Caramel color (E150d)
Natural flavorings[60]
A typical can of Coca-Cola (12 fl ounces/355 ml) contains 39 grams of sugar,[61] 50 mg of sodium, 0 grams fat, 0 grams potassium, and 140 calories.[62] On May 5, 2014, Coca-Cola said it was working to remove a controversial ingredient, brominated vegetable oil, from its drinks.[63]
A UK 330 ml can contains 35 grammes of sugar and 139 calories.
Formula of natural flavorings
Main article: Coca-Cola formula
The exact formula of Coca-Cola's natural flavorings (but not its other ingredients, which are listed on the side of the bottle or can) is a trade secret. The original copy of the formula was held in Truist Financial's main vault in Atlanta for 86 years. Its predecessor, the Trust Company, was the underwriter for the Coca-Cola Company's initial public offering in 1919. On December 8, 2011, the original secret formula was moved from the vault at SunTrust Banks to a new vault containing the formula which will be on display for visitors to its World of Coca-Cola museum in downtown Atlanta.[64]
 World of Coca-Cola museum in Atlanta, Georgia
According to Snopes, a popular myth states that only two executives have access to the formula, with each executive having only half the formula.[65] However, several sources state that while Coca-Cola does have a rule restricting access to only two executives, each knows the entire formula and others, in addition to the prescribed duo, have known the formulation process.[66]
On February 11, 2011, Ira Glass said on his PRI radio show, This American Life, that TAL staffers had found a recipe in "Everett Beal's Recipe Book", reproduced in the February 28, 1979, issue of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, that they believed was either Pemberton's original formula for Coca-Cola, or a version that he made either before or after the product hit the market in 1886. The formula basically matched the one found in Pemberton's diary.[67][68][69] Coca-Cola archivist Phil Mooney acknowledged that the recipe "could be a precursor" to the formula used in the original 1886 product, but emphasized that Pemberton's original formula is not the same as the one used in the current product.[70]
Use of stimulants in formula
 An early Coca-Cola advertisement
When launched, Coca-Cola's two key ingredients were cocaine and caffeine. The cocaine was derived from the coca leaf and the caffeine from kola nut (also spelled "cola nut" at the time), leading to the name Coca-Cola.[71][72]
Coca leaf
Pemberton called for five ounces of coca leaf per gallon of syrup (approximately 37 g/L), a significant dose; in 1891, Candler claimed his formula (altered extensively from Pemberton's original) contained only a tenth of this amount. Coca-Cola once contained an estimated nine milligrams of cocaine per glass. (For comparison, a typical dose or "line" of cocaine is 50 75 mg.[73]) In 1903, it was removed.[74]
After 1904, instead of using fresh leaves, Coca-Cola started using "spent" leaves  the leftovers of the cocaine-extraction process with trace levels of cocaine.[75] Since then (by 1929[76]), Coca-Cola has used a cocaine-free coca leaf extract. Today, that extract is prepared at a Stepan Company plant in Maywood, New Jersey, the only manufacturing plant authorized by the federal government to import and process coca leaves, which it obtains from Peru and Bolivia.[77] Stepan Company extracts cocaine from the coca leaves, which it then sells to Mallinckrodt, the only company in the United States licensed to purify cocaine for medicinal use.[78]
Long after the syrup had ceased to contain any significant amount of cocaine, in North Carolina "dope" remained a common colloquialism for Coca-Cola, and "dope-wagons" were trucks that transported it.[79]
Kola nuts for caffeine
The kola nut acts as a flavoring and the original source of caffeine in Coca-Cola. It contains about 2.0 to 3.5% caffeine, and has a bitter flavor.
In 1911, the US government sued in United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola, hoping to force the Coca-Cola Company to remove caffeine from its formula. The court found that the syrup, when diluted as directed, would result in a beverage containing 1.21 grains (or 78.4 mg) of caffeine per 8 US fluid ounces (240 ml) serving.[80] The case was decided in favor of the Coca-Cola Company at the district court, but subsequently in 1912, the US Pure Food and Drug Act was amended, adding caffeine to the list of "habit-forming" and "deleterious" substances which must be listed on a product's label. In 1913 the case was appealed to the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati, where the ruling was affirmed, but then appealed again in 1916 to the Supreme Court, where the government effectively won as a new trial was ordered. The company then voluntarily reduced the amount of caffeine in its product, and offered to pay the government's legal costs to settle and avoid further litigation.
Coca-Cola contains 34 mg of caffeine per 12 fluid ounces (9.8 mg per 100 ml).[81]
Franchised production model
The actual production and distribution of Coca-Cola follows a franchising model. The Coca-Cola Company only produces a syrup concentrate, which it sells to bottlers throughout the world, who hold Coca-Cola franchises for one or more geographical areas. The bottlers produce the final drink by mixing the syrup with filtered water and sweeteners, putting the mixture into cans and bottles, and carbonating it, which the bottlers then sell and distribute to retail stores, vending machines, restaurants, and foodservice distributors.[82]
The Coca-Cola Company owns minority shares in some of its largest franchises, such as Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coca-Cola Amatil, Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling Company, and Coca-Cola FEMSA, as well as some smaller ones, such as Coca-Cola Bottlers Uzbekistan, but fully independent bottlers produce almost half of the volume sold in the world.
Independent bottlers are allowed to sweeten the drink according to local tastes.[83]
The bottling plant in Skopje, Macedonia, received the 2009 award for "Best Bottling Company".[84]
Geographic spread
Since it announced its intention to begin distribution in Myanmar in June 2012, Coca-Cola has been officially available in every country in the world except Cuba and North Korea.[85] However, it is reported to be available in both countries as a grey import.[86][87]
Coca-Cola has been a point of legal discussion in the Middle East. In the early 20th century, a fatwa was created in Egypt to discuss the question of "whether Muslims were permitted to drink Coca-Cola and Pepsi cola."[88] The fatwa states: "According to the Muslim Hanefite, Shafi'ite, etc., the rule in Islamic law of forbidding or allowing foods and beverages is based on the presumption that such things are permitted unless it can be shown that they are forbidden on the basis of the Qur'an."[88] The Muslim jurists stated that, unless the Qur'an specifically prohibits the consumption of a particular product, it is permissible to consume. Another clause was discussed, whereby the same rules apply if a person is unaware of the condition or ingredients of the item in question.
Coca-Cola first entered the Chinese market in the 1920s and opted for a localized name " " (Ke-Ke Ken-La), but the name sounded like chewing wax blocks, resulting in poor product sales. In the 1930s, the new localized name " " (Ke-kou ke-le), which means "Tasty and Fun", was replaced, taking into account the effects of syllable translation and meaning translation, so that the sales of the product increased and became a good translation case.[89][90] The story introduction from Coca-Cola mentions that Chiang Yee provided the new localized name,[91] but there are also sources that the localized name appeared before 1935,[92] or that it was given by someone named Jerome T. Lieu who studied at Columbia University in New York.[93]
Brand portfolio
 Shortened "Coke" logo used on the back of cans and included in the logos of some flavor variations
This is a list of variants of Coca-Cola introduced around the world. In addition to the caffeine-free version of the original, additional fruit flavors have been included over the years. Not included here are versions of Diet Coke and Coca-Cola Zero Sugar; variant versions of those no-calorie colas can be found at their respective articles.
Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola (1983 present)   Coca-Cola without the caffeine.
Coca-Cola Cherry (1985 present)   Coca-Cola with a cherry flavor. Was available in Canada starting in 1996. Originally marketed as Cherry Coke (Cherry Coca-Cola) in North America until 2006.
New Coke / Coca-Cola II (1985 2002)   An unpopular formula change, remained after the original formula quickly returned and was later rebranded as Coca-Cola II until its full discontinuation in 2002. In 2019, New Coke was re-introduced to the market to promote the third season of the Netflix original series, Stranger Things.[94]
Golden Coca-Cola (2001) was a limited edition produced by Beijing Coca-Cola company to celebrate Beijing's successful bid to host the Olympics.
Coca-Cola with Lemon (2001 2005)   Coca-Cola with a lemon flavor. Available in: Australia, American Samoa, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, China, Denmark, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Iceland, Korea, Luxembourg, Macau, Malaysia, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Caledonia, New Zealand, R union, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tunisia, the United Kingdom, the United States, and West Bank-Gaza
Coca-Cola Vanilla (2002 2005; 2007 present)   Coca-Cola with a vanilla flavor. Available in: Austria, Australia, China, Czech Republic, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Malaysia, Slovakia, South-Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. It was reintroduced in June 2007 by popular demand.
Coca-Cola with Lime (2005 present)   Coca-Cola with a lime flavor. Available in Belgium, Lithuania, Netherlands, Singapore, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Coca-Cola Raspberry (2005; 2009 present)   Coca-Cola with a raspberry flavor. Originally only available in New Zealand. Available in Australia, the United States, and the United Kingdom in Coca-Cola Freestyle fountain since 2009.
Coca-Cola Citra (2005 present)   Coca-Cola with a citrus flavor. Only available in New Zealand, and Japan.
Coca-Cola Black Cherry Vanilla (2006 2007)   Coca-Cola with a combination of black cherry and vanilla flavor. It replaced and was replaced by Vanilla Coke in June 2007.
Coca-Cola Bl k (2006 2008)   Coca-Cola with a rich coffee flavor, formula depends on the country. Only available in the United States, France, Canada, Czech Republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, and Lithuania
Coca-Cola Orange (2007)   Coca-Cola with an orange flavor. Was available in the United Kingdom and Gibraltar for a limited time. In Germany, Austria, and Switzerland it is sold under the label Mezzo Mix. Currently available in Coca-Cola Freestyle fountain outlets in the United States since 2009, and in the United Kingdom since 2014.
Coca-Cola Life (2013 2020)   A version of Coca-Cola with stevia and sugar as sweeteners rather than simply sugar.
Coca-Cola Ginger (2016 present)   A version that mixes in the taste of ginger beer. Available in Australia, New Zealand, and as a limited edition in Vietnam.
Coca-Cola Fiber+ (2017-present)   Diet variant of Coca-Cola with added dietary fiber in the form of dextrin developed by Coca-Cola Asia Pacific. Available in Japan, Taiwan, Mainland China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, and Mongolia
Coca-Cola Orange Vanilla (2019 2021)   Coca-Cola with an orange vanilla flavor (intended to imitate the flavor of an orange Creamsicle). Made available nationwide in the United States on February 25, 2019.[95]
Coca-Cola Energy (2019 present)   An energy drink with a flavor similar to standard Coca-Cola, with guarana, vitamin B3 (niacinamide), vitamin B6 (pyridoxine hydrochloride), and extra caffeine. Introduced in 2019 in the United Kingdom,[96] and released in the United States and Canada in January 2020.[97] Also available in zero-sugar, cherry, and zero-sugar + cherry variants. In May 2021, the company announced they would discontinue the product in North America but it will remain available in other places and it will focus on its traditional beverages.[98]
Coca-Cola Cinnamon (2019 2020)   Coca-Cola with cinnamon flavor. Released in October 2019 in the United States as a limited release for the 2019 holiday season.[99] Made available again in 2020 for the holiday season.
Coca-Cola with Coffee (2019 present)   Coca-Cola, with coffee. Introduced in 2019 in various European markets, and released in the United States and Canada in January 2021. Available in dark blend, vanilla and caramel versions, and also  in zero-sugar dark blend and vanilla variants.
Coca-Cola Cherry Vanilla (2020 present)   Coca-Cola with cherry vanilla flavor. Released in the United States on February 10, 2020.
Coca-Cola Starlight (2022)   Coca-Cola with a space-inspired flavor. Released in North America on February 21, 2022, as a limited edition.
Coca-Cola Marshmello (2022 present)   Coca-Cola with strawberry and watermelon flavor, made in collaboration with Marshmello. Released in 2022 as a limited edition.
Coca-Cola Dreamworld (2022 present)   Coca-Cola with a dream-inspired flavour. Released in 2022 as a limited edition.
Coca-Cola Move / Movement (2023 present)   Coca-Cola with a transformation-inspired flavour, made in collaboration with Rosal a. Released in early 2023 as a limited edition.
 Logo design
The Coca-Cola logo was created by John Pemberton's bookkeeper, Frank Mason Robinson, in 1885.[100] Robinson came up with the name and chose the logo's distinctive cursive script. The writing style used, known as Spencerian script, was developed in the mid-19th century and was the dominant form of formal handwriting in the United States during that period.[101]
Robinson also played a significant role in early Coca-Cola advertising. His promotional suggestions to Pemberton included giving away thousands of free drink coupons and plastering the city of Atlanta with publicity banners and streetcar signs.[102]
Coca-Cola came under scrutiny in Egypt in 1951 because of a conspiracy theory that the Coca-Cola logo, when reflected in a mirror, spells out "No Mohammed no Mecca" in Arabic.[103]
Contour bottle design
"Coke bottle" redirects here. For the song, see Coke Bottle (song).
 Earl R. Dean standing next to the Johnny Bull Machine, the mold machine used to produce the early Coca-Cola contour bottles
 Illustration of a gourd-shaped cocoa pod in the Encyclop dia Britannica
The Coca-Cola bottle, called the "contour bottle" within the company, was created by bottle designer Earl R. Dean and Coca-Cola's general counsel, Harold Hirsch. In 1915, the Coca-Cola Company was represented by their general counsel to launch a competition among its bottle suppliers as well as any competition entrants to create a new bottle for their beverage that would distinguish it from other beverage bottles, "a bottle which a person could recognize even if they felt it in the dark, and so shaped that, even if broken, a person could tell at a glance what it was."[104][105][106][107]
Chapman J. Root, president of The Root Glass Company of Terre Haute, Indiana, turned the project over to members of his supervisory staff, including company auditor T. Clyde Edwards, plant superintendent Alexander Samuelsson, and Earl R. Dean, bottle designer and supervisor of the bottle molding room. Root and his subordinates decided to base the bottle's design on one of the soda's two ingredients, the coca leaf or the kola nut, but were unaware of what either ingredient looked like. Dean and Edwards went to the Emeline Fairbanks Memorial Library and were unable to find any information about coca or kola. Instead, Dean was inspired by a picture of the gourd-shaped cocoa pod in the Encyclop dia Britannica. Dean made a rough sketch of the pod and returned to the plant to show Root. He explained to Root how he could transform the shape of the pod into a bottle. Root gave Dean his approval.[104]
Faced with the upcoming scheduled maintenance of the mold-making machinery, over the next 24 hours Dean sketched out a concept drawing which was approved by Root the next morning. Chapman Root approved the prototype bottle and a design patent was issued on the bottle in November 1915. The prototype never made it to production since its middle diameter was larger than its base, making it unstable on conveyor belts. Dean resolved this issue by decreasing the bottle's middle diameter. During the 1916 bottler's convention, Dean's contour bottle was chosen over other entries and was on the market the same year. By 1920, the contour bottle became the standard for the Coca-Cola Company. A revised version was also patented in 1923. Because the Patent Office releases the Patent Gazette on Tuesday, the bottle was patented on December 25, 1923, and was nicknamed the "Christmas bottle." Today, the contour Coca-Cola bottle is one of the most recognized packages on the planet.[37]
As a reward for his efforts, Dean was offered a choice between a $500 bonus or a lifetime job at The Root Glass Company. He chose the lifetime job and kept it until the Owens-Illinois Glass Company bought out The Root Glass Company in the mid-1930s. Dean went on to work in other Midwestern glass factories.[108]
Raymond Loewy updated the design in 1955 to accommodate larger formats.[109]
Others have attributed inspiration for the design not to the cocoa pod, but to a Victorian hooped dress.[110]
In 1944, Associate Justice Roger J. Traynor of the Supreme Court of California took advantage of a case involving a waitress injured by an exploding Coca-Cola bottle to articulate the doctrine of strict liability for defective products. Traynor's concurring opinion in Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co. is widely recognized as a landmark case in US law today.[111][112][113][114][115]
Examples
Earl R. Dean's original 1915 concept drawing of the contour Coca-Cola bottle
The prototype never made it to production since its middle diameter was larger than its base, making it unstable on conveyor belts.
Final production version with slimmer middle section
Numerous historical Coke bottles
Designer bottles
 A Coca-Cola bottle designed by Jean Paul Gaultier and inspired by American singer Madonna[116]
Karl Lagerfeld is the latest designer to have created a collection of aluminum bottles for Coca-Cola. Lagerfeld is not the first fashion designer to create a special version of the famous Coca-Cola Contour bottle. A number of other limited edition bottles by fashion designers for Coca-Cola Light soda have been created in the last few years, including Jean Paul Gaultier.[116]
In 2009, in Italy, Coca-Cola Light had a Tribute to Fashion to celebrate 100 years of the recognizable contour bottle. Well known Italian designers Alberta Ferretti, Blumarine, Etro, Fendi, Marni, Missoni, Moschino, and Versace each designed limited edition bottles.[117]
In 2019, Coca-Cola shared the first beverage bottle made with ocean plastic.[118]
Competitors
Pepsi, the flagship product of PepsiCo, the Coca-Cola Company's main rival in the soft drink industry, is usually second to Coke in sales, and outsells Coca-Cola in some markets. RC Cola, now owned by the Dr Pepper Snapple Group, the third-largest soft drink manufacturer, is also widely available.[119]
Around the world, many local brands compete with Coke. In South and Central America Kola Real, also known as Big Cola, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola.[120] On the French island of Corsica, Corsica Cola, made by brewers of the local Pietra beer, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola. In the French region of Brittany, Breizh Cola is available. In Peru, Inca Kola outsells Coca-Cola, which led the Coca-Cola Company to purchase the brand in 1999. In Sweden, Julmust outsells Coca-Cola during the Christmas season.[121] In Scotland, the locally produced Irn-Bru was more popular than Coca-Cola until 2005, when Coca-Cola and Diet Coke began to outpace its sales.[122] In the former East Germany, Vita Cola, invented during communist rule, is gaining popularity.
In India, Coca-Cola ranked third behind the leader, Pepsi, and local drink Thums Up. The Coca-Cola Company purchased Thums Up in 1993.[123] As of 2004[update], Coca-Cola held a 60.9% market-share in India.[124] Tropicola, a domestic drink, is served in Cuba instead of Coca-Cola, due to a United States embargo. French brand Mecca-Cola[125] and British brand Qibla Cola[126] are competitors to Coca-Cola in the Middle East.
In Turkey, Cola Turka, in Iran and the Middle East, Zamzam and Parsi Cola, in some parts of China, Future Cola, in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, Kofola, in Slovenia, Cockta, and the inexpensive Mercator Cola, sold only in the country's biggest supermarket chain, Mercator, are some of the brand's competitors. Classiko Cola, made by Tiko Group, the largest manufacturing company in Madagascar, is a competitor to Coca-Cola in many regions.[127]
In 2021, Coca-Cola petitioned to cancel registrations for the marks Thums Up and Limca issued to Meenaxi Enterprise, Inc. based on misrepresentation of source. The Trademark Trial and Appeal Board concluded that "Meenaxi engaged in blatant misuse in a manner calculated to trade on the goodwill and reputation of Coca-Cola in an attempt to confuse consumers in the United States that its Thums Up and Limca marks were licensed or produced by the source of the same types of cola and lemon-lime soda sold under these marks for decades in India."[128]
Advertising
See also: Coca-Cola slogans
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Coca-Cola" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (May 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 An 1890s advertisement showing model Hilda Clark in formal 19th century attire. The ad is titled Drink Coca-Cola 5 . (US).
 Coca-Cola ghost sign in Fort Dodge, Iowa. Older Coca-Cola ghosts behind Borax and telephone ads. April 2008.
 Coca-Cola delivery truck of Argentina, with the slogan "Drink Coca-Cola   delicious, refreshing"
Coca-Cola's advertising has significantly affected American culture, and it is frequently credited with inventing the modern image of Santa Claus as an old man in a red-and-white suit. Although the company did start using the red-and-white Santa image in the 1930s, with its winter advertising campaigns illustrated by Haddon Sundblom, the motif was already common.[129][130] Coca-Cola was not even the first soft drink company to use the modern image of Santa Claus in its advertising: White Rock Beverages used Santa in advertisements for its ginger ale in 1923, after first using him to sell mineral water in 1915.[131][132] Before Santa Claus, Coca-Cola relied on images of smartly dressed young women to sell its beverages. Coca-Cola's first such advertisement appeared in 1895, featuring the young Bostonian actress Hilda Clark as its spokeswoman.
1941 saw the first use of the nickname "Coke" as an official trademark for the product, with a series of advertisements informing consumers that "Coke means Coca-Cola".[133] In 1971, a song from a Coca-Cola commercial called "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing", produced by Billy Davis, became a hit single. During the 1950s the term cola wars emerged, describing the on-going battle between Coca-Cola and Pepsi for supremacy in the soft drink industry.  Coca-Cola and Pepsi were competing with new products, global expansion, US marketing initiatives and sport sponsorships.[134]
 Coca-Cola sales booth on the Cape Verde island of Fogo in 2004
 Coke advertisement in Budapest, 2013
Coke's advertising is pervasive, as one of Woodruff's stated goals was to ensure that everyone on Earth drank Coca-Cola as their preferred beverage. This is especially true in southern areas of the United States, such as Atlanta, where Coke was born.
Some Coca-Cola television commercials between 1960 through 1986 were written and produced by former Atlanta radio veteran Don Naylor (WGST 1936 1950, WAGA 1951 1959) during his career as a producer for the McCann Erickson advertising agency. Many of these early television commercials for Coca-Cola featured movie stars, sports heroes, and popular singers.
During the 1980s, Pepsi ran a series of television advertisements showing people participating in taste tests demonstrating that, according to the commercials, "fifty percent of the participants who said they preferred Coke actually chose the Pepsi."[This quote needs a citation] Coca-Cola ran ads to combat Pepsi's ads in an incident sometimes referred to as the cola wars; one of Coke's ads compared the so-called Pepsi challenge to two chimpanzees deciding which tennis ball was furrier. Thereafter, Coca-Cola regained its leadership in the market.
Selena was a spokesperson for Coca-Cola from 1989 until the time of her death. She filmed three commercials for the company. During 1994, to commemorate her five years with the company, Coca-Cola issued special Selena coke bottles.[135]
The Coca-Cola Company purchased Columbia Pictures in 1982, and began inserting Coke-product images into many of its films. After a few early successes during Coca-Cola's ownership, Columbia began to underperform, and the studio was sold to Sony in 1989.
Coca-Cola has gone through a number of different advertising slogans in its long history, including "The pause that refreshes",[This quote needs a citation] "I'd like to buy the world a Coke",[This quote needs a citation] and "Coke is it".[This quote needs a citation]
In 1999, the Coca-Cola Company introduced the Coke Card, a loyalty program that offered deals on items like clothes, entertainment and food when the cardholder purchased a Coca-Cola Classic. The scheme was cancelled after three years, with a Coca-Cola spokesperson declining to state why.[136]
The company then introduced another loyalty campaign in 2006, My Coke Rewards. This allows consumers to earn points by entering codes from specially marked packages of Coca-Cola products into a website. These points can be redeemed for various prizes or sweepstakes entries.[137]
In Australia in 2011, Coca-Cola began the "share a Coke" campaign, where the Coca-Cola logo was replaced on the bottles and replaced with first names. Coca-Cola used the 150 most popular names in Australia to print on the bottles.[138][139][140] The campaign was paired with a website page, Facebook page, and an online "share a virtual Coke". The same campaign was introduced to Coca-Cola, Diet Coke and Coke Zero bottles and cans in the UK in 2013.[141][142]
Coca-Cola has also advertised its product to be consumed as a breakfast beverage, instead of coffee or tea for the morning caffeine.[143][144]
5 cents
Main article: Fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959
From 1886 to 1959, the price of Coca-Cola was fixed at five cents, in part due to an advertising campaign.
Holiday campaigns
Throughout the years, Coca-Cola has released limited-time collector bottles for Christmas.
 A Freightliner Coca-Cola Christmas truck in Dresden, Germany, 2004
The "Holidays are coming!" advertisement features a train of red delivery trucks, emblazoned with the Coca-Cola name and decorated with Christmas lights, driving through a snowy landscape and causing everything that they pass to light up and people to watch as they pass through.[145]
The advertisement fell into disuse in 2001, as the Coca-Cola Company restructured its advertising campaigns so that advertising around the world was produced locally in each country, rather than centrally in the company's headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia.[146] In 2007, the company brought back the campaign after, according to the company, many consumers telephoned its information center saying that they considered it to mark the beginning of Christmas.[145] The advertisement was created by US advertising agency Doner, and has been part of the company's global advertising campaign for many years.[147]
Keith Law, a producer and writer of commercials for Belfast CityBeat, was not convinced by Coca-Cola's reintroduction of the advertisement in 2007, saying that "I do not think there's anything Christmassy about HGVs and the commercial is too generic."[148]
In 2001, singer Melanie Thornton recorded the campaign's advertising jingle as a single, "Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)", which entered the pop-music charts in Germany at no. 9.[149][150] In 2005, Coca-Cola expanded the advertising campaign to radio, employing several variations of the jingle.[151]
In 2011, Coca-Cola launched a campaign for the Indian holiday Diwali. The campaign included commercials, a song, and an integration with Shah Rukh Khan's film Ra.One.[152][153][154]
Sports sponsorship
Coca-Cola was the first commercial sponsor of the Olympic Games, at the 1928 games in Amsterdam, and has been an Olympics sponsor ever since.[155] This corporate sponsorship included the 1996 Summer Olympics hosted in Atlanta, which allowed Coca-Cola to spotlight its hometown. Most recently, Coca-Cola has released localized commercials for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver; one Canadian commercial referred to Canada's hockey heritage and was modified after Canada won the gold medal game on February 28, 2010, by changing the ending line of the commercial to say "Now they know whose game they're playing".[156]
Since 1978, Coca-Cola has sponsored the FIFA World Cup, and other competitions organized by FIFA.[157] One FIFA tournament trophy, the FIFA World Youth Championship from Tunisia in 1977 to Malaysia in 1997, was called "FIFA  Coca-Cola Cup". In addition, Coca-Cola sponsors NASCAR's annual Coca-Cola 600 and Coke Zero Sugar 400 at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, North Carolina and Daytona International Speedway in Daytona, Florida; since 2020, Coca-Cola has served as a premier partner of the NASCAR Cup Series, which includes holding the naming rights to the series' regular season championship trophy.[158] Coca-Cola is also the sponsor of the iRacing Pro Series.
Coca-Cola has a long history of sports marketing relationships, which over the years have included Major League Baseball, the National Football League, the National Basketball Association, and the National Hockey League, as well as with many teams within those leagues. Coca-Cola has had a longtime relationship with the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers, due in part to the now-famous 1979 television commercial featuring "Mean Joe" Greene, leading to the two opening the Coca-Cola Great Hall at Heinz Field in 2001 and a more recent Coca-Cola Zero commercial featuring Troy Polamalu.
Coca-Cola is the official soft drink of many collegiate football teams throughout the nation, partly due to Coca-Cola providing those schools with upgraded athletic facilities in exchange for Coca-Cola's sponsorship. This is especially prevalent at the high school level, which is more dependent on such contracts due to tighter budgets.
Coca-Cola was one of the official sponsors of the 1996 Cricket World Cup held on the Indian subcontinent. Coca-Cola is also one of the associate sponsors of Delhi Capitals in the Indian Premier League.
In England, Coca-Cola was the main sponsor of The Football League between 2004 and 2010, a name given to the three professional divisions below the Premier League in soccer (football). In 2005, Coca-Cola launched a competition for the 72 clubs of The Football League  it was called "Win a Player". This allowed fans to place one vote per day for their favorite club, with one entry being chosen at random earning  250,000 for the club; this was repeated in 2006. The "Win A Player" competition was very controversial, as at the end of the 2 competitions, Leeds United A.F.C. had the most votes by more than double, yet they did not win any money to spend on a new player for the club. In 2007, the competition changed to "Buy a Player". This competition allowed fans to buy a bottle of Coca-Cola or Coca-Cola Zero and submit the code on the wrapper on the Coca-Cola website. This code could then earn anything from 50p to  100,000 for a club of their choice. This competition was favored over the old "Win a Player" competition, as it allowed all clubs to win some money. Between 1992 and 1998, Coca-Cola was the title sponsor of the Football League Cup (Coca-Cola Cup), the secondary cup tournament of England. Starting in 2019 20 season, Coca-Cola has agreed its biggest UK sponsorship deal by becoming Premier League football's seventh and final commercial partner[159] for the UK and Ireland, China, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Egyptian and the West African markets.
Between 1994 and 1997, Coca-Cola was also the title sponsor of the Scottish League Cup, renaming it to the Coca-Cola Cup like its English counterpart. From 1998 to 2001, the company was the title sponsor of the Irish League Cup in Northern Ireland, where it was named the Coca-Cola League Cup.
Coca-Cola is the presenting sponsor of the Tour Championship, the final event of the PGA Tour held each year at East Lake Golf Club in Atlanta, Georgia.[160]
Introduced March 1, 2010, in Canada, to celebrate the 2010 Winter Olympics, Coca-Cola sold gold colored cans in packs of 12 355 mL (12 imp fl oz; 12 US fl oz) each, in select stores.[161]
Coca-Cola which has been a partner with UEFA since 1988.[162]
In mass media
 Coca-Cola advertised on a Volkswagen T2 in Maring , Paran , Brazil, 2012
Coca-Cola has been prominently featured in many films and television programs. It was a major plot element in films such as One, Two, Three, The Coca-Cola Kid, and The Gods Must Be Crazy, among many others. In music, such as in the Beatles' song, "Come Together", the lyrics say, "He shoot Coca-Cola". The Beach Boys also referenced Coca-Cola in their 1964 song "All Summer Long", singing "Member when you spilled Coke all over your blouse?"[163]
The best selling solo artist of all time[164] Elvis Presley, promoted Coca-Cola during his last tour of 1977.[165] The Coca-Cola Company used Presley's image to promote the product.[166] For example, the company used a song performed by Presley, "A Little Less Conversation", in a Japanese Coca-Cola commercial.[167]
Other artists that promoted Coca-Cola include David Bowie,[168] George Michael,[169] Elton John,[170] and Whitney Houston,[171] who appeared in the Diet Coke commercial, among many others.
Not all musical references to Coca-Cola went well. A line in "Lola" by the Kinks was originally recorded as "You drink champagne and it tastes just like Coca-Cola." When the British Broadcasting Corporation refused to play the song because of the commercial reference, lead singer Ray Davies re-recorded the lyric as "it tastes just like cherry cola" to get airplay for the song.[172][173]
Political cartoonist Michel Kichka satirized a famous Coca-Cola billboard in his 1982 poster "And I Love New York." On the billboard, the Coca-Cola wave is accompanied by the words "Enjoy Coke." In Kichka's poster, the lettering and script above the Coca-Cola wave instead read "Enjoy Cocaine."[174]
Use as political and corporate symbol
 As sold in China
 Astronauts served Coca-Cola from this device on the Space Shuttle in 1995.
Coca-Cola has a high degree of identification with the United States, being considered by some an "American Brand" or as an item representing America, criticized as Cocacolonization. After World War II, this gave rise to the brief production of White Coke by the request of and for Soviet Marshal Georgy Zhukov, who did not want to be seen drinking a symbol of American imperialism. The bottles were given by the President Eisenhower during a conference, and Marshal Zhukov enjoyed the drink. The bottles were disguised as vodka bottles, with the cap having a red star design, to avoid suspicion of Soviet officials.[175] The drink is also often a metonym for the Coca-Cola Company.
Coca-Cola was introduced to China in 1927, and was very popular until 1949. After the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949, the beverage was no longer imported into China, as it was perceived to be a symbol of decadent Western culture and capitalist lifestyle. Importation and sales of the beverage resumed in 1979, after diplomatic relations between the United States and China were restored.[176]
There are some consumer boycotts of Coca-Cola in Arab countries due to Coke's early investment in Israel during the Arab League boycott of Israel (its competitor Pepsi stayed out of Israel).[177] Mecca-Cola and Pepsi are popular alternatives in the Middle East.[178]
A Coca-Cola fountain dispenser (officially a Fluids Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus or FGBA) was developed for use on the Space Shuttle as a test bed to determine if carbonated beverages can be produced from separately stored carbon dioxide, water, and flavored syrups and determine if the resulting fluids can be made available for consumption without bubble nucleation and resulting foam formation. FGBA-1 flew on STS-63 in 1995 and dispensed pre-mixed beverages, followed by FGBA-2 on STS-77 the next year. The latter mixed CO , water, and syrup to make beverages. It supplied 1.65 liters each of Coca-Cola and Diet Coke.[179][180]
Medicinal application
Coca-Cola is sometimes used for the treatment of gastric phytobezoars. In about 50% of cases studied, Coca-Cola alone was found to be effective in gastric phytobezoar dissolution. This treatment can however result in the potential of developing small bowel obstruction in a minority of cases, necessitating surgical intervention.[181][182]
Criticism
Main article: Criticism of Coca-Cola
Criticism of Coca-Cola has arisen from various groups around the world, concerning a variety of issues, including health effects, environmental issues, and business practices. The drink's coca flavoring, and the nickname "Coke", remain a common theme of criticism due to the relationship with the illegal drug cocaine. In 1911, the US government seized 40 barrels and 20 kegs of Coca-Cola syrup in Chattanooga, Tennessee, alleging the caffeine in its drink was "injurious to health", leading to amended food safety legislation.[183]
Beginning in the 1940s, PepsiCo started marketing their drinks to African Americans, a niche market that was largely ignored by white-owned manufacturers in the US, and was able to use its anti-racism stance as a selling point, attacking Coke's reluctance to hire blacks and support by the chairman of the Coca-Cola Company for segregationist Governor of Georgia Herman Talmadge.[184] As a result of this campaign, PepsiCo's market share as compared to Coca-Cola's shot up dramatically in the 1950s with African American soft-drink consumers three times more likely to purchase Pepsi over Coke.[185]
The Coca-Cola Company, its subsidiaries and products have been subject to sustained criticism by consumer groups, environmentalists, and watchdogs, particularly since the early 2000s.[186] In 2019, BreakFreeFromPlastic named Coca-Cola the single biggest plastic polluter in the world. After 72,541 volunteers collected 476,423 pieces of plastic waste from around where they lived, a total of 11,732 pieces were found to be labeled with a Coca-Cola brand (including the Dasani, Sprite, and Fanta brands) in 37 countries across four continents.[187] At the 2020 World Economic Forum in Davos, Coca-Cola's Head of Sustainability, Bea Perez, said customers like them because they reseal and are lightweight, and "business won't be in business if we don't accommodate consumers."[188] In February 2022, Coca-Cola announced that it will aim to make 25 percent of its packaging reusable by 2030.[189]
Coca-Cola Classic is rich in sugars, especially sucrose, which causes dental caries when consumed regularly. Besides this, the high caloric value of the sugars themselves can contribute to obesity. Both are major health issues in the developed world.[190]
In February 2021, Coca-Cola received criticism after a video of a training session, which told employees to "try to be less white", was leaked by an employee. The session also said in order to be "less white" employees had to be less "arrogant" and "defensive".[191][192]
Colombian death-squad allegations
Main article: Sinaltrainal v. Coca-Cola Co.
In July 2001, the Coca-Cola Company was sued over its alleged use of far-right death squads (the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia) to kidnap, torture, and kill Colombian bottler workers that were linked with trade union activity. Coca-Cola was sued in a US federal court in Miami by the Colombian food and drink union Sinaltrainal. The suit alleged that Coca-Cola was indirectly responsible for having "contracted with or otherwise directed paramilitary security forces that utilized extreme violence and murdered, tortured, unlawfully detained or otherwise silenced trade union leaders". This sparked campaigns to boycott Coca-Cola in the UK, US, Germany, Italy, and Australia.[193][194] Javier Correa, the president of Sinaltrainal, said the campaign aimed to put pressure on Coca-Cola "to mitigate the pain and suffering" that union members had suffered.[194]
Speaking from the Coca-Cola Company's headquarters in Atlanta, company spokesperson Rafael Fernandez Quiros said "Coca-Cola denies any connection to any human-rights violation of this type" and added "We do not own or operate the plants".[195]
See also
Food portalDrink portalUnited States portalGeorgia (U.S. state) portal
Coca-Cola HBC AG
Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars
Colalife
Fanta
List of Coca-Cola brands
List of soft drink flavors
Mexican Coke
Neiman Marcus
OpenCola (drink)
Premix and postmix
References
^ Elmore, 2013, p. 717
^ "Fortune 500 Companies 2018: Who Made the List". Fortune. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2018.
^ "2020 Best Global Brands - Interbrand". Interbrand. Retrieved July 7, 2021.
^ a b Eschner, Kat (March 29, 2017). "Coca-Cola's Creator Said the Drink Would Make You Smarter". Smithsonian Magazine. Smithsonian. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. So Pemberton concocted a recipe using coca leaves, kola nuts and sugar syrup. "His new product debuted in 1886: 'Coca-Cola: The temperance drink,'" writes Hamblin.
^ Greenwood, Veronique (September 23, 2016). "The little-known nut that gave Coca-Cola its name". www.bbc.com. Retrieved January 21, 2023.
^ Ivana Kottasova (February 18, 2014). "Does formula mystery help keep Coke afloat?". CNN. Retrieved March 21, 2022.
^ Geuss, Megan (October 2010). "First Coupon Ever". Wired. Vol. 18, no. 11. p. 104.
^ Richard Gardiner, "The Civil War Origin of Coca-Cola in Columbus, Georgia," Muscogiana: Journal of the Muscogee Genealogical Society (Spring 2012), Vol. 23: 21 24.
^ "Coca-Cola Inventor was Local Pharmacist". Columbus Ledger. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ "Columbus helped make Coke's success". Columbus Ledger-Enquirer. March 27, 2011. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2012.
^ Patent Office, United States (1886). Annual Report of the Patent Office, 1885. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
^ "pemberton_1.jpg". Archived from the original on September 8, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2014   via columbusstate.edu.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Blanding, Michael (2010). The Coke machine : the dirty truth behind the world's favorite soft drink. New York: Avery. pp. 14. ISBN 9781583334065. OCLC 535490831.
^ "Spanish town claims origins of Coca-Cola". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Hayes, Jack. "Coca-Cola Television Advertisements: Dr. John S. Pemberton". Nation's Restaurant News. Archived from the original on January 6, 2007. Retrieved January 21, 2007.
^ The Coca-Cola Company. "The Chronicle Of Coca-Cola". Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013.
^ Harford, Tim (May 11, 2007). "The Mystery of the 5-Cent Coca-Cola: Why it's so hard for companies to raise prices". Slate. Archived from the original on May 14, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007.
^ "Themes for Coca-Cola Advertising (1886 1999)". Archived from the original on March 3, 2007. Retrieved February 11, 2007.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ a b Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. pp. 45 47. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ a b Candler, Charles Howard (1950). Asa Griggs Candler. Georgia: Emory University. p. 81.
^ a b Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. pp. 44 45. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. pp. 48 49. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000). For God, Country and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-465-05468-8.
^ "This Day in Georgia History   Coca-Cola Sale Completed   GeorgiaInfo". usg.edu. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Robert W. Woodruff (1889 1985)". New Georgia Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "World of Coke exhibit shares story of forgotten 'Sprite Boy'".
^ a b "Coca-Cola Enterprises : Our Story". Coca-Cola Enterprises. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015.
^ The Coca-Cola Company. "History of Bottling". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2018.
^ "Mar 12, 1894 CE: First Bottles of Coca-Cola". National Geographic Society. December 17, 2013. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved March 12, 2019.
^ "Coca-Cola History". worldofcoca-cola.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Chattanooga Coca-Cola History" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2008.
^ a b "History Of Bottling". Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013.
^ First painted wall sign to advertise Coca-Cola : Cartersville, GA Archived March 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine   Waymarking
^ Staff, The Doctors Book of Home Remedies. Nausea: 10 Stomach-Soothing Solutions Archived May 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
^ Example: Flent's Cola Syrup Label says "For Simple Nausea associated with an upset stomach.* *These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease."
^ "Atlanta Jews and Coca-Cola". Archived from the original on August 21, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Beyond Seltzer Water: The Kashering of Coca-Cola". American Jewish Historical Society. Archived from the original on September 17, 2010. Retrieved February 26, 2007.
^ "Fleeman's Pharmacy (now the Belly General Store)". Archived from the original on December 17, 2003.
^ "Jack Fleeman   86   Owner". Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Georgia. August 17, 2009. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012.
^ "Coke Can History". Archived from the original on May 30, 2012.
^ "A History of Sugar Prices".
^ Ennis, Thomas W. (January 5, 1972). "Sugar Futures up on Soviet Buying". The New York Times.
^ "New Coke   Top 10 Bad Beverage Ideas". Time.com. April 23, 2010. Archived from the original on November 21, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Rory Carroll in Baghdad (July 5, 2005). "Cola wars as Coke moves on Baghdad". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ a b McKay, Betsy (January 30, 2009). "Coke to Omit 'Classic'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Klinemann, Jeffrey (January 31, 2013). "PepsiCo's in the Club... Store, that is, Capturing Costco Food Service Account". BevNET. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015.
^ Fredrix, Emily and Sarah Skidmore (November 17, 2009). "Costco nixes Coke products over pricing dispute". Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 20, 2009.
^ Esterl, Mike (September 19, 2011). "Coke Tailors Its Soda Sizes". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on December 19, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2019.
^ "Coca-Cola returns to Burma after a 60-year absence". BBC News. June 14, 2012. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Jordan, Tony (June 14, 2012). "Coca-Cola Announces Will Return to Myanmar After 60 Years". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on December 11, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Calderon, Justin (June 4, 2013). "Coca-Cola starts bottling in Myanmar". Inside Investor. Archived from the original on September 18, 2013. Retrieved June 5, 2013.
^ "Coca-Cola to invest Rs 28,000 cr in India". June 26, 2012. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Reuters Staff (February 9, 2021). "Coca-Cola turns to 100% recycled plastic bottles in U.S." Reuters. Retrieved February 9, 2021. {{cite news}}: |author= has generic name (help)
^ "Coca-Cola company trials first paper bottle". BBC News. February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021.
^ "Home of Coca-Cola UK : Diet Coke : Coke Zero   Coca-Cola GB". Letsgettogether.co.uk. April 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 15, 2010. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ "Foods List". usda.gov. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "The Daily Plate". The Daily Plate. Retrieved March 13, 2011.[permanent dead link]
^ "Coke, Pepsi to Drop Controversial Chemical from All Drinks". NBC News. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola formula, after 86 years in vault, gets new home". The Christian Science Monitor. December 8, 2011. Archived from the original on January 24, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Urban Legends Reference Pages: Cokelore". Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved February 10, 2007.
^ "Urban Legends Reference Pages: Cokelore (Have a Cloak and a Smile)". November 18, 1999. Archived from the original on December 1, 2005. Retrieved February 22, 2007.
^ Katie Rogers, "'This American Life' bursts Coca-Cola's bubble: What's in that original recipe, anyway?," Archived June 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine The Washington Post BlogPost, February 15, 2011. Retrieved February 16, 2011.
^ Brett Michael Dykes, "Did NPR's 'This American Life' discover Coke's secret formula?," Archived February 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine The Lookout, Yahoo! News, February 15, 2011.
^ David W. Freeman, "'This American Life' Reveals Coca-Cola's Secret Recipe (Full Ingredient List)," Archived February 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine CBS News Healthwatch blogs, February 15, 2011.
^ The Recipe Archived February 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, This American Life.
^ "Coca-cola". Pponline.co.uk. Archived from the original on November 15, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ "The History of Coca-Cola". Archived from the original on March 15, 2009. Retrieved January 23, 2007.
^ "Cocaine Facts - How to Tell Use of Cocaine - Questions, Myths, Truth". thegooddrugsguide.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Liebowitz, Michael, R. (1983). The Chemistry of Love. Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.
^ "Is it true Coca-Cola once contained cocaine?". June 14, 1985. Archived from the original on February 21, 2007. Retrieved February 27, 2007.
^ "Coca-Cola's Scandalous Past". March 2012.
^ May, Clifford D. (July 1, 1988). "How Coca-Cola Obtains Its Coca". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2008. A Stepan laboratory in Maywood, N.J., is the nation's only legal commercial importer of coca leaves, which it obtains mainly from Peru and, to a lesser extent, Bolivia. Besides producing the coca flavoring agent sold to The Coca-Cola Company, Stepan extracts cocaine from the coca leaves, which it sells to Mallinckrodt Inc., a St. Louis pharmaceutical manufacturer that is the only company in the United States licensed to purify the product for medicinal use
^ Benson, Drew. "Coca kick in drinks spurs export fears". Archived from the original on May 30, 2012.
^ "Dope Wagons". ncpedia.org. Archived from the original on February 2, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Text of United States v. Forty Barrels & Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola, 241 U.S. 265 (1916) is available from: CourtListener Findlaw Justia Library of Congress 
^ Gene A. Spiller (1998). Caffeine Content of Some Cola Beverages. CRC. ISBN 978-0-8493-2647-9.
^ "Offices & Bottling Plants". Archived from the original on February 16, 2007. Retrieved January 7, 2013.
^ "What Is the Difference Between Coca-Cola Enterprises and the Coca-Cola Company". Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2014.
^ "Coca-Cola: Macedonia makes the best Coke". Macedoniaonline.eu. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ Stafford, Leon (September 9, 2012). "Coca-Cola to spend $30 billion to grow globally". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved June 8, 2021.
^ Weissert, Will (May 15, 2007). "Cuba stocks US brands despite embargo". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2013.
^ Ryall, Julian (August 31, 2012). "Coca-Cola denies 'cracking' North Korea". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved August 11, 2013.
^ a b Liebesny, Herbert J. (1975). The law of the Near and Middle East readings, cases, and materials. Albany: State University of New York Press. pp. 42 43. ISBN 9780585090207.
^ "Transliteration of 'Coca-Cola' Trademark to Chinese Characters". ATIS - Australian Translating and Interpreting Service. Retrieved June 30, 2022.
^ "Coca-Cola in Chinese is Ke-kou-ke-la". The Economic Times. Retrieved June 30, 2022.
^ " "   . Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018.
^  . www.thinkhk.com. Retrieved June 30, 2022.
^ ""Placing the history of advertising": A spatial history of advertising in modern Shanghai (1905-1949)". purl.stanford.edu. Retrieved June 30, 2022.
^ Huddleston, Tom Jr. (July 5, 2019). "Netflix's 'Stranger Things' revives New Coke. Here's how the failed soda cost Coca-Cola millions in 1985". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019.
^ Meyer, Zlati (February 8, 2019). "Coca-Cola debuts Orange Vanilla, its first new flavor in more than a decade". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola Great Britain announces the launch of Coca-Cola Energy". Archived from the original on May 26, 2019.
^ Wienner-Bronner, Danielle (October 1, 2019). "Coca-Cola Energy is coming to the United States". CNN.com. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola discontinues energy drink in N.America". Reuters. May 14, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2021.
^ Moye, Jay (September 30, 2019). "Priming the Innovation Pump: Coca-Cola Debuts Diverse Lineup of New Drinks at NACS". The Coca-Cola Company. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola Company  Red Spencerian Script". Archived from the original on March 15, 2009. Retrieved January 11, 2007.
^ "The 130-year Evolution of the Coca-Cola logo". The Coca-Cola Company. Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2018.
^ "Frank Robinson, creator of the Coca-Cola logo". June 5, 2008. Archived from the original on January 27, 2009. Retrieved December 15, 2008.
^ Kamdar, Ismail (March 23, 2011). "Of Wa-Hubbies and Conspiracies". Muslim Matters. Archived from the original on January 21, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ a b "Inventory: Earl R. Dean Collection". Vigo County Public Library. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2008.
^ "The Story of the Coca-Cola Bottle". Coca-Cola. February 26, 2015. Archived from the original on November 19, 2017. Retrieved November 20, 2017.
^ "The Contour Bottle Celebrates Its 100th Birthday!" (PDF). Coca-Cola Bottlers Association. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2017.
^ Pendergrast, Mark (2004). For God, Country, and Coca-Cola. Basic Books. p. 104. ISBN 9780684826790. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Donna Gisolo Christenberry (2011). Terre Haute: Farrington's Grove. Arcadia Publishing. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-7385-8319-8. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "The History Behind the Coca-Cola Bottle". The Coca-Cola Company. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019. When King and Family sized packaging were introduced in 1955, Raymond Loewy was part of the team that worked to recast the bottle but still keep the proper proportions.
^ "Snopes urban legend of the Coca-Cola bottle shape". Snopes.com. May 2, 1999. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ Friedman, Lawrence M. (2004). American Law in the 20th Century. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 356 357. ISBN 9780300102994.
^ O'Connell, Jeffrey; Linehan, John (2006).  Carrington, Paul D.; Jones, Trina (eds.). "The Rise and Fall (and Rise Again?) of Accident Law: A Continuing Saga". Law and Class in America: Trends Since the Cold War. New York: New York University Press: 349 363. ISBN 9780814716540. Retrieved February 12, 2017.
^ Feinman, Jay M. (2014). Law 101 (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 166. ISBN 9780199341696.
^ Vandall, Frank J. (2011). A History of Civil Litigation: Political and Economic Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 27. ISBN 9780199781096.
^ Goldberg, John C.P.; Sebok, Anthony J.; Zipursky, Benjamin C.; Kendrick, Leslie C. (2021). Tort Law: Responsibilities and Redress (5th ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer. p. 981. ISBN 9781543821086. Retrieved December 11, 2021.
^ a b Torrisi, Lauren (April 13, 2013). "Couture Coke Bottles Inspired by Madonna". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola Light Gets Dressed By Another Designer, Karl Lagerfeld". Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
^ Heyden, Dylan (October 9, 2019). "Coca-Cola Unveils First Bottles Made With Recycled Ocean Plastic". The Inertia. Archived from the original on October 10, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019.
^ "Islamic cola launched in the UK". February 4, 2003. Retrieved July 23, 2020.
^ Mireles, Ricardo. "In Mexico, Big Cola is the real thing". Logistics Today. Archived from the original on November 9, 2004.
^ "About Kristall Beverage". Archived from the original on December 19, 2003. Retrieved January 31, 2006.
^ Murden, Terry (January 30, 2005). Coke adds life to health drinks sector. Scotland on Sunday. Retrieved February 14, 2006.
^ Kripalani, Manjeet and Mark L. Clifford (February 10, 2003) "Finally, Coke Gets It Right in India" Archived February 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. BusinessWeek. Retrieved August 9, 2006.
^ "Fizzical Facts: Coke claims 60% mkt share in India", Times News Network, August 5, 2005 Archived June 30, 2006, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Mecca-Cola plans new factories for Middle East". www.arabianbusiness.com. March 1, 2007. Retrieved April 7, 2022.
^ "'Protest' drinks range targets Muslims". The Guardian. April 23, 2003. Retrieved March 2, 2022.
^ "Mentoring at Coca-Cola Foods". www.coursehero.com. Retrieved January 8, 2022.[unreliable source?]
^ "The Coca-Cola Companyv. Meenaxi Enterprise, Inc" (PDF). UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE. June 28, 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 23, 2021.
^ Barbara Mikkelson and David P. Mikkelson, "The Claus That Refreshes," snopes.com, February 27, 2001. Retrieved June 10, 2005. Archived December 1, 2005, at Archive-It
^ See George McKay 'Consumption, Coca-colonisation, cultural resistance  and Santa Claus' Archived April 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, in Sheila Whiteley, ed. (2008) Christmas, Ideology and Popular Culture. Edinburgh University Press, pp. 50 70.
^ The White Rock Collectors Association, "Did White Rock or The Coca-Cola Company create the modern Santa Claus Advertisement? Archived December 13, 2021, at the Wayback Machine," whiterocking.org, 2001 . Retrieved January 19, 2007.
^ White Rock Beverages, "Coca-Cola's Santa Claus: Not The Real Thing!," BevNET.com, December 18, 2006 . Retrieved January 19, 2007. Archived January 17, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Coke means Coca-Cola". Coca-Cola Conversations. June 16, 2008. Archived from the original on February 26, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2011.
^ McKelvey, Steve M. (2006). "Coca-Cola vs. PepsiCo   A 'Super' Battleground for the Cola Wars?". Sport MarHeting Quarterly. 15: 114 123. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.392.5206.[dead link]
^ Orozco, Cynthia E. Quintanilla Perez, Selena. Archived April 7, 2020, at the Wayback Machine The Handbook of Texas online. Retrieved on June 5, 2006
^ "Coke Card loses its fizz". Strategy. Brunico Communications Ltd. March 25, 2002. Retrieved January 9, 2021.
^ My Coke Rewards Archived November 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine (Official Site)
^ Burke, Jessica (September 26, 2011). "Sharing your Coke: marketing genius or just entirely weird?". Foodmag.com.au. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved February 23, 2013.
^ "What's in a Name?". Voxy.co.nz. October 25, 2011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "For Summer Campaign, Coke Prints 150 Popular First Names on Bottles". DesignTAXI.com. October 6, 2011. Archived from the original on April 27, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Coca Cola Bottles History". London, UK: Coca-Cola GB. 2013. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
^ "Share a Coke: Is your name on the list?". The Belfast Telegraph. Belfast, UK: Independent News & Media. May 27, 2013. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
^ "A Morning Cola Instead of Coffee?". The New York Times. January 20, 1988. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved April 9, 2013.
^ McGrath, Karen (November 30, 1987). "Soft drink for breakfast could be your cup of tea". Bangor Daily News. Retrieved April 9, 2013.
^ a b Sandison, Nikki (November 16, 2007). "Coca-Cola revives popular 'holidays are coming' ad". Brand Republic. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved January 22, 2011.
^ Armstrong, Stephen (May 14, 2001). "Coke goes for broke". The Guardian. Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on November 23, 2009. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
^ "The Coca-Cola Challenge". Campaign. October 22, 2004. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008.
^ Hardy, Jane (December 27, 2007). "Do TV campaigns ad up?". The Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012.
^ "Melanie Thornton: "Ich wollte immer Musik"". Der Spiegel (in German). SPIEGELnet GmbH. November 25, 2001. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved November 15, 2008.
^ Prentiss Findlay (December 7, 2001). "Charleston native Thornton to be buried on Saturday". The Post and Courier. Charleston, SC. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008.
^ Clark, Nicola (November 29, 2005). "Coca-Cola restructures in healthy drinks focus". Brand Republic. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011.
^ "Coca-Cola launches its Diwali campaign " Best Media Info, News and Analysis on Indian Advertising, Marketing and Media Industry". Bestmediainfo.com. October 13, 2011. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Coca-Cola Diwali!". YouTube. November 12, 2010. Archived from the original on November 20, 2010. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ Heikkila, Pia (May 25, 2010). "From Bollywood to the world". The National. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Coca-Cola". Olympic Movement. Archived from the original on August 21, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2012.
^ "YouTube Post of Coca-Cola 2010 Olympic Hockey Commercial". YouTube. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2010.
^ FIFA.com. "FIFA Partners - FIFA.com". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved August 19, 2017.
^ Brown, Maury (December 5, 2019). "Busch, Coca-Cola, GEICO, Xfinity Become Premier Partners Of NASCAR Cup Series". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019.
^ Wilson, Bill (September 18, 2018). "Premier League signs Coca-Cola as sponsor". BBC News.
^ "TOUR Championship by Coca-Cola". PGATour. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola to Release Gold Can Commemorating the 2010 Olympics". BevWire. March 1, 2010. Archived from the original on March 12, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2010.
^ "Cristiano Ronaldo snub sees Coca-Cola market value fall by $4bn". ESPN. June 16, 2021.
^ "All Summer Long Lyrics   Beach Boys". Sing365.com. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Best-selling solo artist". Guinness World Records. Retrieved March 26, 2021.
^ "Elvis Presley". YouTube. June 21, 1977. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2012.
^ "Coca Cola celebrates 125th anniversary with 'Elvis and Coke'". Rica.alfahosting.org. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Elvis Music in Japanese Coca-Cola Commercial   Misc". ElvisNews.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "David Bowie: Coca-Cola Planet Live (Rare Euro Promo) FLAC   Guitars101   Guitar Forums". Guitars101. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ Diet Coke commercial on YouTube
^ "Coca Cola Light CM   Elton John". YouTube. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Whitney Houston   Diet Coke Commercial (1986)". YouTube. June 14, 2010. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2012.
^ "Banning songs not a rare occurrence for the BBC". The New Zealand Herald. December 19, 2007. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011. Retrieved October 15, 2011.
^ Giles, Jeff. "45 Years Ago: Ray Davies Flies Across the Atlantic  Twice!  to Re-Record Two Words in 'Lola'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2015.
^ "And I Love New York". Rogallery.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2008. Retrieved November 10, 2012.
^ Mark Pendergrast (August 15, 1993). "Viewpoints; A Brief History of Coca-Colonization". The New York Times. p. 256. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012.
^ Koetse, Manya (September 24, 2015). "Coca Cola in China". Marketing. Netherlands: whatsonweibo.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016.
^ "Boycott Israel Campaign page on Coca-Cola". Archived from the original on September 7, 2007. Retrieved August 3, 2007.
^ Tagliabue, John (December 31, 2002). "They Choke on Coke, But Savor Mecca-Cola". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2013   via NYTimes.com.
^ Pearlman, Robert. "Coke machines on-board the space shuttle". CollectSpace. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ Orloff, Richard W. (January 2001) [Press Kit May 1996]. "Space Shuttle Mission STS-77" (PDF). National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 27, 2003. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
^ Iwamuro M.; Okada H.; Matsueda K.; Inaba T.; Kusumoto C.; Imagawa A.; Yamamoto K. (2015). "Review of the diagnosis and management of gastrointestinal bezoars". World Journal of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. 7 (4): 336 345. doi:10.4253/wjge.v7.i4.336. PMC 4400622. PMID 25901212.
^ "Stomach, Definition and Patient Education". Healthline. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015.
^ Benjamin, Ludy T.; Rogers, Anne M.; Rosenbaum, Angela (January 1, 1991). "Coca-Cola, caffeine, and mental deficiency: Harry Hollingworth and the Chattanooga trial of 1911". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences. 27 (1): 42 55. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(199101)27:1<42::AID-JHBS2300270105>3.0.CO;2-1. ISSN 1520-6696. PMID 2010614.
^ Martin, Douglas (May 6, 2007). "Edward F. Boyd Dies at 92; Marketed Pepsi to Blacks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved June 5, 2019.
^ Brian D. Behnken, Gregory D. Smithers (2015). "Racism in American Popular Media: From Aunt Jemima to the Frito Bandito". p. 34. ABC-CLIO
^ Delshad, Irani (February 24, 2016). "Is Coca-Cola an easy target? Or are its critics right?". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2018.
^ Segran, Elizabeth (November 1, 2019). "Coca-Cola, Nestl , and PepsiCo are the world's biggest plastic polluters again". Fast Company. Archived from the original on February 8, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2020.
^ Thomas, Daniel (January 21, 2020). "People still want plastic bottles, says Coca-Cola". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 30, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2020.
^ "Coca-Cola Pledges 25% Reusable Packaging by 2030 - February 16, 2022". The Daily NewsBrief. February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022.
^ Gupta, Prahlad; Gupta, Nidhi; Pawar, Atish Prakash; Birajdar, Smita Shrishail; Natt, Amanpreet Singh; Singh, Harkanwal Preet (December 29, 2013). "Role of Sugar and Sugar Substitutes in Dental Caries: A Review". ISRN Dentistry. 2013: 519421. doi:10.1155/2013/519421. ISSN 2090-4371. PMC 3893787. PMID 24490079.
^ Del R o, Mairem (February 25, 2021). "Coca-Cola Asks Its Workers to Be 'Less White' to Fight Racism". entrepreneur.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2021.
^ Bremner, Jade (February 24, 2021). "Coca-Cola faces backlash over seminar asking staff to 'be less white'". The Independent. Retrieved March 13, 2021.
^ Forero, Juan (July 29, 2001). "Coca-Cola Accused". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2020.
^ a b Brodzinsky, Sibylla (July 24, 2003). "Coca-Cola boycott launched after killings at Colombian plants". The Guardian. Guardian. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016.
^ "Coke sued over death squad claims". bbc.co.uk. BBC. July 20, 2001. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016.
Works cited
Elmore, Bartow J. "Citizen Coke: An Environmental and Political History of the Coca-Cola Company," Enterprise & Society (2013) 14#4 pp 717 731 online.
Further reading
Allen, Frederick. Secret Formula: How Brilliant Marketing and Relentless Salesmanship Made Coca-Cola the Best-Known Product in the World. New York: Harper Business, 1994.
Blanding, Michael. The Coke Machine: The Dirty Truth Behind the World's Favorite Soft Drink. New York: Avery, 2010.
Foster, Robert (2008). Coca-Globalization: Following Soft Drinks from New York to New Guinea. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hamblin, James (January 31, 2013). "Why We Took Cocaine Out of Soda". The Atlantic. When cocaine and alcohol meet inside a person, they create a third unique drug called cocaethylene.
Hays, Constance L. The Real Thing: Truth and Power at the Coca-Cola Company. New York: Random House, 2004.
Kahn, Ely J., Jr. The Big Drink: The Story of Coca-Cola. New York: Random House, 1960.
Louis, Jill Chen and Harvey Z. Yazijian. The Cola Wars. New York: Everest House Publishers, 1980.
Oliver, Thomas. The Real Coke, The Real Story. New York: Random House, 1986.
Pendergrast, Mark. For God, Country, and Coca-Cola: The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink And the Company That Makes It. New York: Basic Books, 2000.
Primary sources
Isdell, Neville. Inside Coca-Cola: A CEO's Life Story of Building the World's Most Popular Brand. With the assistance of David Beasley. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2011.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coca-Cola.
Official website 
Kinescope of a live 1954 TV commercial for Coca-Cola (Internet Archive)
Coca-Cola Advertising History (in Portuguese)
The Contour Bottle
Coca-Cola: Refreshing Memories   slideshow by Life
China Advisory: Avoiding the Wax Tadpole   Effective Chinese Language Trademark Strategy   Chinese language trademark for Coca-Cola
vteVarieties of Coca-ColaRegular
Coca-Cola (traditional)
Caffeine-Free
Black Cherry Vanilla
Blak
Cherry
Citra
Lemon
Lime
Mexican
New Coke
Orange
Raspberry
Starlight
Vanilla
White (USSR)
Low-calorie
C2
Clear
Diet Coke/Coca-Cola Light
Diet Plus
Fiber+
Life
Light Sango
Zero Sugar
Other brands
Tab
vteThe Coca-Cola CompanyBrandsSoft drinks
A&W Root Beer (Canada only)
Ambasa
Ameyal
Barq's
Beat
Beverly
Bj re Julmust
Blue Sky
Cannings
Coca-Cola
Fanta
Hit
Kist
Royal Tru
Fioravanti
Fresca
Fruktime
Frutonic
Guaran  Jesus
Inca Kola
Iron Brew
Joya
Kinley
Kola Inglesa
Krest
Kuat
Lemon & Paeroa
Lift
Mare Rosso
Mello Yello
Mezzo Mix
Nordic Mist
OK Soda
Pibb Xtra
Portello
Quatro
Quwat Jabal
Ramblin' Root Beer
RimZim
Red Flash
Santiba
Sarsi
Seagram's
Senzao
Smart
Sparkle
Sparletta
Sprite
Chinotto
Stoney
Surge
Urge
Tab
Tanora
Tiky
Vault
VegitaBeta
Victoria
Yoli
Juices and teas
Ayataka
Capri Sun
Delaware Punch
Enviga
Far Coast
Five Alive
Fruitopia
Frutonic
Fuze
Glaceau
Gold Peak
Hi-C
Honest Tea
Innocent
Matte Le o
Minute Maid
Cappy
Nestea
Oasis
Odwalla
Qoo
Peace Iced Tea
Simply
Sokenbicha
Sparkle
Tum-E Yummies
VitaminWater
ZICO
Sports drinks
Aquarius
Bodyarmor SuperDrink
Powerade
Monster Beverage(17.9% stake)
BPM Energy
Burn
Formula 50
Full Throttle
Live+
Monster
Mother
NOS
RAC 124
Relentless
Tab Energy
Von Dutch
Bottled water
Abbey Well
AdeS
Arwa
Aquarius
Ciel
Dasani
Deep River Rock
Malvern Water
Smartwater
Topo Chico
Valpre
Coffee-based
Caribou Coffee
Costa Coffee
Dunkin' Donuts
Georgia
illy
Dairy-based
Fairlife
Swerve
Vio
Purchased from Bisleri
Citra
Gold Spot
Limca
Thums Up
Maaza
Joint ventures
Coca-Cola Beverages Africa (66.5%)
Coca-Cola Europacific Partners (19.5%)
Coca-Cola FEMSA (28%)
Coca-Cola Hellenic (23.2%)
Former holdings
Beverage Partners Worldwide
Coca-Cola Amatil
Coca-Cola Enterprises
Columbia Pictures
TriStar Pictures
Legal
United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola (1916)
Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co. (1944)
Sinaltrainal v. Coca-Cola (2001)
POM Wonderful v. Coca-Cola (2014)
Campaignsand slogans
Ashita Ga Arusa
Coke Zero Facial Profiler
Coming Together
Country Sunshine
H2NO
Hey Kid, Catch!
I'd like to buy the world a Coke
The Lost Island of Alanna
MagiCan
Max Headroom
Move to the Beat
My Coke Rewards
MyCoke
Once Upon a Wheel
Open Happiness
Pepsi Invaders
Coca-Cola polar bears
The Polar Bears
Share a Coke
Other
Coca-Cola buildings and structures
Criticism of Coca-Cola
Cocacolonization
Coca-Cola Freestyle
Limca Book of Records
One, Two, Three (1961 film)
vteCola brands
Afri-
Amrat
Apotekarnes
Auvergnat
Baikal
Barr
Beed
Big
Boost!
Breizh
Bubba
Campa
Cassinelli
Cavan
China
Classic (UK)
Club
Coca-Cola
Cockta
Turka
Cole Cold
Corsica
Count
Cricket
Cuba
Diet Coke
Diet Rite
Double
Double Seven
El Ch -
Est
Evoca
Export
Fada
Faygo
Fentimans Curiosity
Filbert's
Frescolita
Fritz-
Fruti
Fuji-
Future
Grandpa Graf's
Green Cola
Isaac
Jolly
Jolt
Jones Soda
Inca
Kofola
Real
Rom n
Kristal
LA Ice
Lava
Like
Maxi
Mecca-
Mr.
No Name
Olvi
Open
Pakola
Pepsi
Parsi
Per 
Polo Cockta
Pran
Premium-
President's Choice
Qibla
RC
Red Bull
Red
Reed's
Rola
Sam's Choice
Schweppes
Shasta
Sinalco
Tab
Thums Up
Topsia
Triple
tuKola
Ubuntu
Vess
Virgin
Vita
XL
Zamzam
Zelal
Zevia
Authority control International
FAST
National
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coca-Cola&oldid=1148670360"