Flag of a country or nation
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "National flag" news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Johnson's new chart of national emblems, published c. 1868. The large flags shown in the corners are the 37-star flag of the United States (flown 1867 1890), the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom, the Russian Imperial Standard, and the French tricolore with inset Imperial Eagle. Various other flags flown by ships are shown. The Flag of Cuba is labelled "Cuban (so called)". The Chinese dragon on the Flag of China was drawn mistakenly as a western dragon.
Part of a series onNationalism
Nation forming
Nationalism in the Middle Ages
Anthem
Church
Colours
Emblem
Father
Flag
Epic
God
Identity
Language
Myth
Sport
State
Symbol
Treasure
Core values
Allegiance
Independence
Patriotism
Self-determination
Solidarity
Types
African
Alt-right
Anarchist
Banal
Blind
Bourgeois
Business
Chauvinism
Welfare
Jingoism
Civic
American
Indian
Irish
Communist
Conservative
Constitutional patriotism
Corporate
Cultural
Cyber-
Ecological
Economic
Ethnic
Ethnopluralism
European
Expansionist
Integral
Left-wing (populism)
Moderate
Musical
Liberal
Mystic
Neo-
New
Pan-
Pluri-
Post-
Racial
Arab
Black
Japanese
Sh wa
Korean
White
Religious
Christian
Catholic
Clerical
Hindu
Hindutva
Muslim
Sikh
Resource
Revolutionary
National syndicalist
National Bolshevik
Fascism
Legionarism
National Socialism
Rexism
Ethnocacerism
Romantic
Technological
Territorial
Trans-
Ultra-
Zionism
OrganizationsList of nationalist organizations
Related concepts
Anationalism
Anti-nationalism
Anti-globalization movement
Anti-imperialism
Civil religion
Communitarianism
Cosmopolitanism
Diaspora politics
Ethnocentrism
Gender and nationalism
Globalism
Historiography and nationalism
Imagined community
Imperialism
Internationalism
Irredentism
Localism
National indifference
Nationalism studies
Nativism
Racism
Revanchism
Right-wing populism
Seasonal or cultural festival
Subsidiarity
in Catholicism
Trumpism
Francoism
Xenophobia
 Politics portalvtePart of the Politics seriesPolitics
Outline
Index
Category
Primary topics
Outline of political science
Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy
Political systems
Anarchy
City-state
Democracy
Dictatorship
Directorial
Federacy
Feudalism
Hybrid regime
Meritocracy
Monarchy
Parliamentary
Presidential
Republic
Semi-parliamentary
Semi-presidential
Theocracy
Academic disciplines
Political science (political scientists)
International relations (theory)
Comparative politics
Political analysis
Political theory
Policy studies
Political psychology
Political sociology
Public administration
Bureaucracy (street-level)
Technocracy
Adhocracy
Policy
Public policy (doctrine)
Domestic policy
Foreign policy
Civil society
Public interest
Government branches
Separation of powers
Legislature
Executive
Judiciary
Election commission
Related topics
Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Critique of political economy
Subseries
Electoral systems
Elections
voting
Unitarism
Federalism
Government
forms
Ideology
Political campaigning
Political parties
 Politics portalvte
A national flag is a flag that represents and symbolizes a given nation. It is flown by the government of that nation, but usually can also be flown by its citizens. A national flag is typically designed with specific meanings for its colours and symbols, which may also be used separately from the flag as a symbol of the nation. The design of a national flag is sometimes altered after the occurrence of important historical events. The burning or destruction of a national flag is a greatly symbolic act.
History[edit]
See also: Timeline of national flags and History of flags
Historically, flags originated as military standards, used as field signs. Throughout history, various examples of such proto-flags exist: the white cloth banners of the Zhou dynasty's armies in the 11th century BC, the vexillum standards flown by the armies of the Roman Empire, the Black Standard famously carried by Muhammad which later became the flag of the Abbasid Caliphate, and the various "Raven banners" flown by Viking chieftains. Angelino Dulcert published a series of comprehensive Portolan charts in the 14th century AD, which famously showcased the flags of several polities depicted   although these are not uniformly "national flags", as some were likely the personal standards of the respective nation's rulers.
The practice of flying flags indicating the country of origin outside of the context of warfare became common with the maritime flag. The current design of the flag of the Netherlands originates as a variant of the late 16th century orange-white-blue Prinsenvlag ("Prince's Flag"), that was used in the Dutch War of Independence (1568 1648), evolving in the early 17th century as the red-white-blue Statenvlag ("States Flag"), the naval flag of the States-General of the Dutch Republic, making the Dutch flag perhaps the oldest tricolour flag in continuous use, although standardisation of the exact colours is of a much later date.[1][2]
During the age of sail in the early 17th century, the Union Jack finds its origins, when James VI of Scotland inherited the English and Irish thrones (as James I). On 12 April 1606, the new flag representing this regal union between England and Scotland was specified in a royal decree, according to which the flag of England (a red cross on a white background, known as St George's Cross), and the flag of Scotland (a white saltire on a blue background, known as the Saltire or St Andrew's Cross), would be joined, forming the flag of Great Britain and first Union Flag[3] - but then without the red Cross of St. Patrick. It continued in use until January 1, 1801, the effective date of the legislative union of Great Britain and Ireland, when the Cross of St. Patrick (a red diagonal cross on white) was incorporated into the flag,[4] giving the Union Jack its current design.
With the emergence of nationalist sentiment from the late 18th century national flags began to be displayed in civilian contexts as well.[5] Notable early examples include the US flag, which was first adopted as a naval ensign in 1777 but began to be displayed as a generic symbol of the United States after the American Revolution, and the French Tricolor, which became a symbol of the Republic in the 1790s.[6]
Most countries of Europe standardised and codified the designs of their maritime flags as national flags, in the course of the 19th and early 20th centuries. The specifications of the flag of Denmark, based on a flag that was in continuous use since the 14th-century, were codified in 1748, as a rectangular flag with certain proportions, replacing the variant with a split.[7] The flag of Switzerland was introduced in 1889, also based on medieval war flags.
In Europe, the red-white-blue tricolour design of the flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands became popular, since it was associated with a republican form of government through that country's long war of independence against the Spanish Crown. That association was greatly reinforced after the French Revolution (1789), when France used the same colours, but with vertical instead of horizontal stripes. Other countries in Europe (like Ireland, Romania and Estonia) and in South and Central America selected tricolours of their own to express their adherence to the principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity as embodied in the French flag.[8]
 A 1919 painting depicting the Brazilian flag being embroidered by a family.
The Ottoman flag (now the flag of Turkey) was adopted in 1844. Other non-European powers followed the trend in the late 19th century, the flag of Japan being introduced in 1870, that of Qing China in 1890. 
Also in the 19th century, most countries of South America introduced a flag as they became independent (Peru in 1820, Bolivia in 1851, Colombia in 1860, Brazil in 1822, etc.)
Currently, there are 193 national flags in the world, of which are flown by sovereign states, within members of the United Nations.
Process of adoption[edit]
The national flag is often mentioned or described in a country's constitution, but its detailed description may be delegated to a flag law passed by the legislature, or even secondary legislation or in monarchies a decree.
Thus, the national flag is mentioned briefly in the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany of 1949 "the federal flag is black-red-gold" (art. 22.2 Die Bundesflagge ist schwarz-rot-gold), but its proportions were regulated in a document passed by the government in the following year. The Flag of the United States is not defined in the constitution but rather in a separate Flag Resolution passed in 1777.
Minor design changes of national flags are often passed on a legislative or executive level, while substantial changes have constitutional character. The design of the flag of Serbia omitting the communist star of the flag of Yugoslavia was a decision made in the 1992 Serbian constitutional referendum, but the adoption of a coat of arms within the flag was based on a government "recommendation" in 2003, adopted legislatively in 2009 and again subject to a minor design change in 2010. The Flag of the United States underwent numerous changes because the number of stars represents the number of states, proactively defined in a Flag Act of 1818 to the effect that "on the admission of every new state into the Union, one star be added to the union of the flag"; it was changed most recently in 1960 with the accession of Hawaii.
A change in national flag is often due to a change of regime, especially following a civil war or revolution. In such cases, the military origins of the national flag and its connection to political ideology (form of government, monarchy vs. republic vs. theocracy, etc.) remains visible. In such cases national flags acquire the status of a political symbol.
The flag of Germany, for instance, was a tricolour of black-white-red under the German Empire, inherited from the North German Confederation (1866). The Weimar Republic that followed adopted a black-red-gold tricolour. Nazi Germany went back to black-white-red in 1933, and black-red-gold was reinstituted by the two successor states, West Germany and East Germany, with East Germany's flag being defaced with Communist symbols, following World War II. Similarly the flag of Libya introduced with the creation of the Kingdom of Libya in 1951 was abandoned in 1969 with the coup d' tat led by Muammar Gaddafi. It was used again by National Transitional Council and by anti-Gaddafi forces during the Libyan Civil War in 2011 and officially adopted by the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration.
Usage[edit]
There are three distinct types of national flag for use on land, and three for use at sea, though many countries use identical designs for several (and sometimes all) of these types of flag.
On land[edit]
On land, there is a distinction between civil flags (FIAV symbol ), state flags (), and war or military flags (). Civil flags may be flown by anyone regardless of whether they are linked to government, whereas state flags are those used officially by government agencies. War flags (also called military flags) are used by military organizations such as Armies, Marine Corps, or Air Forces.
In practice, many countries (such as the United States and the United Kingdom) have identical flags for these three purposes; national flag is sometimes used as a vexillological term to refer to such a three-purpose flag (). In a number of countries, however, and notably those in Latin America, there is a distinct difference between civil and state flags. In most cases, the civil flag is a simplified version of the state flag, with the difference often being the presence of a coat of arms on the state flag that is absent from the civil flag.
Very few countries use a war flag that differs from the state flag. The People's Republic of China, the Republic of China (Taiwan), and Japan are notable examples of this. Swallow-tailed flags are used as war flags and naval ensigns in Nordic countries and charged versions as presidential or royal standards. The Philippines does not have a distinctive war flag in this usual sense, but the flag of the Philippines is legally unique in that it is flown with the red stripe on top when the country is in a state of war, rather than the conventional blue.
Civil flag of Austria
State flag of Austria
Flag of the People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China
At sea[edit]
The naval ensign of the United Kingdom.
The flag that indicates nationality on a ship is called an ensign. As with the national flags, there are three varieties: the civil ensign (), flown by private vessels; state ensigns (also called government ensigns; ), flown by government ships; and war ensigns (also called naval ensigns; ), flown by naval vessels. The ensign is flown from an ensign-staff at the stern of the ship, or from a gaff when underway. Both these positions are superior to any other on the ship, even though the masthead is higher. In the absence of a gaff the ensign may be flown from the yardarm. (See Maritime flags.) National flags may also be flown by aircraft and the land vehicles of important officials. In the case of aircraft, those flags are usually painted on, and those are usually to be painted on in the position as if they were blowing in the wind.
In some countries, such as the United States and Canada (except for the Royal Canadian Navy's Ensign), the national ensign is identical to the national flag, while in others, such as the United Kingdom and Japan, there are specific ensigns for maritime use. Most countries do not have a separate state ensign, although the United Kingdom is a rare exception, in having a red ensign for civil use, a white ensign as its naval ensign, and a blue ensign for government non-military vessels.
Protocol[edit]
Main article: Flag protocol
 The world's fourth tallest flagpole flying a 270 kg (595 lb) Flag of North Korea. It is 160 m (525 ft) in height, over Kij ng-dong ("Peace village") near Panmunjom, the border of North Korea and South Korea.
There is a great deal of protocol involved in the proper display of national flags. A general rule is that the national flag should be flown in the position of honour, and not in an inferior position to any other flag (although some countries make an exception for royal standards). The following rules are typical of the conventions when flags are flown on land:
When a national flag is displayed together with any other flags, it must be hoisted first and lowered last.
When a national flag is displayed together with the national flags of other countries, all the flags should be of approximately equal size and must be flown at an equal height, although the national flag of the host country should be flown in the position of honour (in the centre of an odd number of flagpoles or at the far right   left from an observer's point of view   of an even number of flagpoles).
The flags of Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Lebanon are wrapped (from left to right - from right to left from the side an observer's point of view), as some of these flags carry Arabic texts.
When a national flag is displayed together with flags other than national flags, it should be flown on a separate flagpole, either higher or in the position of honour.
When a national flag is displayed together with any other flags on the same flagpole, it must be at the top, though separate flagpoles are preferable.
When a national flag is displayed together with any other flag on crossed flagpoles, the national flag must be on the observer's left and its flagpole must be in front of the flagpole of the other flag.
When a national flag is displayed together with another flag or flags in procession, the national flag must be on the marching right. If there is a row of flags, it should be in the position of honour.
When a national flag, with some exceptions, is flown upside down it indicates distress. This however is merely tradition. It is not a recognised distress signal according to the International regulations for preventing collisions at sea. Further, a nation's flag is commonly flown inverted as a sign of protest or contempt against the country concerned. As of now, only the flag of the Philippines recognises the distress symbolism of the reverse flag.
Hanging a flag vertically[edit]
Most flags are hung vertically by rotating the flag pole. However, some countries have specific protocols for this purpose or even have special flags for vertical hanging; usually rotating some elements of the flag   such as the coat of arms   so that they are seen in an upright position.[9]
Examples of countries that have special protocol for vertical hanging are: Canada, Czech Republic, Greece, Israel, the Philippines, South Africa, and the United States (reverse always showing); and the United Kingdom (obverse always showing).
Examples of countries that have special designs for vertical hanging are: Austria, Cambodia (coat of arms must be rotated and blue strips are narrowed), Dominica (coat of arms must be rotated and reverse always showing), Germany, Hungary, Liechtenstein (crown must be rotated), Mexico, Montenegro, Nepal, Slovakia (coat of arms must be rotated to normal position), and Saudi Arabia (shahada must be rotated). A vertical banner is used instead of the horizontal flag for Malaysia.
Vertical variation of the flag of Cambodia.
Vertical variation of the flag of Dominica.
Vertical variation of the flag of Germany.
Vertical variation of the flag of Hungary.
Vertical variation of the flag of Liechtenstein.
Vertical variation of the flag of Montenegro.
Vertical variation of the flag of Nepal.
Vertical variation of the flag of Slovakia.
Vertical variation of the flag of Saudi Arabia.
Vertical banner variation of the flag of Malaysia.
Design[edit]
The flag of Nepal is the only national flag which is not a quadrilateral.
The art and practice of designing flags is known as vexillography. The design of national flags has seen a number of customs become apparent.
Most national flags are rectangular, or have a rectangular common variant, with the most notable exception being the flag of Nepal. The ratios of height to width vary among national flags, but none is taller than it is wide, again except for the flag of Nepal. The flags of Switzerland and the Vatican City are the only national flags which are exact squares.
The obverse and reverse of all national flags are either identical or mirrored, except for the flag of Paraguay and the partially recognized Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. See Flags whose reverse differs from the obverse for a list of exceptions including non-national flags.
As of 2011 all national flags consist of at least two different colours. In many cases, the different colours are presented in either horizontal or vertical bands. It is particularly common for colours to be presented in bands of three.
It is common for many flags to feature national symbols, such as coats of arms. National patterns are present in some flags. Variations in design within a national flag can be common in the flag's upper left quarter, or canton.
Colours[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of flags by color and List of flags by color combination.
 Distribution of colours in national flags
The most popular colours in national flags are red, white, green, dark blue, yellow, light blue, and black.[10] The only national flag not to include the colors red, white, or blue is Jamaica.[11] The occurrence of each colour in all the flags is listed in detail in the table below.[10] The table shows that the colours light brown, dark brown and grey only occur in very small quantities. In fact, they only occur in the symbols on flags, such as in the Spanish flag.
Colour
Percentage of Flags
Count of flags
red
76.14%
150
white
71.57%
141
blue
51.78%
102
yellow/gold
45.18%
89
green
44.67%
88
black
30.46%
60
orange
4.57%
9
brown
4.06%
8
gray
3.05%
6
purple
1.52%
3
Similarities[edit]
Blue, yellow and red striped flagsFlags from top left to bottom right:Chad, Romania, Andorra and Moldova
Although the national flag is meant to be a unique symbol for a country, many pairs of countries have highly similar flags. Examples include the flags of Monaco and Indonesia, which differ only slightly in proportion and the tint of red; the flags of the Netherlands and Luxembourg, which differ in proportion as well as in the tint of blue used; and the flags of Romania and Chad, which differ only in the tint of blue.
The flags of Ireland and Ivory Coast and the flags of Mali and Guinea are (aside from shade or ratio differences) vertically mirrored versions from each other. This means that the reverse of one flag matches the obverse of the other. Unlike horizontally mirrored flags (like Poland and Indonesia) the direction in which these flags fly is crucial to identify them.
 Image showing many similar flags
There are three colour combinations that are used on several flags in certain regions. Blue, white, and red is a common combination in Slavic countries such as the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Russia, Serbia, Slovenia, and Croatia as well as among Western nations including Australia, France, Iceland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Many African nations use the Pan-African colours of red, yellow, and green, including Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali and Senegal. Flags containing red, white, and black (a subset of the Pan-Arab colours) can be found particularly among the Arab nations such as Egypt, Iraq, Syria and Yemen.
 Comparison of the Italian and Mexican flags
Due to the common arrangement of the same colours, at first sight, it seems that the only difference between the Italian and the Mexican flag is only the coat of arms of Mexico present in the latter; in reality the Italian tricolour uses lighter shades of green and red, and has different proportions than the Mexican flag those of the Italian flag are equal to 2:3, while the proportions of the Mexican flag are 4:7.[12] The similarity between the two flags posed a serious problem in maritime transport, given that originally the Mexican mercantile flag was devoid of arms and therefore was consequently identical to the Italian Republican tricolour of 1946; to obviate the inconvenience, at the request of the International Maritime Organization, both Italy and Mexico adopted naval flags with different crests.[13]
Many other similarities may be found among current national flags, particularly if inversions of colour schemes are considered, e.g., compare the flag of Senegal to that of Cameroon and Indonesia to Poland and Monaco. Also the flag of Italy and the flag of Hungary use the same colours, although the order and direction differ (the Italian flag is vertical green-white-red and the Hungarian flag is horizontal red-white-green). The same goes for the flag of France and the flag of the Netherlands (the French flag is vertical blue-white-red and the Dutch flag is horizontal red-white-blue). 
Flag families[edit]
Main article: Flag families
While some similarities are coincidental, others are rooted in shared histories, known as a flag family. For example, the flags of Colombia, of Ecuador, and of Venezuela all use variants of the flag of Gran Colombia, the country they composed upon their independence from Spain, created by the Venezuelan independence hero Francisco de Miranda; and the flags of Kuwait, of Jordan, and of Palestine are all highly similar variants of the flag of the Arab revolt of 1916 1918. The flags of Romania and Moldova are virtually the same, because of the common history and heritage. Moldova adopted the Romanian flag during the declaration of independence from the USSR in 1991 (and was used in various demonstrations and revolts by the population) and later the Moldovan coat of arms (which is part of the Romanian coat of arms) was placed in the centre of the flag. All Nordic countries, with the exception of Greenland, use the Nordic Cross design (Iceland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, in addition to the autonomous regions of the Faroe Islands and  land), a horizontal cross shifted to the left on a single-coloured background. The United States and United Kingdom both have red, white, and blue. This similarity is due to the fact that the first 13 states of the U.S. were formerly colonies of the United Kingdom. Some similarities to the United States flag with the red and white stripes are noted as well such as the flag of Malaysia and the flag of Liberia, the latter of which was an American resettlement colony. Also, several former colonies of the United Kingdom, such as Australia, Fiji and New Zealand include the Union Jack in the top left corner.
Slavic countries flag family.
Former Federal Republic of Central America countries flags family.
See also[edit]
Lists of flags
Lists of flags
Gallery of sovereign state flags
Gallery of flags of dependent territories
Timeline of national flags
List of flags by colour combination
Other
Flag Day
Flag desecration
Flags of the World
Flag protocol
Glossary of vexillology
National coat of arms
National emblem
State flag
City flag
References[edit]
^ "Europe: Netherlands   The World Factbook   Central Intelligence Agency". www.cia.gov. CIA. Retrieved 28 January 2019.
^ Worthington, Daryl (17 October 2016). "Why Are So Many Flags Red, White and Blue?". New Historian. Retrieved 28 January 2019.
^ "flag of the United Kingdom". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2021-11-08.
^ "flag of the United Kingdom | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 1 January 2022.
^ "Flags" in  German, French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland.
^ http://users.skynet.be/lotus/flag/fra0-en.htm[bare URL]
^ Dannebrog (in Danish). Den Store Danske. 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-07-14. Retrieved 2014-06-13.
^ "flag - National flags | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 1 January 2022.
^ Nelson, Phil (2005-12-31), Hanging Flags Vertically, Flags of the World, archived from the original on 2010-12-17, retrieved 2011-02-20.
^ a b Bartneck, Christoph; Adrian Clark (2014). "Semi-Automatic Color Analysis For Brand Logos". Color Research and Application. 40: 72 84. doi:10.1002/col.21853.
^ "What Do the Colors and Symbols of the Flag of Jamaica Mean?". World Atlas. Retrieved 17 July 2020.
^ "Bandiera Messico" (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2016.
^ "La bandiera Italiana" (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2016.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to National flags of countries.
Flags of the World, a massive online vexillological database on national and many other kinds of flags
The World All Countries Flags, a website about national symbols
World Flag Database reverse search for ID by colour and layout
[1] for flag construction diagrams, flags of subnational entities, historical flags and country subdivisions
Extensive list of similar flags from around the world
vteNational flags and coats of armsNational flags
Sovereign states
Dependent territories
Timeline
National coats of arms
Sovereign states
Dependent territories
 Heraldry portal
Authority control: National 
Germany
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_flag&oldid=1145188024"