US Navy special operations force
"SEAL" and "Navy SEALs" redirect here. For other uses, see SEAL (disambiguation) and Navy SEALs (disambiguation).
United States Navy SEALsSpecial Warfare insignia known as the "SEAL Trident"Active1 January 1962   present(61 years, 3 months)CountryUnited StatesBranchUnited States NavyTypeSpecial operations forceRoleSpecial operationsDirect actionCounter-terrorismSpecial reconnaissanceAmphibious reconnaissanceUnconventional warfareHostage rescueForeign internal defenseCounter-proliferationCounter narcotic operationsPart ofU.S. Naval Special Warfare CommandJoint Special Operations Command  SEAL Team SixGarrison/HQNaval Amphibious Base CoronadoNaval Amphibious Base Little CreekNickname(s)"Frogmen", "The Teams", "The Men with Green Faces"[1]Motto(s)"The Only Easy Day Was Yesterday"[2] "It Pays To Be A Winner". "Never Out Of The Fight".Engagements
Vietnam War
Multinational Force in Lebanon
Operation Urgent Fury
Achille Lauro hijacking
Operation Earnest Will
Operation Prime Chance
Operation Just Cause
Operation Nifty Package
Operation Desert Storm
Somali Civil War
Operation Restore Hope
Operation Gothic Serpent
Battle of Mogadishu
Operation Uphold Democracy
Yugoslav Wars
1999 East Timorese crisis[3]
Operation Enduring Freedom
War in Afghanistan
Operation Red Wings
Operation Iraqi Freedom
War in North-West Pakistan
Angur Ada raid
Operation Neptune Spear
Maersk Alabama hijacking
War on ISIL
Operation Inherent Resolve
2014 hostage rescue operations in Yemen
2017 Marawi Crisis
[4][5][6]Military unit
The United States Navy Sea, Air, and Land (SEAL) Teams, commonly known as Navy SEALs, are the U.S. Navy's primary special operations force and a component of the Naval Special Warfare Command. Among the SEALs' main functions are conducting small-unit special operation missions in maritime, jungle, urban, arctic, mountainous, and desert environments. SEALs are typically ordered to capture or to kill high level targets, or to gather intelligence behind enemy lines.[7] SEAL team personnel are hand selected, highly trained, and possess a high degree of proficiency in direct action (DA), and special reconnaissance (SR), among other tasks like sabotage, demolition, intelligence gathering, and hydro-graphic reconnaissance, training, and advising friendly militaries or other forces. [8]
Depending on the availability of platforms, threat level, and environment, different methods can be used for the insertion and extraction of SEALs into a target location. This could include nuclear-powered cruise missile submarines equipped with dry deck shelters, SDV submarines, surface vessels, surface swimming, or other vehicles
All active SEALs are members of the U.S. Navy.[12] The CIA's highly secretive and elite Special Operations Group (SOG) recruits operators from SEAL Teams,[13] with joint operations going back to the MACV-SOG during the Vietnam War.[14] This cooperation still exists today, as evidenced by military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.[15][16]
History[edit]
Origins[edit]
Although not formally founded until 1962, the modern-day U.S. Navy SEALs trace their roots to World War II.[7] The United States Military recognized the need for the covert reconnaissance of landing beaches and coastal defenses. As a result, the joint Army, Marine Corps, and Navy Amphibious Scout and Raider School was established in 1942 at Fort Pierce, Florida.[11] The Scouts and Raiders were formed in September of that year, just nine months after the attack on Pearl Harbor, from the Observer Group, a joint U.S. Army-Marine-Navy unit.
Scouts and Raiders[edit]
Recognizing the need for a beach reconnaissance force, a select group of Army and Navy personnel assembled at Amphibious Training Base (ATB) Little Creek, Virginia on 15 August 1942 to begin Amphibious Scouts and Raiders (Joint) training. The Scouts and Raiders' mission was to identify and reconnoiter the objective beach, maintain a position on the designated beach prior to a landing, and guide the assault waves to the landing beach.[7] The unit was led by U.S. Army 1st Lieutenant Lloyd Peddicord as commanding officer, and Navy Ensign John Bell as executive officer. Navy chief petty officers and sailors came from the boat pool at ATB, Solomons, Maryland, and Army Raider personnel came from the 3rd and 9th Infantry Divisions. They trained at Little Creek until embarking for the North Africa campaign the following November. Operation Torch was launched in November 1942 off the Atlantic coast of French Morocco in North Africa.[17]
The first group included Phil H. Bucklew, the "Father of Naval Special Warfare," after whom the Naval Special Warfare Center building is named. Commissioned in October 1942, this group saw combat in November 1942 during Operation Torch on the North African Coast. Scouts and Raiders also supported landings in Sicily, Salerno, Anzio, Normandy, and southern France.[18]
The second group of Scouts and Raiders, code-named Special Service Unit No. 1, was established on 7 July 1943, as a joint and combined operations force. The first mission, in September 1943, was at Finschhafen in Papua New Guinea. Later operations were at Gasmata, Arawe, Cape Gloucester, and the east and south coasts of New Britain, all without any loss of personnel. Conflicts arose over operational matters, and all non-Navy personnel were reassigned. The unit, renamed 7th Amphibious Scouts, received a new mission, to go ashore with the assault boats, buoy channels, erect markers for the incoming craft, handle casualties, take offshore soundings, clear beach obstacles, and maintain voice communications linking the troops ashore, incoming boats and nearby ships. The 7th Amphibious Scouts conducted operations in the Pacific for the duration of the conflict, participating in more than 40 landings.[7]
The third and final Scouts and Raiders organization operated in China. Scouts and Raiders were deployed to fight with the Sino-American Cooperative Organization (SACO). To help bolster the work of SACO, Admiral Ernest J. King ordered that 120 officers and 900 men be trained for "Amphibious Raider" at the Scout and Raider school at Fort Pierce, Florida. They formed the core of what was envisioned as a "guerrilla amphibious organization of Americans and Chinese operating from coastal waters, lakes, and rivers employing small steamboats and sampans." While most Amphibious Raider forces remained at Camp Knox in Calcutta, three of the groups saw active service. They conducted a survey of the upper Yangtze River in the spring of 1945 and, disguised as coolies, conducted a detailed three-month survey of the Chinese coast from Shanghai to Kitchioh Wan, near Hong Kong.[7]
Naval Combat Demolition Units (NCDUs)[edit]
 NCDU 45, CEC Ensign Karnowski, Chief Carpenters Mate Conrad C. Millis, MM2 Equipment Operator Lester Meyers, and three sailors. The unit received a Presidential Unit Citation with ENS Karnowski earning the Navy Cross & French Croix de Guerre with Palm, while MM2 Meyers received a Silver Star.[19]
In September 1942, 17 Navy salvage personnel arrived at ATB Little Creek, Virginia for a week-long course in demolitions, explosive cable cutting, and commando raiding techniques. On 10 November 1942, the first combat demolition unit successfully cut cable and net barriers across the Wadi Sebou River during Operation Torch in North Africa. This enabled USS Dallas (DD-199) to traverse the water and insert U.S. Rangers who captured the Port Lyautey airdrome.
In early May 1943, a two-phase "Naval Demolition Project" was directed by the Chief of Naval Operations "to meet a present and urgent requirement". The first phase began at ATB Solomons, Maryland with the establishment of Operational Naval Demolition Unit No. 1. Six officers and eighteen enlisted men reported from the Seabee's NTC Camp Peary dynamiting and demolition school, for a four-week course. Those Seabees, led by Lieutenant Fred Wise CEC, were immediately sent to participate in the invasion of Sicily.[20] At that time Lieutenant Commander Draper L. Kauffman, "The Father of Naval Combat Demolition," was selected to set up a school for Naval Demolitions and direct the entire Project. The first six classes graduated from "Area E" at NTC Camp Peary.[21] LCDR Kauffman's needs quickly out-grew "Area E" and on 6 June 1943, he established NCDU training at Fort Pierce. Most of Kauffman's volunteers came from the navy's Civil Engineer Corps (CEC) and enlisted Seabees. Training commenced with a grueling week designed to filter out under-performing candidates. Eventually given the name "Hell Week" by NCDU recruits, this rigorous course was integrated into UDT training and remains a part of modern day Navy Seal training today.[22]
By April 1944, a total of 34 NCDUs were deployed to England in preparation for Operation Overlord, the amphibious landing at Normandy. On 6 June 1944, under heavy fire, the NCDUs at Omaha Beach managed to blow eight complete gaps and two partial gaps in the German defenses. The NCDUs suffered 31 killed and 60 wounded, a casualty rate of 52%. Meanwhile, the NCDUs at Utah Beach met less intense enemy fire. They cleared 700 yards (640 metres) of beach in two hours, another 900 yards (820 metres) by the afternoon. Casualties at Utah Beach were significantly lighter with six killed and eleven wounded. During Operation Overlord, not a single demolitioneer was lost to improper handling of explosives. In August 1944, four NCDUs from Utah Beach plus nine others participated in the landings Operation Dragoon in southern France. It was the last amphibious operation in the European Theater of Operations. Once the European invasions were complete, Real Admiral Kelly Turner requisitioned all available NCDUs from Fort Pierce for integration into the Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs) operating in the Pacific Theater.
Thirty NCDUs[23] had been sent to the Pacific prior to Normandy. NCDUs 1 10 were staged on Florida Island in the Solomon Islands (archipelago) during January 1944.[24] NCDU 1 went briefly to the Aleutians in 1943.[25] NCDUs 4 and 5 were the first to see combat by helping the 4th Marines at Green Island and Emirau Island.[25] A few were temporarily attached to UDTs.[24] Later NCDUs 1 10 were combined to form Underwater Demolition Team Able.[24] Six NCDUs: 2,3, 19, 20, 21 and 24 served with the Seventh Amphibious Force and were the only remaining NCDUs at the end of the war. The Naval Special Warfare Command building is named for LTJG Frank Kaine CEC commander of NCDU 2.
OSS Maritime Unit[edit]
Much like their brethren in the US Army Special Forces (aka Green Berets), the Navy SEALs claim a lineage to the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). The OSS was a paramilitary organization and also a progenitor of the CIA.[26] Army Special Forces, founded in 1952 by former members of the OSS, established the first military special operations combat diver units nearly a decade before the SEALs were created in 1962.[27] Some of the earliest World War II predecessors of the Green Berets and SEALs were the Operational Swimmers of OSS.
The OSS executed special operations, dropping operatives behind enemy lines to engage in organized guerrilla warfare as well as to gather information on such things as enemy resources and troop movements.[28] British Combined Operations veteran LCDR Wooley, of the Royal Navy, was placed in charge of the OSS Maritime Unit (MU) in June 1943. Their training started in November 1943 at Camp Pendleton, California, moved to Santa Catalina Island, California in January 1944, and finally moved to the warmer waters of The Bahamas in March 1944. Within the U.S. military, they pioneered flexible swimfins and diving masks, closed-circuit diving equipment (under the direction of Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen),[28][29] the use of Swimmer Delivery Vehicles (a type of submersible), and combat swimming and limpet mine attacks.[16]
The OSS MU mission was "to infiltrate agents and supply resistance groups by sea, conduct maritime sabotage, and develop specialized maritime surface and subsurface equipment and devices." The MU operated in several theaters. In the Mediterranean, a fleet of hired Greek wooden fishing vessels  called caiques  covertly supported OSS agents in Albania, Greece, and Yugoslavia. After Italy surrendered, the MU and Mariassalto, an elite Italian special operations naval unit, operated against the Germans. In the Far East, the MU operated in conjunction with an Operational Group to attack Japanese forces on the Arakan coast of Burma. They jointly conducted reconnaissance missions on the Japanese-held coast, sometimes penetrating several miles up enemy-controlled rivers.[30]
The MU developed or used several innovative devices that would later allow for the creation of a special operations combat-diver capability, first in Army Special Forces (Green Berets) and later in US Navy SEAL units. Perhaps the most important invention in the realm of special operations diving was the Lambertsen Amphibious Respiratory Unit (LARU) invented by Dr. Christian J. Lambertsen. The Lambertsen unit permitted a swimmer to remain underwater for several hours and to approach targets undetected because the LARU did not emit telltale air bubbles. The LARU was later refined, adapted, and the technology used by the U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, and NASA. The Army Special Forces Underwater Operations School at Key West, Florida, the home of Special Forces maritime operations, draws its roots from the Maritime Unit.[30]
Lambertsen began his involvement with OSS as a medical student offering the use of his technology to the secretive organization in 1942. In 1944 he was commissioned as an Army Officer and later joined the OSS as an Operational Swimmer. Lambertsen himself led the OSS Maritime Unit on covert underwater missions to attach explosives to Japanese ships.[31] Dr. Christian Lambertsen is remembered today as the 'Father of Military Underwater Operations'. Along with all the members of the OSS Maritime Unit, he was made honorary Green Berets and recognized by organizations like the UDT Navy Seal Association for their heroic and critical work.[32]
In May 1944, Colonel "Wild Bill" Donovan, the head of the OSS, divided the Maritime Unit into four groups and approached General MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz about using OSS men in the Pacific[33] Gen. MacArthur had no interest at all.[33] Adm Nimitz looked at Donovan's list of units and also said no thank you except he could use the swimmers from the Maritime Unit to expand the UDTs.[33] He was primarily interested in them for being swimmers, not their military training. The interest in the tactical applications of the OSS Operational Swimmers' training only developed later but most of Group A's gear was put into storage as it was not applicable to UDT work.[34] The OSS was very restricted in operations in the Pacific. ADM Nimitz approved the transfer the five officers and 24 enlisted men of Maritime Unit Operational Swimmer Group A led by Lieutenant Choate.[33][34] They became part of UDT 10 in July 1944. LT Choate would become commander of UDT 10. The rest of MU Group A would fill most of UDT 10's command offices as well as many of the swimmers.[34] Five of the OSS-trained men participated in the very first UDT submarine operation with USS Burrfish in the Caroline Islands during August 1944. Three of the men failed to make the rendezvous point for extraction. They were reported captured in Japanese communications and identified as "BAKUHATAI"  explosive ordnance men.[35] They were never seen again and are listed as MIAs.
Underwater Demolition Teams (UDTs)[edit]
Main article: Underwater Demolition TeamsThe first units designated as Underwater Demolition Teams were formed in the Pacific Theater. Rear Admiral Kelly Turner, the Navy's top amphibious expert, ordered the formation of Underwater Demolition Teams in response to the failed invasion at Tarawa and the Marines' inability to clear the surrounding coral reefs with Landing Vehicle Tracked (LVTS). Turner recognized that amphibious operations required intelligence of underwater obstacles. The personnel for these teams were mostly local Seabees or others that had started out in the NCDUs. UDT training was at the Waipio Amphibious Operating Base, under V Amphibious Corps operational and administrative control. Most of the instructors and trainees were graduates of the Fort Pierce NCDU or Scouts and Raiders schools, Seabees, Marines, and Army soldiers.
 Carp. W. H. Acheson Silver Star ceremony for UDT 1 action at Engibi where he stripped down to swim trunks and did reconnaissance in broad daylight on a hostile beach becoming a role model of UDTs being swimmers.
When Teams 1 and 2 were initially formed they were "provisional" with 180 men total.[36] The first underwater demolition team commanders were CDR E.D. Brewster (CEC) UDT 1 and CDR John T. Koehler UDT 2.[37] The teams wore fatigues with life-vests and were not expected to leave their boats   similar to the NCDUs. However, at Kwajalein Fort Pierce protocol was changed. Admiral Turner ordered daylight reconnaissance and CEC. ENS Lewis F. Luehrs and Seabee Chief William Acheson wore swim trunks under their fatigues anticipating they would not be able to get what the Admiral wanted by staying in the boat. They stripped down and spent 45 minutes in the water in broad daylight. When they got out they were taken directly to Admiral Turner's flagship to report, still in their trunks. Admiral Turner concluded that daylight reconnaissance by individual swimmers was the way to get accurate information on coral and underwater obstacles for upcoming landings. This is what he reported to Admiral Nimitz.[38] The success of those UDT 1 Seabees not following Fort Pierce protocol rewrote the UDT mission model and training regimen.[39] Those Seabees also created the image of UDTs as the "naked warriors". At Engebi CDR Brewster was wounded and all of the men with ENS Luehrs wore swim trunks under their greens.[23]
After the operations in the Marshall Islands, Admiral Turner restructured the two provisional UDT units and created 7 permanent units with an allotted size of 96 men per team. In the name of operational efficiency, the UDTs were also made an-all Navy outfit, and any Army and Marine corp engineers were returned to their units. Moving forward, the UDTs would employ the reconnaissance method made successful in Kwajalein - daytime use of swimsuits and goggles instead of the Scouts and Raiders method of nighttime rubber boats. In order to implement these changes and grow the UDTs, Koehler was made the commanding officer of the Naval Combat Demolition Training and Experimental Base on Maui. Admiral Turner also brought on LCDR Draper Kauffman as a combat officer.[37]
 Lt. Luehrs was one of the 30 Officers from the 7th NCR[40] that staged for UDTs 1 & 2. He and Chief Acheson were the first UDT swimmers His 
Corps insignia would have had a Seabee on it,
Seabees made up the vast majority of the men in teams 1 9, 13, and 15.[41][42] Seabees were roughly 20% of UDT 11.[41] The officers were mostly CEC.[43]
At war's end 34 teams had been formed with teams 1 21 having actually been deployed. The Seabees provided over half of the men in the teams that saw service.
The UDT uniform had transitioned from the combat fatigues of the NCDUs to trunks, swimfins, diving masks and Ka-bars. The men trained by the OSS had brought their swimfins with them when they joined the UDTs.[34] They were adopted by the other teams as quickly as Supply could get them.[34]
These "Naked Warriors", as they came to be called post-war, saw action in every major Pacific amphibious landing including: Eniwetok, Saipan, Kwajalein, Tinian, Guam, Angaur, Ulithi, Peleliu, Leyte, Lingayen Gulf, Zambales, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, Labuan, and Brunei Bay. By fall of 1944, the UDT's were considered an indispensable US military special operations unit, and Navy planners in the Central Pacific relied heavily on the UDT's reconnaissance reports and demolition activities to clear the way for landings.[37]
The last UDT operation of the war was on 4 July 1945 at Balikpapan, Borneo. The rapid demobilization at the conclusion of the war reduced the number of active duty UDTs to two on each coast with a complement of seven officers and 45 enlisted men each.[11] However, the UDTs were the only special troops that avoided complete disbandment after the war, unlike the OSS Maritime Unit, the VAC Recon Battalion, and several Marine recon missions.[37]
Because they were so integral to the success of missions in the Pacific during the war, the U.S. Navy did not publicize the existence of the UDTs until post-war.[44] During WWII the Navy did not have a rating for the UDTs nor did they have an insignia. Those men with the CB rating on their uniforms considered themselves Seabees that were doing underwater demolition (Fig. 11). They did not call themselves "UDTs" or "Frogmen" but rather "Demolitioneers" which had carried over from the NCDUs[45] and Lt Cdr Kauffman's recruiting efforts from the Seabee dynamiting and demolition school. The next largest group of UDT volunteers came from the joint Army-Navy Scouts and Raiders school that was also in Fort Pierce and the Navy's bomb disposal school in the Seabee-dominated teams.
For the Marianas operations of Kwajalein, Roi-Namur, Siapan, Tinian, Eniwetok, and Guam, Admiral Turner recommended sixty Silver Stars and over three hundred Bronze Stars with Vs for the Seabees and other service members of UDTs 1 7[46] That was unprecedented in U.S. Naval/Marine Corps history.[46] For UDTs 5 and 7 every officer received a silver star and all the enlisted received bronze stars with Vs for Operation Forager (Tinian).[47] For UDTs 3 and 4 every officer received a silver star and all the enlisted received bronze stars with Vs for Operation Forager (Guam).[47] Admiral Richard Lansing Conolly felt the commanders of teams 3 and 4 (LT Crist and LT W.G. Carberry) should have received Navy Crosses. LT Crist (CEC), LCDR Kauffman, and LT Carberry right-left at the UDT Silver and Bronze Stars award ceremony.  Seabees in both UDT 3 and 4 made signs to greet the Marines assaulting Guam.[47] However, Team 4 was able to leave theirs on the beach for the Marines to see that the Seabees had been there first. UDT 4 posted this sign again on the Hotel Marquee for its 25-year reunion.[48]As the first to often make amphibious landings, the UDTs began making signs to welcome the Marines, indicating they had been there first, to foster the continued friendly rivalry. In keeping with UDT tradition, UDT 21 created a sign to greet the Marines landing in Japan. For Operation Beleaguer UDT 9 was deployed with the III Amphibious Corps to Northern China. In 1965 the UDT 12 put up another beach sign to greet the Marines at Da Nang.
Operation Crossroads UDT 3 was designated TU 1.1.3 for the operation. On 27 April 1946, seven officers and 51 enlisted embarked at CBC Port Hueneme, for transit to Bikini.[49] Their assignment was to retrieve water samples from ground zero of the Baker blast.
Korean War[edit]
 UDT members using the casting technique from a speeding boat
The Korean War began on 25 June 1950, when the North Korean army invaded South Korea. Beginning with a detachment of 11 personnel from UDT 3, UDT participation expanded to three teams with a combined strength of 300 men. During the "Forgotten War" the UDTs fought intensely,  employing demolition expertise gained from World War II and using it for an offensive role. Continuing to use water as cover and concealment as well as an insertion method, the Korean Era UDTs targeted bridges, tunnels, fishing nets, and other maritime and coastal targets. They also developed a close working relationship with the Republic of Korea Underwater Demolitions Unit (predecessor to the Navy Special Warfare Flotilla), which continues today.[7]
Through their focused efforts on demolitions and mine disposal, the UDTs refined and developed their commando tactics during the Korean War. The UDTs also accompanied South Korean commandos on raids in the North to demolish train tunnels. This was frowned upon by higher-ranking officials because they believed it was a non-traditional use of Naval forces. Due to the nature of the war, the UDTs maintained a low operational profile. Some of the missions included transporting spies into North Korea and the destruction of North Korean fishing nets used to supply the North Korean Army.[7]
As part of the Special Operations Group, or SOG, UDTs successfully conducted demolition raids on railroad tunnels and bridges along the Korean coast. The UDTs specialized in a somewhat new mission: Night coastal demolition raids against railroad tunnels and bridges. The UDT men were given the task because, in the words of UDT LT Ted Fielding, "We were ready to do what nobody else could do, and what nobody else wanted to do." (Ted Fielding was awarded the Silver Star during Korea, and was later promoted to the rank of Captain).[50]
On 15 September 1950, UDTs supported Operation Chromite, the amphibious landing at Incheon. UDT 1 and 3 provided personnel who went in ahead of the landing craft, scouting mud flats, marking low points in the channel, clearing fouled propellers, and searching for mines. Four UDT personnel acted as wave-guides for the Marine landing. In October 1950, UDTs supported mine-clearing operations in Wonsan Harbor where frogmen would locate and mark mines for minesweepers. On 12 October 1950, two U.S.minesweepers hit mines and sank. UDTs rescued 25 sailors. The next day, William Giannotti conducted the first U.S. combat operation using an "aqualung" when he dived on USS Pledge. For the remainder of the war, UDTs conducted beach and river reconnaissance, infiltrated guerrillas behind the lines from sea, continued mine sweeping operations and participated in Operation Fishnet, which devastated the North Koreans' fishing capability.[7]
Birth of Navy SEALs and the Vietnam War[edit]
Main article: Vietnam War
President John F. Kennedy, aware of the situation in Southeast Asia, recognized the need for unconventional warfare and special operations as a measure against guerrilla warfare. In a speech to Congress on 25 May 1961, Kennedy spoke of his deep respect for the United States Army Special Forces. While his announcement of the government's plan to put a man on the moon drew most of the attention, in the same speech he announced his intention to spend over $100 million to strengthen U.S. special operations forces and expand American capabilities in unconventional warfare. Some people erroneously credit President Kennedy with creating the Navy SEALs. His announcement was actually only a formal acknowledgement of a process that had been underway since the Korean War.[51]
The Navy needed to determine its role within the special operations arena. In March 1961, Admiral Arleigh Burke, the Chief of Naval Operations, recommended the establishment of guerrilla and counter-guerrilla units. These units would be able to operate from sea, air or land. This was the beginning of the Navy SEALs. All SEALs came from the Navy's Underwater Demolition Teams, who had already gained extensive experience in commando warfare in Korea; however, the Underwater Demolition Teams were still necessary to the Navy's amphibious force.[7]
 Members of SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team Two in a Dry Deck Shelter of the submerged USS Philadelphia
The first two teams were formed in January 1962[52] and stationed on both US coasts: Team One at Naval Amphibious Base Coronado, in San Diego, California and Team Two at Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek, in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Formed entirely with personnel from UDTs, the SEALs mission was to conduct counter guerilla warfare and clandestine operations in maritime and riverine environments.[11] Men of the newly formed SEAL Teams were trained in such unconventional areas as hand-to-hand combat, high-altitude parachuting, demolitions, and foreign languages. The SEALs attended Underwater Demolition Team replacement training and they spent some time training in UDTs. Upon making it to a SEAL team, they would undergo a SEAL Basic Indoctrination (SBI) training class at Camp Kerry in the Cuyamaca Mountains. After SBI training class, they would enter a platoon and conduct platoon training.
According to founding SEAL team member Roy Boehm, the SEALs' first missions were directed against communist Cuba. These consisted of deploying from submarines and carrying out beach reconnaissance in a prelude to a proposed US amphibious invasion of the island. On at least one occasion Boehm and another SEAL smuggled a CIA agent ashore to take pictures of Soviet nuclear missiles being unloaded on the dockside.[53]
The Pacific Command recognized Vietnam as a potential hot spot for unconventional forces. At the beginning of 1962, the UDTs started hydrographic surveys and along with other branches of the US Military, the Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV) was formed. In March 1962, SEALs were deployed to South Vietnam as advisors for the purpose of training Army of the Republic of Vietnam commandos in the same methods they were trained themselves.
The Central Intelligence Agency began using SEALs in covert operations in early 1963. The SEALs were later involved in the CIA sponsored Phoenix Program where it targeted Vietcong (VC) infrastructure and personnel for capture and assassination.
The SEALs were initially deployed in and around Da Nang, training the South Vietnamese in combat diving, demolitions and guerrilla/anti-guerrilla tactics. As the war continued, the SEALs found themselves positioned in the Rung Sat Special Zone where they were to disrupt the enemy supply and troop movements and in the Mekong Delta to fulfill riverine operations, fighting on the inland waterways.
 SEALs on patrol in the Mekong Delta
Combat with the VC was direct. Unlike the conventional warfare methods of firing artillery into a coordinate location, the SEALs operated close to their targets. Into the late 1960s, the SEALs were successful in a new style of warfare, effective in anti-guerrilla and guerrilla actions. SEALs brought a personal war to the enemy in a previously safe area. The VC referred to them as "the men with green faces," due to the camouflage face paint the SEALs wore during combat missions.[54]
In February 1966, a small SEAL Team One detachment arrived in South Vietnam to conduct direct action missions. Operating from Nh  B  Base, near the Rung Sat Special Zone, this detachment signalled the beginning of a SEAL presence that would eventually include 8 SEAL platoons in country on a continuing basis. SEALs also served as advisors for Provincial Reconnaissance Units and the Lein Doc Nguio Nhia, the Vietnamese SEALs.[11]
 1st Presidential Unit Citation awarded to SEAL Team TWO for extraordinary heroism in Vietnam from July 1967 to June 1969.
SEALs continued to make forays into North Vietnam and Laos and covertly into Cambodia, controlled by the Studies and Observations Group. The SEALs from Team Two started a unique deployment of SEAL team members working alone with ARVN Commandos. In 1967, a SEAL unit named Detachment Bravo (Det Bravo) was formed to operate these mixed US and ARVN units.
 Presidential Unit Citation awarded to SEAL Team TWO for extraordinary heroism in Vietnam from July 1969 to June 1971.
By 1970, President Richard Nixon initiated a plan of Vietnamization, which would remove the US from the Vietnam War and return the responsibility of defense back to the South Vietnamese. Conventional forces were being withdrawn; the last SEAL platoon left South Vietnam on 7 December 1971, and the last SEAL advisor left South Vietnam in March 1973. The SEALs were among the highest decorated units for their size in the war, receiving by 1974 one Medal of Honor, two Navy Crosses, 42 Silver stars, 402 Bronze Stars, two Legions of Merit, 352 Commendation Medals, and 51 Navy Achievement Medals[55] Later awards would bring the total to three Medals of Honor and five Navy Crosses. SEAL Team One was awarded three Presidential Unit Citations and one Navy Unit Commendation; SEAL Team Two received two Presidential Unit Citations.[56] By the end of the war, 48 SEALs had been killed in Vietnam, but estimates of their kill count are as high as 2,000. The Navy SEAL Museum in Fort Pierce, Florida, displays a list of the 48 SEALs who lost their lives in combat during the Vietnam War.[57]
Reorganization[edit]
On 1 May 1983, UDT 11 was redesignated as SEAL Team Five, UDT 21 was redesignated as SEAL Team Four, UDT 12 became SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team One (SDVT 1), and UDT 22 was redesignated as SDVT-2. SEAL Team Three, was established 1 October 1983 in Coronado, California. SEAL Team Eight was established on 1 October 1988 at Naval Amphibious Base, Little Creek, Virginia.[citation needed] United States Special Operations Command (SOCOM) was established in April 1987 and its Naval component, United States Naval Special Warfare Command (NAVSPECWARCOM), also known as NSWC, was established at the same time.[58]
Grenada[edit]
Main article: United States invasion of Grenada
Both SEAL Team Four and SEAL Team Six, the predecessor to DEVGRU, participated in the US invasion of Grenada. The SEALs' two primary missions were the extraction of Grenada's Governor-General, Sir Paul Scoon, and the capture of Grenada's only radio tower. Neither mission was well briefed or sufficiently supported with timely intelligence and the SEALs ran into trouble from the very beginning. On 24 October 1983, twelve operators from SEAL Team Six and four Air Force Combat Control Team members (CCT) conducted a predawn combat airborne water insertion from C-130 Hercules aircraft with Zodiac inflatable rubber boats 40 kilometers north of Point Salines, Grenada. The team inserted with full combat gear in bad weather with low visibility conditions and high winds. Four SEALs drowned and were never recovered. SEALs split into two teams and proceeded to their objectives. After digging in at the Governor's mansion, the SEALs realized they had forgotten to load their cryptographic satellite phone. As Grenadian and Cuban troops surrounded the team, the SEALs' only radio ran out of battery power, and they used the mansion's land line telephone to call in AC-130 gunship fire support. The SEALs were pinned down in the mansion overnight and were relieved and extracted by a group of Marines the following morning.
The team sent to the radio station also ran into communication problems. As soon as the SEALs reached the radio facility they found themselves unable to raise their command post. After beating back several waves of Grenadian and Cuban troops supported by BTR-60 armored personnel carriers, the SEALs decided that their position at the radio tower was untenable. They destroyed the station and fought their way to the water where they hid from patrolling enemy forces. After the enemy had given up their search, the SEALs, some wounded, swam into the open sea where they were extracted several hours later after being spotted by a reconnaissance aircraft.
Iran Iraq War[edit]
Main article: Operation Prime Chance
During the closing stages of the Iran Iraq War the United States Navy began conducting operations in the Persian Gulf to protect US-flagged ships from attack by Iranian naval forces. A secret plan was put in place and dubbed Operation Prime Chance. Navy SEAL Teams 1 and 2 along with several Special Boat Units and EOD technicians were deployed on mobile command barges and transported by helicopters from the Army's 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment. Over the course of the operation SEALs conducted VBSS (Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure) missions to counter Iranian mine-laying boats. The only loss of life occurred during the takedown of the Iran Ajr. Evidence gathered on the Iran Ajr by the SEALs later allowed the US Navy to trace the mines that struck USS Samuel B. Roberts (FFG-58). This chain of events led to Operation Praying Mantis, the largest US Naval surface engagement since the Second World War.
During Operation Desert Shield and Storm, Navy SEALs trained Kuwaiti Special Forces. They set up naval special operations groups in Kuwait, working with the Kuwaiti Navy in exile. Using these new diving, swimming, and combat skills, these commandos took part in combat operations such as the liberation of the capital city.
Panama[edit]
Main article: United States invasion of Panama
 Members of SEAL Team 4 immediately before the start of Operation Just Cause
The United States Navy contributed extensive special operations assets to Panama's invasion, codenamed Operation Just Cause. This included SEAL Teams 2 and 4, Naval Special Warfare Unit 8, and Special Boat Unit 26, all falling under Naval Special Warfare Group 2; and the separate Naval Special Warfare Development Group (DEVGRU). DEVGRU fell under Task Force Blue, while Naval Special Warfare Group 2 composed the entirety of Task Force White. Task Force White was tasked with three principal objectives: the destruction of Panamanian Defense Forces (PDF) naval assets in Balboa Harbor and the destruction of Manuel Noriega's private jet at Paitilla Airport (collectively known as Operation Nifty Package), as well as isolating PDF forces on Flamenco Island.
The strike on Balboa Harbor by Task Unit Whiskey is notably marked in SEAL history as the first publicly acknowledged combat swimmer mission since the Second World War. Prior to the commencement of the invasion four Navy SEALs swam underwater into the harbor on Draeger LAR-V rebreathers and attached C4 explosives to and destroyed Noriega's personal gunboat the Presidente Porras.
Task Unit Papa was tasked with the seizure of Paitilla airfield and the destruction of Noriega's plane there. Several SEALs were concerned about the nature of the mission assigned to them being that airfield seizure was usually the domain of the Army Rangers. Despite these misgivings and a loss of operational surprise, the SEALs of TU Papa proceeded with their mission. Almost immediately upon landing, the 48 SEALs came under withering fire from the PDF stationed at the airfield. Although Noriega's plane was eventually destroyed, the SEALs suffered four dead, including Chief Petty Officer Donald McFaul, and thirteen wounded.
Persian Gulf War[edit]
Main article: Gulf War
In August 1990, SEALs were the first western forces to deploy to the Persian Gulf as part of Operation Desert Shield. They infiltrated Kuwait the capital city within hours of the invasion and gathered intelligence and developed plans to rescue US embassy staff should they become hostages. SEALs were also the first to capture Iraqi Prisoners of War when they assaulted nine Kuwaiti Oil platforms on 19 January 1991. On 23 February 1991, a seven-man SEAL team launched a mission to trick the Iraqi military into thinking an amphibious assault on Kuwait by coalition forces was imminent by setting off explosives and placing marking buoys 500 meters off the Kuwaiti coast. The mission was a success and Iraqi forces were diverted east away from the true coalition offensive.[59] The SEALs were first into Kuwait City in their Desert Patrol Vehicles when it was recaptured.[60]
Somalia Intervention[edit]
On 6 December 1992, as part of Operation Restore Hope, U.S. Navy SEALs and Special Boat crewmen from Naval Special Warfare Task Unit TRIPOLI began a three-day operation carrying out reconnaissance operations in the vicinity of Mogadishu airport and harbor; ahead of UNITAFs deployment to the country. They suffered only one casualty, who was injured by an IED.[61][62]
In August 1993 a four-person DEVGRU SEAL sniper team was deployed to Mogadishu to work alongside Delta Force as part of Task Force Ranger in the search for Somali warlord Mohammed Farrah Aidid. They took part in several operations in support of the CIA and Army culminating in the 3 October 'Battle of Mogadishu' where they were part of the ground convoy raiding the Olympic Hotel. All four SEALs would be later awarded the Silver Star in recognition of their bravery while Navy SEAL Howard E. Wasdin would be awarded a Purple Heart after continuing to fight despite being wounded three times during the battle.[63]
War in Afghanistan[edit]
Main article: War in Afghanistan (2001 2021)
Invasion[edit]
Further information on the opening phase of Operation Enduring Freedom   Afghanistan: United States invasion of Afghanistan
In the immediate aftermath of the 11 September attacks, Navy SEALs quickly dispatched to Camp Doha, and those already aboard US Naval vessels in the Persian Gulf and surrounding waters began conducting VBSS operations against ships suspected of having ties to or even carrying al Qaeda operatives. SEAL Teams 3 and 8 also began rotating into Oman from the United States and staging on the island of Masirah for operations in Afghanistan. One of the SEALs' immediate concerns was their lack of suitable vehicles to conduct special reconnaissance (SR) missions in the rough, landlocked terrain of Afghanistan. After borrowing and retrofitting Humvees from the Army Rangers also staging on Masirah, the SEALs inserted into Afghanistan to conduct the SR of what would become Camp Rhino, as part of Operation Enduring Freedom   Afghanistan (OEF-A). These early stages of OEF were commanded by a fellow SEAL, Rear Admiral Albert Calland.
 Task Force K-Bar SEALs at one of the entrances to the Zhawar Kili cave complex
As part of the CJSOTF (Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force) under the command of General Tommy Franks at CENTCOM, SEALs from DEVGRU were part of Task Force Sword, which was established in early October 2001. It was a black SOF (Special Operations Forces) unit under direct command of JSOC. It was a so-called hunter-killer force whose primary objective was to capture or kill senior leadership and HVT within both al-Qaeda and the Taliban. Sword was initially structured around a two-squadron component of operators from Delta Force (Task Force Green) and DEVGRU (Task Force Blue) supported by a Ranger protection force team (Task Force Red), ISA signals intercept and surveillance operators (Task Force Orange) and the 160th SOAR (Task Force Brown). Task Force K-Bar was established on 10 October 2001, it was formed around a Naval Special Warfare Group consisting of SEALs from SEAL Teams 2, 3 and 8 and Green Berets from 1st Battalion, 3rd SFG; the task force was led by SEAL Captain Robert Harward.
The task force's principal task was to conduct SR and SSE missions in the south of the country. Other Coalition SOF-particularly KSK, JTF2 and New Zealand Special Air Service were assigned to the task force. As part of the JIATF-CT (Joint Interagency Task Force-Counterterrorism)   intelligence integration and fusion activity composed of personnel from all of Operation Enduring Freedom   Afghanistan (OEF-A) participating units- SEALs from DEVGRU were part of Task Force Bowie, they were embedded in the task force in AFOs (Advanced Force Operations). The AFOs were 45-man reconnaissances units made up of Delta Force recce specialists augmented by selected SEALs from DEVGRU and supported by ISA's technical experts. The AFOs had been raised to support TF Sword and were tasked with intelligence preparation of the battlefield, working closely with the CIA and reported directly to Task Force Sword. The AFOs conducted covert reconnaissance   sending small 2 or 3-man teams into al-Qaeda 'Backyard' along the border with Pakistan, the AFO operators would deploy observation posts to watch and report enemy movements and numbers as well as environmental reconnaissance; much of the work was done on foot or ATVs.[64]
SEALs were present at the Battle of Qala-i-Jangi in November 2001 alongside their counterparts from the British SBS. Chief Petty Officer Stephen Bass was awarded the Navy Cross for his actions during the battle.
Before the US Marines landed at Camp Rhino in November 2001, a SEAL recce team from SEAL Team 8 conducted reconnaissance of the area, they were mistakenly engaged by orbiting AH-1W attack helicopters, but the SEALs managed to get a message through to the Marines before they suffered casualties.[65] The SR mission in the region of Camp Rhino lasted for four days, after which two United States Air Force Combat Control Teams made a nighttime HALO jump to assist the SEALs in guiding in Marines from the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit who seized control of the area and established a Forward operating base.
Post-invasion[edit]
 Task Force K-Bar SEALs searching munitions found in the Zhawar Kili cave complex
In January 2002, following the Battle of Tora Bora, another series of caves was discovered in Zhawar Kili, just south of Tora Bora; airstrikes hit the sites before SOF teams were inserted into the area. A SEAL platoon from SEAL Team 3, including several of their Desert Patrol Vehicles, accompanied by a German KSK element, a Norwegian SOF team and JTF2 reconnaissance teams spent some nine days conducting extensive SSE, clearing an estimated 70 caves and 60 structures in the area, recovering a huge amount of both intelligence and munitions, but they didn't encounter any al-Qaeda fighters.[66] Subsequent SEAL operations during the invasion of Afghanistan were conducted within Task Force K-Bar, a joint special operations unit of Army Special Forces, United States Air Force Special Tactics Teams, and special operations forces from Norway, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and Denmark. Task Force K-Bar conducted combat operations in the massive cave complexes near the city of Kandahar and surrounding territory, the town of Prata Ghar and hundreds of miles of rough terrain in southern and eastern Afghanistan. Over the course of six months, Task Force K-Bar killed or captured over 200 Taliban and al Qaeda fighters and destroyed tens of thousands of pounds of weapons and ordnance.
In February 2002, while at Camp Rhino, the CIA passed on intelligence from a Predator drone operating in the Paktia province that Taliban Mullah Khirullah Said Wali Khairkhwa was spotted leaving a building by vehicle convoy. SEALs and Danish J gerkorpset commandos boarded Air Force Pave Low helicopters and seized Khairkhwa on the road less than two hours later.[67] The SEALs continued to perform reconnaissance operations for the Marines until leaving after having spent 45 days on the ground.
In March 2002, SEALs from DEVGRU, SEAL Team 2, 3 and 8 participated extensively in Operation Anaconda. During what would become known as the Battle of Takur Ghar, whilst inserting from an MH-47E Chinook, PO1 Neil Roberts from DEVGRU,[68] was thrown from his helicopter when it took fire from entrenched al Qaeda fighters. Roberts was subsequently killed after engaging and fighting dozens of enemies for almost an hour. Several SEALs were wounded in a rescue attempt and their Air Force Combat Controller, Technical Sergeant John Chapman, was killed. Attempts to rescue the stranded SEAL also led to the deaths of several US Army Rangers and an Air Force Pararescueman acting as a Quick Reaction Force.
 Navy SEALs LT Michael P. Murphy and STG2 Matthew Axelson in Afghanistan, both of whom were killed in action
Later in 2002, CJSOFT became a single integrated command under the broader CJTF-180 that commanded all US forces assigned to OEF-A, it was built around an Army Special Forces Group (composed of soldiers from National Guard units) and SEAL teams. A small JSOC element (formerly Task Force Sword/11) not under direct CTJF command   embedded within CJSOFT, it consisted of a joint SEAL and Ranger element that rotated command, and was not under direct ISAF command, although it operated in support of NATO operations.[69]
In June 2005, Lieutenant Michael P. Murphy was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor after his four-man reconnaissance counterinsurgency team was almost wiped out during Operation Red Wings. After the four-man team lost Danny Dietz, he put himself in open view to call in the QRF. He soon after died from injuries sustained. Matthew Axelson also died on this operation. The QRF never reached the scene; it was struck by an RPG killing eight Navy SEALs and eight Army Night Stalkers. Marcus Luttrell was the only survivor from this operation.
 A US Navy SEAL, assigned to Special Operations Task Force-South East, greets children in a village in Uruzgan Province,[70] 30 August 2012.
In early 2010, Brigadier General Scott Miller took command of CJSOTF-Afghanistan and assigned virtually all SOF in the theatre to a new counterinsurgency role that would become known as the ALP/VSO Program (Afghan Local Police/Village Stability Operations), the SOF in Afghanistan were organized into battalion level SOTF (Special Operations Task Forces) each with a geographic area of responsibility-the SEALs were given southeast Afghanistan. To increase security of their assigned VSO village, a SEAL Platoon in Chora District, Uruzgan Province built a wall constructed of 500 metres (550 yd) of HESCO barriers to divert insurgent movements away, this proved successful and eventually the Afghan villagers took ownership of it. SEALs and other SOTF still conducted Direct Action missions, but now partnered with Afghan forces.[71]
On 6 August 2011, seventeen U.S. Navy SEALs were killed when their CH-47 Chinook helicopter was shot down by an RPG fired by Taliban militants. The SEALs were en route to support U.S. Army Rangers who were taking fire while attempting to capture a senior Taliban leader in the Tangi Valley. Fifteen of the SEALs belonged to the Naval Special Warfare Development Group.[72][73][74] Two others were SEALs assigned to a West Coast-based Naval Special Warfare unit.[72][75] A total of 30 Americans and eight Afghans were killed in the crash, making it the single largest loss of U.S. lives in the Global War on Terrorism.
On 16 August 2012, SEALs in Uruzgan Province conducted a joint operation into the Shah Wali Kot Valley where they suffered the loss of a Black Hawk helicopter when it was struck by an insurgent RPG, the crash killed 11 servicemen (seven US and four Afghan).[76]
In December 2012, SEALs from DEVGRU rescued a US doctor who had been kidnapped a few days earlier. However, during the operation the unit suffered a fatality, Petty Officer 1st Class Nicolas D. Checque.[77] Senior Chief Edward Byers, was awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions during this mission.[78]
In May 2013, Rear Admiral Sean Pybus, commander of Navy Special Warfare stated that the unit would cut in half the number of SEAL platoons in Afghanistan by the end of 2013. Pybus also added that the unit is already "undergoing a transition back to its maritime roots" by placing more emphasis on sea-based missions after being involved in mostly landlocked missions since 2001.[79]
Iraq War[edit]
Main article: Iraq War
Invasion[edit]
 US military security personnel on the Al Basrah Oil Terminal after its capture
For the 2003 invasion of Iraq, a squadron from DEVGRU operated as part of Task Force 20. Their role was to conduct heliborne direct action raids, particularly against HVTs. The Naval Special Operations Task Group was assigned to Operation Iraqi Freedom, and was built around a core of SEAL Teams 8 and 10, Polish GROM, Royal Marines from 40 and 42 Commando under the command of 3 Commando Brigade and attached US Psy Ops and civil affairs teams. The Naval Task Group was principally tasked with the capture of the port of Umm Qasr, Iraq's only deep-water port; the oil pipeline facilities of the Al-Faw Peninsula; and the two off-shore platforms the pipelines fed. Once these initial target sets were secured, the Task Group would support conventional forces in the south, conducting reconnaissance and raiding activities. Aviation support was provided by both Marine air of the 15th MEU and 20th Special Operations Squadron.[80]
Several days before the beginning of the invasion, two SDV teams were launched from Mark V Special Operations Craft in the Persian Gulf. Their objectives were the hydrographic reconnaissance of the Al Basrah (MABOT) and Khawr Al Amaya (KAAOT) Oil Terminals. After swimming under the terminals and securing their Mark 8 mod 1s, the SDV SEALs spent several hours taking pictures and surveying Iraqi activity on both platforms before returning to their boats.[59] On 20 March 2003, SEALs from SEAL Team 8 and 10 (31 SEALs, 2 Navy EOD a USAF combat controller and several Iraqi interpreters) moved to seize the MABOT oil terminal whilst GROM operators assaulted the KAAOT Oil Terminals. The terminals were quickly seized with no casualties, and explosives which were found on the terminals were made safe by GROM operators.[81]
The shore-based pumping stations (known as MMS-Monitoring and Meter Stations) and their pipelines on the Al-Faw Peninsula were seized by 12 SEALS from SEAL Team 3, who were mounted in DPVs. They took off from Kuwait and were inserted under Iraqi anti-aircraft fire by MH-53 helicopters. The target area was 'softened up' by JDAM bombs dropped from B-52s on Iraqi bunkers, trenches and dugouts around the oil facilities. After a brief firefight in which the SEALs killed 1 Iraqi soldier and captured 13, the SEALs secured the MMS and the pipelines and were relieved by Royal Marines from 40 Commando. The SEALs advised the Marines, helping coordinate AC-130 Spectres fire support onto Iraqi forces. The other shore-based pumping station at Umm Qasr was secured by SEALs and Royal Marines; before they landed, AC-130 Spectres and A-10As engaged a nearby SAM installation and a responding Iraqi mechanized unit. The SEALs secured the facility itself whilst the Royal Marines cleared Iraqi bunkers, killing several Iraqi soldiers.[82][83][84]
Other Naval Task Group operations included elements of three SEAL platoons in GMV trucks and DPVs seizing the al Zubayr MMS, whilst I MEF attacked the Rumaylah Oil Fields north of al-Faw. SEALs and Special Boat teams helped secure the Khawr Abd Allah and Khawr Az Zubyar waterways, which enabled humanitarian supplies to be delivered to the port of Umm Qasr. SEALs from the unit that secured the al-Faw MMS also conducted reconnaissance on the Shat Al Arab waterway, which was later secured by British forces. SEALs were also involved in various VBSS missions with British and Australian forces to seize Iraqi craft carrying seaborne mines.[59][84][85]
Coalition military planners were concerned that retreating Iraqi forces would destroy the Mukatayin hydroelectric dam, located 57 miles northeast of Baghdad, in an attempt to slow advancing US troops. In addition to restricting the manoeuvre of Coalition forces, the destruction of the dam would deny critical power needs to the surrounding area, as well as cause massive flooding and loss of Iraqi civilian life. A mixed team of SEALs from SEAL Team 5 and Polish GROM was called in to seize the dam. This force was flown several hours by six US Air Force MH-53J Pave Lows; the force consisted of 20 SEALs (with an extra six SEAL snipers in one helicopter carrying the SEAL command and control element) and two EOD operators along with 35 GROM operators to the dam. The SEALs employed DPVs into blocking positions to defend against counter-attack and roving bands of Iranian bandits that had been crossing the border and raiding Iraqi towns. As in Al Faw, the SEALs found their DPVs (the SEAL unit at the al-Faw MMS lost all but two DPVs when they were bogged down in the oily mud) to be ineffective and this marked the last time they would employ them in Iraq. The SEALs and GROM on foot fast-roped out of their helicopters and immediately stormed the dam. The minimal[clarification needed] Iraqi troops guarding the dam surrendered without a fight, and with the exception of a GROM soldier who broke an ankle during the insertion, no casualties were sustained in the operation. After several hours of searching the dam for remaining hostile forces or any explosives, the SEALs secured the dam and held it for five days until they were relieved by advancing elements of the US Army.[89]
During the Battle of Basra, SEALs along with the Brigade Reconnaissance Force and 539 Assault Squadron RM attempted a waterborne approach to Basra via the Shatt al-Arab waterway but were intercepted by Iranian Revolutionary Guard patrol craft and did not want to engage them so they withdrew. On 6 April 2003, after relocating further up the waterway they successfully infiltrated via the waterway, using SEAL UAVs they called in "show-of-force" and an airstrike by a USMC Harrier on Iraqi troops, the SEALs then headed to "Chemical Ali's" house with SSE teams to find traces of chemical weapons.[90] SEALs carried out missions around Nasiriyah, carrying out reconnaissance on surrounding villages and engaging enemy strong points bypassed by the US Marine advance. Charlie Platoon, SEAL Team 3, later operated ahead of the Marine advance carrying out similar missions.[84] SEAL and GROM units continued to cooperate throughout the rest of the invasion phase, with raids and anti-sniper missions in Baghdad.[91]
Post-invasion Iraq[edit]
 Petty Officer Michael A. Monsoor, 2nd Navy SEAL killed in Iraq. This photo was taken during an extraction after a firefight, and the smoke was used to conceal their movements from the enemy.
Following the invasion, SEAL platoons rotated through Iraq, conducting overwatch for US and Iraqi patrols and directly mentoring local Iraqi forces; they also conducted surveillance and sniping missions into known trouble spots. In September 2004, a SEAL sniper element was tasked with establishing an overwatch and surveillance position overlooking Haifa Street, they were inserted by Bradley IFVs from a unit of the 9th Cavalry Regiment, however they were spotted and engaged by insurgents. The SEALs notified the Bradleys, they drove back, fired on the insurgents and set up a cordon for the SEALs to be extracted, one Bradley was destroyed by a car bomb, there were no casualties and the SEALs were extracted.[92]
In the interim between the First Battle of Fallujah and Second Battle of Fallujah, insurgents in Fallujah knew that the coalition assault was inevitable and under the guidance of the influx of foreign fighters, began to build defensive networks throughout the city-ranging from fortified buildings, trench lines, berms, strategically placed car bombs and IEDs. In preparations for the second battle, SEALs conducted reconnaissance near the berms and tested out reports that the insurgents were equipped with night-vision equipment, they proved this by throwing an infrared chemical light into the street which drew small arms fire. SEALs along with the 5th SFG, Marine Force Recon and Det One and other JSOC elements were heavily involved in shaping operations prior to 7 November D-DAY when coalition forces entered the city. The SOF shaping included sophisticated feints to mislead the insurgents as to the direction of the final assault, close target reconnaissance and direct-action missions where a logistics node or IED factory was targeted. When the offensive on the insurgents in the city began, many of the US Marine companies had SEAL sniper teams attached to them, mainly from SEAL Teams 3, 5 and 10.[93]
From 2005, SEALs were heavily committed to western Iraq in Al Anbar Governorate, AQI terrorists who escaped Fallujah had relocated to Ramadi. A SEAL Task Unit was co-located with the Marines at Al Asad Airbase and sent elements to Ramadi and Habbaniyah, the SEALs were initially tasked with target development for the Marines and providing sniper overwatch for their patrols. The SEALs were already training an Iraqi Army unit in Habbaniyah, although FID was their main focus until later that year. A SEAL Task Unit generally comprised two individual SEAL Platoons: each Platoon was made up of seven-man squad elements commanded by a junior officer, three of these Task Units (although a fourth was often added) along with a Special Boat Team detachment and a Headquarters Team (including integral intelligence, targeting and EOD personnel) made up a Naval Special Warfare Squadron. According to Dick Couch, the SEALs began FID with two Iraqi units-the Army Scouts who conducted conventional reconnaissance missions, and the SMP (Special Missions Platoon), a locally formed unit that would later fight alongside the SEALs. Despite several challenges, the SEALs were soon conducted operations with partnered units, particularly in Special Reconnaissance, focusing on the surveillance aspect, whilst conventional US Army or Marines would conduct raids and arrests.[94] The typical loadout of the SEALs in Ramadi included the M4 carbine, optimized for close quarter battle with a 10-inch barrel equipped with a 6-inch sound suppressor, Surefire flashlight and EOTech sight, short barrel and foregrip and seven magazines.[95]
As the SEALs were beginning to make headway in Ramadi, AQI was starting to infiltrate the area by targeting local Sheikhs and convincing them to allow jihadists to marry into local tribes, thus cementing their powerbase and Sheikhs that resisted these advances were met with typical AQI brutality. Al-Qaeda's efforts to install a Sharia-style shadow government in Ramadi led to AQI's downfall-when in the first half of 2006, in the run-up to the Second Battle of Ramadi SEALs, increasingly partnered with conventional forces of the 1st Brigade Combat Team, 1st Armored Division which was planning the offensive. SEALs along with the Scouts and SMP, would conduct reconnaissance, surveillance and sniper overwatch tasks; with their own targeting cell, they also began conducting raids on local insurgent leaders. The 1st BCT began the concerted offensive to clear Ramadi of AQI fighters; on 29 September 2006, whilst at a rooftop overwatch position, Petty Officer Michael A. Monsoor died after leaping upon an enemy grenade during a rooftop firefight, two SEALs on the roof were badly wounded from the grenade fragments and their local Iraqi Scouts ran back into the cover of the building, a fourth SEAL (only lightly wounded), managed to radio his colleagues and get the Scouts to return fire. A SEAL element in a second overwatch position immediately ran through heavy fire to reach Monsoor (whom later died from his wounds in the back of a Bradley IFV) and the wounded SEALs, Monsoor was later awarded the Medal of Honor and the Silver Star. The advances by conventional forces and the SEALs in Ramadi, combined with the brutal tactics of AQI, helped to increase recruitment in a local police initiative-the programme was designed to bring the local Sheikhs' militias into the Iraqi Security Forces. These volunteers would serve locally in their communities to defend them against al-Qaeda, a month after the kidnapping and murder of Sheikh Khalid by AQI (which proved to be the tipping point), the Sheikhs signed a declaration agreeing to fight AQI and by the closing of 2006, even former insurgents were joining the local police (later known as the Anbar Awakening) by the end of the battle, some 1,100 terrorists were killed.[96]
In Fallujah, the SEAL Task Unit were also heavily involved in fighting. In one joint operation to capture an AQI leader, they entered the target building and were engaged resulting in an Iraqi Scout being killed and a SEAL severely wounded, two SEALs returned fire and entered the building, both SEALs entered different rooms, in one room the SEAL encountered three insurgents who opened fired at close range, another SEAL across the hallway was struck in the head and killed, the SEAL in the room with the insurgents killed all three.[97]
In September 2009, in a nighttime raid in Fallujah, SEALs captured Ahmad Hashim Abd al-Isawi (nicknamed the "Butcher of Fallujah"), a prominent al-Qaeda terrorist who was the mastermind behind the 2004 Fallujah ambush. Al-Isawai made accusations of mistreatment while in custody, and testified in April 2010 at the ensuing courts-martial against three SEALs (all of whom were acquitted).[98][99][100] Iraqi authorities later tried and executed al-Isawi by hanging at some point before November 2013.[101]
SEALS remained employed throughout the Iraqi Campaign as Task Units or Task Elements until its close in 2011.
Operation Enduring Freedom   Philippines[edit]
Main article: Operation Enduring Freedom   Philippines
OEF-P was established in 2002 to conduct long-term partnered operations with both Philippine Army special operations and intelligence units, as well as police units, to counter the threat posed by the ASG and JI terrorist groups. Much of this work has been assigned to 1st SFG; SEALs and USAF Special Operations who have also had a long-term presence in the Philippines. There are few confirmed operational details about the SEALs and Green Berets conducting partnered operations, although elements are partnered with Philippine Army and SOF; there have been mentions of Green Berets and SEALs wounded. On 21 June 2002, SEALs in RIBs supported the Philippine Naval Special Operations Group in the operation that killed Abu Sabaya, a senior leader in the ASG. A US Predator UAV marked the HVT with an infrared laser as he tried to escape in a smugglers boat; the MH-47Es from the 160th SOAR used search lights mounted on their helicopters to pinpoint the target's boat while operators from the Philippine Naval Special Operations Group opened fire on the boat killing the terrorist leader and capturing four other terrorists with him. [102]
Operation Enduring Freedom   Horn of Africa[edit]
Main article: Operation Enduring Freedom   Horn of Africa
As part of OEF-HOA, Naval Special Warfare Unit 10 are deployed to Camp Lemonnier, Djibouti, under the command of SOCCE-HOA (Special Operations Command and Control Element-Horn of Africa) which commands all SOCOM units assigned to training or operational missions in the region. Special operations carried out in Somalia are conducted under the codename: Operation Octave Dune, as part of the overall effort in Somalia, which is known as Operation Octave Shield.[103]
Before Djibouti became the epicentre for counter terrorism operations in Africa, unilateral operations were launched from temporary forward locations in friendly nations such as Kenya, or from US Navy Ships. The earliest known operation in Somalia was known as Operation Cobalt Blue: In 2003, SEALs using SEAL Delivery Vehicles swam ashore along the Somali coastline and emplaced covert surveillance cameras. Known as cardinals, the cameras were designed to watch likely target locations for wanted terrorists as al-Qaeda and its affiliates began to regroup in the country, however the cameras only took one image a day and captured very little.[104]
CJSOTF-HOA (Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force-Horn of Africa) developed a rescue plan called Operation Mystic Talon, in case any CIA SAD or ISA operators were captured in the region, the plan required a SEAL platoon with Air Force Special Operations assets that, if necessary, would fight their way into Somalia, recover the hostage and fight their way out, should a mission need to be launched before a dedicated JSOC task force could be deployed to the region.[105]
Maersk Alabama hijacking[edit]
Main article: Maersk Alabama hijacking
On 12 April 2009, in response to a hostage taking incident off the coast of Somalia by Somalian pirates, three Navy SEALs from DEVGRU simultaneously engaged and killed the three pirates who were closely holding the hostage, Captain Richard Phillips, of the freighter ship Maersk Alabama. The pirates and their hostage were being towed in a lifeboat approximately 100 yards behind USS Bainbridge when each of the pirates were killed by a different DEVGRU sniper with a single shot to the head.[106]
Death of Osama bin Laden[edit]
Main article: Death of Osama bin Laden
In the early morning of 2 May 2011 local time, a team of Navy SEALs of the Naval Special Warfare Development Group (DEVGRU), previously called "SEAL Team 6",[107] along with a Belgian Malinois Military Working Dog (named "Cairo"), supported by Special Activities Division officers on the ground, killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad, Pakistan about 35 miles (56 km) from Islamabad in a CIA operation.[108][109] President Barack Obama later confirmed the death of bin Laden, but did not directly mention the involvement of DEVGRU, saying only that a "small team" of Americans undertook the operation to bring down bin Laden.[108] The unprecedented media coverage raised the public profile of the SEAL community, particularly the counter-terrorism specialists commonly known as SEAL Team 6. The Walt Disney Company tried unsuccessfully to trademark the name "SEAL Team 6" the day after the raid.[110] The official name of the military operation was Operation Neptune Spear. The model of the compound used in the 60 Minutes documentary was donated by CBS to the Navy SEAL Museum.[111]
Morning Glory oil tanker[edit]
On 16 March 2014, thirty U.S. Navy SEALs from SEAL Team 2 took control of MV Morning Glory, a tanker full of oil loaded from a rebel-held port in Libya. The raid by Navy SEALs took place in international waters off the coast of Cyprus; the raid was a success, preventing a Libyan splinter militia group selling nationalized Libyan oil on the black market.[112][113]
Operation Inherent Resolve[edit]
Main article: Operation Inherent Resolve
As part of Operation Inherent Resolve's Iraq Campaign, there are at least 100 SEALs as part of a Special Operations advise and assist mission to Peshmerga and Iraqi Security Forces in combating ISIS. The Navy SEAL operation in northern Iraq is called Task Force Trident.[114] On 3 May 2016, Petty Officer 1st Class Charles Keating IV was killed by ISIS small arms fire near the town of Tel Skuf during an ISIS assault on a Peshmerga position. He was a member of a 20-man Quick Reaction Force (QRF)[114] sent to rescue a dozen U.S. advisors at the position and temporarily assist the Peshmerga. Keating IV was awarded the Navy Cross, posthumously, for his actions.[115][116][117]
Selection and training[edit]
Main article: United States Navy SEAL selection and training
 U.S. Navy SEALs conducting training with SCAR rifles.
 Students armed with Mk 18 mod 0s conduct CQB drills during SEAL Qualification Training.
Before getting accepted into Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) training, a prospective candidate must pass a certain number of both mental and physical requirements.[118] These tests include: Pre-enlistment medical screening, ASVAB, AFQT, C-SORT, and PST. Then, the candidate must get a SEAL contract by passing the SEAL Physical Screening Test: 500-yard swim in 12:30, 50 push-ups in 2 minutes, 50 sit-ups in 2 minutes, 10 consecutive pull-ups in 2 minutes, and a 1.5-mile run in 10:30. Candidates receiving a passing score may then be admitted into training to become Navy SEALs.[119] SEAL training is extremely rigorous. The attrition rate fluctuates, but averages at about 80 percent.[120]  Navy SEALs training with MP5 submachine gunsThe average candidate spends over a year in a series of formal training courses before being awarded the Special Warfare Operator Naval Rating and the Navy Enlisted Classification (NEC) 5326 Combatant Swimmer (SEAL) or, in the case of commissioned naval officers, the designation Naval Special Warfare (SEAL) Officer.
Navy SEAL training pipeline:
8-week Naval Recruit Training
8-week Naval Special Warfare Prep School (Pre-BUD/S)
3-Week BUD/S Orientation
24-week Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL Training (BUD/S)[121]
3-week Army airborne School
26-week SEAL Qualification Training (SQT)
Upon graduation from SQT, trainees receive the U.S. Navy SEAL Trident, designating them as Navy SEALs. They are subsequently assigned to a SEAL Team or SEAL Delivery Vehicle (SDV) Team and begin 18-months of predeployment training before they are considered deployable. This training consists of:[122][123]
6-month Professional Development   Individual Specialty Training (ProDev)
6-month Unit Level Training (ULT). ULT is unit training conducted by each Groups Training Detachment. Core unit training blocks are Air Operations, Land Warfare, Maritime, Urban and Special Reconnaissance.
6-month Squadron Integration Training (SIT)[124]
Those enlisted SEALs with a medical rating will first attend the Special Operations Combat Medic Course for 6 months in Fort Bragg, North Carolina[125] before joining a team in order to become a SEAL/Special Operator Corpsman. Those pursuing Officer positions first attend the Junior Officer Training Course (JOTC) to learn about operations planning and how to perform team briefings. In total it can take over 2.5 years to completely train a Navy SEAL for his first deployment.[122][123]
Women[edit]
For broader coverage of this topic, see Women in the United States Navy.
Until December 2015, female sailors were barred from becoming Navy SEALs by naval regulation; however, this prohibition no longer exists. As early as August 2015, it was reported that the "Navy is planning to open its elite SEAL teams to women who can pass the grueling training regimen."[126] In that same month, Admiral Jon Greenert, the Chief of Naval Operations at the time, said that "he and the head of Naval Special Warfare Command, Rear Admiral Brian Losey, believe that if women can pass the legendary six-month Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) training, they should be allowed to serve."[126] On 3 December 2015, it was announced that there are now "no exceptions" to all military roles in the U.S., and women can become U.S. Navy SEALs.[127]
The Washington Examiner reported on 10 August 2017: "A woman aiming to become the first female Navy SEAL officer quit about a week into the initial training".[128]
In 2019 the Navy announced that an unnamed female officer was the first to successfully complete the SEAL Officer Assessment and Selection program (SOAS). She was one of a group of five female candidates to enter the program. She opted not to start BUD/S afterwards, instead choosing another assignment in the Navy.[129][130]
In July 2021, the Naval Special Warfare (NSW) training program graduated its first woman operator, who would go on to become a Special Warfare Combatant-craft Crewman (SWCC). This would mark the first time a woman has graduated from the NSW assessment and selection pipeline.[131][132]
Navy SEAL teams and structures[edit]
 Two members of SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 2 conduct lockout training with USS Hawaii in 2007.
 SEALs from SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team Two fast-rope to the deck of USS Toledo (2005).
The total number of personnel, including SEALs and SWCCs assigned to Naval Special Warfare Command is approximately 8,195 out of a total 8,985 military staff, and 10,166 including civilian support staff, as of 2015.[133]
Naval Special Warfare Groups[edit]
Naval Special Warfare Command is organized into the following configuration:[134]
Naval Special Warfare Group 1   based at the Naval Amphibious Base Coronado in California
SEAL Team 1
SEAL Team 3
SEAL Team 5
SEAL Team 7
Naval Special Warfare Group 2   based at the Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek in Virginia
SEAL Team 2
SEAL Team 4
SEAL Team 8
SEAL Team 10
Naval Special Warfare Group 4   based at the Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek in Virginia
Special Boat Team 12
Special Boat Team 20
Special Boat Team 22
Naval Special Warfare Group 8   based at the Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek in Virginia[135][136][137]
SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 1
SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 2
Special Reconnaissance Team 1
Special Reconnaissance Team 2
Logistics Support 3
Training Detachment 3
Mission Support Center ("organize, train, educate, equip, deploy and sustain specialized intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and preparation-of-the-environment capabilities")[138]
Naval Special Warfare Group 11   based at the Naval Amphibious Base Coronado in California
SEAL Team 17 (formerly Operational Support Team 1)[139]
SEAL Team 18 (formerly Operational Support Teams 2)[139]
Naval Special Warfare Development Group (also known as DEVGRU or SEAL Team 6)   Based at the Dam Neck Annex, NAS Oceana, Virginia Beach, Virginia, assigned operationally to JSOC
Red Squadron
Blue Squadron
Gold Squadron
Silver Squadron
Black Squadron
Grey Squadron
Inactivated Groups:
Naval Special Warfare Group 3   previously based at the Naval Amphibious Base Coronado in California; deactivated in 2021[135][136]
Naval Special Warfare Group 10   previously based at the Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek in Virginia; deactivated in 2021[135][136]
SEAL Teams[edit]
The original SEAL Teams were separated between West Coast (Team One) and East Coast (Team Two) SEALs. Likewise current SEAL Teams are organized into two groups: Naval Special Warfare Group One (West Coast) and Naval Special Warfare Group Two (East Coast), both of which come under the command of Naval Special Warfare Command at NAB Coronado, California. As of 2006, there are eight confirmed Navy SEAL Teams. The current SEAL Team deployments include Teams 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 10. The most recent active-duty teams are SEAL Team 7 and SEAL Team 10, which were formed in March and April 2002, respectively.[140][141] However, two reservist support teams were reorganized into SEAL teams in 2008.[139][142][non-primary source needed]
 SEAL Team 5 conducts an exercise in a Combat Rubber Raiding Craft in 2000.
The Teams deploy as Naval Special Warfare Squadrons or Special Operations Task Forces and can deploy anywhere in the world. Squadrons will normally be deployed and fall under a Joint Task Force (JTF) or a Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force (CJSOTF) as a Special Operations Task Force (SOTF).
Each SEAL Team (or "squadron") is commanded by a Navy commander (O-5), and has eight operational SEAL platoons and a headquarters element. Operationally, the "Team" is divided into two to four 40-man "task units" (or "troops"). Each task unit consists of a headquarters element consisting of a task unit commander, typically a lieutenant commander (O-4), a task unit senior enlisted (E-8), a targeting/operations officer (O-2/3) and a targeting/operations leading/chief petty officer (E-6/7). Under the HQ element are two to four SEAL platoons of 16 men (two officers and 14 enlisted SEALs, and sometimes assigned non-NSW support personnel); a company-sized combat service support (CSS) and/or combat support (CS) consisting of staff N-codes (the Army and Marine Corps use S-codes); N1 Administrative support, N2 Intelligence, N3 Operations, N4 Logistics, N5 Plans and Targeting, N6 Communications, N7 Training, and N8 Air/Medical.
Each 16-man platoon can be task organized for operational purposes into two eight-man squads, four four-man fire teams, or eight two-man sniper/reconnaissance teams. The size of each SEAL "Team", or "squadron", with two to four task units (containing a total of eight platoons) and support staff is approximately 300 personnel. The typical SEAL platoon has an OIC (officer in charge), usually a lieutenant (O-3), a platoon chief (E-7/E-8), and two squads commanded by a LTJG (O-2) and a squad leader (E-6). The remaining members of the squad are operators (E-4 to E-6) with their specialty skills in ordnance, communications, diving, and medical. The core leadership in the troop and platoon are the commander/OIC and the senior enlisted NCO (Senior Chief/chief).
Platoon core skills consist of: Sniper, Breacher, Communicator, Maritime/Engineering, Close Air Support, Corpsman, Point-man/Navigator, Primary Driver/Navigator (Rural/Urban/Protective Security), Heavy Weapons Operator, Sensitive Site Exploitation, Air Operations Master, Lead Climber, Lead Diver/Navigator, Interrogator, Explosive Ordnance Disposal, Technical Surveillance, and Advanced Special Operations.
Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek, a naval base in Virginia Beach, Virginia, is home to SEAL Teams 2, 4, 8, 10, and 18. Naval Amphibious Base Coronado, a naval base in Coronado, California, is home to SEAL Teams 1, 3, 5, 7, and 17. There are also two SEAL Delivery Vehicle (SDV) units, SDVT-1 and SDVT-2, located in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii and Little Creek, Virginia, respectively.[143] SDV Teams are SEAL teams with an added underwater delivery capability. An SDV platoon consists of 12 15 SEALs.
Insignia
Team
Deployment
Number of platoons
HQ
Notes
SEAL Team 1
Worldwide
8 platoons
Coronado, California
SEAL Team 2
Worldwide
8 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia
SEAL Team 3
Middle East
8 platoons
Coronado, California
SEAL Team 4
Worldwide
8 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia
SEAL Team 5
Worldwide
8 platoons
Coronado, California
Naval Special Warfare Development Group(SEAL Team 6)
Worldwide
Classified
Virginia Beach, Virginia
SEAL Team 6 was dissolved in 1987. The Navy then established the Naval Special Warfare Development Group, also known as DEVGRU. While DEVGRU is administratively supported by Naval Special Warfare Command, they are operationally under the command of the Joint Special Operations Command.
SEAL Team 7
Worldwide
8 platoons
Coronado, California
SEAL Team 8
Worldwide
8 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia
SEAL Team 10
Middle East
8 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia
SEAL Team 17
WorldwideReserve
2 platoons
Coronado, California
Formerly Operational Support Team 1
SEAL Team 18
WorldwideReserve
2 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia
Formerly Operational Support Team 2
SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 1
Indian and Pacific Oceans, Middle East[144]
4 platoons
Pearl Harbor, Hawaii[144]
SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 2
Atlantic Ocean, Europe and the Americas[144]
4 platoons
Virginia Beach, Virginia[144]
Special warfare ratings[edit]
Main article: List of United States Navy enlisted rates
The Special Warfare Operator rating (SO) and Special Warfare Boat Operator rating (SB), were established in 2006.[145] Special Warfare Operators (SEALs) and Special Warfare Boat Operators (SWCCs) are no longer required to maintain the original rating they qualified in upon joining the Navy.[146][147]
The following ratings are specific to Navy SEALs:[148][149][150]
Navy rating
Abbreviation
Pay grade
Special warfare rating
Abbreviation
Rank insignia
Master chief petty officer
MCPO
E-9
Master chief special warfare operator
SOCM
Senior chief petty officer
SCPO
E-8
Senior chief special warfare operator
SOCS
Chief petty officer
CPO
E-7
Chief special warfare operator
SOC
Petty officer first class
PO1
E-6
Special warfare operator, first class
SO1
Petty officer second class
PO2
E-5
Special warfare operator, second class
SO2
Petty officer third class
PO3
E-4
Special warfare operator, third class
SO3
United States Navy Parachute Team "Leap Frogs"[edit]
 A member of the U.S. Navy Parachute Demonstration Team, the "Leap Frogs", returns to Earth after a successful jump.
The primary mission of the Navy Parachute Team (NPT) is to support Naval Special Warfare recruiting by gaining access and exposure to appropriate candidates through aerial parachuting demonstrations.[151] The U.S. Navy Parachute Team is a fifteen-man team composed of U.S. Navy SEALs. Each member comes to the team for a three-year tour from one of the two Naval Special Warfare Groups located on the east and west coasts. On completion of the tour, members return to operational units.[152] The parachute team began in 1969 when Navy SEALs and Frogmen volunteered to perform at weekend air shows. The Team initially consisted of five jumpers: LCDR Olson, PHC Gagliardi, SK2 "Herky" Hertenstein, PR1 Al Schmiz and PH2 "Chip" Maury. Schmiz and Maury were members of the original "Chuting Stars."[153] When LCDR Olson was transferred to California, PHC Gene "Gag" Gagliardi (D 546) of UDT Eleven introduced him to the local jumping elite with the San Diego Skydivers, one of the nation's first sports parachuting clubs. He convinced the Commander Naval Operations Support Group, PACIFIC to create a small demonstration team consisting of a cadre of highly qualified freefall jumpers. Its activities were to be conducted on a "not to interfere" basis with other military duties and at no cost to the government, other than utilizing normally scheduled aircraft. This group eventually adopted the "Leap Frogs" name.[153]
The team was officially commissioned as the U.S. Navy Parachute Team in 1974 by the Chief of Naval Operations and assigned the mission of demonstrating Navy excellence throughout the United States. The East Coast-based "Chuting Stars" were disbanded in the 1980s with the "Leap Frogs" taking on all official parachute demonstrations within the Navy.
A typical Leap Frogs' performance consists of six jumpers leaping out of an aircraft at an altitude of 6,000 feet. After freefalling sometimes using smoke or streamers, the Leap Frogs fly their canopies together to build canopy-relative work formations. After performances, the Leap Frogs make themselves available to the public to answer questions about the Navy and the Naval Special Warfare community, as well as to sign autographs.
Influence on foreign units[edit]
 US Navy SEALs and GROM  Polish naval warfare team members  practicing boarding skills near Gdansk, Poland, 2009
From its predecessors, the Underwater Demolition Teams, to its current form, the SEALs have influenced the training and formation of several foreign units. In 1955, the Underwater Demolition Teams provided funding and training for the Republic of Korea Naval Special Warfare Flotilla, who are also known as UDT/SEALs. This was followed in 1956 by providing funding, training and formation of the Philippine Navy Underwater Operations Team (UOT), patterned on the training and implementation of the US Navy SEALs and the UDTs. In 1966, United States Navy SEALs established Pakistan's Special Service Group (Navy) based on a mutual security understanding and the training provided under the IMET program until the 1970s.[154] US Navy SEALs provided initial training to the Indian Marine Special Force, which later became known as the MARCOS.[155]
Due to their reputation as being one of America's premier special operations forces, SEALs (particularly operators from DEVGRU) will often do exchanges with allied SOFs.[84][156][157]
National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum and memorial[edit]
Main article: National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum
The National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum, in Fort Pierce, Florida, was founded in 1985[158] and was recognized as a National Museum by an act of Congress.[159] The museum is dedicated to preserving the history of the Navy SEALs and their predecessors. The SEAL Museum stands on the training site of the first Navy frogmen. There through World War II, thousands of service members were trained as members of Naval Combat Demolition Units and Underwater Demolition Teams. The Museum houses rare historical artifacts from the founding of the UDT to present day, including weapons, vehicles, equipment, and most recently added, the Maersk Alabama lifeboat aboard which Somali pirates held Captain Richard Phillips hostage.
Navy SEAL Memorial[edit]
According to the Navy SEAL Museum, 298 UDT and SEALs were killed in action and died during training accidents as of March 2018:[160]
World War II and Korean War (1941 1953):
96 personnel
Vietnam and Cold War (1954 1989):
104 personnel
Desert Storm and War on Terror (1990   March 2018):
98 personnel
Gallery[edit]
SEAL Tridents
SEALs prepare for a training mission aboard the USS George Washington
A SEAL "Leap Frogs" parachute team high above San Diego
Two SEALs aiming their weapons
SEALs during a VBSS training in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom
SEAL team members participate in a tactical warfare training
SEALs climb a caving ladder during a VBSS training
A SEAL Team coming out of water
A SEAL at sunset
US Navy Basic Underwater Demolition-SEAL (BUD-S) students wade ashore on an Island during an exercise
A SEAL takes up a defensive position in a village in northern Zabul province, Afghanistan, 10 April 2010
SEALs demonstrate winter warfare capabilities.
A SEAL platoon performs a land warfare demonstration
See also[edit]
Naval Special Warfare Development Group, also known as SEAL Team Six, one of the three premier special mission units of the U.S. Armed Forces, composed solely of Navy SEALs  One of the United States' two secretive tier-one counter-terrorism and Special Mission UnitsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen  U.S. Navy Special Warfare ForcePages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
List of United States Navy SEALs  Notable members of the US Navy SEALs and UDTs
List of military special forces units
References[edit]
^ Wentz, Gene; Jurus, B. Abell (1993). Men in Green Faces. St. Martin's Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0312950521.
^ ""The Only Easy Day Was Yesterday" Navy SEALs (Sea, Air & Land)" (PDF). America's Navy. US Navy. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2019.
^ "Larry Wilske".
^ "US joins battle as Philippines takes losses in besieged city". CNBC. 10 June 2017.
^ "Marawi siege: US special forces aiding Philippine army". BBC News Online. 10 June 2017.
^ Dancel, Raul (11 June 2017). "US special forces aid Philippine troops in battle for Marawi". The Straits Times.
^ a b c d e f g h i j "Navy SEAL History". Navy Seals.com. Archived from the original on 31 October 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2014.
^ "The difference between Navy SEALs and other military units". ATACLETE. Retrieved 3 February 2023.
^ "SEAL Requirements". Navy Seals.com. Retrieved 1 July 2011.
^ Laster, Jill (July 2011). "Program letting Coasties train as SEALs on hold". Navy Times.
^ a b c d e "Navy SEAL History". SEAL + SWCC. Retrieved 20 April 2014.
^ [7][9][10][11]
^ Waller, Douglas (3 February 2003). "The CIA's Secret Army". Time. Archived from the original on 9 May 2007.
^ Plaster, John L. (1997). SOG: The Secret Wars of America's Commandos in Vietnam. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0684811055.
^ Haney, Eric L. (2002). Inside Delta Force. New York: Delacorte Press. ISBN 978-0385732512.
^ a b "Army Officer Recalls Hunt for Bin Laden". 60 Minutes. CBS News. 5 October 2008.
^ "SEAL History: Origins of Naval Special Warfare-WWII".
^ "SEAL History: Origins of Naval Special Warfare-WWII". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ Blazich, Frank A. (6 June 2014). "Opening Omaha Beach: Ensign Karnowski and NCDU-45". Seabees Online. Navy Facilities Engineering Command, Washington Navy Yard, DC. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
^ "Seal History: Origins of Naval Special Warfare   WWII". Navy Seal Museum Archives. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
^ "Naval Combat Demolition Units". specwarnet. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
^ "Blasting the Way to the Beachhead: US Navy Underwater Demolition Teams in the Pacific". The National WWII Museum | New Orleans. Retrieved 19 December 2021.
^ a b The Water Is Never Cold, James Douglas O'Dell, 2000, Brassey's: Dulles, VA ISBN 1574882759
^ a b c World War II US Navy Special Warfare Units, Eugene Lipak, Osprey Publishing, POB 3985, NY, NY, 10185. 2014, p. 25
^ a b "A Glance at the Origins of Naval Special Warfare". United States Navy. 1 August 2018.
^ Central Intelligence Agency. "Special Operations". OSS Library. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015.
^ US National Archives. "The Big Picture #372 US ARMY". National Archives. Retrieved 2 May 2019.
^ a b Vann, R. D. (2004). "Lambertsen and O2: beginnings of operational physiology". Undersea Hyperb Med. 31 (1): 21 31. PMID 15233157. Archived from the original on 13 May 2010. Retrieved 14 January 2012.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ Butler, F. K. (2004). "Closed-circuit oxygen diving in the U.S. Navy". Undersea Hyperb Med. 31 (1): 3 20. PMID 15233156. Archived from the original on 13 May 2010. Retrieved 14 January 2012.{{cite journal}}:  CS1 maint: unfit URL (link)
^ a b United States Army Special Operations Command. "Maritime Unit". soc.mil. Retrieved 2 May 2019.
^ Chace, Dave. "Dr. Christian Lambertsen: 70 years of influence on the military dive community". US Army. Retrieved 2 May 2019.
^ "OSS Maritime Unit".
^ a b c d "Series: OSS Training in the National Parks and Service Abroad in World War II". nps.gov. 8 August 2017.
^ a b c d e Gibbony, Lt. L.J. (23 May 1945). "Office of Strategic Services Report, Maritime Unit, Group A, OSS Combat Operations with UDT 10 from 10 August 1944 to 16 April 1945" (PDF). Missing Aircrew Project, Patrick Ranfranz. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
^ Bakuhatai, The Reconnaissance Mission of the USS Burrfish and the Fate of Three American POWs, by Nathaniel Patch, Prologue Magazine, Winter 2015, pp. 26 33, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC  [1]
^ "WWII UDT One & WWII UDT Two". View of the Rockies. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
^ a b c d Milligan, Benjamin H. (2021). By Water Beneath The Walls. United States: Bantam Books. pp. 145 186. ISBN 978-0553392197.
^ Hoyt, Edwin P. (2011). SEALs at War. Random House. p. 25. ISBN 978-0307570062.
^ Kelly, Orr (2014). Brave Men, Dark Waters: The Untold Story of the Navy SEALs. Open Road Media. p. 30. ISBN 978-1497645639.
^ Submarine blasting, 301 NCB cruisebook, Seabee Museum Archives website, Jan 2020, p.60 [2]
^ a b "The Teams in World War II". View of the Rockies. Retrieved 18 October 2017.
^ "reply# 30, Seabees as UDTs, Interview with Wright S. Travis, member of OSS Maritime Unit attached to UDT 10". The Library of Congress. 20 November 2007.
^ Blazich, Frank A. (12 September 2016). "This Week in Seabee History (Week of September 11)". Seabees Online. Navy Facilities Engineering Command. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2017.
^ "'ALL HANDS', The Bureau of Naval Personal Information Bulletin Number 343" (PDF). NAVPERS. October 1945. pp. 12 15. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
^ "NCDU 216 Photo, National Navy UDT SEAL Museum, North Hutchinson Island, Fort Pierce, FL".
^ a b Bush, Elizabeth (2012). America's First Frogman. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1612512983. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
^ a b c Fane USNR (Ret.), Cdr. Francious Douglas (1976). Naked Warriors. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 122 131. ISBN 978-0312959852. Retrieved 27 March 2019.
^ "Sign 1967, Holiday Inn, Navy Seal Museum, Fort Pierce, 3300 N. Hwy. A1A, North Hutchinson Island, Fl 34949".
^ Operations Crossroads, DNA 6032F, prepared by the Defense Nuclear Agency, p. 189 [3]
^ "SEAL History: Underwater Demolition Teams in the Korean War". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ "Genesis of the U.S. Navy's SEa, Air, Land (SEAL) Teams". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ "Video gallery: Forged by Adversity". United States Navy. 2 January 2013.
^ Boehm, Ray; Sasser, Charles (1997). First SEAL. New York: Pocket Books. ISBN 978-0671536251.
^ Watson, James; Dockery, Kevin (1993). Point Man. New York: Avon Books. ISBN 038071986X.
^ US Navy SEAL Combat Manual (PDF). 1974. p. xvi. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022..
^ T.L. Bosiljevac (1990). SEALs: UDT/SEAL Operations in Vietnam. Ballantine Books. pp. 240 241, 250. ISBN 080410722X.
^ Couch (2008).
^ United States Special Operations Command. "Naval Special Warfare Command". socom.mil. Archived from the original on 28 June 2018. Retrieved 6 May 2018.
^ a b c Cawthorne (2008).
^ Neville (2015), p. 14.
^ Friedman, Herbert A. "United States PSYOP in Somalia". Psywarrior. Retrieved 2 December 2012.
^ Borchini, Charles P. (Lt. Col.); Borstelmann, Mari (October 1994). "PSYOP in Somalia: The Voice of Hope" (PDF). Special Warfare. United States Army. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ Wasdin, Howard E.; Templin, Stephen (2011). Seal Team Six: The incredible story of an elite sniper   and the special operations unit that killed Osama Bin Laden. London: Sphere Books. ISBN 978-1847445490.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 25 31.
^ Neville (2015), p. 44.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 49 50 & 77.
^ Neville (2015), p. 78.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 54 69.
^ Neville (2015), p. 83.
^ Neville (2015), p. 166.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 161 162.
^ a b "DOD Identifies Service Members Killed in CH-47 Crash". U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs). 11 August 2011.
^ King, Laura; Dilanian, Ken; Cloud, David S. (6 August 2011). "SEAL Team 6 members among 38 killed in Afghanistan". Los Angeles Times.
^ "Helicopter Crash in Afghanistan Reportedly Kills Members of SEAL Team 6". Fox News Channel. 6 August 2011.
^ "Pentagon releases names of Chinook crash victims". CNN News. 12 August 2011.
^ Neville (2015), p. 162.
^ Shumaker, Lisa (11 December 2012). "Navy identifies SEAL killed in hostage rescue in Afghanistan". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012.
^ "Obama to present Medal of Honor to Navy SEAL". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 2 June 2016.
^ Parsons, Dan (15 May 2013). "SEALs to Undergo 'Evolution in Reverse' as They Return to Maritime Operations". National Defense. National Defense Industrial Association.
^ Neville (2015), p. 96.
^ Neville (2015), p. 123.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 123 126.
^ Rossiter (2009), pp. 149, 153 & 158 162.
^ a b c d e Kyle (2013).
^ Neville (2015), pp. 126 127.
^ Neville (2015), p. 127.
^ Rossiter (2009), p. 161.
^ Owen, Mark (2012). No Easy Day: The Autobiography of a Navy Seal: The Firsthand Account of the Mission That Killed Osama Bin Laden. New York: Dutton Books. p. 49. ISBN 978-0525953722.
^ [84][86][87][88]
^ Rossiter (2009), pp. 325 328.
^ Neville (2015), p. 126.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 178 179.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 175 178.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 179 180.
^ "A Navy SEAL loadout in Ramadi". Corpi d' lite.net. 14 May 2017. Retrieved 1 October 2017.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 180 182.
^ Neville (2015), p. 182.
^ Robinson, Patrick (2013). Honor and Betrayal: The Untold Story of the Navy Seals Who Captured the "Butcher of Fallujah"  and the Shameful Ordeal They Later Endured. Perseus Book Group. ISBN 978-0306823091.
^ "Navy SEAL not guilty of charges in Iraq". CNN. 22 April 2010.
^ Centanni, Steve (6 May 2010). "Navy SEAL Found Not Guilty of Assaulting a Suspected Terrorist". Fox News Channel.
^ Hartwell, Ray V. (26 November 2013). "Persecuting Our Heroes". The American Spectator.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 184 185.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 200 201.
^ Neville (2015), pp. 282 284.
^ Neville (2015), p. 285.
^ "U.S. warship near boat carrying pirates". CNN. 9 April 2009.
^ Flock, Elizabeth (2 May 2011). "Navy SEALs who killed Osama bin Laden are from the elite 'Team 6'". The Washington Post.
^ a b "The raid on Osama bin Laden's compound". CBS News. 2 May 2011.
^ "Osama bin Laden killed in CIA operation". The Washington Post. 8 May 2011.
^ Winter, Jana (25 May 2011). "Mickey Mouse Surrenders to Navy SEALs in Trademark Battle". Fox News Channel.
^ "Model of Osama bin Laden Abbottabad Compound". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ "Navy Seals board rogue Libya oil tanker Morning Glory". BBC News. 17 March 2014.
^ "Navy SEALS board, take control of rogue Libya tanker". Fox News Channel. 17 March 2014.
^ a b "Revelation of March ISIS battle highlights risks for U.S. troops". CNN. 20 June 2016.
^ "U.S. Navy SEAL killed in Iraq battle vs. ISIS". CBS News. 3 May 2016.
^ "Navy SEAL Charles Keating IV gave life rescuing others from ISIS". CNN. 3 May 2016.
^ "Inside the Battle With ISIS that Killed a US Navy SEAL". ABC News. 4 May 2016.
^ "Navy SEAL Enlisted General Requirements". SEAL+SWCC. Retrieved 28 September 2015.
^ "Enlisted SEAL Requirements". Navy Seals.com. Retrieved 28 September 2015.
^ "FAQ". SEAL+SWCC. Retrieved 30 May 2015.
^ "BUD/S". Navy SEALs. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2016.
^ a b "Navy SEALs". Navy.com.
^ a b "Navy SEALs Training Stages Overview". SEAL+SWCC.
^ "Navy SEAL Platoon Training". Navy SEALs Information & Resources. 4 September 2009.
^ "Special Operations Combat Medic Course". U.S. Navy. Archived from the original on 12 April 2021. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
^ a b Larter, David; Myers, Meghann (19 August 2015). "Navy SEALs set to open to women, top admiral says". Navy Times.
^ Crockett, Emily (3 December 2015). ""No exceptions": Women can now serve in all military combat roles". Vox.
^ Tritten, Travis J. (10 August 2017). "Candidate to be first female Navy SEAL officer quits after a week". The Washington Examiner.
^ Hope Hodge Seck (11 December 2019). "The First Woman Has Made it Through SEAL Officer Screening". Military.com. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
^ Seck, Hope Hodge (11 December 2019). "The First Woman Has Made it Through SEAL Officer Screening". Military Times. Retrieved 24 March 2021.
^ Ives, Mike (16 July 2021). "First Woman Completes Training for Elite U.S. Navy Program". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 5 January 2022.
^ "Naval Special Warfare Welcomes CQT Class 115; First Woman Operator". DVIDS. Retrieved 5 January 2022.
^ "Special Operations Forces, Fiscal Year 2014 p.46" (PDF). Government Accountability Office. July 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ "Structure". Navy Seals.com. Archived from the original on 14 December 2018. Retrieved 10 December 2018.
^ a b c "U.S. Naval Special Warfare Command Establishes Group Eight, Disestablishes Groups Three and Ten". DVIDSHUB. 25 August 2021. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2022.
^ a b c Atlamazoglou, Stavros (15 September 2021). "To take on Russia and China, the US Navy is standing up a new unit to do the missions that only SEALs can do". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022.
^ "Fact Book 2022" (PDF). SOCOM. 2022. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022.
^ "Naval Special Warfare Welcomes Group 10 to Force". United States Navy. 26 May 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2018.
^ a b c Menzie, Christopher (8 August 2008). "Naval Special Warfare Reserve Command Renamed". U.S. Navy.
^ "US Navy SEALs". Duniakemilauemas.blogspot.com. 4 October 2011.
^ Crosby, Tommy (12 December 2007). "SEAL Team 7 Holds Change of Command". U.S. Navy.
^ "Archived copy". Facebook. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)
^ Faram, Mark D. (25 February 2019). "SEALs revive stealthy submarine delivery team in Virginia". Navy Times.
^ a b c d "US NAVAL SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES". SOF Reference Manual. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Army Command and General Staff College. 1999.
^ "Navy Special Warfare Operator Rating (SEAL)". Navycs.com. 21 December 2016.
^ Menzie, Christopher (10 October 2006). "NSW Community Establishes New SO and SB Ratings". U.S. Navy.
^ "SEALs and SWCCs drop source ratings". SOCNET: The Special Operations Community Network. 11 October 2006.
^ "Special Warfare Operator (SO)" (PDF). Manual of Navy Enlisted Manpower and Personnel Classifications and Occupational Standards. Vol. I. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 May 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ "Bachelor of Science in Business Administration with a concentration in General Management" (PDF). Trident University International. 23 August 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
^ "Degree Map for a Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies (IDSS): SO   Special Warfare Operator" (PDF). Governors State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
^ "Navy Parachute Team handbook" (PDF). U.S. Navy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2011.
^ "Leap Frogs". Official U.S. Navy Parachute Team Web Site. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011. Retrieved 1 October 2011.
^ a b "SEAL History: The Leap Frogs-Origins of the Navy SEAL Parachuting Exhibition Team". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ Government of Pakistan, Navy Press Release. "Special Service Group (Navy)". The Directorate-General for the Naval Inter-Services Public Relations (Navy ISPR). Naval Inter-Services Public Relations (Navy ISPR). Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2012.
^ "Marine Commando Force". Specialoperations.com. Archived from the original on 5 July 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012.
^ Couch (2008), p. 54.
^ Falconer, Duncan (2001). First into Action: A Dramatic Personal Account of Life in the SBS. London: Little, Brown Book Group. ISBN 978-0751531657.
^ "The Origin of the UDT-SEAL Museum". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Archived from the original on 10 March 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2014.
^ "Ft. Pierce Museum Now the Official National Museum of Navy SEALs and Their Predecessors". NavySEALs.com. Archived from the original on 13 June 2011. Retrieved 1 October 2011.
^ "The Navy SEAL Memorial Wall". National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum. Retrieved 23 January 2019.
Bibliography[edit]
Besel, Jennifer M. The Navy SEALs. Mankato, Minn: Capstone Press, 2011. ISBN 1429653809 OCLC 649079630
Bosiljevac, T.L. SEALs: UDT/SEAL Operations in Vietnam. Ballantine Books, 1990. ISBN 080410722X. OCLC 23228772
Bosiljevac, T.L. SEAL Team Roll-Back. New York: Avon Books, 1999. ISBN 0380787148. OCLC 41020614
Bahmanyar, Mir. US Navy SEALs. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2005. ISBN 1841768073. OCLC 62176513
Bahmanyar, Mir with Chris Osman. SEALs: The US Navy's Elite Fighting Force. Osprey Publishing, 2008. ISBN 1846032261. OCLC 191922842
Cawthorne, Nigel (2008). The Mammoth Book of Inside the Elite Forces. London: Robinson. ISBN 978-1845298210.
Couch, Dick. May the Seals: Their untold history (2014)
Couch, Dick (2008). The Sheriff of Ramadi: Navy SEALs and the Winning of al-Anbar. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1591141389.
Couch, Dick. The Warrior Elite: The Forging of SEAL Class 228. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2003. ISBN 1400046955. OCLC 802957824
Couch, Dick. The Finishing School: Earning the Navy SEAL Trident. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2004. ISBN 0609810464. OCLC 60563833
Couch, Dick. Down Range: Navy SEALs in the War on Terrorism. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2005. ISBN 1400081017. OCLC 71199069
Cummings, Dennis J. The Men Behind the Trident: SEAL Team One in Viet Nam. New York: Bantam Books, 1998. ISBN 0553579282 OCLC 39494815
Denver, Rorke, and Ellis Henican. Damn Few: Making the Modern SEAL Warrior. New York: Hyperion, 2013. ISBN 1401312802 OCLC 795757181
Dockery, Kevin. Navy SEALs: A History of the Early Years. New York: Berkley Books, 2001. ISBN 0425178250 OCLC 0425178250
Dockery, Kevin. Navy SEALs: A History Part II: The Vietnam Years. New York: Berkley Books, 2002. ISBN 0425183483 OCLC 48449554
Dockery, Kevin. Navy SEALs: A History Part III: Post-Vietnam to the Present. New York: Berkley Books, 2003. ISBN 042519034X OCLC 51818673
Dockery, Kevin. Weapons of the Navy SEALs. New York: Berkley Books, 2004. ISBN 0425198340 OCLC 56347561
Donald, Mark L., and Scott Mactavish. Battle Ready: Memoir of a SEAL Warrior Medic. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2013. ISBN 1250009766 OCLC 759914152
Fawcett, Bill. Hunters and Shooters: An Oral History of the U.S. Navy SEALs in Vietnam. New York: W. Morrow and Co., 1995. ISBN 0688126642 OCLC 31520013
Freid-Perenchio, Stephanie, and Jennifer Walton. SEAL: The Unspoken Sacrifice. [Ketchum, ID]: SFP Studio, 2009. ISBN 0615303226 OCLC 525383689
Greitens, Eric. The Heart and the Fist: The Education of a Humanitarian, the Making of a Navy SEAL. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011. ISBN 054742485X OCLC 646308409
Halberstadt, Hans. US Navy SEALs in Action. Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International, 1995. ISBN 0879389931 OCLC 32275764
Jansing, Chris (29 January 2010). "A typical SEAL? Think 007, not Rambo". NBC Field Notes (NBC News). Archived from the original on 31 January 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2010.
Kelly, Orr. Never Fight Fair!: Navy SEALs' Stories of Combat and Adventure. Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1995. ISBN 089141519X OCLC 30894438
Kyle, Chris (2013). American Sniper. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0062082350.
Luttrell, Marcus. Lone Survivor: The Eyewitness Account of Operation Redwing and the Lost Heroes of SEAL Team 10. Little, Brown and Company, 2009. ISBN 0316044695. OCLC 319610219
Luttrell, Marcus., and James D. Hornfischer. Service: A Navy SEAL at War. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Co., 2012. ISBN 0316185361 OCLC 756584153
Mann, Don, and Ralph Pezzullo. Inside SEAL Team Six: My Life and Missions with America's Elite Warriors. New York, NY: Little, Brown & Co., 2011. ISBN 0316204315 OCLC 729343843
McEwen, Scott, and Richard Miniter. Eyes on Target: Inside Stories from the Brotherhood of the U.S. Navy SEALs. New York: Center Street, 2014. ISBN 1455575690 OCLC 828891431
Neville, Leigh (2015). Special Forces in the War on Terror. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1472807908.
Neville, Leigh. Takur Ghar: The SEALs and Rangers on Roberts Ridge, Afghanistan 2002. Oxford, UK: Osprey Pub., 2013. ISBN 1780961987 OCLC 798058824
O'Donnell, Patrick K. First SEALs: The Untold Story of the Forging of America's Most Elite Unit (Da Capo, 2014) online review
Owen, Mark, and Kevin Maurer. No Easy Day: The Autobiography of s Navy SEAL: the Firsthand Account of the Mission That Killed Osama Bin Laden. New York, NY: Dutton, 2012. ISBN 0525953728 OCLC 808121503
Padden, Ian. U.S. Navy SEALs. Toronto: Bantam Books, 1985. ISBN 0553249541 OCLC 12264420
Pfarrer, Chuck. SEAL Target Geronimo: The Inside Story of the Mission to Kill Osama Bin Laden. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2011. ISBN 125000635X OCLC 733234790
Pfarrer, Chuck. Warrior Soul: The Memoir of a Navy SEAL. New York: Random House, 2004. ISBN 1400060362 OCLC 52165997
Redman, Jason, and John R. Bruning. The Trident: The Forging and Reforging of a Navy SEAL Leader. New York: William Morrow, 2013. ISBN 0062208322 OCLC 827260093
Robinson, Patrick. Honor and Betrayal: The Untold Story of the Navy SEALs Who Captured the "Butcher of Fallujah"- and the Shameful Ordeal They Later Endured. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Da Capo Press, 2013. ISBN 030682308X OCLC 861508106
Rossiter, Mike (2009). Target Basra. London, UK: Corgi. ISBN 978-0552157001.
Sasser, Charles W. Encyclopedia of the Navy SEALs. New York: Facts on File, 2002. ISBN 0816045690. OCLC 48383497
Wasdin, Howard E., and Stephen Templin. SEAL Team Six: Memoirs of an Elite Navy SEAL Sniper. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2011. ISBN 031269945X OCLC 681499659
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Navy SEALs.
Official website
United States Navy Parachute Team  official website
"Navy Fact File: Navy SEALs". San Diego: United States Navy. April 2002. Archived from the original on 3 March 2005. Retrieved 25 June 2006.
Peterson, Lt. Cmdr Erick (June 2009). "The Strategic Utility of U.S. Navy SEALs". Master thesis (dtic.mil). Naval Postgraduate School. Archived from the original on 1 December 2012. Retrieved 17 January 2012.
SEAL The Unspoken Sacrifice exhibit at the Pritzker Military Museum & Library
McCoy, Shane T. (August 2004). "Testing Newton's Law", All Hands Magazine, p. 33.
Obringer, Lee Ann. "How the Navy SEALs Work". How Stuff Works. Retrieved 14 June 2006.
Navy SEALs 50   Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Establishment of the U.S. Navy SEALs
Ethos of the Navy SEALs
vte United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM)United States ArmyUSASOC
Units
1st Special Forces Command
75th Ranger Regiment
Army Special Operations Aviation Command
John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
Types
Special Forces
Rangers
Civil Affairs
Psychological Operations
United States Marine CorpsMARSOC
Units
Marine Raider Regiment
Marine Raider Support Group
Marine Raider Training Center
Types
Critical skills operator
United States NavyNAVSPECWARCOM
Units
Naval Special Warfare Group 1
Naval Special Warfare Group 2
Naval Special Warfare Group 4
Naval Special Warfare Group 8
Naval Special Warfare Group 11
Naval Special Warfare Center
Types
Navy SEALs
Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen
United States Air ForceAFSOC
Units
1st Special Operations Wing
24th Special Operations Wing
27th Special Operations Wing
137th Special Operations Wing
193rd Special Operations Wing
352nd Special Operations Wing
353rd Special Operations Wing
492nd Special Operations Wing
919th Special Operations Wing
Types
Pararescue
Combat Control Team
Special Reconnaissance
Combat Rescue Officer
Special Tactics Officer
Combat Aviation Advisors
Psychological Operations
Special mission unitsJSOC
Army
1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta (Delta Force)
Intelligence Support Activity (ISA / The Activity)
Navy
Naval Special Warfare Development Group (DEVGRU / SEAL Team Six)
Air Force
24th Special Tactics Squadron (24 STS)
Joint Communications Unit
Theater SpecialOperations Commands
SOCAFRICA
SOCCENT
SOCEUR
SOCKOR
SOCPAC
SOCNORTH
SOCSOUTH
Source: SOCOM 2013 Fact Book
vteUnited States Navy
 Category
Leadership
Secretary of the Navy
Under Secretary of the Navy
Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
4-star admirals
3-star admirals
1864 1959
2000 2009
2010 2019
2020 present
2-star admirals
House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces
Senate Subcommittee on Seapower
Structure
Navy
Navy Reserve
Fleet Marine Force
Expeditionary Combat Command
Merchant Marine
Units
Active ships
Future ships
Aircraft wings
Aircraft squadrons
Carrier strike group
Installations
Naval Observatory
Master jet base
Operatingforces
Fleet Forces Command
Commander
Pacific Fleet
Commander
Naval Forces Europe   Naval Forces Africa
Naval Forces Central Command
Naval Forces Southern Command
Naval Special Warfare Command
Naval Reserve Forces
Operational Test and Evaluation Force
Naval Network Warfare Command
Military Sealift Command
Shore
Naval Sea Systems Command
Naval Air Systems Command
Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command
Naval Supply Systems Command
Naval Information Warfare Systems Command
Fleet Cyber Command
Naval Academy
Naval Education and Training Command
Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command
Office of Naval Intelligence
Naval Aviation Warfighting Development Center
Naval Legal Service Command
Naval Observatory
Naval Safety Center
Bureau of Naval Personnel
Chief of Naval Personnel
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery
Navy Installations Command
Navy Working Capital Fund
Fleets
Second Fleet
Third Fleet
Fourth Fleet
Fifth Fleet
Sixth Fleet
Seventh Fleet
Tenth Fleet
Ships
A B
C
D F
G H
I K
L
M
N O
P
Q R
S
T V
W Z
Aircraft carriers
Airships
Amphibious warfare ships
Auxiliaries
Battleships
Cruisers
Destroyers
Destroyer escorts
Escort carriers
Frigates
Mine warfare vessels
Monitors
Patrol vessels
Registered civilian vessels
Sailing frigates
Steam frigates
Steam gunboats
Ships of the line
Sloops of war
Submarines
Torpedo boats
Torpedo retrievers
Unclassified miscellaneous vessels
Yard and district craft
PersonnelandtrainingPeopleOfficers
Insignia
Designators
Enlisted
Rates
Ratings
Classification
Personnel
Chaplain Corps
Chief
Deputy Chief
Explosive ordnance disposal
Medical Corps
Dental Corps
Nurse Corps
Medical Service Corps
Supply Corps
Civil Engineer Corps
JAG Corps
JAG
DJAG
NCIS
Boatswain's mates
Hospital corpsman
Naval Aviator
SEALs
Seabees
Master-at-arms
Operations specialist
SWCCs
Hispanic sailors
Training
Recruit
Naval Academy
Officer Candidate School
STA-21
NROTC
BESS
BFTT
CNATT
COMPTUEX
NAWCTSD
AIM
Naval Chaplaincy School
Naval Hospital Corps School
Naval Justice School
Naval Postgraduate School
United States Armed Forces School of Music
Navy Senior Enlisted Academy
Navy Supply Corps School
Naval War College
Nuclear Power School
JMTC
TOPGUN
USNTPS
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Equipment
Uniforms
Awards and decorations
Badges
Current fleet
Future fleet
Reserve fleet
Current aircraft
Weapons
Naval reactors
History and  traditions
History
"Anchors Aweigh"
Blue Angels
Continental Navy
Ensign
Fleet bands
Fleet Week
Jack
Line-crossing ceremony
National Museum
Navy Band
Ceremonial Guard
Navy Flag
Navy Hymn
Navy Memorial
Navy service numbers
Navy Weeks
Revolt of the Admirals
Sailor's Creed
Ship commissioning
Ship decommissioning
Ship naming conventions
Tingey House
USS Constitution
Wetting-down
United States battleship retirement debate
vteNaval special operations forcesCurrent
 Tactical Divers Group
 Clearance Diving Branch
 641st Special Warfare Naval Unit
 Special Warfare Diving and Salvage
GRUMEC
COMANF
 Canadian armed forces divers
 Frogman Corps
 Commandos Marine
 Coastal Jaegers
 Kampfschwimmer
 Underwater Demolition Command
 MARCOS
Denjaka
KOPASKA
Taifib
 Sepah Navy Special Force
 Shayetet 13
 COMSUBIN
 Special Boarding Unit
 Marine Commandos
 PASKAL
 Fuerzas Especiales
 Netherlands Maritime Special Operations Forces
 Marinejegerkommandoen
 Special Service Group Navy
 Naval Special Operations Command
 JW Formoza
 Special Actions Detachment
101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion
Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit
 Russian commando frogmen
 Naval Diving Unit
 4 Special Forces Regiment
 Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla
 Special Boat Squadron
 FGNE
 Kustj garna
Naval Special Warfare Command
Reconnaissance Battalion
Sualt  Taaruz Grup Komutanl 
 Special Boat Service
Navy SEALs
Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen
Defunct
 Navy Beach Commandos
 Kampfschwimmer
 Decima Flottiglia MAS
 UOE
 Royal Naval Commandos
 Beach Jumpers
 Underwater Demolition Team
vteUnderwater diving
Diving activities
Diving modes
Atmospheric pressure diving
Freediving
Saturation diving
Scuba diving
Snorkeling
Surface oriented diving
Surface-supplied diving
Unmanned diving
Diving equipment
Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment
Human factors in diving equipment design
Basic equipment
Diving mask
Snorkel
Swimfin
Breathing gas
Bailout gas
Bottom gas
Breathing air
Decompression gas
Emergency gas supply
Heliox
Nitrox
Oxygen
Travel gas
Trimix
Buoyancy andtrim equipment
Buoyancy compensator
Power inflator
Dump valve
Variable buoyancy pressure vessel
Diving weighting system
Ankle weights
Integrated weights
Trim weights
Weight belt
Decompressionequipment
Decompression buoy
Decompression chamber
Decompression cylinder
Decompression trapeze
Dive computer
Diving bell
Diving shot
Diving stage
Jersey upline
Jonline
Diving suit
Atmospheric diving suit
JIM suit
Newtsuit
Dry suit
Sladen suit
Standard diving suit
Rash vest
Wetsuit
Dive skins
Hot-water suit
Helmetsand masks
Anti-fog
Diving helmet
Free-flow helmet
Lightweight demand helmet
Orinasal mask
Reclaim helmet
Shallow water helmet
Standard diving helmet
Diving mask
Band mask
Full-face mask
Half mask
Instrumentation
Bottom timer
Depth gauge
Dive computer
Dive timer
Diving watch
Helium release valve
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Pneumofathometer
Submersible pressure gauge
Mobilityequipment
Diver propulsion vehicle
Diving bell
Closed bell
Wet bell
Diving stage
Swimfin
Monofin
PowerSwim
Towboard
Wet sub
Safetyequipment
Alternative air source
Octopus regulator
Pony bottle
Bolt snap
Buddy line
Dive light
Diver's cutting tool
Diver's knife
Diver's telephone
Through-water communications
Underwater acoustic communication
Diving bell
Diving safety harness
Emergency gas supply
Bailout block
Bailout bottle
Lifeline
Screw gate carabiner
Emergency locator beacon
Rescue tether
Safety helmet
Shark-proof cage
Snoopy loop
Navigation equipment
Distance line
Diving compass
Dive reel
Line marker
Surface marker buoy
Silt screw
Underwaterbreathingapparatus
Atmospheric diving suit
Diving cylinder
Burst disc
Scuba cylinder valve
Diving helmet
Reclaim helmet
Diving regulator
Mechanism of diving regulators
Regulator malfunction
Regulator freeze
Single-hose regulator
Twin-hose regulator
Full-face diving mask
Open-circuitscuba
Scuba set
Bailout bottle
Decompression cylinder
Independent doubles
Manifolded twin set
Scuba manifold
Pony bottle
Scuba configuration
Sidemount
Sling cylinder
Diving rebreathers
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Carleton CDBA
CDLSE
Cryogenic rebreather
CUMA
DSEA
Dolphin
Halcyon PVR-BASC
Halcyon RB80
IDA71
Interspiro DCSC
LAR-5
LAR-6
LAR-V
LARU
Mark IV Amphibian
Porpoise
Ray
Siebe Gorman CDBA
Salvus
Siva
Surface-supplieddiving equipment
Air line
Diver's umbilical
Diving air compressor
Gas panel
Hookah
Scuba replacement
Sea Trek
Snuba
Standard diving dress
Divingequipmentmanufacturers
AP Diving
Apeks
Aqua Lung America
Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique
Beuchat
Ren  Cavalero
Cis-Lunar
Cressi-Sub
Dacor
DESCO
Dive Xtras
Divex
Diving Unlimited International
Dr gerwerk
Fenzy
Maurice Fernez
Technisub
Oscar Gugen
Heinke
HeinrichsWeikamp
Johnson Outdoors
Mares
Morse Diving
Nemrod
Oceanic Worldwide
Porpoise
Sub Sea Systems
Shearwater Research
Siebe Gorman
Submarine Products
Suunto
Diving support equipmentAccess equipment
Boarding stirrup
Diver lift
Diving bell
Diving ladder
Diving platform (scuba)
Diving stage
Downline
Jackstay
Launch and recovery system
Messenger line
Moon pool
Breathing gashandling
Air filtration
Activated carbon
Hopcalite
Molecular sieve
Silica gel
Booster pump
Carbon dioxide scrubber
Cascade filling system
Diver's pump
Diving air compressor
Diving air filter
Water separator
High pressure breathing air compressor
Low pressure breathing air compressor
Gas blending
Gas blending for scuba diving
Gas panel
Gas reclaim system
Gas storage bank
Gas storage quad
Gas storage tube
Helium analyzer
Nitrox production
Membrane gas separation
Pressure swing adsorption
Oxygen analyser
Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor
Oxygen compatibility
Decompressionequipment
Air-lock
Built-in breathing system
Decompression tables
Diving bell
Bell cursor
Closed bell
Clump weight
Launch and recovery system
Wet bell
Diving chamber
Diving stage
Recreational Dive Planner
Saturation system
Platforms
Dive boat
Canoe and kayak diving
Combat Rubber Raiding Craft
Liveaboard
Subskimmer
Diving support vessel
HMS Challenger (K07)
Underwaterhabitat
Aquarius Reef Base
Continental Shelf Station Two
Helgoland Habitat
Jules' Undersea Lodge
Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station
SEALAB
Tektite habitat
Remotely operatedunderwater vehicles
8A4-class ROUV
ABISMO
Atlantis ROV Team
CURV
Deep Drone
 paulard
Global Explorer ROV
Goldfish-class ROUV
Kaik  ROV
Ka if ROUV
Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System
Mini Rover ROV
OpenROV
ROV KIEL 6000
ROV PHOCA
Scorpio ROV
Sea Dragon-class ROV
Seabed tractor
Seafox drone
SeaPerch
SJT-class ROUV
T1200 Trenching Unit
VideoRay UROVs
Safety equipment
Diver down flag
Diving shot
ENOS Rescue-System
Hyperbaric lifeboat
Hyperbaric stretcher
Jackstay
Jonline
Reserve gas supply
General
Diving spread
Air spread
Saturation spread
Hot water system
Sonar
Underwater acoustic positioning system
Underwater acoustic communication
FreedivingActivities
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Haenyeo
Pearl hunting
Ama
Snorkeling
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Underwater rugby
Underwater target shooting
Competitions
Nordic Deep
Vertical Blue
Disciplines
Constant weight (CWT)
Constant Weight Bi-fins (CWTB)
Constant weight without fins (CNF)
Dynamic apnea (DYN)
Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF)
Free immersion (FIM)
No-limits apnea (NLT)
Static apnea (STA)
Skandalopetra diving
Variable weight apnea (VWT)
Variable weight apnea without fins
Equipment
Diving mask
Diving suit
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Snorkel (swimming)
Speargun
Swimfins
Monofin
Water polo cap
Freedivers
Deborah Andollo
Simone Arrigoni
Peppo Biscarini
Michael Board
Sara Campbell
Derya Can G en
Goran  olak
Carlos Coste
Robert Croft
Mandy-Rae Cruickshank
Yasemin Dalk l 
Leonardo D'Imporzano
Flavia Eberhard
 ahika Erc men
Emma Farrell
Francisco Ferreras
Pierre Frolla
Flavia Eberhard
Mehgan Heaney-Grier
Elisabeth Kristoffersen
Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych
Lo c Leferme
Enzo Maiorca
Jacques Mayol
Audrey Mestre
Karol Meyer
Kate Middleton
St phane Mifsud
Alexey Molchanov
Natalia Molchanova
Dave Mullins
Patrick Musimu
Guillaume N ry
Herbert Nitsch
Umberto Pelizzari
Liv Philip
Annelie Pompe
Michal Risian
Stig Severinsen
Tom Sietas
Aharon Solomons
Martin  t p nek
Walter Steyn
Tanya Streeter
William Trubridge
Devrim Cenk Ulusoy
Fatma Uruk
Danai Varveri
Alessia Zecchini
Nataliia Zharkova
Hazards
Barotrauma
Drowning
Freediving blackout
Deep-water blackout
Shallow-water blackout
Hypercapnia
Hypothermia
Historical
Ama
Octopus wrestling
Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics   Men's underwater swimming
Organisations
AIDA International
Scuba Schools International
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques
F d ration Fran aise d' tudes et de Sports Sous-Marins
Performance Freediving International
Professional divingOccupations
Ama
Commercial diver
Commercial offshore diver
Hazmat diver
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Diving supervisor
Haenyeo
Media diver
Police diver
Public safety diver
Scientific diver
Underwater archaeologist
Militarydiving
Army engineer diver
Canadian Armed Forces Divers
Clearance diver
Frogman
Minentaucher
Royal Navy ships diver
United States military divers
U.S. Navy diver
U.S.Navy master diver
Militarydivingunits
Clearance Diving Branch (RAN)
Commando Hubert
Combat Divers Service (Lithuania)
Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei
Decima Flottiglia MAS
Frogman Corps (Denmark)
Fuerzas Especiales
Fukuryu
GRUMEC
Grup Gerak Khas
Jagdkommando
JW Formoza
JW GROM
JW Komandos w
Kommando Spezialkr fte Marine
KOPASKA
MARCOS
Marine Commandos
Marinejegerkommandoen
Marine Raider Regiment
Minedykkerkommandoen
Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit
Naval Diving Unit (Singapore)
Naval Service Diving Section
Naval Special Operations Command
Operational Diving Division (SA Navy)
Royal Engineers
Russian commando frogmen
Sappers Divers Group
Shayetet 13
Special Air Service
Special Air Service Regiment
Special Actions Detachment
Special Boat Service
Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka)
Special Forces Command (Turkey)
Special Forces Group (Belgium)
Special Operations Battalion (Croatia)
Special Service Group (Navy)
Special Warfare Diving and Salvage
Tactical Divers Group
US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance
US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions
US Navy SEALs
Underwater Construction Teams
Underwater Demolition Command
Underwater Demolition Team
Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces)
UNGERIN
Underwaterwork
Commercial offshore diving
Dive leader
Diver training
Recreational diver training
Hazmat diving
Hyperbaric welding
Media diving
Nondestructive testing
Pearl hunting
Police diving
Potable water diving
Public safety diving
Scientific diving
Ships husbandry
Sponge diving
Submarine pipeline
Underwater archaeology
Archaeology of shipwrecks
Underwater construction
Offshore construction
Underwater demolition
Underwater logging
Underwater photography
Underwater search and recovery
Underwater searches
Underwater videography
Underwater survey
Salvage diving
SS Egypt
Kronan
La Belle
SS Laurentic
RMS Lusitania
Mars
Mary Rose
USS Monitor
HMS Royal George
Vasa
Divingcontractors
COMEX
Helix Energy Solutions Group
International Marine Contractors Association
Tools andequipment
Abrasive waterjet
Airlift
Baited remote underwater video
In-water surface cleaning
Brush cart
Cavitation cleaning
Pressure washing
Pigging
Lifting bag
Remotely operated underwater vehicle
Thermal lance
Tremie
Water jetting
Underwaterweapons
Limpet mine
Speargun
Hawaiian sling
Polespear
Underwaterfirearm
Gyrojet
Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun
Powerhead
Underwater pistols
Heckler & Koch P11
SPP-1 underwater pistol
Underwater revolvers
AAI underwater revolver
Underwater rifles
ADS amphibious rifle
APS underwater rifle
ASM-DT amphibious rifle
Recreational diving
Recreational dive sites
Index of recreational dive sites
List of wreck diving sites
Outline of recreational dive sites
Specialties
Altitude diving
Cave diving
Deep diving
Ice diving
Muck diving
Open-water diving
Rebreather diving
Sidemount diving
Solo diving
Technical diving
Underwater photography
Wreck diving
Diverorganisations
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federaci n Espa ola de Actividades Subacu ticas (FEDAS)
F d ration Fran aise d' tudes et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS)
Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP)
Diving tourismindustry
Dive center
Diving in East Timor
Diving in the Maldives
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Scuba diving tourism
Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands
Shark tourism
Sinking ships for wreck diving sites
Underwater diving on Guam
Diving eventsand festivals
Diversnight
Underwater Bike Race
Diving safety
Human factors in diving equipment design
Human factors in diving safety
Life-support system
Safety-critical system
Scuba diving fatalities
Water safety
Water surface searches
Divinghazards
List of diving hazards and precautions
Environmental
Current
Delta-P
Entanglement hazard
Overhead
Silt out
Wave action
Equipment
Freeflow
Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment
Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus
Single point of failure
Physiological
Cold shock response
Decompression
Nitrogen narcosis
Oxygen toxicity
Seasickness
Uncontrolled decompression
Diver behaviour and competence
Lack of competence
Overconfidence effect
Panic
Task loading
Trait anxiety
Willful violation
Consequences
Barotrauma
Decompression sickness
Drowning
Hypothermia
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
Hyperthermia
Non-freezing cold injury
Divingprocedures
Ascending and descending
Emergency ascent
Boat diving
Canoe and kayak diving
Buddy diving
buddy check
Decompression
Decompression practice
Pyle stop
Ratio decompression
Dive briefing
Dive log
Dive planning
Rule of thirds
Scuba gas planning
Diver communications
Diver rescue
Diver training
Doing It Right
Drift diving
Gas blending for scuba diving
Night diving
Rebreather diving
Scuba gas management
Solo diving
Riskmanagement
Checklist
Hazard identification and risk assessment
Hazard analysis
Job safety analysis
Risk assessment
Risk control
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Incident pit
Lockout tagout
Permit To Work
Redundancy
Safety data sheet
Situation awareness
Diving team
Bellman
Chamber operator
Diver medical technician
Diver's attendant
Diving supervisor
Diving systems technician
Gas man
Life support technician
Stand-by diver
Equipmentsafety
Breathing gas quality
Testing and inspection of diving cylinders
Hydrostatic test
Sustained load cracking
Diving regulator
Breathing performance of regulators
Occupationalsafety andhealth
Association of Diving Contractors International
International Marine Contractors Association
Code of practice
Contingency plan
Diving regulations
Emergency response plan
Diving safety officer
Diving superintendent
Diving supervisor
Operations manual
Standard operating procedure
Diving medicineDivingdisorders
List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Cramp
Motion sickness
Surfer's ear
Pressurerelated
Alternobaric vertigo
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Air embolism
Aerosinusitis
Barodontalgia
Dental barotrauma
Middle ear barotrauma
Pulmonary barotrauma
Compression arthralgia
Decompression illness
Dysbarism
Oxygen
Freediving blackout
Hyperoxia
Hypoxia
Oxygen toxicity
Inert gases
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
Inner ear decompression sickness
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Taravana
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Nitrogen narcosis
Carbon dioxide
Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia
Breathing gascontaminants
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Immersionrelated
Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Laryngospasm
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema
Treatment
Demand valve oxygen therapy
First aid
Hyperbaric medicine
Hyperbaric treatment schedules
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy
Therapeutic recompression
Personnel
Diving Medical Examiner
Diving Medical Practitioner
Diving Medical Technician
Hyperbaric nursing
Screening
Atrial septal defect
Effects of drugs on fitness to dive
Fitness to dive
Psychological fitness to dive
ResearchResearchers indiving physiologyand medicine
Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Peter B. Bennett
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Robert Boyle
Alf O. Brubakk
Albert A. B hlmann
John R. Clarke
Guybon Chesney Castell Damant
Kenneth William Donald
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Robert William Hamilton Jr.
Henry Valence Hempleman
Leonard Erskine Hill
Brian Andrew Hills
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
Neal W. Pollock
John Rawlins
Charles Wesley Shilling
Edward D. Thalmann
Jacques Triger
Diving medicalresearchorganisations
Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC)
Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC)
European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC)
European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS)
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS)
Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA)
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS)
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU)
Law
Civil liability in recreational diving
Diving regulations
Duty of care
List of legislation regulating underwater diving
Investigation of diving accidents
Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage
History of underwater diving
History of decompression research and development
History of Diving Museum
History of scuba diving
List of researchers in underwater diving
Lyons Maritime Museum
Man in the Sea Museum
Timeline of diving technology
Pearling in Western Australia
US Navy decompression models and tables
Archeologicalsites
SS Commodore
USS Monitor
Queen Anne's Revenge
Whydah Gally
Underwater artand artists
The Diver
Jason deCaires Taylor
Engineersand inventors
Jer nimo de Ayanz y Beaumont
William Beebe
Georges Beuchat
Giovanni Alfonso Borelli
Joseph-Martin Cabirol
John R. Clarke
Jacques Cousteau
Charles Anthony Deane
John Deane
Louis de Corlieu
Auguste Denayrouze
Ted Eldred
Henry Fleuss
 mile Gagnan
Karl Heinrich Klingert
Peter Kreeft
Christian J. Lambertsen
Yves Le Prieur
John Lethbridge
Ernest William Moir
Joseph Salim Peress
Auguste Piccard
Joe Savoie
Willard Franklyn Searle
Gordon Smith
Augustus Siebe
Pierre-Marie Touboulic
Jacques Triger
Historicalequipment
Aqua-Lung
RV Calypso
SP-350 Denise
Magnesium torch
Nikonos
Porpoise regulator
Standard diving dress
Sub Marine Explorer
Vintage scuba
Diverpropulsionvehicles
Advanced SEAL Delivery System
Cosmos CE2F series
Dry Combat Submersible
Human torpedo
Motorised Submersible Canoe
Necker Nymph
R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle
SEAL Delivery Vehicle
Shallow Water Combat Submersible
Siluro San Bartolomeo
Welfreighter
Wet Nellie
Military andcovert operations
Raid on Alexandria (1941)
Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior
Scientific projects
1992 cageless shark-diving expedition
Mission 31
Awards and events
Hans Hass Award
International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame
London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures
NOGI Awards
Women Divers Hall of Fame
IncidentsDive boat incidents
Sinking of MV Conception
Diver rescues
Alpazat cave rescue
Tham Luang cave rescue
Early diving
John Day (carpenter)
Charles Spalding
Ebenezer Watson
Freediving fatalities
Lo c Leferme
Audrey Mestre
Nicholas Mevoli
Natalia Molchanova
Offshorediving incidents
Byford Dolphin diving bell accident
Drill Master diving accident
Star Canopus diving accident
Stena Seaspread diving accident
Venture One diving accident
Waage Drill II diving accident
Wildrake diving accident
Professionaldiving fatalities
Roger Baldwin
John Bennett
Victor F. Guiel Jr.
Francis P. Hammerberg
Craig M. Hoffman
Peter Henry Michael Holmes
Johnson Sea Link accident
Edwin Clayton Link
Gerard Anthony Prangley
Pier Skipness
Robert John Smyth
Albert D. Stover
Richard A. Walker
Lothar Michael Ward
Joachim Wendler
Bradley Westell
Arne Zetterstr m
Scuba divingfatalities
1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident
Ricardo Armbruster
Allan Bridge
David Bright
Berry L. Cannon
Cotton Coulson
Cl udio Coutinho
E. Yale Dawson
Deon Dreyer
Milan Dufek
Sheck Exley
Maurice Fargues
Fernando Garfella Palmer
Guy Garman
Steve Irwin
death
Jim Jones
Henry Way Kendall
Artur Koz owski
Yuri Lipski
Kirsty MacColl
Agnes Milowka
Fran ois de Roubaix
Chris and Chrissy Rouse
Dave Shaw
Wesley C. Skiles
Dewey Smith
Rob Stewart
Esbj rn Svensson
Josef Velek
PublicationsManuals
NOAA Diving Manual
U.S. Navy Diving Manual
Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival
Underwater Handbook
Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving
Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving
The new science of skin and scuba diving
Professional Diver's Handbook
Basic Scuba
Standards andCodes of Practice
Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO)
DIN 7876
IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving
ISO 24801 Recreational diving services   Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers
General non-fiction
The Darkness Beckons
Goldfinder
The Last Dive
Shadow Divers
The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure
Research
List of Divers Alert Network publications
Dive guides
Training and registrationDivertraining
Competence and assessment
Competency-based learning
Refresher training
Skill assessment
Diver training standard
Diving instructor
Diving school
Occupational diver training
Commercial diver training
Military diver training
Public safety diver training
Scientific diver training
Recreational diver training
Introductory diving
Teaching method
Muscle memory
Overlearning
Stress exposure training
Skills
Combat sidestroke
Diver navigation
Diver trim
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver
Finning techniques
Scuba skills
Buddy breathing
Low impact diving
Diamond Reef System
Surface-supplied diving skills
Underwater searches
RecreationalscubacertificationlevelsCore diving skills
Advanced Open Water Diver
Autonomous diver
CMAS* scuba diver
CMAS** scuba diver
Introductory diving
Low Impact Diver
Master Scuba Diver
Open Water Diver
Supervised diver
Leadership skills
Dive leader
Divemaster
Diving instructor
Master Instructor
Specialist skills
Rescue Diver
Solo diver
Diver trainingcertificationand registrationorganisations
European Underwater Federation (EUF)
International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF)
International Diving Schools Association (IDSA)
International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA)
List of diver certification organizations
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Nautical Archaeology Society
Universal Referral Program
World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC)
Commercial divercertificationauthorities
Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS)
Commercial diver registration in South Africa
Divers Institute of Technology
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
Department of Employment and Labour
Commercial divingschools
Divers Academy International
Norwegian diver school
Free-divingcertificationagencies
AIDA International (AIDA)
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Performance Freediving International (PI)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Recreationalscubacertificationagencies
American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC)
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
Association nationale des moniteurs de plong e (ANMP)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT)
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Federaci n Espa ola de Actividades Subacu ticas (FEDAS)
F d ration Fran aise d' tudes et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM)
Federazione Italiana Attivit  Subacquee (FIAS)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
International Diving Educators Association (IDEA)
International Life Saving Federation (ILS)
Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF)
National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec)
Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID)
Sub-Aqua Association (SAA)
Scuba Diving International (SDI)
Scuba Educators International (SEI)
Scottish Sub Aqua Club (ScotSAC)
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
T rkiye Sualt  Sporlar  Federasyonu (TSSF)
United Diving Instructors (UDI)
YMCA SCUBA Program
Scientific divercertificationauthorities
American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS)
CMAS Scientific Committee
Technical divercertificationagencies
American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI)
British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC)
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques (CMAS)
Diving Science and Technology (DSAT)
Federazione Italiana Attivit  Subacquee (FIAS)
International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD)
Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI)
Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC)
Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec)
Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID)
Trimix Scuba Association (TSA)
Technical Extended Range (TXR)
Cavediving
Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA)
Cave Diving Group (CDG)
Global Underwater Explorers (GUE)
National Association for Cave Diving (NACD)
National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG)
National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI)
Technical Diving International (TDI)
Military divertraining centres
Defence Diving School
Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center
Underwater Escape Training Unit
Military divertraining courses
United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course
Underwater sportsSurface snorkeling
Finswimming
Snorkeling/breath-hold
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey
Australia
Turkey
Underwater rugby
Colombia
United States
Underwater target shooting
Breath-hold
Aquathlon
Apnoea finswimming
Freediving
Open Circuit Scuba
Immersion finswimming
Sport diving
Underwater cycling
Underwater orienteering
Underwater photography
Rebreather
Underwater photography
Sports governingorganisations and federations
International
AIDA International
Conf d ration Mondiale des Activit s Subaquatiques)
National
AIDA Hellas
Australian Underwater Federation
British Freediving Association
British Octopush Association
British Underwater Sports Association
Comhairle Fo-Thuinn
Federaci n Espa ola de Actividades Subacu ticas
F d ration Fran aise d' tudes et de Sports Sous-Marins
South African Underwater Sports Federation
T rkiye Sualt  Sporlar  Federasyonu
Underwater Society of America)
Competitions
14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship
Underwater Hockey World Championships
Underwater Orienteering World Championships
Underwater Rugby World Championships
Underwater diversPioneersof diving
Eduard Admetlla i L zaro
Aquanaut
Mary Bonnin
James F. Cahill
Jacques Cousteau
Billy Deans
Dottie Frazier
Trevor Hampton
Hans Hass
Dick Rutkowski
Teseo Tesei
Arne Zetterstr m
Underwaterscientistsarchaeologists andenvironmentalists
Michael Arbuthnot
Robert Ballard
George Bass
Mensun Bound
Louis Boutan
Hugh Bradner
Cathy Church
Eugenie Clark
James P. Delgado
Sylvia Earle
John Christopher Fine
George R. Fischer
Anders Franz n
Honor Frost
Fernando Garfella Palmer
David Gibbins
Graham Jessop
Swietenia Puspa Lestari
Pilar Luna
Robert F. Marx
Anna Marguerite McCann
Innes McCartney
Charles T. Meide
Mark M. Newell
Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova
John Peter Oleson
Mendel L. Peterson
Richard Pyle
Andreas Rechnitzer
William R. Royal
Margaret Rule
Gunter Sch bel
Stephanie Schwabe
Myriam Seco
E. Lee Spence
Robert St nuit
Peter Throckmorton
Cristina Zenato
Scuba recordholders
Pascal Bernab 
Jim Bowden
Mark Ellyatt
Sheck Exley
Nuno Gomes
Claudia Serpieri
Krzysztof Starnawski
Underwaterfilmmakersand presenters
Samir Alhafith
David Attenborough
Ram n Bravo
Jean-Michel Cousteau
Richie Kohler
Paul Rose
Andy Torbet
Ivan Tors
Andrew Wight
Underwaterphotographers
Doug Allan
Tamara Benitez
Georges Beuchat
Adrian Biddle
Jonathan Bird
Eric Cheng
Neville Coleman
Jacques Cousteau
John D. Craig
Ben Cropp
Bernard Delemotte
David Doubilet
Candice Farmer
John Christopher Fine
Dermot FitzGerald
Rodney Fox
Ric Frazier
Stephen Frink
Peter Gimbel
Monty Halls
Hans Hass
Henry Way Kendall
Rudie Kuiter
Joseph B. MacInnis
Luis Marden
Agnes Milowka
Noel Monkman
Pete Oxford
Steve Parish
Zale Parry
Pierre Petit
Leni Riefenstahl
Peter Scoones
Brian Skerry
Wesley C. Skiles
E. Lee Spence
Philippe Tailliez
Ron Taylor
Valerie Taylor
Albert Tillman
John Veltri
Stan Waterman
Michele Westmorland
John Ernest Williamson
J. Lamar Worzel
Underwaterexplorers
Caves
Graham Balcombe
Sheck Exley
Martyn Farr
Jochen Hasenmayer
Jill Heinerth
Jarrod Jablonski
William Hogarth Main
Tom Mount
Jack Sheppard
Bill Stone
Reefs
Arthur C. Clarke
Wrecks
Leigh Bishop
John Chatterton
Clive Cussler
Bill Nagle
Valerie van Heest
Aristotelis Zervoudis
Aquanauts
Andrew Abercromby
Joseph M. Acaba
Clayton Anderson
Richard R. Arnold
Serena Au n-Chancellor
Michael Barratt (astronaut)
Robert A. Barth
Robert L. Behnken
Randolph Bresnik
Timothy J. Broderick
Justin Brown
Berry L. Cannon
Scott Carpenter
Gregory Chamitoff
Steve Chappell
Catherine Coleman
Robin Cook
Craig B. Cooper
Fabien Cousteau
Philippe Cousteau
Timothy Creamer
Jonathan Dory
Pedro Duque
Sylvia Earle
Jeanette Epps
Sheck Exley
Albert Falco
Andrew J. Feustel
Michael Fincke
Satoshi Furukawa
Ronald J. Garan Jr.
Michael L. Gernhardt
Christopher E. Gerty
David Gruber
Chris Hadfield
Jeremy Hansen
Jos  M. Hern ndez
John Herrington
Paul Hill
Akihiko Hoshide
Mark Hulsbeck
Emma Hwang
Norishige Kanai
Les Kaufman
Scott Kelly
Karen Kohanowich
Timothy Kopra
Dominic Landucci
Jon Lindbergh
Kjell N. Lindgren
Michael L pez-Alegr a
Joseph B. MacInnis
Sandra Magnus
Thomas Marshburn
Matthias Maurer
K. Megan McArthur
Craig McKinley
Jessica Meir
Simone Melchior
Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger
Andreas Mogensen
Karen Nyberg
John D. Olivas
Takuya Onishi
Luca Parmitano
Nicholas Patrick
Tim Peake
Thomas Pesquet
Marc Reagan
Garrett Reisman
Kathleen Rubins
Dick Rutkowski
Tara Ruttley
David Saint-Jacques
Josef Schmid
Robert Sheats
Dewey Smith
Steve Squyres
Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper
Robert St nuit
Herv  Stevenin
Nicole Stott
James Talacek
Daniel M. Tani
Robert Thirsk
Bill Todd
Mark T. Vande Hei
Koichi Wakata
Rex J. Walheim
Shannon Walker
John Morgan Wells
Joachim Wendler
Douglas H. Wheelock
Peggy Whitson
Dafydd Williams
Jeffrey Williams
Sunita Williams
Reid Wiseman
Kimiya Yui
Writers and journalists
Michael C. Barnette
Victor Berge
Philippe Diol 
Gary Gentile
Bret Gilliam
Bob Halstead
Hillary Hauser
Trevor Jackson
Steve Lewis
John Mattera
Rescuers
Craig Challen
Richard Harris
Rick Stanton
John Volanthen
Frogmen
Lionel Crabb
Ian Edward Fraser
Sydney Knowles
James Joseph Magennis
Commercial salvors
Keith Jessop
Science of underwater diving
List of researchers in underwater diving
Divingphysics
Metre sea water
Neutral buoyancy
Underwater acoustics
Modulated ultrasound
Underwater vision
Underwater computer vision
Divingphysiology
Blood shift
Cold shock response
Diving reflex
Equivalent narcotic depth
Maximum operating depth
Physiological response to water immersion
Underwater vision
Work of breathing
Decompressiontheory
Decompression models:
B hlmann decompression algorithm
Haldane's decompression model
Reduced gradient bubble model
Thalmann algorithm
Thermodynamic model of decompression
Varying Permeability Model
Equivalent air depth
Oxygen window
Physiology of decompression
Divingenvironment
Underwater exploration
Deep-sea exploration
Classification
List of diving environments by type
Altitude diving
Benign water diving
Confined water diving
Deep diving
Inland diving
Inshore diving
Muck diving
Night diving
Open-water diving
Black-water diving
Blue-water diving
Penetration diving
Cave diving
Torricellian chamber
Ice diving
Wreck diving
Recreational dive sites
Underwater environment
Impact
Environmental impact of recreational diving
Low impact diving
Other
Bathysphere
Defense against swimmer incursions
Diver detection sonar
Offshore survey
Rugged compact camera
Underwater domain awareness
Underwater vehicle
Deep-submergencevehicle
Aluminaut
DSV Alvin
American submarine NR-1
Bathyscaphe
Archim de
FNRS-2
FNRS-3
Harmony class bathyscaphe
Sea Pole-class bathyscaphe
Trieste II
Deepsea Challenger
Ictineu 3
JAGO
Jiaolong
Konsul-class submersible
Limiting Factor
Russian submarine Losharik
Mir
Nautile
Pisces-class deep submergence vehicle
DSV Sea Cliff
DSV Shinkai
DSV Shinkai 2000
DSV Shinkai 6500
DSV Turtle
DSV-5 Nemo
Submarine rescue
International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office
Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy)
McCann Rescue Chamber
Submarine rescue ship
Deep-submergencerescue vehicle
LR5
LR7
MSM-1
Mystic-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
DSRV-1 Mystic
DSRV-2 Avalon
NATO Submarine Rescue System
Priz-class deep-submergence rescue vehicle
Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28
Russian submarine AS-34
ASRV Remora
SRV-300
Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System
Type 7103 DSRV
URF (Swedish Navy)
Submarine escape
Escape trunk
Submarine escape training facility
Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia)
Escape set
Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus
Momsen lung
Steinke hood
Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment
Specialinterestgroups
Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia
CMAS Europe
Coral Reef Alliance
Diving Equipment and Marketing Association
Divers Alert Network
Green Fins
Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association
Karst Underwater Research
Nautical Archaeology Program
Nautical Archaeology Society
Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club
Project AWARE
Reef Check
Reef Life Survey
Rubicon Foundation
Save Ontario Shipwrecks
SeaKeys
Sea Research Society
Society for Underwater Historical Research
Society for Underwater Technology
Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command
Neutral buoyancyfacilities forAstronaut training
Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory
Neutral buoyancy pool
Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid
Neutral Buoyancy Simulator
Space Systems Laboratory
Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center
Other
Nautilus Productions
Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device
Seabed mining
 Category
 Commons
 Glossary
Indexes: Dive sites
Divers
Diving
 Outline
 Portal
Authority control International
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Chile
Spain
Catalonia
Israel
United States
Latvia
Other
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Navy_SEALs&oldid=1149109464"