Body of salt water covering the majority of Earth
This article is about natural science aspects of oceans as well as threats from human activities. For more on human experience, history and culture of oceans, see Sea. For other uses, see Ocean (disambiguation).
 World map of the five-ocean model with approximate boundaries
Earth's oceans
Arctic
Atlantic
Indian
Pacific
Southern
vte
The ocean (also the sea or the world ocean) is the body of salt water that covers approximately 70.8% of the Earth and contains 97% of Earth's water.[1] An ocean can also refer to any of the large bodies of water into which the world ocean is conventionally divided.[2] Separate names are used to identify five different areas of the ocean: Pacific (the largest), Atlantic, Indian, Southern, and Arctic (the smallest).[3][4] Seawater covers approximately 361,000,000 km2 (139,000,000 sq mi) of the planet. The ocean is the principal component of Earth's hydrosphere, and therefore integral to life on Earth. Acting as a huge heat reservoir, the ocean influences climate and weather patterns, the carbon cycle, and the water cycle.
Oceanographers divide the ocean into different vertical and horizontal zones based on physical and biological conditions. The pelagic zone consists of the water column from surface to ocean floor throughout the open ocean. The water column is further categorized in other zones depending on depth and on how much light is present. The photic zone includes water from the surface to a depth of 1% of the surface light (about 200 m in the open ocean), where photosynthesis can occur. This makes the photic zone the most biodiverse. Photosynthesis by plants and microscopic algae (free floating phytoplankton) creates organic matter using light, water, carbon dioxide, and nutrients. Ocean photosynthesis creates 50% of the oxygen in earth's atmosphere.[5] This upper sunlit zone is the origin of the food supply which sustains most of the ocean ecosystem. Light penetrates to a depth of only a few hundred meters; the remaining ocean below is cold and dark. The continental shelf where the ocean approaches dry land is more shallow, with a depth of a few hundred meters or less. Human activity has a greater impact on the continental shelf.
Ocean temperatures depend on the amount of solar radiation reaching the ocean surface. In the tropics, surface temperatures can rise to over 30 C (86 F). Near the poles where sea ice forms, the temperature in equilibrium is about  2 C (28 F). Deep ocean temperature is between  2 C (28 F) and 5 C (41 F) in all parts of the ocean.[6] Water continuously circulates in the oceans creating ocean currents. These directed movements of seawater are generated by forces acting upon the water, including temperature differences, atmospheric circulation (wind), the Coriolis effect and differences in salinity.[7] Tidal currents originate from tides, while surface currents are caused by wind and waves. Major ocean currents include the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, Agulhas Current and Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Collectively, currents move enormous amounts of water and heat around the globe. This circulation significantly impacts global climate and the uptake and redistribution of pollutants such as carbon dioxide by moving these contaminants from the surface into the deep ocean.
Ocean water contains large quantities of dissolved gases, including oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen. This gas exchange takes place at the ocean surface and solubility depends on the temperature and salinity of the water.[8] The increasing concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere due to fossil fuel combustion leads to higher concentrations in ocean water, resulting in ocean acidification.[9] The ocean provides society with important environmental services, including climate regulation. It also offers a means of trade and transport and access to food and other resources. Known to be the habitat of over 230,000 species, it may contain far more   perhaps over two million species.[10] However, the ocean is subject to numerous human-caused environmental threats, including marine pollution, overfishing, and effects of climate change on oceans, such as ocean warming, ocean acidification, sea level rise and many more. The continental shelf and coastal waters that are most influenced by human activity are especially vulnerable.
Terminology
Ocean and sea
The terms "the ocean" or "the sea" used without specification refer to the interconnected body of salt water covering the majority of the Earth's surface.[3][4] It includes the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Southern and Arctic Oceans.[11] As a  general term, "the ocean" and "the sea" are often interchangeable, although speakers of British English refer to "the sea" in all cases,[12] even when the body of water is one of the oceans.
Strictly speaking, a "sea" is a body of water (generally a division of the world ocean) partly or fully enclosed by land.[13] The word "sea" can also be used for many specific, much smaller bodies of seawater, such as the North Sea or the Red Sea. There is no sharp distinction between seas and oceans, though generally seas are smaller, and are often partly (as marginal seas) or wholly (as inland seas) bordered by land.[14]
World ocean
Further information: Ocean current, Thermohaline circulation, and Ocean general circulation model
 The ocean dominates Earth's surface and hydrosphere, producing the global thermohaline circulation seawater flow (animation)
The contemporary concept of the World Ocean was coined in the early 20th century by the Russian oceanographer Yuly Shokalsky to refer to the continuous ocean that covers and encircles most of Earth.[15][16] The global, interconnected body of salt water is sometimes referred to as the world ocean, global ocean or the great ocean.[17][18][19] The concept of a continuous body of water with relatively free interchange among its parts is of fundamental importance to oceanography.[20]
Etymology
The word ocean comes from the figure in classical antiquity, Oceanus (/o si n s/; Greek:    kean s,[21] pronounced [ kean s]), the elder of the Titans in classical Greek mythology. Oceanus was believed by the ancient Greeks and Romans to be the divine personification of an enormous river encircling the world.
The concept of  kean s has an Indo-European connection. Greek  kean s has been compared to the Vedic epithet  - y na-, predicated of the dragon V tra-, who captured the cows/rivers. Related to this notion, the Okeanos is represented with a dragon-tail on some early Greek vases.[22]
Natural history
Further information: List of ancient oceans
Origin of water
Further information: Origin of water on Earth
Scientists believe that a sizable quantity of water would have been in the material that formed the Earth.[23] Water molecules would have escaped Earth's gravity more easily when it was less massive during its formation. This is called atmospheric escape.
During planetary formation Earth possibly had magma oceans. Subsequently outgassing, volcanic activity and meteorite impacts, according to current theories, produced an early atmosphere of carbon dioxide, nitrogen and water vapor.
The gases and with them the atmosphere are thought to have accumulated over millions of years and after Earth's surface had significantly cooled the water vapor over time would have condensed, forming Earth's first oceans.[24] The early oceans might have been significantly hotter than today and appeared green due to high iron content.[25]
Geological evidence helps constrain the time frame for liquid water existing on Earth. A sample of pillow basalt (a type of rock formed during an underwater eruption) was recovered from the Isua Greenstone Belt and provides evidence that water existed on Earth 3.8 billion years ago.[26] In the Nuvvuagittuq Greenstone Belt, Quebec, Canada, rocks dated at 3.8 billion years old by one study[27] and 4.28 billion years old by another[28] show evidence of the presence of water at these ages.[26] If oceans existed earlier than this, any geological evidence either has yet to be discovered or has since been destroyed by geological processes like crustal recycling.
However, more recently, in August 2020, researchers reported that sufficient water to fill the oceans may have always been on the Earth since the beginning of the planet's formation.[29][30][31] In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity.[32] By 3.5 Ga, Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.[33]
Ocean formation
Main article: Paleoceanography
The origin of Earth's oceans is unknown. Oceans are thought to have formed in the Hadean eon and may have been the cause for the emergence of life.
Plate tectonics, post-glacial rebound, and sea level rise continually change the coastline and structure of the world ocean. A global ocean has existed in one form or another on Earth for eons.
Since its formation the ocean has taken many conditions and shapes with many past ocean divisions and potentially at times covering the whole globe.[34]
During colder climatic periods, more ice caps and glaciers form, and enough of the global water supply accumulates as ice to lessen the amounts in other parts of the water cycle. The reverse is true during warm periods. During the last ice age, glaciers covered almost one-third of Earth's land mass with the result being that the oceans were about 122 m (400 ft) lower than today. During the last global "warm spell," about 125,000 years ago, the seas were about 5.5 m (18 ft) higher than they are now. About three million years ago the oceans could have been up to 50 m (165 ft) higher.[35]
Geography
Further information: Water distribution on Earth
 The ocean covers ~70% of the Earth, sometimes called the "blue planet" or an ocean world
 The Atlantic, one component of the system, makes up 23% of the "global ocean".
The entire ocean, containing 97% of Earth's water, spans 70.8% of Earth's surface,[1] making it Earth's global ocean or world ocean.[15][17] This makes Earth, along with its vibrant hydrosphere a "water world"[36][37] or "ocean world",[38][39] particularly in Earth's early history when the ocean is thought to have possibly covered Earth completely.[34] The ocean is shaped irregularly, dominating Earth's surface unevenly, allowing the discernment of Earth's surface into a water and land hemisphere, as well as the division of the ocean into particular oceans.
Oceanic divisions
Further information: Borders of the oceans
The major oceanic divisions   listed below in descending order of area and volume   are so named based on nearest continents, various archipelagos, and other criteria.[40][41][42] Oceans are fringed with coastlines that run for 360,000 kilometres in total distance.[43][44] They are also connected to smaller, adjoining bodies of water such as, seas, gulfs, bays, bights, and straits. Seawater covers approximately 361,000,000 km2 (139,000,000 sq mi) and is customarily divided into five principal oceans, as below:
Oceans by size
#
Ocean
Location
Area(km2)
Volume(km3)
Avg. depth(m)
Coastline(km)[45]
1
Pacific Ocean
Between Asia and Australasia and the Americas[46]
168,723,000(46.6%)
669,880,000(50.1%)
3,970
135,663(35.9%)
2
Atlantic Ocean
Between the Americas and Europe and Africa[47]
85,133,000(23.5%)
310,410,900(23.3%)
3,646
111,866(29.6%)
3
Indian Ocean
Between southern Asia, Africa and Australia[48]
70,560,000(19.5%)
264,000,000(19.8%)
3,741
66,526(17.6%)
4
Antarctic/Southern Ocean
Between Antarctica and the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans Sometimes considered an extension of those three oceans.[49][50]
21,960,000(6.1%)
71,800,000(5.4%)
3,270
17,968(4.8%)
5
Arctic Ocean
Between northern North America and Eurasia in the Arctic Sometimes considered a marginal sea of the Atlantic.[51][52][53]
15,558,000(4.3%)
18,750,000(1.4%)
1,205
45,389(12.0%)
Total
361,900,000(100%)
1.335 10^9(100%)
3,688
377,412(100%)
NB: Volume, area, and average depth figures include NOAA ETOPO1 figures for marginal South China Sea.Sources: Encyclopedia of Earth,[46][47][48][49][53] International Hydrographic Organization,[50] Regional Oceanography: an Introduction (Tomczak, 2005),[51] Encyclop dia Britannica,[52] and the International Telecommunication Union.[45]
Ocean basins
Further information: List of submarine topographical features
 Bathymetry of the ocean floor showing the continental shelves and oceanic plateaus (red), the mid-ocean ridges (yellow-green) and the abyssal plains (blue to purple)
The ocean fills Earth's oceanic basins. Earth's oceanic basins cover different geologic provinces of Earth's oceanic crust as well as continental crust. As such it covers mainly Earth's structural basins, but also continental shelfs.
Every ocean basin has a mid-ocean ridge, which creates a long mountain range beneath the ocean. Together they form the global mid-oceanic ridge system that features the longest mountain range in the world. The longest continuous mountain range is 65,000 km (40,000 mi). This underwater mountain range is several times longer than the longest continental mountain range the Andes.[54]
Oceanographers state that less than 20% of the oceans have been mapped.[55]
Physical properties
Color
 Ocean chlorophyll concentration is a proxy for phytoplankton biomass. In this map, blue colors represent lower chlorophyll and reds represent higher chlorophyll. Satellite-measured chlorophyll is estimated based on ocean color by how green the color of the water appears from space.
This section is an excerpt from Ocean color.[edit]
Most of the ocean is blue in color, but in some places the ocean is blue-green, green, or even yellow to brown.[56] Blue ocean color is a result of several factors. First, water preferentially absorbs red light, which means that blue light remains and is reflected back out of the water. Red light is most easily absorbed and thus does not reach great depths, usually to less than 50 meters (164 ft.). Blue light, in comparison, can penetrate up to 200 meters (656 ft.).[57] Second, water molecules and very tiny particles in ocean water preferentially scatter blue light more than light of other colors. Blue light scattering by water and tiny particles happens even in the very clearest ocean water,[58] and is similar to blue light scattering in the sky. 
The main substances that affect the color of the ocean include dissolved organic matter, living phytoplankton with chlorophyll pigments, and non-living particles like marine snow and mineral sediments.[59] Chlorophyll can be measured by satellite observations and serves as a proxy for ocean productivity (marine primary productivity) in surface waters. In long term composite satellite images, regions with high ocean productivity show up in yellow and green colors because they contain more (green) phytoplankton, whereas areas of low productivity show up in blue.
Water cycle, weather and rainfall
Further information: Effects of climate change on the water cycle and Water distribution on Earth
 The ocean is a major driver of Earth's water cycle.
Ocean water represents the largest body of water within the global water cycle (oceans contain 97% of Earth's water). Evaporation from the ocean moves water into the atmosphere to later rain back down onto land and the ocean.[60] Oceans have a significant effect on the biosphere. The ocean as a whole is thought to cover approximately 90% of the Earth's biosphere.[55] Oceanic evaporation, as a phase of the water cycle, is the source of most rainfall (about 90%),[60] causing a global cloud cover of 67% and a consistent oceanic cloud cover of 72%.[61] Ocean temperatures affect climate and wind patterns that affect life on land. One of the most dramatic forms of weather occurs over the oceans: tropical cyclones (also called "typhoons" and "hurricanes" depending upon where the system forms).
As the world's ocean is the principal component of Earth's hydrosphere, it is integral to life on Earth, forms part of the carbon cycle and water cycle, and   as a huge heat reservoir   influences climate and weather patterns.
Waves and swell
 Movement of water as waves pass
Main articles: Wind wave and Swell (ocean)
The motions of the ocean surface, known as undulations or wind waves, are the partial and alternate rising and falling of the ocean surface. The series of mechanical waves that propagate along the interface between water and air is called swell   a term used in sailing, surfing and navigation.[62] These motions profoundly affect ships on the surface of the ocean and the well-being of people on those ships who might suffer from sea sickness.
Wind blowing over the surface of a body of water forms waves that are perpendicular to the direction of the wind. The friction between air and water caused by a gentle breeze on a pond causes ripples to form. A strong blow over the ocean causes larger waves as the moving air pushes against the raised ridges of water. The waves reach their maximum height when the rate at which they are travelling nearly matches the speed of the wind. In open water, when the wind blows continuously as happens in the Southern Hemisphere in the Roaring Forties, long, organized masses of water called swell roll across the ocean.[63]: 83 84 [40][64] If the wind dies down, the wave formation is reduced, but already-formed waves continue to travel in their original direction until they meet land. The size of the waves depends on the fetch, the distance that the wind has blown over the water and the strength and duration of that wind. When waves meet others coming from different directions, interference between the two can produce broken, irregular seas.[40]
Constructive interference can cause individual (unexpected) rogue waves much higher than normal.[65] Most waves are less than 3 m (10 ft) high[65] and it is not unusual for strong storms to double or triple that height.[66] Rogue waves, however, have been documented at heights above 25 meters (82 ft).[67][68]
The top of a wave is known as the crest, the lowest point between waves is the trough and the distance between the crests is the wavelength. The wave is pushed across the surface of the ocean by the wind, but this represents a transfer of energy and not horizontal movement of water. As waves approach land and move into shallow water, they change their behavior. If approaching at an angle, waves may bend (refraction) or wrap around rocks and headlands (diffraction). When the wave reaches a point where its deepest oscillations of the water contact the ocean floor, they begin to slow down. This pulls the crests closer together and increases the waves' height, which is called wave shoaling. When the ratio of the wave's height to the water depth increases above a certain limit, it "breaks", toppling over in a mass of foaming water.[65] This rushes in a sheet up the beach before retreating into the ocean under the influence of gravity.[69]
Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions or other major geological disturbances can set off waves that can lead to tsunamis in coastal areas which can be very dangerous.[70][71]
Sea level and surface
The ocean's surface is an important reference point for oceanography and geography, particularly as mean sea level. The ocean surface has globally little, but measurable topography, depending on the ocean's volumes.
The ocean surface is a crucial interface for oceanic and atmospheric processes. Allowing interchange of particles, enriching the air and water, as well as grounds by some particles becoming sediments. This interchange has fertilized life in the ocean, on land and air. These processes and components altogether form ocean surface ecosystems.
Tides
Main article: Tide
 High tide and low tide in the Bay of Fundy, Canada.
Tides are the regular rise and fall in water level experienced by oceans in response to the gravitational influences of the moon and the sun, and the effects of the Earth's rotation. During each tidal cycle, at any given place the water rises to a maximum height known as "high tide" before ebbing away again to the minimum "low tide" level. As the water recedes, it uncovers more and more of the foreshore, also known as the intertidal zone. The difference in height between the high tide and low tide is known as the tidal range or tidal amplitude.[72][73]
In the open ocean tidal ranges are less than 1 meter, but in coastal areas these tidal ranges increase to more than 10 meters in some areas.[74] Some of the largest tidal ranges in the world occur in the Bay of Fundy and Ungava Bay in Canada, reaching up to 16 meters.[75] Other locations with record high tidal ranges include the Bristol Channel between England and Wales, Cook Inlet in Alaska, and the R o Gallegos in Argentina.[76]
Most places experience two high tides each day, occurring at intervals of about 12 hours and 25 minutes. This is half the 24 hours and 50 minute period that it takes for the Earth to make a complete revolution and return the moon to its previous position relative to an observer. Tidal force or tide-raising force decreases rapidly with distance, so the moon has more than twice as great an effect on tides as the Sun.[77] When the sun, moon and Earth are all aligned (full moon and new moon), the combined effect results in the high "spring tides".[72] A storm surge can occur when high winds pile water up against the coast in a shallow area and this, coupled with a low pressure system, can raise the surface of the ocean at high tide dramatically.
Depth
Further information: Bathymetry
The average depth of the oceans is about 4 km. More precisely the average depth is 3,688 meters (12,100 ft).[40] Nearly half of the world's marine waters are over 3,000 meters (9,800 ft) deep.[19] "Deep ocean," which is anything below 200 meters (660 ft.), covers about 66% of Earth's surface.[78] This figure does not include seas not connected to the World Ocean, such as the Caspian Sea.
The deepest point in the ocean is the Mariana Trench, located in the Pacific Ocean near the Northern Mariana Islands.[79] Its maximum depth has been estimated to be 10,971 meters (35,994 ft). The British naval vessel Challenger II surveyed the trench in 1951 and named the deepest part of the trench the "Challenger Deep". In 1960, the Trieste successfully reached the bottom of the trench, manned by a crew of two men.
Oceanic zones
Further information: Ocean stratification
 The major oceanic zones, based on depth and biophysical conditions
Oceanographers divide the ocean into different vertical and horizontal zones defined by physical and biological conditions. The pelagic zone consists of the water column of the open ocean, and can be divided into further regions categorized by light abundance and by depth.
Grouped by light penetration
The photic zone includes the oceans from the surface to a depth of 200 m; it is the region where photosynthesis can occur and is, therefore, the most biodiverse. Photosynthesis by plants and microscopic algae (free floating phytoplankton) allows the creation of organic matter from chemical precursors including water and carbon dioxide. This organic matter can then be consumed by other creatures. Much of the organic matter created in the photic zone is consumed there but some sinks into deeper waters.
Below the photic zone is the mesopelagic or twilight zone where there is a very small amount of light. Below that is the aphotic deep ocean to which no surface sunlight at all penetrates. Life that exists deeper than the photic zone must either rely on material sinking from above (see marine snow) or find another energy source. Hydrothermal vents are a source of energy in what is known as the aphotic zone (depths exceeding 200 m). The pelagic part of the photic zone is known as the epipelagic.[80]
Grouped by depth and temperature
The pelagic part of the aphotic zone can be further divided into vertical regions according to depth and temperature:[80]
The mesopelagic is the uppermost region. Its lowermost boundary is at a thermocline of 12 C (54 F) which generally lies at 700 1,000 meters (2,300 3,300 ft) in the tropics. Next is the bathypelagic lying between 10 and 4 C (50 and 39 F), typically between 700 1,000 meters (2,300 3,300 ft) and 2,000 4,000 meters (6,600 13,100 ft). Lying along the top of the abyssal plain is the abyssopelagic, whose lower boundary lies at about 6,000 meters (20,000 ft). The last and deepest zone is the hadalpelagic which includes the oceanic trench and lies between 6,000 11,000 meters (20,000 36,000 ft).
The benthic zones are aphotic and correspond to the three deepest zones of the deep-sea. The bathyal zone covers the continental slope down to about 4,000 meters (13,000 ft). The abyssal zone covers the abyssal plains between 4,000 and 6,000 m. Lastly, the hadal zone corresponds to the hadalpelagic zone, which is found in oceanic trenches.
Distinct boundaries between ocean surface waters and deep waters can be drawn based on the properties of the water. These boundaries are called thermoclines (temperature), haloclines (salinity), chemoclines (chemistry), and pycnoclines (density). If a zone undergoes dramatic changes in temperature with depth, it contains a thermocline, a distinct boundary between warmer surface water and colder deep water. The tropical thermocline is typically deeper than the thermocline at higher latitudes. Polar waters, which receive relatively little solar energy, are not stratified by temperature and generally lack a thermocline because surface water at polar latitudes are nearly as cold as water at greater depths. Below the thermocline, water everywhere in the ocean is very cold, ranging from  1 C to 3 C. Because this deep and cold layer contains the bulk of ocean water, the average temperature of the world ocean is 3.9 C.[81] If a zone undergoes dramatic changes in salinity with depth, it contains a halocline. If a zone undergoes a strong, vertical chemistry gradient with depth, it contains a chemocline. Temperature and salinity control the density of ocean water, with colder and saltier water being more dense, and this density in turn regulates the global water circulation within the ocean.[80] The halocline often coincides with the thermocline, and the combination produces a pronounced pycnocline, a boundary between less dense surface water and dense deep water.
Grouped by distance from land
The pelagic zone can be further subdivided into two sub regions based on distance from land: the neritic zone and the oceanic zone. The neritic zone encompasses the water mass directly above the continental shelves and hence includes coastal waters, whereas the oceanic zone includes all the completely open water.
The littoral zone covers the region between low and high tide and represents the transitional area between marine and terrestrial conditions. It is also known as the intertidal zone because it is the area where tide level affects the conditions of the region.[80]
Volumes
The volume of water in all the oceans together is approximately 1.335 billion cubic kilometers (1.335 sextillion liters, 320.3 million cubic miles).[40][82][83]This section is an excerpt from Hydrosphere.[edit]
It has been estimated that there are 1.386 billion cubic kilometres (333 million cubic miles) of water on Earth.[84][85][86] This includes water in gaseous, liquid and frozen forms as soil moisture, groundwater and permafrost in the Earth's crust (to a depth of 2 km); oceans and seas, lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, glaciers, ice and snow cover on Earth's surface; vapour, droplets and crystals in the air; and part of living plants, animals and unicellular organisms of the biosphere. Saltwater accounts for 97.5% of this amount, whereas fresh water accounts for only 2.5%. Of this fresh water, 68.9% is in the form of ice and permanent snow cover in the Arctic, the Antarctic and mountain glaciers; 30.8% is in the form of fresh groundwater; and only 0.3% of the fresh water on Earth is in easily accessible lakes, reservoirs and river systems.[87]
The total mass of Earth's hydrosphere is about 1.4   1018 tonnes, which is about 0.023% of Earth's total mass. At any given time, about 2   1013 tonnes of this is in the form of water vapor in the Earth's atmosphere (for practical purposes, 1 cubic metre of water weighs 1 tonne). Approximately 71% of Earth's surface, an area of some 361 million square kilometres (139.5 million square miles), is covered by ocean. The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of sea water (3.5%).[88]
Temperature
Main articles: Ocean temperature and Ocean heat content
Ocean temperatures depends on the amount of solar radiation falling on its surface. In the tropics, with the Sun nearly overhead, the temperature of the surface layers can rise to over 30 C (86 F) while near the poles the temperature in equilibrium with the sea ice is about  2 C (28 F). There is a continuous circulation of water in the oceans. Warm surface currents cool as they move away from the tropics, and the water becomes denser and sinks. The cold water moves back towards the equator as a deep sea current, driven by changes in the temperature and density of the water, before eventually welling up again towards the surface. Deep ocean water has a temperature between  2 C (28 F) and 5 C (41 F) in all parts of the globe.[6]
This section is an excerpt from Effects of climate change on oceans   Rising ocean temperature.[edit]
It is clear that the ocean is warming as a result of climate change, and this rate of warming is increasing.[89]: 9  The global ocean was the warmest it had ever been recorded by humans in 2022.[90] This is determined by the ocean heat content, which exceeded the previous 2021 maximum in 2022.[90] The steady rise in ocean temperatures is an unavoidable result of the Earth's energy imbalance, which is primarily caused by rising levels of greenhouse gases.[90] Between pre-industrial times and the 2011 2020 decade, the ocean's surface has heated between 0.68 and 1.01 C.[91]: 1214 
Temperature and salinity by region
The waters in different regions of the ocean have quite different temperature and salinity characteristics. This is due to differences in the local water balance (precipitation vs. evaporation) and the "sea to air" temperature gradients. These characteristics can vary widely among ocean regions. The table below provides an illustration of the sort of values usually encountered.
General characteristics of ocean surface waters by region[92][93][94][95][96]
Characteristic
Polar regions
Temperate regions
Tropical regions
Precipitation vs. evaporation
Precip > Evap
Precip > Evap
Evap > Precip
Sea surface temperature in winter
 2 C
5 to 20 C
20 to 25 C
Average salinity
28  to 32 
35 
35  to 37 
Annual variation of air temperature
  40 C
10 C
< 5 C
Annual variation of water temperature
< 5 C
10 C
< 5 C
Sea ice
Main articles: Sea ice and Arctic sea ice decline
Seawater with a typical salinity of 35  has a freezing point of about  1.8 C (28.8 F).[80][97] Because sea ice is less dense than water, it floats on the ocean's surface (as does fresh water ice, which has an even lower density). Sea ice covers about 7% of the Earth's surface and about 12% of the world's oceans.[98][99][100] Sea ice usually starts to freeze at the very surface, initially as a very thin ice film. As further freezing takes place, this ice film thickens and can form ice sheets. The ice formed incorporates some sea salt, but much less than the seawater it forms from. As the ice forms with low salinity this results in saltier residual seawater. This in turn increases density and promotes vertical sinking of the water.[101]
Ocean currents and global climate
 Ocean surface currents
 A map of the global thermohaline circulation; blue represents deep-water currents, whereas red represents surface currents.
See also: Effects of climate change on oceans  Changing ocean currents
Types of ocean currents
An ocean current is a continuous, directed movement of seawater generated by a number of forces acting upon the water, including wind, the Coriolis effect, temperature and salinity differences.[7] Ocean currents are primarily horizontal water movements. They have different origins, such as tides for tidal currents, or wind and waves for surface currents.
Tidal currents are in phase with the tide, hence are quasiperiodic; associated with the influence of the moon and sun pull on the ocean water. Tidal currents may form various complex patterns in certain places, most notably around headlands.[102] Non-periodic or non-tidal currents are created by the action of winds and changes in density of water. In littoral zones, breaking waves are so intense and the depth measurement so low, that maritime currents reach often 1 to 2 knots.[103]
The wind and waves create surface currents (designated as "drift currents"). These currents can decompose in one quasi-permanent current (which varies within the hourly scale) and one movement of Stokes drift under the effect of rapid waves movement (which vary on timescales of a couple of seconds). The quasi-permanent current is accelerated by the breaking of waves, and in a lesser governing effect, by the friction of the wind on the surface.[103]
This acceleration of the current takes place in the direction of waves and dominant wind. Accordingly, when the ocean depth increases, the rotation of the earth changes the direction of currents in proportion with the increase of depth, while friction lowers their speed. At a certain ocean depth, the current changes direction and is seen inverted in the opposite direction with current speed becoming null: known as the Ekman spiral. The influence of these currents is mainly experienced at the mixed layer of the ocean surface, often from 400 to 800 meters of maximum depth. These currents can considerably change and are dependent on the yearly seasons. If the mixed layer is less thick (10 to 20 meters), the quasi-permanent current at the surface can adopt quite a different direction in relation to the direction of the wind. In this case, the water column becomes virtually homogeneous above the thermocline.[103]
The wind blowing on the ocean surface will set the water in motion. The global pattern of winds (also called atmospheric circulation) creates a global pattern of ocean currents. These are driven not only by the wind but also by the effect of the circulation of the earth (coriolis force). Theses major ocean currents include the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio current, Agulhas current and Antarctic Circumpolar Current. The Antarctic Circumpolar Current encircles Antarctica and influences the area's climate as well as connecting currents in several oceans.[103]
Relationship of currents and climate
Main article: Atlantic meridional overturning circulation
 Map of the Gulf Stream, a major ocean current that transports heat from the equator to northern latitudes and moderates the climate of Europe.
Collectively, currents move enormous amounts of water and heat around the globe influencing climate. These wind driven currents are largely confined to the top hundreds of meters of the ocean. At greater depth the drivers of water motion are the thermohaline circulation (the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is part of a global thermoholine circulation). This is driven by the cooling of surface waters at northern and southern polar latitudes creating dense water which sinks to the bottom of the ocean. This cold and dense water moves slowly away from the poles which is why the waters in the deepest layers of the world ocean are so cold. This deep ocean water circulation is relatively slow and water at the bottom of the ocean can be isolated from the ocean surface and atmosphere for hundreds or even a few thousand years.[103] This circulation has important impacts on global climate and the uptake and redistribution of pollutants such as carbon dioxide by moving these contaminants from the surface into the deep ocean.
Ocean currents greatly affect Earth's climate by transferring heat from the tropics to the polar regions and thereby also affecting air temperature and precipitation in coastal regions and further inland. Surface heat and freshwater fluxes create global density gradients that drive the thermohaline circulation part of large-scale ocean circulation. It plays an important role in supplying heat to the polar regions, and thus in sea ice regulation.
Oceans moderate the climate of locations where prevailing winds blow in from the ocean. At similar latitudes, a place on Earth with more influence from the ocean will have a more moderate climate than a place with more influence from land. For example, the cities San Francisco (37.8 N) and New York (40.7 N) have different climates because San Francisco has more influence from the ocean. San Francisco, on the west coast of North America, gets winds from the west over the Pacific Ocean, and the influence of the ocean water yields a more moderate climate with a warmer winter and a longer, cooler summer, with the warmest temperatures happening later in the year. New York, on the east coast of North America gets winds from the west over land, so New York has colder winters and hotter, earlier summers than San Francisco.
Warmer ocean currents yield warmer climates in the long term, even at high latitudes. At similar latitudes, a place influenced by warm ocean currents will have a warmer climate overall than a place influenced by cold ocean currents. French Riviera (43.5 N) and Rockland, Maine (44.1 N) have same latitude, but the French Riviera is influenced by warm waters transported by the Gulf Stream into the Mediterranean Sea and has a warmer climate overall. Maine is influenced by cold waters transported south by the Labrador Current giving it a colder climate overall.
Changes in the thermohaline circulation are thought to have significant impacts on Earth's energy budget. Since the thermohaline circulation governs the rate at which deep waters reach the surface, it may also significantly influence atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. Modern observations, climate simulations and paleoclimate reconstructions suggest that the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) has weakened since the preindustrial era. The latest climate change projections in 2021 suggest that the AMOC is likely to weaken further over the 21st century.[104]: 19  Such a weakening could cause large changes to global climate, with the North Atlantic particularly vulnerable.[104]: 19 
Chemical properties
Main article: Seawater  Properties
Salinity
Further information: Salinity  Seawater, and Seawater  Salinity
 Annual mean sea surface salinity in practical salinity units (psu) from the World Ocean Atlas.[105]
Salinity is a measure of the total amounts of dissolved salts in seawater. It was originally measured via measurement of the amount of chloride in seawater and hence termed chlorinity. It is now routinely measured by measuring electrical conductivity of the water sample. Salinity can be calculated using the chlorinity, which is a measure of the total mass of halogen ions (includes fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine) in seawater. By international agreement, the following formula is used to determine salinity:[106]
Salinity (in  ) = 1.80655   Chlorinity (in  )
The average ocean water chlorinity is about 19.2 , and, thus, the average salinity is around 34.7 .[106]
Salinity has a major influence on the density of seawater. A zone of rapid salinity increase with depth is called a halocline. The temperature of maximum density of seawater decreases as its salt content increases. Freezing temperature of water decreases with salinity, and boiling temperature of water increases with salinity. Typical seawater freezes at around  2 C at atmospheric pressure.[107]
Salinity is higher in Earth's oceans where there is more evaporation and lower where there is more precipitation. If precipitation exceeds evaporation, as is the case in polar and some temperate regions, salinity will be lower. If evaporation exceeds precipitation, as is sometimes the case in tropical regions, salinity will be higher. For example, evaporation is greater than precipitation in the Mediterranean Sea, which has an average salinity of 38 , more saline than the global average of 34.7 .[108] Thus, oceanic waters in polar regions have lower salinity content than oceanic waters tropical regions.[106] However, when sea ice forms at high latitudes, salt is excluded from the ice as it forms, which can increase the salinity in the residual seawater in polar regions such as the Arctic Ocean.[80][109]
Observations of sea surface salinity between 1950 and 2019 indicate that due to the effects of climate change on oceans regions of high salinity and evaporation have become more saline, while regions of low salinity and more precipitation have become fresher.[110] It is very likely that the Pacific and Antarctic/Southern Oceans have freshened while the Atlantic has become more saline.[110]
Dissolved gases
 Sea surface oxygen concentration in moles per cubic meter from the World Ocean Atlas.[111]
Ocean water contains large quantities of dissolved gases, including oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen. These dissolve into ocean water via gas exchange at the ocean surface, with the solubility of these gases depending on the temperature and salinity of the water.[8] The four most abundant gases in earth's atmosphere and oceans are nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide. In the ocean by volume, the most abundant gases dissolved in seawater are carbon dioxide (including bicarbonate and carbonate ions, 14 mL/L on average), nitrogen (9 mL/L), and oxygen (5 mL/L) at equilibrium at 24 C (75 F) [112][113][114] All gases are more soluble   more easily dissolved   in colder water than in warmer water. For example, when salinity and pressure are held constant, oxygen concentration in water almost doubles when the temperature drops from that of a warm summer day 30 C (86 F) to freezing 0 C (32 F). Similarly, carbon dioxide and nitrogen gases are more soluble at colder temperatures, and their solubility changes with temperature at different rates.[112][115]
Oxygen, photosynthesis and carbon cycling
Further information: Marine biogeochemical cycles, Ocean deoxygenation, Oceanic carbon cycle, and Biological pump
 Diagram of the ocean carbon cycle showing the relative size of stocks (storage) and fluxes.[116]
The process of photosynthesis in the surface ocean releases oxygen and consumes carbon dioxide. This photosynthesis in the ocean is dominated by phytoplankton, microscopic free floating algae. After the plants grow, bacterial decomposition of the organic matter formed by photosynthesis in the ocean consumes oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. The sinking and bacterial decomposition of some organic matter in deep ocean water, at depths where the waters are out of contact with the atmosphere, leads to a reduction in oxygen concentrations and increase in carbon dioxide, carbonate and bicarbonate.[117] This cycling of carbon dioxide in oceans is an important part of the global carbon cycle.
The oceans represent a major carbon sink for carbon dioxide taken up from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and by dissolution (see also carbon sequestration). There is also increasing attention focused on carbon dioxide uptake in coastal marine habitats such as mangroves and saltmarshes, a process sometimes referred to as  Blue carbon . Attention is focused on these ecosystems because they are strong carbon sinks as well as ecologically important habitats under considerable threat from human activities and environmental degradation.
As deep ocean water circulates throughout the globe, it contains gradually less oxygen and gradually more carbon dioxide with more time away from the air at the surface. This gradual decrease in oxygen concentration happens as sinking organic matter continuously gets decomposed during the time the water is out of contact with the atmosphere.[117] Most of the deep waters of the ocean still contain relatively high concentrations of oxygen sufficient for most animals to survive. However, some ocean areas have very low oxygen due to long periods of isolation of the water from the atmosphere. These oxygen deficient areas, called oxygen minimum zones or hypoxic waters, could be made worse by the effects of climate change on oceans.[118]
pH and alkalinity
Further information: pH  Seawater, Seawater  pH, and Ocean acidification
Seawater pH is typically limited to a range between 7.5 and 8.4.[117] It is slightly alkaline and had an average pH of about 8.2 over the past 300 million years.[119] Between 1950 and 2020, the average pH of the ocean surface fell from approximately 8.15 to 8.05.[120] Carbon dioxide emissions from human activities are the primary cause of ocean acidification, with atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels exceeding 410 ppm (in 2020). CO2 from the atmosphere is absorbed by the oceans. This produces carbonic acid (H2CO3) which dissociates into a bicarbonate ion (HCO 3) and a hydrogen ion (H+). The presence of free hydrogen ions (H+) lowers the pH of the ocean.
Alkalinity is the balance of base (proton acceptors) and acids (proton donors) in seawater, or indeed any natural waters. The alkalinity provides the chemical buffer that regulates the pH of seawater. While there are many ions in seawater that can contribute to the alkalinity, many of these are at very low concentrations. This means that that, for all practical purposes, the only significant contributors to seawater alkalinity in the open ocean with well oxygenated waters are the carbonate, bicarbonate and borate ions. The first two of these ions contribute more than 95% of this alkalinity.[117]
The growth of phytoplankton in surface ocean waters leads to the conversion of some bicarbonate and carbonate ions into organic matter. Some of this organic matter sinks into the deep ocean where it is broken down back into carbonate and bicarbonate. This process is related to ocean productivity, or marine primary production. Thus alkalinity tends to increase with depth and also along the global thermohaline circulation from the Atlantic to the Pacific and Indian ocean, although these increases are small. The concentrations vary overall by only a few percent.[117][121]
Residence times of chemical elements and ions
 Residence time of elements in the ocean depends on supply by processes like rock weathering and rivers vs. removal by processes like evaporation and sedimentation.
The ocean waters contain many chemical elements as dissolved ions. Elements dissolved in ocean waters have a wide range of concentrations. Some elements have very high concentrations of several grams per liter, such as sodium and chloride, together making up the majority of ocean salts. Other elements, such as iron, are present at tiny concentrations of just a few nanograms (10 9 grams) per liter.[106]
The concentration of any element depends on its rate of supply to the ocean and its rate of removal. Elements enter the ocean from rivers, the atmosphere and hydrothermal vents. Elements are removed from ocean water by sinking and becoming buried in sediments or evaporating to the atmosphere in the case of water and some gases.  Oceanographers consider the balance of input and removal by estimating the residence time of an element. Residence time is the average time the element would spend dissolved in the ocean before it is removed. Very abundant elements in ocean water like sodium have high rates of input, reflecting high abundance in rocks and relatively rapid rock weathering, coupled to very slow removal from the ocean because sodium ions are rather unreactive and very soluble. In contrast, other elements such as iron and aluminium are abundant in rocks but very insoluble, meaning that inputs to the ocean are low and removal is rapid. These cycles represent part of the major global cycle of elements that has gone on since the Earth first formed. The residence times of the very abundant elements in the ocean are estimated to be millions of years, while for highly reactive and insoluble elements, residence times are only hundreds of years.[106]
Residence times of elements and ions[122][123]
Chemical element or ion
Residence time (years)
Chloride (Cl )
100,000,000
Sodium (Na+)
68,000,000
Magnesium (Mg2+)
13,000,000
Potassium (K+)
12,000,000
Sulfate (SO42 )
11,000,000
Calcium (Ca2+)
1,000,000
Carbonate (CO32 )
110,000
Silicon (Si)
20,000
Water (H2O)
4,100
Manganese (Mn)
1,300
Aluminum (Al)
600
Iron (Fe)
200
Nutrients
See also: Eutrophication  Coastal waters
 
North Atlantic    gyre
North Atlantic    gyre
North Atlantic    gyre
IndianOcean gyre
NorthPacificgyre
SouthPacificgyre
South Atlantic        gyre
 Ocean gyres rotate clockwise in the north and counterclockwise in the south
A few elements such as nitrogen, phosphorus, iron, and potassium are essential for life, are major components of biological material, and are commonly called  nutrients . Nitrate and phosphate have ocean residence times of 10,000[124] and 69,000 [125] years, respectively, while potassium is a much more abundant ion in the ocean with a residence time of 12 million[126] years. The biological cycling of these elements means that this represents a continuous removal process from the ocean's water column as degrading organic material sinks to the ocean floor as sediment.
Phosphate from intensive agriculture and untreated sewage is transported via runoff to rivers and coastal zones to the ocean where it is metabolized. Eventually, it sinks to the ocean floor and is no longer available to humans as a commercial resource.[127] Production of rock phosphate, an essential ingredient in inorganic fertilizer[128] is a slow geological process occurring in some of the world's ocean sediments thus making minable sedimentary apatite (phosphate) in effect a non-renewable resource (see peak phosphorus). This continuous net deposition loss of non-renewable phosphate from human activities may become a resource problem in the future for fertilizer production and food security.[129][130]
Marine life
Main articles: Marine life, Marine habitats, Marine primary production, Marine biology, and Marine ecosystem
 Some representative ocean animals (not drawn to scale) within their approximate depth-defined ecological habitats. Marine microorganisms also exist on the surfaces and within the tissues and organs of the diverse life inhabiting the ocean, across all ocean habitats. The animals rooted to or living on the ocean floor are not pelagic but are benthic animals.[131]
Life within the ocean evolved 3 billion years prior to life on land. Both the depth and the distance from shore strongly influence the biodiversity of the plants and animals present in each region.[132] The diversity of life in the ocean is immense, including:
Animals: most animal phyla have species that inhabit the ocean, including many that are found only in marine environments such as sponges, Cnidaria (such as corals and jellyfish), comb jellies, Brachiopods, and Echinoderms (such as sea urchins and sea stars). Many other familiar animal groups primarily live in the ocean, including cephalopods (includes octopus and squid), crustaceans (includes lobsters, crabs, and shrimp), fish, sharks, cetaceans (includes whales, dolphins, and porpoises). In addition, many land animals have adapted to living a major part of their life on the oceans. For instance, seabirds are a diverse group of birds that have adapted to a life mainly on the oceans. They feed on marine animals and spend most of their lifetime on water, many going on land only for breeding. Other birds that have adapted to oceans as their living space are penguins, seagulls and pelicans. Seven species of turtles, the sea turtles, also spend most of their time in the oceans.
Plants: including sea grasses, or mangroves
Algae: algae is a "catch-all" term to include many photosynthetic, single-celled eukaryotes, such as green algae, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, but also multicellular algae, such as some red algae (including organisms like Pyropia, which is the source of the edible nori seaweed), and brown algae (including organisms like kelp).
Bacteria: ubiquitous single-celled prokaryotes found throughout the world
Archaea: prokaryotes distinct from bacteria, that inhabit many environments of the ocean, as well as many extreme environments
Fungi: many marine fungi with diverse roles are found in oceanic environments
This section is an excerpt from Marine life.[edit]
 Killer whales (orcas) are highly visible marine apex predators that hunt many large species. But most biological activity in the ocean takes place with microscopic marine organisms that cannot be seen individually with the naked eye, such as marine bacteria and phytoplankton.[133]
Marine life, sea life, or ocean life is the plants, animals and other organisms that live in the salt water of seas or oceans, or the brackish water of coastal estuaries. At a fundamental level, marine life affects the nature of the planet. Marine organisms, mostly microorganisms, produce oxygen and sequester carbon. Marine life in part shape and protect shorelines, and some marine organisms even help create new land (e.g. coral building reefs).
More than 200,000 marine species have been documented, and perhaps two million marine species are yet to be documented.[134] Marine species range in size from the microscopic like phytoplankton, which can be as small as 0.02 micrometres, to huge cetaceans like the blue whale   the largest known animal, reaching 33 m (108 ft) in length.[135][136] Marine microorganisms, including protists and bacteria and their associated viruses, have been variously estimated as constituting about 70%[137] or about 90%[138][133] of the total marine biomass. Marine life is studied scientifically in both marine biology and in biological oceanography. The term marine comes from the Latin mare, meaning "sea" or "ocean".
This section is an excerpt from Marine habitats.[edit]
Marine habitats are habitats that support marine life. Marine life depends in some way on the saltwater that is in the sea (the term marine comes from the Latin mare, meaning sea or ocean). A habitat is an ecological or environmental area inhabited by one or more living  species.[139] The marine environment supports many kinds of these habitats. Marine habitats can be divided into coastal and open ocean habitats. Coastal habitats are found in the area that extends from as far as the tide comes in on the shoreline out to the edge of the continental shelf. Most marine life is found in coastal habitats, even though the shelf area occupies only seven percent of the total ocean area. Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf.
This section is an excerpt from Marine ecosystem.[edit]
 Coral reefs form complex marine ecosystems with tremendous biodiversity.
Marine ecosystems are the largest of Earth's aquatic ecosystems and exist in waters that have a high salt content. These systems contrast with freshwater ecosystems, which have a lower salt content. Marine waters cover more than 70% of the surface of the Earth and account for more than 97% of Earth's water supply[140][141] and 90% of habitable space on Earth.[142] Seawater has an average salinity of 35 parts per thousand of water. Actual salinity varies among different marine ecosystems.[143] Marine ecosystems can be divided into many zones depending upon water depth and shoreline features. The oceanic zone is the vast open part of the ocean where animals such as whales, sharks, and tuna live. The benthic zone consists of substrates below water where many invertebrates live. The intertidal zone is the area between high and low tides. Other near-shore (neritic) zones can include mudflats, seagrass meadows, mangroves, rocky intertidal systems, salt marshes, coral reefs, lagoons. In the deep water, hydrothermal vents may occur where chemosynthetic sulfur bacteria form the base of the food web.
Human uses of the oceans
Main articles: Sea  Humans and the sea, and The sea in culture
The ocean has been linked to human activity throughout history. These activities serve a wide variety of purposes, including navigation and exploration, naval warfare, travel, shipping and trade, food production (e.g. fishing, whaling, seaweed farming, aquaculture), leisure (cruising, sailing, recreational boat fishing, scuba diving), power generation (see marine energy and offshore wind power), extractive industries (offshore drilling and deep sea mining), freshwater production via desalination.
Many of the world's goods are moved by ship between the world's seaports.[144] Large quantities of goods are transported across the ocean, especially across the Atlantic and around the Pacific Rim.[145] A lot of cargo, such as manufactured goods, is usually transported within standard sized, lockable containers, loaded on purpose-built container ships at dedicated terminals.[146] Containerization greatly increased the efficiency and decreased the cost of moving goods by sea, and was a major factor leading to the rise of globalization and exponential increases in international trade in the mid-to-late 20th century.[147]
Oceans are also the major supply source for the fishing industry. Some of the major harvests are shrimp, fish, crabs, and lobster.[55] The biggest commercial fishery globally is for anchovies, Alaska pollock and tuna.[148]: 6  A report by FAO in 2020 stated that "in 2017, 34 percent of the fish stocks of the world's marine fisheries were classified as overfished".[148]: 54  Fish and other fishery products from both wild fisheries and aquaculture are among the most widely consumed sources of protein and other essential nutrients. Data in 2017 showed that "fish consumption accounted for 17 percent of the global population's intake of animal proteins".[148] In order to fulfill this need, coastal countries have exploited marine resources in their exclusive economic zone, although fishing vessels are increasingly venturing further afield to exploit stocks in international waters.[149]
The ocean offers a very large supply of energy carried by ocean waves, tides, salinity differences, and ocean temperature differences which can be harnessed to generate electricity.[150] Forms of sustainable marine energy include tidal power, ocean thermal energy and wave power.[150][151] Offshore wind power is captured by wind turbines placed out on the ocean; it has the advantage that wind speeds are higher than on land, though wind farms are more costly to construct offshore.[152] There are large deposits of petroleum, as oil and natural gas, in rocks beneath the ocean floor. Offshore platforms and drilling rigs extract the oil or gas and store it for transport to land.[153]
"Freedom of the seas" is a principle in international law dating from the seventeenth century. It stresses freedom to navigate the oceans and disapproves of war fought in international waters.[154] Today, this concept is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).[154]
There are two major international legal organizations that are involved in ocean governance on a global scale, namely the International Maritime Organization and the United Nations. The International Maritime Organization (IMO), which was ratified in 1958 is responsible mainly for maritime safety, liability and compensation and they have held some conventions on marine pollution related to shipping incidents. Ocean governance is the conduct of the policy, actions and affairs regarding the world's oceans.[155]
Threats from human activities
 Global cumulative human impact on the ocean[156]
Further information: Human impact on marine lifeHuman activities affect marine life and marine habitats through many negative influences, such as marine pollution (including marine debris and microplastics) overfishing, ocean acidification and other effects of climate change on oceans.
Climate change
This section is an excerpt from Effects of climate change on oceans.[edit]
Among the effects of climate change on oceans are an increase of ocean temperatures, more frequent marine heatwaves, ocean acidification, a rise in sea level from ocean warming and ice sheet melting, sea ice decline, increased upper ocean stratification, reductions in oxygen levels, changes to ocean currents including a weakening of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation.[89] All these changes have knock-on effects which disturb marine ecosystems. The primary factor causing these changes is the Earth warming due to human-caused emissions of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide and methane. This leads inevitably to ocean warming, because the ocean is taking up most of the additional heat in the climate system.[157] The ocean absorbs some of the extra carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and this causes the pH value of the ocean to drop.[158] It is estimated that the ocean absorbs about 25% of all human-caused CO2 emissions.[158]
Ocean temperature stratification increases as the ocean surface warms due to rising air temperatures.[159]: 471 The decline in mixing of the ocean layers stabilises warm water near the surface while reducing cold, deep water circulation. The reduced up and down mixing reduces the ability of the ocean to absorb heat, directing a larger fraction of future warming toward the atmosphere and land. The amount of energy available for tropical cyclones and other storms is expected to increase, while nutrients for fish in the upper ocean layers are expected to decrease, as is the ocean's capacity to store carbon.[160] At the same time, contrasts in salinity are increasing: salty areas are becoming saltier and fresher areas less salty.[161]
Warmer water cannot contain the same amount of oxygen as cold water. As a result, the gas exchange equilibrium shifts, lowering ocean oxygen levels while increasing oxygen in the atmosphere. Increased thermal stratification may result in a reduced supply of oxygen from surface waters to deeper waters, lowering the water's oxygen content further.[162][page needed] The ocean has already lost oxygen throughout its water column, and oxygen minimum zones are expanding worldwide.[159]: 471 
These changes harm marine ecosystems, which can accelerate species extinctions[163] or cause population explosions, altering species distribution.[89] This also affects coastal fishing and tourism. Rising water temperatures will also harm various oceanic ecosystems, such as coral reefs. The direct effect is coral bleaching on these reefs, which are sensitive to even minor temperature changes, so a small increase in temperature could have a significant impact in these environments. Ocean acidification and temperature rise will also affect the productivity and distribution of species within the ocean, threatening fisheries and upsetting marine ecosystems. Loss of sea ice habitats due to warming will severely impact the many polar species that rely on it. The interactions between many of these climate change factors increase pressures on the climate system and ocean ecosystems.[89]
Marine pollution
This section is an excerpt from Marine pollution.[edit]
Marine pollution occurs when substances used or spread by humans, such as industrial, agricultural and residential waste, particles, noise, excess carbon dioxide or invasive organisms enter the ocean and cause harmful effects there. The majority of this waste (80%) comes from land-based activity, although marine transportation significantly contributes as well.[164] Since most inputs come from land, either via the rivers, sewage or the atmosphere, it means that continental shelves are more vulnerable to pollution. Air pollution is also a contributing factor by carrying off iron, carbonic acid, nitrogen, silicon, sulfur, pesticides or dust particles into the ocean.[165] The pollution often comes from nonpoint sources such as agricultural runoff, wind-blown debris, and dust. These nonpoint sources are largely due to runoff that enters the ocean through rivers, but wind-blown debris and dust can also play a role, as these pollutants can settle into waterways and oceans.[166] Pathways of pollution include direct discharge, land runoff, ship pollution, bilge pollution, atmospheric pollution and, potentially, deep sea mining.
The types of marine pollution can be grouped as pollution from marine debris, plastic pollution, including microplastics, ocean acidification, nutrient pollution, toxins and underwater noise. Plastic pollution in the ocean is a type of marine pollution by plastics, ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags, down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. Marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on, or is suspended in the ocean. Plastic pollution is harmful to marine life.
Plastic pollution
This section is an excerpt from Marine plastic pollution.[edit]
Marine plastic pollution (or plastic pollution in the ocean) is a type of marine pollution by plastics, ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags, down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. Marine debris is mainly discarded human rubbish which floats on, or is suspended in the ocean. Eighty percent of marine debris is plastic.[167][168] Microplastics and nanoplastics result from the breakdown or photodegradation of plastic waste in surface waters, rivers or oceans. Recently, scientists have uncovered nanoplastics in heavy snow, more specifically about 3000 tons that cover Switzerland yearly.[169] 
It is estimated that there is a stock of 86 million tons of plastic marine debris in the worldwide ocean as of the end of 2013, assuming that 1.4% of global plastics produced from 1950 to 2013 has entered the ocean and has accumulated there.[170] Global "consumption" of plastics is estimated to be 300 million tonnes per year as of 2022, with around 8 million tonnes ending up in the oceans as macroplastics.[171][172] Approximately 1.5 million tonnes of primary microplastics end up in the seas. Around 98% of this volume is created by land-based activities, with the remaining 2% being generated by sea-based activities.[172][173][174] It is estimated that 19 23 million tonnes of plastic leaks into aquatic ecosystems annually.[175] The 2017 United Nations Ocean Conference estimated that the oceans might contain more weight in plastics than fish by the year 2050.[176]
A woman and a boy collecting plastic waste at a beach during a cleanup exercise
Oceans are polluted by plastic particles ranging in size from large original material such as bottles and bags, down to microplastics formed from the fragmentation of plastic material. This material is only very slowly degraded or removed from the ocean so plastic particles are now widespread throughout the surface ocean and are known to be having deleterious effects on marine life.[177] Discarded plastic bags, six pack rings, cigarette butts and other forms of plastic waste which finish up in the ocean present dangers to wildlife and fisheries.[178] Aquatic life can be threatened through entanglement, suffocation, and ingestion.[179][180][181] Fishing nets, usually made of plastic, can be left or lost in the ocean by fishermen. Known as ghost nets, these entangle fish, dolphins, sea turtles, sharks, dugongs, crocodiles, seabirds, crabs, and other creatures, restricting movement, causing starvation, laceration, infection, and, in those that need to return to the surface to breathe, suffocation.[182] There are various types of ocean plastics causing problems to marine life. Bottle caps have been found in the stomachs of turtles and seabirds, which have died because of the obstruction of their respiratory and digestive tracts.[183] Ghost nets are also a problematic type of ocean plastic as they can continuously trap marine life in a process known as "ghost fishing".[184]
Overfishing
This section is an excerpt from Overfishing.[edit]
Overfishing is the removal of a species of fish (i.e. fishing) from a body of water at a rate greater than that the species can replenish its population naturally (i.e. the overexploitation of the fishery's existing fish stock), resulting in the species becoming increasingly underpopulated in that area. Overfishing can occur in water bodies of any sizes, such as ponds, wetlands, rivers, lakes or oceans, and can result in resource depletion, reduced biological growth rates and low biomass levels. Sustained overfishing can lead to critical depensation, where the fish population is no longer able to sustain itself. Some forms of overfishing, such as the overfishing of sharks, has led to the upset of entire marine ecosystems.[185] Types of overfishing include: growth overfishing, recruitment overfishing, ecosystem overfishing.
Protection
Main articles: Marine conservation and marine protected area
Protecting Earth's oceans ecosystem/s against its recognized threats is a major component of environmental protection and is closely related to sustainable development. One of its main techniques is the creation and enforcement of marine protected areas (MPAs). Other techniques may include standardized product certifications, supply chain transparency requirements policies, policies to prevent marine pollution, eco-tariffs, research and development,[186] ecosystem-assistance (e.g. for coral reefs), support for sustainable seafood (e.g. sustainable fishing practices and types of aquaculture), banning and systematically obstructing (e.g. via higher costs policies) unsustainable ocean use and associated industries (e.g. cruise ship travel, certain shipping practices), monitoring, revising waste management of plastics and fashion industry pollutants, protection of marine resources and components whose extraction or disturbance would cause substantial harm, engagement of broader publics and impacted communities,[187] novel decision-making mechanisms,[188] and the development of ocean clean-up projects. Ocean protection serves to i.a. protect human health and to safeguard stable conditions of this natural ecosystem upon which humans depend.[189][190][additional citation(s) needed]
It may be necessary to consider marine protection within a national, regional and international context.[191]
In 2021, 43 expert scientists published the first scientific framework version that   via integration, review, clarifications and standardization   enables the evaluation of levels of protection of marine protected areas and can serve as a guide for any subsequent efforts to improve, plan and monitor marine protection quality and  extents. Examples are the efforts towards the 30%-protection-goal of the "Global Deal For Nature"[192] and the UN's Sustainable Development Goal 14 ("life below water").[193][194]
Global Ocean Treaty
In March 2023 a High Seas Treaty was signed. Greenpeace called it "the biggest conservation victory ever".[195] The main achievement is the new possibility to create marine protected areas in international waters. By doing so the agreement now makes it possible to protect 30% of the oceans by 2030 (part of the 30 by 30 target).[196][195]
Extraterrestrial oceans
Main articles: Planetary oceanography, Extraterrestrial liquid water, and Ocean world
Further information: List of largest lakes and seas in the Solar System
Extraterrestrial oceans may be composed of water or other elements and compounds. The only confirmed large stable bodies of extraterrestrial surface liquids are the lakes of Titan, which are made of hydrocarbons instead of water. However, there is strong evidence for subsurface water oceans' existence elsewhere in the Solar System. The best-established candidates for subsurface water oceans in the Solar System are Jupiter's moons Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto; and Saturn's moons Enceladus and Titan.[197]
Although Earth is the only known planet with large stable bodies of liquid water on its surface and the only one in the Solar System, other celestial bodies are thought to have large oceans.[198] In June 2020, NASA scientists reported that it is likely that exoplanets with oceans may be common in the Milky Way galaxy, based on mathematical modeling studies.[199][200]
The inner structure of gas giants remain poorly understood. Scientists suspect that, under extreme pressure, hydrogen would act as a supercritical fluid, hence the likelihood of oceans of liquid hydrogen deep in the interior of gas giants like Jupiter.[201][202]
Oceans of liquid carbon have been hypothesized to exist on ice giants, notably Neptune and Uranus.[203][204]
See also
Oceans portalGeography portalEcology portalEnvironment portalWeather portalWorld portal
European Atlas of the Seas
Land and water hemispheres
List of seas
Marine heatwave
World Ocean Atlas
World Oceans Day
References
^ a b "8(o) Introduction to the Oceans". www.physicalgeography.net.
^ "Ocean." Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ocean. Accessed March 14, 2021.
^ a b "ocean, n". Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved February 5, 2012.
^ a b "ocean". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved February 6, 2012.
^ "How much oxygen comes from the ocean?". National Ocean Service. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration U.S. Department of Commerce. February 26, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021.
^ a b Gordon, Arnold (2004). "Ocean Circulation". The Climate System. Columbia University. Retrieved July 6, 2013.
^ a b NOAA, NOAA. "What is a current?". Ocean Service Noaa. National Ocean Service. Retrieved December 13, 2020.
^ a b Chester, R.; Jickells, Tim (2012). "Chapter 8: Air sea gas exchange". Marine geochemistry (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley/Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-34909-0. OCLC 781078031.
^ IUCN (2017) THE OCEAN AND CLIMATE CHANGE, IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) Issues Brief.
^ Drogin, Bob (August 2, 2009). "Mapping an ocean of species". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 18, 2009.
^ "Sea". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved March 13, 2013.
^ Bromhead, Helen, Landscape and Culture   Cross-linguistic Perspectives, p. 92, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2018, ISBN 9027264007, 9789027264008; unlike Americans, speakers of British English do not go swimming in "the ocean" but always "the sea".
^ "WordNet Search   sea". Princeton University. Retrieved February 21, 2012.
^ "What's the difference between an ocean and a sea?". Ocean facts. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
^ a b Janin, H.; Mandia, S.A. (2012). Rising Sea Levels: An Introduction to Cause and Impact. McFarland, Incorporated, Publishers. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7864-5956-8. Retrieved August 26, 2022.
^ Bruckner, Lynne and Dan Brayton (2011). Ecocritical Shakespeare (Literary and Scientific Cultures of Early Modernity). Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 978-0754669197.
^ a b Ro, Christine (February 3, 2020). "Is It Ocean Or Oceans?". Forbes. Retrieved August 26, 2022.
^ "Ocean". Sciencedaily.com. Retrieved November 8, 2012.
^ a b ""Distribution of land and water on the planet". UN Atlas of the Oceans. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.
^ Spilhaus, Athelstan F. (July 1942). "Maps of the whole world ocean". Geographical Review. 32 (3): 431 5. doi:10.2307/210385. JSTOR 210385.
^  , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus project
^ Matasovi , Ranko, A Reader in Comparative Indo-European Religion Zagreb: Univ of Zagreb, 2016. page 20.
^ Drake, Michael J. (2005), "Origin of water in the terrestrial planets", Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 40 (4): 515 656, Bibcode:2005M&PS...40..515J, doi:10.1111/j.1945-5100.2005.tb00958.x.
^ "Why do we have an ocean?". NOAA's National Ocean Service. June 1, 2013. Retrieved September 3, 2022.
^ "NASA Astrobiology". Astrobiology. June 5, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2022.
^ a b Pinti, Daniele L.; Arndt, Nicholas (2014), "Oceans, Origin of", Encyclopedia of Astrobiology, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1 5, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-27833-4_1098-4, ISBN 9783642278334
^ Cates, N.L.; Mojzsis, S.J. (March 2007). "Pre-3750 Ma supracrustal rocks from the Nuvvuagittuq supracrustal belt, northern Qu bec". Earth and Planetary Science Letters. 255 (1 2): 9 21. Bibcode:2007E&PSL.255....9C. doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2006.11.034. ISSN 0012-821X.
^ O'Neil, Jonathan; Carlson, Richard W.; Paquette, Jean-Louis; Francis, Don (November 2012). "Formation age and metamorphic history of the Nuvvuagittuq Greenstone Belt" (PDF). Precambrian Research. 220 221: 23 44. Bibcode:2012PreR..220...23O. doi:10.1016/j.precamres.2012.07.009. ISSN 0301-9268.
^ Washington University in St. Louis (August 27, 2020). "Meteorite study suggests Earth may have been wet since it formed - Enstatite chondrite meteorites, once considered 'dry,' contain enough water to fill the oceans -- and then some". EurekAlert!. Retrieved August 28, 2020.
^ American Association for the Advancement of Science (August 27, 2020). "Unexpected abundance of hydrogen in meteorites reveals the origin of Earth's water". EurekAlert!. Retrieved August 28, 2020.
^ Piani, Laurette; Marrocchi, Yves; Rigaudier, Thomas; Vacher, Lionel G.; Thomassin, Dorian; Marty, Bernard (2020). "Earth's water may have been inherited from material similar to enstatite chondrite meteorites". Science. 369 (6507): 1110 13. Bibcode:2020Sci...369.1110P. doi:10.1126/science.aba1948. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 32855337. S2CID 221342529.
^ Guinan, E. F.; Ribas, I. (2002).  Benjamin Montesinos, Alvaro Gimenez and Edward F. Guinan (ed.). Our Changing Sun: The Role of Solar Nuclear Evolution and Magnetic Activity on Earth's Atmosphere and Climate. ASP Conference Proceedings: The Evolving Sun and its Influence on Planetary Environments. San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific. Bibcode:2002ASPC..269...85G. ISBN 978-1-58381-109-2.
^ Staff (March 4, 2010). "Oldest measurement of Earth's magnetic field reveals battle between Sun and Earth for our atmosphere". Phys.org. Retrieved March 27, 2010.
^ a b Voosen, Paul (March 9, 2021). "Ancient Earth was a water world". Science. American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 371 (6534): 1088 1089. doi:10.1126/science.abh4289. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 33707245. S2CID 241687784.
^ "The Water Cycle summary". USGS Water Science School. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
^ Smith, Yvette (June 7, 2021). "Earth Is a Water World". NASA. Retrieved August 27, 2022.
^ "Water-Worlds". National Geographic Society. May 20, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022.
^ Lunine, Jonathan I. (2017). "Ocean worlds exploration". Acta Astronautica. Elsevier BV. 131: 123 130. Bibcode:2017AcAau.131..123L. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2016.11.017. ISSN 0094-5765.
^ "Ocean Worlds". Ocean Worlds. Retrieved August 27, 2022.
^ a b c d e "Volumes of the World's Oceans from ETOPO1". NOAA. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
^ "Ocean-bearing Planets: Looking For Extraterrestrial Life In All The Right Places". Sciencedaily.com. Retrieved November 8, 2012.
^ "CIA World Factbook". CIA. Retrieved April 5, 2015.
^ Charette, Matthew; Smith, Walter H. F. (2010). "The volume of Earth's ocean". Oceanography. 23 (2): 112 114. doi:10.5670/oceanog.2010.51. Retrieved January 13, 2014.
^ World The World Factbook, CIA. Retrieved January 13, 2014.
^ a b "Recommendation ITU-R RS.1624: Sharing between the Earth exploration-satellite (passive) and airborne altimeters in the aeronautical radionavigation service in the band 4 200 4 400 MHz (Question ITU-R 229/7)" (PDF). ITU Radiotelecommunication Sector (ITU-R). Retrieved April 5, 2015. The oceans occupy about 3.35 108 km2 of area. There are 377412 km of oceanic coastlines in the world.
^ a b "Pacific Ocean". Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
^ a b "Atlantic Ocean". Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
^ a b "Indian Ocean". Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
^ a b "Southern Ocean". Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved March 10, 2015.
^ a b "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2011. Retrieved December 28, 2020.
^ a b Tomczak, Matthias; Godfrey, J. Stuart (2003). Regional Oceanography: an Introduction (2 ed.). Delhi: Daya Publishing House. ISBN 978-81-7035-306-5. Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved April 10, 2006.
^ a b Ostenso, Ned Allen. "Arctic Ocean". Encyclop dia Britannica. Retrieved July 2, 2012. As an approximation, the Arctic Ocean may be regarded as an estuary of the Atlantic Ocean.
^ a b "Arctic Ocean". Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
^ "What is the longest mountain range on earth?". National Ocean Service. US Department of Commerce. Retrieved October 17, 2014.
^ a b c "NOAA   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   Ocean". Noaa.gov. Retrieved February 16, 2020.
^ Fleming, Nic (May 27, 2015). "Is the sea really blue?". BBC - Earth. BBC. Retrieved August 25, 2021.
^ Webb, Paul (July 2020), "6.5 Light", Introduction to Oceanography, retrieved July 21, 2021
^ Morel, Andre; Prieur, Louis (1977). "Analysis of variations in ocean color 1". Limnology and Oceanography. 22 (4): 709 722. Bibcode:1977LimOc..22..709M. doi:10.4319/lo.1977.22.4.0709.
^ Coble, Paula G. (2007). "Marine Optical Biogeochemistry: The Chemistry of Ocean Color". Chemical Reviews. 107 (2): 402 418. doi:10.1021/cr050350+. PMID 17256912.
^ a b "The Water Cycle: The Oceans". US Geological Survey. Retrieved July 17, 2021.
^ King, Michael D.; Platnick, Steven; Menzel, W. Paul; Ackerman, Steven A.; Hubanks, Paul A. (2013). "Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Clouds Observed by MODIS Onboard the Terra and Aqua Satellites". IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). 51 (7): 3826 3852. Bibcode:2013ITGRS..51.3826K. doi:10.1109/tgrs.2012.2227333. ISSN 0196-2892. S2CID 206691291.
^ Observation of swell dissipation across oceans, F. Ardhuin, Collard, F., and B. Chapron, 2009: Geophys. Res. Lett. 36, L06607, doi:10.1029/2008GL037030
^ Stow, Dorrik (2004). Encyclopedia of the Oceans. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-860687-1.
^ Young, I. R. (1999). Wind Generated Ocean Waves. Elsevier. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-08-043317-2.
^ a b c Garrison, Tom (2012). Essentials of Oceanography. 6th ed. page 204 ff. Brooks/Cole, Belmont. ISBN 0321814053.
^ National Meteorological Library and Archive (2010). "Fact Sheet 6 The Beaufort Scale". Met Office (Devon)
^ Holliday, N. P.; Yelland, M. J.; Pascal, R.; Swail, V. R.; Taylor, P. K.; Griffiths, C. R.; Kent, E. (2006). "Were extreme waves in the Rockall Trough the largest ever recorded?". Geophysical Research Letters. 33 (5): L05613. Bibcode:2006GeoRL..33.5613H. doi:10.1029/2005GL025238.
^ Laird, Anne (2006). "Observed Statistics of Extreme Waves". Naval Postgraduate School (Monterey).
^ "Ocean waves". Ocean Explorer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved April 17, 2013.
^ "Life of a Tsunami". Tsunamis & Earthquakes. US Geological Survey. Retrieved July 14, 2021.
^ "Physics of Tsunamis". National Tsunami Warning Center of the USA. Retrieved July 14, 2021.
^ a b "Tides and Water Levels". NOAA Oceans and Coasts. NOAA Ocean Service Education. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
^ "Tidal amplitudes". University of Guelph. Retrieved September 12, 2013.
^ "Chapter 8. Gravity Waves, Tides, and Coastal Oceanography". Descriptive physical oceanography : an introduction. Lynne D. Talley, George L. Pickard, William J. Emery, James H. Swift (6th ed.). Amsterdam: Academic Press. 2011. ISBN 978-0-7506-4552-2. OCLC 720651296.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ "Weird Science: Extreme Tidal Ranges". Exploring Our Fluid Earth: Teaching Science as Inquiry. University of Hawai i. Retrieved November 9, 2021.
^ "Where are the Highest Tides in the World?". Casual Navigation. Retrieved November 9, 2021.
^ "Tides". Ocean Explorer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved April 20, 2013.
^ Drazen, Jeffrey C. "Deep-Sea Fishes". School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, the University of Hawai i at M noa. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved June 7, 2007.
^ "Scientists map Mariana Trench, deepest known section of ocean in the world". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. December 7, 2011. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2012.
^ a b c d e f "Chapter 3. Physical Properties of Seawater". Descriptive physical oceanography : an introduction. Lynne D. Talley, George L. Pickard, William J. Emery, James H. Swift (6th ed.). Amsterdam: Academic Press. 2011. ISBN 978-0-7506-4552-2. OCLC 720651296.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ "What is a thermocline?". National Ocean Service. US Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 7, 2021.
^ Qadri, Syed (2003). "Volume of Earth's Oceans". The Physics Factbook. Retrieved June 7, 2007.
^ Charette, Matthew; Smith, Walter H. F. (2010). "The volume of Earth's ocean". Oceanography. 23 (2): 112 114. doi:10.5670/oceanog.2010.51. Retrieved September 27, 2012.
^ Where is Earth's water?, United States Geological Survey.
^ Eakins, B.W. and G.F. Sharman, Volumes of the World's Oceans from ETOPO1, NOAA National Geophysical Data Center, Boulder, CO, 2010.
^ Water in Crisis: Chapter 2, Peter H. Gleick, Oxford University Press, 1993.
^ World Water Resources: A New Appraisal and Assessment for the 21st Century (Report). UNESCO. 1998. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
^ Kennish, Michael J. (2001). Practical handbook of marine science. Marine science series (3rd ed.). CRC Press. p. 35. ISBN 0-8493-2391-6.
^ a b c d "Summary for Policymakers". The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (PDF). 2019. pp. 3 36. doi:10.1017/9781009157964.001. ISBN 978-1-00-915796-4.
^ a b c Cheng, Lijing; Abraham, John; Trenberth, Kevin E.; Fasullo, John; Boyer, Tim; Mann, Michael E.; Zhu, Jiang; Wang, Fan; Locarnini, Ricardo; Li, Yuanlong; Zhang, Bin; Yu, Fujiang; Wan, Liying; Chen, Xingrong; Feng, Licheng (2023). "Another Year of Record Heat for the Oceans". Advances in Atmospheric Sciences: 1 12. doi:10.1007/s00376-023-2385-2. ISSN 0256-1530. PMC 9832248. PMID 36643611.  Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
^ Fox-Kemper, B., H.T. Hewitt, C. Xiao, G. A algeirsd ttir, S.S. Drijfhout, T.L. Edwards, N.R. Golledge, M. Hemer, R.E. Kopp, G.  Krinner, A. Mix, D. Notz, S. Nowicki, I.S. Nurhati, L. Ruiz, J.-B. Sall e, A.B.A. Slangen, and Y. Yu, 2021: Chapter 9: Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L.  Connors, C. P an, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelek i, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1211 1362
^ "IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007, Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis, 5.6 Synthesis". IPCC (archive). Retrieved July 19, 2021.
^ "Evaporation minus precipitation, Latitude-Longitude, Annual mean". ERA-40 Atlas. ECMWF. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014.
^ Barry, Roger Graham; Chorley, Richard J. (2003). Atmosphere, Weather, and Climate. Routledge. p. 68. ISBN 9780203440513.
^ Deser, C.; Alexander, M. A.; Xie, S. P.; Phillips, A. S. (2010). "Sea Surface Temperature Variability: Patterns and Mechanisms" (PDF). Annual Review of Marine Science. 2: 115 43. Bibcode:2010ARMS....2..115D. doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-120408-151453. PMID 21141660. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2014.
^ Huang, Rui Xin (2010). Ocean circulation : wind-driven and thermohaline processes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-511-68849-2. OCLC 664005236.
^ Jeffries, Martin O. (2012). "Sea ice". Encyclopedia Britannica. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved April 21, 2013.
^ Wadhams, Peter (January 1, 2003). "How Does Arctic Sea Ice Form and Decay?". Arctic theme page. NOAA. Archived from the original on March 6, 2005. Retrieved April 25, 2005.
^ Weeks, Willy F. (2010). On Sea Ice. University of Alaska Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-60223-101-6.
^ Shokr, Mohammed; Sinha, Nirmal (2015). Sea Ice   Physics and Remote Sensing. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1119027898.
^ "Sea Ice". National Snow and Ice Data Center. Retrieved November 22, 2022.
^ "Tidal Currents   Currents: NOAA's National Ocean Service Education". National Ocean Service. US Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 7, 2021.
^ a b c d e "Chapter 7. Dynamical Processes for Descriptive Ocean Circulation". Descriptive physical oceanography : an introduction. Lynne D. Talley, George L. Pickard, William J. Emery, James H. Swift (6th ed.). Amsterdam: Academic Press. 2011. ISBN 978-0-7506-4552-2. OCLC 720651296.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)
^ a b IPCC, 2019: Summary for Policymakers. In: IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H.-O. P rtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegr a, M.  Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157964.001.
^ Baranova, Olga. "World Ocean Atlas 2009". National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI). Retrieved January 18, 2022.
^ a b c d e Chester, R.; Jickells, Tim (2012). "Chapter 7: Descriptive oceanography: water-column parameters". Marine geochemistry (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley/Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-34909-0. OCLC 781078031.
^ "Can the ocean freeze? Ocean water freezes at a lower temperature than freshwater". NOAA. Retrieved January 2, 2019.
^ "Hydrologic features and climate". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved January 18, 2022.
^ "Salinity and Brine". National Snow and Ice Data Center. Retrieved January 18, 2022.
^ a b Fox-Kemper, B., H.T. Hewitt, C. Xiao, G. A algeirsd ttir, S.S. Drijfhout, T.L. Edwards, N.R. Golledge, M. Hemer, R.E. Kopp, G.  Krinner, A. Mix, D. Notz, S. Nowicki, I.S. Nurhati, L. Ruiz, J.-B. Sall e, A.B.A. Slangen, and Y. Yu, 2021: Chapter 9: Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L.  Connors, C. P an, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelek i, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, pages 1211 1362, doi:10.1017/9781009157896.011.
^ Garcia, H.E.; Locarnini, R.A.; Boyer, T.P.; Antonov, J.I. (2006).  Levitus, S. (ed.). World Ocean Atlas 2005, Volume 3: Dissolved Oxygen, Apparent Oxygen Utilization, and Oxygen Saturation. Washington, D.C: NOAA Atlas NESDIS 63, U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 342.
^ a b "The seawater solution". Seawater. Elsevier. 1995. pp. 85 127. doi:10.1016/b978-075063715-2/50007-1. ISBN 9780750637152.
^ "Dissolved Gases other than Carbon Dioxide in Seawater" (PDF). soest.hawaii.edu. Retrieved May 5, 2014.
^ "Dissolved Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide" (PDF). chem.uiuc.edu.
^ "12.742. Marine Chemistry. Lecture 8. Dissolved Gases and Air-sea exchange" (PDF). Retrieved May 5, 2014.
^ "Ocean carbon cycle". GRID-Arendal. June 5, 2009. Retrieved January 18, 2022.
^ a b c d e Chester, R.; Jickells, Tim (2012). "Chapter 9: Nutrients oxygen organic carbon and the carbon cycle in seawater". Marine geochemistry (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley/Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-34909-0. OCLC 781078031.
^ Breitburg, Denise; Levin, Lisa A.; Oschlies, Andreas; Gr goire, Marilaure; Chavez, Francisco P.; Conley, Daniel J.; Gar on, V ronique; Gilbert, Denis; Guti rrez, Dimitri; Isensee, Kirsten; Jacinto, Gil S. (January 5, 2018). "Declining oxygen in the global ocean and coastal waters". Science. 359 (6371): eaam7240. Bibcode:2018Sci...359M7240B. doi:10.1126/science.aam7240. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 29301986.
^ "Ocean Acidification". National Geographic. April 27, 2017. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018.
^ Terhaar, Jens; Fr licher, Thomas L.; Joos, Fortunat (2023). "Ocean acidification in emission-driven temperature stabilization scenarios: the role of TCRE and non-CO2 greenhouse gases". Environmental Research Letters. 18 (2): 024033. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/acaf91. ISSN 1748-9326. S2CID 255431338.
^ Emerson, Steven; Hedges, John (April 24, 2008). Chemical Oceanography and the Marine Carbon Cycle (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/cbo9780511793202. ISBN 978-0-521-83313-4.
^ "Calculation of residence times in seawater of some important solutes" (PDF). gly.uga.edu.
^ Chester, R.; Jickells, Tim (2012). "Chapter 11: Trace elements in the oceans". Marine geochemistry (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley/Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-34909-0. OCLC 781078031.
^ "Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute".
^ "Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute".
^ "Potassium". www3.mbari.org.
^ Paytan, Adina; McLaughlin, Karen (2007). "The Oceanic Phosphorus Cycle". Chemical Reviews. 107 (2): 563 576. doi:10.1021/cr0503613. ISSN 0009-2665. PMID 17256993. S2CID 1872341.
^ Cordell, Dana; Drangert, Jan-Olof; White, Stuart (2009). "The story of phosphorus: Global food security and food for thought". Global Environmental Change. 19 (2): 292 305. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.10.009. S2CID 1450932.
^ Edixhoven, J. D.; Gupta, J.; Savenije, H. H. G. (December 19, 2014). "Recent revisions of phosphate rock reserves and resources: a critique". Earth System Dynamics. 5 (2): 491 507. Bibcode:2014ESD.....5..491E. doi:10.5194/esd-5-491-2014. ISSN 2190-4987. S2CID 858311.
^ Amundson, R.; Berhe, A. A.; Hopmans, J. W.; Olson, C.; Sztein, A. E.; Sparks, D. L. (2015). "Soil and human security in the 21st century". Science. 348 (6235): 1261071. doi:10.1126/science.1261071. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 25954014. S2CID 206562728.
^ Apprill, A. (2017)"Marine animal microbiomes: toward understanding host microbiome interactions in a changing ocean". Frontiers in Marine Science, 4: 222. doi:10.3389/fmars.2017.00222.  Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
^ "Chapter 34: The Biosphere: An Introduction to Earth's Diverse Environment". Biology: Concepts & Connections. section 34.7.
^ a b Cavicchioli R, Ripple WJ, Timmis KN, Azam F, Bakken LR, Baylis M,  et al. (September 2019). "Scientists' warning to humanity: microorganisms and climate change". Nature Reviews. Microbiology. 17 (9): 569 586. doi:10.1038/s41579-019-0222-5. PMC 7136171. PMID 31213707.  Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
^ Drogin, B (August 2, 2009). "Mapping an ocean of species". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 18, 2009.
^ Paul, GS (2010). "The Evolution of Dinosaurs and their World". The Princeton Field Guide to Dinosaurs. Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-691-13720-9.
^ Bortolotti, Dan (2008). Wild blue: a natural history of the world's largest animal. New York: Thomas Dunn Books. ISBN 978-0-312-38387-9. OCLC 213451450.
^ Bar-On YM, Phillips R, Milo R (June 2018). "The biomass distribution on Earth". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 115 (25): 6506 6511. Bibcode:2018PNAS..115.6506B. doi:10.1073/pnas.1711842115. PMC 6016768. PMID 29784790.
^ "Census Of Marine Life". Smithsonian. Retrieved October 29, 2020.
^ Abercrombie, M., Hickman, C.J. and Johnson, M.L. 1966.A Dictionary of Biology. Penguin Reference Books, London
^ "Oceanic Institute". www.oceanicinstitute.org. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ "Ocean Habitats and Information". January 5, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ "Facts and figures on marine biodiversity | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization". www.unesco.org. Retrieved December 1, 2018.
^ United States Environmental Protection Agency (March 2, 2006). "Marine Ecosystems". Retrieved August 25, 2006.
^ Zacharias, Mark (March 14, 2014). Marine Policy: An Introduction to Governance and International Law of the Oceans. Routledge. ISBN 9781136212475.
^ Halpern, Benjamin S.; Walbridge, Shaun; Selkoe, Kimberly A.; Kappel, Carrie V.; Micheli, Fiorenza; D'Agrosa, Caterina; Bruno, John F.; Casey, Kenneth S.; Ebert, Colin; Fox, Helen E.; Fujita, Rod (2008). "A Global Map of Human Impact on Marine Ecosystems". Science. 319 (5865): 948 952. Bibcode:2008Sci...319..948H. doi:10.1126/science.1149345. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 18276889. S2CID 26206024.
^ Sauerbier, Charles L.; Meurn, Robert J. (2004). Marine Cargo Operations: a guide to stowage. Cambridge, Md: Cornell Maritime Press. pp. 1 16. ISBN 978-0-87033-550-1.
^ "Industry Globalization | World Shipping Council". www.worldshipping.org. Retrieved May 4, 2021.
^ a b c The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020. FAO. 2020. doi:10.4060/ca9229en. hdl:10535/3776. ISBN 978-92-5-132692-3. S2CID 242949831.
^ "Fisheries: Latest data". GreenFacts. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
^ a b "What is Ocean Energy". Ocean Energy Systems. 2014. Retrieved May 14, 2021.
^ Cruz, Jo o (2008). Ocean Wave Energy   Current Status and Future Perspectives. Springer. p. 2. ISBN 978-3-540-74894-6.
^ "Offshore Wind Power 2010". BTM Consult. 22 November 2010. Archived from the original on 30 June 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2013.
^ Lamb, Robert (2011). "How offshore drilling works". HowStuffWorks. Retrieved May 6, 2013.
^ a b "The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (A historical perspective)". United Nations Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. Retrieved May 8, 2013.
^ Evans, J. P. (2011). Environmental Governance. Hoboken: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-203-15567-7. OCLC 798531922.
^ Halpern, B.S.; Frazier, M.; Afflerbach, J.;  et al. (2019). "Recent pace of change in human impact on the world's ocean". Scientific Reports. 9 (1): 11609. Bibcode:2019NatSR...911609H. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-47201-9. PMC 6691109. PMID 31406130.
^ Cheng, Lijing; Abraham, John; Hausfather, Zeke; Trenberth, Kevin E. (January 11, 2019). "How fast are the oceans warming?". Science. 363 (6423): 128 129. Bibcode:2019Sci...363..128C. doi:10.1126/science.aav7619. PMID 30630919. S2CID 57825894.
^ a b Doney, Scott C.; Busch, D. Shallin; Cooley, Sarah R.; Kroeker, Kristy J. (October 17, 2020). "The Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Ecosystems and Reliant Human Communities". Annual Review of Environment and Resources. 45 (1): 83 112. doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-012320-083019.   Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
^ a b Bindoff, N.L., W.W.L. Cheung, J.G. Kairo, J. Ar stegui, V.A. Guinder, R. Hallberg, N. Hilmi, N. Jiao, M.S. Karim, L. Levin, S. O'Donoghue, S.R. Purca Cuicapusa, B. Rinkevich, T. Suga, A. Tagliabue, and P. Williamson, 2019: Chapter 5: Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems, and Dependent Communities. In: IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H.-O. P rtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegr a, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. In press.
^ Freedman, Andrew (September 29, 2020). "Mixing of the planet's ocean waters is slowing down, speeding up global warming, study finds". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 15, 2020. Retrieved October 12, 2020.
^ Cheng, Lijing; Trenberth, Kevin E.; Gruber, Nicolas; Abraham, John P.; Fasullo, John T.; Li, Guancheng; Mann, Michael E.; Zhao, Xuanming; Zhu, Jiang (2020). "Improved Estimates of Changes in Upper Ocean Salinity and the Hydrological Cycle". Journal of Climate. 33 (23): 10357 10381. Bibcode:2020JCli...3310357C. doi:10.1175/jcli-d-20-0366.1.
^ Chester, R.; Jickells, Tim (2012). "Chapter 9: Nutrients oxygen organic carbon and the carbon cycle in seawater". Marine geochemistry (3rd ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley/Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-118-34909-0. OCLC 781078031.
^ Briand F., ed. (2013). "Marine Extinctions: Patterns and Processes - an overview". CIESM Workshop Monographs. 45: 5 19.
^ Charles Sheppard, ed. (2019). World seas : an Environmental Evaluation. Vol. III, Ecological Issues and Environmental Impacts (Second ed.). London. ISBN 978-0128052044. OCLC 1052566532.
^ Duce, Robert, Galloway, J. and Liss, P. (2009). "The Impacts of Atmospheric Deposition to the Ocean on Marine Ecosystems and Climate WMO Bulletin Vol 58 (1)". Retrieved September 22, 2020.
^ "What is the biggest source of pollution in the ocean?". National Ocean Service (US). Silver Spring, MD: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved September 21, 2022.
^ Weisman, Alan (2007). The World Without Us. St. Martin's Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-0312347291.
^ "Marine plastic pollution". IUCN. May 25, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2022.
^ H, Eskarina; ley (January 26, 2022). "Nanoplastics in snow: The extensive impact of plastic pollution". Open Access Government. Retrieved February 1, 2022.
^ Jang, Y. C., Lee, J., Hong, S., Choi, H. W., Shim, W. J., & Hong, S. Y. 2015. Estimating the global inflow and stock of plastic marine debris using material flow analysis: a preliminary approach. Journal of the Korean Society for Marine Environment and Energy, 18(4), 263 273.[1]
^ "The average person eats thousands of plastic particles every year, study finds". Environment. June 5, 2019. Retrieved March 17, 2023.
^ a b Bank, European Investment (February 27, 2023). "Microplastics and Micropollutants in Water: Contaminants of Emerging Concern". {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help)
^ Yuan, Zhihao; Nag, Rajat; Cummins, Enda (June 1, 2022). "Human health concerns regarding microplastics in the aquatic environment - From marine to food systems". Science of the Total Environment. 823: 153730. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153730. ISSN 0048-9697.
^ Garc a Rell n, Adriana; V zquez Ares, Diego; V zquez Brea, Constantino; Francisco L pez, Ahinara; Bello Bugallo, Pastora M. (January 1, 2023). "Sources, sinks and transformations of plastics in our oceans: Review, management strategies and modelling". Science of the Total Environment. 854: 158745. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158745. ISSN 0048-9697.
^ "Drowning in Plastics   Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics". UNEP   UN Environment Programme. October 21, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2022.
^ Wright, Pam (June 6, 2017). "UN Ocean Conference: Plastics Dumped In Oceans Could Outweigh Fish by 2050, Secretary-General Says". The Weather Channel. Retrieved May 5, 2018.
^ Ostle, Clare; Thompson, Richard C.; Broughton, Derek; Gregory, Lance; Wootton, Marianne; Johns, David G. (2019). "The rise in ocean plastics evidenced from a 60-year time series". Nature Communications. 10 (1): 1622. Bibcode:2019NatCo..10.1622O. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09506-1. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 6467903. PMID 30992426.
^ "Research |AMRF/ORV Alguita Research Projects" Archived 13 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Algalita Marine Research Foundation. Macdonald Design. Retrieved 19 May 2009
^ UNEP (2005) Marine Litter: An Analytical Overview
^ Six pack rings hazard to wildlife Archived 13 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine. helpwildlife.com
^ Louisiana Fisheries   Fact Sheets. seagrantfish.lsu.edu
^ "'Ghost fishing' killing seabirds". BBC News. June 28, 2007.
^ Efferth, Thomas; Paul, Norbert W (November 2017). "Threats to human health by great ocean garbage patches". The Lancet Planetary Health. 1 (8): e301 e303. doi:10.1016/s2542-5196(17)30140-7. ISSN 2542-5196. PMID 29628159.
^ Gibbs, Susan E.; Salgado Kent, Chandra P.; Slat, Boyan; Morales, Damien; Fouda, Leila; Reisser, Julia (April 9, 2019). "Cetacean sightings within the Great Pacific Garbage Patch". Marine Biodiversity. 49 (4): 2021 2027. doi:10.1007/s12526-019-00952-0.
^ Scales, Helen (March 29, 2007). "Shark Declines Threaten Shellfish Stocks, Study Says". National Geographic News. Retrieved May 1, 2012.
^ Olsen, Erik; Kaplan, Isaac C.; Ainsworth, Cameron; Fay, Gavin; Gaichas, Sarah; Gamble, Robert; Girardin, Raphael; Eide, Cecilie H.; Ihde, Thomas F.; Morzaria-Luna, Hem Nalini; Johnson, Kelli F.; Savina-Rolland, Marie; Townsend, Howard; Weijerman, Mariska; Fulton, Elizabeth A.; Link, Jason S. (2018). "Ocean Futures Under Ocean Acidification, Marine Protection, and Changing Fishing Pressures Explored Using a Worldwide Suite of Ecosystem Models". Frontiers in Marine Science. 5: 64. doi:10.3389/fmars.2018.00064. ISSN 2296-7745.
^ Manson, Paul; Nielsen-Pincus, Max; Granek, Elise F.; Swearingen, Thomas C. (February 15, 2021). "Public perceptions of ocean health and marine protection: Drivers of support for Oregon's marine reserves". Ocean & Coastal Management. 201: 105480. doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2020.105480. ISSN 0964-5691. S2CID 230555294.
^ Deng, Na; Chen, Xu; Xiong, Caiquan (2020). "Design and Construction of Intelligent Decision-Making System for Marine Protection and Law Enforcement". Advances on Broad-Band Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems. Springer International Publishing. 97: 828 837. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-33506-9_75. ISBN 978-3-030-33505-2. S2CID 208114517.
^ "Protecting the Marine Environment". www.epa.gov. March 26, 2014. Retrieved October 25, 2021.
^ "Quantitative targets for marine protection: a review of the scientific basis and applications" (PDF). Retrieved October 25, 2021.
^ Farran, Sue. "Is marine protection compatible with the right to economic development in Pacific Island States?".
^ Dinerstein, E.; Vynne, C.; Sala, E.; Joshi, A. R.; Fernando, S.; Lovejoy, T. E.; Mayorga, J.; Olson, D.; Asner, G. P.; Baillie, J. E. M.; Burgess, N. D.; Burkart, K.; Noss, R. F.; Zhang, Y. P.; Baccini, A.; Birch, T.; Hahn, N.; Joppa, L. N.; Wikramanayake, E. (2019). "A Global Deal For Nature: Guiding principles, milestones, and targets". Science Advances. 5 (4): eaaw2869. Bibcode:2019SciA....5.2869D. doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaw2869. PMC 6474764. PMID 31016243.
^ "Improving ocean protection with the first marine protected areas guide". Institut de Recherche pour le D veloppement. Retrieved October 19, 2021.
^ Grorud-Colvert, Kirsten; Sullivan-Stack, Jenna; Roberts, Callum; Constant, Vanessa; Horta e Costa, Barbara; Pike, Elizabeth P.; Kingston, Naomi; Laffoley, Dan; Sala, Enric; Claudet, Joachim; Friedlander, Alan M.; Gill, David A.; Lester, Sarah E.; Day, Jon C.; Gon alves, Emanuel J.; Ahmadia, Gabby N.; Rand, Matt; Villagomez, Angelo; Ban, Natalie C.; Gurney, Georgina G.; Spalding, Ana K.; Bennett, Nathan J.; Briggs, Johnny; Morgan, Lance E.; Moffitt, Russell; Deguignet, Marine; Pikitch, Ellen K.; Darling, Emily S.; Jessen, Sabine; Hameed, Sarah O.; Di Carlo, Giuseppe; Guidetti, Paolo; Harris, Jean M.; Torre, Jorge; Kizilkaya, Zafer; Agardy, Tundi; Cury, Philippe; Shah, Nirmal J.; Sack, Karen; Cao, Ling; Fernandez, Miriam; Lubchenco, Jane (2021). "The MPA Guide: A framework to achieve global goals for the ocean" (PDF). Science. 373 (6560): eabf0861. doi:10.1126/science.abf0861. PMID 34516798. S2CID 237473020.
^ a b Flores, Gaby. "How people power helped protect the oceans". Greenpeace. Retrieved March 9, 2023.
^ KIM, JULIANA; TREISMAN, RACHEL. "What to know about the new U.N. high seas treaty   and the next steps for the accord". NPR. Retrieved March 9, 2023.
^ Hendrix, Amanda R.; Hurford, Terry A.; Barge, Laura M.; Bland, Michael T.; Bowman, Jeff S.; Brinckerhoff, William; Buratti, Bonnie J.; Cable, Morgan L.; Castillo-Rogez, Julie; Collins, Geoffrey C.;  et al. (2019). "The NASA Roadmap to Ocean Worlds". Astrobiology. 19 (1): 1 27. Bibcode:2019AsBio..19....1H. doi:10.1089/ast.2018.1955. PMC 6338575. PMID 30346215.
^ Dyches, Preston; Chou, Felcia (April 7, 2015). "The Solar System and Beyond is Awash in Water". NASA. Retrieved April 8, 2015.
^ NASA (June 18, 2020). "Are planets with oceans common in the galaxy? It's likely, NASA scientists find". EurekAlert!. Retrieved June 20, 2020.
^ Shekhtman, Lonnie;  et al. (June 18, 2020). "Are Planets with Oceans Common in the Galaxy? It's Likely, NASA Scientists Find". NASA. Retrieved June 20, 2020.
^ "A Freaky Fluid inside Jupiter?". NASA. Retrieved December 8, 2021.
^ "NASA System Exploration Jupiter". NASA. Retrieved December 8, 2021.
^ "Oceans of diamond possible on Uranus and Neptune". Astronomy Now. Retrieved December 8, 2021.
^ Magazine, Smithsonian. "It May Rain Diamonds Inside Neptune and Uranus". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved December 8, 2021.
External links
Ocean  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from Wikiquote
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) Fisheries Division
NOAA   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (United States)
United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development (2021 2030)
vteEarthAtmosphere
Atmosphere of Earth
Prebiotic atmosphere
Troposphere
Stratosphere
Mesosphere
Thermosphere
Exosphere
Weather
Climate
Climate system
Energy balance
Climate change
Climate variability and change
Climatology
Paleoclimatology
Continents
Africa
Antarctica
Asia
Australia
Europe
North America
South America
Culture and society
List of sovereign states
dependent territories
In culture
Earth Day
Flag
Symbol
World economy
Etymology
World history
Time zones
World
Environment
Biome
Biosphere
Biogeochemical cycles
Ecology
Ecosystem
Human impact on the environment
Evolutionary history of life
Nature
Geodesy
Cartography
Digital mapping
Earth's orbit
Geodetic astronomy
Geomatics
Gravity
Navigation
Remote Sensing
Geopositioning
Virtual globe
Geophysics
Earth structure
Fluid dynamics
Geomagnetism
Magnetosphere
Mineral physics
Seismology
Plate tectonics
Signal processing
Tomography
Geology
Age of Earth
Earth science
Extremes on Earth
Future
Geological history
Geologic time scale
Geologic record
History of Earth
Oceans
Antarctic/Southern Ocean
Arctic Ocean
Atlantic Ocean
Indian Ocean
Pacific Ocean
Oceanography
Planetary science
Evolution of the Solar System
Geology of solar terrestrial planets
Location in the Universe
The Moon
Solar System
 Category
 Commons
Outline
 World portal
 Earth sciences portal
 Geology portal
 Solar System portal
vteEarth's oceans and seasAntarctic/Southern Ocean
Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea
Arctic Ocean
Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
American Mediterranean Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of  land
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean
Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean
Arafura Sea
Bali Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Java Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seram Sea
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea
Endorheic basins
Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea
Others
Ocean
Sea
Superocean
 Oceans portal
 Category
vtePhysical oceanographyWaves
Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami
megatsunami
Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave nonlinearity
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave current interaction
Waves and shallow water
one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations
Wind wave
model
Circulation
Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis Stokes force
Craik Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Ni o Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geochemical Ocean Sections Study
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean current
Ocean dynamics
Ocean dynamical thermostat
Ocean gyre
Princeton ocean model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation
shutdown
Upwelling
Wind generated current
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment
Tides
Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline
Theory of tides
Landforms
Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Knoll
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano
Platetectonics
Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovi i  discontinuity
Vine Matthews Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc
Ocean zones
Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash
Sea level
Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System
Acoustics
Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics
Satellites
Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3
Related
Acidification
Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Explorations
Observations
Reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean temperature
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Outline of oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Stratification
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas
 Oceans portal
 Category
 Commons
Authority control: National 
Latvia
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean&oldid=1149377552"