Myths of ancient Greece
Scenes from Greek mythology depicted in ancient art. Left-to-right, top-to-bottom: the birth of Aphrodite, a revel with Dionysus and Silenus, Adonis playing the kithara for Aphrodite, Heracles slaying the Lernaean Hydra, the Colchian dragon regurgitating Jason in the presence of Athena, Hermes with his mother Maia, the Trojan Horse, and Odysseus's ship sailing past the island of the sirens
Greek mythology
Deities
Primordial
Titans
Olympians
Nymphs
Water
Chthonic
Heroes and heroism
Heracles / Hercules
Labors
Achilles
Hector
Trojan War
Odysseus
Odyssey
Jason
Argonauts
Golden Fleece
Perseus
Medusa
Gorgon
Oedipus
Sphinx
Orpheus
Orphism
Theseus
Minotaur
Bellerophon
Pegasus
Chimera
Daedalus
Labyrinth
Atalanta
Hippomenes
Golden apple
Cadmus
Thebes
Aeneas
Aeneid
Phaethon
Triptolemus
Eleusinian Mysteries
Pelops
Ancient Olympic Games
Pirithous
Centauromachy
Amphitryon
Teumessian fox
Narcissus
Narcissism
Meleager
Calydonian boar hunt
Otrera
Amazons
Related
Satyrs
Centaurs
Dragons
Demogorgon
Religion in Ancient Greece
Mycenaean gods
 Ancient Greece portal  Myths portalvte
A major branch of classical mythology, Greek mythology is the body of myths originally told by the ancient Greeks, and a genre of ancient Greek folklore. These stories concern the origin and nature of the world, the lives and activities of deities, heroes, and mythological creatures, and the origins and significance of the ancient Greeks' own cult and ritual practices. Modern scholars study the myths to shed light on the religious and political institutions of ancient Greece, and to better understand the nature of myth-making itself.[1]
The Greek myths were initially propagated in an oral-poetic tradition most likely by Minoan and Mycenaean singers starting in the 18th century BC;[2] eventually the myths of the heroes of the Trojan War and its aftermath became part of the oral tradition of Homer's epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey. Two poems by Homer's near contemporary Hesiod, the Theogony and the Works and Days, contain accounts of the genesis of the world, the succession of divine rulers, the succession of human ages, the origin of human woes, and the origin of sacrificial practices. Myths are also preserved in the Homeric Hymns, in fragments of epic poems of the Epic Cycle, in lyric poems, in the works of the tragedians and comedians of the fifth century BC, in writings of scholars and poets of the Hellenistic Age, and in texts from the time of the Roman Empire by writers such as Plutarch and Pausanias.
Aside from this narrative deposit in ancient Greek literature, pictorial representations of gods, heroes, and mythic episodes featured prominently in ancient vase paintings and the decoration of votive gifts and many other artifacts. Geometric designs on pottery of the eighth century BC depict scenes from the Epic Cycle as well as the adventures of Heracles. In the succeeding Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic periods, Homeric and various other mythological scenes appear, supplementing the existing literary evidence.[3]
Greek mythology has had an extensive influence on the culture, arts, and literature of Western civilization and remains part of Western heritage and language. Poets and artists from ancient times to the present have derived inspiration from Greek mythology and have discovered contemporary significance and relevance in the themes.[4]: 43 
 Achilles and Penthesileia by Exekias, c. 540 BC, British Museum, London
Sources
Greek mythology is known today primarily from Greek literature and representations on visual media dating from the Geometric period from c. 900 BC to c. 800 BC onward.[5]: 200  In fact, literary and archaeological sources integrate, sometimes mutually supportive and sometimes in conflict; however, in many cases, the existence of this corpus of data is a strong indication that many elements of Greek mythology have strong factual and historical roots.[6]
Literary sources
Mythical narration plays an important role in nearly every genre of Greek literature. Nevertheless, the only general mythographical handbook to survive from Greek antiquity was the Library of Pseudo-Apollodorus. This work attempts to reconcile the contradictory tales of the poets and provides a grand summary of traditional Greek mythology and heroic legends.[7]: 1  Apollodorus of Athens lived from c. 180 BC to c. 125 BC and wrote on many of these topics. His writings may have formed the basis for the collection; however, the "Library" discusses events that occurred long after his death, hence the name Pseudo-Apollodorus.
 Prometheus (1868 by Gustave Moreau). The myth of Prometheus first was attested by Hesiod and then constituted the basis for a tragic trilogy of plays, possibly by Aeschylus, consisting of Prometheus Bound, Prometheus Unbound, and Prometheus Pyrphoros.
Among the earliest literary sources are Homer's two epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey. Other poets completed the Epic Cycle, but these later and lesser poems now are lost almost entirely. Despite their traditional name, the Homeric Hymns have no direct connection with Homer. The oldest are choral hymns from the earlier part of the so-called Lyric age.[8]: 7  Hesiod, a possible contemporary with Homer, offers in his Theogony (Origin of the Gods) the fullest account of the earliest Greek myths, dealing with the creation of the world, the origin of the gods, Titans, and Giants, as well as elaborate genealogies, folktales, and aetiological myths. Hesiod's Works and Days, a didactic poem about farming life, also includes the myths of Prometheus, Pandora, and the Five Ages. The poet advises on the best way to succeed in a dangerous world, rendered yet more dangerous by its gods.[3]
Lyrical poets often took their subjects from myth, but their treatment became gradually less narrative and more allusive. Greek lyric poets, including Pindar, Bacchylides and Simonides, and bucolic poets such as Theocritus and Bion, relate individual mythological incidents.[9]: xii  Additionally, myth was central to classical Athenian drama. The tragic playwrights Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides took most of their plots from myths of the age of heroes and the Trojan War. Many of the great tragic stories (e.g. Agamemnon and his children, Oedipus, Jason, Medea, etc.) took on their classic form in these tragedies. The comic playwright Aristophanes also used myths, in The Birds and The Frogs.[8]: 8 
Historians Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, and geographers Pausanias and Strabo, who traveled throughout the Greek world and noted the stories they heard, supplied numerous local myths and legends, often giving little-known alternative versions.[9]: xii  Herodotus in particular, searched the various traditions he encountered and found the historical or mythological roots in the confrontation between Greece and the East.[10]: 60 [11]: 22  Herodotus attempted to reconcile origins and the blending of differing cultural concepts.
The poetry of the Hellenistic and Roman ages was primarily composed as a literary rather than cultic exercise. Nevertheless, it contains many important details that would otherwise be lost. This category includes the works of:
The Roman poets Ovid, Statius, Valerius Flaccus, Seneca and Virgil with Servius's commentary.
The Greek poets of the Late Antique period: Nonnus, Antoninus Liberalis, and Quintus Smyrnaeus.
The Greek poets of the Hellenistic period: Apollonius of Rhodes, Callimachus, Pseudo-Eratosthenes, and Parthenius.
Prose writers from the same periods who make reference to myths include Apuleius, Petronius, Lollianus, and Heliodorus. Two other important non-poetical sources are the Fabulae and Astronomica of the Roman writer styled as Pseudo-Hyginus, the Imagines of Philostratus the Elder and Philostratus the Younger, and the Descriptions of Callistratus.
Finally, several Byzantine Greek writers provide important details of myth, much derived from earlier now lost Greek works. These preservers of myth include Arnobius, Hesychius, the author of the Suda, John Tzetzes, and Eustathius. They often treat mythology from a Christian moralizing perspective.[12]
Archaeological sources
 The Roman poet Virgil, here depicted in the fifth-century manuscript, the Vergilius Romanus, preserved details of Greek mythology in many of his writings.
The discovery of the Mycenaean civilization by the German amateur archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in the nineteenth century, and the discovery of the Minoan civilization in Crete by the British archaeologist Arthur Evans in the twentieth century, helped to explain many existing questions about Homer's epics and provided archaeological evidence for many of the mythological details about gods and heroes. Unfortunately, the evidence about myths and rituals at Mycenaean and Minoan sites is entirely monumental, as the Linear B script (an ancient form of Greek found in both Crete and mainland Greece) was used mainly to record inventories, although certain names of gods and heroes have been tentatively identified.[3]
Geometric designs on pottery of the eighth-century  BC depict scenes from the Trojan cycle, as well as the adventures of Heracles.[13] These visual representations of myths are important for two reasons. Firstly, many Greek myths are attested on vases earlier than in literary sources: of the twelve labors of Heracles, for example, only the Cerberus adventure occurs in a contemporary literary text.[14] Secondly, visual sources sometimes represent myths or mythical scenes that are not attested in any extant literary source. In some cases, the first known representation of a myth in geometric art predates its first known representation in late archaic poetry, by several centuries.[5] In the Archaic (c. 750  c. 500 BC), Classical (c. 480 323 BC), and Hellenistic (323 146 BC) periods, Homeric and various other mythological scenes appear, supplementing the existing literary evidence.[3]
Survey of mythic history
 Phaedra with an attendant, probably her nurse, a fresco from Pompeii, c. 60  c. 20 BC
Greek mythology has changed over time to accommodate the evolution of their culture, of which mythology, both overtly and in its unspoken assumptions, is an index of the changes. In Greek mythology's surviving literary forms, as found mostly at the end of the progressive changes, it is inherently political, as Gilbert Cuthbertson (1975) has argued.[i][15]
The earlier inhabitants of the Balkan Peninsula were an agricultural people who, using animism, assigned a spirit to every aspect of nature. Eventually, these vague spirits assumed human forms and entered the local mythology as gods.[16]: 17  When tribes from the north of the Balkan Peninsula invaded, they brought with them a new pantheon of gods, based on conquest, force, prowess in battle, and violent heroism. Other older gods of the agricultural world fused with those of the more powerful invaders or else faded into insignificance.[16]: 18 
After the middle of the Archaic period, myths about relationships between male gods and male heroes became more and more frequent, indicating the parallel development of pedagogic pederasty (   , eros paidikos), thought to have been introduced around 630 BC. By the end of the fifth-century  BC, poets had assigned at least one eromenos, an adolescent boy who was their sexual companion, to every important god except Ares and many legendary figures.[17] Previously existing myths, such as those of Achilles and Patroclus, also then were cast in a pederastic light.[18]: 54  Alexandrian poets at first, then more generally literary mythographers in the early Roman Empire, often re-adapted stories of Greek mythological characters in this fashion.
The achievement of epic poetry was to create story-cycles and, as a result, to develop a new sense of mythological chronology. Thus Greek mythology unfolds as a phase in the development of the world and of humans.[19]: 11  While self-contradictions in these stories make an absolute timeline impossible, an approximate chronology may be discerned. The resulting mythological "history of the world" may be divided into three or four broader periods:
The myths of origin or age of gods (Theogonies, "births of gods"): myths about the origins of the world, the gods, and the human race.
The age when gods and mortals mingled freely: stories of the early interactions between gods, demigods, and mortals.
 The age of heroes (heroic age), where divine activity was more limited. The last and greatest of the heroic legends is the story of the Trojan War and after (which is regarded by some researchers as a separate, fourth period).[8]: 35 
While the age of gods often has been of more interest to contemporary students of myth, the Greek authors of the archaic and classical eras had a clear preference for the age of heroes, establishing a chronology and record of human accomplishments after the questions of how the world came into being were explained. For example, the heroic Iliad and Odyssey dwarfed the divine-focused Theogony and Homeric Hymns in both size and popularity. Under the influence of Homer the "hero cult" leads to a restructuring in spiritual life, expressed in the separation of the realm of the gods from the realm of the dead (heroes), of the Chthonic from the Olympian.[20]: 205  In the Works and Days, Hesiod makes use of a scheme of Four Ages of Man (or Races): Golden, Silver, Bronze, and Iron. These races or ages are separate creations of the gods, the Golden Age belonging to the reign of Cronos, the subsequent races to the creation of Zeus. The presence of evil was explained by the myth of Pandora, when all of the best of human capabilities, save hope, had been spilled out of her overturned jar.[21] In Metamorphoses, Ovid follows Hesiod's concept of the four ages.[22]
Origins of the world and the gods
Further information: Greek primordial gods and Family tree of the Greek gods
 Amor Vincit Omnia (Love Conquers All), a depiction of the god of love, Eros. By Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio, circa 1601 1602.
"Myths of origin" or "creation myths" represent an attempt to explain the beginnings of the universe in human language.[9]: 10  The most widely accepted version at the time, although a philosophical account of the beginning of things, is reported by Hesiod, in his Theogony. He begins with Chaos, a yawning nothingness. Out of the void emerged Gaia (the Earth) and some other primary divine beings: Eros (Love), the Abyss (the Tartarus), and the Erebus.[23] Without male assistance, Gaia gave birth to Uranus (the Sky) who then fertilized her. From that union were born first the Titans six males: Coeus, Crius, Cronus, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Oceanus; and six females: Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Rhea, Theia, Themis, and Tethys. After Cronus was born, Gaia and Uranus decreed no more Titans were to be born. They were followed by the one-eyed Cyclopes and the Hecatonchires or Hundred-Handed Ones, who were both thrown into Tartarus by Uranus. This made Gaia furious. Cronus ("the wily, youngest and most terrible of Gaia's children"),[23] was convinced by Gaia to castrate his father. He did this and became the ruler of the Titans with his sister-wife, Rhea, as his consort, and the other Titans became his court.
A motif of father-against-son conflict was repeated when Cronus was confronted by his son, Zeus. Because Cronus had betrayed his father, he feared that his offspring would do the same, and so each time Rhea gave birth, he snatched up the child and ate it. Rhea hated this and tricked him by hiding Zeus and wrapping a stone in a baby's blanket, which Cronus ate. When Zeus was full-grown, he fed Cronus a drugged drink which caused him to vomit, throwing up Rhea's other children, including Poseidon, Hades, Hestia, Demeter, and Hera, and the stone, which had been sitting in Cronus's stomach all this time. Zeus then challenged Cronus to war for the kingship of the gods. At last, with the help of the Cyclopes (whom Zeus freed from Tartarus), Zeus and his siblings were victorious, while Cronus and the Titans were hurled down to imprisonment in Tartarus.[24]
 Attic black-figured amphora depicting Athena being "reborn" from the head of Zeus, who had swallowed her mother Metis, on the right, Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, assists, circa 550 525 BC (Mus e du Louvre, Paris)
Zeus was plagued by the same concern, and after a prophecy that the offspring of his first wife, Metis, would give birth to a god "greater than he", Zeus swallowed her.[25]: 98  She was already pregnant with Athena, however, and she burst forth from his head fully-grown and dressed for war.[25]: 108 
The earliest Greek thought about poetry considered the theogonies to be the prototypical poetic genre the prototypical mythos and imputed almost magical powers to it. Orpheus, the archetypal poet, also was the archetypal singer of theogonies, which he uses to calm seas and storms in Apollonius' Argonautica, and to move the stony hearts of the underworld gods in his descent to Hades. When Hermes invents the lyre in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, the first thing he does is sing about the birth of the gods.[26] Hesiod's Theogony is not only the fullest surviving account of the gods but also the fullest surviving account of the archaic poet's function, with its long preliminary invocation to the Muses. Theogony also was the subject of many lost poems, including those attributed to Orpheus, Musaeus, Epimenides, Abaris, and other legendary seers, which were used in private ritual purifications and mystery-rites. There are indications that Plato was familiar with some version of the Orphic theogony.[27]: 147  A silence would have been expected about religious rites and beliefs, however, and that nature of the culture would not have been reported by members of the society while the beliefs were held. After they ceased to become religious beliefs, few would have known the rites and rituals. Allusions often existed, however, to aspects that were quite public.
Images existed on pottery and religious artwork that were interpreted and more likely, misinterpreted in many diverse myths and tales. A few fragments of these works survive in quotations by Neoplatonist philosophers and recently unearthed papyrus scraps. One of these scraps, the Derveni Papyrus now proves that at least in the fifth-century BC a theogonic-cosmogonic poem of Orpheus was in existence.[20]: 236 [27]: 147 
The first philosophical cosmologists reacted against, or sometimes built upon, popular mythical conceptions that had existed in the Greek world for some time. Some of these popular conceptions can be gleaned from the poetry of Homer and Hesiod. In Homer, the Earth was viewed as a flat disk afloat on the river of Oceanus and overlooked by a hemispherical sky with sun, moon, and stars. The Sun (Helios) traversed the heavens as a charioteer and sailed around the Earth in a golden bowl at night. Sun, earth, heaven, rivers, and winds could be addressed in prayers and called to witness oaths. Natural fissures were popularly regarded as entrances to the subterranean house of Hades and his predecessors, home of the dead.[28]: 45  Influences from other cultures always afforded new themes.
Greek pantheon
Further information: Ancient Greek religion, Twelve Olympians, Family Tree of the Greek Gods, and List of Mycenaean gods
 Zeus, disguised as a swan, seduces Leda, the Queen of Sparta. A sixteenth-century copy of the lost original by Michelangelo.
According to Classical-era mythology, after the overthrow of the Titans, the new pantheon of gods and goddesses was confirmed. Among the principal Greek gods were the Olympians, residing on Mount Olympus under the eye of Zeus. (The limitation of their number to twelve seems to have been a comparatively modern idea.)[29]: 8  Besides the Olympians, the Greeks worshipped various gods of the countryside, the satyr-god Pan, Nymphs (spirits of rivers), Naiads (who dwelled in springs), Dryads (who were spirits of the trees), Nereids (who inhabited the sea), river gods, Satyrs, and others. In addition, there were the dark powers of the underworld, such as the Erinyes (or Furies), said to pursue those guilty of crimes against blood-relatives.[30] In order to honor the Ancient Greek pantheon, poets composed the Homeric Hymns (a group of thirty-three songs).[31] Gregory Nagy (1992) regards "the larger Homeric Hymns as simple preludes (compared with Theogony), each of which invokes one god."[32]: 54 
The gods of Greek mythology are described as having essentially corporeal but ideal bodies. According to Walter Burkert, the defining characteristic of Greek anthropomorphism is that "the Greek gods are persons, not abstractions, ideas or concepts."[20]: 182  Regardless of their underlying forms, the Ancient Greek gods have many fantastic abilities; most significantly, the gods are not affected by disease, and can be wounded only under highly unusual circumstances. The Greeks considered immortality as the distinctive characteristic of their gods; this immortality, as well as unfading youth, was insured by the constant use of nectar and ambrosia, by which the divine blood was renewed in their veins.[29]: 4 
Each god descends from his or her own genealogy, pursues differing interests, has a certain area of expertise, and is governed by a unique personality; however, these descriptions arise from a multiplicity of archaic local variants, which do not always agree with one another. When these gods are called upon in poetry, prayer, or cult, they are referred to by a combination of their name and epithets, that identify them by these distinctions from other manifestations of themselves (e.g., Apollo Musagetes is "Apollo, [as] leader of the Muses"). Alternatively, the epithet may identify a particular and localized aspect of the god, sometimes thought to be already ancient during the classical epoch of Greece.
Most gods were associated with specific aspects of life. For example, Aphrodite was the goddess of love and beauty, Ares was the god of war, Hades the ruler of the underworld, and Athena the goddess of wisdom and courage.[29]: 20ff  Some gods, such as Apollo and Dionysus, revealed complex personalities and mixtures of functions, while others, such as Hestia (literally "hearth") and Helios (literally "sun"), were little more than personifications. The most impressive temples tended to be dedicated to a limited number of gods, who were the focus of large pan-Hellenic cults. It was, however, common for individual regions and villages to devote their own cults to minor gods. Many cities also honored the more well-known gods with unusual local rites and associated strange myths with them that were unknown elsewhere. During the heroic age, the cult of heroes (or demigods) supplemented that of the gods.
Age of gods and mortals
Bridging the age when gods lived alone and the age when divine interference in human affairs was limited was a transitional age in which gods and mortals moved together. These were the early days of the world when the groups mingled more freely than they did later. Most of these tales were later told by Ovid's Metamorphoses and they are often divided into two thematic groups: tales of love, and tales of punishment.[8]: 38 
 Dionysus with satyrs. Interior of a cup painted by the Brygos Painter, Cabinet des M dailles.
Tales of love often involve incest, or the seduction or rape of a mortal woman by a male god, resulting in heroic offspring. The stories generally suggest that relationships between gods and mortals are something to avoid; even consenting relationships rarely have happy endings.[8]: 39  In a few cases, a female divinity mates with a mortal man, as in the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, where the goddess lies with Anchises to produce Aeneas.[33]
The second type (tales of punishment) involves the appropriation or invention of some important cultural artifact, as when Prometheus steals fire from the gods, when Tantalus steals nectar and ambrosia from Zeus' table and gives it to his subjects revealing to them the secrets of the gods, when Prometheus or Lycaon invents sacrifice, when Demeter teaches agriculture and the Mysteries to Triptolemus, or when Marsyas invents the aulos and enters into a musical contest with Apollo. Ian Morris considers Prometheus' adventures as "a place between the history of the gods and that of man."[34]: 291  An anonymous papyrus fragment, dated to the third century, vividly portrays Dionysus' punishment of the king of Thrace, Lycurgus, whose recognition of the new god came too late, resulting in horrific penalties that extended into the afterlife.[35]: 50  The story of the arrival of Dionysus to establish his cult in Thrace was also the subject of an Aeschylean trilogy.[36]: 28  In another tragedy, Euripides' The Bacchae, the king of Thebes, Pentheus, is punished by Dionysus, because he disrespected the god and spied on his Maenads, the female worshippers of the god.[37]: 195 
 Demeter and Metanira in a detail on an Apulian red-figure hydria, circa 340 BC (Altes Museum, Berlin)
In another story, based on an old folktale-motif,[38] and echoing a similar theme, Demeter was searching for her daughter, Persephone, having taken the form of an old woman called Doso, and received a hospitable welcome from Celeus, the King of Eleusis in Attica. As a gift to Celeus, because of his hospitality, Demeter planned to make his son Demophon a god, but she was unable to complete the ritual because his mother Metanira walked in and saw her son in the fire and screamed in fright, which angered Demeter, who lamented that foolish mortals do not understand the concept and ritual.[39]
Heroic age
The age in which the heroes lived is known as the Heroic age.[40] The epic and genealogical poetry created cycles of stories clustered around particular heroes or events and established the family relationships between the heroes of different stories; they thus arranged the stories in sequence. According to Ken Dowden (1992), "there is even a saga effect: We can follow the fates of some families in successive generations."[19]: 11 
After the rise of the hero cult, gods and heroes constitute the sacral sphere and are invoked together in oaths and prayers which are addressed to them.[20]: 205  Burkert (2002) notes that "the roster of heroes, again in contrast to the gods, is never given fixed and final form. Great gods are no longer born, but new heroes can always be raised up from the army of the dead." Another important difference between the hero cult and the cult of gods is that the hero becomes the centre of local group identity.[20]: 206 
The monumental events of Heracles are regarded as the dawn of the age of heroes. To the Heroic Age are also ascribed three great events: the Argonautic expedition, the Theban Cycle, and the Trojan War.[40][41]: 340 
Heracles and the Heracleidae
Further information: Heracles, Heracleidae, and Hercules
 Heracles with his baby Telephus (Louvre Museum, Paris)
Some scholars believe[41]: 10  that behind Heracles' complicated mythology there was probably a real man, perhaps a chieftain-vassal of the kingdom of Argos. Some scholars suggest the story of Heracles is an allegory for the sun's yearly passage through the twelve constellations of the zodiac.[42] Others point to earlier myths from other cultures, showing the story of Heracles as a local adaptation of hero myths already well established. Traditionally, Heracles was the son of Zeus and Alcmene, granddaughter of Perseus.[43] His fantastic solitary exploits, with their many folk-tale themes, provided much material for popular legend. According to Burkert (2002), "He is portrayed as a sacrificer, mentioned as a founder of altars, and imagined as a voracious eater himself; it is in this role that he appears in comedy.[20]
While his tragic end provided much material for tragedy Heracles is regarded by Thalia Papadopoulou as "a play of great significance in examination of other Euripidean dramas."[44][20]: 211  In art and literature Heracles was represented as an enormously strong man of moderate height; his characteristic weapon was the bow but frequently also the club. Vase paintings demonstrate the unparalleled popularity of Heracles, his fight with the lion being depicted many hundreds of times.[20]: 211 
Heracles also entered Etruscan and Roman mythology and cult, and the exclamation "mehercule" became as familiar to the Romans[clarification needed] as "Herakleis" was to the Greeks.[20]: 211  In Italy he was worshipped as a god of merchants and traders, although others also prayed to him for his characteristic gifts of good luck or rescue from danger.[43]
Heracles attained the highest social prestige through his appointment as official ancestor of the Dorian kings. This probably served as a legitimation for the Dorian migrations into the Peloponnese. Hyllus, the eponymous hero of one Dorian phyle, became the son of Heracles and one of the Heracleidae or Heraclids (the numerous descendants of Heracles, especially the descendants of Hyllus other Heracleidae included Macaria, Lamos, Manto, Bianor, Tlepolemus, and Telephus). These Heraclids conquered the Peloponnesian kingdoms of Mycenae, Sparta and Argos, claiming, according to legend, a right to rule them through their ancestor. Their rise to dominance is frequently called the "Dorian invasion". The Lydian and later the Macedonian kings, as rulers of the same rank, also became Heracleidae.[45][20]: 211 
 Bellerophon riding Pegasus and slaying the Chimera, central medallion of a Roman mosaic from Autun, Mus e Rolin, 2nd to 3rd century AD
Other members of this earliest generation of heroes such as Perseus, Deucalion, Theseus and Bellerophon, have many traits in common with Heracles. Like him, their exploits are solitary, fantastic and border on fairy tale, as they slay monsters such as the Chimera and Medusa. Bellerophon's adventures are commonplace types, similar to the adventures of Heracles and Theseus. Sending a hero to his presumed death is also a recurrent theme of this early heroic tradition, used in the cases of Perseus and Bellerophon.[46]
Argonauts
Further information: Argonauts
The only surviving Hellenistic epic, the Argonautica of Apollonius of Rhodes (epic poet, scholar, and director of the Library of Alexandria) tells the myth of the voyage of Jason and the Argonauts to retrieve the Golden Fleece from the mythical land of Colchis. In the Argonautica, Jason is impelled on his quest by king Pelias, who receives a prophecy that a man with one sandal would be his nemesis. Jason loses a sandal in a river, arrives at the court of Pelias, and the epic is set in motion. Nearly every member of the next generation of heroes, as well as Heracles, went with Jason in the ship Argo to fetch the Golden Fleece. This generation also included Theseus, who went to Crete to slay the Minotaur; Atalanta, the female heroine, and Meleager, who once had an epic cycle of his own to rival the Iliad and Odyssey. Pindar, Apollonius and the Bibliotheca endeavor to give full lists of the Argonauts.[47][48][49]
Although Apollonius wrote his poem in the 3rd century BC, the composition of the story of the Argonauts is earlier than Odyssey, which shows familiarity with the exploits of Jason (the wandering of Odysseus may have been partly founded on it).[50][51] In ancient times the expedition was regarded as a historical fact, an incident in the opening up of the Black Sea to Greek commerce and colonization.[50] It was also extremely popular, forming a cycle to which a number of local legends became attached. The story of Medea, in particular, caught the imagination of the tragic poets.[51]
House of Atreus and Theban Cycle
Further information: Theban Cycle and Seven against Thebes
In between the Argo and the Trojan War, there was a generation known chiefly for its horrific crimes. This includes the doings of Atreus and Thyestes at Argos. Behind the myth of the house of Atreus (one of the two principal heroic dynasties with the house of Labdacus) lies the problem of the devolution of power and of the mode of accession to sovereignty. The twins Atreus and Thyestes with their descendants played the leading role in the tragedy of the devolution of power in Mycenae.[52]
The Theban Cycle deals with events associated especially with Cadmus, the city's founder, and later with the doings of Laius and Oedipus at Thebes; a series of stories that lead to the war of the Seven against Thebes and the eventual pillage of that city at the hands of the Epigoni.[7]: 317  (It is not known whether the Seven figured in early epic.) As far as Oedipus is concerned, early epic accounts seem to have him continuing to rule at Thebes after the revelation that Iokaste was his mother, and subsequently marrying a second wife who becomes the mother of his children markedly different from the tale known to us through tragedy (e.g. Sophocles' Oedipus Rex) and later mythological accounts.[7]: 311 
Trojan War and aftermath
Further information: Trojan War and Epic Cycle
 El Juicio de Paris by Enrique Simonet, 1904. Paris is holding the golden apple on his right hand while surveying the goddesses in a calculative manner.
 In The Rage of Achilles by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo (1757, Fresco, 300 x 300 cm, Villa Valmarana, Vicenza) Achilles is outraged that Agamemnon would threaten to seize his warprize, Briseis, and he draws his sword to kill Agamemnon. The sudden appearance of the goddess Athena, who, in this fresco, has grabbed Achilles by the hair, prevents the act of violence.
Greek mythology culminates in the Trojan War, fought between Greece and Troy, and its aftermath. In Homer's works, such as the Iliad, the chief stories have already taken shape and substance, and individual themes were elaborated later, especially in Greek drama. The Trojan War also elicited great interest in the Roman culture because of the story of Aeneas, a Trojan hero whose journey from Troy led to the founding of the city that would one day become Rome, as recounted in Virgil's Aeneid (Book II of Virgil's Aeneid contains the best-known account of the sack of Troy).[53][54] Finally there are two pseudo-chronicles written in Latin that passed under the names of Dictys Cretensis and Dares Phrygius.[55]
The Trojan War cycle, a collection of epic poems, starts with the events leading up to the war: Eris and the golden apple of Kallisti, the Judgement of Paris, the abduction of Helen, the sacrifice of Iphigenia at Aulis. To recover Helen, the Greeks launched a great expedition under the overall command of Menelaus's brother, Agamemnon, king of Argos, or Mycenae, but the Trojans refused to return Helen. The Iliad, which is set in the tenth year of the war, tells of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles, who was the finest Greek warrior, and the consequent deaths in battle of Achilles' beloved comrade Patroclus and Priam's eldest son, Hector. After Hector's death the Trojans were joined by two exotic allies, Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, and Memnon, king of the Ethiopians and son of the dawn-goddess Eos.[54] Achilles killed both of these, but Paris then managed to kill Achilles with an arrow in the heel. Achilles' heel was the only part of his body which was not invulnerable to damage by human weaponry. Before they could take Troy, the Greeks had to steal from the citadel the wooden image of Pallas Athena (the Palladium). Finally, with Athena's help, they built the Trojan Horse. Despite the warnings of Priam's daughter Cassandra, the Trojans were persuaded by Sinon, a Greek who feigned desertion, to take the horse inside the walls of Troy as an offering to Athena; the priest Laocoon, who tried to have the horse destroyed, was killed by sea-serpents. At night the Greek fleet returned, and the Greeks from the horse opened the gates of Troy. In the total sack that followed, Priam and his remaining sons were slaughtered; the Trojan women passed into slavery in various cities of Greece. The adventurous homeward voyages of the Greek leaders (including the wanderings of Odysseus and Aeneas (the Aeneid), and the murder of Agamemnon) were told in two epics, the Returns (the lost Nostoi) and Homer's Odyssey.[53] The Trojan cycle also includes the adventures of the children of the Trojan generation (e.g., Orestes and Telemachus).[54]
The Trojan War provided a variety of themes and became a main source of inspiration for Ancient Greek artists (e.g. metopes on the Parthenon depicting the sack of Troy); this artistic preference for themes deriving from the Trojan Cycle indicates its importance to the Ancient Greek civilization.[53] The same mythological cycle also inspired a series of posterior European literary writings. For instance, Trojan Medieval European writers, unacquainted with Homer at first hand, found in the Troy legend a rich source of heroic and romantic storytelling and a convenient framework into which to fit their own courtly and chivalric ideals. Twelfth-century authors, such as Beno t de Sainte-Maure (Roman de Troie [Romance of Troy, 1154 60]) and Joseph of Exeter (De Bello Troiano [On the Trojan War, 1183]) describe the war while rewriting the standard version they found in Dictys and Dares. They thus follow Horace's advice and Virgil's example: they rewrite a poem of Troy instead of telling something completely new.[56]
Some of the more famous heroes noted for their inclusion in the Trojan War were:
On the Trojan side:
Aeneas
Hector
Paris
On the Greek side:
Ajax (there were two Ajaxes)
Achilles
King Agamemnon
Menelaus
Odysseus
Greek and Roman conceptions of myth
Mythology was at the heart of everyday life in Ancient Greece.[16]: 15  Greeks regarded mythology as a part of their history. They used myth to explain natural phenomena, cultural variations, traditional enmities, and friendships. It was a source of pride to be able to trace the descent of one's leaders from a mythological hero or a god. Few ever doubted that there was truth behind the account of the Trojan War in the Iliad and Odyssey. According to Victor Davis Hanson, a military historian, columnist, political essayist, and former classics professor, and John Heath, a classics professor, the profound knowledge of the Homeric epos was deemed by the Greeks the basis of their acculturation. Homer was the "education of Greece" (   ), and his poetry "the Book".[57]
Philosophy and myth
 Plato in Raphael's The School of Athens
After the rise of philosophy, history, prose and rationalism in the late 5th century BC, the fate of myth became uncertain, and mythological genealogies gave place to a conception of history which tried to exclude the supernatural (such as the Thucydidean history).[58] While poets and dramatists were reworking the myths, Greek historians and philosophers were beginning to criticize them.[8]
By the sixth century BC, a few radical philosophers were already beginning to label the poets' tales as blasphemous lies: Xenophanes of Colophon complained that Homer and Hesiod attributed to the gods "all that is shameful and disgraceful among men; they steal, commit adultery, and deceive one another."[5]: 169 70  This line of thought found its most sweeping expression in Plato's Republic and Laws. Plato created his own allegorical myths (such as the vision of Er in the Republic), attacked the traditional tales of the gods' tricks, thefts, and adulteries as immoral, and objected to their central role in literature.[8] Plato's criticism was the first serious challenge to the Homeric mythological tradition,[57] referring to the myths as "old wives' chatter."[59] For his part Aristotle criticized the pre-Socratic quasi-mythical philosophical approach and underscored that "Hesiod and the theological writers were concerned only with what seemed plausible to themselves, and had no respect for us ... But it is not worth taking seriously writers who show off in the mythical style; as for those who do proceed by proving their assertions, we must cross-examine them."[58]
Nevertheless, even Plato did not manage to wean himself and his society from the influence of myth; his own characterization for Socrates is based on the traditional Homeric and tragic patterns, used by the philosopher to praise the righteous life of his teacher:[60]
But perhaps someone might say: "Are you then not ashamed, Socrates, of having followed such a pursuit, that you are now in danger of being put to death as a result?" But I should make to him a just reply: "You do not speak well, Sir, if you think a man in whom there is even a little merit ought to consider danger of life or death, and not rather regard this only, when he does things, whether the things he does are right or wrong and the acts of a good or a bad man. For according to your argument all the demigods would be bad who died at Troy, including the son of Thetis, who so despised danger, in comparison with enduring any disgrace, that when his mother (and she was a goddess) said to him, as he was eager to slay Hector, something like this, I believe,
My son, if you avenge the death of your friend Patroclus and kill Hector, you yourself shall die; for straightway, after Hector, is death appointed unto you. (Hom. Il. 18.96)
he, when he heard this, made light of death and danger, and feared much more to live as a coward and not to avenge his friends, and said,
Straightway may I die, after doing vengeance upon the wrongdoer, that I may not stay here, jeered at beside the curved ships, a burden of the earth.
Hanson and Heath estimate that Plato's rejection of the Homeric tradition was not favorably received by the grassroots Greek civilization.[57] The old myths were kept alive in local cults; they continued to influence poetry and to form the main subject of painting and sculpture.[58]
More sportingly, the 5th century BC tragedian Euripides often played with the old traditions, mocking them, and through the voice of his characters injecting notes of doubt. Yet the subjects of his plays were taken, without exception, from myth. Many of these plays were written in answer to a predecessor's version of the same or similar myth. Euripides mainly impugns the myths about the gods and begins his critique with an objection similar to the one previously expressed by Xenocrates: the gods, as traditionally represented, are far too crassly anthropomorphic.[5]: 169 70 
Hellenistic and Roman rationalism
 Cicero saw himself as the defender of the established order, despite his personal skepticism concerning myth and his inclination towards more philosophical conceptions of divinity.
During the Hellenistic period, mythology took on the prestige of elite knowledge that marks its possessors as belonging to a certain class. At the same time, the skeptical turn of the Classical age became even more pronounced.[61]: 89  Greek mythographer Euhemerus established the tradition of seeking an actual historical basis for mythical beings and events.[62] Although his original work (Sacred Scriptures) is lost, much is known about it from what is recorded by Diodorus and Lactantius.[7]: 7 
Rationalizing hermeneutics of myth became even more popular under the Roman Empire, thanks to the physicalist theories of Stoic and Epicurean philosophy. Stoics presented explanations of the gods and heroes as physical phenomena, while the Euhemerists rationalized them as historical figures. At the same time, the Stoics and the Neoplatonists promoted the moral significations of the mythological tradition, often based on Greek etymologies.[63] Through his Epicurean message, Lucretius had sought to expel superstitious fears from the minds of his fellow-citizens.[64]: xxvi  Livy, too, is skeptical about the mythological tradition and claims that he does not intend to pass judgement on such legends (fabulae).[61]: 88  The challenge for Romans with a strong and apologetic sense of religious tradition was to defend that tradition while conceding that it was often a breeding-ground for superstition. The antiquarian Varro, who regarded religion as a human institution with great importance for the preservation of good in society, devoted rigorous study to the origins of religious cults. In his Antiquitates Rerum Divinarum (which has not survived, but Augustine's City of God indicates its general approach) Varro argues that whereas the superstitious man fears the gods, the truly religious person venerates them as parents.[64]: xxvi  According to Varro, there have been three accounts of deities in the Roman society: the mythical account created by poets for theatre and entertainment, the civil account used by people for veneration as well as by the city, and the natural account created by the philosophers.[65] The best state is, adds Varro, where the civil theology combines the poetic mythical account with the philosopher's.[65]
Roman Academic Cotta ridicules both literal and allegorical acceptance of myth, declaring roundly that myths have no place in philosophy.[61]: 87  Cicero is also generally disdainful of myth, but, like Varro, he is emphatic in his support for the state religion and its institutions. It is difficult to know how far down the social scale this rationalism extended.[61]: 88  Cicero asserts that no one (not even old women and boys) is so foolish as to believe in the terrors of Hades or the existence of Scyllas, centaurs or other composite creatures,[66] but, on the other hand, the orator elsewhere complains of the superstitious and credulous character of the people.[67] De Natura Deorum is the most comprehensive summary of Cicero's line of thought.[64]: xxvii 
Syncretizing trends
See also: Roman mythology
 Apollo (early Imperial Roman copy of a fourth-century Greek original, Louvre Museum)
In Ancient Roman times, a new Roman mythology was born through syncretization of numerous Greek and other foreign gods. This occurred because the Romans had little mythology of their own, and inheritance of the Greek mythological tradition caused the major Roman gods to adopt characteristics of their Greek equivalents.[61]: 88  The gods Zeus and Jupiter are an example of this mythological overlap. In addition to the combination of the two mythological traditions, the association of the Romans with eastern religions led to further syncretizations.[68] For instance, the cult of Sun was introduced in Rome after Aurelian's successful campaigns in Syria. The Asiatic divinities Mithras (that is to say, the Sun) and Ba'al were combined with Apollo and Helios into one Sol Invictus, with conglomerated rites and compound attributes.[69] Apollo might be increasingly identified in religion with Helios or even Dionysus, but texts retelling his myths seldom reflected such developments. The traditional literary mythology was increasingly dissociated from actual religious practice. The worship of Sol as special protector of the emperors and the empire remained the chief imperial religion until it was replaced by Christianity.
The surviving 2nd-century collection of Orphic Hymns (second century AD) and the Saturnalia of Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius (fifth century) are influenced by the theories of rationalism and the syncretizing trends as well. The Orphic Hymns are a set of pre-classical poetic compositions, attributed to Orpheus, himself the subject of a renowned myth. In reality, these poems were probably composed by several different poets, and contain a rich set of clues about prehistoric European mythology.[70] The stated purpose of the Saturnalia is to transmit the Hellenic culture Macrobius has derived from his reading, even though much of his treatment of gods is colored by Egyptian and North African mythology and theology (which also affect the interpretation of Virgil). In Saturnalia reappear mythographical comments influenced by the Euhemerists, the Stoics and the Neoplatonists.[63]
Modern interpretations
Further information: Modern understanding of Greek mythology
The genesis of modern understanding of Greek mythology is regarded by some scholars as a double reaction at the end of the eighteenth century against "the traditional attitude of Christian animosity", in which the Christian reinterpretation of myth as a "lie" or fable had been retained.[71] In Germany, by about 1795, there was a growing interest in Homer and Greek mythology. In G ttingen, Johann Matthias Gesner began to revive Greek studies, while his successor, Christian Gottlob Heyne, worked with Johann Joachim Winckelmann, and laid the foundations for mythological research both in Germany and elsewhere.[5]: 9 
Comparative and psychoanalytic approaches
See also: Comparative mythology
 Max M ller is regarded as one of the founders of comparative mythology. In his Comparative Mythology (1867) M ller analysed the "disturbing" similarity between the mythologies of "savage races" with those of the early Europeans.
The development of comparative philology in the 19th century, together with ethnological discoveries in the 20th century, established the science of myth. Since the Romantics, all study of myth has been comparative. Wilhelm Mannhardt, James Frazer, and Stith Thompson employed the comparative approach to collect and classify the themes of folklore and mythology.[72] In 1871 Edward Burnett Tylor published his Primitive Culture, in which he applied the comparative method and tried to explain the origin and evolution of religion.[73][74]: 9  Tylor's procedure of drawing together material culture, ritual and myth of widely separated cultures influenced both Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell. Max M ller applied the new science of comparative mythology to the study of myth, in which he detected the distorted remains of Aryan nature worship. Bronis aw Malinowski emphasized the ways myth fulfills common social functions. Claude L vi-Strauss and other structuralists have compared the formal relations and patterns in myths throughout the world.[72]
Sigmund Freud introduced a transhistorical and biological conception of man and a view of myth as an expression of repressed ideas. Dream interpretation is the basis of Freudian myth interpretation and Freud's concept of dreamwork recognizes the importance of contextual relationships for the interpretation of any individual element in a dream. This suggestion would find an important point of rapprochement between the structuralist and psychoanalytic approaches to myth in Freud's thought.[75] Carl Jung extended the transhistorical, psychological approach with his theory of the "collective unconscious" and the archetypes (inherited "archaic" patterns), often encoded in myth, that arise out of it.[3] According to Jung, "myth-forming structural elements must be present in the unconscious psyche."[76] Comparing Jung's methodology with Joseph Campbell's theory, Robert A. Segal (1990) concludes that "to interpret a myth Campbell simply identifies the archetypes in it. An interpretation of the Odyssey, for example, would show how Odysseus's life conforms to a heroic pattern. Jung, by contrast, considers the identification of archetypes merely the first step in the interpretation of a myth."[77] Karl Ker nyi, one of the founders of modern studies in Greek mythology, gave up his early views of myth, in order to apply Jung's theories of archetypes to Greek myth.[5]: 38 
Origin theories
See also: Mycenaean religion; Mycenaean deities; and Similarities between Roman, Greek and Etruscan mythologies
Mythology
Mythologies
Albanian
Arabian
Armenian
Australian Aboriginal
Amazigh
Baltic (Latvian - Lithuanian - Prussian)
Basque
Bantu
Brazilian
Buddhist
Catalan
Cantabrian
Celtic
Breton
Cornish
Irish
Scottish
Welsh
Chinese
Christian
Efik
Egyptian
English
Estonian
Etruscan
Finnish
French
Georgian
Germanic
Frankish
Continental Germanic
Norse
Greek
Guanche
Hindu
Hittite
Hungarian
Indonesian
Islamic
Japanese
Jewish
Korean
Lugbara
Lusitanian
Maasai
Malagasy
M ori
Mbuti
Meitei
Melanesian
Mesopotamian
Micronesian
Mongol
Native American
Algonquian
Abenaki
Blackfoot
Lenape
Aztec
Californian
Miwok
Ohlone
Chan 
Chilote
Choctaw
Creek
Guarani
Haida
Inca
Inuit
Iroquois
Maya
Muisca
Pacific Northwest
Kwakwaka wakw
Plains Indians
Ho-Chunk
Lakota
Pawnee
Puebloan
Hopi
Zuni
Selk'nam
Talamancan
Ossetian
Papuan
Persian
Philippine
Polynesian
Proto-Indo-European
Proto-Uralic
Roman
Romanian
S mi
Slavic
Somali
Talysh
Thai
Tibetan
Turkic
Vietnamese
West Africa
Yoruba
Types
Creation
Flood
National
Origin
Lists
Creations
Creatures
Deities
Floods
Heroes
Culture
Folk
Objects
Pairs
Places
Sources
Related concepts
Deity
Legendary creature
Type
Twins
Culture hero
Folk hero
See also
Comparative mythology
Comparative religion
Euhemerism
Folklore
Epics
Pseudo-mythology
Religion and mythology
Symbolism
Theology
vte
Max M ller attempted to understand an Indo-European religious form by tracing it back to its Indo-European (or, in M ller's time, "Aryan") "original" manifestation. In 1891, he claimed that "the most important discovery which has been made during the nineteenth century concerning the ancient history of mankind ... was this sample equation: Sanskrit Dyaus-pitar = Greek Zeus = Latin Jupiter = Old Norse Tyr".[74]: 12  The question of Greek mythology's place in Indo-European studies has generated much scholarship since M ller's time. For example, philologist Georges Dum zil draws a comparison between the Greek Uranus and the Sanskrit Varuna, although there is no hint that he believes them to be originally connected.[78] In other cases, close parallels in character and function suggest a common heritage, yet lack of linguistic evidence makes it difficult to prove, as in the case of the Greek Moirai and the Norns of Norse mythology.[79]
It appears that the Mycenaean religion was the mother of the Greek religion[80] and its pantheon already included many divinities that can be found in classical Greece.[81] However, Greek mythology is generally seen as having heavy influence of Pre-Greek and Near Eastern cultures, and as such contains few important elements for the reconstruction of the Proto-Indo-European religion.[82] Consequently, Greek mythology received minimal scholarly attention in the context of Indo-European comparative mythology until the mid 2000s.[83]
Archaeology and mythography have revealed influence from Asia Minor and the Near East. Adonis seems to be the Greek counterpart more clearly in cult than in myth of a Near Eastern "dying god". Cybele is rooted in Anatolian culture while much of Aphrodite's iconography may spring from Semitic goddesses. There are also possible parallels between the earliest divine generations (Chaos and its children) and Tiamat in the Enuma Elish.[84][85] According to Meyer Reinhold, "near Eastern theogonic concepts, involving divine succession through violence and generational conflicts for power, found their way into Greek mythology."[86]
In addition to Indo-European and Near Eastern origins, some scholars have speculated on the debts of Greek mythology to the indigenous pre-Greek societies: Crete, Mycenae, Pylos, Thebes and Orchomenus.[20]: 23  Historians of religion were fascinated by a number of apparently ancient configurations of myth connected with Crete (the god as bull, Zeus and Europa, Pasipha  who yields to the bull and gives birth to the Minotaur, etc.). Martin P. Nilsson asserts, based on the representations and general function of the gods, that a lot of Minoan gods and religious conceptions were fused in the Mycenaean religion.[87] and concluded that all great classical Greek myths were tied to Mycenaean centres and anchored in prehistoric times.[88] Nevertheless, according to Burkert, the iconography of the Cretan Palace Period has provided almost no confirmation for these theories.[20]: 24 
Motifs in Western art and literature
Further information: Greek mythology in western art and literature
See also: List of films based on Greco-Roman mythology and Greek mythology in popular culture
 Botticelli's The Birth of Venus (c. 1485 1486, oil on canvas, Uffizi, Florence) a revived Venus Pudica for a new view of pagan Antiquity is often said to epitomize for modern viewers the spirit of the Renaissance.[3]
The widespread adoption of Christianity did not curb the popularity of the myths. With the rediscovery of classical antiquity in the Renaissance, the poetry of Ovid became a major influence on the imagination of poets, dramatists, musicians and artists.[3][89] From the early years of Renaissance, artists such as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael, portrayed the Pagan subjects of Greek mythology alongside more conventional Christian themes.[3][89] Through the medium of Latin and the works of Ovid, Greek myth influenced medieval and Renaissance poets such as Petrarch, Boccaccio and Dante in Italy.[3]
 The Lament for Icarus (1898) by Herbert James Draper
In Northern Europe, Greek mythology never took the same hold of the visual arts, but its effect was very obvious on literature.[90] The English imagination was fired by Greek mythology starting with Chaucer and John Milton and continuing through Shakespeare to Robert Bridges in the 20th century. Racine in France and Goethe in Germany revived Greek drama, reworking the ancient myths.[3][89] Although during the Enlightenment of the 18th century reaction against Greek myth spread throughout Europe, the myths continued to provide an important source of raw material for dramatists, including those who wrote the libretti for many of Handel's and Mozart's operas.[91]
By the end of the 18th century, Romanticism initiated a surge of enthusiasm for all things Greek, including Greek mythology. In Britain, new translations of Greek tragedies and Homer inspired contemporary poets (such as Alfred Tennyson, Keats, Byron and Shelley) and painters (such as Lord Leighton and Lawrence Alma-Tadema).[92] Christoph Gluck, Richard Strauss, Jacques Offenbach and many others set Greek mythological themes to music.[3] American authors of the 19th century, such as Thomas Bulfinch and Nathaniel Hawthorne, held that the study of the classical myths was essential to the understanding of English and American literature.[9]: 4  In more recent times, classical themes have been reinterpreted by dramatists Jean Anouilh, Jean Cocteau, and Jean Giraudoux in France, Eugene O'Neill in America, and T. S. Eliot in Britain and by novelists such as James Joyce and Andr  Gide.[3]
References
Notes
^ Cuthbertson (1975) selects a wider range of epic, from Gilgamesh to Voltaire's Henriade, but his central theme that myths encode mechanisms of cultural dynamics structure community by the creation of moral consensus is a familiar mainstream view that applies to Greek myth.
Citations
^ "Volume: Hellas, Article: Greek Mythology". Encyclopaedia The Helios. 1952.
^ Cartwirght, Mark. "Greek Mythology". World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved 26 March 2018.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Adkins, A. W. H.; Pollard, John R. T. (2002) [1998]. "Greek Mythology". Encyclop dia Britannica.
^ Foley, John Miles (1999). "Homeric and South Slavic Epic". Homer's Traditional Art. Penn State Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01870-6.
^ a b c d e f Graf, Fritz. 2009 [1993]. Greek Mythology: An Introduction, translated by T. Marier. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9780801846571.
^ Alms, Anthony. 2007. Theology, Trauerspiel, and the Conceptual Foundations of Early German Opera. City University of New York.
^ a b c d Hard, Robin (2003). "Sources of Greek Myth". The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: based on H. J. Rose's "A Handbook of Greek mythology". London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-18636-0.
^ a b c d e f g Miles, Geoffrey (1999). "The Myth-kitty" in Classical Mythology in English Literature: A Critical Anthology. Chicago: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-415-14754-5.
^ a b c d Klatt, Mary J., and Antoinette Brazouski. 1994. "Preface" in Children's Books on Ancient Greek and Roman Mythology: An Annotated Bibliography. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-28973-6.
^ Cartledge, Paul A. 2004. The Spartans (translated in Greek). Livanis. ISBN 978-960-14-0843-9.
^ Cartledge, Paul A. 2002. "Inventing the Past: History v. Myth" in The Greeks. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280388-7.
^ Pasiphae Archived 15 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Encyclopedia: Greek Gods, Spirits, Monsters
^ Jane Henle, Greek Myths: A Vase Painter's Notebook (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1973) ISBN 0-253-32636-2
^ Homer, Iliad, 8. An epic poem about the Battle of Troy. 366 369
^ Cuthbertson, Gilbert (1975) Political Myth and Epic. Ann Arbor: Michigan State University Press.
^ a b c Albala, Ken G, Claudia Durst Johnson, and Vernon E. Johnson. 2000. Understanding the Odyssey. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-41107-1.
^ Calimach, Andrew, ed. 2002. "The Cultural Background." Pp. 12 109 in Lovers' Legends: The Gay Greek Myths. New Rochelle, NY: Haiduk Press. ISBN 978-0-9714686-0-3.
^ Percy, William A. 1999. "The Institutionalization of Pederasty" in Pederasty and Pedagogy in Archaic Greece. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-252-06740-2.
^ a b Dowden, Ken. 1992. "Myth and Mythology" in The Uses of Greek Mythology. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-06135-3.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Burkert, Walter. 2002. "Prehistory and the Minoan Mycenaen Era" in Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical, translated by J. Raffan. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-15624-6.
^ Hesiod, Works and Days, 90 105 Archived 12 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine
^ Ovid, Metamorphoses, I, 89 162 Archived 23 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Hesiod, Theogony, 116 138
^ Hesiod, Theogony, 713 735
^ a b Guirand, Felix (1987) [1959]. "Greek Mythology".  In Guirand, Felix (ed.). New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology. Translated by R. Aldington and D. Ames. Hamlyn. ISBN 978-0-600-02350-0.
^ Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 414 435 Archived 25 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Betegh, G bor. 2004. "The Interpretation of the poet" in The Derveni Papyrus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80108-9.
^ Algra, Keimpe. 1999. "The Beginnings of Cosmology" in The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-44667-9.
^ a b c Stoll, Heinrich Wilhelm. 1852. Handbook of the Religion and Mythology of the Greeks, translated by R. B. Paul. Francis & John Rivington.
^ Adkins, A. W. H.; Pollard, John R. T. (2 March 2020) [2002]. "Greek Religion". Encyclop dia Britannica.
^ J. Cashford, The Homeric Hymns, vii
^ Nagy, Gregory. 1992. "The Hellenization of the Indo-European Poetics" in Greek Mythology and Poetics. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-8048-5.
^ 
Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, 75 109 Archived 12 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ Morris, Ian. 2000. Archaeology As Cultural History. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-19602-0.
^ Weaver, John B. 1998. "Introduction" in The Plots of Epiphany. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-018266-8.
^ Bushnell, Rebecca W. 2005. "Helicocentric Stoicism in the Saturnalia: The Egyptian Apollo" in Medieval: A Companion to Tragedy. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-0735-8.
^ Trobe, Kala. 2001. "Dionysus" in Invoke the Gods. Llewellyn Worldwide. ISBN 978-0-7387-0096-0.
^ Nilsson, Martin P. 1940. "The Religion of Eleusis" in Greek Popular Religion Archived 1 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 50 Archived 1 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 255 274 Archived 16 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b Kelsey, Francis W. (1889). A Handbook of Greek Mythology. Allyn and Bacon. p. 30.
^ a b Rose, Herbert Jennings. 1991. A Handbook of Greek Mythology. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-04601-5.
^ Dupuis, C. F. The Origin of All Religious Worship. p. 86.
^ a b "Heracles". Encyclop dia Britannica. 6 February 2020 [1999].
^ Papadopoulou, Thalia. 2005. "Introduction" in Heracles and Euripidean Tragedy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85126-8. p. 1.
^ Herodotus, The Histories, I, 6 7 Archived 16 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Kirk, Geoffrey Stephen. 1973. "The Thematic Simplicity of the Myths" in Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures Archived 27 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-02389-5. p. 183.
^ Apollodorus, Library and Epitome, 1.9.16 Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Apollonius, Argonautica, I, 20ff Archived 12 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Pindar, Pythian Odes, Pythian 4.1 Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Argonaut". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
^ a b Grimal, Pierre. 1986. "Argonauts." P. 58 in The Dictionary of Classical Mythology. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1.
^ Bonnefoy, Yves. 1992. "Kinship Structures in Greek Heroic Dynasty" in Greek and Egyptian Mythologies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-06454-3. p. 103.
^ a b c "Trojan War". Encyclopaedia The Helios. 1952.
^ a b c "Troy (Ancient City)". Encyclop dia Britannica. 25 April 2019 [1998].
^ Dunlop, John. 1842. "Romances of Chivalry" in The History of Fiction. Carey and Hart. ISBN 978-1-149-40338-9. p. 355.
^ Kelly, Douglas. The Conspiracy of Allusion. p. 121.
^ a b c Hanson, Victor Davis, and John Heath. 1999. Who Killed Homer, with translations by R. Karakatsani. Kakos. ISBN 978-960-352-545-5. p. 37.
^ a b c Griffin, Jasper. 1986. "Greek Myth and Hesiod" in The Oxford Illustrated History of Greece and the Hellenistic World, edited by J. Boardman, J. Griffin, and O. Murray. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285438-4. p. 80.
^ Plato, Theaetetus, 176b Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine
^ Plato, Apology, 28b-d Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b c d e Gale, Monica R. 1994. Myth and Poetry in Lucretius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-45135-2.
^ "Euhemerus". Encyclop dia Britannica. 3 January 2020 [1998].
^ a b Chance, Jane. 1994. Medieval Mythography. University Press of Florida. ISBN 978-0-8130-1256-8. p. 69.
^ a b c Walsh, Patrick Gerald. 1998. The Nature of the Gods. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-282511-7.
^ a b Barfield, Raymond (2011). The Ancient Quarrel Between Philosophy and Poetry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 75 76. ISBN 978-1-139-49709-1.
^ Cicero, Tusculanae Disputationes, 1.11 Archived 15 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ Cicero, De Divinatione, 2.81 Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ North John A., Mary Beard, and Simon R. F. Price. 1998. "The Religions of Imperial Rome" in Classical Mythology in English Literature: A Critical Anthology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-31682-8. p. 259.
^ Hacklin, Joseph. 1994. "The Mythology of Persia" in Asiatic Mythology. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 978-81-206-0920-4. p. 38.
^ Sacred Texts, Orphic Hymns Archived 18 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine
^ Ackerman, Robert. 1991. Introduction to Jane Ellen Harrison's 'A Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion'. p. xv.
^ a b Buxton, Richard G. A.; Bolle, Kees W.; Smith, Jonathan Z. (2002). "myth". Encyclop dia Britannica.
^ Segal, Robert A. 1999. Theorizing about Myth. University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 978-1-55849-191-5. p. 16.
^ a b Allen, Douglas. 1978. Structure & Creativity in Religion: Hermeneutics in Mircea Eliade's Phenomenology and New Directions. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-90-279-7594-2.
^ Caldwell, Richard. 1990. "The Psychoanalytic Interpretation of Greek Myth" in Approaches to Greek Myth. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-3864-4. p. 344.
^ Jung, Carl. The Psychology of the Child Archetype. p. 85.
^ Segal, Robert A. (1990). "The Romantic Appeal of Joseph Campbell." Christian Century (April 1990):332 5. Archived from the original on 7 January 2007.
^ H.I. Poleman, Review, 78 79
^ A. Winterbourne, When the Norns Have Spoken, 87
^ Nilsson, Martin Persson. 1967. Geschichte der Griechischen Religion (3rd ed.). Munich: C.H. Beck Verlag. Volume I, p. 339.
^ Paul, Adams John (10 January 2010). "Mycenaean Divinities". Northridge, CA: California State University. Retrieved 25 September 2013.
^ Puhvel, Jaan. 1987. Comparative Mythology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 138, 143.
^ Mallory, J.P., and Douglas Q. Adams. 2006. Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World. London: Oxford University Press. p. 440.
^ L. Edmunds, Approaches to Greek Myth, 184
^ Segal, Robert A. 1991. "A Greek Eternal Child" in Myth and the Polis, edited by D. C. Pozzi and J. M. Wickersham. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-2473-1. p. 64.
^ M. Reinhold, The Generation Gap in Antiquity, 349
^ Martin P. Nilsson (1927) The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek Religion
^ M. Wood, In Search of the Trojan War, 112
^ a b c L. Burn, Greek Myths, 75
^ Miles, Geoffrey, ed. (2006). Classical Mythology in English literature: A Critical Anthology. Routledge. ISBN 0415147557. OCLC 912455670.
^ l. Burn, Greek Myths, 75
^ l. Burn, Greek Myths, 75 76
Primary sources (Greek and Roman)
Aeschylus, The Persians. See original text in Perseus program Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound. See original text in Perseus program Archived 2 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Apollodorus, Library and Epitome. See original text in Perseus program Archived 2 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica, Book I. See original text in Sacred Texts Archived 12 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Cicero, De Divinatione. See original text in the Latin Library Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Cicero, Tusculanae resons. See original text in the Latin Library Archived 15 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Herodotus, The Histories, I. See original text in the Sacred Texts Archived 16 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Hesiod, Works and Days. Translated into English Archived 12 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine by Hugh G. Evelyn-White.
Hesiod (1914). Theogony . Translated by Hugh Gerard Evelyn-White   via Wikisource.
Homer, Iliad. See original text in Perseus program Archived 27 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite. Translated into English by Gregory Nagy.
Homeric Hymn to Demeter. See original text in Perseus project Archived 11 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine.
Homeric Hymn to Hermes. See the English translation in the Medieval and Classical Literature Library Archived 25 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Ovid, Metamorphoses. See original text in the Latin Library Archived 23 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Pausanias, Description of Greece See original text in Perseus program Archived 20 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine.
Pindar, Pythian Odes, Pythian 4: For Arcesilas of Cyrene Chariot Race 462 BC. See original text in the Perseus program Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Plato, Apology. See original text in Perseus program Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Plato, Theaetetus. See original text in Perseus program Archived 29 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Secondary sources
Ackerman, Robert (1991). "Introduction". Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion by Jane Ellen Harrison (Reprint ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01514-9.
Albala Ken G; Johnson Claudia Durst; Johnson Vernon E. (2000). "Origin of Mythology". Understanding the Odyssey. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-41107-1.
Algra, Keimpe (1999). "The Beginnings of Cosmology". The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-44667-9.
Allen, Douglas (1978). "Early Methological Approaches". Structure & Creativity in Religion: Hermeneutics in Mircea Eliade's Phenomenology and New Directions. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-90-279-7594-2.
"Argonaut". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
Betegh, G bor (2004). "The Interpretation of the poet". The Derveni Papyrus. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80108-9.
Bonnefoy, Yves (1992). "Kinship Structures in Greek Heroic Dynasty". Greek and Egyptian Mythologies. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-06454-3.
Bulfinch, Thomas (2003). "Greek Mythology and Homer". Bulfinch's Greek and Roman Mythology. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30881-9.
Burkert, Walter (2002). "Prehistory and the Minoan Mycenaen Era". Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical (translated by John Raffan). Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-15624-6.
Burn, Lucilla (1990). Greek Myths. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-72748-9.
Bushnell, Rebecca W. (2005). "Helicocentric Stoicism in the Saturnalia: The Egyptian Apollo". Medieval A Companion to Tragedy. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-0735-8.
Chance, Jane (1994). "Helicocentric Stoicism in the Saturnalia: The Egyptian Apollo". Medieval Mythography. University Press of Florida. ISBN 978-0-8130-1256-8.
Caldwell, Richard (1990). "The Psychoanalytic Interpretation of Greek Myth". Approaches to Greek Myth. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-3864-4.
Calimach, Andrew (2002). "The Cultural Background". Lovers' Legends: The Gay Greek Myths. Haiduk Press. ISBN 978-0-9714686-0-3.
Cartledge, Paul A. (2002). "Inventing the Past: History v. Myth". The Greeks. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280388-7.
Cartledge, Paul A. (2004). The Spartans (translated in Greek). Livanis. ISBN 978-960-14-0843-9.
Cashford, Jules (2003). "Introduction". The Homeric Hymns. Penguin Classics. ISBN 978-0-14-043782-9.
Dowden, Ken (1992). "Myth and Mythology". The Uses of Greek Mythology. Routledge (UK). ISBN 978-0-415-06135-3.
Dunlop, John (1842). "Romances of Chivalry". The History of Fiction. Carey and Hart. ISBN 978-1-149-40338-9.
Edmunds, Lowell (1980). "Comparative Approaches". Approaches to Greek Myth. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-3864-4.
"Euhemerus". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
Foley, John Miles (1999). "Homeric and South Slavic Epic". Homer's Traditional Art. Penn State Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01870-6.
Gale, Monica R. (1994). "The Cultural Background". Myth and Poetry in Lucretius. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-45135-2.
"Greek Mythology". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
"Greek Religion". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
Griffin, Jasper (1986). "Greek Myth and Hesiod". The Oxford Illustrated History of Greece and the Hellenistic World edited by John Boardman, Jasper Griffin and Oswyn Murray. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285438-4.
Grimal, Pierre (1986). "Argonauts". The Dictionary of Classical Mythology. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1.
Hacklin, Joseph (1994). "The Mythology of Persia". Asiatic Mythology. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 978-81-206-0920-4.
Hanson, Victor Davis; Heath, John (1999). Who Killed Homer (translated in Greek by Rena Karakatsani). Kakos. ISBN 978-960-352-545-5.
Hard, Robin (2003). "Sources of Greek Myth". The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: based on H. J. Rose's "A Handbook of Greek mythology". Routledge (UK). ISBN 978-0-415-18636-0.
"Heracles". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
Jung Carl Gustav, Ker nyi Karl (2001). "Prolegomena". Essays on a Science of Mythology (Reprint ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01756-3.
Jung, C.J. (2002). "Troy in Latin and French Joseph of Exeter's "Ylias" and Beno t de Sainte-Maure's "Roman de Troie"". Science of Mythology. Routledge (UK). ISBN 978-0-415-26742-7.
Kelly, Douglas (2003). "Sources of Greek Myth". An Outline of Greek and Roman Mythology. Douglas Kelly. ISBN 978-0-415-18636-0.
Kelsey, Francis W. (1889). A Handbook of Greek Mythology. Allyn and Bacon.
Kirk, Geoffrey Stephen (1973). "The Thematic Simplicity of the Myths". Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-02389-5.
Kirk, Geoffrey Stephen (1974). The Nature of Greek Myths. Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-021783-4.
Klatt J. Mary, Brazouski Antoinette (1994). "Preface". Children's Books on Ancient Greek and Roman Mythology: An Annotated Bibliography. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-28973-6.
Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae. Artemis-Verlag. 1981 1999. {{cite encyclopedia}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)
Miles, Geoffrey (1999). "The Myth-kitty". Classical Mythology in English Literature: A Critical Anthology. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-415-14754-5.
Morris, Ian (2000). Archaeology As Cultural History. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-19602-0.
"myth". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
Nagy, Gregory (1992). "The Hellenization of the Indo-European Poetics". Greek Mythology and Poetics. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-8048-5.
Nilsson, Martin P. (1940). "The Religion of Eleusis". Greek Popular Religion. Columbia University Press.
North John A.; Beard Mary; Price Simon R.F. (1998). "The Religions of Imperial Rome". Classical Mythology in English Literature: A Critical Anthology. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-31682-8.
Papadopoulou, Thalia (2005). "Introduction". Heracles and Euripidean Tragedy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85126-8.
Percy, William Armostrong III (1999). "The Institutionalization of Pederasty". Pederasty and Pedagogy in Archaic Greece. Routledge (UK). ISBN 978-0-252-06740-2.
Poleman, Horace I. (March 1943). "Review of "Ouranos-Varuna. Etude de mythologie comparee indo-europeenne by Georges Dumezil"". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 63 (1): 78 79. doi:10.2307/594160. JSTOR 594160.
Reinhold, Meyer (20 October 1970). "The Generation Gap in Antiquity". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 114 (5): 347 65. JSTOR 985800.
Rose, Herbert Jennings (1991). A Handbook of Greek Mythology. Routledge (UK). ISBN 978-0-415-04601-5.
Segal, Robert A. (1991). "A Greek Eternal Child". Myth and the Polis edited by Dora Carlisky Pozzi, John Moore Wickersham. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-2473-1.
Segal, Robert A. (4 April 1990). "The Romantic Appeal of Joseph Campbell". Christian Century. Archived from the original on 7 January 2007.
Segal, Robert A. (1999). "Jung on Mythology". Theorizing about Myth. Univ of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 978-1-55849-191-5.
Stoll, Heinrich Wilhelm (translated by R. B. Paul) (1852). Handbook of the religion and mythology of the Greeks. Francis and John Rivington.
Trobe, Kala (2001). "Dionysus". Invoke the Gods. Llewellyn Worldwide. ISBN 978-0-7387-0096-0.
"Trojan War". Encyclopaedia The Helios. 1952.
"Troy". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2002.
"Volume: Hellas, Article: Greek Mythology". Encyclopaedia The Helios. 1952.
Walsh, Patrick Gerald (1998). "Liberating Appearance in Mythic Content". The Nature of the Gods. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-282511-7.
Weaver, John B. (1998). "Introduction". The Plots of Epiphany. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-018266-8.
Winterbourne, Anthony (2004). "Spinning and Weaving Fate". When the Norns Have Spoken. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 978-0-8386-4048-7.
Wood, Michael (1998). "The Coming of the Greeks". In Search of the Trojan War. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21599-3.
Further reading
Ancient Greece portalMyths portalReligion portalMythology portalHistory portal
Gantz, Timothy (1993). Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-4410-2.
Graves, Robert (1993) [1955]. The Greek Myths (Cmb/Rep ed.). Penguin (Non-Classics). ISBN 978-0-14-017199-0.
Hamilton, Edith (1998) [1942]. Mythology (New ed.). Back Bay Books. ISBN 978-0-316-34151-6.
Kerenyi, Karl (1980) [1951]. The Gods of the Greeks (Reissue ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-27048-6.
Kerenyi, Karl (1978) [1959]. The Heroes of the Greeks (Reissue ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-27049-3.
Luchte, James (2011). Early Greek Thought: Before the Dawn. Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-0-567-35331-3.
Morford M.P.O., Lenardon L.J. (2006). Classical Mythology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530805-1.
Pinsent, John (1972). Greek Mythology. Bantam. ISBN 978-0-448-00848-6.
Pinsent, John (1991). Myths and Legends of Ancient Greece. Library of the World's Myths and Legends. Peter Bedrick Books. ISBN 978-0-87226-250-8.
Powell, Barry (2008). Classical Myth (6th ed.). Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-606171-7.
Powell, Barry (2001). A Short Introduction to Classical Myth. Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-025839-7.
Ruck Carl, Staples Blaise Daniel (1994). The World of Classical Myth. Carolina Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-89089-575-7.
Smith, William (1870), Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.
Veyne, Paul (1988). Did the Greeks Believe in Their Myths? An Essay on Constitutive Imagination. (translated by Paula Wissing). University of Chicago. ISBN 978-0-226-85434-2.
Woodward, Roger D., ed. (2007). The Cambridge Companion to Greek Mythology. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84520-5.
External links
Library resources about  Greek mythology 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Listen to this article (1 hour and 8 minutes)
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 19 January 2009 (2009-01-19), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help  More spoken articles)
 Media related to Greek mythology at Wikimedia Commons
Greek Myths on In Our Time at the BBC
Library of Classical Mythology Texts translations of works of classical literature
LIMC-France provides databases dedicated to Graeco-Roman mythology and its iconography.
Martin P. Nilsson, The Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology, on Google books
Greek mythology, the age of gods, myths and heroes, Hellenism.Net
vteAncient Greek religion and mythologyReligion and religious practiceMain beliefs
Ages of Man
Golden Age
Heroic Age
Ancient accounts of Homer
Apotheosis
Arete
Daemon
Destiny
Eudaimonia
Euhemerism
Eunoia
Eusebeia
Golden mean
Golden Rule
Greek words for love
Hemitheos
Hero cult
Hubris
Interpretatio graeca
Katabasis
Know thyself
Metempsychosis
Nympholepsy
Paradoxography
Patron gods
Pederasty
Phronesis
Polytheism
Sophrosyne
Soter
Theia mania
Xenia
Texts / odes /epic poemsEpic Cycle
Aethiopis
Cypria
Iliad
Iliupersis
Little Iliad
Nostoi
Odyssey
Telegony
Theban Cycle
Oedipodea
Thebaid
Epigoni
Alcmeonis
Others
Aesop's Fables
Aretalogy
Argonautica
Bibliotheca
Catalogue of Women
Cyranides
Delphic maxims
Derveni papyrus
Dionysiaca
Golden Verses of Pythagoras
Greek Magical Papyri
Homerica
Homeric Hymns
Interpretation of Dreams
Myth of Er
Oneirocritica
Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis
Sibylline Books
Sortes Astrampsychi
Theogony
Works and Days
ReligionsAntecedents
Minoan religion
Mycenaean religion
List of Mycenaean deities
Paleo-Balkan mythology
Proto-Indo-European mythology
Religions of the ancient Near East
Classical forms
Atheism
Classical polytheism
Monotheism
Pythagoreanism
Quasi-religious schools of philosophy
Hellenistic religions
Eastern Christianity
Egyptian religion
Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great
Esoteric systems
Early alchemy
Gnosticism
Hermeticism
Neoplatonism
Etruscan religion
Greco-Buddhism
Hellenistic Judaism
Roman religion
Mystery religionsand sacred mysteries
Arcadian Mysteries
Delos Mysteries
Dionysian Mysteries
Eleusinian Mysteries
Imbrian Mysteries
Mithraism
Mysteries of Isis
Orphism
Samothracian Mysteries
New religious movements
Discordianism
Feraferia
Gaianism
Hellenism
Religious practiceWorship / rituals
Amphidromia
Astragalomancy
Baptes
Daduchos
Divination
Funeral and burial practices
Funeral oration
Greco-Roman mysteries
Hero cult
Heroon
Hierophany
Hieros gamos
Hymns
Incubation
Komos
Nekyia
Omophagia
Orgia
Panegyris
Prayer
Sacrifice
Animal sacrifice
Hecatomb
Holocaust
Libation
Pharmakos
Votive offering
Theatre
Religiousoffices
Amphictyonic league
Archon basileus
Basilinna
Gerarai
Hiereiai
Hierophant
Hierophylakes
Iatromantis
Kanephoros
Mystagogue
Oracle
Sibyl
Thiasus
Religiousobjects
Baetylus
Cult image
Chryselephantine statue
Xoanon
Greek terracotta figurines
Kernos
Kykeon
Loutrophoros
Omphalos
Panathenaic amphora
Rhyton
Sacrificial tripod
Sceptre
Thymiaterion
Magic
Apotropaic magic
Curse tablet
Divination
Greek Magical Papyri
Hermeticism
Hermetica
Necromancy
Philia
EventsFestivals / feasts
Actia
Adonia
Agrionia
Amphidromia
Anthesteria
Apellai
Apaturia
Aphrodisia
Arrhephoria
Ascolia
Bendidia
Boedromia
Brauronia
Buphonia
Chalceia
Diasia
Delia
Delphinia
Dionysia
Ecdysia
Elaphebolia
Gamelia
Halieia
Haloa
Heracleia
Hermaea
Hieromenia
Iolaia
Kronia
Lenaia
Leucophryna
Lykaia
Metageitnia
Munichia
Oschophoria
Pamboeotia
Pandia
Plynteria
Ptolemaieia
Pyanopsia
Skira
Synoikia
Soteria
Tauropolia
Thargelia
Theseia
Thesmophoria
Games
Agon
Panathenaic Games
Rhieia
Panhellenic Games
Olympic Games
Heraean Games
Pythian Games
Nemean Games
Isthmian Games
Sacred placesTemples / sanctuaries
Delphinion
Mithraeum
Necromanteion of Acheron
Nymphaeum
Panionium
Parthenon
Ploutonion
Temenos
Temple of Artemis, Ephesus
Temple of Zeus, Olympia
Oracles
Amphiareion of Oropos
Aornum
Claros
Delphi
Didyma
Dodona
Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae
Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion
Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros
Oracle of Menestheus
Sanctuary of the Great Gods
Tegyra
Mountains
Cretea
Mount Ida (Crete)
Mount Ida (Turkey)
Mount Lykaion
Olympus
Caves
Cave of Zeus, Ayd n
Caves of Pan
Cave of Zeus, Crete
Psychro Cave
Vari Cave
Islands
Island of Achilles
Delos
Islands of Diomedes
Springs
Castalian Spring
Hippocrene
Pierian Spring
Others
Athenian sacred ships
Paralus
Salaminia
Eleusis
Hiera Orgas
Kanathos
Olympia
Sacred Way
Myths and mythologyDeitiesPrimordial deities
Aether
Aion
Ananke
Chaos
Chronos
Erebus
Eros
Gaia
Hemera
The Moirai (Fates)
Moros
Nyx
Phanes
Pontus
Thalassa
Tartarus
Uranus
TitansFirst generation
Coeus
Crius
Cronus
Hyperion
Iapetus
Mnemosyne
Oceanus
Phoebe
Rhea
Tethys
Theia
Themis
Second generation
Asteria
Astraeus
Atlas
Eos
Epimetheus
Helios
Leto
Menoetius
Metis
Pallas
Perses
Prometheus
Selene
Third generation
Hecate
Hesperus
Phosphorus
Twelve Olympians
Aphrodite
Apollo
Ares
Artemis
Athena
Demeter
Dionysus
Hephaestus
Hera
Hermes
Hestia
Poseidon
Zeus
Water deities
Amphitrite
Alpheus
Ceto
Glaucus
Naiads
Nereids
Nereus
Oceanids
Phorcys
Poseidon
Potamoi
Potamides
Proteus
Scamander
Thaumas
Thetis
Triton
Love deitiesErotes
Anteros
Eros
Hedylogos
Hermaphroditus
Himeros
 Hymen/Hymenaeus
Pothos
Aphrodite
Aphroditus
Philotes
Peitho
War deities
Adrestia
Alala
Alke
Amphillogiai
Androktasiai
Ares
Athena
Bia
Deimos
Enyalius
Enyo
Eris
Gynaecothoenas
Homados
Hysminai
Ioke
Keres
Kratos
Kydoimos
Ma
Machai
Nike
Palioxis
Pallas
Perses
Phobos
Phonoi
Polemos
Proioxis
Chthonic deitiesPsychopomps
Charon
Hermes
Hermanubis
Thanatos
Angelos
Cabeiri
Hades / Pluto
Hecate
Hypnos
Keres
Lampad
Macaria
Melino 
Persephone
Zagreus
Health deities
Aceso
Aegle
Artemis
Apollo
Asclepius
Chiron
Darrhon
Eileithyia
Epione
Hebe
Hygieia
Iaso
Paean
Panacea
Telesphorus
Sleep deities
Empusa
Epiales
Hypnos
Pasithea
Oneiroi
Messenger deities
Angelia
Arke
Hermes
Iris
Trickster deities
Apate
Dolos
Hermes
Momus
Magic deities
Circe
Hecate
Hermes Trismegistus
Pasipha 
Other major deities
Azone
Cybele
Eileithyia
The Erinyes (Furies)
Harmonia
The Muses
Nemesis
Pan
Pegasus
Unknown God
Zelus
Heroes / heroines
Abderus
Achilles
Actaeon
Adonis
Aeneas
Ajax the Great
Ajax the Lesser
Akademos
Amphiaraus
Amphitryon
Antilochus
Atalanta
Autolycus
Bellerophon
Bouzyges
Cadmus
Calydonian hunters
Chrysippus
Cyamites
Daedalus
Diomedes
Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces)
Echetlus
Eleusis
Erechtheus
Eunostus
Ganymede
Hector
Heracles
Icarus
Iolaus
Jason and the Argonauts
Meleager
Narcissus
Nestor
Odysseus
Oedipus
Orpheus
Otrera
Pandion
Peleus
Pelops
Penthesilea
Perseus
Seven against Thebes
Theseus
Triptolemus
Oracles / seers
Aesacus
Aleuas
Amphiaraus
Amphilochus
Ampyx
Anius
Asbolus
Bakis
Branchus
Calchas
Carnus
Carya
Cassandra
Elatus
Ennomus
Epimenides
Halitherses
Helenus
Iamus
Idmon
Manto
Melampus
Mopsus
Munichus
Phineus
Polyeidos
Polypheides
Pythia
Sibyls
Cimmerian
Cumaean
Delphic
Erythraean
Hellespontine
Libyan
Persian
Phrygian
Samian
Telemus
Theiodamas
Theoclymenus
Tiresias
Other  mortals
Aegeus
Aegisthus
Agamemnon
Andromache
Andromeda
Antigone
Augeas
Briseis
Cassiopeia
Creon of Thebes
Chryseis
Chrysothemis
Clytemnestra
Damocles
Deidamia of Scyros
Deucalion
Electra
Eteocles
Europa
Gordias
Hecuba
Helen of Troy
Hellen
The Heracleidae
Hermione
Hippolyta
Io
Iphigenia
Ismene
Jocasta
Laius
Lycaon
The Maenads
Memnon
Menelaus
Midas
Minos
Myrrha
Neoptolemus
Niobe
Orestes
Paris
Patroclus
Penelope
Phoenix
Polybus of Corinth
Polynices
Priam
Pylades
Pyrrha
Telemachus
Troilus
UnderworldEntrances to  the underworldRivers
Acheron
Cocytus
Eridanos
Lethe
Phlegethon
Styx
Lakes/swamps
Acherusia
Avernus Lake
Lerna Lake
Caves
Cave at Cape Matapan
Cave at Lake Avernus
Cave at Heraclea Pontica
Charoniums
Charonium at Aornum
Charonium at Acharaca
Ploutonion
Ploutonion at Acharaca
Ploutonion at Eleusis
Ploutonion at Hierapolis
Places
Elysium
Erebus
Fields of Asphodel
Isles of the Blessed
Mourning Fields
Tartarus
Judges
Aeacus
Minos
Rhadamanthus
Guards
Campe
Cerberus
Residents
Anticlea
Dana des
Eurydice
Ixion
Ocnus
Salmoneus
Shades
Sisyphus
Tantalus
Tiresias
Titans
Tityos
Visitors
Dionysus
Heracles
Hermes
Odysseus
Orpheus
Pirithous
Psyche
Theseus
Symbols/objects
Bident
Cap of invisibility
Charon's obol
Animals, daemons, and spirits
Ascalaphus
Ceuthonymus
Eurynomos
Menoetius
MythicalBeingsLists
Greek mythological creatures
Greek mythological figures
List of minor Greek mythological figures
Metamorphoses in Greek mythology
Minor spirits
Daemon
Agathodaemon
Cacodaemon
Eudaemon
Nymph
Satyr
Beasts / creatures
Centaur
Centaurides
Ichthyocentaur
Cyclops
Dragon
Drakaina
Echidna
Giant
Hecatonchires
Gorgon
Harpy
Hippocampus
Horses of Helios
Lamia
Phoenix
Python
Siren
Scylla and Charybdis
Sphinx
Typhon
Captured / slain by  heroes
Calydonian boar
Cerberus
Cerynian Hind
Chimera
Cretan Bull
Crommyonian Sow
Erymanthian boar
Khalkotauroi
Lernaean Hydra
Mares of Diomedes
Medusa
Minotaur
Nemean lion
Orthrus
Polyphemus
Stymphalian birds
Talos
Teumessian fox
Tribes
Amazons
Anthropophagi
Bebryces
Curetes
Dactyls
Gargareans
Halizones
Korybantes
Lapiths
Lotus-eaters
Myrmidons
Pygmies
Spartoi
Telchines
Places / Realms
Aethiopia
Ara
Colchis
Erytheia
Hyperborea
Libya
Nysa
Ogygia
Panchaia
Scheria
Scythia
Tartessos
Themiscyra
Events
Acis and Galatea
Calydonian boar hunt
Eros and Psyche
Judgment of Paris
Labours of Heracles
Returns from Troy
Wars
Amazonomachy
Attic War
Centauromachy
Gigantomachy
Indian War
Theomachy
Titanomachy
Trojan War
Things
Adamant
Aegis
Ambrosia
Apple of Discord
Argo
Dragon's teeth
Diipetes
Eidolon
Galatea
Girdle of Aphrodite
Golden apple
Golden Fleece
Gordian knot
Harpe
Ichor
Labyrinth
Language of the birds
Lotus tree
Milk of Hera
Moly
Necklace of Harmonia
Orichalcum
Palladium
Panacea
Pandora's box
Petasos (Winged helmet)
Phaeacian ships
Philosopher's stone
Shield of Achilles
Shirt of Nessus
Sword of Damocles
Talaria
Thunderbolt
Thyrsus
Trident of Poseidon
Trojan Horse
Winnowing Oar
Wheel of fire
Symbols
Caduceus
Cornucopia
Gorgoneion
Kantharos
Labrys
Orphic egg
Ouroboros
Owl of Athena
Rod of Asclepius
Moderntreatments
Classical mythology in western art and literature
Classicism
Classics
Greek mythology in popular culture
Modern understanding of Greek mythology
vteAncient Greek deities by affiliationPrimordial  deities
Aether
Aion/Chronos
Ananke
Chaos
Erebus
Eros
Gaia
Hemera
Nyx
The Ourea
Phanes
Pontus
Tartarus
Thalassa
Uranus
Fates
Atropos
Clotho
Lachesis
Titan  deitiesTitanes (male)
Coeus
Crius
Cronus
Hyperion
Iapetus
Oceanus
Titanides (female)
Dione
Mnemosyne
Phoebe
Rhea
Tethys
Theia
Themis
Children of Hyperion
Eos
Helios
Selene
Children of Coeus
Asteria
Leto
Children of Crius
Astraeus
Pallas
Perses
Children of Iapetus
Atlas
Epimetheus
Menoetius
Prometheus
Olympian  deitiesTwelve Olympians
Aphrodite
Apollo
Ares
Artemis
Athena
Demeter
Dionysus
Hephaestus
Hera
Hermes
Hestia
Poseidon
Zeus
Theoi Olympioi
Asclepius
Eileithyia
Enyo
Eris
Iris
Harmonia
Hebe
Heracles
Paean
Pan
Mousai (Muses)
Daughters of Zeus
Calliope
Clio
Euterpe
Erato
Melpomene
Polyhymnia
Terpsichore
Thalia
Urania
Daughters of Apollo
Apollonis
Borysthenis
Cephisso
Boeotian Muses
Aoide
Melete
Mneme
Muses of the Lyre
Hypate
Mese
Nete
Muses at Sicyon
Polymatheia
Charites (Graces)
Aglaea
Antheia
Euphrosyne
Hegemone
Pasithea
Thalia
Horae (Hours)
Dike
Eirene
Eunomia
Children of Styx
Bia
Kratos
Nike
Zelus
Water  deitiesSea deities
Amphitrite
Benthesikyme
Brizo
Calliste
Calypso
Ceto
Eurybia
Glaucus
The Ichthyocentaurs
Leucothea
Melicertes
Nereus
Nerites
The Nesoi
Oceanus
Phorcys
Pontus/Thalassa
Poseidon
Proteus
Rhodos
Tethys
Thaumas
Thetis
Triton
Oceanids
Acaste
Admete
Amalthea
Asia
Callirhoe
Ceto
Clymene (consort of Helios)
Clymene (wife of Iapetus)
Clytie
Dione
Dodone
Doris
Electra
Eurynome
Idyia
Melia (consort of Apollo)
Melia (consort of Inachus)
Metis
Perse
Philyra
Pleione
Plouto
Styx
Telesto
Theia
Zeuxo
Nereids
Amatheia
Amphithoe
Amphitrite
Arethusa
Cymatolege
Cymo
Dynamene
Galatea
Galene
Protomedeia
Psamathe
Sao
Spio
Thalia
Thetis
Potamoi
Achelous
Almo
Alpheus
Anapos
Asopus
Asterion
Axius
Caanthus
Cebren
Cephissus
Clitumnus
Enipeus
Kladeos
Meander
Nilus
Numicus
Phyllis
Peneus
Rivers of the Underworld
Acheron
Cocytus
Eridanos
Lethe
Phlegethon
Styx
Sangarius
Scamander
Simoeis
Strymon
Naiads
Aegina
Achiroe
Aganippe
The Anigrides
Argyra
Bistonis
Bolbe
Caliadne
Cassotis
Castalia
Cleocharia
Creusa
Daphne
Drosera
Harpina
The Ionides
Ismenis
Larunda
Lilaea
Liriope
Melite
Metope
Minthe
Moria
Nana
Nicaea
Orseis
Pallas
Pirene
Salmacis
Stilbe
The Thriae
Corycia
Cleodora
Melaina
Tiasa
Chthonic  deitiesTheoi Chthonioi
Angelos
Gaia
Hades
Hecate
The Lampads
Macaria
Melino 
Persephone
Zagreus
Erinyes (Furies)
Alecto
Megaera
Tisiphone
Earthborn
Cyclopes
Gigantes
Hecatonchires
Kouretes
Meliae
Telchines
Typhon
Apotheothenai
Trophonius
Triptolemus
Orpheus
Aeacus
Minos
Rhadamanthus
PersonificationsChildren of Eris
Algos
Amphillogiai
The Androktasiai
At 
Dysnomia
Horkos
Hysminai
Lethe
Logoi
Limos
Machai
Neikea
Phonoi
Ponos
Pseudea
Children of Nyx
Apate
Dolos
Eleos
Elpis
Epiphron
Eris
Geras
Hesperides
Hybris
Hypnos
The Keres
The Moirai
Atropos
Clotho
Lachesis
Momus
Moros
Nemesis
Oizys
The Oneiroi
Philotes
Sophrosyne
Thanatos
Children of Phorcys
Echidna
The Graeae
Deino
Enyo
Pemphredo
The Gorgones
Euryale
Medusa
Stheno
The Sirenes
Aglaopheme
Leucosia
Ligeia
Molpe
Parthenope
Peisinoe
Thelxiepeia
Children of Thaumas
The Harpiae
Aello
Celaeno
Ocypete
Podarge
Arke
Iris
Children of other gods
Aergia
Aidos
Alala
Aletheia
Angelia
Arete
Astraea
Caerus
The Younger Charites
Eucleia
Eupheme
Euthenia
Philophrosyne
Corus
Deimos
The Erotes
Anteros
Eros
Hedylogos
Hermaphroditus
Hymen
Pothos
Ersa
Eupraxia
Hedone
Homonoia
Iacchus
The Litae
Peitho
Phobos
Tyche
Others
Achlys
Adephagia
Alala
Alke
Amechania
Anaideia
Alastor
Apheleia
The Arae
Dikaiosyne
Dyssebeia
Chrysus
Eiresione
Ekecheiria
Eulabeia
Eusebeia
Gelos
Heimarmene
Homados
Horme
Ioke
Kakia
Koalemos
Kydoimos
Lyssa
The Maniae
Methe
Nomos
Palioxis
Peitharchia
Penia
Penthus
Pepromene
Pheme
Phrike
Phthonus
Poine
Polemos
Poros
Praxidice
Proioxis
Prophasis
Soter
Soteria
Thrasos
Other deitiesSky
The Anemoi
Boreas
The Astra Planeti
Stilbon
Hesperus
Phosphorus
Pyroeis
Phaethon
Phaenon
Astrape and Bronte
Aura
Chione
The Hesperides
The Hyades
Nephele
The Pleiades
Alcyone
Sterope
Celaeno
Electra
Maia
Merope
Taygete
Agriculture
Aphaea
Demeter
Despoina
Eunostus
Philomelus
Plutus
Health
Asclepius
Aceso
Darrhon
Epione
Iaso
Hygieia
Paean
Panacea
Telesphorus
Rustic deities
Aetna
Agdistis
The Alseids
Amphictyonis
The Anthousai
Aristaeus
Attis
The Auloniads
Britomartis
The Cabeiri
Comus
The Dryades
Erato
The Hamadryades
Chrysopeleia
The Epimeliades
Hecaterus
Leuce
Ma
The Maenades
The Meliae
The Napaeae
The Nymphai Hyperboreioi
The Oreads
Adrasteia
Cyllene
Echo
Helice
Iynx
Nomia
Oenone
Pitys
The Pegasides
Priapus
Rhapso
Silenus
Telete
Others
Alexiares and Anicetus
Aphroditus
Enodia
Circe
Enyalius
Palaestra
Pasipha 
Sosipolis
vteMythology of EuropeSovereign states
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Dependencies andother entities
 land
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard
Authority control International
FAST
National
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greek_mythology&oldid=1145769627"