Civil War general and 18th president of the United States
For other uses, see Ulysses S. Grant (disambiguation).
"General Grant" redirects here. For other uses, see General Grant (disambiguation).
Ulysses S. GrantPortrait by Mathew Brady, c. 1870 188018th President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1869  March 4, 1877Vice PresidentSchuyler Colfax (1869 1873)Henry Wilson (1873 1875)None (1875 1877)[a]Preceded byAndrew JohnsonSucceeded byRutherford B. HayesCommanding General of the U.S. ArmyIn officeMarch 9, 1864  March 4, 1869President
Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson
Preceded byHenry W. HalleckSucceeded byWilliam Tecumseh ShermanActing United States Secretary of WarIn officeAugust 12, 1867  January 14, 1868PresidentAndrew JohnsonPreceded byEdwin StantonSucceeded byEdwin Stanton
Personal detailsBornHiram Ulysses Grant(1822-04-27)April 27, 1822Point Pleasant, Ohio, U.S.DiedJuly 23, 1885(1885-07-23) (aged 63)Wilton, New York, U.S.Cause of deathThroat cancerResting placeGrant's Tomb, New York CityPolitical partyRepublicanSpouseJulia Dent  (m. 1848) Children
Frederick
Ulysses Jr.
Nellie
Jesse II
Parents
Jesse Root Grant
Hannah Simpson Grant
EducationUnited States Military Academy (BS)OccupationMilitary officerpoliticianSignatureNicknamesSamUnconditional SurrenderMilitary serviceBranch/serviceU.S. Army (Union Army)Years of service
1839 1854
1861 1869
RankGeneral of the ArmyCommands
Company F, 4th Infantry
21st Illinois Infantry Regiment
District of Southeast Missouri
District of Cairo
Army of the Tennessee
Division of the Mississippi
United States Army
Battles/wars
Mexican American War
American Civil War
Ulysses S. Grant (born Hiram Ulysses Grant, / ha r m ju l si z/ HY-r m yoo-LISS-eez; April 27, 1822  July 23, 1885) was an American military officer and politician who served as the 18th president of the United States from 1869 to 1877. As Commanding General, he led the Union Army to victory in the American Civil War in 1865 and thereafter briefly served as U.S. Secretary of War. Later, as president, Grant was an effective civil rights executive who signed the bill that created the Justice Department and worked with Radical Republicans to protect African Americans during Reconstruction.
Born and raised in Ohio, Grant possessed an exceptional ability with horses. Admitted to West Point, Grant graduated in the class of 1843 and served with distinction in the Mexican American War. In 1848, he married Julia Dent, and together they had four children. Grant resigned from the army in 1854 but returned to his family impoverished. He joined the Union Army shortly after the American Civil War broke out in 1861 and rose to prominence after winning early Union victories in the western theater. In 1863, he led the Vicksburg campaign, which gained control of the Mississippi River, dealing a serious strategic blow to the Confederacy, splitting it in two. President Abraham Lincoln promoted him to lieutenant general after his victory at Chattanooga. For thirteen months, Grant fought Robert E. Lee during the high-casualty Overland Campaign and at Petersburg. After Lee fled Petersburg, Grant surrounded and captured his army at Appomattox. On April 9, 1865, Lee formally surrendered to Grant. In 1866, president Andrew Johnson promoted Grant to General of the Army. Later, Grant openly broke with Johnson over Reconstruction policies; Grant used the Reconstruction Acts, which had been passed over Johnson's veto, to enforce civil rights for recently freed African Americans. 
A war hero, drawn in by his sense of duty, Grant was unanimously nominated by the Republican Party and then elected president in 1868. As president, Grant stabilized the post-war national economy, supported congressional Reconstruction and the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment, and crushed the Ku Klux Klan. Under Grant, the Union was completely restored. He appointed African Americans and Jewish Americans to prominent federal offices. In 1871, he created the first Civil Service Commission, advancing the civil service more than any prior president. The Liberal Republicans and Democrats united behind Grant's opponent in the 1872 election, but Grant was handily reelected. Grant's Native American policy was to assimilate Indians into White culture; the Great Sioux War was fought during his term. His foreign policy was mostly peaceful, without war, the Alabama Claims against Great Britain skillfully resolved. However, his prized Caribbean Dominican Republic annexation was rejected by the Senate.
The Grant administration was often remembered primarily for a number of scandals, including the Gold Ring and the Whiskey Ring, but modern scholarship has better appreciated Grant's appointed reformers and prosecutions. Grant appointed John Brooks Henderson and David Dyer, who prosecuted the Whiskey Ring; Benjamin Bristow and Edwards Pierrepont, who served as Grant's anti-corruption team; and Zachariah Chandler, who cleaned up corruption in the Interior. Grant's administration prosecuted Mormon polygamists in 1871, vice crimes such as pornography, and abortion from 1873 to 1877. The Panic of 1873 plunged the nation into a severe economic depression that allowed the Democrats to win the House majority. In the intensely disputed 1876 presidential election, Grant facilitated the approval by Congress of a peaceful compromise.
With the tour he took in his retirement, Grant became the first president to circumnavigate the world, meeting many prominent foreign leaders. In 1880, Grant was unsuccessful in obtaining the Republican presidential nomination for a third term. In the final year of his life, facing severe financial reversals and dying of throat cancer, he wrote his memoirs, which were published in two volumes in 1885 and 1886, shortly after Grant's death. They proved to be a major critical and financial success. At the time of his death, he was memorialized as a symbol of national unity. Grant was a modern general and "a skillful leader who had a natural grasp of tactics and strategy". Historical assessments and rankings of Grant were negative about him and his presidency before recovering somewhat beginning in the 1980s. The consensus among them rates his presidency below average. Grant's critics take a negative view of his economic mismanagement and his failed Dominican Republic annexation treaty, while his admirers emphasize Grant's concern for Native Americans and enforcement of civil and voting rights.[1]
Early life and education
Further information: Early life and career of Ulysses S. Grant
 Grant's birthplace, Point Pleasant, Ohio
Hiram Ulysses Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, on April 27, 1822, to Jesse Root Grant, a tanner and merchant, and Hannah Simpson Grant.[2] His ancestors Matthew and Priscilla Grant arrived aboard the ship Mary and John at Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630.[3] Grant's great-grandfather fought in the French and Indian War, and his grandfather, Noah, served in the American Revolution at Bunker Hill.[4] Afterward, Noah settled in Pennsylvania and married Rachel Kelley,  the daughter of an Irish pioneer.[5] Their son Jesse (Ulysses's father) was a Whig Party supporter and a fervent abolitionist.[6] Jesse Grant moved to Point Pleasant in 1820 and found work as a foreman in a tannery.[7] He soon met his future wife, Hannah, and the two were married on June 24, 1821.[8] Hannah descended from Presbyterian immigrants from Ballygawley in County Tyrone, Ireland.[9][10] Ten months after she was married, Hannah gave birth to Ulysses, her and Jesse's first child.[11] The boy's name, Ulysses, was drawn from ballots placed in a hat. To honor his father-in-law, Jesse named the boy Hiram Ulysses, though he would always refer to him as Ulysses.[12][b]
In 1823, the family moved to Georgetown, Ohio, where five more siblings were born: Simpson, Clara, Orvil, Jennie, and Mary.[14] At the age of five, Ulysses began his formal education, starting at a subscription school and later in two private schools.[15] In the winter of 1836 1837, Grant was a student at Maysville Seminary, and in the autumn of 1838, he attended John Rankin's academy. In his youth, Grant developed an unusual ability to ride and manage horses.[16] Grant disliked the tannery, so his father put his ability with horses to use by giving him work driving wagon loads of supplies and transporting people.[17] Unlike his siblings, Grant was not forced to attend church by his Methodist parents.[18][c] For the rest of his life, he prayed privately and never officially joined any denomination.[20] To others, including his own son, Grant appeared to be an agnostic.[21] He inherited some of Hannah's Methodist piety and quiet nature.[22] Grant was largely apolitical before the war but wrote, "If I had ever had any political sympathies they would have been with the Whigs. I was raised in that school."[23]
Early military career and personal life
West Point and first assignment
 Grant c. 1845 1847
Grant's father wrote to Representative Thomas L. Hamer requesting that he nominate Ulysses to the United States Military Academy (USMA) at West Point, New York. Despite political differences with Jesse Root Grant, Hamer, a Democrat, nominated his 17-year-old son to West Point in spring 1839.[24] Grant was accepted on July 1, although he doubted his academic abilities.[25] Hamer, unfamiliar with Grant, submitted an incorrect name to West Point. On September 14 Grant was enlisted Cadet "U.S. Grant" at the national academy.[26][d] His nickname at West Point became "Sam" among army colleagues since the initials "U.S." also stood for "Uncle Sam".[30][e]
Initially, Grant was indifferent to military life, but within a year he reexamined his desire to leave the academy and later wrote that "on the whole I like this place very much".[32] While at the academy, his greatest interest was horses, and he earned a reputation as the "most proficient" horseman.[33] During the graduation ceremony, while riding York, a large and powerful horse that only Grant could manage, he set a high-jump record that stood for 25 years.[34][f] Seeking relief from military routine, he studied under Romantic artist Robert Walter Weir, producing nine surviving artworks.[36] He spent more time reading books from the library than his academic texts, including works by James Fenimore Cooper and others.[37] On Sundays, cadets were required to march to and attend services at the academy's church, a requirement that Grant disliked.[38] Quiet by nature, Grant established a few intimate friends among fellow cadets, including Frederick Tracy Dent and James Longstreet. He was inspired both by the Commandant, Captain Charles F. Smith, and by General Winfield Scott, who visited the academy to review the cadets. Grant later wrote of the military life, "there is much to dislike, but more to like."[39]
Grant graduated on June 30, 1843, ranked 21st out of 39 in his class and was promoted the next day to the rank brevet second lieutenant.[40] Small for his age at 17, he had entered the academy weighing only 117 pounds (53 kg) at 5 feet 2 inches (1.57 m) tall; upon graduation four years later he had grown to a height of 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m).[41] Grant planned to resign his commission after his four-year term of duty. He would later write to a friend that among the happiest days of his life were the day he left the presidency and the day he left the academy.[42] Despite his excellent horsemanship, he was not assigned to the cavalry, but to the 4th Infantry Regiment.[g] Grant's first assignment took him to the Jefferson Barracks near St. Louis, Missouri. Lt. Col. Robert C. Buchanan fined Grant wine bottles for Grant's late returns from White Haven.[44] Commanded by Colonel Stephen W. Kearny, the barracks was the nation's largest military base in the West.[45] Grant was happy with his new commander but looked forward to the end of his military service and a possible teaching career.[46]
Marriage and family
In Missouri, Grant visited Dent's family and became engaged to Dent's sister, Julia, in 1844.[46] Four years later on August 22, 1848, they were married at Julia's home in St. Louis. Grant's abolitionist father disapproved of the Dents' owning slaves, and neither of Grant's parents attended the wedding.[47] Grant was flanked by three fellow West Point graduates, all dressed in their blue uniforms, including Longstreet, Julia's cousin.[48][h] At the end of the month, Julia was warmly received by Grant's family in Bethel, Ohio.[51] They had four children: Frederick, Ulysses Jr. ("Buck"), Ellen ("Nellie"), and Jesse.[52] After the wedding, Grant obtained a two-month extension to his leave and returned to St. Louis when he decided, with a wife to support, that he would remain in the army.[53]
Mexican American War
Main article: Mexican American War
 Battle of Monterrey Published 1847
After rising tensions with Mexico following the United States annexation of Texas, war broke out in 1846. During the conflict, Grant distinguished himself as a daring and competent soldier.[54] Before the war President John Tyler had ordered Grant's unit to Louisiana as part of the Army of Occupation under Major General Zachary Taylor.[55] In September 1846, Tyler's successor, James K. Polk, unable to provoke Mexico into war at Corpus Christi, Texas, ordered Taylor to march 150 miles south to the Rio Grande. Marching south to Fort Texas, to prevent a Mexican siege, Grant experienced combat for the first time on May 8, 1846, at the Battle of Palo Alto.[56]
Grant served as regimental quartermaster, but yearned for a combat role; when finally allowed, he led a charge at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma.[57] He demonstrated his equestrian ability at the Battle of Monterrey by volunteering to carry a dispatch past snipers, where he hung off the side of his horse, keeping the animal between him and the enemy. Before leaving the city he assured some wounded Americans he would send for help.[58] Polk, wary of Taylor's growing popularity, divided his forces, sending some troops (including Grant's unit) to form a new army under Major General Winfield Scott.[59] Traveling by sea, Scott's army landed at Veracruz and advanced toward Mexico City.[60] The army met the Mexican forces at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec outside Mexico City.[61] For his bravery at Molino del Rey, Grant was brevetted first lieutenant on September 30.[62] At San Cosm , Grant directed his men to drag a disassembled howitzer into a church steeple, then reassembled it and bombarded nearby Mexican troops.[61] His bravery and initiative earned him his brevet promotion to captain.[63] On September 14, 1847, Scott's army marched into the city; Mexico ceded the vast territory, including California, to the U.S. on February 2, 1848.[64]
During the war, Grant established a commendable record, studied the tactics and strategies of Scott and Taylor, and emerged as a seasoned officer, writing in his memoirs that this is how he learned much about military leadership.[65] In retrospect, although he respected Scott, he identified his leadership style with Taylor's. However, Grant also wrote that the Mexican war was morally unjust and that the territorial gains were designed to expand slavery, stating, "I was bitterly opposed to the measure ... and to this day, regard the war which resulted as one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation." He opined that the Civil War was divine punishment on the U.S. for its aggression against Mexico.[66] During the war, Grant discovered his "moral courage" and began to consider a career in the army.[67]
Historians increasingly have pointed to the importance of Grant's experience as an assistant quartermaster during the war. Although he was initially averse to the position, it prepared Grant in understanding military supply routes, transportation systems, and logistics, particularly with regard to "provisioning a large, mobile army operating in hostile territory," according to biographer Ronald White.[57] Grant came to recognize how wars could be won or lost by crucial factors that lay beyond the tactical battlefield. Serving as assistant quartermaster made Grant a complete soldier, and learning how to supply an entire army gave Grant the training to sustain large armies.[68][i]
Post-war assignments and resignation
Grant's first post-war assignments took him and Julia to Detroit on November 17, 1848, but he was soon transferred to Madison Barracks, a desolate outpost in upstate New York, in bad need of supplies and repair. After four months, Grant was sent back to his quartermaster job in Detroit.[71] When the discovery of gold in California brought droves of prospectors and settlers to the territory, Grant and the 4th infantry were ordered to reinforce the small garrison there. Grant was charged with bringing the soldiers and a few hundred civilians from New York City to Panama, overland to the Pacific and then north to California. Julia, eight months pregnant with Ulysses Jr., did not accompany him. While Grant was in Panama, a cholera epidemic broke out and claimed the lives of many soldiers, civilians, and children. Grant established and organized a field hospital in Panama City, and moved the worst cases to a hospital barge one mile offshore.[72] When orderlies protested having to attend to the sick, Grant did much of the nursing himself, earning high praise from observers.[73] In August, Grant arrived in San Francisco. His next assignment sent him north to Vancouver Barracks in the Oregon Territory.[74]
Grant tried several business ventures but failed, and in one instance his business partner absconded with $800 of Grant's investment, equivalent to $21,000 in 2021.[75][76] Concerning local Indians, Grant assured Julia, by letter, they were harmless, and he developed empathy for their plight.[77] Grant witnessed white agents cheating Indians of their supplies, and the devastation of smallpox and measles, transferred by white settlers.[78]
Promoted to captain on August 5, 1853, Grant was assigned to command Company F, 4th Infantry, at the newly constructed Fort Humboldt in California.[79] Grant arrived at Fort Humboldt on January 5, 1854, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Buchanan, a martinet officer, with whom Grant had earlier crossed paths at Jefferson Barracks.[80] Separated from his wife and family, Grant began to drink.[81] Colonel Buchanan reprimanded Grant for one drinking episode and told Grant to "resign or reform." Grant told Buchanan he would "resign if I don't reform."[82] On Sunday, Grant was found influenced by alcohol, but not incapacitated, at his company's paytable.[83] Keeping his pledge to Buchanan, Grant resigned, effective July 31, 1854.[84] Buchanan endorsed Grant's letter of resignation but did not submit any report that verified the incident.[85][j] Grant did not face court-martial, and the War Department said: "Nothing stands against his good name."[91] Grant said years later, "the vice of intemperance (drunkenness) had not a little to do with my decision to resign."[92] With no means of support, Grant returned to St. Louis and reunited with his family, uncertain about his future.[93]
Civilian struggles, slavery, and politics
 "Hardscrabble" Published 1891 The farm home Grant built in Missouri for his family. His wife Julia called the home an "unattractive cabin".
In 1854, at age 32, Grant entered civilian life, without any money-making vocation to support his growing family. It was the beginning of seven years of financial struggles, poverty, and instability.[94] Grant's father offered him a place in the Galena, Illinois, branch of the family's leather business, but demanded Julia and the children stay in Missouri, with the Dents, or with the Grants in Kentucky. Grant and Julia declined the offer. Grant farmed (for the next four years[95]), using Julia's slave Dan, on his brother-in-law's property, Wish-ton-wish, near St. Louis.[96] The farm was not successful and to earn an alternate living he sold firewood on St. Louis street corners.[97]
In 1856, the Grants moved to land on Julia's father's farm, and built a home called "Hardscrabble" on Grant's Farm. Julia described the rustic house as an "unattractive cabin", but made the dwelling as homelike as possible with the family's keepsakes and other belongings.[98] Grant's family had little money, clothes, and furniture, but always had enough food.[99] During the Panic of 1857, which devastated Grant as it did many farmers, Grant pawned his gold watch in order to buy Christmas gifts for his family.[100] In 1858, Grant rented out Hardscrabble and moved his family to Julia's father's 850-acre plantation.[101] That fall, after suffering from malaria, Grant finally gave up farming.[102]
The same year, Grant acquired a slave from his father-in-law, a thirty-five-year-old man named William Jones.[103] Although Grant was not an abolitionist, he was not considered a "slavery man", and could not bring himself to force a slave to do work.[104] In March 1859, Grant freed William by a manumission deed, potentially worth at least $1,000, when Grant needed the money.[105][k] Grant moved to St. Louis, taking on a partnership with Julia's cousin Harry Boggs working in the real estate business as a bill collector, again without success and with Julia's prompting ended the partnership.[107] In August, Grant applied for a position as county engineer, believing his education qualified him for the job. He had thirty-five notable recommendations, but the position was given on the basis of political affiliation and Grant was passed over by the Free Soil and Republican county commissioners because he was believed to share his father-in-law's Democratic sentiments.[108] In the 1856 presidential election, Grant cast his first presidential vote for Democrat James Buchanan, later saying he was really voting against Republican John C. Fr mont over concern that his anti-slavery position would lead to southern secession and war and because he considered Fr mont to be a shameless self-promoter.[109]
In April 1860, Grant and his family moved north to Galena, accepting a position in his father's leather goods business run by his younger brothers Simpson and Orvil.[110][l] In a few months, Grant paid off his debts.[112] The family attended the local Methodist church and he soon established himself as a reputable citizen of Galena.[113] For the 1860 election, he could not vote because he was not yet a legal resident of Illinois, but he favored Democrat Stephen A. Douglas over the eventual winner, Abraham Lincoln, and Lincoln over the Southern Democrat, John C. Breckinridge.[114] He was torn between his increasingly anti-slavery views and the fact that his wife remained a staunch Democrat.[115]
Civil War
Main article: Ulysses S. Grant and the American Civil War
 Brigadier General Grant photographed at Cairo, Illinois, September 1861 (Published 1911)
On April 12, 1861, the American Civil War began when Confederate troops attacked Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina.[116] The news came as a shock in Galena, and Grant shared his neighbors' concern about the war.[117] On April 15, Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers.[118] The next day, Grant attended a mass meeting to assess the crisis and encourage recruitment, and a speech by his father's attorney, John Aaron Rawlins, stirred Grant's patriotism.[119][m] Ready to fight, Grant recalled with satisfaction, "I never went into our leather store again."[120][n] On April 18, Grant chaired a second recruitment meeting, but turned down a captain's position as commander of the newly formed militia company, hoping his previous experience would aid him to obtain a more senior military rank.[122]
Early commands
Further information: Kentucky in the American Civil War
Grant's early efforts to be recommissioned were rejected by Major General George B. McClellan and Brigadier General Nathaniel Lyon. On April 29, supported by Congressman Elihu B. Washburne of Illinois, Grant was appointed military aide to Governor Richard Yates and mustered ten regiments into the Illinois militia. On June 14, again aided by Washburne, Grant was promoted to Colonel and put in charge of the unruly 21st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment, which he soon restored to good order and discipline.[123] Colonel Grant and his 21st Regiment were transferred to Missouri to dislodge Confederate forces.[124]
On August 5, with Washburne's aid, Grant was appointed Brigadier General of volunteers.[125] Major General John C. Fr mont, Union commander of the West, passed over senior generals and appointed Grant commander of the District of Southeastern Missouri.[126][o] On September 2, Grant arrived at Cairo, Illinois, assumed command by replacing Colonel Oglesby, and set up his headquarters to plan a campaign down the Mississippi, and up the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers.[128] After the Confederates moved into western Kentucky, taking Columbus,[129] with designs on southern Illinois, Grant, after notifying Fr mont, and without waiting further for his reply, strategically advanced on Paducah, Kentucky, taking it without a fight on September 6.[130] Having understood the importance to Lincoln about Kentucky's neutrality, Grant assured its citizens, "I have come among you not as your enemy, but as your friend."[131] On November 1, Fr mont ordered Grant to "make demonstrations" against the Confederates on both sides of the Mississippi, but prohibited him from attacking the enemy.[132]
Belmont (1861), Forts Henry and Donelson (1862)
Main articles: Battle of Belmont, Battle of Fort Henry, and Battle of Fort Donelson
Battle of Fort DonelsonPublished 1887Map showing Fort Donelson and surrounding area during capture
On November 2, 1861, Lincoln removed Fr mont from command, freeing Grant to attack Confederate soldiers encamped in Cape Girardeau, Missouri.[132] On November 5, Grant, along with Brigadier General John A. McClernand, landed 2,500 men at Hunter's Point, and on November 7 engaged the Confederates at the Battle of Belmont.[133] The Union army took the camp, but the reinforced Confederates under Brigadier Generals Frank Cheatham and Gideon J. Pillow forced a chaotic Union retreat. [134] Grant had wanted to destroy Confederate strongholds at both Belmont, Missouri and Columbus, Kentucky, but was not given enough troops and was only able to disrupt their positions. Grant's troops fought their way back to their Union boats and escaped back to Cairo under fire from the fortified stronghold at Columbus. [135] Although Grant and his army retreated, the battle gave his volunteers much-needed confidence and experience.[136] It also showed Lincoln that Grant was a general willing to fight.[137]
Columbus blocked Union access to the lower Mississippi. Grant and lieutenant colonel James B. McPherson planned to bypass Columbus and with a force of 25,000 troops, move against Fort Henry on the Tennessee River. They would then march ten miles east to Fort Donelson on the Cumberland River, with the aid of gunboats, opening both rivers and allowing the Union access further south. Grant presented his plan to Henry Halleck, his new commander in the newly created Department of Missouri.[138] Halleck was considering the same strategy, but rebuffed Grant, believing he needed twice the number of troops. However, after Halleck telegraphed and consulted McClellan about the plan, he finally agreed on the condition that the attack would be conducted in close cooperation with the navy Flag Officer, Andrew H. Foote. [139] Foote's gunboats bombarded Fort Henry, leading to its surrender on February 6, 1862, before Grant's infantry even arrived.[140]
Grant then ordered an immediate assault on Fort Donelson, which dominated the Cumberland River. Fort Donelson, unlike Fort Henry, had a force equal to Grant's army. Unaware of the garrison's strength, Grant, McClernand, and Smith positioned their divisions around the fort. The next day McClernand and Smith independently launched probing attacks on apparent weak spots but were forced to retreat by the Confederates. On February 14, Foote's gunboats began bombarding the fort, only to be repulsed by its heavy guns. Seizing the initiative, the next day, Pillow fiercely attacked and routed one of Grant's divisions, McClernand's. Union reinforcements arrived, giving Grant a total force of over 40,000 men. Grant was with Foote, four miles away when the Confederates attacked. Hearing the battle noise, Grant rode back and rallied his troop commanders, riding over seven miles of freezing roads and trenches, exchanging reports. When Grant blocked the Nashville Road, the Confederates retreated back into Fort Donelson.[141] On February 16, Foote resumed his bombardment, which signaled a general attack. Confederate generals John B. Floyd and Pillow fled, leaving the fort in command of Simon Bolivar Buckner, who submitted to Grant's demand for "unconditional and immediate surrender".[142]
Grant had won the first major victory for the Union, capturing Floyd's entire rebel army of more than 12,000. Halleck was angry that Grant had acted without his authorization and complained to McClellan, accusing Grant of "neglect and inefficiency". On March 3, Halleck sent a telegram to Washington complaining that he had no communication with Grant for a week. Three days later, Halleck followed up with a postscript claiming "word has just reached me that ... Grant has resumed his bad habits (of drinking)."[143] Lincoln, regardless, promoted Grant to major general of volunteers and the Northern press treated Grant as a hero. Playing off his initials, they took to calling him "Unconditional Surrender Grant".[144]
Shiloh (1862) and aftermath
Further information: Battle of Shiloh
Battle of ShilohThulstrup 1888Battle of Shiloh map
With great armies now massing, it was widely thought in the North that another western battle might end the war.[145] Grant, reinstated by Halleck at the urging of Lincoln and Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, left Fort Henry and traveled by boat up the Tennessee River to rejoin his army with orders to advance with the Army of the Tennessee into Tennessee. Grant's main army was located at Pittsburg Landing, while 40,000 Confederate troops converged at Corinth, Mississippi.[146] Brigadier General William Tecumseh Sherman assured Grant that his green troops were ready for an attack. Grant agreed and wired Halleck with their assessment.[147] Grant wanted to attack the Confederates at Corinth, but Halleck ordered him not to attack until Major General Don Carlos Buell arrived with his division of 25,000.[148] Meanwhile, Grant prepared for an attack on the Confederate army of roughly equal strength. Instead of preparing defensive fortifications between the Tennessee River and Owl Creek,[p] and clearing fields of fire, they spent most of their time drilling the largely inexperienced troops while Sherman dismissed reports of nearby Confederates.[149]
Union inaction created the opportunity for the Confederates to attack first before Buell arrived.[150] On the morning of April 6, 1862, Grant's troops were taken by surprise when the Confederates, led by Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and P. G. T. Beauregard, struck first "like an Alpine avalanche" near Shiloh church, attacking five divisions of Grant's army and forcing a confused retreat toward the Tennessee River.[151] Johnston was killed and command fell upon Beauregard.[152] One Union line held the Confederate attack off for several hours at a place later called the "Hornet's Nest", giving Grant time to assemble artillery and 20,000 troops near Pittsburg Landing.[153] The Confederates finally broke through the Hornet's Nest to capture a Union division, but "Grant's Last Line" held the landing, while the exhausted Confederates, lacking reinforcements, halted their advance.[154] The day's fighting had been costly, with thousands of casualties. That evening, heavy rain set in. Sherman found Grant standing alone under a tree in the rain. "Well, Grant, we've had the devil's own day of it, haven't we?" Sherman said. "Yes," replied Grant. "Lick 'em tomorrow, though."[155]
Bolstered by 18,000 fresh troops from the divisions of Major Generals Buell and Lew Wallace, Grant counterattacked at dawn the next day and regained the field, forcing the disorganized and demoralized rebels to retreat back to Corinth.[156] Halleck ordered Grant not to advance more than one day's march from Pittsburg Landing, stopping the pursuit of the Confederate Army.[157] Although Grant had won the battle the situation was little changed, with the Union in possession of Pittsburg Landing and the Confederates once again holed up in Corinth.[158] Grant, now realizing that the South was determined to fight and that the war would not be won with one battle, would later write, "Then, indeed, I gave up all idea of saving the Union except by complete conquest."[159]
Shiloh was the costliest battle in American history to that point and the staggering 23,746 total casualties stunned the nation.[160] Briefly hailed a hero for routing the Confederates, Grant was soon mired in controversy.[161] The Northern press castigated Grant for shockingly high casualties, and accused him of drunkenness during the battle, contrary to the accounts of officers and others with him at the time.[162][q] Discouraged, Grant considered resigning but Sherman convinced him to stay.[163] Lincoln dismissed Grant's critics, saying "I can't spare this man; he fights."[164] Ultimately, Grant's costly victory at Shiloh ended any chance for the Confederates to prevail in the Mississippi valley or regain its strategic advantage in the West.[165]
Halleck arrived from St. Louis on April 11, took command, and assembled a combined army of about 120,000 men. On April 29, he relieved Grant of field command and replaced him with Major General George Henry Thomas. Halleck slowly marched his army to take Corinth, entrenching each night.[166] Meanwhile, Beauregard pretended to be reinforcing, sent "deserters" to the Union Army with that story, and moved his army out during the night, to Halleck's surprise when he finally arrived at Corinth on May 30.[167]
Halleck divided his combined army and reinstated Grant as field commander of the Army of the Tennessee on July 11.[168]
Later that year, on September 19, Grant's army defeated Confederates at the Battle of Iuka, then successfully defended Corinth, inflicting heavy casualties.[169] On October 25, Grant assumed command of the District of the Tennessee.[170] In November, after Lincoln's preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, Grant ordered units under his command to incorporate former slaves into the Union Army, giving them clothes, shelter, and wages for their services.[171] Grant held western Tennessee with almost 40,000 men.[172]
Vicksburg campaign (1862 1863)
Further information: Vicksburg Campaign and General Order No. 11 (1862)
 Grant's successful gamble: Porter's gunboats night ran the Confederate gauntlet at Vicksburg on the Mississippi River.Published 1863
The Union capture of Vicksburg, the last Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi River, was vital, and would split the Confederacy in two.[173] Lincoln, however, appointed McClernand for the job, rather than Grant or Sherman.[174] Halleck, who retained power over troop displacement, ordered McClernand to Memphis, and placed him and his troops under Grant's authority.[175] On November 13, 1862, Grant captured Holly Springs and advanced to Corinth.[176] Grant's plan was to march south to Jackson, and attack Vicksburg overland, while Sherman would attack Vicksburg from Chickasaw Bayou.[177] However, Confederate cavalry raids on December 11 and 20, 1862, broke Union communications and recaptured Holly Springs, preventing Grant and Sherman from converging on Vicksburg.[178] Grant observed sabotage by civilians who had feigned loyalty and complained: "Guerrillas are hovering around in every direction."[179] On December 29, a Confederate army led by Lieutenant General John C. Pemberton repulsed Sherman's direct approach ascending the bluffs to Vicksburg at Chickasaw Bayou.[180] McClernand reached Sherman's army, assumed command, and independently of Grant led a campaign that captured Confederate Fort Hindman.[181]
Contraband fugitive African-American slaves poured into Grant's district, whom he sent north to Cairo, to be integrated into white society as domestic servants in Chicago. However, Lincoln ended this move when Illinois political leaders complained.[182] On his own initiative, Grant set up a pragmatic program and hired a young Presbyterian Chaplain John Eaton to administer slave refuge work camps.[183] Compensated contraband freed slaves would be used to pick cotton that would be shipped north and sent to aid the Union war effort. Lincoln approved and Grant's camp program was successful.[184] Grant also worked freed black labor on the bypass canal and other points on the river, incorporating them into the Union Army and Navy.[185]
 The Battle of Jackson, fought on May 14, 1863, was part of the Vicksburg Campaign.Published 1863
Grant's war responsibilities included combating an illegal Northern cotton trade and civilian obstruction.[186][187] Smuggling of cotton was rampant, while the price of cotton skyrocketed.[188] Grant believed the smuggling funded the Confederacy and provided them with military intelligence, while Union soldiers were dying in the fields.[189] He had received numerous dispatches with complaints about Jewish speculators in his district.[190] He also feared the trading corrupted many of his officers who were also eager to make a profit on a bale of cotton, while the majority of those involved in illegal trading was not Jewish.[191] Outraged that gold paid for southern cotton, Grant required two permits, one from the Treasury and one from the Union Army, to purchase cotton.[188][r]
On December 17, 1862, Grant issued a controversial General Order No. 11, expelling "Jews, as a class", from his Union Army military district.[192][187][s] The order was fully enforced at Holly Springs (December 17) and Paducah (December 28). Confederate General Van Dorn's raid on Holly Springs (December 20), prevented many Jewish people from potential expulsion. After complaints, Lincoln rescinded the order on January 3, 1863. Grant finally stopped the order within three weeks on January 17.[194][t]
On January 29, 1863, Grant assumed overall command. Eventually, he attempted to advance his army through water-logged terrain to bypass Vicksburg's guns.[200] The plan of attacking Vicksburg from downriver carried great risk because upon crossing the Mississippi River, his army would be beyond the reach of most of its supply lines.[201] On April 16, Grant ordered Admiral David Dixon Porter's gunboats south under fire from the Vicksburg batteries to meet up with troops who had marched south down the west side of the river.[202] Grant ordered diversionary battles, confusing Pemberton and allowing Grant's army to move east across the Mississippi, landing troops at Bruinsburg.[203] Grant's army captured Jackson, the state capital. Advancing west, Grant defeated Pemberton's army at the Battle of Champion Hill on May 16, forcing their retreat into Vicksburg.[204] After Grant's men assaulted the entrenchments twice, suffering severe losses, they settled in for a siege lasting seven weeks. During quiet periods of the campaign, Grant would take to drinking on occasion.[205] The personal rivalry between McClernand and Grant continued until Grant removed him from command when he contravened Grant by publishing an order without permission.[206] Pemberton surrendered Vicksburg to Grant on July 4, 1863.[207]
Vicksburg's fall gave Union forces control of the Mississippi River and split the Confederacy. By that time, Grant's political sympathies fully coincided with the Radical Republicans' aggressive prosecution of the war and emancipation of the slaves.[208] The success at Vicksburg was a morale boost for the Union war effort.[206] When Stanton suggested Grant be brought east to run the Army of the Potomac, Grant demurred, writing that he knew the geography and resources of the West better and he did not want to upset the chain of command in the East.[209]
Chattanooga (1863) and promotion
Further information: Chattanooga Campaign
 Union troops swarm Missionary Ridge and defeat Bragg's army. Published 1886
Lincoln promoted Grant to major general in the regular army (as opposed to the volunteers) and assigned him command of the newly formed Division of the Mississippi on October 16, 1863, comprising the Armies of the Ohio, the Tennessee, and the Cumberland.[210] After the Battle of Chickamauga, the Army of the Cumberland retreated into Chattanooga where they were partially besieged.[211] Grant arrived in Chattanooga on horseback, after a journey by boat from Vicksburg to Cairo, and then by train to Bridgeport, Alabama. Plans to resupply the city and break the partial siege had already been set on foot before his arrival. Forces commanded by Major General Joseph Hooker, which had been sent from the Army of the Potomac, approached from the west and linked up with other units moving east from inside the city, capturing Brown's Ferry and opening a supply line to the railroad at Bridgeport.[212]
Grant planned to have Sherman's Army of the Tennessee, assisted by the Army of the Cumberland, assault the northern end of Missionary Ridge, preparatory to rolling down it on the enemy's right flank. On November 23, Major General George Henry Thomas surprised the enemy in open daylight, advancing the Union lines and taking Orchard Knob, between Chattanooga and the ridge. The next day, Sherman failed to achieve his mission of getting atop Missionary Ridge, which was the key to Grant's plan of battle. Hooker's forces took Lookout Mountain using an ingenious maneuver to flank the enemy, in unexpected success.[213] On the 25th, Grant ordered Major General George Henry Thomas to advance to the rifle-pits at the case of Missionary in an effort to help Sherman, after Sherman's army failed to take Missionary Ridge from the northeast.[214] Four divisions of the Army of the Cumberland, with the center two led by Major General Philip Sheridan and Brigadier General Thomas J. Wood, chased the Confederates out of the rifle-pits at the base and, against orders, continued the charge up the 45-degree slope and captured the Confederate entrenchments along the crest, forcing a hurried retreat.[215] The decisive battle gave the Union control of Tennessee and opened Georgia, the Confederate heartland, to Union invasion.[216] Grant was given an enormous thoroughbred horse, Cincinnati, by a thankful admirer in St. Louis.[217]
On March 2, 1864, Lincoln promoted Grant to lieutenant general, giving him command of all Union Armies.[218] Grant's new rank had only previously been held by George Washington.[219] Grant arrived in Washington on March 8, and he was formally commissioned by Lincoln the next day at a Cabinet meeting.[220] Grant developed a good working relationship with Lincoln, who allowed Grant to devise his own strategy.[221] Grant established his headquarters with General George Meade's Army of the Potomac in Culpeper, north-west of Richmond, and met weekly with Lincoln and Stanton in Washington.[222][u] After protest from Halleck, Grant scrapped a risky invasion plan of North Carolina, and adopted a plan of five coordinated Union offensives on five fronts, so Confederate armies could not shift troops along interior lines.[224] Grant and Meade would make a direct frontal attack on Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia, while Sherman now chief of the western armies was to destroy Joseph E. Johnston's Army of Tennessee and take Atlanta.[225] Major General Benjamin Butler would advance on Lee from the southeast, up the James River, while Major General Nathaniel Banks would capture Mobile.[226] Major General Franz Sigel was to capture granaries and rail lines in the fertile Shenandoah Valley.[227]
Grant now commanded in total 533,000 battle-ready troops spread out over an eighteen-mile front, while the Confederates had lost many officers in battle and had great difficulty finding replacements.[228] He was popular, and there was talk that a Union victory early in the year could lead to his candidacy for the presidency. Grant was aware of the rumors, but had ruled out a political candidacy; the possibility would soon vanish with delays on the battlefield.[229]
Overland Campaign (1864)
Main article: Overland Campaign
Confederate General John Brown Gordon declared to General Lee after the Wilderness that there was  no doubt that Grant is retreating.  Lee replied,  You are mistaken, quite mistaken. Grant is not retreating. He is not a retreating man."[230]
The Overland Campaign was a series of brutal battles fought in Virginia for seven weeks during May and June 1864.[231] Sigel's and Butler's efforts failed, and Grant was left alone to fight Lee.[232] On the morning of Wednesday, May 4, Grant dressed in full uniform, sword at his side, led the army out from his headquarters at Culpeper towards Germanna Ford.[233] They crossed the Rapidan unopposed, while supplies were transported on four pontoon bridges.[234] On May 5, the Union army attacked Lee in the Wilderness, a three-day battle with estimated casualties of 17,666 Union and 11,125 Confederate.[235]
Rather than retreat, Grant flanked Lee's army to the southeast and attempted to wedge his forces between Lee and Richmond at Spotsylvania Court House.[236] Lee's army got to Spotsylvania first and a costly battle ensued, lasting thirteen days, with heavy casualties.[237] On May 12, Grant attempted to break through Lee's Muleshoe salient guarded by Confederate artillery, resulting in one of the bloodiest assaults of the Civil War, known as the Bloody Angle.[238] Unable to break Lee's lines, Grant again flanked the rebels to the southeast, meeting at North Anna, where a battle lasted three days.[239]
 Commanding General Grant at the Battle of Cold Harbor, June 1864
Cold Harbor
Main article: Battle of Cold Harbor
Grant believed breaking through Lee's lines at its weakest point, Cold Harbor, a vital road hub that linked to Richmond, would mean the destruction of Lee's army, the capture of Richmond, and a quick end to the rebellion.[240] Grant already had two corps in position at Cold Harbor with Hancock's corps on the way.[241] The recent bloody Wilderness campaign had severely diminished Confederate morale and hence Grant was now willing to advance on Lee's army once again.[242]
Lee's lines were extended north and east of Richmond and Petersburg for approximately ten miles, but there were several points where there were no fortifications built yet, and Cold Harbor was one of them. On June 1 and 2 both Grant and Lee were still waiting for reinforcements to arrive. Hancock's men had marched all night and arrived too exhausted for an immediate attack that morning. Grant agreed to let the men rest and postponed the attack until 5 p.m., and then again until 4:30 a.m. on June 3. However, Grant and Meade did not give specific orders for the attack, leaving it up to the corps commanders to decide where they would coordinate and attack the Confederate lines, as no senior commander had yet reconnoitered the latest Confederate developments. Grant had not yet learned that overnight Lee had hastily constructed entrenchments to thwart any breach attempt at Cold Harbor.[243] Grant had put off making an attack twice and was anxious to make his move before the rest of Lee's army arrived. On the morning of June 3, the third day of the thirteen-day battle, with a force of more than 100,000 men, against Lee's 59,000, Grant attacked not realizing that Lee's army was now well entrenched, much of it obscured by trees and bushes.[244] Grant's army suffered 12,000 14,000 casualties, while Lee's army suffered 3,000 5,000 casualties,[v] but Lee was less able to replace them.[245]
The unprecedented number of casualties was shocking by all accounts and heightened anti-war sentiment in the North. After the battle Grant wanted to appeal to Lee under the white flag for each side to gather up their wounded, most of them Union soldiers, but Lee insisted that a total truce be enacted and while they were deliberating all but a few of the wounded died in the field.[246] Without giving an apology for the disastrous defeat in his official military report, Grant confided in his staff after the battle and years later wrote in his memoirs that he "regretted that the last assault at Cold Harbor was ever made. I might say the same thing of the assault ... at Vicksburg."[247]
Siege of Petersburg (1864 1865)
Further information: Siege of Petersburg and Battle of the Crater
Undetected by Lee, Grant moved his army south of the James River, freed Butler from the Bermuda Hundred, and advanced toward Petersburg, Virginia's central railroad hub.[248] Beauregard defended Petersburg, and Lee's veteran reinforcements arrived on June 18, resulting in a nine-month siege. Northern resentment grew. Sheridan was assigned command of the Union Army of the Shenandoah and Grant directed him to "follow the enemy to their death" in the Shenandoah Valley. When Sheridan suffered attacks by John S. Mosby's irregular Confederate cavalry, Grant recommended rounding up their families for imprisonment at Fort McHenry.[249] After Grant's abortive attempt to capture Petersburg, Lincoln supported Grant in his decision to continue and visited Grant's headquarters at City Point on June 21 to assess the state of the army and meet with Grant and Admiral Porter. By the time Lincoln departed his appreciation for Grant had grown.[250]
To strike at Lee in a timely capacity Grant was forced to use what resources were immediately available, and they were diminishing by the day. Grant had to commit badly needed troops to check Confederate General Jubal Early's raids in the Shenandoah Valley and who was getting dangerously close to the Potomac River, and Washington.[251] By late July, at Petersburg, Grant reluctantly approved a plan to blow up part of the enemy trenches from a tunnel filled with many tons of gunpowder. The massive explosion created a crater, 170 feet across and 30 feet deep, killing an entire Confederate regiment in an instant.[252][w] The poorly led Union troops under Major General Burnside and Brigadier General Ledlie, rather than encircling the crater, rushed forward and poured directly into it, which was widely deemed a mistake. Recovering from the surprise, Confederates, led by Major General William Mahone,[253] surrounded the crater and easily picked off Union troops within it. The Union's 3,500 casualties outnumbered the Confederates' by three-to-one. The battle marked the first time that Union black troops, who endured a large proportion of the casualties, engaged in any major battle in the east.[254] Grant admitted that the overall mining tactic had been a "stupendous failure".[255]
 Grant (center left) next to Lincoln with General Sherman (far left) and Admiral Porter (right)   The Peacemakers by Healy, 1868
Grant would later meet with Lincoln and testify at a court of inquiry[256] against Generals Burnside and Ledlie for their incompetence. In his memoirs he blamed both of them for that disastrous Union defeat.[257][258] Rather than fight Lee in a full-frontal attack as he had done at Cold Harbor, Grant continued to force Lee to extend his defenses south and west of Petersburg, better allowing him to capture essential railroad links.[251]
Union forces soon captured Mobile Bay and Atlanta and now controlled the Shenandoah Valley, ensuring Lincoln's reelection in November.[259] Sherman convinced Grant and Lincoln to send his army to march on Savannah.[260] Sherman cut a 60-mile path of destruction unopposed, reached the Atlantic Ocean, and captured Savannah on December 22.[261] On December 16, after much prodding by Grant, the Union Army under Thomas smashed John Bell Hood's Confederate Army at Nashville.[262] These campaigns left Lee's forces at Petersburg as the only significant obstacle remaining to Union victory.[263]
By March 1865, Lee was trapped, Grant had severely weakened Lee's strength, having extended his lines to 35 miles.[264] Confederate troops no longer confident of their commander, deserted Lee by the thousands, starving and under the duress of trench warfare. [265] On March 25, in a desperate effort, Lee sacrificed his remaining troops (4,000 CSA casualties) at Fort Stedman, a Union victory, and considered the last Petersburg line battle. Grant, Sherman, Porter, and Lincoln held a conference to discuss the surrender of Lee's Confederate depleted armies and Reconstruction of the South on March 28.[266]
Defeated Lee and victory (1865)
Main articles: Third Battle of Petersburg, Appomattox Campaign, and Battle of Appomattox Court House
 Defeated by Grant, Lee surrendered at Appomattox Court House
On April 2, Grant ordered a general assault on Lee's entrenched depleted forces. Lee abandoned Petersburg and Richmond, while Grant's conquering Union troops easily took Petersburg and captured Richmond the next day.[267] A desperate Lee, and part of his army cut and ran, attempted to link up with the remnants of Joseph E. Johnston's defeated army. Sheridan's cavalry, however, stopped the two armies from converging, cutting them off from their supply trains.[268] Grant was in communication with Lee before he entrusted his aide Orville Babcock to carry his last dispatch to Lee that demanded his surrender with instructions to escort him to a meeting place of Lee's choosing.[269] Grant immediately rode west, bypassing Lee's army, to join Sheridan who had captured Appomattox Station, blocking Lee's escape route. On his way, Grant received a letter sent by Lee informing him Lee would surrender his army.[270]
On April 9, Grant and Lee met at Appomattox Court House.[271] Upon receiving Lee's dispatch about the proposed meeting Grant had been jubilant. Although Grant felt depressed at the fall of "a foe who had fought so long and valiantly," he believed the Southern cause was "one of the worst for which a people ever fought."[272] After briefly discussing their days of old in Mexico, Grant wrote out the terms of surrender. Men and officers were to be paroled, but in addition, there was amnesty: "Each officer and man will be allowed to return to his home, not to be disturbed by U.S. authority so long as they observe their paroles and the laws in force where they may reside." Lee immediately accepted Grant's terms and signed the surrender document, without any diplomatic recognition of the Confederacy. The vanquished Lee, afterward asked Grant that his former Confederate troops keep their horses. Grant generously allowed Lee's request.[273][274] Grant ordered his troops to stop all celebration, saying the "war is over; the rebels are our countrymen again."[275] Johnston's Tennessee army surrendered on April 26, 1865, Richard Taylor's Alabama army on May 4, and Kirby Smith's Texas army on May 26, ending the war.[276]
Lincoln's assassination
Main article: Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
On April 14, 1865, five days after Grant's victory at Appomattox, he attended a cabinet meeting in Washington. Lincoln invited him and his wife Julia to Ford's Theatre but they declined, because they had plans to travel to their home in Burlington. In a conspiracy that also targeted top cabinet members in one last effort to topple the Union, Lincoln was fatally shot by John Wilkes Booth at the theater and died the next morning.[277] Many, including Grant himself, thought that he, Grant, had been a target in the plot, and during the subsequent trial, the government tried to prove that Grant had been stalked by Booth's conspirator Michael O'Laughlen.[278] Stanton notified Grant of the President's death and summoned him back to Washington. Vice President Andrew Johnson was sworn in as president on April 15. Attending Lincoln's funeral on April 19, Grant stood alone and wept openly; he later said Lincoln was "the greatest man I have ever known".[279] Grant was determined to work with Johnson, and he privately expressed "every reason to hope" in the new president's ability to run the government "in its old channel".[280]
Commanding General
Main article: Ulysses S. Grant as commanding general, 1865 1869
Ulysses S. Grant by Balling (1865)Constant Mayer's portrait of 1866
At the war's end, Grant remained commander of the army, with duties that included dealing with Maximilian and French troops in Mexico, enforcement of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states, and supervision of Indian wars on the western Plains.[281] After the Grand Review of the Armies, Lee and his generals were indicted for treason in Virginia. Johnson demanded they be put on trial, but Grant insisted that they should not be tried, citing his Appomatox amnesty. Johnson backed down, so charges against Lee were dropped.[282][283] Grant secured a house for his family in Georgetown Heights in 1865 but instructed Elihu Washburne that for political purposes his legal residence remained in Galena, Illinois.[284] That same year, Grant spoke at Cooper Union in New York in support of Johnson's presidency. Further travels that summer took the Grants to Albany, New York, back to Galena, and throughout Illinois and Ohio, with enthusiastic receptions.[285] On July 25, 1866, Congress promoted Grant to the newly created rank of General of the Army of the United States.[286]
Saved Lee's life
On June 7, 1865, Robert E. Lee, and other former Confederate officers were indicted by a grand jury for the high crime of treason against the United States, a capital offense punished by imprisonment and hanging. Johnson wanted to punish Lee, and "make treason odious". When informed, Grant objected and went to the White House telling President Johnson that Lee was protected by Grant's surrender terms Grant had generously given Lee at Appomattox in April. When an angered Grant threatened to resign, President Johnson backed down, and on June 20, Johnson's Attorney General James Speed ordered the United States Attorney General in Norfolk, Virginia to drop treason proceedings against Lee, saving Lee from punishment and prosecution.[287]
Tour of the South
Further information: Reconstruction era
President Johnson's Reconstruction policy included a speedy return of the former Confederates to Congress, reinstating whites to office in the South, and relegating blacks to second-class citizenship.[288] On November 27, 1865, General Grant left Washington, sent by Johnson on a fact-finding mission to the South, to counter a pending less favorable report by Senator Carl Schurz.[289][x] Grant recommended continuation of the Freedmen's Bureau, which Johnson opposed, but advised against using black troops, which he believed encouraged an alternative to farm labor.[291] Grant did not believe the people of the South were ready for self-rule, and that both whites and blacks in the South required protection by the federal government. Concerned that the war led to diminished respect for civil authorities, Grant continued using the Army to maintain order.[292] Grant's report on the South, which he later recanted, sympathized with Johnson's conservative Reconstruction policies.[293] Although Grant desired former Confederates be returned to Congress, he advocated eventual black citizenship. On December 19, the day after the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment was announced in the Senate, Johnson's response used Grant's report, read aloud to the Senate, to undermine Schurz's final report and Radical opposition to Johnson's policies.[294]
Break from Johnson
Grant was initially optimistic about Johnson, saying he was satisfied the nation had "nothing to fear" from the Johnson administration.[295] Despite differing styles, Grant got along cordially with Johnson and attended cabinet meetings concerning Reconstruction.[295] By February 1866, the relationship began to break down.[296] Johnson opposed Grant's closure of the Richmond Examiner for disloyal editorials and his enforcement of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, passed over Johnson's veto.[296] Needing Grant's popularity, Johnson took Grant on his "Swing Around the Circle" tour, a failed attempt to gain national support for lenient policies toward the South.[297] Grant privately called Johnson's speeches a "national disgrace" and he left the tour early.[298] On March 2, 1867, overriding Johnson's veto, Congress passed the first of three Reconstruction Acts, using military officers to enforce the policy.[299] Protecting Grant, Congress passed the Command of the Army Act, preventing his removal or relocation, and forcing Johnson to pass orders through Grant.[300]
In August 1867, bypassing the Tenure of Office Act, Johnson discharged Secretary of War Stanton without Senate approval and appointed Grant ad interim Secretary of War. Stanton was the only remaining cabinet member friendly to the Radicals.[301] Although Grant initially recommended against dismissing Stanton, Grant accepted the position, not wanting the Army to fall under a conservative appointee who would impede Reconstruction, and managed an uneasy partnership with Johnson.[302] In December 1867, Congress voted to keep Stanton, who was reinstated by a Senate Committee on Friday, January 10, 1868. Grant told Johnson he was going to resign the office to avoid fines and imprisonment. Johnson, who believed the law would be overturned, said he would assume Grant's legal responsibility, and reminded Grant that he had promised him to delay his resignation until a suitable replacement was found.[303] The following Monday, not willing to wait for the law to be overturned, Grant surrendered the office to Stanton, causing confusion with Johnson.[304] With the complete backing of his cabinet, Johnson personally accused Grant of lying and "duplicity" at a stormy cabinet meeting, while a shocked and disappointed Grant felt it was Johnson who was lying.[305] The publication of angry messages between Grant and Johnson led to a complete break between the two.[306] The controversy led to Johnson's impeachment and trial in the Senate.[307] Johnson was saved from removal from office by one vote.[308] Grant's popularity rose among the Radical Republicans and his nomination for the presidency appeared certain.[309]
Election of 1868
Main article: 1868 United States presidential election
 Grant Colfax Republican TicketPublished 1868
When the Republican Party met at the 1868 Republican National Convention in Chicago, the delegates unanimously nominated Grant for president and Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax for vice president.[307] Although Grant had preferred to remain in the army, he accepted the Republican nomination, believing that he was the only one who could unify the nation.[310] The Republicans advocated "equal civil and political rights to all" and African American enfranchisement.[311][312] The Democrats, having abandoned Johnson, nominated former governor Horatio Seymour of New York for president and Francis P. Blair of Missouri for vice president.[313] The Democrats opposed suffrage for African Americans and advocated the immediate restoration of former Confederate states to the Union and amnesty from "all past political offenses".[314]
Grant played no overt role during the campaign and instead was joined by Sherman and Sheridan in a tour of the West that summer.[315] However, the Republicans adopted his words "Let us have peace" as their campaign slogan.[316] Grant's 1862 General Order No. 11 became an issue during the presidential campaign; he sought to distance himself from the order, saying "I have no prejudice against sect or race, but want each individual to be judged by his own merit."[317] The Democrats and their Klan supporters focused mainly on ending Reconstruction, intimidating blacks and Republicans, and returning control of the South to the white Democrats and the planter class, alienating War Democrats in the North.[318] An example was the murder of Republican Congressman James M. Hinds in Arkansas by a Klansman in October 1868, as Hinds campaigned for Grant. Grant won the popular vote by 300,000 votes out of 5,716,082 votes cast, receiving an Electoral College landslide of 214 votes to Seymour's 80.[319] Seymour received a majority of white voters, but Grant was aided by 500,000 votes cast by blacks,[313] winning him 52.7 percent of the popular vote.[320] He lost Louisiana and Georgia, primarily due to Ku Klux Klan violence against African-American voters.[321] At the age of 46, Grant was the youngest president yet elected, and the first president after the nation had outlawed slavery.[322]
Presidency (1869 1877)
Main article: Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant
Photo by Mathew Brady, 1870Official White House portrait of President Grant by Henry Ulke, 1875
On March 4, 1869, Grant was sworn in as the eighteenth President of the United States by Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase. In his inaugural address, Grant urged the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment, while large numbers of African Americans attended his inauguration.[323] He also urged that bonds issued during the Civil War should be paid in gold, called for "proper treatment" of Native Americans and encouraged their "civilization and ultimate citizenship".[324]
Grant's cabinet appointments sparked both criticism and approval.[325] He appointed Elihu B. Washburne Secretary of State and John A. Rawlins Secretary of War.[326] Washburne resigned, and Grant appointed him Minister to France. Grant then appointed former New York Senator Hamilton Fish Secretary of State.[326] Rawlins died in office, and Grant appointed William W. Belknap Secretary of War.[327] Grant appointed New York businessman Alexander T. Stewart Secretary of Treasury, but Stewart was found legally ineligible to hold office by a 1789 law.[328][y] Grant then appointed Massachusetts Representative George S. Boutwell Secretary of Treasury.[326] Philadelphia businessman Adolph E. Borie was appointed Secretary of Navy, but found the job stressful and resigned.[329][z] Grant then appointed New Jersey's attorney general, George M. Robeson, Secretary of Navy.[331] Former Ohio Governor Jacob D. Cox (Interior), former Maryland Senator John Creswell (Postmaster-General), and Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar (Attorney General) rounded out the cabinet.[332]
Grant nominated Sherman to succeed him as general-in-chief and gave him control over war bureau chiefs.[333] When Rawlins took over the War Department he complained to Grant that Sherman was given too much authority. Grant reluctantly revoked his own order, upsetting Sherman and damaging their wartime friendship. James Longstreet, a former Confederate general who had endorsed Grant's nomination, was nominated for the position of Surveyor of Customs of the port of New Orleans; this was met with general amazement, and seen as a genuine effort to unite the North and South.[334] In March 1872, Grant signed legislation that established Yellowstone National Park, the first national park.[335] Grant was sympathetic to women's rights; including support of female suffrage, saying he wanted "equal rights to all citizens".[336]
To make up for his infamous General Order No. 11, Grant appointed more than fifty Jewish people to federal office, including consuls, district attorneys, and deputy postmasters.[337] He appointed Edward S. Salomon territorial governor of Washington, the first time an American Jewish man occupied a governor's seat. Grant was sympathetic to the plight of persecuted Jewish people. In November 1869, reports surfaced of the Russian Tsar Alexander II penalizing 2,000 Jewish families for smuggling by expelling them to the interior of the country. In response, Grant publicly supported the Jewish American B'nai B'rith petition against the Tsar. In December 1869, Grant appointed a Jewish journalist as Consul to Romania, to protect Jewish people there from "severe oppression".[337]
 Anthony Comstock, Grant's vigorous prosecutor of abortionists and pornographers.
In 1875, Grant proposed a constitutional amendment that limited religious indoctrination in public schools.[338] Instruction of "religious, atheistic, or pagan tenets", would be banned, while funding "for the benefit or in aid, directly or indirectly, of any religious sect or denomination", would be prohibited. Schools would be for all children "irrespective of sex, color, birthplace, or religions".[339] Grant's views were incorporated into the Blaine Amendment, but it was defeated by the Senate.[340]
In October 1871, under the Morrill Act, Grant rounded up and prosecuted hundreds of Utah Territory Mormon polygamists, using federal marshals, including Mormon leader Brigham Young, indicted for "lewd and lascivious cohabitation".[341][342][343]: 301 [344] Grant had called polygamy a "crime against decency and morality".[345] In 1874, Grant signed into law the Poland Act, that put Mormon polygamists under the U.S. District Courts, and limited Mormons on juries.[345]  Beginning in March 1873, under the Comstock Act, Grant prosecuted, through the Postal Department, immoral and indecent pornographers, in addition to abortionists. To administer the prosecutions, Grant put in charge a vigorous moral leader and reformer Anthony Comstock.[346] Comstock headed a federal commission and was empowered to seize and destroy obscene material and hand out arrest warrants to offenders of the law.[345]
Reconstruction
Main article: Reconstruction era
 Amos T. Akerman, appointed Attorney General by Grant, who vigorously prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan
Grant was considered an effective civil rights president, concerned about the plight of African Americans.[347] On March 18, 1869, Grant signed into law equal rights for blacks, to serve on juries and hold office, in Washington D.C., and in 1870 he signed into law the Naturalization Act that gave foreign blacks citizenship.[347] During his first term, Reconstruction took precedence. Republicans controlled most Southern states, propped up by Republican-controlled Congress, northern money, and southern military occupation.[348][aa] Grant advocated the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment that said states could not disenfranchise African Americans.[350] Within a year, the three remaining states Mississippi, Virginia, and Texas adopted the new amendment and were admitted to Congress.[351] Grant put military pressure on Georgia to reinstate its black legislators and adopt the new amendment.[352] Georgia complied, and on February 24, 1871, its senators were seated in Congress, with all the former Confederate states represented, the Union was completely restored under Grant.[353][ab] Under Grant, for the first time in American history, Black-American males served in the United States Congress, all from the Southern states.[355]
In 1870, to enforce Reconstruction, Congress and Grant created the Justice Department that allowed the Attorney General and the new Solicitor General to prosecute the Klan.[356] Congress and Grant passed a series of three Enforcement Acts, designed to protect blacks and Reconstruction governments.[357][ac] Using the powers of the Enforcement Acts, Grant crushed the Ku Klux Klan.[359] By October, Grant suspended habeas corpus in part of South Carolina and sent federal troops to help marshals, who initiated prosecutions.[360] Grant's Attorney General, Amos T. Akerman, who replaced Hoar, was zealous to destroy the Klan.[361] Akerman and South Carolina's U.S. marshal arrested over 470 Klan members, while hundreds of Klansmen, including the wealthy leaders, fled the state.[362][ad] By 1872 the Klan's power had collapsed, and African Americans voted in record numbers in elections in the South.[364][ae] Attorney General George H. Williams, Akerman's replacement, in the Spring of 1873, suspended prosecutions of the Klan in North Carolina and South Carolina, but prior to the election of 1874, he changed course and prosecuted the Klan.[366][af][ag]
During Grant's second term, the North retreated from Reconstruction, while southern conservative whites called "Redeemers" formed armed groups, the Red Shirts and the White League, who openly used violence, intimidation, voter fraud, and racist appeals to overturn Republican rule.[370] Northern apathy toward blacks, the depressed economy and Grant's scandals made it politically difficult for the Grant administration to maintain support for Reconstruction. Power shifted when the House was taken over by the Democrats in the election of 1874.[371][ah] Grant ended the Brooks Baxter War, bringing Reconstruction in Arkansas to a peaceful conclusion. He sent troops to New Orleans in the wake of the Colfax massacre and disputes over the election of Governor William Pitt Kellogg.[373] Grant recalled Sheridan and most of the federal troops from Louisiana.[374]
By 1875, Redeemer Democrats had taken control of all but three Southern states. As violence against black Southerners escalated once more, Grant's Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont told Republican Governor Adelbert Ames of Mississippi that the people were "tired of the autumnal outbreaks in the South", and declined to intervene directly, instead of sending an emissary to negotiate a peaceful election.[375] Grant later regretted not issuing a proclamation to help Ames, having been told Republicans in Ohio would bolt the party if Grant intervened in Mississippi.[376] Grant told Congress in January 1875 he could not "see with indifference Union men or Republicans ostracized, persecuted, and murdered."[377] Congress refused to strengthen the laws against violence but instead passed a sweeping law to guarantee blacks access to public facilities.[378] Grant signed it as the Civil Rights Act of 1875, but there was little enforcement and the Supreme Court ruled the law unconstitutional in 1883.[379] In October 1876, Grant dispatched troops to South Carolina to keep Republican Governor Daniel Henry Chamberlain in office.[380]
After Grant left office in 1877, the nation returned to compromise. Grant's Republican successor, President Rutherford B. Hayes, was conciliatory toward the South and favored "local control" of civil rights on the condition that Democrats make an honorary pledge to confirm the constitutional amendments that protected blacks.[381] During Republican negotiations with Democrats, that Grant took no direct part in, the Republicans received the White House for Hayes in return for ending enforcement of racial equality for blacks and removing federal troops from the last three states.[382] As promised, Hayes withdrew federal troops from South Carolina and Louisiana, which marked the end of Reconstruction.[383]
Financial affairs
 Secretary of Treasury George S. Boutwell aided Grant to defeat the Gold Ring.
Soon after taking office, Grant took conservative steps to return the nation's currency to a more secure footing.[384] During the Civil War, Congress had authorized the Treasury to issue banknotes that, unlike the rest of the currency, were not backed by gold or silver. The "greenback" notes, as they were known, were necessary to pay the unprecedented war debts, but they also caused inflation and forced gold-backed money out of circulation; Grant was determined to return the national economy to pre-war monetary standards.[385] On March 18, 1869, he signed the Public Credit Act of 1869 that guaranteed bondholders would be repaid in "coin or its equivalent", while greenbacks would gradually be redeemed by the Treasury and replaced by notes backed by specie. The act committed the government to the full return of the gold standard within ten years.[386] This followed a policy of "hard currency, economy and gradual reduction of the national debt." Grant's own ideas about the economy were simple, and he relied on the advice of wealthy and financially successful businessmen that he courted.[384]
Gold corner conspiracy
Further information: Black Friday (1869)
In April 1869, two railroad tycoons Jay Gould and Jim Fisk conspired a plot to corner the gold market in New York, the nation's financial capital.[387] They both controlled the Erie Railroad, and a high price of gold would allow foreign agriculture buyers to purchase exported crops, shipped east over the Erie's routes.[388] Boutwell's bi-weekly policy of selling gold from the Treasury, however, kept gold artificially low.[389] Unable to corrupt Boutwell, the two schemers built a relationship with Grant's brother-in-law, Abel Corbin, and gained access to Grant.[390] Gould bribed Assistant Treasurer Daniel Butterfield $10,000 to gain insider information into the Treasury.[391][ai][aj] Gould and Fisk personally lobbied Grant onboard their private yacht from New York to Boston, in mid-June 1869 to influence Grant's gold policy.[393][ak]
In July, Grant reduced the sale of Treasury gold to $2,000,000 per month and subsequent months.[394] Fisk played a role in August in New York, having a letter from Gould, he told Grant his gold policy would destroy the nation.[395] By September, Grant, who was naive in matters of finance, was convinced that a low gold price would help farmers, and the sale of gold for September was not increased.[396] On September 23, when the gold price reached 143+1 8, Boutwell rushed to the White House and talked with Grant.[397] The following day, September 24, known as Black Friday, Grant ordered Boutwell to sell, whereupon Boutwell wired Butterfield in New York, to sell $4,000,000 in gold.[398] The bull market at Gould's Gold Room collapsed, the price of gold plummeted from 160 to 133+1 3, a bear market panic ensued, Gould and Fisk fled for their own safety, while severe economic damages lasted months.[399] By January 1870, the economy resumed its post-war recovery.[400][al]
Foreign affairs
 Secretary of State Hamilton Fish and Grant successfully settled the Alabama Claims by treaty and arbitration.
Grant had limited foreign policy experience, acquired during his service in the Mexican-American war. Grant relied heavily on his talented Secretary of State Hamilton Fish. Fundamentally, Grant had an expansionist impulse to protect American interests abroad and was a strong advocate of the Monroe Doctrine.[402] Grant and Fish had a reserved but cordial friendship. There were no foreign-policy disasters and no wars to engage in. Besides Grant himself, the main players in foreign affairs were Secretary Fish and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Charles Sumner. They had to cooperate to get a treaty ratified. Sumner, who hated Grant, led the opposition to Grant's plan to annex Santo Domingo. Sumner previously had hypocritically fully supported the annexation of Alaska. [403] In 1871, a U.S. expedition to Korea failed to open up trade and ended with an American military victory at the battle of Ganghwa-do.[404]
Grant had an idealist side to his foreign policy. Grant appointed a Jewish lawyer, Benjamin F. Peixotto, U.S. Consul in Bucharest, in response to the Romanian persecution of Jews. Grant said that respect "for human rights is the first duty for those set as rulers" over the nations. [405]
Treaty of Washington (1871)
Main article: Treaty of Washington (1871)
The most pressing diplomatic problem in 1869 was the settlement of the Alabama claims, depredations caused to the Union merchant ships by the Confederate warship CSS Alabama, built in a British shipyard in violation of neutrality rules.[406] Secretary Hamilton Fish played the central role in formulating and implementing the Treaty of Washington and the Geneva arbitration (1872).[407] Senator Charles Sumner, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee led the demand for reparations, with talk of British Columbia as payment.[408] Sumner and other U.S. politicians stated that the British prolonged the war by two years due to being complicit in allowing the smuggling of arms through the Union blockade via blockade runners, thus adding such action alongside the British-built Confederate raiders to the claims.[409][410] Fish and Treasurer George Boutwell convinced Grant that peaceful relations with Britain were essential, and the two nations agreed to negotiate along those lines.[411]
To avoid jeopardizing negotiations, Grant refrained from recognizing Cuban rebels who were fighting for independence from Spain, which would have been inconsistent with American objections to the British granting belligerent status to Confederates.[384][am] A commission in Washington produced a treaty whereby an international tribunal would settle the damage amounts; the British admitted regret, but not fault.[412][an] The Senate, including Grant critics Sumner and Carl Schurz, approved the Treaty of Washington, which settled disputes over fishing rights and maritime boundaries, by a 50 12 vote, signed on May 8, 1871.[414] The Alabama claims settlement would be Grant's most successful foreign policy achievement that secured peace with Great Britain and the United States.[415] Although the damages to American soil arising from blockade runners loaded with British arms supplies was left out,[410] the settlement ($15,500,000) of the Alabama Claims resolved troubled Anglo-American issues and turned Britain into America's strongest ally.[416]
Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic)
Main article: Annexation of Santo Domingo
 Wharf of Santo Domingo CityDominican Republic
In 1869, Grant initiated his plan, later to become an obsession, to annex the Dominican Republic, then called Santo Domingo.[417] Grant believed acquisition of the Caribbean island and Saman  Bay would increase the United States' natural resources, and strengthen U.S. naval protection to enforce the Monroe Doctrine, safeguard against British obstruction of U.S. shipping and protect a future oceanic canal, stop slavery in Cuba and Brazil, while blacks in the United States would have a safe haven from "the crime of Klu Kluxism".[418]
Joseph W. Fabens, an American speculator who represented Buenaventura B ez, the president of the Dominican Republic, met with Secretary Fish and proposed annexation,[419] whose island inhabitants sought American protection.[420] Fish wanted nothing to do with the island, but he dutifully brought up Faben's proposal to Grant at a cabinet meeting.[421] On July 17, Grant sent his military White House aide Orville E. Babcock to evaluate the islands' resources, local conditions, and B ez's terms for annexation, but was given no diplomatic authority.[422] When Babcock returned to Washington with two unauthorized annexation treaties, Grant, however, approved and pressured his cabinet to accept them.[423][ao] Grant ordered Fish to draw up formal treaties, sent to B ez by Babcock's return to the island nation. The Dominican Republic would be annexed for $1.5 million and Saman  Bay would be lease-purchased for $2 million. General D.B. Sackett and General Rufus Ingalls accompanied Babcock.[425] On November 29, President B ez signed the treaties. On December 21, the treaties were placed before Grant and his cabinet.[426]
Grant's grand plan to annex Santo Domingo, a black and mixed-race nation, into the United States, however, would be hostilely obstructed by Senator Charles Sumner.[427] On December 31, Grant met with Sumner, unannounced, at Sumner's Washington D.C. home to gain his support for annexation. Grant left confident Sumner approved, but what Sumner actually said was controversially disputed, by various witnesses. Without appealing to the American public, to his detriment, Grant submitted the treaties on January 10, 1870, to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, chaired by the stubborn and imperious Sumner, for ratification, but Sumner purposefully shelved the bills.[428] Prompted by Grant to stop stalling the treaties, Sumner's committee took action but rejected the bills by a 5-to-2 vote. Sumner opposed annexation and reportedly said the Dominicans were "a turbulent, treacherous race" in a closed session of the Senate.[429] Sumner sent the treaties for a full Senate vote, while Grant personally lobbied other senators. Despite Grant's efforts, the Senate defeated the treaties, on Thursday, June 30, by a 28 28 vote when a 2/3 majority was required.[430]
Grant was outraged, and on Friday, July 1, 1870, he sacked his appointed Minister to Great Britain, John Lothrop Motley, Sumner's close friend and ally. [431] In January 1871, Grant signed a joint resolution to send a commission to investigate annexation.[432] For this undertaking, he chose three neutral parties, with Fredrick Douglass to be secretary of the commission, that gave Grant the moral high ground from Sumner.[433] Although the commission approved its findings, the Senate remained opposed, forcing Grant to abandon further efforts.[434] Seeking retribution, in March 1871, Grant maneuvered to have Sumner deposed of Sumner's powerful Senate chairmanship, replaced by Grant ally Simon Cameron.[435] The stinging controversy over Santo Domingo overshadowed Grant's foreign diplomacy.[415] Critics complained of Grant's reliance on military personnel to implement his policies.[425]
Cuba and Virginius Affair
Main article: Virginius Affair
 American Captain Frye and his crew were executed by Spanish authority.
American policy under Grant was to remain neutral during the Ten Years' War (1868 78), a series of long bloody revolts that were taking place in Cuba against Spanish rule. On the recommendation of Fish and Senator Sumner, Grant refused to recognize the belligerence of the rebels, and in effect endorsed Spanish colonial rule there, while calling for the abolition of slavery in Cuba.[436][437] This was done to protect American commerce and to keep peace with Spain.[437]
This fragile policy, however, was severely broken in October 1873, when a Spanish cruiser captured a merchant ship, Virginius, flying the U.S. flag, carrying supplies and men to aid the insurrection. Treating them as pirates, without trial, Spanish authorities executed 53 prisoners, including eight American citizens. American Captain Joseph Frye was executed and his crew was executed and decapitated and their lifeless bodies were mutilated, trampled by horses. Many enraged Americans protested and called for war with Spain. Grant ordered U.S. Navy Squadron warships to converge on Cuba, off of Key West, supported by the USS Kansas. On November 27, Fish reached a diplomatic resolution in which Spain's president, Emilio Castelar y Ripoll, expressed his regret, surrendered the Virginius and the surviving captives. A year later, Spain paid a cash indemnity of $80,000 to the families of the executed Americans.[438][439]
Free trade with Hawaii
 King Kal kaua of Hawaii meets President Grant at the White House on his state visit, 1874.Published January 2, 1875
In the face of strong opposition from Democrats, Grant and Fish secured a free trade treaty in 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii, incorporating the Pacific islands' sugar industry into the United States' economic sphere.[440] The Southern Democrats, wanting to protect American rice and sugar producers, tried to squash a bill to implement the Hawaiian treaty. The Democrats, in opposition, because the treaty was believed to be an island annexation attempt, referred to the Hawaiians as an "inferior" non-white race. Despite opposition, the implementation bill passed Congress.[440]
Mexican border raids
At the close of Grant's second term in office, Fish had to contend with Indian raids on the Mexican border, due to a lack of law enforcement over the U.S.   Mexican border. The problem would escalate during the Hayes administration, under Fish's successor William Evarts.[437]
Federal Indian policy
Main article: Native American policy of the Ulysses S. Grant administration
Further information: Black Hills Land Claim, Black Hills Gold Rush, and Great Sioux War
 Ely Samuel Parker appointed by President Grant as the first Native American (Seneca) Commissioner of Indian Affairs
When Grant took office in 1869, the nation's policy towards Native Americans was in chaos, affecting more than 250,000 Native Americans being governed by 370 treaties.[441] Grant's religious faith influenced his "peace" policy toward Native Americans, believing that the "Creator" did not place races of men on earth for the "stronger" to destroy the "weaker".[442] President Grant was mostly an assimilationist, wanting Indians to adopt European customs, education, English language, Christianity, private property, clothing, and to accept democratic government, that would lead to eventual Indian citizenship.[443][444] At Grant's 1869 Inauguration, Grant said "the proper treatment of the original occupants of the land, the Indian, is one deserving of careful study. I will favor any course towards them which tends to their civilization, Christianization and ultimate citizenship."[444] Grant appointed Ely S. Parker, an assimilated Seneca and member of his wartime staff, to serve as the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the first Native American to serve in this position, surprising many around him. [445][444]
In April 1869, Grant signed legislation establishing an unpaid Board of Indian Commissioners to reduce corruption and oversee the implementation of what was called Grant's Indian "Peace" policy.[446][ap] In 1870, a setback in Grant's policy occurred over the Marias Massacre, causing public outrage.[448] In 1871, Grant ended the sovereign tribal treaty system; by law individual Native Americans were deemed wards of the federal government.[449][aq]  Grant's Indian policy was undermined by Parker's resignation in 1871, denominational infighting among Grant's chosen religious agents, and entrenched economic interests.[450] Grant's Indian policy was also lampooned by an 1871 Thomas Nast cartoon, that depicted Grant as "Robinson Crusoe", forcing an Indian Chief, "his man Friday", into tightly fitted western attire.[444] Nonetheless, Indian wars declined overall during Grant's first term, while on October 1, 1872, Major General Oliver Otis Howard negotiated peace with the Apache leader Cochise.[451] On December 28, 1872, another setback took place to Grant's policy when General George Crook and the 5th Cavalry massacred about 75 Yavapai Apache Indians at Skeleton Cave, Arizona.[452]
During his second term, Grant's Indian policy fell apart.[453] On April 11, 1873, Major General Edward Canby was killed in Northern California south of Tule Lake by Modoc leader Kintpuash, in a failed peace conference to end the Modoc War.[454] Grant ordered restraint after Canby's death. The army captured Kintpuash, who was convicted of Canby's murder and hanged on October 3 at Fort Klamath, while the remaining Modoc tribe was relocated to the Indian Territory.[454] In 1874, the army defeated the Comanche at the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon, forcing them to finally settle at the Fort Sill reservation in 1875.[455] Grant pocket-vetoed a bill in 1874 protecting bison, and instead supported Interior Secretary Columbus Delano, who correctly believed the killing of bison would force Plains Native Americans to abandon their nomadic lifestyle.[456][ar] In April 1875, another setback occurred to Grant's policy. The U.S. Army led by Lt. Austin Henly massacred 27 Cheyenne Indians, including 19 men, and 8 women and children, on the Sappa Creek, in Kansas.[458][459]
 Battle of the Little Big HornGreat Sioux WarPublished 1889
With the lure of gold discovered in the Black Hills and the westward force of Manifest Destiny, white settlers trespassed on Sioux protected lands used for religious and marital ceremonies. Red Cloud reluctantly entered negotiations on May 26, 1875, but other Sioux chiefs readied for war.[460] Grant told the Sioux leaders to make "arrangements to allow white persons to go into the Black Hills." Antagonistic toward Native American culture, Grant told them their children would attend schools, speak English, and prepare "for the life of white men."[443]
On November 3, 1875, Grant held a meeting at the White House and, under advice from Sheridan, agreed not to enforce keeping out miners from the Black Hills, forcing Native Americans onto the Sioux reservation.[461] Sheridan told Grant that the U.S. Army was undermanned and the territory involved was vast, requiring great numbers of soldiers to enforce the treaty.[462]
During the Great Sioux War that started after Sitting Bull refused to relocate to agency land, warriors led by Crazy Horse massacred George Armstrong Custer and 268 of his men at the Battle of the Little Big Horn. The slaughter took place during the Centennial, and the Indian victory was announced to the nation on July 4, while angry white settlers demanded retribution. Grant castigated Custer in the press, saying "I regard Custer's massacre as a sacrifice of troops, brought on by Custer himself, that was wholly unnecessary wholly unnecessary."[463] Previously, Custer had infuriated Grant when he testified against Grant's brother Orville during a House investigation into trading post graft on March 1, 1876.[464] In September and October 1876, Grant persuaded the tribes to relinquish the Black Hills. Congress ratified the agreement three days before Grant left office in 1877.[465][as][at]
Election of 1872 and second term
Main article: 1872 United States presidential election
 Cartoon by Thomas Nast on Grant's opponents in the reelection campaign
Grant's first administration was mixed with both success and failure.[469] In 1871, to placate reformers, he created the America's first Civil Service Commission, chaired by reformer George William Curtis.[470]
The Liberal Republicans, composed of reformers, men who supported low tariffs, and those who opposed Grant's prosecution of the Klan, broke from Grant and the Republican Party.[471] The Liberals, who personally disliked Grant, detested his alliance with Senator Simon Cameron and Senator Roscoe Conkling, considered to be spoilsmen politicians.[472]
In 1872, the Liberals nominated Horace Greeley, a leading Republican New York Tribune editor and a fierce enemy of Grant, for president, and Missouri governor B. Gratz Brown, for vice president.[473] The Liberals denounced Grantism, corruption, nepotism, and inefficiency, demanded the withdrawal of federal troops from the South, literacy tests for blacks to vote, and amnesty for Confederates.[474] The Democrats adopted the Greeley-Brown ticket and the Liberals party platform.[475][au] Greeley, whose Tribune gave him wider name recognition and a louder campaign voice, pushed the themes that the Grant administration was failed and corrupt.[477]
The Republicans nominated Grant for reelection, with Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts replacing Colfax as the vice presidential nominee.[478][av] The Republicans shrewdly borrowed from the Liberals' party platform, including "extended amnesty, lowered tariffs, and embraced civil service reform."[480] Grant lowered customs duties, gave amnesty to former Confederates, and implemented a civil service merit system, neutralizing the opposition.[481] To placate the burgeoning suffragist movement, the Republicans' platform mentioned that women's rights would be treated with "respectful consideration."[482] Concerning Southern policy, Greeley advocated that local government control be given to whites, while Grant advocated federal protection of blacks.[483] Grant was supported by Frederick Douglass, prominent abolitionists, and Indian reformers.[484]
Grant won reelection easily thanks to federal prosecution of the Klan, a strong economy, debt reduction, lowered tariffs, and tax reductions.[485] He received 3.6 million (55.6%) votes to Greeley's 2.8 million votes and an Electoral College landslide of 286 to 66.[486][aw] A majority of African Americans in the South voted for Grant, while Democratic opposition remained mostly peaceful.[489] Grant lost in six former slave states that wanted to see an end to Reconstruction.[490] He proclaimed the victory as a personal vindication of his presidency, but inwardly he felt betrayed by the Liberals.[491] Grant was sworn in for his second term by Salmon P. Chase on March 4, 1873. In his second inaugural address, he reiterated the problems still facing the nation and focused on what he considered the chief issues of the day: freedom and fairness for all Americans while emphasizing the benefits of citizenship for freed slaves. Grant concluded his address with the words, "My efforts in the future will be directed towards the restoration of good feelings between the different sections of our common community".[492][ax] In 1873, Wilson suffered a stroke; never fully recovering, he died in office on November 22, 1875.[494][ay] With Wilson's loss, Grant relied on Fish's guidance more than ever.[496]
Panic of 1873 and loss of House
Grant continued to work for a strong dollar, signing into law the Coinage Act of 1873, which effectively ended the legal basis for bimetallism (the use of both silver and gold as money), establishing the gold standard in practice.[497][az] The Coinage Act discontinued the standard silver dollar and established the gold dollar as the sole monetary standard; because the gold supply did not increase as quickly as the population, the result was deflation. Silverites, who wanted more money in circulation to raise the prices that farmers received, denounced the move as the "Crime of 1873", claiming the deflation made debts more burdensome for farmers.[499]
 Grant is congratulated for vetoing the "inflation bill" in 1874.
Economic turmoil renewed during Grant's second term. In September 1873, Jay Cooke & Company, a New York brokerage house, collapsed after it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Cooke's Northern Pacific Railway. The collapse rippled through Wall Street, and other banks and brokerages that owned railroad stocks and bonds were also ruined.[500] On September 20, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for ten days.[501] Grant, who knew little about finance, traveled to New York to consult leading businessmen and bankers for advice on how to resolve the crisis, which became known as the Panic of 1873.[502] Grant believed that, as with the collapse of the Gold Ring in 1869, the panic was merely an economic fluctuation that affected bankers and brokers.[503] He instructed the Treasury to buy $10 million in government bonds, injecting cash into the system. The purchases curbed the panic on Wall Street, but an industrial depression, later called the Long Depression, nonetheless swept the nation.[502] Many of the nation's railroads 89 out of 364 went bankrupt.[504]
Congress hoped inflation would stimulate the economy and passed The Ferry Bill, which became known as the "Inflation Bill" in 1874.[505] Many farmers and workingmen favored the bill, which would have added $64 million in greenbacks to circulation, but some Eastern bankers opposed it because it would have weakened the dollar.[506] Belknap, Williams, and Delano[ba] told Grant a veto would hurt Republicans in the November elections. Grant believed the bill would destroy the credit of the nation, and he vetoed it despite their objections. Grant's veto placed him in the conservative faction of the Republican Party and was the beginning of the party's commitment to a gold-backed dollar.[508] Grant later pressured Congress for a bill to further strengthen the dollar by gradually reducing the number of greenbacks in circulation. When the Democrats gained a majority in the House after the 1874 elections, the lame-duck Republican Congress did so before the Democrats took office.[509] On January 14, 1875, Grant signed the Specie Payment Resumption Act, which required gradual reduction of the number of greenbacks allowed to circulate and declared that they would be redeemed for gold beginning on January 1, 1879.[510][bb]
Reforms and scandals
Further information: Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration reforms and Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration scandals
The post-Civil War economy brought on massive industrial wealth and government expansion. Speculation, lifestyle extravagance, and corruption in federal offices were rampant.[512] All of Grant's executive departments were investigated by Congress.[513] Grant by nature was honest, trusting, gullible, and extremely loyal to his chosen friends. His responses to malfeasance were mixed, at times appointing cabinet reformers, but also at times defending culprits.[514]
 Cartoonist Thomas Nast praises Grant for rejecting demands by Pennsylvania politicians to suspend civil service rules.
Grant in his first term appointed Secretary of Interior Jacob D. Cox, who implemented civil service reform: he fired unqualified clerks, and took other measures.[515] On October 3, 1870, Cox resigned office under a dispute with Grant over handling of a mining claim.[516][bc] Authorized by Congress on March 3, 1871, Grant created and appointed the first Civil Service Commission.[518] Grant's Commission created rules for competitive exams, the end of mandatory political assessments, classifying positions into grades, and appointees were chosen from the top three performing federal applicants.[519] The rules took effect on January 1, 1872, but Department heads, and others were exempted.[520][bd][be] Grant, more than any previous president, elevated the federal civil service, but his critics refused to acknowledge this.[520]
In November 1871, Grant's appointed New York Collector, and Conkling ally, Thomas Murphy, resigned. Grant replaced Murphy with another Conkling ally, Chester A. Arthur, who implemented Boutwell's reforms.[523] A Senate committee investigated the New York Customs House from January 3, 1872, to June 4, 1872. Previous Grant appointed collectors Murphy and Moses H. Grinnell charged lucrative fees for warehouse space, without the legal requirement of listing the goods.[524] This led to Grant firing warehouse owner George K. Leet, for pocketing the exorbitant freight fees and splitting the profits.[525][bf]  Boutwell's reforms included stricter record-keeping and that goods be stored on company docks.[524] Grant ordered prosecutions in New York by Attorney General George H. Williams and Secretary of Treasury Boutwell of persons accepting and paying for bribes.[526] Although exonerated, Grant was derided for his association with Conkling's New York patronage machine.[527]
On March 3, 1873, Grant signed into law an appropriation act that increased pay for federal employees, Congress (retroactive), the Judiciary, and the President.[528][524] Grant's annual salary doubled from $25,000 to $50,000. Critics derided Congress' two year retroactive, "services rendered", $4,000 lump sum payment for each Congressman, and the law was partially repealed. Grant, however, kept his much needed pay raise, while his personal reputation remained intact.[529][524]
In 1872, Grant signed into law an act that ended private moiety (tax collection) contracts, but an attached rider allowed three more contracts.[530] Boutwell's assistant secretary William A. Richardson, hired John B. Sanborn to go after "individuals and cooperations" who allegedly evaded taxes. Retained by Richardson (as Secretary), Sanborn aggressively collected $213,000, while splitting $156,000 to others, including Richardson, and the Republican Party campaign committee.[531][524] During an 1874 Congressional investigation, Richardson denied involvement, but Sanborn said he met with Richardson six times over the contracts.[532] Congress severely condemned Richardson's permissive manner. Grant appointed Richardson judge of the Court of Claims, and replaced him with reformer Benjamin Bristow.[533] In June, Grant and Congress abolished the moiety system.[534]
Bristow effectively cleaned house, tightened up the Treasury's investigation force, implemented civil service, and fired hundreds of corrupt appointees.[535] Bristow discovered Treasury receipts were low, and launched an investigation that uncovered the notorious Whiskey Ring, that involved collusion between distillers and Treasury officials to evade paying the Treasury millions in tax revenues.[536] Much of this money was being pocketed while some of it went into Republican coffers.[537] In mid-April, Bristow informed Grant of the ring. On May 10, Bristow struck hard and broke the ring.[538] Federal marshals raided 32 installations nationwide and arrested 350 men; 176 indictments were obtained, leading to 110 convictions and $3,150,000 in fines returned to the Treasury.[539]
 Harper's Weekly cartoon on Bristow's Whiskey Ring investigation
Grant appointed David Dyer, under Bristow's recommendation, federal attorney to prosecute the Ring in St. Louis, who indicted Grant's old friend General John McDonald, supervisor of Internal Revenue.[540] Grant endorsed Bristow's investigation writing on a letter "Let no guilty man escape..."[541] Bristow's investigation discovered Babcock received kickback payments, and that Babcock had secretly forewarned McDonald, the ring's mastermind boss, of the coming investigation.[542] On November 22, the jury convicted McDonald.[543] On December 9, Babcock was indicted, however, Grant refused to believe in Babcock's guilt, was ready to testify in Babcock's favor, but Fish warned that doing so would put Grant in the embarrassing position of testifying against a case prosecuted by his own administration.[544] Instead, Grant remained in Washington and on February 12, 1876, gave a deposition in Babcock's defense, expressing that his confidence in his secretary was "unshaken".[545] Grant's testimony silenced all but his strongest critics.[546]
The St. Louis jury acquitted Babcock, but Grant allowed Babcock to remain at the White House. However, after Babcock was indicted in a frame up of a Washington reformer, called the Safe Burglary Conspiracy,
Grant finally dismissed him from the White House. Babcock kept his position of Superintendent of Public Buildings in Washington.[547][524] [bg]
The Interior Department under Secretary Columbus Delano, whom Grant appointed to replace Cox, was rife with fraud and corruption. The exception was Delano's effective oversight of Yellowstone. Grant reluctantly forced Delano's resignation. Surveyor General Silas Reed had set up corrupt contracts that benefited Delano's son, John Delano.[549] Grant's Secretary Interior Zachariah Chandler, who succeeded Delano in 1875, implemented reforms, fired corrupt agents and ended profiteering.[550] When Grant was informed by Postmaster Marshall Jewell of a potential Congressional investigation into an extortion scandal involving Attorney General George H. Williams' wife, Grant fired Williams and appointed reformer Edwards Pierrepont in his place. Grant's new cabinet appointments temporarily appeased reformers.[551]
After the Democrats took control of the House in 1875, more corruption in federal departments was exposed.[552] Among the most damaging scandal involved Secretary of War William W. Belknap, who took quarterly kickbacks from the Fort Sill tradership, which led to his resignation in February 1876.[553] Belknap was impeached by the House but was acquitted by the Senate.[554] Grant's own brother Orvil set up "silent partnerships" and received kickbacks from four trading posts.[555] Congress discovered that Secretary of Navy Robeson had been bribed by a naval contractor, but no articles of impeachment were drawn up.[556] In his December 5, 1876, Eighth Annual Message, Grant apologized to the nation: "Failures have been errors of judgement, not of intent."[557]
Election of 1876
Main article: 1876 United States presidential election
The abandonment of Reconstruction by the nation played a central role during the Election of 1876.[558] Mounting investigations into corruption by the House, controlled by the Democrats, politically discredited Grant's presidency.[559] Grant, by a public letter in 1875, chose not to run for a third term, while the Republicans chose Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio, a reformer, at their convention.[560] The Democrats nominated Governor Samuel J. Tilden of New York. Voting irregularities in three Southern states caused the election that year to remain undecided for several months.[561] Grant told Congress to settle the matter through legislation and assured both sides that he would not use the army to force a result, except to curb violence. On January 29, 1877, he signed legislation forming an Electoral Commission to decide the matter.[562] Hayes was ruled elected President by the commission; to forestall Democratic protests, Republicans agreed to the Compromise of 1877, in which the last troops were withdrawn from Southern capitals. With Reconstruction dead, an 80-year era of Jim Crow segregation was launched.[563] Grant's "calm visage" throughout the election crisis appeased the nation.[564]
To the chagrin of Grant, President Hayes appointed Reconstruction critics, including Liberal Republican icon Carl Schurz to Secretary of Interior.[565]
Post-presidency (1877 1885)
Main article: Post-presidency of Ulysses S. Grant
After leaving the White House, Grant said he "was never so happy in my life". The Grants left Washington for New York, to attend the birth of their daughter Nellie's child, staying at Hamilton Fish's residence. Calling themselves "waifs", the Grants toured Cincinnati, St. Louis, Chicago, and Galena, without a clear idea of where they would live afterward.[566]
World tour and diplomacy
Main article: World tour of Ulysses S. Grant
 Grant and Bismarck in 1878
For some years Grant had entertained the idea of taking a long-deserved vacation after his presidency and, after liquidating one of his investments to finance the venture, the Grants set out on a world tour that lasted approximately two and a half years.[567] Grant's voyage abroad was funded by a Nevada-based mining company investment he made that earned him $25,000 ($636,172 in 2021 dollars).[568][569] Preparing for the tour, they arrived in Philadelphia on May 10, 1877, and were honored with celebrations during the week before their departure. On May 16, Grant and Julia left for England aboard the SS Indiana.[570] During the tour the Grants made stops in Europe, Africa, India, and points in the Middle East and Far East, meeting with notable dignitaries such as Queen Victoria, Pope Leo XIII, Otto von Bismarck, Li Hongzhang, Emperor Meiji and others. Grant was the first U.S. president to visit Jerusalem and the Holy Land.[571]
In August 1878, Grant visited St. Petersburg and Moscow in Russia. When the Grants arrived in St. Petersburg, Tsar Alexander II sent out an imperial carriage that brought them to meet the Tsar at his Summer Palace.[572] The Tsar was interested in the warfare of Native Americans and asked Grant about the future of the Plains Indians, while Grant attempted to answer him satisfactorily.[573] In St. Petersburg, as was his custom, and as a man with common roots, Grant mingled and conversed with the local people. U.S. Minister to Russia Edwin W. Stoughton escorted the Grants to see the ceremonial Russian man-of-war Peter the Great and Grant was given a seventeen-gun salute.
As a courtesy to Grant by the Hayes administration, his touring party received federal transportation on three U.S. Navy ships: a five-month tour of the Mediterranean on the USS Vandalia, travel from Hong Kong to China on the USS Ashuelot, and transportation from China to Japan on the USS Richmond.[574] During the tour, the Hayes administration encouraged Grant to assume a public unofficial diplomatic role to represent the United States and strengthen American interests abroad, while resolving issues for some countries in the process.[575] Homesick, the Grants left Japan sailing on the SS City of Tokio escorted by a Japanese man-of-war, crossed the Pacific and landed in San Francisco on September 20, 1879, greeted by cheering crowds.[576] Before returning home to Philadelphia, Grant stopped at Chicago for a reunion with General Sherman and the Army of the Tennessee.[577] Grant's tour demonstrated to Europe and Asia that the United States was an emerging world power.[578]
Third term attempt
Main article: 1880 Republican National Convention
 Cartoonist Joseph Keppler lampooned Grant and his associates. Puck, 1880
Stalwarts, led by Grant's old political ally, Roscoe Conkling, saw Grant's renewed popularity as an opportunity to regain power, and sought to nominate him for the presidency in 1880. Opponents called it a violation of the unofficial two-term rule in use since George Washington. Grant said nothing publicly but wanted the job and encouraged his men.[579] Washburne urged him to run; Grant demurred, saying he would be happy for the Republicans to win with another candidate, though he preferred James G. Blaine to John Sherman. Even so, Conkling and John A. Logan began to organize delegates in Grant's favor. When the convention convened in Chicago in June, there were more delegates pledged to Grant than to any other candidate, but he was still short of a majority vote to get the nomination.[580]
At the convention, Conkling nominated Grant with an eloquent speech, the most famous line being: "When asked which state he hails from, our sole reply shall be, he hails from Appomattox and its famous apple tree."[580] With 370 votes needed for the nomination, the first ballot had Grant at 304, Blaine at 284, Sherman at 93, and the rest to minor candidates.[581] Subsequent ballots followed, with roughly the same result; neither Grant nor Blaine could win. After thirty-six ballots, Blaine's delegates deserted him and combined with those of other candidates to nominate a compromise candidate: Representative and former Union general James A. Garfield of Ohio.[582] A procedural motion made the vote unanimous for Garfield, who accepted the nomination.[583] Grant gave speeches for Garfield but declined to criticize the Democratic nominee, Winfield Scott Hancock, a general who had served under him in the Army of the Potomac.[584] Garfield won the election. Grant gave Garfield his public support and pushed him to include Stalwarts in his administration.[585] On July 2, 1881, Garfield was shot by an assassin and died on September 19. On learning of Garfield's death from a reporter, Grant wept bitterly.[586]
Business failures
In the 19th century, there were no federal presidential pensions, and the Grants' personal income was limited to $6,000 a year.[587] Grant's world tour had been costly, and he had depleted most of his savings, while he needed to earn money and find a new home.[588] Wealthy friends bought him a house on Manhattan's Upper East Side, and to make an income, Grant, Jay Gould, and former Mexican Finance Secretary Mat as Romero chartered the Mexican Southern Railroad, with plans to build a railroad from Oaxaca to Mexico City. Grant urged Chester A. Arthur, who had succeeded Garfield as president in 1881, to negotiate a free trade treaty with Mexico. Arthur and the Mexican government agreed, but the United States Senate rejected the treaty in 1883. The railroad was similarly unsuccessful, falling into bankruptcy the following year.[589]
At the same time, Grant's son Buck had opened a Wall Street brokerage house with Ferdinand Ward although a conniving man who swindled numerous wealthy men, Ward was at the time regarded as a rising star on Wall Street. The firm, Grant & Ward, was initially successful.[590] In 1883, Grant joined the firm and invested $100,000 of his own money.[591] Grant, however, warned Ward that if his firm engaged in government business he would dissolve their partnership.[592] To encourage investment, Ward paid investors abnormally high interest, by pledging the company's securities on multiple loans in a process called rehypothecation,[593] which would now be understood as a Ponzi scheme. Ward, in collusion with banker James D. Fish and kept secret from bank examiners, retrieved the firm's securities from the company's bank vault.[594] When the trades went bad, multiple loans came due, all backed up by the same collateral.
Historians agree that the elder Grant was likely unaware of Ward's intentions, but it is unclear how much Buck Grant knew. In May 1884, enough investments went bad to convince Ward that the firm would soon be bankrupt. Ward, who assumed Grant was "a child in business matters,"[595] told him of the impending failure, but assured Grant that this was a temporary shortfall.[596] Grant approached businessman William Henry Vanderbilt, who gave him a personal loan of $150,000.[597] Grant invested the money in the firm, but it was not enough to save it from failure. The fall of Grant & Ward set off the Panic of 1884.
Vanderbilt offered to forgive Grant's debt entirely, an offer Grant refused.[598] Essentially penniless, but compelled by a sense of personal honor he repaid what he could with his Civil War mementos and the sale or transfer of all other assets.[599] Vanderbilt took title to Grant's home, although he allowed the Grants to continue to reside there, and pledged to donate the souvenirs to the federal government and insisted the debt had been paid in full.[600] Grant was distraught over Ward's deception and asked privately how he could ever "trust any human being again."[601]
In March 1885, as his health was failing, he testified against both Ward and Fish.[602] Ward was convicted of fraud in October 1885, months after Grant's death, and served six and a half years in prison.[603] After the collapse of Grant & Ward, there was an outpouring of sympathy for Grant.[604]
Memoirs, military pension, and death
Main article: Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant
Grant working on his memoirs, less than a month before his death. Howe, June 27, 1885Grant's last photo, taken only four days before his death
Throughout his career, Grant repeatedly told highly detailed stories of his military experiences, often making slight mistakes in terms of dates and locations. As a poor hardscrabble farmer in St. Louis just before the war, he kept his neighbors spellbound until midnight "listening intently to his vivid narrations of Army experiences."[605] In calm moments during the Civil War, he often spoke of his recent experiences, typically "in terse and often eloquent language."[606] Grant's interpretations changed in his letters written during the Mexican War period, there is no criticism of the war. By contrast his Memoirs are highly critical of the political aspects, condemning the war as unwarranted aggression by the United States. Grant told and retold his war stories so many times that writing his Memoirs was more a matter of repetition and polish rather than trying to recall his memories for the first time.[607][bh]
In the summer of 1884, Grant complained of a sore throat but put off seeing a doctor until late October, when he learned it was cancer, possibly caused by his frequent cigar smoking.[609][bi] Grant chose not to reveal the seriousness of his condition to his wife, who soon found out from Grant's doctor.[611] Before being diagnosed, Grant attended a Methodist service for Civil War veterans in Ocean Grove, New Jersey, on August 4, 1884, receiving a standing ovation from more than ten thousand veterans and others; it would be his last public appearance.[612] In March of the following year, The New York Times announced that Grant was dying of cancer, and a nationwide public concern for the former president began.[613] Knowing of Grant and Julia's financial difficulties, Congress sought to honor him and restored him to the rank of General of the Army with full retirement pay Grant's assumption of the presidency in 1869 had required that he resign his commission and forfeit his (and his widow's) pension.[614]
Grant was nearly broke and worried constantly about leaving his wife a suitable amount of money to live on. Imagining that a set of memoirs might provide this, Grant approached The Century Magazine, which offered Grant a book contract with a 10 percent royalty, but Grant's friend Mark Twain, one of the few who understood how precarious Grant's financial condition actually was, made him an offer for his memoirs that paid an unheard-of 70 percent royalty.[615] To provide for his family, Grant worked intensely on his memoirs at his home in New York City. His former staff member Adam Badeau assisted him with much of the research, while his son Frederick located documents and did much of the fact-checking.[616] Because of the summer heat and humidity, his doctors recommended that he move upstate to a cottage at the top of Mount McGregor, offered by a family friend.[617]
On July 18, 1885, Grant finished his memoir; he lived for only five more days.[618] Grant's memoirs treat his early life and time in the Mexican American War briefly and include the events of his life up to the end of the Civil War.[619] The Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant was a critical and commercial success. Julia Grant eventually received about $450,000 in royalties (equivalent to $13,600,000 in 2021).[620] The memoir has been highly regarded by the public, military historians, and literary critics.[621] Grant portrayed himself in the persona of the honorable Western hero, whose strength lies in his honesty and straightforwardness. He candidly depicted his battles against both the Confederates and internal army foes.[622][bj]
 Grant's funeral train at West Point, bound for New York City
After a year-long struggle with throat cancer, surrounded by his family, Grant died at 8:08 a.m. in the Mount McGregor cottage on July 23, 1885, at the age of 63.[624] Sheridan, then Commanding General of the Army, ordered a day-long tribute to Grant on all military posts, and President Grover Cleveland ordered a thirty-day nationwide period of mourning. After private services, the honor guard placed Grant's body on a special funeral train, which traveled to West Point and New York City. A quarter of a million people viewed it in the two days before the funeral. Tens of thousands of men, many of them veterans from the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR), marched with Grant's casket drawn by two dozen black stallions[625] to Riverside Park in the Morningside Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan. His pallbearers included Union generals Sherman and Sheridan, Confederate generals Simon Bolivar Buckner and Joseph E. Johnston, Admiral David Dixon Porter, and Senator John A. Logan, the head of the GAR.[626] Following the casket in the seven-mile-long (11 km) procession were President Cleveland, the two living former presidents Hayes and Arthur, all of the President's Cabinet, as well as the justices of the Supreme Court.[627]
Attendance at the New York funeral topped 1.5 million.[626] Ceremonies were held in other major cities around the country, while Grant was eulogized in the press and likened to George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.[628] Grant's body was laid to rest in Riverside Park, first in a temporary tomb, and then twelve years later, on April 17, 1897 in the General Grant National Memorial, also known as "Grant's Tomb", the largest mausoleum in North America.[626]
Historical reputation
Further information: Historical reputation of Ulysses S. Grant and Historical rankings of presidents of the United States
Grant was hailed across the North as the winning general in the American Civil War and overall his military reputation has held up quite well. Achieving great national fame for his victories at Vicksburg and the surrender at Appomattox, he was widely credited as the General who "saved the Union".[629]  Grant was the most successful general, Union or Confederate, to dominate the Civil War.[630] Criticized by the South for using excessive force, his overall military reputation stands intact.[631] Grant's drinking was often exaggerated by the press and falsely stereotyped by many of his rivals and critics.[632] During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Grant's reputation was damaged by the Lost Cause movement and the Dunning School.[633][bk]
Views of Grant reached new lows as he was seen as an unsuccessful president and an unskilled, if lucky, general.[635] In the 1950s, some historians made a reassessment of Grant's military career, shifting the analysis of Grant as the victor by brute force to that of successful, skillful, modern strategist and commander.[636] Historian William S. McFeely's biography, Grant (1981), won the Pulitzer Prize, and brought renewed scholarly interest in Grant. McFeely believed Grant was an "ordinary American" trying to "make his mark" during the 19th Century. [637] In the 21st century, Grant's reputation improved markedly among historians after the publication of Grant (2001), by historian Jean Edward Smith.[638][639] Opinions of Grant's presidency demonstrate a better appreciation of Grant's personal integrity, Reconstruction efforts, and peace policy towards Indians, even when they fell short.[640][641][642]
External video Presentation by H.W. Brands on The Man Who Saved the Union, October 28, 2012, C-SPAN Presentation by Ronald C. White on American Ulysses, October 5, 2016, C-SPAN Q&A interview with White on American Ulysses, December 4, 2016, C-SPAN Presentation by White on American Ulysses, September 2, 2017, C-SPAN Q&A interview with Ron Chernow on Grant, November 5, 2017, C-SPAN Presentation by Chernow on Grant, September 1, 2018, C-SPAN Presentation by Charles W. Calhoun on The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant, February 8, 2018, C-SPAN
H.W. Brands' The Man Who Saved the Union (2012), Ronald C. White's American Ulysses (2016) and Ron Chernow's Grant (2017) continued the elevation of Grant's historical reputation.[643] White said Grant, "demonstrated a distinctive sense of humility, moral courage, and determination," and as president he "stood up for African Americans, especially fighting against voter suppression perpetrated by the Ku Klux Klan."[644] White believed Grant was "an exceptional person and leader."[645] Charles W. Calhoun's The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant (2017) noted Grant's successes in office, but asked whether Grant's revived reputation was found in the "popular consciousness."[646]
Historians still debate how effective Grant was at halting corruption.[647] The scandals during the Grant administration were often used to stigmatize his political reputation.[648] Militarily evaluated, Grant was a modern general and "a skillful leader who had a natural grasp of tactics and strategy."[649]
Grant's successful Civil War military strategies have been recognized and adapted into successful business practices.[650] According to historian David Heffernan, Grant's presidency has been "unfairly denigrated" for generations, disregarding his prosecution of the Klan, and peaceful resolution of the controversial Election of 1876.[651] Historian Robert Farley is concerned that the Cult of Lee and the Dunning School were resentful of Grant for his strong enforcement of Reconstruction, prosecution of the Klan, and the defeat of Lee at Appomatox, resulted in Grant's shoddy treatment by historians. Farley said the Cult of Lee had "little room for Grant, in no small part because Grant was the only president to vigorously pursue Reconstruction and the first to treat blacks as both human and American."[652]
In a 2021 C-SPAN survey ranking Presidents from worst to best, Grant was ranked 20 out of 43 Presidents. Grant was noted for being "a strong advocate for civil rights" during his presidency.[653][654]
On December 23, 2022, the bicentenary of  Grant's birth, Grant was authorized for posthumous promotion to the rank of General of the Armies of the United States as part of the 2023 Defense Authorization Bill. Preceded by George Washington and John J. Pershing, Grant will become the third person to hold this rank if the authorization is acted on by the President.[655][656][657]
Memorials and presidential library
See also: Ulysses S. Grant cultural depictions
 Grant National Memorial, known as "Grant's Tomb", largest mausoleum in North America
Several memorials honor Grant. In addition to his mausoleum Grant's Tomb in New York City there is the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial at the foot of Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.[658] Created by sculptor Henry Merwin Shrady and architect Edward Pearce Casey, and dedicated in 1922, it overlooks the Capitol Reflecting Pool.[659] In 2015, restoration work began, which is expected to be completed before the bicentennial of Grant's birth in 2022.[660]
The Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site near St. Louis, and several other sites in Ohio and Illinois memorialize Grant's life.[661] The U.S. Grant Cottage State Historic Site, located at the top of Mount McGregor in Wilton, New York, preserves the house in which he completed his memoirs and died.[662][663] There are smaller memorials in Chicago's Lincoln Park and Philadelphia's Fairmount Park. Named in his honor are Grant Park, as well as several counties in western and midwestern states. On June 3, 1891, a bronze statue of Grant by Danish sculptor Johannes Gelert was dedicated at Grant Park in Galena, Illinois.[664][665] From 1890 to 1940, part of what is now Kings Canyon National Park was called General Grant National Park, named for the General Grant sequoia.[666]
In May 2012, the Ulysses S. Grant Foundation, on the institute's fiftieth anniversary, selected Mississippi State University as the permanent location for Ulysses S. Grant's presidential library.[667][668] Historian John Y. Simon edited Grant's letters into a 32-volume scholarly edition published by Southern Illinois University Press.[669]
Grant's image has appeared on the front of the United States fifty-dollar bill since 1913. In 1921, the Ulysses S. Grant Centenary Association was founded with the goal of coordinating special observances and erecting monuments in recognition of Grant's historical role. The venture was financed by the minting of 10,000 gold dollars (depicted below) and 250,000 half dollars. The coins were minted and issued in 1922, commemorating the 100th anniversary of Grant's birth.[670][671] Grant has also appeared on several U.S. postage stamps, the first one issued in 1890, five years after his death.[672]
On June 19, 2020, Juneteenth protesters[673] toppled a bronze bust, U. S. Grant (1896), at Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.[674][675][bl] Grant had briefly owned one slave, whom he set free.[673]
Grant has appeared on the United States fifty-dollar bill since 1913.  The 1922 one-dollar gold piece of the Grant Memorial coinage issued on the 100th anniversary of his birth. See also: Grant half-dollarThe first U.S. postage stamp honoring Grant, issued 1890Ulysses S. Grant honored on currency and postage
Dates of rank
Insignia
Rank
Date
Component
No insignia
Cadet, USMA
July 1, 1839
Regular Army
Brevet Second Lieutenant
July 1, 1843
Regular Army
Second Lieutenant
September 30, 1845
Regular Army
Brevet First Lieutenant
September 8, 1847
Regular Army
First Lieutenant
September 16, 1847
Regular Army
Captain
August 5, 1853
Regular Army(Resigned July 31, 1854.)
Colonel
June 17, 1861
Volunteers
Brigadier General
August 7, 1861
Volunteers(To rank from May 17, 1861.)
Major General
February 16, 1862
Volunteers
Major General
July 4, 1863
Regular Army
Lieutenant General
March 4, 1864
Regular Army
General of the Army
July 25, 1866
Regular Army
Source:[676]
See also
List of American Civil War battles
List of American Civil War generals (Union)
Notes
^ Vice President Wilson died in office. This occurred prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967; hence, the vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next ensuing election and inauguration.
^ Grant's step-grandmother Sarah Simpson, an educated woman who read French classical literature, spoke up for the name Ulysses, the legendary, ancient Greek hero.[13]
^ Biographer Edward G. Longacre offers the theory held by some biographers that Grant's parents' decision was based on their recognition of his aversion to music. Longacre, however, also suggests that not pushing religion may have been a form of simple parental neglect.[19]
^ One source says Hamer nominated Grant Ulysses Sidney Grant.[27] Another source says Hamer thought the "S" stood for Simpson, Grant's mother's maiden name.[28] According to Grant, the "S." did not stand for anything. Upon graduation from the academy he adopted the name "Ulysses S. Grant".[29]
^ In another version of the story, Grant inverted his first and middle names to register at West Point as "Ulysses Hiram Grant" because he thought reporting to the academy with a trunk that carried the initials H.U.G. would subject him to teasing and ridicule.[31] Upon finding that Hamer had nominated him as "Ulysses S. Grant." Grant decided to keep the name because he could avoid the "hug" monogram and it was easier to keep the wrong name than to try changing school records.[31]
^ All the graduates were mounted on horses during the ceremony.[35]
^ At the time, class ranking largely determined branch assignments.[43] Those at the top of the class were usually assigned to the Engineers, followed by Artillery, Cavalry, and Infantry.[43]
^ Several scholars, including Jean Edward Smith, Ron Chernow, and Charles B. Flood said that Longstreet was Grant's best man and the two other officers were Grant's groomsmen. [49] All three served in the Confederate Army and surrendered to Grant at Appomattox.[50]
^ During the Civil War, when Grant's Union supply depot at Holly Springs was sacked in December 1862, he incorporated the strategy of the Union Army foraging the land,[69] rather than expose long Union supply lines to enemy attack.[70]
^ William McFeely said that Grant left the army simply because he was "profoundly depressed" and that the evidence as to how much and how often Grant drank remains elusive.[86] Jean Edward Smith maintains Grant's resignation was too sudden to be a calculated decision.[87] Buchanan never mentioned it again until asked about it during the Civil War.[88] The effects and extent of Grant's drinking on his military and public career are debated by historians.[89] Lyle Dorsett said Grant was an "alcoholic" but functioned amazingly well. William Farina maintains Grant's devotion to family kept him from drinking to excess and sinking into debt.[90]
^ By comparison of consumer prices, $1,000 in 1859 would be equivalent to about $30,000 in 2020.[106]
^ Jesse's tannery business was known as "Grant & Perkins" in 1862.[111]
^ Rawlins later became Grant's aide-de-camp and close friend during the war.
^ Grant's position about civil war was made clear in an April 21 letter to his father; "we have a government and laws and a flag, and they must all be sustained. There are but two parties now, Traitors and Patriots ..."[121]
^ Fr mont dismissed rumors of Grant's drunkenness years earlier in the regular army, saying there was something about Grant's manner "that was sufficient to counteract the influence of what they said."[127]
^ See topographical map
^ In response to allegations of Grant's drinking, his staff officer, William R. Rowley, maintained that the allegation was a fabricated lie. Other witnesses claimed that Grant was sober on the morning of April 6.
^ Grant's father, and his Jewish partners, the Mack Brothers, visited Grant's camp to get a legal cotton trade permit, which further infuriated Grant, who ordered them to leave the district on the next train.[192][187]
^ Thirty Jewish families were expelled from Paducah, Kentucky.[193]
^ In 2012, historian Jonathan D. Sarna said: "Gen. Ulysses S. Grant issued the most notorious anti-Jewish official order in American history."[195] Grant made amends with the Jewish community during his presidency, appointing them to various federal positions.[196] In 2017, biographer Ron Chernow said  of Grant: "Grant as president atoned for his action in a multitude of meaningful ways. He was never a bigoted, hate-filled man and was haunted by his terrible action for the rest of his days."[197][198] In 2019, historian Donald L. Miller said: "Why Grant singled out Jews will never be known."[199]
^ Meade had followed Halleck's cautious approach to fighting, and Grant was there to give him direction and encouragement to be more aggressive.[223]
^ Estimates vary considerably among historians as to the actual numbers of casualties at Cold Harbor. See: Battle of Cold Harbor, Aftermath section, casualty chart, outlining estimates from seven historians
^ Numbers for casualties vary among historians. See Battle of the Crater, Aftermath section
^ Senator Carl Shurz, sent earlier by Johnson in July 1865, reported whites in the South harbored resentment of the North, and that blacks suffered from violence and fraud.[290]
^ Republican Senator Charles Sumner thwarted an effort to make an exemption for Stewart's appointment to hold office, that caused contention with Grant.[328]
^ Borie's notable achievement was to desegregate the Washington Navy Yard.[330]
^ Grant's vision of Reconstruction included federal enforcement of civil rights and acceptance of black citizenship without violence and intimidation.[349]
^ Southern Reconstructed states were controlled locally by Republican (Radical) carpetbaggers, scalawags and former slaves. By 1877 the conservative Democrats had full control of the region and Reconstruction was dead.[354]
^ Urged by Grant and his Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, the strongest of these laws was the Ku Klux Klan Act, passed on April 20, 1871, that authorized the president to impose martial law and suspend the writ of habeas corpus.[358]
^ Akerman returned over 3,000 indictments of the Klan throughout the South and obtained 600 convictions for the worst offenders.[363]
^ To placate the South in 1870, Grant signed the Amnesty Act, which restored political rights to former Confederates.[365]
^ Civil rights prosecutions continued but with fewer yearly cases and convictions.[367]
^ Additionally, Grant's Postmaster General, John Creswell used his patronage powers to integrate the postal system and appointed a record number of African-American men and women as postal workers across the nation, while also expanding many of the mail routes.[368] Grant appointed Republican abolitionist and champion of black education Hugh Lennox Bond as U.S. Circuit Court judge.[369]
^ Supreme Court rulings in the Slaughter-House Cases and United States v. Cruikshank restricted federal enforcement of civil rights.[372]
^ Butterfield was to send coded messages to Gould and Fisk to secretly alert them of Treasury gold sales by Boutwell.[392]
^ Corbin and Gould ordered Grant's personal secretary Horace Porter $500,000 in gold and purchased $1.5 million in gold for Corbin.[392]
^ Grant's inner circle, including Julia, were rumored to also have been given speculative gold accounts.[392]
^ An 1870 Congressional investigation chaired by James A. Garfield cleared Grant of profiteering, but excoriated Gould and Fisk for their manipulation of the gold market and Corbin for exploiting his personal connection to Grant.[401]
^ Urged by his Secretary of War Rawlins, Grant initially supported recognition of Cuban belligerency, but Rawlins's death on September 6, 1869, removed any cabinet support for military intervention.[384]
^ The international tribunal awarded the United States $15,500,000.[413]
^ There is evidence to suggest in Babcock's diary that he was offered 1,000 acres of land in exchange for annexation.[424]
^ His Peace Policy aimed to replace entrepreneurs serving as Native American agents with missionaries and aimed to protect Native Americans on reservations and educate them in farming.[447]
^ Grant believed that Native Americans, given opportunities for education and work, could serve alongside white men. [442]
^ Bison were hunted almost to the point of extinction during the latter 1800s; Yellowstone National Park was the only remaining place in the country where free-roaming herds persisted.[457]
^ In spite of Grant's peaceful efforts, over 200 battles were fought with Native Americans during his presidency. Grant's peace policy survived Custer's death, even after Grant left office in 1877, as Indian policy remained under the Interior Department rather than changed over to the War Department.[466] The policy was considered humanitarian for its time but was later criticized for disregarding tribal cultures.[467]
^ The 1877 Black Hills takeover by the federal government has remained in dispute by the Sioux tribe, as no monetary funding was given for the land and only 10% of the tribal males signed the cession agreement.[468]
^ The Democrats were in disarray over the 1871 Tweed Ring scandal in New York City.[476]
^ Details revealed of the 1867 Cr dit Mobilier bribery scandal, implicating both Colfax and Wilson, stung the Grant administration, but Grant was not connected to the corruption.[479]
^ Greeley died on November 28, 1872, as a result, his electoral votes were split between four candidates. Thomas A. Hendricks, the governor-elect of Indiana, received the majority: 42 electoral votes.[487][488]
^ The day after his Inauguration, Grant wrote a letter to Colfax expressing his faith and trust in Colfax's integrity and allowed him to publish the letter, but the effort only served to compromise Grant's reputation.[493]
^ Thomas W. Ferry, President pro tempore of the Senate, was first in line in the United States presidential line of succession from November 22, 1875, to March 4, 1877.[495]
^ The gold standard and deflation economy remained in effect into the mid-1890s.[498]
^ Grant and Delano, his second Secretary of Interior, were third cousins.[507]
^ The 1879 date was more distant than Grant had hoped, but the knowledge that paper money would soon be worth its face value in gold drove them towards parity before the bill took effect. The country was still not on the gold standard, with silver coins remaining lawful currency.[511]
^ William McGarrahan claimed ownership of a lucrative California quicksilver mine under the jurisdiction of the Interior Department. Cox, who worked the mine believed McGarrahan was a "fraudulent claimant." Grant wanted the dispute settled by Congress.[517]
^ When Congress failed to make the Commission's reform rules permanent, Grant dissolved the Commission in 1874.[521]
^ Grant defended his powers to remove officers or make appointments of personal friends.[522]
^ Among those named to have taken Custom House kickbacks were Grant's personal secretaries Orville Babcock and Horace Porter.[524]
^ McFeely, writing in 1981, believed that Grant knew of Babcock's guilt, while Smith, in 2001, believed the evidence against Babcock was circumstantial at best.[548]
^ To restore his family's income and reputation, Grant wrote several articles on his Civil War campaigns for The Century Magazine at $500 (equivalent to $15,000 in 2021) each. The articles were well received by critics, and the editor, Robert Underwood Johnson, suggested that Grant write a book of memoirs, as Sherman and others had done. Grant's articles would serve as the basis for several chapters.[608]
^ Today, medical historians believed he suffered from a T1N1 carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa.[610]
^ Twain called the Memoirs a "literary masterpiece." Given over a century of favorable literary analysis, reviewer Mark Perry states that the Memoirs are "the most significant work" of American non-fiction.[623]
^ Historian Gregory Downs said, "After the war, Confederate apologists launched a brutally effective propaganda campaign against Grant to obscure the true history of slavery, the Civil War and the white Southern terrorist campaigns against Reconstruction."[634]
^ The toppling of Grant's statue, prompted a response from U.C. Davis history professor Gregory Downs. Noting President Grant's endorsement of the 15th Amendment and prosecution of the Klan, Downs said, "When the mob members tore down Grant's bust, they unknowingly built upon a 150-year effort to erase and defame him."[634]
References
^ Brands 2012b, p. 44.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 6.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 3.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 21 22.
^ White 2016, p. 6.
^ Hesseltine 1957, p. 4.
^ White 2016, p. 8.
^ White 2016, pp. 8 9.
^ Ulster-Scots and the US Presidents, p. 3.
^ Killanin, 1989, p. 62.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 5 6; White 2016, p. 9.
^ Simpson 2014, pp. 2 3; White 2016, pp. 9 10.
^ White 2016, pp. 9 10.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 6 7.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 497; White 2016, pp. 16, 18.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 8, 10, 140 41; White 2016, p. 21.
^ Brands 2012, p. 8; White 2016, p. 19.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 6 7; Waugh 2009, p. 10.
^ Longacre 2006, p. 7.
^ Simpson 2014, pp. 2 3; Longacre 2006, pp. 6 7.
^ Waugh 2009, p. 10.
^ White 2016, p. 20; Simpson 2014, p. 20.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 99 100.
^ White 2016, pp. 24 25.
^ White 2016, pp. 25, 43; Cullum 1891, pp. 170 71; Simpson 2014, pp. 10 11.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 12; Smith 2001, pp. 24, 83; Simon 1967, pp. 3 4; Kahan 2018, p. 2.
^ Poore, & Tiffany 1885, p. 12.
^ Simon 1967, pp. 3 4.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 12; Smith 2001, pp. 24, 83; Simon 1967, pp. 3 4.
^ White 2016, p. 30.
^ a b Garland 1898, pp. 30 31.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 13 14; Smith 2001, pp. 26 28.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 10.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 24, 27; Smith 2001, p. 28.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 27.
^ Smith 2001, p. 27; McFeely 1981, pp. 16 17.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 16 17; Smith 2001, pp. 26 27.
^ White 2016, p. 41.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 12 13.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 27; Longacre 2006, p. 21; Cullum 1850, pp. 256 57.
^ White 2016, p. 43; Chernow 2017, p. 19; Smith 2001, pp. 28 29.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 28; McFeely 1981, pp. 16, 19.
^ a b Jones, p. 1580.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 28 29; Brands 2012, p. 15; Chernow 2017, p. 81.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 28 29; Brands 2012, p. 15.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 30 33.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 61 62; White 2016, p. 102; Waugh 2009, p. 33.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 73 74; Waugh 2009, p. 33; Chernow 2017, p. 62; White 2016, p. 102.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 62; Smith 2001, p. 73; Flood 2005, p. 2007.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 62.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 20, 26; Bonekemper 2011, p. 8; Simpson 2014, p. 49.
^ Smith 2001, p. 73.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 49.
^ Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, p. 271.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 35 37; Brands 2012, pp. 15 17.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 30 31; Brands 2012, p. 23.
^ a b White 2016, p. 80.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 33 34; Brands 2012, p. 37.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 34 35.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 41 42.
^ a b McFeely 1981, p. 36.
^ White 2016, p. 66; Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, p. 271.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 44; Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, p. 271.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 67 68, 70, 73; Brands 2012, pp. 49 52.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 458; Chernow 2017, p. 58.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 30, 31, 37 38.
^ White 2016, p. 75.
^ White 2016, pp. 85, 96; Chernow 2017, p. 46.
^ Miller 2019, p. 248.
^ Smith 2001, p. 244.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 65.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 74.
^ Smith 2001, p. 76 78; Chernow 2017, pp. 73 74.
^ Smith 2001, p. 78; Chernow 2017, p. 75.
^ Johnston, Louis; Williamson, Samuel H. (2023). "What Was the U.S. GDP Then?". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved January 1, 2023. United States Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the Measuring Worth series. 
^ McFeely 1981; Chernow 2017.
^ White 2016, p. 487; Chernow 2017, p. 78.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 78.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 52; Cullum 1891, p. 171; Chernow 2017, p. 81.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 81 83.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 55; Chernow 2017, pp. 84 85.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 85.
^ Cullum 1891, p. 171; Chernow 2017, pp. 84 85.
^ Cullum 1891, p. 171; Chernow 2017, pp. 85 86.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 86 87; White 2016, pp. 118 20; McFeely 1981, p. 55.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 55.
^ Smith 2001, p. 87.
^ Smith 2001, p. 88.
^ Farina 2007, p. 202.
^ Farina 2007, pp. 13, 202; Dorsett 1983.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 55 58.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 87 88; Lewis 1950, pp. 328 32.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 77 78.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 95, 106; Simon 2002, p. 242; McFeely 1981, p. 60 61; Brands 2012, pp. 94 96.
^ Axelrod 2011, p. 208.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 58 60; White 2016, p. 125.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 61.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 58 60; Chernow 2017, p. 94.
^ Brands 2012, p. 96.
^ White 2016, p. 128.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 62; Brands 2012, p. 86; White 2016, p. 128.
^ Brands 2012; White 2016.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 94 95; White 2016, p. 130.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 86 87.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 94 95; McFeely 1981, p. 69; White 2016, p. 130.
^ "What was a Dollar from the Past Worth Today?". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved June 23, 2020.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 64; Brands 2012, pp. 89 90; White 2016, pp. 129 31.
^ White 2016, p. 131; Simon 1969, pp. 4 5.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 69 70.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 65 66; White 2016, pp. 133, 136.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 66.
^ White 2016, p. 136.
^ White 2016, pp. 135 37.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 69 70; Simon 1969, pp. 4 5.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 119 20.
^ White 2016, p. 140.
^ Brands 2012, p. 121.
^ Smith 2001, p. 99.
^ White 2016, pp. 140 43; Brands 2012, pp. 121 22; McFeely 1981, p. 73; Bonekemper 2012, p. 17; Smith 2001, p. 99; Chernow 2017, p. 125.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 73; Chernow 2017, p. 125.
^ Brands 2012, p. 123.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 122 23; McFeely 1981, p. 80; Bonekemper 2012.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 45 46; Simon 1965; Bonekemper 2012, pp. 18 19.
^ Smith 2001, p. 113; Bonekemper 2012.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 21.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 117 18; Catton 1963, p. 29; Bonekemper 2012, p. 21.
^ Catton 2015, p. 68.
^ White 2016, p. 159; Bonekemper 2012, p. 21.
^ Axelrod 2011, pp. 208 09.
^ Flood 2005, p. 63; White 2016, p. 159; Bonekemper 2012, p. 21.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 91; Chernow 2017, pp. 153 55.
^ a b White 2016, p. 168.
^ White 2016, pp. 169 71.
^ White 2016, p. 172.
^ White 2016, pp. 172 73; Groom 2012, pp. 94, 101 03.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 92 94.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 33, 35.
^ White 2016, p. 168; McFeely 1981, p. 94.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 138 42; Groom 2012, pp. 101 03.
^ Smith 2001, p. 146.
^ Axelrod 2011, p. 210.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 141 64; Brands 2012, pp. 164 65.
^ Groom 2012, pp. 138, 143 44.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 164 65; Smith 2001, pp. 125 34.
^ Groom 2012, p. 18.
^ White 2016, p. 210; Barney 2011, p. 287.
^ Smith 2001, p. 185.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 111 12; Groom 2012, p. 63; White 2016, p. 211.
^ Groom 2012, pp. 62 65; McFeely 1981, p. 112.
^ White 2016, p. 211.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 111; Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 94; Catton 1963, pp. 228, 230 31; Barney 2011, p. 287.
^ White 2016, pp. 217 18.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 58 59, 63 64.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 114; Flood 2005, pp. 109, 112; Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 58 59, 63 64.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 205.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 59, 63 64; Smith 2001, p. 206.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 115 16.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 115.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 187 88; Grant 1885, p. Chap XXV.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 94; White 2016, p. 221.
^ White 2016, pp. 223 24.
^ Kaplan 2015, pp. 1109 19; White 2016, pp. 223 25.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 188 91; White 2016, pp. 230 31.
^ White 2016, p. 225 26.
^ Smith 2001, p. 204; Barney 2011, p. 289.
^ White 2016, p. 229.
^ White 2016, p. 230; Groom 2012, pp. 363 64.
^ Longacre 2006, p. 137; White 2016, p. 231.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 211 12.
^ Badeau 1887, p. 126.
^ Flood 2005, p. 133.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 221 23; Catton 1960, p. 112.
^ White 2016, p. 243; Miller 2019, p. xii; Chernow 2017, p. 236.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 221 23; Catton 1960, p. 112; Chernow 2017, pp. 236 37.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 147 48; White 2016, p. 246; Chernow 2017, pp. 238 39.
^ White 2016, p. 248; Chernow 2017, pp. 231 32.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 239.
^ Catton 1960, pp. 119, 291; White 2016, pp. 248 49; Chernow 2017, pp. 239 41.
^ White 2016, p. 235.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 223, 225; White 2016, p. 250.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 147 48.
^ Miller 2019, pp. 206 07.
^ Miller 2019, pp. 206 09.
^ Miller 2019, pp. 209 10.
^ White 2016; Miller 2019, p. 154 55.
^ Smith 2001, p. 225; White 2016, pp. 235 36.
^ a b c Blakemore 2019.
^ a b Chernow 2017, p. 232.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 143 44, 151; Sarna 2012a, p. 37; White 2016, pp. 235 36.
^ Miller 2019, p. 259.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 232 33; Howland 1868, pp. 123 24.
^ a b Brands 2012, p. 218; Shevitz 2005, p. 256.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 235 36; Sarna 2012a, p. 6.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 226 27.
^ Sarna 2012b.
^ Sarna 2012a, pp. 89, 147; White 2016, p. 494; Chernow 2017, p. 236.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 236.
^ Sarna 2012a, pp. 89, 147; White 2016, p. 494.
^ Miller 2019, p. 260.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 148 49.
^ White 2016, p. 269.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 226 28.
^ Flood 2005, p. 160.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 164 65.
^ Smith 2001, p. 231.
^ a b McFeely 1981, p. 136.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 122 38; Smith 2001, pp. 206 57.
^ Catton 2015, p. 8.
^ Catton 2015, p. 7.
^ Brands 2012, p. 265; Cullum 1891, p. 172; White 2016, p. 295.
^ Flood 2005, p. 196.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 145 47; Smith 2001, pp. 267 68; Brands 2012, pp. 267 68.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 214 15.
^ Flood 2005, p. 216.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 217 18.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 148 50.
^ Smith 2001, p. 303.
^ Flood 2005, p. 232; McFeely 1981, p. 148; Cullum 1891, p. 172.
^ White 2016, pp. 313, 319.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 339, 342.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 343 44, 352.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 156; Chernow 2017, p. 352.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 292 93.
^ Wheelan 2014, p. 20; Simon 2002, p. 243; Chernow 2017, pp. 356 57.
^ Catton 1960, pp. 190, 193; Wheelan 2014, p. 20; Chernow 2017, pp. 348, 356 57.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 157; Wheelan 2014, p. 20; Chernow 2017, p. 356 57.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 157 75; Smith 2001, pp. 313 39, 343 68; Wheelan 2014, p. 20; Chernow 2017, pp. 356 57.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 355.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 162 63.
^ Chernow, 1992 p 384
^ Chernow 2017, p. 378.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 396 97.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 303, 314; Chernow 2017, pp. 376 77.
^ Smith 2001, p. 314; Chernow 2017, pp. 376 77.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 378 79, 384; Bonekemper 2012, p. 463.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 165.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 385 87, 394 95; Bonekemper 2012, p. 463.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 389, 392 95.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 169.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 170 71; Furgurson 2007, p. 235; Chernow 2017, p. 403.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 403.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 403 04; Bonekemper 2011.
^ Furgurson 2007, pp. 120 21.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 403 04.
^ Bonekemper 2011, pp. 41 42.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 406 07.
^ Bonekemper III 2010, p. 182; Chernow 2017, p. 407; Grant 1885, p. 276, Vol. II.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 157 75; Smith 2001, pp. 313 39, 343 68.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 178 86.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 414; White 2016, pp. 369 70.
^ a b Catton 2015, p. 309.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 429.
^ Catton 2015, p. 324.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 398.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 179; Smith 2001, pp. 369 95; Catton 2015, pp. 308 09.
^ Catton 2015, p. 325.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 430.
^ Grant Memoirs, Vol. II, 1885, pp. 313 14.
^ Catton 1960, pp. 223, 228; Smith 2001, p. 387.
^ Catton 1960, p. 235; Smith 2001, pp. 388 89.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 388 89.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 389 90.
^ Smith 2001, p. 390.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 359.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 353.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 213 14.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 365 66.
^ White 2016, pp. 403 04.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 401 03.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 504; Smith 2001, pp. 401 03.
^ White 2016, p. 405.
^ Grant 1885, p. Chapter LXVII; Smith 2001, p. 404.
^ White 2016, pp. 405 06.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 92; Smith 2001, p. 405.
^ White 2016, p. 407.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 212, 219 20; Catton 1960, p. 304; Chernow 2017, p. 510.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 224; White 2016, p. 412.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 375 76.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 409 12.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 227 29; White 2016, p. 414.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 410 11; Chernow 2017, pp. 556 57.
^ White 2016, p. 418.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 417 18.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 232 33.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 233 34.
^ Smith 2001, p. 434n.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 416 418.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 10.
^ Simpson 1988, pp. 433 34.
^ Simpson 1988, p. 433.
^ Smith 2001, p. 420; McFeely 1981, pp. 238 41.
^ Brands 2012, p. 390.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 565 66.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 240 41; Smith 2001, pp. 420 21; Chernow 2017, pp. 565 66; Simpson 1988, p. 439.
^ a b Chernow 2017, pp. 533 34.
^ a b Chernow 2017, p. 569.
^ Brands 2012, p. 396; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 397 98.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 432 33; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Smith 2001, p. 438; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Simon 2002, p. 244; Chernow 2017, p. 594 595.
^ Simon 2002, p. 244; Chernow 2017, pp. 594 95.
^ White 2016, p. 453.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 603.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 35 36.
^ White 2016, p. 454 55; Simon 2002, pp. 244.
^ a b Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 611.
^ White 2016, pp. 458 59; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Simon 2002, p. 244; Chernow 2017, p. 614.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 244 45.
^ Peters & Woolley 2018a.
^ a b Simon 2002, p. 245.
^ Peters & Woolley 2018b.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 46.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 264 67.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 459 60.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 468 69.
^ Smith 2001, p. 461.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 55.
^ Foner 2014, pp. 243 44.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 284; Smith 2001, p. 461; White 2016, p. 471.
^ White 2016, p. 472.
^ Patrick 1968, p. 166; McFeely 1981, p. 305; Simon 2002, pp. 246, 250.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 465 66; White 2016, pp. 475, 530; Chernow 2017, pp. 635 36; Simon 2002, p. 246.
^ a b c Simon 2002, pp. 246 47.
^ White 2016, pp. 507, 564; Simon 2002, pp. 246 47.
^ a b Kahan 2018, pp. 46 47.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 48.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 47 48.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 628; Simon 2002, pp. 246 47; Kahan 2018, p. 48.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 446, 469 70; Kahan 2018, pp. 47 48.
^ White 2016, pp. 474 75.
^ Smith 2001, p. 472; White 2016, pp. 474 75.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 376.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 749 50; Kahan 2018, p. xii; Calhoun 2017, pp. 384 85.
^ a b Kahan 2018, p. 76; Chernow 2017, pp. 643 44; Sarna 2012a, pp. ix xiv.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 512.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 512 13; Smith 2001, p. 570.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 513.
^ "The Mormon Trials". The Boston Globe. October 30, 1871.
^ "The Mormon Trials" (PDF). The New York Times. November 22, 1871. Retrieved August 16, 2011.
^ Ertman, M. M. (2010). Race Treason: The Untold Story of America's Ban on Polygamy.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 131 132.
^ a b c Kahan 2018, p. 132.
^ Carpenter 2001, pp. 84 85.
^ a b Kahan 2018, p. 61.
^ Scher 2015, p. 83; Simon 2002, p. 247.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 96; Kaczorowski 1995, p. 155.
^ Simon 2002.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 435, 465; Chernow 2017, pp. 686 87; Simon 2002, p. 247.
^ Brands 2012, p. 465.
^ Simon 2002, p. 246.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 247 48.
^ Black-American Members by Congress, 1870 Present Access Date November 10, 2021
^ Smith 2001, pp. 543 45; Brands 2012, p. 474.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 64 65; Calhoun 2017, pp. 317 19.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 545 46; White 2016, p. 521; Simon 2002, p. 248; Kahan 2018, pp. 64 65; Calhoun 2017, pp. 317 319.
^ Foner 2019, pp. 119 21.
^ Simon 2002, p. 248.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 66.
^ Smith 2001, p. 547; Calhoun 2017, p. 324.
^ Smith 2001, p. 547.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 547 48.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 67 68.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 122.
^ Wang 1997, p. 102; Kaczorowski 1995, p. 182.
^ Osborne & Bombaro 2015, pp. 6, 12, 54; Chernow 2017, p. 629.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 628.
^ Richter 2012, pp. 72, 527 28, 532; Kahan 2018, pp. 121 22.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 552 53; Kahan 2018, pp. 121 22.
^ Kaczorowski 1995, p. 184.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 538 41; Foner 2014, p. 528.
^ Brands 2012, p. 553.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 420 22.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 816 17.
^ Brands 2012, p. 552.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 418 19.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 418 19; Franklin 1974, p. 235.
^ Brands 2012, p. 570.
^ Sproat 1974, pp. 163 65; Calhoun 2017, pp. 561 62.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 603 04; Sproat 1974, pp. 163 65; Calhoun 2017, pp. 561 62.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 853 54; Smith 2001, pp. 603 04; Sproat 1974, pp. 163 65.
^ a b c d Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 279.
^ White 2016, pp. 476 78; Simon 2002, p. 248; Burdekin & Siklos 2013, pp. 24 25.
^ Simon 2002, p. 248; Chernow 2017, p. 672; Calhoun 2017, p. 125; Kahan 2018, p. 54.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 125 28; Kahan 2018, p. 54.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 128.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 437 43; McFeely 1974, p. 134; Chernow 2017, p. 673; Calhoun 2017, pp. 128 29; Kahan 2018, p. 55.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 136, 323 24; Chernow 2017, p. 674; Kahan 2018, pp. 55 56.
^ a b c Kahan 2018, pp. 55 56.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 129 30.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 130.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 131.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 437 43; Simon 2002, p. 248; Calhoun 2017, p. 130.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 140 41.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 141.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 445, 636; Chernow 2017, pp. 677 88; Calhoun 2017, p. 141.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 328; Smith 2001, p. 490.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 445 46; Simon 2002, p. 248.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 75 76.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 310 11, 380 81.
^ Lindsay, James M. (June 10, 2013). "TWE Remembers: The Korean Expedition of 1871 and the Battle of Ganghwa (Shinmiyangyo)". The Waters Edge. Retrieved March 28, 2021.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 76.
^ Simon 2002, p. 249; Smith 2001, p. 491; Kahan 2018, p. 78.
^ Libby, Justin (1994). "Hamilton Fish and the Origins of Anglo-American Solidarity". Mid-America. 76 (3): 205 26.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 352 54.
^ John W. Dwinelle (1870). American Opinions on the "Alabama," and other political questions. p. 37-39.
^ a b "Alabama Claims, 1862-1872". GlobalSecurity.org.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 508 11.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 512 15; Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 512 15.
^ Smith 2001, p. 249; Simon 2002, pp. 512 15; Calhoun 2017, p. 344.
^ a b Calhoun 2017, p. 7.
^ White, Ronald C. (2019). "The Life of Ulysses S. Grant". Retrieved March 6, 2021.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 555, 660 61; Kahan 2018, pp. 75 76; Calhoun 2017, p. 199.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 661 62; Kahan 2018, pp. 75 76; Calhoun 2017, pp. 199 200, 206; Brands 2012, pp. 454 55.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 90 91; Calhoun 2017, p. 204.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 661.
^ Schmiel 2014.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 207, 210 11; Kahan 2018, p. 91.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 500 02; Chernow 2017, pp. 663 64; Calhoun 2017, p. 220.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 215.
^ a b Calhoun 2017, p. 224.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 91; Calhoun 2017, pp. 223, 226.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 665.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 660 65; Calhoun 2017, pp. 226 34, 254.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 237 38.
^ White 2016, pp. 509 12; Pletcher 1998, p. 167; Simon 2002; McFeely 1981, pp. 339 40.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 254, 258; Kahan 2018, p. 94.
^ Brands 2012, p. 461; Kahan 2018, pp. 94 95.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 715 16.
^ Brands 2012, p. 461; Smith 2001, pp. 505 06.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; McFeely 1981, pp. 349 52; Kahan 2018, p. 95.
^ Priest, Andrew (2014). "Thinking about Empire: The administration of Ulysses S. Grant, Spanish colonialism and the ten years' war in Cuba" (PDF). Journal of American Studies. 48 (2): 541 58. doi:10.1017/s0021875813001400. S2CID 145139039.
^ a b c Hamilton Fish (1808 1893).
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 426 31.
^ Nevins 1936, pp. 667 94.
^ a b Calhoun 2017, pp. 539 40.
^ White 2016, p. 487.
^ a b White 2016, p. 491.
^ a b Chernow 2017, pp. 830 31.
^ a b c d Federal Indian Policy
^ White 2016, pp. 490 91; Simon 2002, p. 250; Smith 2001, pp. 472 73.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; Smith 2001, p. 535; Simon 2002, p. 250.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 308 09; Brands 2012, p. 502.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 270.
^ Waltmann 1971, p. 327.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250.
^ Coffey 2011; Kahan 2018, pp. 71 72.
^ Block (December 2020)
^ Kahan 2018, p. 127.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 532 35; Coffey 2011.
^ Coffey 2011, pp. 604 05.
^ Taylor 2011, pp. 3187 88; Pritchard 1999, p. 5.
^ NPS: Bison Ecology
^ Timeline of US Indian Massacres
^ Churchill 1997, p. 237
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 830 31; Brands 2012, p. 564.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 832; Calhoun 2017, p. 546.
^ Smith 2001, p. 538.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 565 66; Donovan 2008, pp. 115, 322 23.
^ Behncke & Bloomfield (2020), pp. 181 84.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 549.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 316.
^ Smith 2001, p. 541.
^ Bell 2018, pp. 6 7.
^ Foner 2014, pp. 499 500; Kahan 2018, p. 103.
^ Patrick 1968, pp. 172 73; Simon 2002, p. 250; Smith 2001, pp. 589 90; Kahan 2018, pp. 105, 106.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; Chernow 2017, pp. 734 35; Kahan 2018, pp. 105 06; Brands 2012, pp. 488 89.
^ Kahan 2018, pp. 104 06.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 250 51; Brands 2012, p. 495; Chernow 2017, pp. 740 41.
^ Wang 1997, pp. 103 04; Simon 2002, p. 250; Chernow 2017, pp. 735, 740.
^ Brands 2012, p. 495.
^ Kahan 2018, p. 107.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 361, 375.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 743.
^ Simon 2002, p. 251; Chernow 2017, p. 753; Kahan 2018, p. 114.
^ White 2016, p. 532.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 372 73, 387.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 749 50.
^ Foner 2014; Calhoun 2017.
^ White 2016, p. 535.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 384; Simon 2002, pp. 250 51; Chernow 2017, p. 749.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 250 51; Brands 2012, p. 499.
^ Brands 2012, p. 499.
^ Election of 1872.
^ Foner 2014, p. 508.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 98.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 250 51.
^ White 2016, pp. 540 41.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 752 53.
^ White 2016, p. 545; Diller 1996, p. 1545.
^ Feerick, John D.; Freund, Paul A. (1965). From Failing Hands: the Story of Presidential Succession. New York City: Fordham University Press. p. 116. LCCN 65-14917. The New York Herald of November 23, 1875, noted that as President pro tempore, Senator Thomas W. Ferry* of Michigan "would act as President in case the present incumbent of the office should die before the expiration of his term . . . . " In an editorial on the following day, the New York Herald viewed Ferry's possible succession as cause for alarm: "According to his record he [Ferry] is a fanatical inflationist. ... If President Grant should suddenly be taken away Thomas W. Ferry, of Michigan, would be his successor. The country has reason to shudder at the possibility .... [I]f Mr. Ferry is still an inflationist it would be inexcusable for the Senate to retain him in his present position, when only a single life stands between so dangerous a man and the Presidency of the United States."
^ McFeely 1981, p. 385.
^ Venable 2011, pp. 66 68.
^ Burdekin & Siklos 2013, p. 25.
^ Weinstein 1967, pp. 307 26.
^ Brands 2012, p. 517.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 393.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 576 79.
^ Brands 2012, p. 518.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 391; Smith 2001, pp. 375 77.
^ Chernow, Ron (2018). Grant. New York: Penguin Books. p. 779. ISBN 978-0-14-311063-7.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 395.
^ Porter 2005, p. 185.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 580 81.
^ White 2016, pp. 545, 550.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 580 82; Brands 2012, p. 554.
^ Brands 2012, p. 582.
^ Woodward 1957, p. 156; White 2016, pp. 538, 541.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 133 34; Chernow 2017, p. 825.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 587, 92; McFeely 1981, pp. 407 15; White 2016, pp. 538 39; Chernow 2017, p. 672; Kahan 2018, p. 119.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 730; Schmiel 2014, pp. 205, 213; Calhoun 2017, p. 293.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 730 31; Schmiel 2014, pp. 214 15; Calhoun 2017, pp. 284 86.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 284 86.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 589 90; Simon 2002, p. 250; Calhoun 2017, p. 372.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 731; Calhoun 2017, p. 372.
^ a b Calhoun 2017, p. 372.
^ Smith 2001, p. 589.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 372.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 36667, 735 37; McFeely 1974, pp. 144 45; Kahan 2018, p. 114.
^ a b c d e f g Marinez (March 15, 2021).
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 368 69; McFeely 1974, pp. 144 45; Kahan 2018, p. 114.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 369.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 735 37; Kahan 2018, p. 114.
^ Simon 2002, p. 251; Calhoun 2017, pp. 402 09.
^ Simon 2002, p. 251; Smith 2001, pp. 552 53; Calhoun 2017.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 446.
^ Smith 2001, p. 578; McFeely 1974, p. 147; Chernow 2017, pp. 782; Calhoun 2017, pp. 446 47.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 147 48; Chernow 2017, p. 782; White 2016.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 147 48; Chernow 2017, p. 782; Calhoun 2017, pp. 446 48.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 133 34.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 556 57; Kohn 2000, p. 417; Nevins 1929, p. 56; McFeely 1974, p. 148; White 2016, pp. 557, 560; Calhoun 2017, p. 494.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 494, 496.
^ Simon 2002, p. 252; Chernow 2017, p. 798.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 496 97.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 156; Smith 2001, p. 584; Brands 2012, pp. 556 57; White 2016, pp. 754; Calhoun 2017.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 498.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 499.
^ Simon 2002, p. 252; White 2016, p. 562; Calhoun 2017, pp. 77 78.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 515.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 805 06; Calhoun 2017, pp. 518, 522 23.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 592 93; White 2016, p. 564; Simon 2002.
^ Smith 2001, p. 592.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 591 93; Simon 2002, p. 252; Calhoun 2017, p. 527.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 415; Smith 2001, p. 591.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 149 50.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; Patrick 1968, p. 172; White 2016, p. 560.
^ White 2016, p. 557; Chernow 2017, pp. 787 88.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 429; White 2016, p. 554.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 560 61; Donovan 2008, p. 104; Simon 2002, p. 252; Chernow 2017.
^ Simon 2002, p. 252.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 819 20.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 153.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 441 42.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 252 53.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 440 41; Patrick 1968, p. 255; Simon 2002, pp. 252 53.
^ Simon 2002; McFeely 1981, pp. 440 41; Smith 2001, pp. 586, 596.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 597 98.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 601 03.
^ Smith 2001, p. 604; Chernow 2017, p. 858.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 603 04.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 852 54.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 862; White 2016, p. 587.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 448 49; White 2016, p. 587.
^ Smith 2001, p. 387.
^ "$25,000 in 1877   2019 Inflation Calculator". www.in2013dollars.com. Retrieved October 17, 2019.
^ Young 1879a, p. 5; White 2016, p. 590.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 872.
^ White 2016, pp. 589; Chernow 2017, p. 875.
^ Brands 2012, p. 608; Chernow 2017, pp. 875 876.
^ White 2016, pp. 597 602, 608 10.
^ Campbell 2016, pp. xi xii, 2 3.
^ Smith 2001, p. 613; Chernow 2017, pp. 881 83.
^ Brands 2012, p. 598.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 871.
^ Hesseltine 1957, pp. 432 39.
^ a b Brands 2012, pp. 600 01.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 479 81.
^ Brands 2012, p. 602.
^ Smith 2001, p. 617.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 604 05.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 607 09.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 613 14.
^ Bunting III 2004, p. 151.
^ Brands 2012, p. 611.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 486 89.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 488 91; Ward 2012.
^ Brands 2012, p. 619.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 917 18.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 488 91; White 2016, p. 269.
^ White 2016, pp. 627 29.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 917.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 620 21; White 2016, pp. 627 29.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 492 93.
^ "General Grant's Example: He Declines Mr. Vanderbilt's Offer to Relieve Him from His Debt". New York Herald. May 22, 1884. pp. 3G.
^ Perry 2004, p. xxix.
^ White 2016, pp. 632 33; Brands 2012, pp. 620 21.
^ Smith 2001, p. 621.
^ Badeau 1887, p. 447; Mackowski & White 2015, p. 169.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 620 21.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 925 26.
^ Albert Deane Richardson (1868). A Personal History of U.S. Grant. p. 157.
^ Adam Badeau (1881). Military History of Ulysses S. Grant: From April, 1861, to April, 1865. D. Appleton. p. 143.
^ Ferraro 2019.
^ McFeely 1981.
^ White 2016, p. 636; Waugh 2009, p. 277.
^ Renehan & Lowry 1995, pp. 377 83.
^ White 2016, p. 637.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 495 96.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 622 62; Smith 2001, p. 625.
^ Smith 2001, p. 625; White 2016, p. 641.
^ Grant, Ulysses S. (2019).  Marzalek, John F.; Nolen, David S.; Gallo, Louie P. (eds.). The Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant The Complete Annotated Edition. Ulysses S. Grant Association. p. xx. ISBN 978-0-674-23785-8.
^ Brands 2012, p. 625.
^ White 2016, p. 646.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 629 30.
^ Smith 2001, p. 627.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 501 05.
^ Wilson 1962, pp. 131 73.
^ Russell 1990, pp. 189 209.
^ Perry 2004, pp. 234 35.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 517.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 955.
^ a b c Brands 2012, pp. 633 35.
^ Smith 2001, p. 19.
^ Waugh 2009, pp. 215 59.
^ Richard G. Mannion, "The life of a reputation: The public memory of Ulysses S. Grant" (Unpublished PhD dissertation, Georgia State University; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  2012. 3547096). 
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. xiii.
^ Bonekemper 2011; White 2016, pp. 287 88.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 55, 77; Waugh 2009, pp. 39 40.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 521 22; White 2016, p. xxiii; Foner 2015b, p. 587; Calhoun 2017.
^ a b Downs, Gregory (June 25, 2020). "Toppling of the Ulysses Grant statue is no way to treat history". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved July 16, 2020.
^ Brands 2012b, p. 45.
^ Rafuse 2007, p. 851.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. xii, xiii, 522; White 2016, p. xxiv.
^ Swain, Susan (February 17, 2017). "C-Span Releases Third Historians Survey of Presidential Leadership". C-SPAN Survey on Presidents. Retrieved June 30, 2020. The most-average U.S. president, as rated by our historian participants is Ulysses S. Grant, who ranks 22 out of 43 presidents.
^ "Ulysses S. Grant". C-SPAN Survey on Presidents 2017. September 4, 2001. Retrieved June 30, 2020.
^ Waugh 2009, p. 2.
^ The Economist, essay
^ Stiles 2016.
^ Maslin, NYT book review, 2017
^ Hunt 2017.
^ White 2016, p. xxiv.
^ Calhoun 2017, pp. 5 6, 592.
^ White 2016, p. 539.
^ Calhoun 2017, p. 592.
^ Axelrod 2011, p. 205.
^ Bradford, Jeff (March 29, 2021). "Business And Life Lessons From Ulysses S. Grant". Forbes. Retrieved April 10, 2021.
^ Heffernan 2021.
^ Farley 2021.
^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2021". c-span.org. Retrieved June 27, 2022.
^ Fieldstadt, Elisha (May 30, 2022). "Presidents ranked from worst to best". CBS News. Retrieved June 18, 2022.
^ Glynn, Erin (December 22, 2022). "Southwest Ohio native Ulysses S. Grant to get posthumous promotion". Cincinnati Enquirer. Retrieved December 24, 2022.
^ Congressional Record. December 23, 2022.
^ Act of December 23, 2022 [James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023] (H. R. 7776).
^ Smithsonian Institution, Eassy, 2014
^ Capitol Visiting Center, Washington D.C.
^ "Ulysses S. Grant Memorial Restoration to Begin". Retrieved June 27, 2016.
^ "Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site". National Park Service. 2014.
^ "U.S. Grant Cottage State Historic Site". Ulysses S. Grant Cottage. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ "Grant Cottage State Historic Site". NYS Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation. New York State. Retrieved September 30, 2018.
^ Price & Hendricks 2007, p. 45.
^ "Grant in Sculpture   Part II". grantstomb.org. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved November 24, 2015.
^ National Park Service (2015). "When Two Parks Meet: The History of the Generals Highway in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks".
^ See website
^ "New Ulysses Grant presidential library at home in the South". Associated Press. November 16, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2018.
^ See Catalog Archived December 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. A search engine is at Ulysses S Grant Digital Collections at Mississippi State U Archived December 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
^ "Silver Commemoratives, 1922". NGC. Retrieved November 25, 2016.
^ "1922 Grant Half Dollar". SDL Numismatic Properties. 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2016.
^ Haimann 2006.
^ a b Kamiya, Gary (February 2, 2021). "The Holier-Than-Thou Crusade in San Francisco". www.theatlantic.com. The Atlantic. Retrieved June 30, 2021.
^ Hurd, Cheryl; Smith, Christie; Quintana, Sergio (June 19, 2020). "Demonstrators Topple Statues in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park". NBC Bay Area. Retrieved June 28, 2020.
^ Rubenstein, Steve; Swan, Rachel (June 20, 2020). "Historical statues toppled as rage spills into San Francisco's Golden Gate Park". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved June 28, 2020.
^ Historical Register and Dictionary of the United States Army.  Francis B. Heitman.  1903.  Vol. 1.  p. 470.
Bibliography
Main article: Bibliography of Ulysses S. Grant
Biographical
Anbinder, Tyler (June 1997). "Ulysses S. Grant, Nativist". Civil War History. 43 (2): 119 41. doi:10.1353/cwh.1997.0086.
Badeau, Adam (1887). Grant in Peace: From Appomattox to Mount McGregor. New York: D. Appleton. ISBN 978-0-8369-5723-5. OCLC 558211659.
Bonekemper III, Edward H. (2010). Ulysses S. Grant: A Victor, Not a Butcher: The Military Genius of the Man Who Won the Civil War Ulysses S. Grant: A Victor, Not a Butcher. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-1-5969-8641-1.
Brands, H. W. (2012). The Man Who Saved the Union: Ulysses S. Grant in War and Peace. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-53241-9.
Brands, H. W. (2012b). "Presidents in Crisis Grant: Takes on the Klan". American History: 42 47. ISSN 1076-8866.
Bunting III, Josiah (2004). Ulysses S. Grant. New York City: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6949-5.
Calhoun, Charles W. (2017). The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-2484-3. scholarly review and response by Calhoun at doi:10.14296/RiH/2014/2270
Campbell, Edwina S. (2016). Citizen of a Wider Commonwealth: Ulysses S. Grant's Postpresidential Diplomacy. Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-3478-0.
Chernow, Ron (2017). Grant. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-487-6.
Coolidge, Louis (1917). Ulysses S. Grant. Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Co. ISBN 9780404508944.; scholarly review at doi:10.14296/RiH/2014/2270
Dorsett, Lyle W. (1983). "The Problem of Ulysses S. Grant's Drinking During the Civil War". Hayes Historical Journal. 4 (2): 37 49.
"Election of 1872". American Presidency Project  . Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2018.
Furgurson, Ernest B. (2007) [2000]. Not war but murder. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-3074-2704-5.
Garland, Hamlin (1898). Ulysses S. Grant: His Life and Character. New York: Doubleday & McClure. ISBN 978-0-7950-1911-1   via Google Books.
Hesseltine, William B. (1957) [1935]. Ulysses S. Grant: Politician. New York: F. Ungar Pub. Co. ISBN 978-1-931313-85-8.
Howland, Edward (1868). Grant as a soldier and Statesmen. J. B. Burr & Co.
Kahan, Paul (2018). The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant: Preserving the Civil War's Legacy. Yardley, PA: Westholme Publishing, LLC. ISBN 978-1-59416-273-2.
Longacre, Edward G. (2006). General Ulysses S. Grant: The Soldier and the Man. Cambridge, MA: First Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81636-9. online free
Mackowski, Chris; White, Kristopher D. (2015). Grant's Last Battle: The Story Behind the Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant. El Dorado Hills, CA: Savas Beatie LLC. ISBN 978-1-61121-160-3.
McFeely, William S. (1974).  Woodward C. Vann (ed.). Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. New York: Delacorte Press. pp. 133 62. ISBN 978-0-440-05923-3.
  (1981). Grant: A Biography. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-01372-6.
Nevins, Allan (1929). Dictionary of American Biography Bristow, Benjamin Helm. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 55 56.
Patrick, Rembert W. (1968). The Reconstruction of the Nation. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-501016-9.
Paxson, Frederic Logan; Bach, Christian A. (1931). "Ulysses S. Grant". Dictionary of American Biography. Vol. VII. New York: C. Scribner's Sons. pp. 492 501.
Perry, Mark (2004). Grant and Twain: The Story of a Friendship That Changed America. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-64273-2.
Pletcher, David M. (1998). The Diplomacy of Trade and Investment: American Economic Expansion in the Hemisphere, 1865 1900. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-1127-9.
Poore, Benjamin Perley; Tiffany, O. H. (1885). Life of U.S. Grant. Edgewood Publishing Company. ISBN 9780795018916.
Pritchard, James A. (1999). Preserving Yellowstone's Natural Conditions: Science and the Perception of Nature. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-3722-3.
Richter, William L. (2012). Historical Dictionary of the Civil War and Reconstruction (2 ed.). Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-7817-4.
Schmiel, Eugene D. (2014). Citizen-General: Jacob Dolson Cox and the Civil War Era. Athens: Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0-8214-2082-9.
Shevitz, Amy Hill (2005). "General Orders No. 11 (1862)".  In Richard S. Levy (ed.). Antisemitism A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution. Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC CLIO. p. 256.
  (1967).  John Y. Simon (ed.). "The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant, Volume 01: 1837 1861". Mississippi State University Libraries (electronic): Southern Illinois University Press.
  (1969). "The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant, Volume 02: April September 1861". Mississippi. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016.
  (1991). The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant: October 1, 1867   June 30, 1868. SIU Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-1693-9.
  (2002). "Ulysses S. Grant".  In Graff, Henry (ed.). The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). pp. 245 60. ISBN 978-0-684-80551-1.
Simpson, Brooks D. (2014) [2000]. Ulysses S. Grant: Triumph Over Adversity, 1822 1865. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-65994-6.
Smith, Jean Edward (2001). Grant. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-84927-0.
Sproat, John G. (1974).  Woodward C. Vann (ed.). Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. New York: Delacorte Press. pp. 163 76. ISBN 978-0-440-05923-3.
Taylor, M. Scott (December 2011). "Buffalo Hunt: International Trade and the Virtual Extinction of the North American Bison" (PDF). The American Economic Review. 101 (7): 3162 95. doi:10.1257/aer.101.7.3162. JSTOR 41408734. S2CID 154413490.
Waltmann, Henry G. (Winter 1971). "Circumstantial Reformer: President Grant & the Indian Problem". Arizona and the West. 13 (4): 323 42. JSTOR 40168089.
Wang, Xi (1997). The Trial of Democracy: Black Suffrage and Northern Republicans, 1860 1910. Athens: The University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-4206-1.
Ward, Geoffrey C. (2012). A Disposition to Be Rich: How a Small-Town Pastor's Son Ruined an American President, Brought on a Wall Street Crash, and Made Himself the Best-Hated Man in the United States. New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-44530-2.
Waugh, Joan (2009). U.S. Grant: American Hero, American Myth. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3317-9.
Weinstein, Allen (1967). "Was There a 'Crime of 1873'?: The Case of the Demonetized Dollar". Journal of American History. 54 (2): 307 26. doi:10.2307/1894808. JSTOR 1894808.
White, Ronald C. (2016). American Ulysses: A Life of Ulysses S. Grant. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-58836-992-5.
Woodward, C. Vann (April 1957). "The Lowest Ebb". American Heritage. 8 (3): 53 108. ISSN 0002-8738.
Haimann, Alexander T. (2006). "5-cent Grant". Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2016.
"Three Great American Disinflations: 1. introduction". U.S. Federal Reserve Board. Retrieved December 17, 2016.
"Today's historians have a higher opinion of Ulysses S. Grant". The Economist. October 5, 2017.
Military and politics
Axelrod, Alan (2011). Generals South Generals North The Commanders of the Civil War Reconsidered (ebook). Lyons Press. ISBN 978-0-7627-8849-1.
Barney, William L. (2011). The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Civil War. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-19-978201-7.
Behncke, Ted; Bloomfield, Gary (2020). Custer. Philadelphia & Oxford: Casemate. ISBN 978-1-61200-889-9.
Bell, Robert A. (2018). "The Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868 and the Sioux: Is the United States Honoring the Agreements it Made?". Indigenous Policy Journal. XXVIII (3).
Blakemore, Erin (July 23, 2019). "During the Civil War, Gen. Ulysses Grant Began Expelling Southern Jews   Until Lincoln Stepped In". History.com. Retrieved January 1, 2020.
Burdekin, Richard C.K.; Siklos, Pierre L. (2013). "Gold Resumption and the Deflation of the 1870s".  In Randall E. Parker; Robert M. Whaples (eds.). Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History. New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203067871. ISBN 978-0-415-67703-5. SSRN 2030878.
Bonekemper, Edward H. (2012). Grant and Lee. Washington, DC: Regnery History. ISBN 978-1-62157-010-3.
Carpenter, Daniel P. (2001). "Chapter Three". The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputations, Networks, and Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, 1862 1928. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp. 84 85. ISBN 978-0-691-07009-4. OCLC 47120319. Retrieved April 1, 2010.
Catton, Bruce (1998). This Hallowed Ground: A History of the Civil War. New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-307-94708-6.
  (1960). The Civil War. New York: American Heritage. ISBN 978-0-618-00187-3.
  (1963). Terrible Swift Sword. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-1-84212-293-8. OCLC 7474086.
  (2015) [1968]. Grant Takes Command. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-13210-7.
Coffey, David (2011).  Spencer C. Tucker (ed.). The Encyclopedia of North American Indian Wars, 1607 1890: A Political, Social, and Military History. Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-697-8.
Cullum, George W. (1850). "Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the U.S. Military Academy". Boston: Houghton Mifflin And Company.
  (1891). Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the U.S. Military Academy. Vol. 2. Boston: Houghton Mifflin And Company. ISBN 978-0-608-42862-8.
DiNunzio, Mario R. (Winter 1973). "Lyman Trumbull, the States' Rights Issue, and the Liberal Republican Revolt". Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society. 66 (4): 364 75. JSTOR 40190731.
Donovan, James (2008). A Terrible Glory: Custer and the Little Bighorn   The Last Great Battle of the American West. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-06747-8.
Farina, William (2007). Ulysses S. Grant, 1861 1864: His Rise from Obscurity to Military Greatness. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-2977-6.
Flood, Charles Bracelen (2005). Grant and Sherman: The Friendship That Won the Civil War. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-114871-2.
Foner, Eric (2014). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution 1863 1877 Updated Version. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-235451-8.
  (2019). The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-35852-0.
Franklin, John Hope (1974). The Enforcement of the Civil Rights Act of 1875. Prologue.
Miller, Donald L. (2019). Vicksburg: Grant's Campaign That Broke the Confederacy. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-4137-0.
Friedman, Norman (1985). U.S. Battleships: An Illustrated Design History. Annapolis, MD: United States Naval Institute. ISBN 978-0-87021-715-9.
Goethals, George R. (2015). Presidential Leadership and African Americans. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-81424-0.
Groom, Winston (2012). Shiloh 1862. National Geographic Society. ISBN 978-1-4262-0879-9.
Lewis, Lloyd (1950). Captain Sam Grant. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-52348-6.
Kaczorowski, Robert J. (1995). "Federal Enforcement of Civil Rights During the First Reconstruction". Fordham Urban Law Journal. 23 (1): 155 86. ISSN 2163-5978.
Kohn, George C. (2000). The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal. New York: Facts on File, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8160-4420-7.
McCormick, Robert R. (1934). Ulysses S. Grant The Great Soldier of America. New York: D. Appleton-Century Company.
Nevins, Allan (1936). Hamilton Fish: The Inner History of the Grant Administration. Vol. 2. New York: Dodd, Mead. ASIN B00085BDXU.
Porter, Lorle (2005). Politics & Peril: Mount Vernon, Ohio in the Nineteenth Century. Zanesville, OH: New Concord Press. ISBN 978-1-887932-25-7.
Renehan, A.; Lowry, J. C. (July 1995). "The Oral Tumours of two American Presidents: What If They Were Alive Today?". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 88 (7): 377 83. PMC 1295266. PMID 7562805.
Sarna, Jonathan D. (2012a). When General Grant Expelled the Jews. New York: Schocken Books. ISBN 978-0-8052-4279-9.
  (March 13, 2012b). "When Gen. Grant Expelled the Jews". Slate.
Scaturro, Frank J. (1998). President Grant Reconsidered. Lanham, MD: University Press of America. ISBN 978-0-7618-1078-0.
Scher, Richard K. (2015) [1997]. Politics in the New South: Republicanism, Race and Leadership in the Twentieth Century. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-56324-848-1.
Simon, John Y. (1965). "From Galena to Appomattox: Grant and Washburne". Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society. 58 (2): 165 89. JSTOR i40006018.
Simpson, Brooks D. (1988). "Grant's Tour of the South Revisited". The Journal of Southern History. JSTOR. 54 (3): 425 448. doi:10.2307/2208997. JSTOR 2208997. Retrieved August 16, 2020.
Simpson, Brooks D. (1991). Let Us Have Peace: Ulysses S. Grant and the Politics of War and Reconstruction, 1861-1868. Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0807819661.
Tucker, Spencer C., ed. (2013). The Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War: A Political, Social, and Military History. Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-853-8.
Venable, Shannon (2011). Gold: A Cultural Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-38430-1.
Wheelan, Joseph (2014). Bloody Spring: Forty Days that Sealed the Confederacy's Fate. Boston: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-82206-3.
Primary sources
Grant, Ulysses S. (1885). Personal memoirs of U.S. Grant : in two volumes. Vol. I. New York : Charles L. Webster & Co.
  (1885). Personal memoirs of U.S. Grant : in two volumes. Vol. II. New York : Charles L. Webster & Co.   Many editions in paper and online; ends in 1865
Simon, John Y., ed. (1967 2009). "The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant". Mississippi State University. Archived from the original on October 13, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2014.
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. (2018b). "1868 Democratic Party Platform". The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on August 3, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2017.
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. (2018a). "Republican Party Platform of 1868". The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 19, 2017.
Young, John Russell (1879a). Around the World with General Grant, Vol. I. New York: The American News Company.
"Gen. Grant and the Jews". The New York Times. January 18, 1863.
Historiography
Arnold, Matthew. General Grant by Matthew Arnold with a Rejoinder by Mark Twain. Kent, Ohio, and London, England: The Kent State University Press, 1995 (on Grant's Memoirs)
Bonekemper, Edward H. (April 2011). "The Butcher's Bill: Ulysses S. Grant Is Often Referred to as a 'Butcher,' But Does Robert E. Lee Actually Deserve That Title?". Civil War Times. 52 (1): 36 43. OCLC 67618265.
Diller, Daniel C. (1996).  Michael Nelson (ed.). Guide to the Presidency. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-56802-018-1.
Ferraro, William M.. (January 2019). "Old and New Views of Ulysses S. Grant: The Soldier and The Man". Journal of Military History. 83 (1): 195 212.
Foner, Eric (November 2, 2012). "'The Man Who Saved the Union: Ulysses Grant in War and Peace' by H. W. Brands (book review)". The Washington Post. Washington, DC. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013.
  (March 28, 2015a). "Why Reconstruction Matters". The New York Times Opinion.
  (July 23, 2015b). "Ulysses S. Grant Died 130 Years Ago. Racists Hate Him, But Historians No Longer Do". Huffington Post.
Hunt, Linda Lawrence (July 27, 2017). "'American Ulysses' writer Ronald C. White explains why Grant is so often misunderstood". The Christian Science Monitor. Boston, Massachusetts.
Jones, Terry L. (2011). Historical Dictionary of the Civil War. Vol. 1. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8108-7953-9   via Google Books.
Marszalek, John F.; Nolen, David S.; Gallo, Louie P.; Williams, Frank J. (2019). Hold On With a Bullldog Grip: A Short Study of Ulysses S. Grant. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi.
Kaplan, Mike (October 2015). "Grant's Drinking or... The Beast That Will Not Die". Journal of Military History. 79 (4): 1109 19.
Maslin, Janet (October 10, 2017). "In Ron Chernow's 'Grant,' an American Giant's Makeover Continues". The New York Times. Retrieved October 13, 2017.
Osborne, John M.; Bombaro, Christine (2015). "Forgotten Abolitionist: John A. J. Creswell of Maryland". scholar.dickinson.edu (PDF). Carlisle, PA: Dickinson College.
Price, Kay; Hendricks, Marian (2007). Galena. Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7385-5114-2.
Rafuse, Ethan S. (July 2007). "Still a Mystery? General Grant and the Historians, 1981 2006". Journal of Military History. 71 (3): 849 74. doi:10.1353/jmh.2007.0230. S2CID 159901226.
Russell, Henry M. W. (Spring 1990). "The Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant: The Rhetoric of Judgment". Virginia Quarterly Review. 66 (2): 189 209. ISSN 0042-675X.
Stiles, T.J. (October 19, 2016). "Ulysses S. Grant: New Biography of 'A Nobody From Nowhere'". The New York Times.
Wilson, Edmund (1962). Patriotic Gore: Studies in the Literature of the American Civil War. ISBN 978-0-393-31256-0. (Ch. IV. "Northern Soldiers: Ulysses S. Grant")
Zimmerman, Jonathan (November 12, 2010). "Why should we pay our ex-presidents?". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved November 23, 2016.
"General Ulysses S. Grant Memorial, (sculpture)". Collections Search Center. Smithsonian Institution. 2014.
"The Brink of Extinction   and recovery". Bison Ecology. National Park Service, Yellowstone National Park. Retrieved December 26, 2016.
"Ulysses S. Grant Memorial". U.S. Government: Capitol Visiting Center. Retrieved June 27, 2016.
Killanin, Baron Michael Morris; Duignan, Michael V. (1989). The Shell Guide to Ireland. Park West, Dublin, Ireland: Gill and Macmillan. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-7171-1595-2   via Google Books.
"Ulster-Scots and the United States Presidents" (PDF). Ulster-Scots Agency. p. 3. Retrieved July 12, 2010.
Heffernan, David (August 6, 2021). "Ulysses S. Grant   Civil War General & President Documentary". Youtube. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
Farley, Robert (September 20, 2021). "Why too many historians look down on Ulysses S. Grant". Insider. Retrieved September 23, 2021.
Little, Becky (August 31, 2018). "How the Cult of Robert E. Lee Was Born". history.com. History. Retrieved October 19, 2021.
"Biographies of the Secretaries of State: Hamilton Fish (1808 1893)". Department of State. Retrieved February 18, 2022.
Martinez, J.Michael (March 15, 2021). "Scoundrels: Political Scandals in American History Scandals of the 1870s". Retrieved February 27, 2022.
"President Ulysses S. Grant and Federal Indian Policy". nps.gov. Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site. Retrieved April 14, 2022.
Block, Kathy.  Du Shane, Neal (ed.). "Skeleton Cave Massacre Site". American Pioneer & Cemetery Research Project. Retrieved April 13, 2022.
"Timeline of US Indian Massacres". aaanativearts.com. February 29, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2022.
Churchill, Ward, A Little Matter of Genocide: Holocaust and Denial in the Americas, 1492 to the Present, City Lights, 1997, 381 pages, ISBN 978-0-87286-323-1
External links
Ulysses S. Grant  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Miller Center on the Presidency at U of Virginia, brief articles on Grant and his presidency
Works by Ulysses S. Grant in eBook form at Standard Ebooks
Works by Ulysses S. Grant at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Ulysses S. Grant at Internet Archive
Works by Ulysses S. Grant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site Missouri   National Park Service
Ulysses S. Grant Presidential Library
Ulysses S. Grant: A Resource Guide   Library of Congress (COLLECTION: Ulysses S. Grant Papers)
Ulysses S. Grant collected news and commentary at The New York Times
"Life Portrait of Ulysses S. Grant", from C-SPAN's American presidents: Life Portraits, July 12, 1999
Ulysses S. Grant Personal Manuscripts
vteUlysses S. Grant18th President of the United States (1869 1877)Military career
Grant and the American Civil War
Fort Donelson
Shiloh
Vicksburg
Chattanooga
Overland
Richmond Petersburg
Appomattox
Court House
Commanding General of the U.S. Army, 1865 1869
Presidency
First inauguration
Second inauguration
Scandals
Reforms
Reconstruction
Amnesty Act
Native American policy
"Peace Policy"
Modoc War
Great Sioux War
U.S. Department of Justice
15th Amendment
Naturalization Act of 1870
Treaty of Washington
Alabama Claims
Enforcement Acts
Enforcement Act of 1870
Second Enforcement Act
Ku Klux Klan Act
Civil Rights Act of 1875
Page Act of 1875
Korean Expedition
Comstock laws
Black Friday
Panic of 1873
Annexation of Santo Domingo
Pardons
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
State of the Union addresses
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
Post-presidency
Bid for a third term
World tour
Books
Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant
Life
Early life
Birthplace
Boyhood home
Schoolhouse
White Haven home
farm
Ulysses S. Grant Cottage
Galena home
Horsemanship
speeding arrest
Grant's Tomb
Elections
Republican National Convention, 1868
1872
United States presidential election, 1868
1872
Legacy
Bibliography
Grant Park
Grant Memorial
Presidential library
Grantism
General Grant ship
General Grant tree
grove
Grant Cottage State Historic Site
Lee and Grant at Appomattox
The Peacemakers
U.S. Capitol statue
Brooklyn relief
Chicago statue
Ohio Statehouse statue
Philadelphia statue
San Francisco bust
Cultural depictions
Ulysses S. Grant (2002 documentary)
Grant (2020 miniseries)
U.S. Postage stamps
Currency
$50 bill
1922 Grant Memorial coinage
Grant High School
U.S. Grant Hotel
Family
Hannah Simpson Grant (mother)
Jesse Root Grant (father)
Julia Grant (wife)
Frederick Dent Grant (son)
Ulysses S. Grant Jr. (son)
Jesse Root Grant II (son)
Nellie Grant (daughter)
Ulysses S. Grant III (grandson)
Chapman Grant (grandson)
Ulysses S. Grant IV (grandson)
Julia Dent Grant (granddaughter)
  Andrew Johnson
Rutherford B. Hayes  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Military offices
Preceded byHenry W. Halleck
 Commanding General of the U.S. Army 1864 1869
Succeeded byWilliam Tecumseh Sherman
Political offices
Preceded byEdwin Stanton
 Acting United States Secretary of War 1867 1868
Succeeded byEdwin Stanton
Preceded byAndrew Johnson
 President of the United States 1869 1877
Succeeded byRutherford B. Hayes
Party political offices
Preceded byAbraham Lincoln
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1868, 1872
Succeeded byRutherford B. Hayes
National Rifle Association
Preceded byE. L. Molineux
 President of the NRA 1883 1884
Succeeded byPhilip Sheridan
Articles related to Ulysses S. Grant
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteRepublican Party
History
National Union Party
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Presidentialticketsandnationalconventions
1856 (Philadelphia): Fr mont/Dayton
1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin
1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson
1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax
1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson
1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler
1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur
1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan
1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton
1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid
1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart
1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt
1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks
1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman
1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler
1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks
1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge
1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes
1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis
1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis
1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox
1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary
1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker
1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren
1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon
1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon
1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge
1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller
1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole
1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp
2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin
2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan
2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence
2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence
2024 (Milwaukee)
Presidentialadministrations
Lincoln (1861 1865)
Johnson (1865 1868)
Grant (1869 1877)
Hayes (1877 1881)
Garfield (1881)
Arthur (1881 1885)
Harrison (1889 1893)
McKinley (1897 1901)
Roosevelt (1901 1909)
Taft (1909 1913)
Harding (1921 1923)
Coolidge (1923 1929)
Hoover (1929 1933)
Eisenhower (1953 1961)
Nixon (1969 1974)
Ford (1974 1977)
Reagan (1981 1989)
G. H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
G. W. Bush (2001 2009)
Trump (2017 2021)
U.S. SenateleadersandConferencechairs
J. P. Hale (1859 1862)
Anthony (1862 1884)
Sherman (1884 1885)
Edmunds (1885 1891)
Sherman (1891 1897)
Allison (1897 1908)
E. Hale (1908 1911)
Cullom (1911 1913)
Gallinger (1913 1918)
Lodge (1918 1924)
Curtis (1924 1929)
Watson (1929 1933)
McNary (1933 1940)
Austin (1940 1941)
McNary (1941 1944)
White (1944 1949)
Wherry (1949 1952)
Bridges (1952 1953)
Taft (1953)
Knowland (1953 1959)
Dirksen (1959 1969)
Scott (1969 1977)
Baker (1977 1979)
Stevens (1979 1980)
Baker (1980 1985)
Dole (1985 1996)
Lott (1996 2003)
Frist (2003 2007)
McConnell (2007 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andConferencechairs
Pennington (1860 1861)
Grow (1861 1863)
Colfax (1863 1869)
Pomeroy (1869)
Blaine (1869 1875)
McCrary (1875 1877)
Hale (1877 1879)
Frye (1879 1881)
Keifer (1881 1883)
Cannon (1883 1889)
Reed (1889 1891)
T. J. Henderson (1891 1895)
Reed (1895 1899)
D. B. Henderson (1899 1903)
Cannon (1903 1911)
Mann (1911 1919)
Gillett (1919 1925)
Longworth (1925 1931)
Snell (1931 1939)
Martin (1939 1959)
Halleck (1959 1965)
Ford (1965 1973)
Rhodes (1973 1981)
Michel (1981 1995)
Gingrich (1995 1999)
Hastert (1999 2007)
Boehner (2007 2015)
Ryan (2015 2019)
McCarthy (2019 )
RNCChairs
Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Campbell
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Mart nez/Duncan
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
McDaniel
Chair elections
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Parties bystate andterritoryState
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Territory
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Affiliated  organizationsFundraisinggroups
National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Redistricting Trust
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Governors Association
Sectionalgroups
College Republicans
Chairmen
Congressional Hispanic Conference
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans
Republicans Overseas
Factionalgroups
Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
Republican Governance Group
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List
Related
Primaries
Debates
Bibliography
International Democrat Union
Timeline of modern American conservatism
Trumpism
vteCabinet of President Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)Secretary of State
Elihu B. Washburne (1869)
Hamilton Fish (1869 1877)
Secretary of the Treasury
George S. Boutwell (1869 1873)
William Adams Richardson (1873 1874)
Benjamin Bristow (1874 1876)
Lot M. Morrill (1876 1877)
Secretary of War
John Aaron Rawlins (1869)
William W. Belknap (1869 1876)
Alphonso Taft (1876)
J. Donald Cameron (1876 1877)
Attorney General
Ebenezer R. Hoar (1869 1870)
Amos T. Akerman (1870 1871)
George Henry Williams (1871 1875)
Edwards Pierrepont (1875 1876)
Alphonso Taft (1876 1877)
Postmaster General
John Creswell (1869 1874)
James William Marshall (1874)
Marshall Jewell (1874 1876)
James Noble Tyner (1876 1877)
Secretary of the Navy
Adolph E. Borie (1869)
George M. Robeson (1869 1877)
Secretary of the Interior
Jacob Dolson Cox (1869 1870)
Columbus Delano (1870 1875)
Zachariah Chandler (1875 1877)
vteLeaders of the United States ArmySenior Officer / Commanding General
Washington
Knox
Doughty
Harmar
St. Clair
Wayne
Hamilton
Wilkinson
Dearborn
J. Brown
Macomb
W. Scott
McClellan
Halleck
Grant
Sherman
Sheridan
Schofield
Miles
Chiefs of Staff
Young
Chaffee
Bates
Bell
Wood
Wotherspoon
H. Scott
Bliss
March
Pershing
Hines
Summerall
MacArthur
Craig
Marshall
Eisenhower
Bradley
Collins
Ridgway
Taylor
Lemnitzer
Decker
Wheeler
Johnson
Westmoreland
B. Palmer
Abrams
Weyand
Rogers
Meyer
Wickham
Vuono
Sullivan
Reimer
Shinseki
Schoomaker
Casey
Dempsey
Odierno
Milley
McConville
Vice Chiefs of Staff
Collins
Haislip
Hull
Bolte
W. Palmer
Lemnitzer
Decker
Eddleman
Hamlett
Abrams
Haines
B. Palmer
Haig
Weyand
Kerwin
Kroesen
Vessey
Wickham
Thurman
A. Brown
RisCassi
Sullivan
Reimer
Peay
Tilelli
Griffith
Crouch
Shinseki
Keane
Casey
Cody
Chiarelli
Austin
Campbell
Allyn
McConville
Martin
George
vteAmerican Civil WarOriginsOrigins
Timeline leading to the War
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry
Kansas-Nebraska Act
Lincoln Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Nullification crisis
Origins of the American Civil War
Panic of 1857
Popular sovereignty
Secession
South Carolina Declaration of Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers
Slavery
African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Crittenden Compromise
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Emancipation Proclamation
Fire-Eaters
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Positive good
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Abolitionism
Abolitionism in the United States
Susan B. Anthony
James G. Birney
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Lane Debates on Slavery
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Caning
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad
CombatantsTheatersCampaignsBattlesStatesCombatantsUnion
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service
Confederacy
Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Theaters
Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade
Major campaigns
Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin Nashville
Price's Missouri Expedition
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Mobile
Appomattox
Major battles
Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Fort Pillow
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Crater
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks
Involvement(by state or territory)
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Dakota Territory
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indian Territory
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Involvement(cities)
Atlanta
Charleston
Chattanooga
New Orleans
Richmond
Washington, D.C.
Winchester
LeadersConfederateMilitary
R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Polk
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler
Civilian
Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens
UnionMilitary
Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Fr mont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas
Civilian
Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles
AftermathConstitution
Reconstruction Amendments
13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment
Reconstruction
Alabama Claims
Brooks Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax riot of 1873
Compromise of 1877
Confederate refugees
Confederados
Eufaula riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Homestead Acts
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
trial
efforts
timeline
first inquiry
second inquiry
impeachment managers investigation
Kirk Holden war
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Ethnic violence
Memphis riots of 1866
Meridian riot of 1871
New Orleans riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867
South Carolina riots of 1876
Reconstruction acts
Habeas Corpus Act of 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871
Reconstruction era
Reconstruction military districts
Reconstruction Treaties
Indian Council at Fort Smith
Red Shirts
Redeemers
Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
White League
Post-Reconstruction
Commemoration
Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate Memorial Day
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day
Confederate Memorial Hall
Disenfranchisement
Black Codes
Jim Crow
Historiographic issues
Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Red Shirts
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Confederate Veterans
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Children of the Confederacy
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Monumentsand memorials
Union: List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln
Confederate:
Confederate artworks in the United States Capitol
List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Cemeteries
Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' Memorial Associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries
Veterans
1913 Gettysburg reunion
1938 Gettysburg reunion
Confederate Memorial Hall
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans
Related topicsMilitary
Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate revolving cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad
Political
Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States presidential election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Politicians killed
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union Leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats
Music
Battle Hymn of the Republic
Dixie
John Brown's Body
A Lincoln Portrait
Marching Through Georgia
Maryland, My Maryland
When Johnny Comes Marching Home
Daar kom die Alibama
Other topics
Baltimore riot of 1861
Battlefield preservation
Bibliography
Confederate war finance
Confederate States dollar
Espionage
Confederate Secret Service
Great Revival of 1863
Juneteenth
Naming the war
Native Americans
Catawba
Cherokee
Choctaw
Seminole
New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City riots of 1863
Photographers
Richmond riots of 1863
Gender issues
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission
Women soldiers
 Category
 Portal
vteReconstruction eraParticipantsFederal government
Presidents
Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
Rutherford B. Hayes
Congress
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
Radical Republicans
Moderate Republicans
Conservative Republicans
African-American senators
African-American representatives
Reconstruction Amendments
United States Congress Joint Committee on Reconstruction
United States House Select Committee on Reconstruction
Federal judiciary
Taney Court
Chase Court
Waite Court
Federal bureaucracy
Edwin Stanton
Freedmen's Bureau
Justice Department
State governments
Southern United States
Confederate States of America
Others
African Americans
Free people of color
Freedman
Politicians
Carpetbaggers
Ku Klux Klan
Scalawag
Redeemers
White League
Red Shirts
Democratic Party
Bourbon Democrat
Horatio Seymour
Samuel J. Tilden
Republican Party
Stalwart
Charles Sumner
Thaddeus Stevens
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin Wade
John Bingham
James Mitchell Ashley
Freedman's Savings Bank
ElectionsPresidential
1864
DNC
National Union Convention
Radical Democracy Party
1868
DNC
RNC
1872
DNC
RNC
Liberal Republican Party
Straight-Out Democratic Party
Victoria Woodhull
1876
DNC
RNC
Greenback Convention
Prohibition Convention
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
U.S. Senate
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
U.S. House
1864 65
1866 67
1868 69
1870 71
1872 73
1874 75
1876 77
Gubernatorial
1863
CA
CT
MA
MN
NH
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
WV
1864
CT
IL
IN
LA
MD
MA
MI
MO
NH
VT
WV
1865
CT
FL
LA
MA
MN
NJ
OH
SC
VT
WI
1866
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
NC
OR
PA
TX
VT
WV
1867
CA
CT
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
VT
WI
1868
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
NJ
SC
VT
WV
1869
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
PA
VA
VT
WI
1870
AL
CT
DE
MA
ME
MI
MO
OR
SC
VT
WV
1871
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
NJ
OH
WI
1872
AL
CT
FL
IL
IN
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
PA
SC
VT
WV
1873
CT
IA
MA
ME
MN
MS
OH
VA
WI
1874
AL
CT
DE
KS
MA
ME
MI
MO
DE
OR
SC
VT
1875
CA
CT
IA
KY
MA
MD
ME
MN
OH
OH
WI
1876
AL
CO
CT Apr.
CT Nov.
FL
IL
IN
KS
LA
MA
ME
MI
MO
NC
RI
SC
VT
WV
1864 elections
1866 elections
1868 elections
1870 elections
1872 elections
1874 elections
1876 electionsKey eventsPrelude
American Indian Wars
Slavery in the United States
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792)
The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women (1838)
Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1839)
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
National Women's Rights Convention (1850)
American Civil War
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act (1862)
Militia Act of 1862
1863
Emancipation Proclamation
General Order No. 143
Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction
Ten Percent Plan
National Bank Act
Women's Loyal National League
New York City draft riots
1863 State of the Union Address
1864
Wade Davis Bill
1864 elections
1864 State of the Union Address
1865
13th Amendment
Second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln
Address
Black Codes
Special Field Orders No. 15 
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedmen's Bureau bills
Confederates surrender at Appomattox
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Shaw University
New Departure
1865 State of the Union Address
Founding of the Ku Klux Klan
1866
Civil Rights Act of 1866
Memphis riots of 1866
New Orleans massacre of 1866
Swing Around the Circle
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Fort Smith Conference and Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866
Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866
Tennessee readmitted to Union
Petition for Universal Freedom
National Labor Union
Ex parte Garland
Ex parte Milligan
Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866
1866 elections
1867
Tenure of Office Act
Command of Army Act
Indian Peace Commission
Knights of the White Camelia
Pulaski riot
Reconstruction Acts
Constitutional conventions of 1867
Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Peonage Act of 1867
First impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
1867 State of the Union Address
1868
14th Amendment
Second impeachment inquiry against Andrew Johnson
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Timeline
Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson
Impeachment managers investigation
Articles of impeachment
Arkansas readmitted to Union
Florida readmitted to Union
North Carolina readmitted to Union
South Carolina readmitted to Union
Louisiana readmitted to Union
Alabama readmitted to Union
Opelousas massacre
Fourth Reconstruction Act
Georgia v. Stanton
1868 elections
1868 State of the Union Address
1869
National Woman Suffrage Association
American Woman Suffrage Association
Alabama Claims
Annexation of Santo Domingo
Board of Indian Commissioners
Public Credit Act of 1869
Black Friday (1869)
Ex parte McCardle
First transcontinental railroad
1869 State of the Union Address
1870
15th Amendment
Enforcement Act of 1870
Justice Department
Naturalization Act of 1870
Kirk-Holden War
Shoffner Act
1870 elections
1870 State of the Union Address
1871
Ku Klux Klan hearings
First Enforcement Act of 1871
Second Enforcement Act of 1871
Alcorn State University
Meridian race riot of 1871
Treaty of Washington
New York custom house ring
Civil service commission
United States expedition to Korea
1871 State of the Union Address
1872
General Mining Act of 1872
Cr dit Mobilier Scandal
Modoc War
Star route scandal
Salary Grab Act
Amnesty Act
1872 elections
1872 State of the Union Address
1873
Panic of 1873
Colfax Massacre
Timber Culture Act
Slaughter-House Cases
Virginius Affair
Coinage Act of 1873
Long Depression
Comstock laws
1873 State of the Union Address
1874
Brooks Baxter War
Battle of Liberty Place
Coushatta Massacre
Red River War
Timber Culture Act
White League
Election Massacre of 1874
Vicksburg Riot of 1874
Black Hills Gold Rush
Sanborn incident
Anti-Moiety Acts
1874 elections
1874 State of the Union Address
1875
United States v. Cruikshank
Civil Rights Act of 1875
Red Shirts
Mississippi Plan
Clifton Riot of 1875
Yazoo City Riot of 1875
Specie Payment Resumption Act
Whiskey Ring
Wheeler Compromise
Delano affair
Pratt & Boyd
1875 State of the Union Address
1876
Hamburg Massacre
South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876
Ellenton massacre
Great Sioux War of 1876
Battle of the Little Bighorn
United States v. Reese
Trader post scandal
Centennial Exposition
Cattellism
Safe burglary conspiracy
1876 elections
1876 State of the Union Address
1877
Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
Nez Perce War
Desert Land Act
Great Railroad Strike of 1877
Aftermath
Posse Comitatus Act (1878)
Civil Rights Cases (1883)
United States v. Harris (1883)
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Williams v. Mississippi (1898)
Wilmington insurrection of 1898
Giles v. Harris (1903)
Disenfranchisement
AspectsHistoriography
Bibliography of the Reconstruction Era
James Shepherd Pike
The Prostrate State (1874)
James Bryce
The American Commonwealth (1888)
Claude Bowers
The Tragic Era (1929)
Columbia University
John Burgess
Walter Lynwood Fleming
Dunning School
William Archibald Dunning
Charles A. Beard
Howard K. Beale
W. E. B. Du Bois
Black Reconstruction (1935)
C. Vann Woodward
Joel Williamson
William R. Brock
American Crisis (1963)
John Hope Franklin
From Slavery to Freedom (1947)
After Slavery (1965)
Leon Litwack
Been in the Storm So Long (1979)
Eric Foner
Reconstruction (1988)
Kenneth M. Stampp
Steven Hahn
A Nation Under Our Feet (2003)
The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution (2019)
Memory
Winslow Homer
A Visit from the Old Mistress (1876)
Thomas Dixon, Jr.
The Leopard's Spots (1902)
The Clansman (1905)
D. W. Griffith
The Birth of a Nation (1915)
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Gone with the Wind (1939)
David W. Blight
Race and Reunion (2001)
Legacy
Women's suffrage in the United States
Labor history of the United States
Gilded Age
Jim Crow era
Civil rights movement
American frontier
Other topics
History of the United States (1865 1918)
African American founding fathers of the United States
Industrialization
Suffrage
Habeas corpus
Race (human categorization)
White supremacy
Paramilitary
Forty acres and a mule
Reconstruction Treaties
Whitecapping
Category
vteHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright
vte(  1864)   1868 United States presidential election   (1872  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Ulysses S. Grant
Vice President: Schuyler Colfax
Other candidates
For Vice President: Benjamin Wade
John Creswell
Andrew Gregg Curtin
Reuben Fenton
Hannibal Hamlin
James Harlan
William D. Kelley
Samuel C. Pomeroy
James Speed
Henry Wilson
Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Horatio Seymour
Vice President: Francis P. Blair Jr.
Other candidates
George H. Pendleton
Thomas A. Hendricks
Winfield S. Hancock
Andrew Johnson (incumbent)
Sanford E. Church
Asa Packer
James E. English
Joel Parker
James R. Doolittle
Stephen J. Field
Francis P. Blair Jr.
Salmon P. Chase
John T. Hoffman
Other 1868 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1868)   1872 United States presidential election   (1876  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Ulysses S. Grant (incumbent)
Vice President: Henry Wilson
Liberal Republican Party Democratic Party (Convention)Nominees
President: Horace Greeley
Vice President: Benjamin G. Brown
Othercandidates
Liberal Republican: Charles F. Adams
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin G. Brown
David Davis
Andrew Curtin
Salmon P. Chase
Democratic: Jeremiah S. Black
James A. Bayard
William S. Groesbeck
Third party and independent candidatesLabor Reform Party
Nominee: David Davis
VP nominee: Joel Parker
Other candidates: Charles O'Conor (declined nomination)
People's (Equal Rights) Party
Nominee: Victoria Woodhull
VP nominee: Frederick Douglass
Prohibition Party
Convention
Nominee: James Black
VP nominee: John Russell
Other 1872 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1872)   1876 United States presidential election   (1880  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Rutherford B. Hayes
Vice President: William A. Wheeler
Other candidates
James G. Blaine
Benjamin Bristow
Oliver P. Morton
Roscoe Conkling
John F. Hartranft
Marshall Jewell
Elihu B. Washburne
William A. Wheeler
Ulysses S. Grant (incumbent)
Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Samuel J. Tilden
Vice President: Thomas A. Hendricks
Other candidates
Thomas A. Hendricks
Winfield S. Hancock
William Allen
Thomas F. Bayard
Joel Parker
Third party and independent candidatesGreenback Party
Nominee: Peter Cooper
VP nominee: Samuel F. Cary
Other candidates: Andrew Curtin
William Allen
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Green C. Smith
VP nominee: Gideon T. Stewart
American Party
Nominee: James Walker
VP nominee: Donald Kirkpatrick
See also: Electoral Commission
Other 1876 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1876)   1880 United States presidential election   (1884  )Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: James A. Garfield
Vice President: Chester A. Arthur
Other candidates
Ulysses S. Grant
James G. Blaine
John Sherman
George F. Edmunds
Elihu B. Washburne
William Windom
Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Winfield S. Hancock
Vice President: William H. English
Other candidates
Thomas F. Bayard
Samuel J. Randall
Henry B. Payne
Samuel J. Tilden
Allen G. Thurman
Stephen J. Field
William R. Morrison
Thomas A. Hendricks
Third party and independent candidatesGreenback Party(Convention)
Nominee: James B. Weaver
VP nominee: Barzillai J. Chambers
Other candidates: Hendrick B. Wright
Stephen D. Dillaye
Benjamin Butler
Solon Chase
Edward P. Allis
Alexander Campbell
Thompson H. Murch
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Neal Dow
VP nominee: Henry A. Thompson
American Party
Nominee: John W. Phelps
VP nominee: Samuel C. Pomeroy
Other 1880 elections: House
Senate
Portals: Biography American Civil War Ohio Illinois Politics United States
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
Korea
Netherlands
Poland
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
ULAN
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
SNAC
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ulysses_S._Grant&oldid=1149652885"