President of the United States from 1923 to 1929
This article is about the president of the United States. For his grandfather, see Calvin Galusha Coolidge.
"John Calvin Coolidge" redirects here. For his father, see John Calvin Coolidge Sr.
Calvin CoolidgeCoolidge in 191930th President of the United StatesIn officeAugust 2, 1923  March 4, 1929Vice President
None (1923 1925)[a]
Charles G. Dawes(1925 1929)
Preceded byWarren G. HardingSucceeded byHerbert Hoover29th Vice President of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1921  August 2, 1923PresidentWarren G. HardingPreceded byThomas R. MarshallSucceeded byCharles G. Dawes48th Governor of MassachusettsIn officeJanuary 2, 1919  January 6, 1921LieutenantChanning H. CoxPreceded bySamuel W. McCallSucceeded byChanning H. Cox46th Lieutenant Governor of MassachusettsIn officeJanuary 6, 1916  January 2, 1919GovernorSamuel W. McCallPreceded byGrafton D. CushingSucceeded byChanning H. CoxPresident of the Massachusetts SenateIn officeJanuary 7, 1914  January 6, 1915Preceded byLevi H. GreenwoodSucceeded byHenry Gordon WellsMember of the Massachusetts SenateIn officeJanuary 3, 1912  January 6, 1915Preceded byAllen T. TreadwaySucceeded byJohn B. HullConstituencyBerkshire, Hampden, and Hampshire counties16th Mayor of NorthamptonIn officeJanuary 3, 1910  January 1, 1912Preceded byJames W. O'BrienSucceeded byWilliam FeikerMember of theMassachusetts House of RepresentativesIn officeJanuary 2, 1907  January 6, 1909Preceded byMoses M. BassettSucceeded byCharles A. MontgomeryConstituency1st Hampshire
Personal detailsBornJohn Calvin Coolidge Jr.(1872-07-04)July 4, 1872Plymouth Notch, Vermont, U.S.DiedJanuary 5, 1933(1933-01-05) (aged 60)Northampton, Massachusetts, U.S.Resting placePlymouth Notch CemeteryPolitical partyRepublicanSpouseGrace Goodhue  (m. 1905) Children
John
Calvin Jr.
ParentJohn Calvin Coolidge Sr. (father)RelativesCalvin Galusha Coolidge (grandfather)EducationAmherst College (AB)OccupationPoliticianlawyerSignature
Calvin Coolidge's voice
On government spendingRecorded July 4, 1920
Calvin Coolidge (born John Calvin Coolidge Jr.;[1] / ku l d /; July 4, 1872  January 5, 1933) was an American attorney and politician who served as the 30th president of the United States from 1923 to 1929.
Born in Vermont, Coolidge was a Republican lawyer from New England who climbed up the ladder of Massachusetts state politics, becoming the state's 48th governor; his response to the Boston Police Strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight as a man of decisive action. Coolidge was elected the country's 29th vice president the next year, succeeding the presidency upon the sudden death of President Warren G. Harding in 1923. Elected in his own right in 1924, Coolidge gained a reputation as a small-government conservative distinguished by a taciturn personality and dry sense of humor, receiving the nickname "Silent Cal". Though his widespread popularity enabled him to run for a second full term, he chose not to run again in 1928, remarking that ten years as president was (at the time) "longer than any other man has had it  too long!"
Throughout his gubernatorial career, Coolidge ran on the record of fiscal conservatism, strong support for women's suffrage, and a vague opposition to Prohibition.[2] During his presidency, he restored public confidence in the White House after the many scandals of the Harding administration. He signed into law the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans, and oversaw a period of rapid and expansive economic growth known as the "Roaring Twenties", leaving office with considerable popularity.[3] He was known for his hands-off governing approach and pro-business stances. As a Coolidge biographer wrote: "He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class, could interpret their longings and express their opinions. That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength."[4]
Scholars have ranked Coolidge in the lower half of U.S. presidents. He gains almost universal praise for his stalwart support of racial equality during a period of heightened racial tension in the United States,[5] and is highly praised by advocates of smaller government and laissez-faire economics, while supporters of an active central government generally view him far less favorably. His critics argue that he failed to use the country's economic boom to help struggling farmers and workers in other flailing industries,[6] and there is still much debate among historians as to the extent to which Coolidge's economic policies contributed to the onset of the Great Depression.[7]
Early life and family history
John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born on July 4, 1872, in Plymouth Notch, Vermont the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day. He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr. (1845 1926) and Victoria Josephine Moor (1846 1885). Although named for his father, John, from early childhood Coolidge was addressed by his middle name, Calvin. His middle name was selected in honor of John Calvin, a founder of the Congregational church in which Coolidge was raised and remained active throughout his life.[8]
Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations and developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper, and public servant. He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in the Vermont House of Representatives as well as the Vermont Senate.[9] Coolidge's mother was the daughter of Hiram Dunlap Moor, a Plymouth Notch farmer and Abigail Franklin.[10] She was chronically ill and died at the age of 39, perhaps from tuberculosis, when Coolidge was 12 years old. His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge (1875 1890), died at the age of 15, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was 18. Coolidge's father married a Plymouth schoolteacher in 1891, and lived to the age of 80.[11]
Coolidge's family had deep roots in New England. His earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge, emigrated from Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts.[12] Coolidge's great-great-grandfather, also named John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth.[13] His grandfather Calvin Galusha Coolidge served in the Vermont House of Representatives.[14] Coolidge was also a descendant of Samuel Appleton, who settled in Ipswich and led the Massachusetts Bay Colony during King Philip's War.[15]
The Coolidge Homestead in Plymouth Notch, Vermont
Coolidge as an Amherst College undergraduate
Early career and marriage
Education and law practice
 Professor Charles Edward Garman
Coolidge attended the Black River Academy and then St. Johnsbury Academy before enrolling at Amherst College, where he distinguished himself in the debating class. As a senior, he joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity and graduated cum laude. While at Amherst, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman a Congregational mystic who had a neo-Hegelian philosophy.
Coolidge explained Garman's ethics forty years later:
[T]here is a standard of righteousness that might does not make right, that the end does not justify the means, and that expediency as a working principle is bound to fail. The only hope of perfecting human relationships is in accordance with the law of service under which men are not so solicitous about what they shall get as they are about what they shall give. Yet people are entitled to the rewards of their industry. What they earn is theirs, no matter how small or how great. But the possession of property carries the obligation to use it in a larger service...[16]
At his father's urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts, to become a lawyer. Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond & Field, and reading law with them. John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field, both Amherst graduates, introduced Coolidge to practicing law in the county seat of Hampshire County, Massachusetts. In 1897, Coolidge was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, becoming a country lawyer.[17] With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898. He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court. As his reputation as a hard-working and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services.[18]
Marriage and family
 Grace Coolidge
In 1903, Coolidge met Grace Goodhue, a graduate of the University of Vermont and a teacher at Northampton's Clarke School for the Deaf. They married on October 4, 1905, at 2:30 p.m. in a small ceremony which took place in the parlor of Grace's family's house, having overcome her mother's objections to the marriage.[19] The newlyweds went on a honeymoon trip to Montreal, originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidge's request. After 25 years he wrote of Grace, "for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces".[20]
The Coolidges had two sons: John (1906 2000) and Calvin Jr. (1908 1924). On June 30, 1924, Calvin Jr. had played tennis with his brother on the White House tennis courts without putting on socks and developed a blister on one of his toes. The blister subsequently degenerated into sepsis. Calvin Jr. died a little over a week later at the age of 16.[21] The President never forgave himself for Calvin Jr's death.[22] His eldest son John said it "hurt [Coolidge] terribly", and psychiatric biographer Robert E. Gilbert, author of  The Tormented President: Calvin Coolidge, Death, and Clinical Depression, said that Coolidge "ceased to function as President after the death of his sixteen-year-old son". Gilbert explains in his book how Coolidge displayed all ten of the symptoms listed by the American Psychiatric Association as evidence of major depressive disorder following Calvin Jr.'s sudden death.[23] John later became a railroad executive, helped to start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site.[24]
Coolidge was frugal, and when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting. He and his wife attended Northampton's Edwards Congregational Church before and after his presidency.[25][26]
Local political office (1898 1915)
City offices
The Republican Party was dominant in New England at the time, and Coolidge followed the example of Hammond and Field by becoming active in local politics.[27] In 1896, Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley, and was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee the next year.[28] In 1898, he won election to the City Council of Northampton, placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected.[27] The position offered no salary but provided Coolidge with valuable political experience.[29] In 1899, he was chosen City Solicitor by the City Council. He was elected for a one-year term in 1900, and reelected in 1901.[30] This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of $600 (equivalent to $19,543 in 2021).[30] In 1902, the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor, and Coolidge returned to private practice. Soon thereafter, however, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him. The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only one year.[31] In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board. When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern, the recently married Coolidge replied, "Might give me time!"[31]
Massachusetts state legislator and mayor
 Coolidge as a State Representative in 1908
See also: 134th Massachusetts General Court (1913), 135th Massachusetts General Court (1914), and 136th Massachusetts General Court (1915)
In 1906, the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the Massachusetts House of Representatives. He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court.[32] In his freshman term, Coolidge served on minor committees and, although he usually voted with the party, was known as a Progressive Republican, voting in favor of such measures as women's suffrage and the direct election of Senators.[33] While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane who controlled the western faction of the Massachusetts Republican Party; Crane's party rival in the east of the commonwealth was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge.[34] Coolidge forged another key strategic alliance with Guy Currier, who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm and broad circle of friends which Coolidge lacked, and which would have a lasting impact on his political career.[35] In 1907, he was elected to a second term, and in the 1908 session Coolidge was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position.[36]
 Coolidge's home (1906 1930) in Northampton, Massachusetts
Instead of vying for another term in the State House, Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired. He was well liked in the town, and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1,597 to 1,409.[37] During his first term (1910 to 1911), he increased teachers' salaries and retired some of the city's debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease.[38] He was renominated in 1911, and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin.[39]
In 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session; Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin.[40] At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the "Bread and Roses" strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts.[b] After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers' demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee.[41] A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans that year was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt, and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft. Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party.[42] When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district, Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin.[42]
"Do the day's work. If it be to protect the rights of the weak, whoever objects, do it. If it be to help a powerful corporation better to serve the people, whatever the opposition, do that. Expect to be called a stand-patter, but don't be a stand-patter. Expect to be called a demagogue, but don't be a demagogue. Don't hesitate to be as revolutionary as science. Don't hesitate to be as reactionary as the multiplication table. Don't expect to build up the weak by pulling down the strong. Don't hurry to legislate. Give administration a chance to catch up with legislation."
"Have Faith in Massachusetts" as delivered by Calvin Coolidge to the Massachusetts State Senate, 1914[43]
In the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act, which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in western Massachusetts.[44] Coolidge intended to retire after his second term as was the custom, but when the president of the state senate, Levi H. Greenwood, considered running for lieutenant governor, Coolidge decided to run again for the Senate in the hopes of being elected as its presiding officer.[45] Although Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate, he was defeated primarily due to his opposition to women's suffrage; Coolidge was in favor of the women's vote, won his re-election, and with Crane's help, assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate.[46] After his election in January 1914, Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech entitled Have Faith in Massachusetts, which summarized his philosophy of government.[43]
Coolidge's speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account;[47] towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing his name for nomination to lieutenant governor. After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections, Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate.[48] Coolidge's supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns, encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor.[49] Stearns, an executive with the Boston department store R. H. Stearns, became another key ally, and began a publicity campaign on Coolidge's behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session.[50]
Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916 1921)
 Coolidge with his family (c. 1915)
Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall. Coolidge was the leading vote-getter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall's eastern base of support.[51] McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one-year terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes.[52]
In Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states; nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as an administrative inspector and was a member of the governor's council. He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee.[53] As a full-time elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton.[54] McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and again in 1917. When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor.[55]
1918 election
Coolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918. He and his running mate, Channing Cox, a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, ran on the previous administration's record: fiscal conservatism, a vague opposition to Prohibition, support for women's suffrage, and support for American involvement in World War I.[2] The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish and German Americans.[56] Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16,773 votes over his opponent, Richard H. Long, in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns.[57]
Boston Police Strike
Main article: Boston Police Strike
In 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union, Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated. In August of that year, the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union.[58] Curtis declared the union's leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty, but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4.[59] The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters, convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8.[60] The following day, about three-quarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike.[61][c] Coolidge, tacitly but fully in support of Curtis' position, closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities. He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle  that a policeman does not strike. That night and the next, there was sporadic violence and rioting in the unruly city.[62] Peters, concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority, and relieved Curtis of duty.[63]
"Your assertion that the Commissioner was wrong cannot justify the wrong of leaving the city unguarded. That furnished the opportunity; the criminal element furnished the action. There is no right to strike against the public safety by anyone, anywhere, any time. ... I am equally determined to defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts and to maintain the authority and jurisdiction over her public officers where it has been placed by the Constitution and laws of her people."
"Telegram from Governor Calvin Coolidge to Samuel Gompers", September 14, 1919[64]
Coolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then in need of his intervention, conferred with Crane's operative, William Butler, and then acted.[65] He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force.[66] Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited.[67]
That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers. "Whatever disorder has occurred", Gompers wrote, "is due to Curtis's order in which the right of the policemen has been denied "[68] Coolidge publicly answered Gompers's telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strike  and his response launched him into the national consciousness.[68] Newspapers across the nation picked up on Coolidge's statement and he became the newest hero to opponents of the strike. Amid of the First Red Scare, many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolutions, like those that had taken place in Russia, Hungary, and Germany. While Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, conservatives across the nation had seen a rising star.[69] Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader, and as a strict enforcer of law and order.
1919 election
 Coolidge inspects militia in Boston police strike
Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919. By this time Coolidge's supporters (especially Stearns) had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation and some of Coolidge's speeches were published in book form.[43] He faced the same opponent as in 1918, Richard Long, but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125,101 votes, more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier.[d] His actions in the police strike, combined with the massive electoral victory, led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920.[71]
Legislation and vetoes as governor
By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $100 bonus (equivalent to $1,563 in 2021) to Massachusetts veterans. He also signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from fifty-four hours to forty-eight, saying, "We must humanize the industry, or the system will break down."[72] He signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming $4 million from expenditures, thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt.[73]
Coolidge also wielded the veto pen as governor. His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators' pay by 50%.[74] Although Coolidge was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75% alcohol or less, in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. "Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution," he said in his veto message. "Against it, they are void."[75]
Vice presidency (1921 1923)
1920 election
Main article: 1920 United States presidential election
 An original Harding-Coolidge campaign button
At the 1920 Republican National Convention, most of the delegates were selected by state party caucuses, not primaries. As such, the field was divided among many local favorites.[76] Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the party's U.S. Senators, never considered him seriously.[77] After ten ballots, the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president.[78] When the time came to select a vice presidential nominee, the bosses also made and announced their decision on whom they wanted  Sen. Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin  and then prematurely departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision. A delegate from Oregon, Wallace McCamant, having read Have Faith in Massachusetts, proposed Coolidge for vice president instead. The suggestion caught on quickly with the masses starving for an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated.[79]
The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox, for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, for vice president. The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign, as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism.[80] Harding ran a "front-porch" campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South, New York, and New England  his audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches.[81] On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South.[80] They also won in Tennessee, the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction.[80]
"Silent Cal"
 President Harding and Vice President Coolidge with their wives
The U.S. vice-presidency did not carry many official duties, but Coolidge was invited by President Harding to attend cabinet meetings, making him the first vice president to do so.[82] He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country.[83]
As vice president, Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties, where the legend of "Silent Cal" was born. It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate, such as Coolidge being "silent in five languages".[84] Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker, in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as "Silent Cal". An apocryphal story has it that a person seated next to him at a dinner said to him, "I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you." He replied, "You lose."[85] However, on April 22, 1924, Coolidge himself said that the "You lose" quotation never occurred. The story about it was related by Frank B. Noyes, President of the Associated Press, to their membership at their annual luncheon at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, when toasting and introducing Coolidge, who was the invited speaker. After the introduction and before his prepared remarks, Coolidge said to the membership, "Your President [referring to Noyes] has given you a perfect example of one of those rumors now current in Washington which is without any foundation."[86]
Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society; when asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, "Got to eat somewhere."[87] Alice Roosevelt Longworth, a leading Republican wit, underscored Coolidge's silence and his dour personality: "When he wished he were elsewhere, he pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said nothing. He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle."[88] Coolidge and his wife, Grace, who was a great baseball fan, once attended a Washington Senators game and sat through all nine innings without saying a word, except once when he asked her the time.[89]
As president, Coolidge's reputation as a quiet man continued. "The words of a President have an enormous weight," he would later write, "and ought not to be used indiscriminately."[90] Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation; indeed, he cultivated it. "I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President," he once told Ethel Barrymore, "and I think I will go along with them."[91] Some historians suggest that Coolidge's image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic,[92] while others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior to be natural, deepening after the death of his son in 1924.[93] Dorothy Parker, upon learning that Coolidge had died, reportedly remarked, "How can they tell?"[94]
Presidency (1923 1929)
Main articles: Presidency of Calvin Coolidge and First inauguration of Calvin Coolidge
For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Calvin Coolidge presidency.
On August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly from a heart attack in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States. Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding's death.[95] Coolidge dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled.[95] His father, a notary public and justice of the peace, administered the oath of office in the family's parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47 a.m. on August 3, 1923, whereupon the new President of the United States returned to bed.
Coolidge returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath.[96] This second oath-taking remained a secret until it was revealed by Harry M. Daugherty in 1932, and confirmed by Hoehling.[97] When Hoehling confirmed Daugherty's story, he indicated that Daugherty, then serving as United States Attorney General, asked him to administer the oath without fanfare at the Willard Hotel.[97] According to Hoehling, he did not question Daugherty's reason for requesting a second oath-taking but assumed it was to resolve any doubt about whether the first swearing-in was valid.[97]
 President Coolidge signing appropriation bills for the Veterans Bureau on the South Lawn during the garden party for wounded veterans, June 5, 1924. General John J. Pershing is at left. The man at right, looking on, appears to be Veterans Bureau Director Frank T. Hines.
The nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge, who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration; many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924.[98] Coolidge believed that those of Harding's men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence, taking a methodical approach to the scandals, principally the Teapot Dome scandal, while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty.[99] Coolidge thought the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice; this was affirmed by the resulting resignations of those involved. He personally intervened in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after he refused to cooperate with the congressional probe. He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing. Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors.[100]
Coolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened on December 6, 1923, giving a speech that supported many of Harding's policies, including Harding's formal budgeting process, the enforcement of immigration restrictions and arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania.[101] The address to Congress was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio.[102] The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed just one month into Coolidge's term, and was generally well received in the country.[103] In May 1924, the World War I veterans' World War Adjusted Compensation Act or "Bonus Bill" was passed over his veto.[104] Coolidge signed the Immigration Act later that year, which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration, but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bill's specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants.[105] Just before the Republican Convention began, Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58% to 46%, as well as personal income tax rates across the board, increased the estate tax and bolstered it with a new gift tax.[106]
On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States. By that time, two-thirds of them were already citizens, having gained it through marriage, military service (veterans of World War I were granted citizenship in 1919), or the land allotments that had earlier taken place.[107][108][109]
1924 election
Main article: 1924 United States presidential election
 1924 electoral vote results
The Republican Convention was held on June 10 12, 1924, in Cleveland, Ohio; Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot.[110] The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot, but he declined; former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted.[110]
The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City. The convention soon deadlocked, and after 103 ballots, the delegates finally agreed on a compromise candidate, John W. Davis, with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president. The Democrats' hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette, a Republican senator from Wisconsin, split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party. Many believed that the split in the Republican party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency.[111]
After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn; he later said that "when he [the son] died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him."[112] Even as he mourned, Coolidge ran his standard campaign, not mentioning his opponents by name or maligning them, and delivering speeches on his theory of government, including several that were broadcast over the radio.[113] It was the most subdued campaign since 1896, partly because of Coolidge's grief, but also because of his naturally non-confrontational style.[114] The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920. Coolidge and Dawes won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follette's home state. Coolidge won the election with 382 electoral votes and the popular vote by 2.5 million over his opponents' combined total.[115]
Industry and trade
See also: Radio Act of 1927, Federal Radio Commission, Equal-time rule, and Lochner era
"[I]t is probable that a press which maintains an intimate touch with the business currents of the nation is likely to be more reliable than it would be if it were a stranger to these influences. After all, the chief business of the American people is business. They are profoundly concerned with buying, selling, investing and prospering in the world."
"President Calvin Coolidge's address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors", Washington D.C., January 25, 1925[116]
During Coolidge's presidency, the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the "Roaring Twenties". He left the administration's industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover, who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio.[117] Coolidge disdained regulation and demonstrated this by appointing commissioners to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction.[118] The regulatory state under Coolidge was, as one biographer described it, "thin to the point of invisibility".[119]
Historian Robert Sobel offers some context of Coolidge's laissez-faire ideology, based on the prevailing understanding of federalism during his presidency: "As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards. Did he support these measures while president? No, because in the 1920s, such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments."[120][121] However, Coolidge did sign the Radio Act of 1927 into law that established the Federal Radio Commission (1927 1934), the equal-time rule for radio broadcasters in the United States, and restricted radio broadcasting licenses to stations that demonstrated that they served "the public interest, convenience, or necessity".
Taxation and government spending
Coolidge adopted the taxation policies of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, who advocated "scientific taxation"  the notion that lowering taxes will increase, rather than decrease, government receipts.[122] Congress agreed, and tax rates were reduced in Coolidge's term.[122] In addition to federal tax cuts, Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring of the federal debt.[123] Coolidge's ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress, and in 1924, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for some two million people.[123] They reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928, all the while continuing to keep spending down so as to reduce the overall federal debt.[124] By 1927, only the wealthiest 2% of taxpayers paid any federal income tax.[124] Federal spending remained flat during Coolidge's administration, allowing one-fourth of the federal debt to be retired in total. State and local governments saw considerable growth, however, surpassing the federal budget in 1927.[125] By 1929, after Coolidge's series of tax rate reductions had cut the tax rate to 24 percent on those making over $100,000, the federal government collected more than a billion dollars in income taxes, of which 65 percent was collected from those making over $100,000. In 1921, when the tax rate on people making over $100,000 a year was 73 percent, the federal government collected a little over $700 million in income taxes, of which 30 percent was paid by those making over $100,000.[126]
Opposition to farm subsidies
 Coolidge with his vice president, Charles G. Dawes
Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge's presidency was relief for farmers. Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices.[127] Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the elections that year.[128] In 1926, with farm prices falling once more, Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen  both Republicans  proposed the McNary Haugen Farm Relief Bill. The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in high-yield years and hold it (when feasible) for later sale or sell it abroad.[129] Coolidge opposed McNary-Haugen, declaring that agriculture must stand "on an independent business basis", and said that "government control cannot be divorced from political control."[129] Instead of manipulating prices, he favored instead Herbert Hoover's proposal to increase profitability by modernizing agriculture. Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing the McNary-Haugen measure as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated.[130]
After McNary-Haugen's defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the Curtis-Crisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm co-operatives in times of surplus; the bill did not pass.[130] In February 1927, Congress took up the McNary-Haugen bill again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it.[131] In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy.[132] Congress did not override the veto, but it passed the bill again in May 1928 by an increased majority; again, Coolidge vetoed it.[131] "Farmers never have made much money," said Coolidge, the Vermont farmer's son. "I do not believe we can do much about it."[133]
Flood control
Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005.[134] Although he did eventually name Secretary Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that Coolidge overall showed a lack of interest in federal flood control.[134] Coolidge did not believe that personally visiting the region after the floods would accomplish anything, and that it would be seen as mere political grandstanding. He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require; he believed property owners should bear much of the cost.[135] On the other hand, Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation.[136] When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15.[137]
Civil rights
 Osage men with Coolidge after he signed the bill granting Native Americans U.S. citizenship
According to one biographer, Coolidge was "devoid of racial prejudice", but rarely took the lead on civil rights. Coolidge disliked the Ku Klux Klan and no Klansman is known to have received an appointment from him. In the 1924 presidential election his opponents (Robert La Follette and John Davis), and his running mate Charles Dawes, often attacked the Klan but Coolidge avoided the subject.[138] During his administration, lynchings of African-Americans decreased and millions of people left the Ku Klux Klan.[139]
Coolidge spoke in favor of the civil rights of African Americans, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were "just as sacred as those of any other citizen" under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a "public and a private duty to protect those rights."[140][141]
Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to make lynching a federal crime (it was already a state crime, though not always enforced). Congress refused to pass any such legislation. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans living on reservations. (Those off reservations had long been citizens.) [142] On June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at historically black, non-segregated Howard University, in which he thanked and commended African Americans for their rapid advances in education and their contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in the World War, all while being faced with discrimination and prejudices at home.[143]
In a speech in October 1924, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they have "contributed much to making our country what it is." He stated that although the diversity of peoples was a detrimental source of conflict and tension in Europe, it was peculiar for the United States that it was a "harmonious" benefit for the country. Coolidge further stated the United States should assist and help immigrants who come to the country and urged immigrants to reject "race hatreds" and "prejudices".[144][page needed]
Foreign policy
 Official portrait of Calvin Coolidge
Coolidge was neither well versed nor very interested in world affairs.[145] His focus was directed mainly at American business, especially pertaining to trade, and "Maintaining the Status Quo". Although not an isolationist, he was reluctant to enter into European involvements.[146] While Coolidge believed strongly in a non-interventionist foreign policy, he did believe that the United States was exceptional.[147]
Coolidge considered the 1920 Republican victory as a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the United States should join the League of Nations.[148] Coolidge believed the League did not serve American interests.[148] However, he spoke in favor of joining the Permanent Court of International Justice (World Court), provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions.[149] In 1926, the Senate eventually approved joining the Court (with reservations).[150] The League of Nations accepted the reservations, but it suggested some modifications of its own.[151] The Senate failed to act and so the United States did not join the World Court.[151]
Coolidge authorized the Dawes Plan, a financial plan by Charles Dawes, to provide Germany partial relief from its reparations obligations from World War I. The plan initially provided stimulus for the German economy.[152] Additionally, Coolidge attempted to pursue further curbs on naval strength following the early successes of Harding's Washington Naval Conference by sponsoring the Geneva Naval Conference in 1927, which failed owing to a French and Italian boycott and ultimate failure of Great Britain and the United States to agree on cruiser tonnages. As a result, the conference was a failure and Congress eventually authorized for increased American naval spending in 1928.[153] The Kellogg Briand Pact of 1928, named for Coolidge's Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg, and French foreign minister Aristide Briand, was also a key peacekeeping initiative. The treaty, ratified in 1929, committed signatories  the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan  to "renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another".[154] The treaty did not achieve its intended result  the outlawry of war  but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II.[155] Coolidge also continued the previous administration's policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union.[156]
Efforts were made to normalize ties with post-Revolution Mexico. Coolidge recognized Mexico's new governments under  lvaro Obreg n and Plutarco El as Calles, and continued American support for the elected Mexican government against the National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty during the Cristero War, lifting the arms embargo on that country; he also appointed Dwight Morrow as Ambassador to Mexico with the successful objective to avoid further American conflict with Mexico.[157][158][159]
Coolidge's administration would see continuity in the occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti, and an end to the occupation of the Dominican Republic in 1924 as a result of withdrawal agreements finalized during Harding's administration.[160] In 1925, Coolidge ordered the withdrawal of Marines stationed in Nicaragua following perceived stability after the 1924 Nicaraguan general election, but redeployed them there in January 1927 following failed attempts to peacefully resolve the rapid deterioration of political stability and avert the ensuing Constitutionalist War; Henry L. Stimson was later sent by Coolidge to mediate a peace deal that would end the civil war and extend American military presence in Nicaragua beyond Coolidge's term in office.[157]
To extend an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over America's interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean,[161] Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States, January 15 17, 1928, in Havana, Cuba, the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency.[162] He would be the last sitting American president to visit Cuba until Barack Obama in 2016.[163]
For Canada, Coolidge authorized the St. Lawrence Seaway, a system of locks and canals that would provide large vessels passage between the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes.[164][157]
Cabinet
 Coolidge's cabinet in 1924, outside the White House.Front row, left to right: Harry Stewart New, John W. Weeks, Charles Evans Hughes, Coolidge, Andrew Mellon, Harlan F. Stone, Curtis D. Wilbur.Back row, left to right: James J. Davis, Henry C. Wallace, Herbert Hoover, Hubert Work.
Although a few of Harding's cabinet appointees were scandal-tarred, Coolidge initially retained all of them, out of an ardent conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president he was obligated to retain Harding's counselors and policies until the next election. He kept Harding's able speechwriter Judson T. Welliver; Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925.[165] Coolidge appointed C. Bascom Slemp, a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician, to work jointly with Edward T. Clark, a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vice-presidential staff, as Secretaries to the President (a position equivalent to the modern White House Chief of Staff).[103]
Perhaps the most powerful person in Coolidge's Cabinet was Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, who controlled the administration's financial policies and was regarded by many, including House Minority Leader John Nance Garner, as more powerful than Coolidge himself.[166] Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover also held a prominent place in Coolidge's Cabinet, in part because Coolidge found value in Hoover's ability to win positive publicity with his pro-business proposals.[167] Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes directed Coolidge's foreign policy until he resigned in 1925 following Coolidge's re-election. He was replaced by Frank B. Kellogg, who had previously served as a senator and as the ambassador to Great Britain. Coolidge made two other appointments following his re-election, with William M. Jardine taking the position of Secretary of Agriculture and John G. Sargent becoming Attorney General.[168] Coolidge did not have a vice president during his first term, but Charles Dawes became vice president during Coolidge's second term, and Dawes and Coolidge clashed over farm policy and other issues.[169]
OFFICE
NAME
TERM
President
Calvin Coolidge
1923 1929
Vice President
None
1923 1925
 
Charles G. Dawes
1925 1929
Secretary of State
Charles Evans Hughes
1923 1925
 
Frank B. Kellogg
1925 1929
Secretary of the Treasury
Andrew Mellon
1923 1929
Secretary of War
John W. Weeks
1923 1925
 
Dwight F. Davis
1925 1929
Attorney General
Harry M. Daugherty
1923 1924
 
Harlan F. Stone
1924 1925
 
John G. Sargent
1925 1929
Postmaster General
Harry S. New
1923 1929
Secretary of the Navy
Edwin C. Denby
1923 1924
 
Curtis D. Wilbur
1924 1929
Secretary of the Interior
Hubert Work
1923 1928
 
Roy O. West
1928 1929
Secretary of Agriculture
Henry C. Wallace
1923 1924
 
Howard M. Gore
1924 1925
 
William M. Jardine
1925 1929
Secretary of Commerce
Herbert Hoover
1923 1928
 
William F. Whiting
1928 1929
Secretary of Labor
James J. Davis
1923 1929
Judicial appointments
Main article: List of federal judges appointed by Calvin Coolidge
See also: Harlan F. Stone Supreme Court nomination
 Coolidge appointed Harlan F. Stone first as Attorney General and then as a Supreme Court Justice.
Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Harlan F. Stone in 1925. Stone was Coolidge's fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican. Stone was serving as dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general in 1924 to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding's Attorney General, Harry M. Daugherty.[170] It does not appear that Coolidge considered appointing anyone other than Stone, although Stone himself had urged Coolidge to appoint Benjamin N. Cardozo.[171] Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the court's three liberal justices who would often vote to uphold New Deal legislation.[172] President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone to be chief justice.
Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 61 judges to the United States district courts. He appointed judges to various specialty courts as well, including Genevieve R. Cline, who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928.[173] Coolidge also signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload.
1928 election
Main article: 1928 United States presidential election
In the summer of 1927, Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota. While on vacation, Coolidge surprisingly issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president: "I do not choose to run for President in 1928."[174] After allowing the reporters to take that in, Coolidge elaborated. "If I take another term, I will be in the White House till 1933  Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had it  too long!"[175] In his memoirs, Coolidge explained his decision not to run: "The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them. While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish."[176] After leaving office, he and Grace returned to Northampton, where he wrote his memoirs. The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 with a landslide by Herbert Hoover. Coolidge had been reluctant to endorse Hoover as his successor; on one occasion he remarked that "for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice  all of it bad."[177] Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the nomination of the popular commerce secretary.[178]
Post-presidency (1929 1933)
 Coolidge addressing a crowd at Arlington National Cemetery's Roman-style Memorial Amphitheater in 1924
After his presidency, Coolidge retired to a spacious home in Northampton, "The Beeches".[179] He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River and was often observed on the water by local boating enthusiasts. During this period, he also served as chairman of the Non-Partisan Railroad Commission, an entity created by several banks and corporations to survey the country's long-term transportation needs and make recommendations for improvements. He was an honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind, a director of New York Life Insurance Company, president of the American Antiquarian Society, and a trustee of Amherst College.[180]
Coolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, "Calvin Coolidge Says", from 1930 to 1931.[181] Faced with a Democratic landslide in the 1932 presidential election, some Republicans spoke of rejecting Hoover as their party's nominee, and instead drafting Coolidge to run. Coolidge made it clear that he was not interested in running again, and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him.[182] Hoover was renominated, and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him. Hoover then lost the general election to Coolidge's 1920 vice presidential Democratic opponent Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide.[183]
Death
Coolidge died suddenly from coronary thrombosis at "The Beeches" on January 5, 1933, at 12:45 p.m., aged 60.[184] Shortly before his death, Coolidge confided to an old friend: "I feel I no longer fit in with these times."[185] Coolidge is buried in Plymouth Notch Cemetery, Plymouth Notch, Vermont. The nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site. The State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors' center nearby to mark Coolidge's 100th birthday on July 4, 1972.
Radio, film, and commemorations
Despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician, Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president. He made himself available to reporters, giving 520 press conferences, meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since.[186] Coolidge's second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio. On December 6, 1923, his speech to Congress was broadcast on radio,[187] the first presidential radio address.[188] Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission. On August 11, 1924, Theodore W. Case, using the Phonofilm sound-on-film process he developed for Lee de Forest, filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn, making "Silent Cal" the first president to appear in a sound film. The title of the DeForest film was President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds.[189][190] When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. Navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans-Atlantic flight, President Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and presented him with the Medal of Honor;[191] the event was captured on film.[192]
The Sesquicentennial of American Independence Half Dollar, minted in 1926
Coolidge on a 1938 postage stamp
Coolidge with reporters and cameramen, 1924
Collection of video clips of President Coolidge
See also
SS President Coolidge
Coolidge, Arizona
Coolidge Dam
List of things named after Calvin Coolidge
Presidency of Calvin Coolidge
Notes
^ Coolidge was Vice President under Warren G. Harding and became president upon Harding's death on August 2, 1923. As this was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next ensuing election and inauguration.
^ See also the main article, Lawrence textile strike, for a full description.
^ The exact total was 1,117 out of 1,544[61]
^ The tally was Coolidge 317,774, Long 192,673.[70]
References
^ "John Coolidge, Guardian of President's Legacy. Dies at 93". The New York Times. June 4, 2000. Retrieved May 11, 2019. [He] had originally been John Calvin Coolidge, but dropped his first name to avoid confusion and later legally changed it.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, p. 111; McCoy 1967, pp. 75 76.
^ McCoy 1967, pp. 420 421; Greenberg 2006, pp. 49 53.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 500.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 12 13; Greenberg 2006, pp. 1 7.
^ Fieldstadt, Elisha (April 22, 2021). "Presidents ranked from worst to best". CBS News. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2021.
^ "Significant Papers   Coolidge Prosperity Gave America the Reserve to Weather the Great Depression". Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation. Retrieved September 27, 2021.
^ "The Pilgrim's Faith: Coolidge and Religion". www.coolidgefoundation.org. Retrieved December 15, 2019.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 22.
^ Coolidge 1929, p. 12.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 17; McCoy 1967, p. 5; White 1938, p. 11.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 12.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 7.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 24.
^ Roberts 1995, p. 199.
^ White 1938, pp. 43 44.
^ Shlaes 2013, pp. 66 68.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 74 81; McCoy 1967, pp. 22 26.
^ Bryson 2013, p. 187.
^ White 1938, p. 61.
^ Shapell, Benjamin; Willen, Sara (July 6, 2017). "The Death of Calvin Coolidge Jr". Shapell Manuscript Foundation. Retrieved April 8, 2019.
^ Remini, Robert V.; Golway, Remini, Terry, eds. (2008). Fellow Citizens: The Penguin Book of U.S. Presidential Inaugural Addresses. Penguin Books. p. 307. ISBN 978-1440631573.
^ "President Coolidge's Burden". The Atlantic. 2003. Retrieved December 12, 2021.
^ Martin 2000.
^ Shlaes 2013, p. 91.
^ Grinder, Darrin; Shaw, Steve (2016). The Presidents & Their Faith: From George Washington to Barack Obama. Elevate Publishing. ISBN 978-1943425778.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, pp. 49 51.
^ White 1938, pp. 51 53.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 83.
^ a b Fuess 1940, pp. 84 85.
^ a b McCoy 1967, p. 29.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 61.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 62; Fuess 1940, p. 99.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 63 66.
^ White 1938, pp. 99 102.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 68 69.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 72.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 106 107; Sobel 1998a, p. 74.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 108.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 76.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 110 111; McCoy 1967, pp. 45 46.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, pp. 79 80; Fuess 1940, p. 111.
^ a b c Coolidge 1919, pp. 2 9.
^ White 1938, p. 105.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 114 115.
^ White 1938, p. 111.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 90 92.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 90; Fuess 1940, p. 124.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 92 98; Fuess 1940, pp. 133 136.
^ White 1938, p. 117.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 139 142.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 145.
^ White 1938, p. 125.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 151 152.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 107 110.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 112.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 115; McCoy 1967, p. 76.
^ Russell 1975, pp. 77 79; Sobel 1998a, p. 129.
^ Russell 1975, pp. 86 87.
^ Russell 1975, pp. 111 113; Sobel 1998a, pp. 133 136.
^ a b Russell 1975, p. 113.
^ White 1938, pp. 162 164.
^ Russell 1975, p. 120.
^ Coolidge 1919, pp. 222 224.
^ White 1938, pp. 164 165.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 142.
^ Russell 1975, pp. 182 183.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, p. 143.
^ Shlaes 2013, pp. 174 179.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 238.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 239 243; McCoy 1967, pp. 102 113.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 117; Fuess 1940, p. 195.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 186.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 187; McCoy 1967, p. 81.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 187 188.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 152 153.
^ White 1938, pp. 198 199.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 259 260.
^ White 1938, pp. 211 213.
^ a b c Sobel 1998a, pp. 204 212.
^ White 1938, pp. 217 219.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 210 211.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 219; McCoy 1967, p. 136.
^ Appleby, Joyce; Brinkley, Alan; Broussard, Albert S.; McPherson, James M.; Ritchie, Donald A. (2010). The American vision : modern times. Appleby, Joyce, 1929 2016, National Geographic Society (U.S.) (Teacher wraparound ed.). Columbus, Ohio: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill. p. 364. ISBN 978-0078775154. OCLC 227926730.
^ Hannaford, p. 169.
^ "Coolidge for a New Arms Conference; Demands Constructive Federal Thrift; Favors Participation in German Loan  Sees Hope in Dawes Plan  Proposes Limitation Parley After Reparations Settlement  Intends to Punish Graft  Some Public Officers Guilty, He Says at Associated Press Annual Luncheon  Hears Political Reports  Though All Callers Except Col. George Harvey Describe Their Visits as Formal". The New York Times. April 23, 1924. p. 2. Retrieved June 10, 2019.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 217.
^ Cordery 2008, p. 302.
^ Bryson 2013, p. [page needed].
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 243.
^ Greenberg 2006, p. 60.
^ Buckley, pp. 593 626.
^ Gilbert, pp. 87 109.
^ Greenberg 2006, p. 9.
^ a b Fuess 1940, pp. 308 309.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 310 315.
^ a b c "Confirms Daugherty's Story of Coolidge's Second Oath".
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 226 228; Fuess 1940, pp. 303 205; Ferrell 1998, pp. 43 51.
^ White 1938, p. 265.
^ White 1938, pp. 272 277.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 328 329; Sobel 1998a, pp. 248 49.
^ Shlaes 2013, p. 271.
^ a b Fuess 1940, pp. 320 322.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 341.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 342; Sobel 1998a, p. 269.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 278 279.
^ Madsen 2015, p. 168.
^ Kappler 1929.
^ Landry 2016.
^ a b Fuess 1940, pp. 345 346.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 300.
^ Coolidge 1929, p. 190.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 300 301.
^ Sobel 1998a, pp. 302 303.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 354.
^ Shlaes 2013, p. 324.
^ Ferrell 1998, pp. 64 65.
^ Ferrell 1998, pp. 66 72; Sobel 1998a, p. 318.
^ Ferrell 1998, p. 72.
^ Sobel 1998b.
^ Greenberg 2006, p. 47; Ferrell 1998, p. 62.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, pp. 310 311; Greenberg 2006, pp. 127 129.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, pp. 310 311; Fuess 1940, pp. 382 383.
^ a b Ferrell 1998, p. 170.
^ Ferrell 1998, p. 174.
^ Rader, Benjamin (1971). Federal Taxation in the 1920s: A Re-examination. Historian. pp. 432 433.
^ Ferrell 1998, p. 84; McCoy 1967, pp. 234 235.
^ McCoy 1967, p. 235.
^ a b Fuess 1940, pp. 383 384.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, p. 327.
^ a b Fuess 1940, p. 388; Ferrell 1998, p. 93.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 331.
^ Ferrell 1998, p. 86.
^ a b Sobel 1998a, p. 315; Barry 1997, pp. 286 287; Greenberg 2006, pp. 132 135.
^ McCoy 1967, pp. 330 331.
^ Barry 1997, pp. 372 274.
^ Greenberg 2006, p. 135.
^ Roberts 2014, p. 209.
^ Shlaes 2013, p. 6.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 250; McCoy 1967, pp. 328 329.
^ s:Calvin Coolidge's First State of the Union Address
^ Deloria 1992, p. 91.
^ Coolidge 1926, pp. 31 36.
^ Coolidge 1926, pp. 159 56.
^ "Calvin Coolidge: Foreign Affairs | Miller Center". Miller Center. October 4, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2018.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 342.
^ Joel Webster. "Coolidge against the world: Peace, prosperity, and foreign policy in the 1920s". James Madison University. Retrieved February 1, 2020.
^ a b McCoy 1967, pp. 184 185.
^ McCoy 1967, p. 360.
^ McCoy 1967, p. 363.
^ a b Greenberg 2006, pp. 114 116.
^ "Dawes Plan | World War I reparations". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved October 28, 2018.
^ Marriott, Leo. (2005). Treaty cruisers : the world's first international warship building competition. Barnsley: Pen & Sword Maritime. p. 12. ISBN 1844151883. OCLC 60668374.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 421 423.
^ McCoy 1967, pp. 380 381; Greenberg 2006, pp. 123 124.
^ McCoy 1967, p. 181.
^ a b c "Foreign Policy". coolidgefoundation.org. Retrieved October 28, 2018.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 349.
^ McCoy 1967, pp. 178 179.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 414 417; Ferrell 1998, pp. 122 123.
^ Miller Center 2016.
^ Historian 2018.
^ Kim 2014.
^ "The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System". Saint Lawrence Seaway. March 20, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2018.
^ Greenberg 2006, pp. 48 49.
^ Rusnak 1983, pp. 270 271.
^ Polsky & Tkacheva 2002, pp. 224 227.
^ Greenberg 2006, pp. 111 112.
^ Senate Historian 2014.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 364.
^ Handler 1995, pp. 113 122.
^ Galston, passim.
^ Freeman 2002, p. 216.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 370.
^ White 1938, p. 361.
^ Coolidge 1929, p. 239.
^ Ferrell 1998, p. 195.
^ Clemens & Daggett 1945, pp. 147 63.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 407.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 450 455.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 403; Ferrell 1998, pp. 201 202.
^ Fuess 1940, pp. 457 459; Greenberg 2006, p. 153.
^ Fuess 1940, p. 460.
^ Greenberg 2006, pp. 154 155.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 410.
^ Greenberg 2006, p. 7.
^ Sobel 1998a, p. 252.
^ Williams, Emrys (1967). "The Presidential address". Radio and Electronic Engineer. 33 (1): 1. doi:10.1049/ree.1967.0001. ISSN 0033-7722.
^ de Forest 1924.
^ Mashon, Mike (November 3, 2016). "Silent Cal, Not So Silent | Now See Hear!". blogs.loc.gov. Retrieved February 9, 2019.
^ "Medal of Honor will be awarded to Lindbergh". UPI. May 23, 1927. Retrieved February 9, 2019.
^ Unknown (1927). "Lindbergh honored by President Calvin Coolidge". Periscope Film. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved February 9, 2019.
Works cited
External video Q&A interview with Amity Shlaes on Coolidge, February 10, 2013, C-SPAN Booknotes interview with Robert Sobel on Coolidge: An American Enigma, August 30, 1998, C-SPAN
About Coolidge and his era
"Confirms Daugherty's Story of Coolidge's Second Oath". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. St. Louis, Missouri. Associated Press. February 2, 1932. p. 1C. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
Barry, John M. (1997). Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed America. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0684840024.
Buckley, Kerry W. (December 2003). "'A President for the "Great Silent Majority': Bruce Barton's Construction of Calvin Coolidge". The New England Quarterly. 76 (4): 593 626. doi:10.2307/1559844. JSTOR 1559844.
Bryson, Bill (2013), One Summer: America, 1927, New York: Doubleday, ISBN 978-0767919401
Clemens, Cyril; Daggett, Athern P. (1945), "Coolidge's "I Do Not Choose to Run": Granite or Putty?", The New England Quarterly, 18 (2): 147 163, doi:10.2307/361282, JSTOR 361282
Cordery, Stacy A. (2008). Alice: Alice Roosevelt Longworth, from White House Princess to Washington Power Broker. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0143114277.
Deloria, Vincent (1992). American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0806124247.
Ferrell, Robert H. (1998). The Presidency of Calvin Coolidge. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0700608928.
Freeman, Jo (2002). A Room at a Time: How Women Entered Party Politics. Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 978-0847698059.
de Forest, Lee (1924). "President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground (1924)". Retrieved February 4, 2007.
Fuess, Claude Moore (1940). Calvin Coolidge: The Man from Vermont. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-1406756739.
Galston, Miriam (November 1995). "Activism and Restraint: The Evolution of Harlan Fiske Stone's Judicial Philosophy". Tulane Law Revue. 70: 137.
Gilbert, Robert E. (2005). "Calvin Coolidge's Tragic Presidency: the Political Effects of Bereavement and Depression". Journal of American Studies. 39 (1): 87 109. doi:10.1017/S0021875805009266. JSTOR 27557598.
Greenberg, David (2006). Calvin Coolidge. The American Presidents Series. Times Books. ISBN 978-0805069570.
Handler, Milton C. (December 1995). "Clerking for Justice Harlan Fiske Stone". Journal of Supreme Court History. 20 (1): 113 122. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5818.1995.tb00098.x. ISSN 1059-4329.
Historian (2018). "Travels of President Calvin Coolidge". U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian.
Kappler, Charles (1929). "Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol. IV, Treaties". Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved October 14, 2008.
Kim, Susanna (December 18, 2014). "Here's What Happened the Last Time a US President Visited Cuba". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2016.
Landry, Alysa (July 26, 2016). "First Sitting Prez Adopted by Tribe Starts Desecration of Mount Rushmore". IndianCountryToday.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2018.
Madsen, Deborah L., ed. (2015). The Routledge Companion to Native American Literature. Routledge. p. 168. ISBN 978-1317693192.
Martin, Douglas (June 4, 2000). "John Coolidge, Guardian of President's Legacy. Dies at 93". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
McCoy, Donald R. (1967). Calvin Coolidge: The Quiet President. Macmillan. ISBN 978-1468017779.
Miller Center (2016). "Calvin Coolidge: Foreign Affairs". millercenter.org. Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2016.
Polsky, Andrew J.; Tkacheva, Olesya (Winter 2002). "Legacies versus Politics: Herbert Hoover, Partisan Conflict, and the Symbolic Appeal of Associationalism in the 1920s" (PDF). International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society. 16 (2): 207 235. doi:10.1023/A:1020525029722. hdl:2027.42/43975. JSTOR 20020160. S2CID 142508983. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 20, 2017.
Roberts, Gary Boyd (1995). "Ancestors of American Presidents". The Bimonthly Newsletter of the New England Historic Genealogical Society. 15: 199.
Roberts, Jason (2014). "The Biographical Legacy of Calvin Coolidge and the 1924 Presidential Election".  In Katherine A. S. Sibley (ed.). A Companion to Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover. Wiley Blackwell. ISBN 978-1118834473.
Rusnak, Robert J. (Spring 1983). "Andrew W. Mellon: Reluctant Kingmaker". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 13 (2): 269 278. JSTOR 27547924.
Russell, Francis (1975). A City in Terror: Calvin Coolidge and the 1919 Boston Police Strike. Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0807050330.
Senate Historian (2014). "Charles G. Dawes, 30th Vice President (1925 1929)". US Senate. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
Shlaes, Amity (2013). Coolidge. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0061967559.
Sobel, Robert (1998a). Coolidge: An American Enigma. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-0895264107.
Sobel, Robert (1998b). "Coolidge and American Business". John F. Kennedy Library and Museum. Archived from the original on March 8, 2006.
White, William Allen (1938). A Puritan in Babylon: The Story of Calvin Coolidge. Macmillan.
By Coolidge
Coolidge, Calvin (1919). Have Faith in Massachusetts: A Collection of Speeches and Messages (2nd ed.). Houghton Mifflin.
Coolidge, Calvin (2004) [1926]. Foundations of the Republic: Speeches and Addresses. University Press of the Pacific. ISBN 978-1410215987.
Coolidge, Calvin (1929). The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge. Cosmopolitan Book Corp. ISBN 978-0944951033.
Coolidge, Calvin (2001).  Peter Hannaford (ed.). The Quotable Calvin Coolidge: Sensible Words for a New Century. Images From The Past, Incorporated. ISBN 978-1884592331.
Further reading
Library resources about  Calvin Coolidge 
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Calvin Coolidge
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Ferrell, Robert H. (2008). Grace Coolidge: The People's Lady in Silent Cal's White House. ISBN 978-0700615636. LCCN 2007045737.
Felzenberg, Alvin S. (Fall 1998). "Calvin Coolidge and Race: His Record in Dealing with the Racial Tensions of the 1920s". New England Journal of History. 55 (1): 83 96.
Fuess, Claude M. (1953), "Calvin Coolidge   Twenty Years After" (PDF), Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, 63 (2): 351 369
Hatfield, Mark O. (1997). "Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)". Vice Presidents of the United States, 1789 1993. U.S. Government Printing Office. pp. 347 354.
Postell, Joseph W. "Roaring Against Progressivism: The Principled Conservatism of Calvin Coolidge," in Joseph W. Postell and Johnathan O'Neill, eds.  Toward an American Conservatism: Constitutional Conservatism during the Progressive Era (2013) pp. 181 208.
Russell, Francis.  Coolidge and the Boston Police Strike.  Antioch Review 16#4 (1956), pp. 403 15. online
Tacoma, Thomas J. The Political Thought of Calvin Coolidge: Burkean Americanist (Lexington Books, 2020).
Tacoma, Thomas. "Calvin Coolidge and the Great Depression: A New Assessment." Independent Review 24.3 (2019): 361 380. online
Zibel, Howard J. "The Role of Calvin Coolidge in the Boston Police Strike of 1919," Industrial and Labor Relations Forum 6, no. 3 (November 1969): 299 318
Primary sources
Coolidge, Calvin (1964).  Howard H. Quint and Robert H. Ferrell (ed.). The Talkative President: The Off the Record Press Conferences of Calvin Coolidge. University of Massachusetts Press.
Coolidge, Grace (1992).  Wikander, Lawrence E.; Ferrell, Robert H. (eds.). Grace Coolidge: An Autobiography. High Plains Pub. Co. ISBN 978-1881019015. LCCN 92072825.
External links
Calvin Coolidge  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from Wikisource
White House biography
United States Congress. "Calvin Coolidge (id: C000738)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library & Museum
Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation
Text of a number of Coolidge speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs
Calvin Coolidge collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Calvin Coolidge: A Resource Guide, Library of Congress
Works by Calvin Coolidge at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Calvin Coolidge at Internet Archive
President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground, the first presidential film with sound recording
Calvin Coolidge at Curlie
"Life Portrait of Calvin Coolidge", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, September 27, 1999
Calvin Coolidge Personal Manuscripts
Appearances on C-SPAN
Calvin Coolidge at IMDb 
Newspaper clippings about Calvin Coolidge in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
vteCalvin Coolidge
30th President of the United States (1923 1929)
29th Vice President of the United States (1921 1923)
48th Governor of Massachusetts (1919 1921)
Life
Early life and family history
Boyhood home and first inauguration site
gravesite
Calvin Coolidge House
Early career and marriage
Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts
Boston police strike (1919)
Vice Presidency
Retirement and death
Presidential Library and Museum
Presidency
First inauguration
Second inauguration
Industry and trade
Taxation (Revenue Act of 1924, Revenue Act of 1926, Revenue Act of 1928)
Allegheny National Forest
Civil rights (Indian Citizenship Act of 1924)
Immigration Act of 1924
Clarke McNary Act
World War Adjusted Compensation Act (1924)
Opposition to farm subsidies (McNary Haugen Farm Relief Bill)
Judiciary Act of 1925
Flood control (Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, Flood Control Act of 1928)
State of the Union Addresses (1926
1927)
"I do not choose to run" (1927)
Radio Act of 1927
Federal Radio Commission
Equal-time rule
Brave Little State of Vermont speech (1928)
McSweeney-McNary Act of 1928
Foreign policy (Banana Wars, United States occupation of Nicaragua (1912 1933), United States occupation of Haiti (1915 1934), United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916 1924), Washington Naval Treaty (1922), Kellogg Briand Pact (1928)
Presidential transition of Herbert Hoover
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
Harlan F. Stone Supreme Court nominations
Elections
1918 Massachusetts gubernatorial election
1919 Massachusetts gubernatorial election
1920 Republican National Convention
1920 United States presidential election
1924 Republican National Convention
1924 United States presidential election
Books
The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge (1929)
Public image
Things named after Coolidge
Sesquicentennial half dollar
U.S. postage stamps
Coolidge effect
SS President Coolidge
Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries)
Family
Grace Coolidge (wife)
John Coolidge (son)
John Calvin Coolidge Sr. (father)
Calvin Galusha Coolidge (grandfather)
Arthur Brown, Olympia Brown, Charles A. Coolidge (cousins)
Marcus A. Coolidge, Arthur W. Coolidge, Martha Coolidge, Carlos Coolidge (distant relations)
Edmund Rice (ancestor)
Rob Roy (family dog)
Rebecca (pet raccoon)
  Warren G. Harding
Herbert Hoover  
  Thomas R. Marshall
Charles G. Dawes  
 Category
Offices and distinctions
Massachusetts House of Representatives
Preceded byMoses M. Bassett
 Member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives 1907 1909
Succeeded byCharles A. Montgomery
Massachusetts Senate
Preceded byAllen T. Treadway
 Member of the Massachusetts Senate 1912 1915
Succeeded byJohn B. Hull
Political offices
Preceded byJames W. O'Brien
 Mayor of Northampton, Massachusetts 1910 1912
Succeeded byWilliam Feiker
Preceded byLevi H. Greenwood
 President of the Massachusetts Senate 1914 1915
Succeeded byHenry Gordon Wells
Preceded byGrafton D. Cushing
 Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts 1916 1919
Succeeded byChanning H. Cox
Preceded bySamuel W. McCall
 Governor of Massachusetts 1919 1921
Preceded byThomas R. Marshall
 Vice President of the United States 1921 1923
Succeeded byCharles G. Dawes
Preceded byWarren G. Harding
 President of the United States 1923 1929
Succeeded byHerbert Hoover
Party political offices
Preceded bySamuel W. McCall
 Republican nominee for Governor of Massachusetts 1918, 1919
Succeeded byChanning H. Cox
Preceded byCharles W. Fairbanks
 Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1920
Succeeded byFrank Orren LowdenWithdrew
Preceded byWarren G. Harding
 Republican nominee for President of the United States 1924
Succeeded byHerbert Hoover
Articles related to Calvin Coolidge
vtePresidents of the United StatesPresidents andpresidencies
George Washington (1789 1797)
John Adams (1797 1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801 1809)
James Madison (1809 1817)
James Monroe (1817 1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825 1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829 1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837 1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841 1845)
James K. Polk (1845 1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849 1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850 1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853 1857)
James Buchanan (1857 1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865 1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869 1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877 1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881 1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885 1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889 1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893 1897)
William McKinley (1897 1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901 1909)
William Howard Taft (1909 1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913 1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929 1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945 1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953 1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961 1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 1969)
Richard Nixon (1969 1974)
Gerald Ford (1974 1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977 1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981 1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
Bill Clinton (1993 2001)
George W. Bush (2001 2009)
Barack Obama (2009 2017)
Donald Trump (2017 2021)
Joe Biden (2021 present)
Presidencytimelines
Washington
McKinley
T. Roosevelt
Taft
Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama
Trump
Biden
 Category
 List
vteCabinet of President Calvin Coolidge (1923 1929)Vice President
None (1923 1925)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Secretary of State
Charles Evans Hughes (1923 1925)
Frank B. Kellogg (1925 1929)
Secretary of the Treasury
Andrew Mellon (1923 1929)
Secretary of War
John W. Weeks (1923 1925)
Dwight F. Davis (1925 1929)
Attorney General
Harry M. Daugherty (1923 1924)
Harlan F. Stone (1924 1925)
John G. Sargent (1925 1929)
Postmaster General
Harry Stewart New (1923 1929)
Secretary of the Navy
Edwin Denby (1923 1924)
Curtis D. Wilbur (1924 1929)
Secretary of the Interior
Hubert Work (1923 1928)
Roy Owen West (1928 1929)
Secretary of Agriculture
Henry Cantwell Wallace (1923 1924)
Howard Mason Gore (1924 1925)
William Marion Jardine (1925 1929)
Secretary of Commerce
Herbert Hoover (1923 1928)
William F. Whiting (1928 1929)
Secretary of Labor
James J. Davis (1923 1929)
vteVice presidents of the United States
John Adams (1789 1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797 1801)
Aaron Burr (1801 1805)
George Clinton (1805 1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813 1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817 1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825 1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833 1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837 1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845 1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849 1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857 1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861 1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869 1873)
Henry Wilson (1873 1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877 1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889 1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893 1897)
Garret Hobart (1897 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905 1909)
James S. Sherman (1909 1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913 1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925 1929)
Charles Curtis (1929 1933)
John N. Garner (1933 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941 1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949 1953)
Richard Nixon (1953 1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961 1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965 1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973 1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974 1977)
Walter Mondale (1977 1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981 1989)
Dan Quayle (1989 1993)
Al Gore (1993 2001)
Dick Cheney (2001 2009)
Joe Biden (2009 2017)
Mike Pence (2017 2021)
Kamala Harris (2021 present)
 Category
 Commons
 List
vteCabinet of President Warren G. Harding (1921 1923)Vice President
Calvin Coolidge (1921 1923)
Secretary of State
Charles Evans Hughes (1921 1923)
Secretary of the Treasury
Andrew Mellon (1921 1923)
Secretary of War
John W. Weeks  (1921 1923)
Attorney General
Harry M. Daugherty (1921 1923)
Postmaster General
Will H. Hays (1921 1922)
Hubert Work (1922 1923)
Harry Stewart New (1923)
Secretary of the Navy
Edwin Denby (1921 1923)
Secretary of the Interior
Albert B. Fall (1921 1923)
Hubert Work (1923)
Secretary of Agriculture
Henry Cantwell Wallace (1921 1923)
Secretary of Commerce
Herbert Hoover (1921 1923)
Secretary of Labor
James J. Davis (1921 1923)
vteRepublican Party
History
National Union Party
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System
Presidentialticketsandnationalconventions
1856 (Philadelphia): Fr mont/Dayton
1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin
1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson
1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax
1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson
1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler
1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur
1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan
1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton
1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid
1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart
1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt
1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks
1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman
1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler
1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks
1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge
1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes
1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis
1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis
1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox
1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary
1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker
1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren
1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon
1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon
1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge
1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller
1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew
1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole
1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush
1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle
1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp
2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney
2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin
2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan
2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence
2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence
2024 (Milwaukee)
Presidentialadministrations
Lincoln (1861 1865)
Johnson (1865 1868)
Grant (1869 1877)
Hayes (1877 1881)
Garfield (1881)
Arthur (1881 1885)
Harrison (1889 1893)
McKinley (1897 1901)
Roosevelt (1901 1909)
Taft (1909 1913)
Harding (1921 1923)
Coolidge (1923 1929)
Hoover (1929 1933)
Eisenhower (1953 1961)
Nixon (1969 1974)
Ford (1974 1977)
Reagan (1981 1989)
G. H. W. Bush (1989 1993)
G. W. Bush (2001 2009)
Trump (2017 2021)
U.S. SenateleadersandConferencechairs
J. P. Hale (1859 1862)
Anthony (1862 1884)
Sherman (1884 1885)
Edmunds (1885 1891)
Sherman (1891 1897)
Allison (1897 1908)
E. Hale (1908 1911)
Cullom (1911 1913)
Gallinger (1913 1918)
Lodge (1918 1924)
Curtis (1924 1929)
Watson (1929 1933)
McNary (1933 1940)
Austin (1940 1941)
McNary (1941 1944)
White (1944 1949)
Wherry (1949 1952)
Bridges (1952 1953)
Taft (1953)
Knowland (1953 1959)
Dirksen (1959 1969)
Scott (1969 1977)
Baker (1977 1979)
Stevens (1979 1980)
Baker (1980 1985)
Dole (1985 1996)
Lott (1996 2003)
Frist (2003 2007)
McConnell (2007 )
U.S. Houseleaders,Speakers,andConferencechairs
Pennington (1860 1861)
Grow (1861 1863)
Colfax (1863 1869)
Pomeroy (1869)
Blaine (1869 1875)
McCrary (1875 1877)
Hale (1877 1879)
Frye (1879 1881)
Keifer (1881 1883)
Cannon (1883 1889)
Reed (1889 1891)
T. J. Henderson (1891 1895)
Reed (1895 1899)
D. B. Henderson (1899 1903)
Cannon (1903 1911)
Mann (1911 1919)
Gillett (1919 1925)
Longworth (1925 1931)
Snell (1931 1939)
Martin (1939 1959)
Halleck (1959 1965)
Ford (1965 1973)
Rhodes (1973 1981)
Michel (1981 1995)
Gingrich (1995 1999)
Hastert (1999 2007)
Boehner (2007 2015)
Ryan (2015 2019)
McCarthy (2019 )
RNCChairs
Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Campbell
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Mart nez/Duncan
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
McDaniel
Chair elections
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Parties bystate andterritoryState
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Territory
American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Affiliated  organizationsFundraisinggroups
National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Redistricting Trust
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Governors Association
Sectionalgroups
College Republicans
Chairmen
Congressional Hispanic Conference
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans
Republicans Overseas
Factionalgroups
Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
Republican Governance Group
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List
Related
Primaries
Debates
Bibliography
International Democrat Union
Timeline of modern American conservatism
Trumpism
vteGovernors of MassachusettsColony  (1629 1686)
Endecott
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Haynes
Vane
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Bellingham
Winthrop
Endecott
T. Dudley
Winthrop
Endecott
T. Dudley
Endecott
Bellingham
Endecott
Bellingham
Leverett
Bradstreet
Dominion  (1686 1689)
J. Dudley
Andros
Bradstreet
Province  (1692 1776)
W. Phips
Stoughton
Bellomont
Stoughton
Governor's Council
J. Dudley
Governor's Council
J. Dudley
Tailer
Shute
Dummer
Burnet
Dummer
Tailer
Belcher
Shirley
S. Phips
Shirley
S. Phips
Governor's Council
Pownall
Hutchinson
Bernard
Hutchinson
Gage
Commonwealth  (since 1776)
Hancock
Cushing
Bowdoin
Hancock
Adams
Sumner
Gill
Governor's Council
Strong
Sullivan
Lincoln Sr.
Gore
Gerry
Strong
Brooks
Eustis
Morton
Lincoln Jr.
Davis
Armstrong
Everett
Morton
Davis
Morton
Briggs
Boutwell
Clifford
E. Washburn
Gardner
Banks
Andrew
Bullock
Claflin
W. Washburn
Talbot
Gaston
Rice
Talbot
Long
Butler
Robinson
Ames
Brackett
Russell
Greenhalge
Wolcott
Crane
Bates
Douglas
Guild
Draper
Foss
Walsh
McCall
Coolidge
Cox
Fuller
Allen
Ely
Curley
Hurley
Saltonstall
Tobin
Bradford
Dever
Herter
Furcolo
Volpe
Peabody
Volpe
Sargent
Dukakis
King
Dukakis
Weld
Cellucci
Swift
Romney
Patrick
Baker
Healey
Italics indicate acting officeholders
vte Lieutenant governors of MassachusettsColony  (1629 1686)
Goffe
Humphrey
T. Dudley
Ludlow
Bellingham
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Bellingham
Endecott
Winthrop
T. Dudley
Endecott
T. Dudley
Endecott
Bellingham
Willoughby
Leverett
Symonds
Bradstreet
Danforth
Dominion  (1686 1689)
Stoughton
Nicholson
Province  (1692 1776)
Stoughton
Povey
Tailer
Dummer
Tailer
S. Phips
Hutchinson
A. Oliver
T. Oliver
Commonwealth  (since 1776)
T. Cushing
B. Lincoln
Adams
Gill
S. Phillips
Robbins
L. Lincoln
Cobb
Gray
W. Phillips
L. Lincoln Jr.
Morton
Winthrop
Armstrong
Hull
Childs
Reed
Cushman
Huntington
Plunkett
Brown
Benchley
Trask
Goodrich
Nesmith
Hayden
Claflin
Tucker
Talbot
Knight
Long
Weston
Ames
Brackett
Haile
Wolcott
Crane
Bates
Guild
Draper
Frothingham
Luce
Walsh
Barry
G. Cushing
C. Coolidge
Cox
Fuller
Allen
Youngman
Bacon
Hurley
Kelly
Cahill
Bradford
A. Coolidge
Sullivan
Whittier
R. Murphy
McLaughin
Bellotti
Richardson
Sargent
Dwight
O'Neill
Kerry
E. Murphy
Cellucci
Swift
Healey
Murray
Polito
Driscoll
vtePresidents of the Massachusetts Senate
Cushing
Powell
Adams
S. Phillips
Adams
Cobb
Otis
J. Bacon
S. Dana
Otis
S. Dana
J. Phillips
Silsbee
Mills
S. Leland
Lathrop
Fowler
Saltonstall
Thorndike
Pickman
Bliss
Mann
M. Lawrence
King
Quincy
P. Leland
Robinson
Quincy
Lincoln
Calhoun
Scudder
Bell
Wilder
Wilson
Warren
Cook
Benchley
Baker
Upham
Phelps
Claflin
Clifford
Field
Pond
Brastow
Pitman
Brastow
H. Coolidge
Loring
Cogswell
Bishop
Crocker
Bruce
Pillsbury
Boardman
Hartwell
Sprague
Pinkerton
Butler
G. Lawrence
Smith
Soule
Jones
W. Dana
Chapple
Treadway
Greenwood
C. Coolidge
H. Wells
McKnight
Allen
W. Wells
G. Bacon
Fish
Moran
Wragg
Cotton
Goodwin
Hunt
A. Coolidge
Nicholson
Richardson
Dolan
Richardson
Furbush
Holmes
Powers
Donahue
Harrington
Bulger
Birmingham
Travaglini
Murray
Rosenberg
Chandler
Spilka
vte(  1916)   1920 United States presidential election   (  1924)Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Warren G. Harding
Vice President: Calvin Coolidge
Other candidates
Leonard Wood
Frank Orren Lowden
Hiram Johnson
William Cameron Sproul
Nicholas Murray Butler
Calvin Coolidge
Robert M. La Follette
Jeter Connelly Pritchard
Miles Poindexter
Howard Sutherland
Herbert Hoover
Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: James M. Cox
Vice President: Franklin D. Roosevelt
Other candidates
William Gibbs McAdoo
A. Mitchell Palmer
Al Smith
John W. Davis
Edward I. Edwards
Woodrow Wilson (incumbent)
Robert Latham Owen
Third party and independent candidatesSocialist Party
Nominee: Eugene V. Debs
VP nominee: Seymour Stedman
Farmer Labor Party
Nominee: Parley P. Christensen
VP nominee: Max S. Hayes
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Aaron S. Watkins
VP nominee: D. Leigh Colvin
American Party
Nominee: James E. Ferguson
VP nominee: William J. Hough
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: William Wesley Cox
VP nominee: August Gillhaus
Single Tax
Nominee: Robert Colvin Macauley
VP nominee: Richard C. Barnum
Other 1920 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1920)   1924 United States presidential election   (  1928)Republican Party(Convention   Primaries)Nominees
President: Calvin Coolidge (incumbent)
Vice President: Charles G. Dawes
Other candidates
Hiram Johnson
Robert M. La Follette
Democratic Party(Convention  Primaries)Nominees
President: John W. Davis
Vice President: Charles W. Bryan
Other candidates
William Gibbs McAdoo
Al Smith
campaign
Oscar Underwood
Progressive PartyNominees
President: Robert M. La Follette
Vice President: Burton K. Wheeler
Other Third party and independent candidatesCommunist Party
Nominee: William Z. Foster
VP nominee: Benjamin Gitlow
Prohibition Party
Nominee: Herman P. Faris
VP nominee: Marie C. Brehm
American Party
Nominee: Gilbert Nations
VP nominee: Charles Hiram Randall
Other 1924 elections: House
Senate
vte(  1928)   1932 United States presidential election   (  1936)Democratic Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Franklin D. Roosevelt
Vice President: John Nance Garner
Other candidates
John Nance Garner
William H. Murray
James A. Reed
Albert Ritchie
Al Smith (campaign)
Republican Party(Convention)Nominees
President: Herbert Hoover (incumbent)
Vice President: Charles Curtis (incumbent)
Other candidates
John J. Blaine
Calvin Coolidge
Joseph I. France
James W. Wadsworth
Third party and independent candidatesCommunist Party
Nominee: William Z. Foster
VP nominee: James W. Ford
Prohibition Party
Nominee: William David Upshaw
Socialist Party
Nominee: Norman Thomas
VP nominee: James H. Maurer
Socialist Labor Party
Nominee: Verne L. Reynolds
VP nominee: John W. Aiken
Independents
James Renshaw Cox
William Hope Harvey
Other 1932 elections: House
Senate
vteConservatism in the United StatesSchools
Compassionate
Fiscal
Fusionism
Libertarian
Social
Neo-
Paleo-
Traditionalist
 The template below (Imagemap American conservatives) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. 
Principles
American exceptionalism
Classical liberalism
Family values
Free market
Free trade
Judeo-Christian values
Limited government
Moral absolutism
Natural law
Protectionism
Republicanism
Rule of law
Tradition
History
Timeline of modern American conservatism
PeoplePresidents
Adams (John)
Adams (John Quincy)
Arthur
G. H. W. Bush
G. W. Bush
Cleveland
Coolidge
Fillmore
Grant
Harding
Harrison
Hoover
McKinley
Nixon
Reagan
W. H. Taft
Taylor
Trump
Tyler
Washington
Supreme Court  justices
Alito
Barrett
Burger
Butler
Fuller
Gorsuch
Harlan
Kavanaugh
Kennedy
McReynolds
O'Connor
Rehnquist
Roberts
Scalia
Sutherland
Thomas
Van Devanter
White
Philosophers
Babbitt
Beale
Bork
Breitbart
Buckley
Burnham
Chambers
Friedman
Gottfried
Kemp
Kirk
Kirkpatrick
Kristol
Leo
Meyer
Negroponte
Olson
Rice
Rothbard
Schlesinger
Sowell
Strauss
Tyrrell
A. Williams
W. E. Williams
Wolfowitz
Other figures
Agnew
Ailes
Atwater
Beck
Boehner
Carlson
Carson
Cheney
Conway
Coulter
Curtis
Cruz
DeSantis
Dole
Elder
Falwell
Frist
Gingrich
Giuliani
Goldwater
Graham
Hannity
Ingraham
Jeb
Koch
LaPierre
Limbaugh
Lodge
Longworth
Lott
Martin
Mercer
McCain
McCarthy
McConnell
Murdoch
Norquist
Novak
O'Reilly
Palin
Rand Paul
Ron Paul
Pence
Perot
Powell
Quayle
Romney
Rove
Rumsfeld
Ryan
Sessions
Schlafly
Shapiro
Stone
R. A. Taft
Parties
American Independent Party
American Party
Conservative Party of New York
Constitution Party
Democratic Party (early factions until the 1890s)
Democratic-Republican Party (elements)
Federalist Party
Native American Party
Prohibition Party
Reform Party
Republican Party
Movements
Asian and Pacific Islander conservatism
Black conservatism
Christian right
Conservative Democrats
Women in conservatism
Green conservatism
LGBT conservatism
Movement
New Right
Old Right
Patriot movement
Radical Right
Right-libertarianism
Rockefeller Republican
Tea Party movement
Trumpism
Historical factions
Bourbon Democrats
Loyalists
Old Right
Southern Agrarians
Scholarly study
The Conservative Illusion (1959)
See also
American nationalism
Bibliography of conservatism in the United States
List of American conservatives
National conservatism
Southern strategy
 Conservatism portal
Portals: Biography 1920s Conservatism Radio United States Politics Law
Authority control International
FAST
2
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Germany
Israel
United States
Sweden
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Poland
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
US Congress
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Calvin_Coolidge&oldid=1146946302"