Type of strong coffee
This article is about the coffee preparation method and the resulting beverage. For other uses, see Espresso (disambiguation).
"Petit noir" redirects here. For French wine grapes also known as Petit noir, see Juran on (grape) and N grette.
EspressoA cup of espresso from Ventimiglia, ItalyTypeHotCountry of origin ItalyIntroduced1901ColorBlack
Espresso (/ spr so / (listen), Italian: [e spr sso]) is a coffee-brewing method of Italian origin,[1] in which a small amount of nearly boiling water (about 90 C or 190 F) is forced under 9 10 bars (900 1,000 kPa; 130 150 psi) of pressure through finely-ground coffee beans. Espresso can be made with a wide variety of coffee beans and roast degrees. Espresso is the most common way of making coffee in southern Europe, especially in Italy, France, Spain, and Portugal. It is also popular in Switzerland, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Chile, Brazil, Australia, and New Zealand.
Espresso is generally thicker than coffee brewed by other methods, with a viscosity similar to that of warm honey. This is due to the higher concentration of suspended and dissolved solids, and the crema on top (a foam with a creamy consistency).[2] As a result of the pressurized brewing process, the flavors and chemicals in a typical cup of espresso are very concentrated. Espresso has more caffeine per unit volume than most coffee beverages, but because its usual serving size is much smaller than (for example) drip-brewed coffee, the caffeine content of a single serving of espresso is generally lower than that of a mug of drip coffee.[3] The actual caffeine content of any coffee drink varies by size, bean origin, roast method, and other factors, but a typical 28 grams (1 ounce) serving of espresso usually contains 64.5 milligrams of caffeine, whereas a typical (8 ounce) serving of drip coffee usually contains 150 to 200 mg.[4][5][6]
The three dispersed phases in espresso are what make this beverage unique. The first dispersed phase is an emulsion of oil droplets. The second phase is suspended solids, while the third is the layer of gas bubbles or foam. The dispersion of very small oil droplets is perceived in the mouth as creamy. This characteristic of espresso contributes to what is known as the body of the beverage. These oil droplets preserve some of the aromatic compounds that are lost to the air in other coffee forms, enhancing the strong flavor of espresso.[7]
Espresso is served on its own, and is also used as the base for various other coffee drinks, including caff  latte, cappuccino, caff  macchiato, caff  mocha, flat white, and caff  Americano.
Brewing[edit]
 Video of how espresso is typically made in the U.S.
 Espresso brewing
 Finely-ground coffee for espresso
Espresso is made by forcing very hot water under high pressure through finely ground compacted coffee. There is no universal standard defining the process of extracting espresso,[8] but several published definitions attempt to constrain the amount and type of ground coffee used, the temperature and pressure of the water, and the rate of extraction.[9][10] Generally, one uses an espresso machine to make espresso.
The act of producing a shot of espresso is often called "pulling" a shot, originating from lever espresso machines, with which a barista pulls down a handle attached to a spring-loaded piston, which forces hot water through the coffee at high pressure. However, it is more common for an electric pump to generate the pressure.[11]
Tamping down the coffee promotes the water's even penetration through the grounds.[12] This process produces a thicker beverage by extracting both solid and dissolved components.
The "crema" is a layer of dense foam that forms on top of the drink.[13][14] It consists of emulsified oils in the ground coffee turned into a colloid, which does not occur in other brewing methods. Crema is produced when water, placed under very high pressure, dissolves more carbon dioxide, a gas present inside the coffee that is produced during the roasting process.[15]
The technical parameters outlined by the Italian Espresso National Institute for making a "certified Italian espresso" are:[16]
Parameter
Value
Portion of ground coffee
7 0.5 g (0.25 0.02 oz)
Exit temperature of water from unit
88 2 C (190 4 F)
Temperature in cup
67 3 C (153 5 F)
Entry water pressure
9 1 bar (900 100 kPa; 131 15 psi)
Percolation time
25   5 seconds
Volume in cup (including crema)
25 2.5 ml (0.88 0.09 imp fl oz; 0.85 0.08 US fl oz)
Espresso roast[edit]
Espresso is both a coffee beverage and a brewing method. It is not a specific bean, bean blend, or roast level. Any bean or roasting level can be used to produce authentic espresso. For example, in southern Italy, a darker roast is generally preferred. Farther north, the trend moves toward slightly lighter roasts, while outside Italy a wide range is popular.[17]
History[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Angelo Moriondo, inventor of an important precursor to the espresso coffee machine. Luigi Bezzera and "caffe espresso" at the World Expo 1906 in Milan.
 A manual espresso machine
 A modern commercial espresso machine
Angelo Moriondo, from Turin, is often erroneously credited for inventing the beverage, since he patented a steam-driven coffee beverage making device in 1884 (No. 33/256), probably the first Italian coffee machine similar to other French and English 1800s steam-driven coffee machines. The device is "almost certainly the first Italian bar machine that controlled the supply of steam and water separately through the coffee" and Moriondo is "certainly one of the earliest discoverers of the expresso  [sic] machine, if not the earliest".[18] Seventeen years later, in 1901, Luigi Bezzera, from Milan, devised and patented several improved versions of the espresso machine, the first of which was applied for on 19 December 1901. Titled "Innovations in the machinery to prepare and immediately serve coffee beverage"; Patent No. 153/94, 61707, was granted on 5 June 1902, and was the first espresso machine.[19] In 1903, the patent was bought by Desiderio Pavoni, who founded the La Pavoni company and began to produce the machine industrially, manufacturing one machine daily in a small workshop in Via Parini, Milan.[20]
A detailed discussion of the spread of espresso is given in (Morris 2007). In Italy, the rise of espresso consumption was associated with industrialization and urbanization, notably in Turin, Genoa, and Milan in northwest Italy.[citation needed]
Italians also spread espresso culture into their East African colonies, Italian Somalia and Italian Eritrea.[21] Under the Fascist regime, coffee consumed standing up was subject to price controls, encouraging the "stand at a bar" culture.[citation needed]
In the English-speaking world, espresso became popular, particularly in the form of cappuccino, owing to the tradition of drinking coffee with milk and the exotic appeal of the foam; in the United States, this was more often in the form of lattes, with or without flavored syrups added. The latte is claimed to have been invented in the 1950s by Italian American Lino Meiorin of Caffe Mediterraneum in Berkeley, California, as a long cappuccino, and was then popularized in Seattle,[22] and then nationally and internationally by Seattle-based Starbucks in the late 1980s and 1990s.
In the United Kingdom, espresso grew in popularity among youth in the 1950s, who felt more welcome in the coffee shops than in pubs. Espresso was initially popular, particularly within the Italian diaspora, growing in popularity with tourism to Italy exposing others to espresso, as developed by Eiscaf s established by Italians in Germany. Initially, expatriate Italian espresso bars were seen as downmarket venues, serving the working-class Italian diaspora and thus providing appeal to the alternative subculture; this can still be seen in the United States in Italian American neighborhoods, such as Boston's North End, New York's Little Italy, and San Francisco's North Beach. As specialty coffee developed in the 1980s (following earlier developments in the 1970s and even 1960s), an indigenous artisanal coffee culture developed, with espresso instead positioned as an upmarket drink.
In the 2010s, coffee culture commentators distinguish large-chain mid-market coffee as "Second Wave Coffee", and upmarket artisanal coffee as "Third Wave Coffee". In the Middle East and Asia, espresso is growing in popularity, with the opening of Western coffee-shop chains.[23][self-published source?]
Trieste is the seat of the Universita del Caffe, founded by Illy in 1999. This center of excellence was created to spread the quality coffee culture through training across the world, educate barista, and conduct research and innovation. Particular attention is paid to the preparation of the espresso and the relevant scientific research. It is also about the correct interaction of coffee and espresso machine.[24]
Caf  vs. home preparation[edit]
See also: Espresso machine A Quickmill 820 home espresso machine
Home espresso machines have increased in popularity with the general rise of interest in espresso. Today, a wide range of home espresso equipment can be found in kitchen and appliance stores, online vendors, and department stores. The first espresso machine for home use was the Gaggia Gilda.[25] Soon afterwards, similar machines such as the Faema Faemina, FE-AR La Peppina and VAM Caravel followed suit in similar form factor and operational principles.[26] These machines still have a small but dedicated share of fans. Until the advent of the first small electrical pump-based espresso machines such as the Gaggia Baby and Quickmill 810, home espresso machines were not widely adopted. In recent years, the increased availability of convenient counter-top fully automatic home espresso makers and pod-based espresso serving systems has increased the quantity of espresso consumed at home. The popularity of home espresso making parallels the increase of home coffee roasting. Some amateurs pursue both home roasting coffee and making espresso.
Etymology and spelling[edit]
 An Italian-American espresso shop
Some English dictionaries translate espresso as "pressed-out",[27] but the word also conveys the senses of expressly for you and quickly:
The words express, expres and espresso each have several meanings in English, French and Italian. The first meaning is to do with the idea of "expressing" or squeezing the flavour from the coffee using the pressure of the steam. The second meaning is to do with speed, as in a train. Finally there is the notion of doing something "expressly" for a person ... The first Bezzera and Pavoni espresso machines in 1906 took 45 seconds to make a cup of coffee, one at a time, expressly for you.[28] 
Modern espresso, using hot water under pressure, as pioneered by Gaggia in the 1940s, was originally called crema caff  (in English, "cream coffee") as seen on old Gaggia machines, due to the crema.[29] This term is no longer used, though crema caff  and variants (caff  crema, caf  crema) still appear in branding.
Variant spelling[edit]
The spelling expresso is mostly considered incorrect, though some sources call it a less common variant.[30] It is common in French and Portuguese. Italy uses the term espresso, substituting s for most x letters in Latin-root words; x is not considered part of the standard Italian alphabet. Italian people commonly refer to it simply as caff  (coffee), espresso being the ordinary coffee to order; the same happens in Portugal (caf ), with some regional variations (bica in Lisbon and cimbalino traditionally in Porto); in Spain, while caf  expreso is seen as the more "formal" denomination, caf  solo (alone, without milk) is the usual way to ask for it when at an espresso bar.
Some sources state that expresso is an incorrect spelling, including Garner's Modern American Usage.[31] While the 'expresso' spelling is recognized as mainstream usage in some American dictionaries,[32][33] some cooking websites call the 'x' variant illegitimate.[34][35][36] Oxford Dictionaries online states "The spelling "expresso" is not used in the original Italian and is strictly incorrect, although it is common."[37] The Oxford English Dictionary and Merriam-Webster call it a variant spelling.[31][38] The Online Etymology Dictionary calls "expresso" a variant of "espresso".[39] The Oxford Dictionary of American Usage and Style (2000) describes the spelling expresso as "wrong", and specifies espresso as the only correct form.[40] The third edition of Fowler's Modern English Usage, published by the Oxford University Press in 1996, noted that the form espresso "has entirely driven out the variant expresso (which was presumably invented under the impression that it meant 'fast, express')".[41]
Shot variables[edit]
See also: Doppio, Ristretto, and Lungo
 Extracting a doppio
 A double ristretto with the first half of the shot in the glass at the bottom of the image, and the second half in the glass on the right
 Caff  lungo
The main variables in a shot of espresso are the "size" and "length".[42][43] This terminology is standardized, but the precise sizes and proportions vary substantially.
Caf s may have a standardized shot (size and length), such as "triple ristretto",[43] only varying the number of shots in espresso-based drinks such as lattes, but not changing the extraction   changing between a double and a triple requires changing the filter basket size, while changing between ristretto, normale, and lungo may require changing the grind, which is less easily accommodated in a busy caf .
Size[edit]
The size can be a single, double, or triple, using a proportional amount of ground coffee, roughly 7, 14, and 21 grams; correspondingly sized filter baskets are used. The Italian multiplier term doppio is often used for a double, with solo and triplo being more rarely used for singles and triples. The single shot is the traditional shot size, being the maximum that could easily be pulled on a lever machine.
Single baskets are sharply tapered or stepped down in diameter to provide comparable depth to the double baskets and, therefore, comparable resistance to water pressure. Most double baskets are gently tapered (the "Faema model"), while others, such as the La Marzocco, have straight sides. Triple baskets are normally straight-sided.
Portafilters will often come with two spouts, usually closely spaced, and a double-size basket   each spout can optionally dispense into a separate cup, yielding two solo-size (but doppio-brewed) shots, or into a single cup (hence the close spacing). True solo shots are rare, with a single shot in a caf  generally being half of a doppio shot.
In espresso-based drinks in America, particularly larger milk-based drinks, a drink with three or four shots of espresso will be called a "triple" or "quad", respectively.
Length[edit]
The length of the shot can be ristretto (or stretto) (reduced), normale or standard (normal), or lungo (long):[44] these may correspond to a smaller or larger drink with the same amount of ground coffee and same level of extraction or to different length of extraction. Proportions vary and the volume (and low density) of crema make volume-based comparisons difficult (precise measurement uses the mass of the drink). Typically ristretto is half the volume of normale, and lungo is double to triple the normale volume. For a double shot, (14 grams of dry coffee), a normale uses about 60 ml of water. A double ristretto, a common form associated with espresso, uses half the amount of water, about 30 ml.
Ristretto, normale, and lungo may not simply be the same shot, stopped at different times[citation needed] which may result in an under-extracted shot (if run too short a time) or an over-extracted shot (if run too long a time).[citation needed] Rather, the grind is adjusted (finer for ristretto, coarser for lungo) so the target volume is achieved by the time extraction finishes.
A significantly longer shot is the caff  crema, which is longer than a lungo, ranging in size from 120 240 ml (4.2 8.4 imp fl oz; 4.1 8.1 US fl oz), and brewed in the same way, with a coarser grind.
The method of adding hot water produces a milder version of original flavor, while passing more water through the load of ground coffee will add other flavors to the espresso, which might be unpleasant for some people.
Nutrition[edit]
Coffee, brewed, espresso, restaurant-preparedNutritional value per 100 g (3.5 oz)Energy8.4 kJ (2.0 kcal)Carbohydrates0.
Fat0.2
Protein0.1
VitaminsQuantity %DV Riboflavin (B2)17% 0.2 mgNiacin (B3)35% 5.2 mg
MineralsQuantity %DV Magnesium23% 80 mg
Other constituentsQuantityWater97.8 gTheobromine0 mgCaffeine212 mg
Link to Full USDA Nutrient Report
Units
 g = micrograms  mg = milligrams
IU = International units
 Percentages are roughly approximated using US recommendations for adults.
In a 100 ml (grams, 3.5 oz) reference amount, espresso has significant levels of dietary mineral magnesium, the B vitamins niacin and riboflavin, and around 212 mg of caffeine per 100 grams of liquid brewed coffee (table).
Espresso-based drinks[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 A traditional macchiato as served in Italy
In addition to being served alone, espresso is frequently blended, notably with milk   either steamed (without significant foam), wet foamed ("microfoam"), or dry foamed, and with hot water. Notable milk-based espresso drinks, in order of size, include: macchiato, cappuccino, flat white, and latte; other milk and espresso combinations include latte macchiato, cortado and gal o, which are made primarily with steamed milk with little or no foam. Espresso and water combinations include Americano and long black. Other combinations include batch-brewed coffee with espresso, sometimes called "red eye" or "shot in the dark".[45]
In order of size, these may be organized as follows:
Traditional macchiato: 35 40 ml, one shot (30 ml) with a small amount of milk (mostly steamed, with slight foam so there is a visible mark)
Modern macchiato: 60 ml or 120 ml, one or two shots (30 or 60 ml), with 1:1 milk
Cortado: 60 ml, one shot with 1:1 milk, little foam
Piccolo Latte: 90 ml, one shot with 1:2 milk, little foam
Gal o: 120 ml, one shot with 1:3 milk, little foam
Flat white: 150 ml, one or two shots (30 or 60 ml), with 1:4 or 2:3 milk, and a small amount (usually 6 mm or 1 4 inch) microfoam.
Cappuccino: a very popular frothed milk and espresso drink with no generally-accepted volume standards, but usually served at 120 to 160 ml, including a single or (more commonly) double shot of espresso.[46]
Latte: 240 600 ml, two or more shots (60 ml), with 1:3 1:9 milk
Dirty: 200 ml, about 150 ml cold milk, one or two shot of espresso pouring over the cold milk directly. Usually served with glass.[47]
Some common combinations may be organized graphically as follows:
mixed with
frothed milk
hot water
espresso is on
top
latte macchiato
long black
bottom
caff  latte
caff  americano
Methods of preparation differ between drinks and between baristas. For macchiatos, cappuccino, flat white, and smaller lattes and Americanos, the espresso is brewed into the cup, then the milk or water is poured in. For larger drinks, where a tall glass will not fit under the brew head, the espresso is brewed into a small cup, then poured into the larger cup; for this purpose a demitasse or specialized espresso brew pitcher may be used. This "pouring into an existing glass" is a defining characteristic of the latte macchiato and classic renditions of the red eye. Alternatively, a glass with "existing" water may have espresso brewed into it   to preserve the crema   in the long black. Brewing onto milk is not generally done.
Alcoholic espresso cocktails[edit]
Caff  corretto
Espresso martini
See also[edit]
Coffee portalDrink portal
List of coffee drinks
List of hot beverages
 Coffee portal
Caffeinated drink
References[edit]
Citations
^ "Espresso Coffee Maker Through History". EspressoCoffeeBrewers.com. 13 December 2017. Retrieved 8 April 2021.
^ Illy, "Il caff  e i cinque sensi" [1]: "La tazzina di porcellana bianca incornicia la crema: una trama sottile nei toni del nocciola, percorsa da leggere striature rossastre"
^ "The Great Debate: Does Espresso or Drip Coffee Have More Caffeine?". Mr. Coffee. 24 October 2014. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2015.
^ "Show Foods". Archived from the original on 24 November 2013.
^ How much caffeine is in your daily habit?   MayoClinic.com
^ "Show Foods". Archived from the original on 22 November 2013.
^ Illy, Andrea (2005). Espresso Coffee: The Science of Quality. Elsevier Academic Press.
^ "Today's Espresso Scene". Home Barista. Retrieved 29 April 2011.
^ "Espresso Coffee". Coffee Research Institute. Retrieved 29 April 2011.
^ "L'Espresso Italiano Certificato" (PDF). Istituto Nazionale Espresso Italiano. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2006. Retrieved 29 April 2011.
^ Davids, Kenneth (15 October 2013). Espresso: Ultimate Coffee, Second Edition. St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4668-5477-2.
^ "Espresso Tamping". CoffeeResearch.org. Retrieved 8 December 2013.
^ "What is Crema?". seattlecoffeegear. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2013.
^ "Espresso Crema". ChemistryViews.org. Retrieved 8 October 2014.
^ Hoffmann, James (2018). The World Atlas of Coffee 2nd Edition. Great Britain: Mitchell Beazley. p. 96. ISBN 978-1-78472-429-0.
^ "Espresso Italiano Certificato" (PDF). Istituto Nazionale Espresso Italiano. Retrieved 15 February 2013.
^ Illy, Francesco; Illy, Riccardo (1992). The book of coffee : a gourmet's guide (1st American ed.). New York: Abbeville Press. ISBN 978-1558593213.
^ Bersten 1993, p. 105.
^ "ESPRESSO BASICS : HISTORY". coffeereview.com.
^ Stamp, Jimmy. "The Long History of the Espresso Machine". Smithsonian. Retrieved 4 April 2019.
^ "Roger Blench: Postcard from Eritrea". RogerBlench.info. Retrieved 16 November 2021.
^ "Invention of the Caffe Latte". Caffe Mediterraneum. Archived from the original on 14 June 2009. Retrieved 19 April 2009.
^ Hutchins, Timothy (3 July 2017). Coffee Culture. Lulu.com. ISBN 9781387074518.[self-published source]
^ Almut Siefert "Zu Besuch in der Kaffee-Universit t in Triest. Eine Bohne kann alles verderben." In: Stuttgarter Zeitung, 27 September 2019.
^ Bersten 1993, p. 131.
^ Bersten 1993, p. 132-133.
^ "espresso". Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University press. 1989. Retrieved 30 October 2009.
^ Bersten 1993, p. 99.
^ Morris 2007.
^ "Expresso - Define Expresso at Dictionary.com". Dictionary.com.
^ a b Ben Yagoda (18 August 2014). "Espresso or expresso? The x spelling actually has considerable historical precedent". Slate Magazine.
^ Expresso   Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Merriam-webster.com (13 August 2010). Retrieved on 13 February 2011.
^ Expresso | Define Expresso at Dictionary.com. Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved on 13 February 2011.
^ What is espresso? Or is it expresso?. Homecooking.about.com (14 June 2010). Retrieved on 13 February 2011.
^ What is Espresso. Espresso People. Retrieved on 13 February 2011.  Archived 1 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ "The Great Debate: Espresso vs. Expresso". Espresso Blog. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015.
^ Definition of espresso from Oxford Dictionaries Online. Oxforddictionaries.com. Retrieved on 13 February 2011.
^ "Expresso   Definition of Expresso by Merriam-Webster".
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary".
^ Garner 2000, pp. 129 130.
^ Burchfield 1996, p. 286.
^ "Brewing ratios for espresso beverages - Home-Barista.com".
^ a b Anatomy of a Triple Ristretto Archived 9 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine, by Jeremy Gauger, Gimme Coffee, 17 March 2009   images and explanation
^ Hofmann, Paul (7 August 1983). "Fare of the Country: In Italy, Espresso is the Elixir of Life". Retrieved 25 March 2018.
^ Kevin, Sinnott (2010). The art and craft of coffee: an enthusiast's guide to selecting, roasting, and brewing exquisite coffee. Beverly, Mass.: Quarry Books. p. 160. ISBN 9781592535637. OCLC 437298903.
^ Ortved, John (29 September 2015). "Is That Cappuccino You're Drinking Really a Cappuccino?". The New York Times.
^ "What Is A Dirty Coffee?". Above Average Coffee. 30 December 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2021.
Sources
Bersten, Ian (1993). Coffee Floats Tea Sinks: Through History and Technology to a Complete Understanding. Helian Books. ISBN 0-646-09180-8.
Burchfield, R. W. (1996). Fowler's Modern English Usage (third ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-869126-6.
Garner, Bryan (2000). The Oxford Dictionary of American Usage and Style. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513508-4.
Morris, Jonathan (2007), "The Cappuccino Conquests. The Transnational History of Italian Coffee", Academia.org, University of Hertfordshire
Further reading[edit]
Davids, Kenneth (2013). Coffee: A Guide to Buying, Brewing, and Enjoying (5 ed.). St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1466854420.
Fumagalli, Ambrogio (1995). Coffee Makers. Chronicle Books. ISBN 0-8118-1082-8.
Illy, Andrea; Viani, Rinantonio (2005). Espresso: The Science of Quality. Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-370371-9.
Illy, Francesco; Illy, Riccardo (1989). The Book of Coffee. Milano: Abbeville Press. ISBN 1-55859-321-7.
Schomer, David C. Espresso Coffee: Professional Techniques. 1996.
External links[edit]
 The dictionary definition of espresso at Wiktionary
 Media related to Espresso at Wikimedia Commons
vte Cuisine of ItalyHistory
Ancient Roman cuisine
Medieval cuisine
Early modern cuisine
Contemporary cuisine
Regional cuisines
Abruzzese
Apulian
Arb resh 
Ligurian
Lombard
Lucanian
Neapolitan
Roman
Sardinian
Sicilian
Venetian
Pasta and sauces
Pasta (List)
Carbonara
Pesto
Rag 
Neapolitan rag 
Arrabbiata sauce
Amatriciana sauce
Marinara sauce
Genovese sauce
Bolognese sauce
Checca sauce
Fettuccine Alfredo
Pasta alla Norma
Pasta con i peperoni cruschi
Pasta con le sarde
Pasta e fagioli
Pasta al pomodoro
Pasta all'Ortolana
Rigatoni con la Pajata
Cacio e pepe
Spaghetti aglio e olio
Spaghetti alla puttanesca
Spaghetti alle vongole
Tumact me tulez
Soups
Soup alla canavese
Soup alla modenese
Acquacotta
Bagnun
Minestrone
Ribollita
Other dishes (List)
Bagna c uda
Braciola
Bruschetta
Cotoletta
Cotoletta alla milanese
Crostino
Bollito misto
Baccal  alla lucana
Baccal  alla vicentina
Cacciatore
Cacciucco
Caponata
Cappon magro
Caprese salad
Carciofi alla romana
Carpaccio
Carne pizzaiola
Cassoeula
Ciambotta
Ciccioli
Coda alla vaccinara
Fiorentina
Fondue
Frico
Frittata
Fr ttuli
Istrian stew
Lampredotto
Polenta
Porchetta
Panzanella
Parmigiana
Ossobuco
Orzotto
Rafanata
Risotto
Rollatini
Saltimbocca
Scaloppine
Timballo
Vitello tonnato
Pizza and street food
Pizza
al taglio
Neapolitan pizza
Sicilian pizza
Focaccia
Piscialandrea
Calzone
Panzerotti
Crocch 
Arancini
Suppl 
Frittula
Panelle
Pani c  meusa
Panino
Piadina
Arrosticini
Farinata
Tramezzino
Zippuli
Sardenara
Scaccia
U' pastizz 'rtunnar
Cheeses and charcuterie
Cheeses
PDO
Salumi
Pastry and desserts (List)
Bocconotto
Bombolone
Bruttiboni
Buccellato
Budino
Cannoli
Cantuccini
Cassata
Cassatella di sant'Agata
Castagnaccio
Cavallucci
Colomba di Pasqua
Crostata
Crocetta of Caltanissetta
Gelato
Granita
Grattachecca
Marzipan
Mustacciuoli
Neapolitan ice cream
Neccio
Pandoro
Panettone
Panforte
Panna cotta
Panpepato
Parrozzo
Pastiera
Pignolata
Pizzelle
Ricciarelli
Seada
Semifreddo
Sfogliatelle
Sorbetto
Sponge cake
Spumoni
Struffoli
Tartufo
Tiramisu
Torrone
Torta caprese
Zabaione
Zeppole
Zuccotto
Zuppa Inglese
Breads
Borlengo
Breadstick
Ciabatta
Coppia Ferrarese
Filone
Michetta
Pane carasau
Pane di Altamura
Pane sciocco
Sgabeo
Taralli
Vastedda
Wines
Varieties
IGT
DOCG
DOC
Abruzzo
Calabrian
Friulan
Lombardy
Piedmont
Tuscan
Veneto
Alcoholic beverages
Beer
Grappa
Sambuca
Mirto
Vermouth
Spritz
Limoncello
Fernet
Campari
Aperol
Cynar
Amaro
Amaretto
Nocino
Centerbe
Bargnolino
Maraschino
Sassolino
Strega
Rosolio
Galliano
Frangelico
Alchermes
Aurum
Coffee
Caff 
Espresso
Lungo
Ristretto
Doppio
Espressino
Cappuccino
Caffelatte
Latte macchiato
Caff  macchiato
Caff  corretto
Affogato
Mocaccino
Marocchino
Bicerin
Barbajada
Bombardino
See also
Sammarinese cuisine
Italian-American cuisine
Italian food products
Osteria
Trattoria
Enoteca
Sagra
List of Italian chefs
List of Italian dishes
Meal structure
Italian Sounding
 Italy portal
 Food portal
vteCoffeeTopics
Economics
Fair trade
History
International Coffee Day
Single-origin coffee
Third-wave coffee
Production
Coffee production
List of countries by coffee production
Coffee roasting
Coffee wastewater
Decaffeination
Home roasting
Species and varieties
Arabica
Benguet
Blue Mountain
Bonifieur
Bourbon
Geisha
Kona
Maracaturra
Maragogipe
Molokai
S795
Sagada
Charrieriana
Liberica
Barako
Racemosa
Robusta
Sulu
Components
Cafestol
Caffeic acid
Caffeine
Coffee bean
Furan-2-ylmethanethiol
Kahweol
Preparation
AeroPress
Arabic coffee
Jebena
Brewed coffee
Chemex
Cezve
Chorreador
Coffeemaker
Cold brew
nitro
Espresso
doppio
lungo
ristretto
Espresso machine
French press
Instant coffee
Coffee syrup
Knockbox
Moka pot
Neapolitan flip coffee pot
Percolator
Turkish coffee
Vacuum maker
Single-serve coffee container
Coffee drinks
Affogato
Americano
Beaten coffee
Bica
Bicerin
Black Russian
C  ph  s a  
Caf  au lait
Caf  com cheirinho
Caf  con leche
Caf  de olla
Caf  Touba
Caff  corretto
Caff  crema
Caff  macchiato
Caff  mocha
Cappuccino
Carajillo
Coffee cabinet
Coffee milk
Cortado
Caf  Cubano
Dalgona coffee
Egg coffee
Espresso
Flat white
Frapp  coffee
Frappuccino
Gal o
Garoto
Gassosa al caff 
Iced coffee
Indian filter coffee
Ipoh white coffee
Irish coffee
Karsk
Kopi
Kopi luwak
Kopi tubruk
Kurdish coffee
Latte macchiato
Latte
Liqueur coffee
Long black
Lungo
Marocchino
Mazagran
Moretta
Oliang
Raf coffee
Red eye
Ristretto
R desheimer Kaffee
Tenom coffee
Turkish coffee
White coffee
White Russian
Wiener Melange
Yuenyeung
Organization lists
Bakery caf s
Coffee companies
Coffeehouses
Lifestyle
Barista
Bikini barista
Caff  sospeso
Coffee break
Coffee ceremony of Ethiopia and Eritrea
CoffeeCon
Coffee culture
Coffee cupping
Coffee palace
Coffeehouse
Historical coffeehouses
Kopi tiam
Latte art
Viennese coffee house
Substitutes
Barley coffee
Barley tea
Barleycup
Caro
Cereal coffee
Chicory
Dandelion coffee
Inka
Maya nut
Postum
Qishr
Serving vessels
Coffee cup
sleeve
Cezve
Demitasse
spoon
Tasse   caf 
Zarf
Competitions
United States Barista Championship
World Barista Championship
World Brewers Cup
Misc.
Coffee and doughnuts
Coffee bag
Coffee service
Coffee leaf rust
Coffee wars
Gustav III of Sweden's coffee experiment
Canned coffee
Coffee vending machine
Used coffee grounds
Sustainable coffee
 Coffee portal
 Category: Coffee
vteCoffee in ItalyRoasters
illy
Lavazza
Massimo Zanetti Beverage Group
Caff  Pascucci
Caff  del Doge
Guglielmo Caff 
Historicalcoffeehouses
Antico Caff  Greco
Caff  Bardi
Caff -Pasticceria Cova
Caff  Florian
Caff  Giubbe Rosse
Caff  Lavena
Caff  Michelangiolo
Caff  Quadri
Caff  San Marco
Caff  Fiorio
Caff  Gambrinus
Gran Caff  Doney
Palazzina Majani, Bologna
Pedrocchi Caf 
Antico Caff  Spinnato
People
Alfonso Bialetti
Francesco Illy
Luigi Lavazza
Angelo Moriondo
Technology
Bialetti
Caffitaly
Cimbali
FrancisFrancis
De'Longhi
Elektra
Faema
Gaggia
La Marzocco
Lelit
Rancilio
Saeco
Smeg
Drinks
Affogato
Barbajada
Bicerin
Bombardino
Caff  corretto
Caff  crema
Caff  macchiato
Espressino
Espresso
Lungo
Ristretto
Doppio
Latte macchiato
Marocchino
Mocaccino
Shakerato
Gassosa al caff 
Moretta
Other
Barista
Caff  sospeso
Easy Serving Espresso Pod
Espresso machine
IperEspresso
ISSpresso
Lavazza A Modo Mio
Moka pot
Neapolitan flip coffee pot
 Coffee portal Italy portal
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Japan
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Espresso&oldid=1149674967"