1927 1949 civil war in China
This article is about the military conflict between the Chinese Communists and Nationalists. For the social and political changes during the war, see Chinese Communist Revolution. For other uses, see Chinese Civil War (disambiguation).
Chinese Civil WarPart of the interwar period, the Cold War (from 1947) and the Cross-Strait conflict (from 1949)Clockwise from top: communist troops at the Battle of Siping; Muslim soldiers of the NRA; Mao Zedong in the 1930s; Chiang Kai-shek inspecting soldiers; CCP general Su Yu inspecting the troops shortly before the Menglianggu campaignDate1 August 1927[1]   26 December 1936 (First phase)(9 years, 4 months, 3 weeks and 4 days)10 August 1945   7 December 1949 (Second phase; de facto)(4 years, 3 months, 3 weeks and 6 days)7 December 1949   present (de jure)(73 years, 4 months and 1 week)LocationMainland China (including Hainan) and its coast, China Burma borderResult
Communist victory on the mainland and then diplomatic field in 1971, Taiwan Strait stalemate.
Major combat ended, but no armistice or peace treaty signed
The Kuomintang Islamic insurgency against the People's Republic of China's rule continued in the provinces of Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, Xinjiang, Yunnan until 1958.
Unretreated KMT forces left in Mainland China destroyed in the campaigns
"Counterrevolutionaries" purged in Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries
De facto existence of Two Chinas
Beginning of the Cross-Strait conflictTerritorialchanges
Chinese Communist Party control of Mainland China, including Hainan
People's Republic of China established in Mainland China
Government of the Republic of China evacuated to the island of TaiwanBelligerents
1927 1937:
 Republic of China
 Kuomintang
 National Revolutionary Army
1927 1937:
 Chinese Communist Party
 Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army
 Chinese Soviet Republic (1931 1937)
 Jiangxi Fujian Soviet (1931 1934)
 Fujian People's Government (1933 1934)
Supported by:
 Soviet Union
 Communist International
1946 1949:
 Republic of China
 Kuomintang
 Republic of China Armed Forces
Supported by:
 United States
1946 1949: Chinese Communist Party
Pre-PLA troops and militia
 Inner Mongolian People's Republic (1945 1945)
 People's Liberation Army
Supported by:
 Soviet Union
1949 present:
 Republic of China
  Republic of China Armed Forces
Supported by:
 United States
1949 present:
 People's Republic of China
 Chinese Communist Party
 People's Liberation Army
Supported by:
 Soviet Union (until 1961)
Commanders and leaders
 Chiang Kai-shek
(Director-General of the Kuomintang)
Other leaders
  Bai Chongxi
  Chen Cheng
  Li Zongren
  Yan Xishan
  He Yingqin
  Hu Zongnan
  Gu Zhutong
  Wei Lihuang
  Du Yuming 
  Sun Li-jen
  Fu Zuoyi 
  Liu Zhi
  Xue Yue
  Wang Yaowu
  Tang Enbo
  Huang Baitao 
  Zhang Lingfu 
  Zhang Xueliang
  Feng Yuxiang
(until 1930)
 Mao Zedong
(Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party)
Other leaders
  Zhu De
  Peng Dehuai
  Zhou Enlai
  Lin Biao
  Liu Bocheng
  He Long
  Chen Yi
  Luo Ronghuan
  Xu Xiangqian
  Nie Rongzhen
  Ye Jianying
  Deng Xiaoping
  Su Yu
  Chen Geng
  Wang Jiaxiang
  Ye Ting 
  Bo Gu 
  Li De
  Zhang Guotao
(until 1936)
Strength
2 million (regular) 2.3 million (militia) (June 1946)[2][3][4]
1.2 million (regular) 2.6 million (militia) (July 1945)[3][5]Casualties and losses
c. 1.5 million (1948 1949)[6][4]
260,000 killed190,000 missing850,000 wounded (1945 1949)[7][6]
Above one estimate 1945 1949 set for combatants, with overall up to 6 million (including civilians)[6]
Early phase, 1928 1937: c. 7 million (including civilians)[8]
Concluding phase, 1945 1949: c. 2.5 million (including civilians)[9]
vteCampaigns of the Chinese Civil War
First Phase (1927 1937)
Autumn Harvest Uprising
Encirclement campaigns
Long March
Resumption of hostilities (1945 1949)
Operation Beleaguer
Northeast China
Liaoshen
Huaihai
Pingjin
Yangtze River
Shanghai
Hainan
Guningtou
Wanshan
Aftermath
Xinjiang
Kuomintang Islamic insurgency
China Burma border
Cross-strait conflict
Chinese Civil WarTraditional Chinese Simplified Chinese Literal meaningKuomintang-Communist Civil WarTranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinGu -G ng N izh nWuRomanizationkoh-gon-ne-tsoeYue: CantoneseJyutpinggwok3 gung6 noi6 zin3Southern MinHokkien POJkok-ki ng l i-chi n
Part of a series onRevolution
Types
Bourgeois
Colour
Communist
Democratic
Nonviolent
Permanent
Proletarian
Social
Wave
Methods
Boycott
Civil disobedience
Civil war
Class conflict
Coup d' tat
Demonstration
Guerrilla warfare
Insurgency
Nonviolent resistance
Protest
Rebellion
Revolutionary terror
Samizdat
Strike action
Tax resistance
Terrorism
Causes
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Capitalism
Collaborationism
Colonialism
Cronyism
Despotism
Dictatorship
Discrimination
Economic depression
Economic inequality
Electoral fraud
Famine
Fascism
Feudalism
Imperialism
Military occupation
Monarchy
Millenarianism
Natural disaster
Nepotism
Persecution
Political corruption
Political repression
Poverty
Tyranny
Totalitarianism
Unemployment
Examples
Neolithic
Commercial
Industrial
English
Atlantic
American
Brabant
Li ge
French
Haitian
Serbian
Greek
Of 1820
Of 1830
Belgian
Texas
Of 1848
Hungarian (1848)
Bulgarian unification
Philippine
1st Iranian
Young Turk
Mexican
Chinese
Of 1917 1923
Russian
German
Spanish
Guatemalan
Chinese Communist
Hungarian (1956)
Cuban
Rwandan
Cultural
Argentine
Nicaraguan
2nd Iranian
Saur
People Power
August Revolution
Carnation
Of 1989
Yogurt
Velvet
Romanian
Singing
Bolivarian
Bulldozer
Rose
Orange
Tulip
Kyrgyz
Arab Spring
Tunisian
Egyptian
Yemeni
Euromaidan
2018 2020 Arab protests
Sudanese
 Politics portalvte
The Chinese Civil War was fought between the Kuomintang-led government of the Republic of China and forces of the Chinese Communist Party, armed conflict continuing intermittently from 1 August 1927 until 7 December 1949, and ending with Communist control of mainland China.
The war is generally divided into two phases with an interlude: from August 1927 to 1937, the KMT-CCP Alliance collapsed during the Northern Expedition, and the Nationalists controlled most of China. From 1937 to 1945, hostilities were mostly put on hold as the Second United Front fought the Japanese invasion of China with eventual help from the Allies of World War II, but even then co-operation between the KMT and CCP was minimal and armed clashes between them were common. Exacerbating the divisions within  China further was that a puppet government, sponsored by Japan and nominally led by Wang Jingwei, was set up to nominally govern the parts of China under Japanese occupation.
The civil war resumed as soon as it became apparent that the Japanese defeat was imminent, and the CCP gained the upper hand in the second phase of the war from 1945 to 1949, generally referred to as the Chinese Communist Revolution.
The Communists gained control of mainland China and established the People's Republic of China in 1949, forcing the leadership of the Republic of China to retreat to the island of Taiwan.[10] Starting in the 1950s, a lasting political and military standoff between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait has ensued, with the ROC in Taiwan and the PRC in mainland China both officially claiming to be the legitimate government of all China. After the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis, both tacitly ceased fire in 1979; however, no armistice or peace treaty has ever been signed.[11]
Background[edit]
History of theRepublic of China (ROC)
Culture
Economy
Education
Geography
Politics
1912 1949Mainland rule
1911 Revolution
Provisional Gov't
Beiyang Government
Warlord Era
Northern Expedition
Shanghai massacre
Chinese Civil War
Nationalist Government
Second Sino-Japanese War
Nanjing Massacre
Constitutional government
1945 presentTaiwan
Retrocession of Taiwan
February 28 Incident
White Terror
Exodus to Taiwan
Korean War
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Vietnam War
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Project National Glory
Three Noes
Lieyu massacre
Wild Lily student movement
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis
Anti-Secession Law
100th anniversary
Sunflower Student Movement
2015 Ma Xi meeting
2017 Summer Universiade
History of
China
the PRC(1949 present)
Taiwan(geographical)
Taipei
Kaohsiung
Beijing
the Kuomintang
the Taiwan issue
 Taiwan portalvte
Following the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the 1911 Revolution, Sun Yat-sen assumed the presidency of the newly formed Republic of China, and was shortly thereafter succeeded by Yuan Shikai.[12][page needed] Yuan was frustrated in a short-lived attempt to restore monarchy in China, and China fell into power struggle after his death in 1916.
The Kuomintang (KMT), led by Sun Yat-sen, created a new government in Guangzhou to rival the warlords who ruled over large swathes of China and prevented the formation of a solid central government.[13] After Sun's efforts to obtain aid from Western countries were ignored, he turned to the Soviet Union. In 1923, Sun and Soviet representative Adolph Joffe in Shanghai pledged Soviet assistance to China's unification in the Sun Joffe Manifesto, a declaration of cooperation among the Comintern, KMT, and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).[14] Comintern agent Mikhail Borodin arrived in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of both the CCP and the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The CCP, which was initially a study group, and the KMT jointly formed the First United Front.[13][14]
In 1923, Sun sent Chiang Kai-shek, one of his lieutenants, for several months of military and political study in Moscow.[15] Chiang then became the head of the Whampoa Military Academy that trained the next generation of military leaders. The Soviets provided the academy with teaching material, organization, and equipment, including munitions.[15] They also provided education in many of the techniques for mass mobilization. With this aid, Sun raised a dedicated "army of the party", with which he hoped to defeat the warlords militarily. CCP members were also present in the academy, and many of them became instructors, including Zhou Enlai, who was made a political instructor.[16]
Communist members were allowed to join the KMT on an individual basis.[14] The CCP itself was still small at the time, having a membership of 300 in 1922 and only 1,500 by 1925.[17] As of 1923, the KMT had 50,000 members.[17]
However, after Sun died in 1925, the KMT split into left- and right-wing movements. KMT members worried that the Soviets were trying to destroy the KMT from inside using the CCP. The CCP then began movements in opposition of the Northern Expedition, passing a resolution against it at a party meeting.
Then, in March 1927, the KMT held its second party meeting where the Soviets helped pass resolutions against the Expedition and curbing Chiang's power. Soon, the KMT would be clearly divided.
Throughout this time, the Soviet Union sent money and spies to support the CCP. Without their support, the communist party likely would have failed. This is evidenced by documents showing of other communist parties in China at the time, one with as many as 10,000 members, but which all failed without support from the Soviet Union.[18]
Shanghai Massacre and Northern Expedition[edit]
In early 1927, the KMT-CCP rivalry led to a split in the revolutionary ranks. The CCP and the left wing of the KMT decided to move the seat of the KMT government from Guangzhou to Wuhan, where communist influence was strong.[17] However, Chiang and Li Zongren, whose armies defeated the warlord Sun Chuanfang, moved eastward toward Jiangxi. The leftists rejected Chiang's demand to eliminate Communist influence within KMT, and Chiang denounced them for betraying Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People by taking orders from the Soviet Union. According to Mao Zedong, Chiang's tolerance of the CCP in the KMT camp decreased as his power increased.[19]
On 7 April, Chiang and several other KMT leaders held a meeting, during which they proposed that Communist activities were socially and economically disruptive and had to be undone for the Nationalist revolution to proceed. On 12 April, in Shanghai, many Communist members in the KMT were purged[13] through hundreds of arrests and executions[20] on the orders of General Bai Chongxi. The CCP referred to this as the 12 April Incident, the White Terror, or the Shanghai Massacre.[21] This incident widened the rift between Chiang and Wang Jingwei, the leader of the left wing faction of the KMT who controlled the city of Wuhan.
Eventually, the left wing of the KMT also expelled CCP members from the Wuhan government, which in turn was toppled by Chiang Kai-shek. The KMT resumed its campaign against warlords and captured Beijing in June 1928.[22] Soon, most of eastern China was under the control of the Nanjing central government, which received prompt international recognition as the sole legitimate government of China. The KMT government announced, in conformity with Sun Yat-sen, the formula for the three stages of revolution: military unification, political tutelage, and constitutional democracy.[23]
Communist insurgency (1927 1937)[edit]
Main article: Encirclement Campaigns
Communist insurgency (1927 1937)Second National Revolutionary War (Mainland China)Traditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinD rc  Gu n i G m ng Zh nzh ng
On 1 August 1927, the Communist Party launched an uprising in Nanchang against the Nationalist government in Wuhan. This conflict led to the creation of the Red Army.[1][24] On 4 August, the main forces of the Red Army left Nanchang and headed southwards for an assault on Guangdong. Nationalist forces quickly reoccupied Nanchang while the remaining members of the CCP in Nanchang went into hiding.[1] A CCP meeting on 7 August confirmed the objective of the party was to seize the political power by force, but the CCP was quickly suppressed the next day by the Nationalist government in Wuhan, led by Wang Jingwei. On 14 August, Chiang Kai-shek announced his temporary retirement, as the Wuhan faction and Nanjing faction of the Kuomintang were allied once again with common goal of suppressing the CCP after the earlier split. Wang Jingwei took the leadership of KMT after Chiang.[citation needed]
Attempts were later made by the CCP to take the cities of Changsha, Shantou and Guangzhou. The Red Army consisting of mutinous former National Revolutionary Army (NRA) soldiers as well as armed peasants established control over several areas in southern China.[24] KMT forces continued to attempt to suppress the rebellions.[24] Then, in September, Wang Jingwei was forced out of Wuhan. September also saw an unsuccessful armed rural insurrection, known as the Autumn Harvest Uprising, led by Mao Zedong.[25] Borodin then returned to the Soviet Union in October via Mongolia. In November, Chiang Kai-shek went to Shanghai and invited Wang to join him. On 11 December, the CCP started the Guangzhou Uprising, establishing a soviet there the next day, but lost the city by 13 December to a counter-attack under the orders of General Zhang Fakui. On 16 December, Wang Jingwei fled to France. There were now three capitals in China: the internationally recognized republic capital in Beijing, the CCP and left-wing KMT at Wuhan and the right-wing KMT regime at Nanjing, which would remain the KMT capital for the next decade.[26][27]
This marked the beginning of a ten-year armed struggle, known in mainland China as the "Ten-Year Civil War" ( ) which ended with the Xi'an Incident, when Chiang Kai-shek was forced to form the Second United Front against invading forces from the Empire of Japan. In 1930, the Central Plains War broke out as an internal conflict of the KMT; launched by Feng Yuxiang, Yan Xishan, and Wang Jingwei. The attention was turned to root out remaining pockets of CCP activity in a series of five encirclement campaigns.[28] The first and second campaigns failed, and the third was aborted due to the Mukden Incident. The fourth campaign (1932 1933) achieved some early successes, but Chiang's armies were badly mauled when they tried to penetrate into the heart of Mao's Soviet Chinese Republic. During these campaigns, KMT columns struck swiftly into CCP areas, but were easily engulfed by the vast countryside and were not able to consolidate their foothold.
Finally, in late 1934, Chiang launched a fifth campaign that involved the systematic encirclement of the Jiangxi Soviet region with fortified blockhouses.[29] The blockhouse strategy was devised and implemented in part by newly hired Nazi advisors.[30] Unlike previous campaigns in which they penetrated deeply in a single strike, this time the KMT troops patiently built blockhouses, each separated by about eight kilometres (five miles), to surround the Communist areas and cut off their supplies and food sources.[29]
In October 1934, the CCP took advantage of gaps in the ring of blockhouses (manned by the forces of a warlord ally of Chiang Kai-shek's, rather than regular KMT troops) and broke out of the encirclement. The warlord armies were reluctant to challenge Communist forces for fear of losing their own men and did not pursue the CCP with much fervor. In addition, the main KMT forces were preoccupied with annihilating Zhang Guotao's army, which was much larger than Mao's. The massive military retreat of Communist forces lasted a year and covered what Mao estimated as 12,500 km (25,000 Li); it became known as the Long March.[31]
This military retreat was undertaken by the Chinese Communist Party, led by Mao Zedong, to evade the pursuit or attack of the Kuomintang army. It consisted of a series of marches, during which numerous Communist armies in the south escaped to the north and west. Over the course of the march from Jiangxi the First Front Army, led by an inexperienced military commission, was on the brink of annihilation by Chiang Kai-Shek's troops as their stronghold was in Jiangxi. The Communists, under the command of Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai, "escaped in a circling retreat to the west and north, which reportedly traversed over 9,000 kilometers over 370 days." The route passed through some of the most difficult terrain of western China by traveling west, and then northwards towards Shaanxi. "In November 1935, shortly after settling in northern Shaanxi, Mao officially took over Zhou Enlai's leading position in the Red Army. Following a major reshuffling of official roles, Mao became the chairman of the Military Commission, with Zhou and Deng Xiaoping as vice-chairmen." This marked Mao's position as the pre-eminent leader of the Party, with Zhou in second position to him.[citation needed]
The march ended when the CCP reached the interior of Shaanxi. Zhang Guotao's army (Red 4th Front Army), which took a different route through northwest China, was largely destroyed by the forces of Chiang Kai-shek and his Chinese Muslim allies, the Ma clique. Along the way, the Communist army confiscated property and weapons from local warlords and landlords, while recruiting peasants and the poor, solidifying its appeal to the masses. Of the 90,000 100,000 people who began the Long March from the Soviet Chinese Republic, only around 7,000 8,000 made it to Shaanxi.[32] The remnants of Zhang's forces eventually joined Mao in Shaanxi, but with his army destroyed, Zhang, even as a founding member of the CCP, was never able to challenge Mao's authority. Essentially, the great retreat made Mao the undisputed leader of the Chinese Communist Party.
The Kuomintang used Khampa troops who were former bandits to battle the Communist Red Army as it advanced and to undermine local warlords who often refused to fight Communist forces to conserve their own strength. The KMT enlisted 300 "Khampa bandits" into its Consolatory Commission military in Sichuan, where they were part of the effort of the central government to penetrate and destabilize local Han warlords such as Liu Wenhui. The government was seeking to exert full control over frontier areas against the warlords. Liu had refused to battle the Communists in order to conserve his army. The Consolatory Commission forces were used to battle the Red Army, but they were defeated when their religious leader was captured by the Communists.[33]
In 1936, Zhou Enlai and Zhang Xueliang grew closer, with Zhou even suggesting that he join the CCP. However, this was turned down by the Comintern in the USSR. Later on, Zhou persuaded Zhang and Yang Hucheng, another warlord, to instigate the Xi'an Incident. Chiang was placed under house arrest and forced to stop his attacks on the Red Army, instead focusing on the Japanese threat.
The situation in China in 1929: After the Northern Expedition, the KMT had direct control over east and central China, while the rest of China proper as well as Manchuria was under the control of warlords loyal to the Nationalist government.
Map showing the communist-controlled Soviet Zones of China during and after the encirclement campaigns
Route(s) taken by Communist forces during the Long March
A Communist leader addressing survivors of the Long March
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, Commander-in-Chief of the National Revolutionary Army, emerged from the Northern Expedition as the leader of the Republic of China
NRA soldiers marching
NRA troops firing artillery at Communist forces
Second Sino-Japanese War (1937 1945)[edit]
Main article: Second Sino-Japanese War
 The leaders of the Chinese Communist Party (L-R) Zhou Enlai, Mao Zedong, and Zhu De
During Japan's invasion and occupation of Manchuria, Chiang Kai-shek saw the CCP as the greater threat. Chiang refused to ally with the CCP, preferring to unite China by eliminating the warlord and CCP forces first. He believed his forces were too weak to face the Japanese Imperial Army; only after unification could the KMT mobilize against Japan. He ignored the Chinese people's discontent and anger at the KMT policy of compromise with the Japanese, instead ordering KMT generals Zhang Xueliang and Yang Hucheng to suppress the CCP. However, their provincial forces suffered significant casualties in battles with the Red Army.[34]
On 12 December 1936, the disgruntled Zhang and Yang conspired to kidnap Chiang and force him into a truce with the CCP. The incident became known as the Xi'an Incident.[35] Both parties suspended fighting to form a Second United Front to focus their energies and fight the Japanese.[35] In 1937, Japan launched its full-scale invasion of China and its well-equipped troops overran KMT defenders in northern and coastal China.
The alliance of CCP and KMT was in name only.[36] Unlike the KMT forces, CCP troops shunned conventional warfare and instead waged guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. The level of actual cooperation and coordination between the CCP and KMT during World War II was minimal.[36] In the midst of the Second United Front, the CCP and the KMT were still vying for territorial advantage in "Free China" (i.e., areas not occupied by the Japanese or ruled by Japanese puppet governments such as Manchukuo and the Reorganized National Government of China).[36]
The situation came to a head in late 1940 and early 1941 when clashes between Communist and KMT forces intensified. Chiang demanded in December 1940 that the CCP's New Fourth Army evacuate Anhui and Jiangsu Provinces, due to its provocation and harassment of KMT forces in this area. Under intense pressure, the New Fourth Army commanders complied. The following year they were ambushed by KMT forces during their evacuation, which led to several thousand deaths.[37] It also ended the Second United Front, formed earlier to fight the Japanese.[37]
As clashes between the CCP and KMT intensified, countries such as the United States and the Soviet Union attempted to prevent a disastrous civil war. After the New Fourth Army incident, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent special envoy Lauchlin Currie to talk with Chiang Kai-shek and KMT party leaders to express their concern regarding the hostility between the two parties, with Currie stating that the only ones to benefit from a civil war would be the Japanese. The Soviet Union, allied more closely with the CCP, sent an imperative telegram to Mao in 1941, warning that civil war would also make the situation easier for the Japanese military. Due to the international community's efforts, there was a temporary and superficial peace. Chiang criticized the CCP in 1943 with the propaganda piece China's Destiny, which questioned the CCP's power after the war, while the CCP strongly opposed Chiang's leadership and referred to his regime as fascist in an attempt to generate a negative public image. Both leaders knew that a deadly battle had begun between themselves.[38]
In general, developments in the Second Sino-Japanese War were to the advantage of the CCP, as its guerrilla war tactics had won them popular support within the Japanese-occupied areas. However, the KMT had to defend the country against the main Japanese campaigns, since it was the legal Chinese government, a factor which proved costly to Chiang Kai-shek and his troops. Japan launched its last major offensive against the KMT, Operation Ichi-Go, in 1944, which resulted in the severe weakening of Chiang's forces.[39] The CCP also suffered fewer losses through its guerrilla tactics. By the end of the war, the Red Army had grown to more than 1.3 million members, with a separate militia of over 2.6 million. About one hundred million people lived in CCP-controlled zones.
Japanese occupation (red) of eastern China near the end of the war, and Communist bases (striped)
Immediate post-war clashes (1945 1946)[edit]
 Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong met in Chongqing in 1945.
Under the terms of the Japanese unconditional surrender dictated by the Allies, Japanese troops were to surrender to KMT troops but not to the CCP, which was present in some of the occupied areas.[40] In Manchuria, however, where the KMT had no forces, the Japanese surrendered to the Soviet Union. Chiang Kai-shek reminded Japanese troops to remain at their posts to receive the KMT, but Communist forces soon began taking surrenders from the Japanese and fighting those who resisted.[40] General Wedemeyer of the United States Army became alarmed at these developments and wanted seven American divisions to be sent to China, but General Marshall replied that it should not be given priority over Japan and Korea.[41]
The first post-war peace negotiation, attended by both Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong, was in Chongqing from 28 August to 10 October 1945. Chiang entered the meeting at an advantage because he had recently signed a friendly treaty with the Soviet Union while the Communists were still forcing the Japanese to surrender in some places. Mao was accompanied by American ambassador Patrick J. Hurley, who was devoted to Chiang but also wanted to ensure Mao's safety in light of the past history between the two Chinese leaders.[42] It concluded with the signing of the Double Tenth Agreement.[43] Both sides stressed the importance of a peaceful reconstruction, but the conference did not produce any concrete results.[43] Battles between the two sides continued even as peace negotiations were in progress, until the agreement was reached in January 1946. However, large campaigns and full-scale confrontations between the CCP and Chiang's troops were temporarily avoided.
 Shangdang Campaign, September October 1945
In the last month of World War II in East Asia, Soviet forces launched the huge Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation against the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria and along the Chinese-Mongolian border.[44] This operation destroyed the Kwantung Army in just three weeks and left the USSR occupying all of Manchuria by the end of the war in a total power vacuum of local Chinese forces. Consequently, the 700,000 Japanese troops stationed in the region surrendered. Later in the year Chiang Kai-shek realized that he lacked the resources to prevent a CCP takeover of Manchuria following the scheduled Soviet departure.[45] He therefore made a deal with the Soviets to delay their withdrawal until he had moved enough of his best-trained men and modern material into the region. However, the Soviets refused permission for the Nationalist troops to traverse its territory and spent the extra time systematically dismantling the extensive Manchurian industrial base (worth up to $2 billion) and shipping it back to their war-ravaged country.[45] KMT troops were then airlifted by the US to occupy key cities in North China, while the countryside was already dominated by the CCP. On 15 November 1945, the KMT began a campaign to prevent the CCP from strengthening its already strong base.[46] At the same time, however, the return of the KMT also brought widespread graft and corruption, with an OSS officer remarking that the only winners were the Communists.[47]
In the winter of 1945 46, Joseph Stalin commanded Marshal Rodion Malinovsky to give Mao Zedong most Imperial Japanese Army weapons that were captured.[48]
Chiang Kai-shek's forces pushed as far as Chinchow (Jinzhou) by 26 November 1945, meeting with little resistance. This was followed by a Communist offensive on the Shandong Peninsula that was largely successful, as all of the peninsula, except what was controlled by the US, fell to the Communists.[46] The truce fell apart in June 1946 when full-scale war between CCP and KMT forces broke out on 26 June 1946. China then entered a state of civil war that lasted more than three years.[49]
The Soviet Red Army invaded Manchuria in August 1945.
Chinese Communist soldiers march north to occupy rural Manchuria, 1945.
Resumed fighting (1946 1949)[edit]
Background and disposition of forces[edit]
Resumed fighting (1946 1949)Third National Revolutionary War (Mainland China)Traditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinD s nc  Gu n i G m ng Zh nzh ngWar of Liberation (mainland China)Traditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinJi f ng Zh nzh ngWuRomanizationchia-fhon-tsan-zenYue: CantoneseJyutpinggaai2 fong3 zin3 zang1Southern MinHokkien POJk i-h ng chi n-chengAnti-Communist Counter-insurgency War (Taiwan)Traditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinF ng ng K nlu n Zh nzh ngChinese People's Liberation War (mainland China)Traditional Chinese Simplified Chinese TranscriptionsStandard MandarinHanyu PinyinZh nggu  R nm n Ji f ng Zh nzh ng
By the end of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the power of the Communist Party grew considerably. Their main force grew to 1.2 million troops, backed with additional militia of 2 million, totalling 3.2 million troops. Their "Liberated Zone" in 1945 contained 19 base areas, including one-quarter of the country's territory and one-third of its population; this included many important towns and cities. Moreover, the Soviet Union turned over all of its captured Japanese weapons and a substantial amount of their own supplies to the Communists, who received Northeastern China from the Soviets as well.[50]
In March 1946, despite repeated requests from Chiang, the Soviet Red Army under the command of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky continued to delay pulling out of Manchuria, while Malinovsky secretly told the CCP forces to move in behind them, which led to full-scale war for the control of the Northeast. These favorable conditions also facilitated many changes inside the Communist leadership: the more radical hard-line faction who wanted a complete military take-over of China finally gained the upper hand and defeated the careful opportunists.[51] Before giving control to Communist leaders, on 27 March, Soviet diplomats requested a joint venture of industrial development with the Nationalist Party in Manchuria.[52]
Although General Marshall stated that he knew of no evidence that the CCP was being supplied by the Soviet Union, the CCP was able to utilize a large number of weapons abandoned by the Japanese, including some tanks. When large numbers of well-trained KMT troops began to defect to the Communist forces, the CCP was finally able to achieve material superiority.[53][54] The CCP's ultimate trump card was its land reform policy. This drew the massive number of landless and starving peasants in the countryside into the Communist cause.[55] This strategy enabled the CCP to access an almost unlimited supply of manpower for both combat and logistical purposes; despite suffering heavy casualties throughout many of the war's campaigns, manpower continued to grow. For example, during the Huaihai Campaign alone the CCP was able to mobilize 5,430,000 peasants to fight against the KMT forces.[56]
 Nationalist warplanes being prepared for an air raid on Communist bases
After the war with the Japanese ended, Chiang Kai-shek quickly moved KMT troops to newly liberated areas to prevent Communist forces from receiving the Japanese surrender.[50] The US airlifted many KMT troops from central China to the Northeast (Manchuria). President Harry S. Truman was very clear about what he described as "using the Japanese to hold off the Communists". In his memoirs he writes:
It was perfectly clear to us that if we told the Japanese to lay down their arms immediately and march to the seaboard, the entire country would be taken over by the Communists. We therefore had to take the unusual step of using the enemy as a garrison until we could airlift Chinese National troops to South China and send Marines to guard the seaports.  President Truman[57]
Using the pretext of "receiving the Japanese surrender", business interests within the KMT government occupied most of the banks, factories and commercial properties, which had previously been seized by the Imperial Japanese Army.[50] They also conscripted troops at an accelerated pace from the civilian population and hoarded supplies, preparing for a resumption of war with the Communists. These hasty and harsh preparations caused great hardship for the residents of cities such as Shanghai, where the unemployment rate rose dramatically to 37.5%.[50]
The US strongly supported the Kuomintang forces. About 50,000 US soldiers were sent to guard strategic sites in Hebei and Shandong in Operation Beleaguer. The US equipped and trained KMT troops, and transported Japanese and Koreans back to help KMT forces to occupy liberated zones as well as to contain Communist-controlled areas.[50] According to William Blum, American aid included substantial amounts of mostly surplus military supplies, and loans were made to the KMT.[58] Within less than two years after the Sino-Japanese War, the KMT had received $4.43 billion from the US most of which was military aid.[50]
Outbreak of war[edit]
Situation in 1947
Situation in the fall of 1948
Situation in the winter of 1948 and 1949
Situation in April to October 1949
As postwar negotiations between the Nationalist government in Nanjing and the Communist Party failed, the civil war between these two parties resumed. This stage of war is referred to in mainland China and Communist historiography as the "War of Liberation" (Chinese:  ; pinyin: Ji f ng Zh nzh ng). On 20 July 1946, Chiang Kai-shek launched a large-scale assault on Communist territory in North China with 113 brigades (a total of 1.6 million troops).[50] This marked the first stage of the final phase in the Chinese Civil War.
Knowing their disadvantages in manpower and equipment, the CCP executed a "passive defense" strategy. It avoided the strong points of the KMT army and was prepared to abandon territory in order to preserve its forces. In most cases the surrounding countryside and small towns had come under Communist influence long before the cities. The CCP also attempted to wear out the KMT forces as much as possible. This tactic seemed to be successful; after a year, the power balance became more favorable to the CCP. They wiped out 1.12 million KMT troops, while their strength grew to about two million men.[50]
 The PLA enters Beiping (today's Beijing) in the Pingjin Campaign.
In March 1947, the KMT achieved a symbolic victory by seizing the CCP capital of Yan'an.[59] The Communists counterattacked soon afterwards; on 30 June 1947, CCP troops crossed the Yellow River and moved to the Dabie Mountains area, restored and developed the Central Plain. At the same time, Communist forces also began to counterattack in Northeastern China, North China and East China.[50]
By late 1948, the CCP eventually captured the northern cities of Shenyang and Changchun and seized control of the Northeast after suffering numerous setbacks while trying to take the cities, with the decisive Liaoshen Campaign.[60] The New 1st Army, regarded as the best KMT army, was forced to surrender after the CCP conducted a brutal six-month siege of Changchun that resulted in more than 150,000 civilian deaths from starvation.[61]
 Republic of China FT tanks
The capture of large KMT units provided the CCP with the tanks, heavy artillery and other combined-arms assets needed to execute offensive operations south of the Great Wall. By April 1948, the city of Luoyang fell, cutting the KMT army off from Xi'an.[62] Following a fierce battle, the CCP captured Jinan and Shandong province on 24 September 1948. The Huaihai Campaign of late 1948 and early 1949 secured east-central China for the CCP.[60] The outcome of these encounters were decisive for the military outcome of the civil war.[60]
The Pingjin Campaign resulted in the Communist conquest of northern China. It lasted 64 days, from 21 November 1948 to 31 January 1949.[63] The PLA suffered heavy casualties while securing Zhangjiakou, Tianjin along with its port and garrison at Dagu and Beiping.[63] The CCP brought 890,000 troops from the northeast to oppose some 600,000 KMT troops.[62] There were 40,000 CCP casualties at Zhangjiakou alone. They in turn killed, wounded or captured some 520,000 KMT during the campaign.[63]
 The Nationalists' retreat to Taipei: after the Nationalists lost Nanjing (Nanking) they next moved to Guangzhou (Canton), then to Chongqing (Chungking), Chengdu (Chengtu) and finally, Xichang (Sichang) before arriving Taipei in 1949.
After achieving decisive victory at Liaoshen, Huaihai and Pingjin campaigns, the CCP destroyed 144 regular and 29 irregular KMT divisions, including 1.54 million veteran KMT troops, which significantly reduced the strength of Nationalist forces.[50] Stalin initially favored a coalition government in postwar China, and tried to persuade Mao to stop the CCP from crossing the Yangtze and attacking the KMT positions south of the river.[64] Mao rejected Stalin's position and on 21 April, and began the Yangtze River Crossing Campaign. On 23 April, they captured the KMT's capital, Nanjing.[31] The KMT government retreated to Canton (Guangzhou) until 15 October, Chongqing until 25 November, and then Chengdu before retreating to Taiwan on 7 December. By late 1949, the People's Liberation Army was pursuing remnants of KMT forces southwards in southern China, and only Tibet was left. A Chinese Muslim Hui cavalry regiment, the 14th Tungan Cavalry, was sent by the Kuomintang to attack Mongol and Soviet positions along the border during the Pei-ta-shan Incident.[65][66]
The Kuomintang made several last-ditch attempts to use Khampa troops against the Communists in southwest China. The Kuomintang formulated a plan in which three Khampa divisions would be assisted by the Panchen Lama to oppose the Communists.[67] Kuomintang intelligence reported that some Tibetan tusi chiefs and the Khampa Su Yonghe controlled 80,000 troops in Sichuan, Qinghai and Tibet. They hoped to use them against the Communist army.[68]
Pushing south[edit]
Main article: Proclamation of the People's Republic of China
 Mao Zedong's proclamation of the founding of the People's Republic in 1949
On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the founding of the People's Republic of China with its capital at Beiping, which was returned to the former name Beijing. Chiang Kai-shek and approximately two million Nationalist soldiers retreated from mainland China to the island of Taiwan in December after the PLA advanced into the Sichuan province. Isolated Nationalist pockets of resistance remained in the area, but the majority of the resistance collapsed after the fall of Chengdu on 10 December 1949, with some resistance continuing in the far south.[69]
 Communist conquest of Hainan Island in mid 1950
A PRC attempt to take the ROC-controlled island of Quemoy was thwarted in the Battle of Kuningtou, halting the PLA advance towards Taiwan.[70] In December 1949, Chiang proclaimed Taipei the temporary capital of the Republic of China and continued to assert his government as the sole legitimate authority in China.
The Communists' other amphibious operations of 1950 were more successful: they led to the Communist conquest of Hainan Island in April 1950, the Wanshan Islands off the Guangdong coast (May August 1950), and Zhoushan Island off Zhejiang (May 1950).[71]
Aftermath and unsolved issues (1949 present)[edit]
Main articles: Cross-Strait relations and Kuomintang retreat to Taiwan
See also: Political status of Taiwan and Two Chinas
 Map of the Chinese Civil War (1946 1949, and 1950)
Most observers expected Chiang's government to eventually fall to the imminent invasion of Taiwan by the People's Liberation Army, and the US was initially reluctant in offering full support for Chiang in their final stand. US President Harry S. Truman announced on 5 January 1950 that the United States would not engage in any dispute involving the Taiwan Strait, and that he would not intervene in the event of an attack by the PRC.[72] Truman, seeking to exploit the possibility of a Titoist-style Sino-Soviet split, announced in his United States Policy toward Formosa that the US would obey the Cairo Declaration's designation of Taiwan as Chinese territory and would not assist the Nationalists. However, the Communist leadership was not aware of this change of policy, instead becoming increasingly hostile to the US.[73] The situation quickly changed after the sudden onset of the Korean War in June 1950. This led to changing political climate in the US, and President Truman ordered the United States Seventh Fleet to sail to the Taiwan Strait as part of the containment policy against potential Communist advance.[74]
 "Forget not that you are in J "--a rock in Quemoy Island with Chiang Kai-shek's calligraphy signifying the retaking of one's homeland
In June 1949, the ROC declared a "closure" of all mainland China ports and its navy attempted to intercept all foreign ships. The closure was from a point north of the mouth of Min River in Fujian to the mouth of the Liao River in Liaoning.[75] Since mainland China's railroad network was underdeveloped, north south trade depended heavily on sea lanes. ROC naval activity also caused severe hardship for mainland China fishermen.
During the retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan, KMT troops, who couldn't retreat to Taiwan, were left behind and allied with local bandits to fight a guerrilla war against the Communists. These KMT remnants were eliminated in the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries and the Campaigns to Suppress Bandits.[76] According to official statistics from the CCP in 1954, during the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries, at least 2.6 million people were arrested, some 1.29 million people were imprisoned, and 712,000 people were executed.[77] Most of those killed were former Kuomintang officials, businessmen, former employees of Western companies and intellectuals whose loyalty was suspect.[78]
Winning China proper in 1950, also after Annexation of Tibet, the CCP controlled the entire mainland in late 1951 (excluding Kinmen and Matsu Islands). But a group of approximately 3,000 KMT Central soldiers retreated to Burma and continued launching guerrilla attacks into south China during the Kuomintang Islamic Insurgency in China (1950 1958) and Campaign at the China Burma Border. Their leader, Li Mi, was paid a salary by the ROC government and given the nominal title of Governor of Yunnan. Initially, the US-supported these remnants and the Central Intelligence Agency provided them with military aid. After the Burmese government appealed to the United Nations in 1953, the US began pressuring the ROC to withdraw its loyalists. By the end of 1954 nearly 6,000 soldiers had left Burma and Li declared his army disbanded. However, thousands remained, and the ROC continued to supply and command them, even secretly supplying reinforcements at times to maintain a base close to China.
After the ROC complained to the United Nations against the Soviet Union for violating the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance to support the CCP, the UN General Assembly Resolution 505 was adopted on 1 February 1952, condemning the Soviet Union.
In the end, the Communist military forces suffered 1.3 million combat casualties in the 1945 1949 phase of the war: 260,000 killed, 190,000 missing, and 850,000 wounded, discounting irregulars. Nationalist casualties in the same phase were recorded after the war by the PRC 5,452,700 regulars and 2,258,800 irregulars.[7]
 Monument in memory of the crossing of the Yangtze in Nanjing
Taiwan Strait Tensions[edit]
Though viewed as a military liability by the US, the ROC viewed its remaining islands in Fujian as vital for any future campaign to defeat the PRC and retake mainland China. On 3 September 1954, the First Taiwan Strait Crisis began when the PLA started shelling Kinmen and threatened to take the Dachen Islands in Zhejiang.[75] On 20 January 1955, the PLA took nearby Yijiangshan Island, with the entire ROC garrison of 720 troops killed or wounded defending the island. On 24 January of the same year, the United States Congress passed the Formosa Resolution authorizing the President to defend the ROC's offshore islands.[75] The First Taiwan Straits crisis ended in March 1955 when the PLA ceased its bombardment. The crisis was brought to a close during the Bandung conference.[75]
The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis began on 23 August 1958 with air and naval engagements between PRC and ROC forces, leading to intense artillery bombardment of Quemoy (by the PRC) and Amoy (by the ROC), and ended on November of the same year.[75] PLA patrol boats blockaded the islands from ROC supply ships. Though the US rejected Chiang Kai-shek's proposal to bomb mainland China artillery batteries, it quickly moved to supply fighter jets and anti-aircraft missiles to the ROC. It also provided amphibious assault ships to land supplies, as a sunken ROC naval vessel was blocking the harbor. On 7 September, the US escorted a convoy of ROC supply ships and the PRC refrained from firing.
The third crisis occurred in 1995 96. The PLA responded to Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui's visit to the United States, and the U.S. recognition of Lee as a representative of Taiwan with military exercises. PLA actions were also meant to deter Taiwanese voters from supporting Lee in the 1996 election. The U.S. deployed two aircraft carriers in response to the PLA's actions and Lee won the election. The carriers were not attacked and deescalation followed.[79]
U.S. speaker Nancy Pelosi's visit to Taiwan in August 2022 triggered the PLA to cause military exercises across the Taiwan Strait. She originally intended to travel to Taiwan in April 2022,[80] but was delayed due to COVID-19.[81] She rescheduled the trip to August as part of a wider Asian trip. The White House was reported to have been initially divided over the appropriateness of the trip but later affirmed Pelosi's right to visit Taiwan.[82][83][84][85] As a result, the PLA announced four days of unprecedented military live-fire drills,[86] in six zones that encircle the island on the busiest international waterways and aviation routes.[87] In response to the announcement, ROC officials complained that the PLA's live-fire drills were an invasion of Taiwan's territorial space and a direct challenge to free air and sea navigation.[88]
Political fallout[edit]
Main articles: China and the United Nations and United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758
 Lockheed U-2 wreckage (pilot Chang Liyi) on display at the Museum in Beijing
On 25 October 1971, the United Nations General Assembly admitted the PRC and expelled the ROC, which had been a founding member of the United Nations and was one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Representatives of Chiang Kai-shek refused to recognise their accreditations as representatives of China and left the assembly. Recognition for the People's Republic of China soon followed from most other member nations, including the United States.[89]
By 1984, PRC and ROC began to de-escalate their hostilities through diplomatic relations with each other, and cross-straits trade and investment has been growing ever since. The state of war was officially declared over by the ROC in 1991.[90] Despite the end of the hostilities, the two sides have never signed any agreement or treaty to officially end the war. According to Mao Zedong, there were three ways of "staving off imperialist intervention in the short term" during the continuation of the Chinese Revolution. The first was through a rapid completion of the military takeover of the country, and through showing determination and strength against "foreign attempts at challenging the new regime along its borders". The second was by "formalising a comprehensive military alliance with the Soviet Union", which would dedicate Soviet power to directly defending China against its enemies; this aspect became extensively significant given the backdrop of the start of the Cold War. And finally, the regime had to "root out its domestic opponents: the heads of secret societies, religious sects, independent unions, or tribal and ethnic organisations". By destroying the basis of domestic reaction, Mao believed a safer world for the Chinese revolution to spread in would come into existence.[91]
Under the new ROC president Lee Teng-hui, the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion was renounced in May 1991, thus ending the chances of the Kuomintang's quest to retake the mainland. In July 1999, Lee announced a "special diplomatic relationship". China was furious again, but the military drills were stopped by the 921 earthquakes. It was the last tense moment of this civil war.[92]
With the election in 2000 of Democratic Progressive Party candidate Chen Shui-bian, a party other than the KMT gained the presidency for the first time in Taiwan. The new president did not share the Chinese nationalist ideology of the KMT and CCP. This led to tension between the two sides, although trade and other ties such as the 2005 Pan-Blue visit continued to increase.
With the election of Pro-mainland President Ma Ying-jeou (KMT) in 2008, significant warming of relations resumed between Taipei and Beijing, with high-level exchanges between the semi-official diplomatic organizations of both states such as the Chen-Chiang summit series. Although the Taiwan Strait remains a potential flash point, regular direct air links were established in 2009.[12][page needed]
Reasons for the Communist victory[edit]
The historian Rana Mitter concluded that the Nationalist government in 1945 had been "fundamentally destroyed by the war with Japan".[93] Mitter writes that a lack of trust in the Nationalist government developed, as it was increasingly seen as "corrupt, vindictive, and with no overall vision of what China under its rule should look like".[94]
Historian Odd Arne Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang Kai-shek and also because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonized too many interest groups in China. Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against the Japanese. Meanwhile, the Communists targeted different groups, such as peasants, and brought them to their side.[95]
Chiang wrote in his diary in June 1948: "After the fall of Kaifeng our conditions worsened and became more serious. I now realized that the main reason our nation has collapsed, time after time throughout our history, was not because of superior power used by our external enemies, but because of disintegration and rot from within."[96]
The better-trained Communist army was also able to receive support from the USSR, which helped to counter the American aid that the Nationalists received.[94] Chen Yun said: "They did their best to help us, we were backed by the Soviet Union and North Korea."[97][98][99][100]
Strong American support for the Nationalists was hedged with the failure of the Marshall Mission, and then stopped completely mainly because of KMT corruption[101] (such as the notorious Yangtze Development Corporation controlled by H.H. Kung and T. V. Soong's family)[102][103] and KMT's military setback in Northeast China.
The main advantage of the Chinese Communist Party was the "extraordinary cohesion" within the top level of its leadership. These skills were not only secured from defections that came about during difficult times but also coupled with "communications and top level debates over tactics". The charismatic style of leadership of Mao Zedong created a "unity of purpose" and a "unity of command" which the KMT lacked. Apart from that, the CCP had mastered the manipulation of local politics to their benefit; this was also derived from their propaganda skills that had also been decentralised successfully by portraying their opponents as "enemies of all groups of Chinese" and itself as "defenders of the nation" and people (given the backdrop of the war with Japan).[104]
In the Chinese Civil War after 1945, the economy in the ROC areas collapsed because of hyperinflation and the failure of price controls by the ROC government and financial reforms; the Gold Yuan devaluated sharply in late 1948[105] and resulted in the ROC government losing the support of the cities' middle classes. In the meantime, the Communists continued their relentless land reform (land redistribution) programs to win the support of the population in the countryside.
Historians such as Jay Taylor, Robert Cowley, and Anne W. Carroll argue that the nationalists' failure was largely caused by external reasons outside of the KMT's control, most notably the refusal of the Truman administration to support Chiang with the withdrawal of aid, the US armed embargo, the failed pursuit of a d tente between the nationalists and the communists, and the USSR's consistent support of the CPC in the Chinese Civil War.[106][107][108][109]
Atrocities[edit]
During the war, both the Nationalists and Communists carried out mass atrocities, with millions of non-combatants deliberately killed by both sides.[110] Benjamin Valentino has estimated atrocities in the Chinese Civil War resulted in the death of between 1.8 million and 3.5 million people between 1927 and 1949.[111][better source needed][dubious    discuss]
Nationalist atrocities[edit]
Over several years after the 1927 Shanghai massacre, the Kuomintang killed between 300,000 and one million people, primarily peasants, in anti-communist campaigns as part of the White Terror.[112][113] During the White Terror, the Nationalists specifically targeted women with short hair who had not been subjected to foot binding, on the presumption that such "non-traditional" women were radicals.[113] Nationalist forces cut off their breasts, shaved their heads, and displayed their mutilated bodies to intimidate the populace.[113]
From 1946 to 1949, the Nationalists arrested, tortured, and killed political dissidents via the Sino-American Cooperative Organization.[114]
Communist atrocities[edit]
Main articles: Siege of Changchun and Chinese Land Reform  Mass killings of landlords
During the December 1930 Futian incident, the communists executed 2,000 to 3,000 members of the Futian battalion after its leaders had mutinied against Mao Zedong.[115]
Between 1931 and 1934 in the Jiangxi Fujian Soviet, the communist authorities engaged in a widespread campaign of violence against civilians to ensure compliance with its policies and to stop defection to the advancing KMT, including mass executions, land confiscation and forced labor.[116] According to Li Weihan, a high-ranking communist in Jiangxi at the time, in response to mass flight of civilians to KMT held areas, the local authorities authorities would "usually to send armed squads after those attempting to flee and kill them on the spot, producing numerous mass graves throughout the CSR [Chinese Soviet Republic in Jiangxi] that would later be uncovered by the KMT and its allies." Zhang Wentian, another high-ranking communist, reported that "the policy of annihilating landlords as an exploiting class had degenerated into a massacre"[117] The population of the communist controlled area fell by 700,000 from 1931 and 1935, of which a large proportion were murdered as "class enemies", worked to death, committed suicide, or died in other circumstances attributable to the communists.[118]
During the Siege of Changchun, the People's Liberation Army implemented a military blockade on the KMT-held city of Changchun and prevented civilians from leaving the city during the blockade;[119] this blockade caused the starvation of tens[119] to 150[120] thousand civilians. The PLA continued to use siege tactics throughout Northeast China.[121]
At the outbreak of the Chinese Civil War in 1946, Mao Zedong began to push for a return to radical policies to mobilize China against the landlord class, but protected the rights of middle peasants and specified that rich peasants were not landlords.[122] The 7 July Directive of 1946 set off eighteen months of fierce conflict in which all rich peasant and landlord property of all types was to be confiscated and redistributed to poor peasants. Party work teams went quickly from village to village and divided the population into landlords, rich, middle, poor, and landless peasants. Because the work teams did not involve villagers in the process, however, rich and middle peasants quickly returned to power. [123] The Outline Land Law of October 1947 increased the pressure.[124] Those condemned as landlords were buried alive, dismembered, strangled and shot.[125]
In response to the aforementioned land reform campaign, the Kuomintang helped establish the "Huanxiang Tuan" ( ), or Homecoming Legion, which was composed of landlords who sought the return of their redistributed land and property from peasants and CCP guerrillas, as well as forcibly conscripted peasants and communist POWs.[126] The Homecoming legion conducted its guerrilla warfare campaign against CCP forces and purported collaborators up until the end of the civil war in 1949.[126]
See also[edit]
China portalTaiwan portal
List of wars involving the People's Republic of China
Campaign to suppress bandits in northeast China
Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Wuping
Campaign to suppress bandits in southwestern China
Campaign to Suppress Bandits in Eastern China
References[edit]
^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2012). China at War: An Encyclopedia. p. 295. ISBN 9781598844153. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
^ Li, Xiaobing (1 June 2007). A History of the Modern Chinese Army. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-7224-8. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2021.
^ a b Hsiung, James C. (1992). China's Bitter Victory: The War With Japan, 1937 1945. New York: M. E. Sharpe publishing. ISBN 1-56324-246-X. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2015.
^ a b Sarker, Sunil Kumar (1994). The Rise and Fall of Communism. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. ISBN 9788171565153. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 6 April 2021.
^  ,  . " " "".  .  - . Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
^ a b c Lynch, Michael (2010). The Chinese Civil War 1945 49. Osprey Publishing. p. 91. ISBN 978-1-84176-671-3.[permanent dead link]
^ a b "The History of the Chinese People's Liberation Army." Beijing: People's Liberation Army Press. 1983.
^ "Twentieth Century Atlas - Death Tolls". Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
^ "Twentieth Century Atlas - Death Tolls". Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
^ Lew, Christopher R.; Leung, Pak-Wah, eds. (2013). Historical Dictionary of the Chinese Civil War. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. p. 3. ISBN 978-0810878730. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2017.
^ Green, Leslie C. The Contemporary Law of Armed Conflict. p. 79.
^ a b So, Alvin Y.; Lin, Nan; Poston, Dudley, eds. (July 2001). The Chinese Triangle of Mainland China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong: Comparative Institutional Analyses. Contributions in Sociology. Vol. 133. Westport, CT; London: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30869-7. ISSN 0084-9278. OCLC 45248282.
^ a b c "Milestones: 1945 1952 - Office of the Historian". history.state.gov. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2021.
^ a b c March, G. Patrick. Eastern Destiny: Russia in Asia and the North Pacific. [1996] (1996). Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-275-95566-4. p. 205.
^ a b H.H. Chang,  Chiang Kai Shek   Asia's Man of Destiny (Doubleday, 1944; reprint 2007 ISBN 1-4067-5818-3). p. 126.
^ Ho, Alfred K. Ho, Alfred Kuo-liang. [2004] (2004). China's Reforms and Reformers. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-275-96080-3. p. 7.
^ a b c Fairbank, John King. [1994] (1994). China: A New History. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-11673-9.
^ Kuhn, Robert (2005). The man who changed China: the life and legacy of Jiang Zemin. Crown Publishers.
^ Zedong, Mao. Thompson, Roger R. [1990] (1990). Report from Xunwu. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-2182-3.
^ Brune, Lester H. Dean Burns, Richard Dean Burns. [2003] (2003). Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-93914-3.
^ Zhao, Suisheng. [2004] (2004). A Nation-state by Construction: Dynamics of Modern Chinese Nationalism. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-5001-7.
^ Guo, Xuezhi. [2002] (2002). The Ideal Chinese Political Leader: A Historical and Cultural Perspective. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-275-97259-3.
^ Theodore De Bary, William. Bloom, Irene. Chan, Wing-tsit. Adler, Joseph. Lufrano Richard. Lufrano, John. [1999] (1999). Sources of Chinese Tradition. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-10938-5. p. 328.
^ a b c Lee, Lai to. Trade Unions in China: 1949 To the Present. [1986] (1986). National University of Singapore Press. ISBN 9971-69-093-4.
^ Blasko, Dennis J. [2006] (2006). The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-77003-3.
^ Esherick, Joseph. (2000). Remaking the Chinese City: Modernity and National Identity, 1900 1950. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-2518-7.
^ Clark, Anne, Klein, Donald. eds. (1971). Biographic Dictionary of Chinese Communism (Harvard University Press), p. 134.
^ Lynch, Michael. Clausen, S ren. [2003] (2003). Mao. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-21577-3.
^ a b Manwaring, Max G. Joes, Anthony James. [2000] (2000). Beyond Declaring Victory and Coming Home: The Challenges of Peace and Stability operations. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-275-96768-9. p. 58.
^ Karl, Rebecca E. (2010). Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world : a concise history. Durham [NC]: Duke University Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4. OCLC 503828045.
^ a b Zhang, Chunhou. Vaughan, C. Edwin. [2002] (2002). Mao Zedong as Poet and Revolutionary Leader: Social and Historical Perspectives. Lexington books. ISBN 0-7391-0406-3. pp. 58, 65.
^ Bianco, Lucien. Bell, Muriel. [1971] (1971). Origins of the Chinese Revolution, 1915 1949. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-0827-4. p. 68.
^ Lin, Hsiao-ting (2010). Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Kourney to the West. Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia. Vol. 67 (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2011. A force of about 300 soldiers was organized and augmented by recruiting local Khampa bandits into the army. The relationship between the Consolatory Commission and Liu Wenhui seriously deteriorated in early 1936, when the Norla Hutuktu
^ Background of Xi'an Incident. Cultural China. Retrieved June 4, 2021.
^ a b Ye, Zhaoyan Ye, Berry, Michael. [2003] (2003). Nanjing 1937: A Love Story. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-12754-5.
^ a b c Buss, Claude Albert. [1972] (1972). Stanford Alumni Association. The People's Republic of China and Richard Nixon. United States.
^ a b Schoppa, R. Keith. [2000] (2000). The Columbia Guide to Modern Chinese History. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-11276-9.
^ Chen, Jian. [2001] (2001). Mao's China and the Cold War. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-807-84932-4.
^ Lary, Diana. [2007] (2007). China's Republic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-84256-5.
^ a b Zarrow, Peter Gue. (2005). China in War and Revolution, 1895 1949. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-36447-7. p. 338.
^ Spector, Ronald H. (2007). In the ruins of empire : the Japanese surrender and the battle for postwar Asia (1st ed.). New York. pp. 38 39. ISBN 9780375509155.
^ Spector, Ronald H. (2007). In the ruins of empire : the Japanese surrender and the battle for postwar Asia (1st ed.). New York. ISBN 9780375509155.
^ a b Xu, Guangqiu. [2001] (2001). War Wings: The United States and Chinese Military Aviation, 1929 1949. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-313-32004-7. p. 201.
^ Bright, Richard Carl. [2007] (2007). Pain and Purpose in the Pacific: True Reports of War. Trafford Publishing. ISBN 1-4251-2544-1.
^ a b Lilley, James. China hands: nine decades of adventure, espionage, and diplomacy in Asia. PublicAffairs, New York, 2004
^ a b Jessup, John E. (1989). A Chronology of Conflict and Resolution, 1945 1985. New York: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-24308-5.
^ Spector, Ronald H. (2007). In the ruins of empire : the Japanese surrender and the battle for postwar Asia (1st ed.). New York. p. 61. ISBN 9780375509155.
^ Yang Kuisong (24 November 2011).  . Sina Books. Archived from the original on 26 September 2013. Retrieved 17 May 2013.
^ Hu, Jubin. (2003). Projecting a Nation: Chinese National Cinema Before 1949. Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 962-209-610-7.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Nguy n Anh Th i (chief author); Nguy n Qu c H ng; V  Ng c Oanh; Tr n Th  Vinh;  ng Thanh To n;   Thanh B nh (2002). L ch s  th  gi i hi n  i (in Vietnamese). Ho Chi Minh City: Gi o D c Publisher. pp. 320 322. 8934980082317. {{cite book}}: |last= has generic name (help)
^ Michael M Sheng, Battling Western Imperialism, Princeton University Press, 1997, pp. 132 135
^ Liu, Shiao Tang (1978). Min Kuo Ta Shih Jih Chih. Vol. 2. Taipei: Zhuan Chi Wen Shuan. p. 735.
^ The New York Times, 12 January 1947, p. 44.
^ Zeng Kelin, Zeng Kelin jianjun zishu (General Zeng Kelin Tells His Story), Liaoning renmin chubanshe, Shenyang, 1997. pp. 112 113
^ Ray Huang, cong dalishi jiaodu du Jiang Jieshi riji (Reading Chiang Kai-shek's diary from a macro-history perspective), China Times Publishing Press, Taipei, 1994, pp. 441 443
^ Lung Ying-tai, dajiang dahai 1949, Commonwealth Publishing Press, Taipei, 2009, p. 184
^ Harry S.Truman, Memoirs, Vol. Two: Years of Trial and Hope, 1946 1953 (Great Britain 1956), p. 66
^ p23, U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, William Blum, Zed Books 2004 London.
^ Lilley, James R. China Hands: Nine Decades of Adventure, Espionage, and Diplomacy in Asia. ISBN 1-58648-136-3.
^ a b c Westad, Odd Arne. [2003] (2003). Decisive Encounters: The Chinese Civil War, 1946 1950. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-4484-X. pp. 192 193.
^ Pomfret, John. "Red Army Starved 150,000 Chinese Civilians, Books Says" Seattle Times 2 October 2009 Accessed: 2009-10-02. Archived WebSite
^ a b Elleman, Bruce A. Modern Chinese Warfare, 1795 1989. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-21473-4.
^ a b c Finkelstein, David Michael. Ryan, Mark A. McDevitt, Michael. [2003] (2003). Chinese Warfighting: The PLA Experience Since 1949. M.E. Sharpe. China. ISBN 0-7656-1088-4. p. 63.
^ Donggil Kim, "Stalin and the Chinese Civil War." Cold War History 10.2 (2010): 185 202.
^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986). Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911 1949. Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 215. ISBN 0-521-25514-7. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986). Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911 1949. Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 225. ISBN 0-521-25514-7. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2010.
^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010). Modern China's ethnic frontiers: a journey to the west. Vol. 67 of Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2011. China's far northwest.23 A simultaneous proposal suggested that, with the support of the new Panchen Lama and his entourage, at least three army divisions of anti-Communist Khampa Tibetans could be mustered in southwest China.
^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010). Modern China's ethnic frontiers: a journey to the west. Vol. 67 of Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. xxi. ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2011. (tusi) from the Sichuan-Qinghai border; and Su Yonghe, a Khampa native-chieftain from Nagchuka on the Qinghai- Tibetan border. According to Nationalist intelligence reports, these leaders altogether commanded about 80000 irregulars.
^ Cook, Chris Cook. Stevenson, John. [2005] (2005). The Routledge Companion to World History Since 1914. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-34584-7. p. 376.
^ Qi, Bangyuan. Wang, Dewei. Wang, David Der-wei. [2003] (2003). The Last of the Whampoa Breed: Stories of the Chinese Diaspora. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-13002-3. p. 2.
^ MacFarquhar, Roderick. Fairbank, John K. Twitchett, Denis C. [1991] (1991). The Cambridge History of China. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-24337-8. p. 820.
^ "Harry S Truman, "Statement on Formosa," January 5, 1950". University of Southern California. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2017.
^ Yafeng Xia (2006). Negotiating with the Enemy: U.S.-China Talks during the Cold War, 1949-1972. Indiana University Press. p. 38. ISBN 9780253112378.
^ Bush, Richard C. (2005). Untying the Knot: Making Peace in the Taiwan Strait. Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 0-8157-1288-X
^ a b c d e Tsang, Steve Yui-Sang Tsang. The Cold War's Odd Couple: The Unintended Partnership Between the Republic of China and the UK, 1950 1958. (2006). I.B. Tauris. ISBN 1-85043-842-0. pp. 155, 115 120, 139 145
^ Yang, Kuisong (March 2008). ""Reconsidering the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries"". The China Quarterly (193): 102 121. JSTOR 20192166. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022   via JSTOR.
^ Guo, Xuezhi (29 August 2012). China's Security State: Philosophy, Evolution, and Politics. Cambridge University Press. p. 62. ISBN 978-1-107-02323-9. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2022. Among them, 712.000 counterrevolutionaries were executed, 1.29 million were imprisoned, and 1.2 million were subject to control at various times.
^ Steven W. Mosher. China Misperceived: American Illusions and Chinese Reality. Basic Books, 1992. ISBN 0-465-09813-4 p. 73
^ Kuhn, Anthony; Feng, Emily (2 August 2022). "What 3 past Taiwan Strait crises can teach us about U.S.-China tensions today". www.npr.org. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022.
^ Pollard, Martin Quin (7 April 2022). "China warns U.S. against House Speaker Pelosi visiting Taiwan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022.
^ Chiacu, Doina (8 April 2022). "U.S. House Speaker Pelosi is latest U.S. official to test positive for COVID". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022.
^ Mason, Jeff; Martina, Michael (1 August 2022). "White House: U.S. will not be intimidated by China; Pelosi has right to visit Taiwan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2022.
^ "Nancy Pelosi's plan to visit Taiwan prompts outrage from China". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022.
^  - :               [China-Taiwan: Tensions rise amid possible Pelosi visit]. BBC News   (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022.
^          :                   [Nancy Pelosi flies to Taiwan: what you need to know about the crisis between the USA and China]. unian.ua (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022.
^ Zheng, Sarah (2 August 2022). "China Plans Four Days of Military Drills in Areas Encircling Taiwan". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 6 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022.
^ Davidson, Helen; Ni, Vincent (3 August 2022). "China to begin series of unprecedented live-fire drills off Taiwan coast". the Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022.
^ Lee, Yimou (4 August 2022). "China begins 'illegitimate, irresponsible' live-fire military drills - Taiwan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022.
^ "People's Republic of China In, Taiwan Out, at U.N." The Learning Network. 25 October 2011. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2018.
^ "Taiwan flashpoint". BBC News. Archived from the original on 18 December 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017.
^ Decisive Encounters By Westad, Odd Arne. Stanford University Press, 21 Mar pp. 292 297 2003 (Google Books).
^ " ( )". Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 23 May 2022.
^ Mitter, Rana (10 September 2013). Forgotten Ally: China's World War II, 1937 1945. HMH. ISBN 9780547840567. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
^ a b Mitter, Rana (2020). China's good war : how World War II is shaping a new nationalism. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-674-98426-4. OCLC 1141442704. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2022.
^ Odd Arne Westad, Restless Empire: China and the World Since 1750 (2012) p. 291.
^ Trei, Lisa (9 March 2005). "Hoover's new archival acquisitions shed light on Chinese history". Stanford University. Archived from the original on 11 July 2019. Retrieved 11 July 2019.
^ "  35        ". Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2020.
^  ,  . " ".  .  . Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2021.
^  ,  . " ".  .  . Archived from the original on 14 May 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2021.
^  ,  . " ".  .  . Archived from the original on 13 November 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2021.
^ Sun, Tung-hsun (1982). "Some Recent American Interpretations of Sino-American Relations of the Late 1940s: An Assessment" (PDF). Institute of European and American Studies, Academia Sinica. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2018.
^ T.V. Soong   A Register of His Papers in the Hoover Institution Archives Archived 27 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine media.hoover.org
^    1931  6         . big5.backchina.com (in Traditional Chinese). Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 23 November 2018.
^ For quotes see Odd Arne Westad (2003). Decisive Encounters: The Chinese Civil War, 1946 1950. Stanford University Press. pp. 9 11. ISBN 9780804744843. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 6 October 2019.
^ "  -  ". Archived from the original on 2 January 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2014.
^ Taylor, Jay (2009). The Generalissimo. Harvard University Press. pp. 102 103. ISBN 9780674054714. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 18 March 2023.
^ "Chiang's China". Worldif.economist.com. 1 July 2015. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022.
^ "China Without Tears: If Chiang Kai-Shek Hadn't Gambled in 1946". Uchronia.net. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022.
^ "Who Lost China? | EWTN". Archived from the original on 23 July 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022.
^ Rummel, Rudolph (1994), Death by Government.
^ Valentino, Benjamin A. Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century. Cornell University Press. 8 December 2005. p. 88
^ Barnouin, Barbara and Yu Changgen. Zhou Enlai: A Political Life Archived 25 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2006. ISBN 962-996-280-2. Retrieved 12 November 2022. p. 38
^ a b c Karl, Rebecca E. (2010). Mao Zedong and China in the twentieth-century world : a concise history. Durham [NC]: Duke University Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4. OCLC 503828045.
^ Mitter, Rana (2020). China's good war : how World War II is shaping a new nationalism. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-674-98426-4. OCLC 1141442704. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2022.
^ Feigon, Lee (2002). Mao: A Reinterpretation. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. pp. 51 53. ISBN 978-1566634588.
^ Opper, Marc (2018). "Revolution Defeated: The Collapse of the Chinese Soviet Republic". Twentieth-Century China. 43 (1): 60. doi:10.1353/tcc.2018.0003. S2CID 148775889.
^ Opper, Marc (2020). "The Chinese Soviet Republic, 1931-1934" (PDF). People's Wars in China, Malaya, and Vietnam. University of Michigan Press. p. 58. doi:10.3998/mpub.11413902. ISBN 9780472131846. JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.11413902.8. S2CID 211359950. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2022.
^ Halliday, Jon; Chang, Jung (30 September 2012). Mao: The Unknown Story. p. 133. ISBN 9781448156863. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 8 November 2022. The Ruijin base, the seat of the first Red state, consisted of large parts of the provinces of Jiangxi and Fujian. These two provinces suffered the greatest population decrease in the whole of China from the year when the Communist state was founded, 1931, to the year after the Reds left, 1935. The population of Red Jiangxi fell by more than half a million   a drop of 20 percent. The fall in Red Fujian was comparable. Given that escapes were few, this means that altogether some 700,000 people died in the Ruijin base. A large part of these were murdered as  class enemies,  or were worked to death, or committed suicide, or died other premature deaths attributable to the regime.
^ a b Koga, Yukiko (2016). Inheritance of Loss: China, Japan, and the Political Economy of Redemption After Empire. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 022641213X.
^ "Pomfret, John (October 2, 2009). "Red Army Starved 150,000 Chinese Civilians, Books Says". Associated Press. The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2009. Retrieved October 2, 2009". Archived from the original on 25 October 2011.
^ Lary, Diana (2015). China's Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 1107054672.
^ DeMare, Brian James (2019). Land Wars: The Story of China's Agrarian Revolution. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-1503609525.
^ Tanner (2015), pp. 134 135.
^ Saich The Rise to Power of the Chinese Communist Party Outline Land Law of 1947 Archived 6 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine
^ Scheidel, Walter (2017). The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century. Princeton University Press. p. 225. ISBN 978-0-691-16502-8. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 25 November 2019.
^ a b Liu, Zaiyu (2002).   (PDF). Hong Kong: Twenty First Century Bimonthly. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2019.
Further reading[edit]
Cheng, Victor Shiu Chiang. "Imagining China's Madrid in Manchuria: The Communist Military Strategy at the Onset of the Chinese Civil War, 1945 1946." Modern China 31.1 (2005): 72 114.
Chi, Hsi-sheng. Nationalist China at War: Military Defeats and Political Collapse, 1937 45 (U of Michigan Press, 1982).
Dreyer, Edward L. China at War 1901 1949 (Routledge, 2014).
Dupuy, Trevor N. The Military History of the Chinese Civil War (Franklin Watts, Inc., 1969).
Eastman, Lloyd E. "Who lost China? Chiang Kai-shek testifies." China Quarterly 88 (1981): 658 668.
Eastman, Lloyd E., et al. The Nationalist Era in China, 1927 1949 (Cambridge UP, 1991).
Fenby, Jonathan. Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the China He Lost (2003).
Ferlanti, Federica. "The New Life Movement at War: Wartime Mobilisation and State Control in Chongqing and Chengdu, 1938 1942" European Journal of East Asian Studies 11#2 (2012), pp. 187 212 online how Nationalist forces mobilized society
Jian, Chen. "The Myth of America's  Lost Chance  in China: A Chinese Perspective in Light of New Evidence." Diplomatic History 21.1 (1997): 77 86.
Lary, Diana. China's Civil War: A Social History, 1945 1949 (Cambridge UP, 2015). excerpt
Levine, Steven I. "A new look at American mediation in the Chinese civil war: the Marshall mission and Manchuria." Diplomatic History 3.4 (1979): 349 376.
Lew, Christopher R. The Third Chinese Revolutionary Civil War, 1945 49: An Analysis of Communist Strategy and Leadership (Routledge, 2009).
Li, Xiaobing. China at War: An Encyclopedia (ABC-CLIO, 2012).
Lynch, Michael. The Chinese Civil War 1945 49 (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2014).
Mitter, Rana. "Research Note Changed by War: The Changing Historiography Of Wartime China and New Interpretations Of Modern Chinese History." Chinese Historical Review 17.1 (2010): 85 95.
Nasca, David S. Western Influence on the Chinese National Revolutionary Army from 1925 to 1937. (Marine Corps Command And Staff Coll Quantico Va, 2013). online
Pepper, Suzanne. Civil war in China: the political struggle 1945 1949 (Rowman & Littlefield, 1999).
Reilly, Major Thomas P. Mao Tse-Tung And Operational Art During The Chinese Civil War (Pickle Partners Publishing, 2015) online.
Shen, Zhihua, and Yafeng Xia. Mao and the Sino Soviet Partnership, 1945 1959: A New History. (Lexington Books, 2015).
Tanner, Harold M. (2015), Where Chiang Kai-shek Lost China: The Liao-Shen Campaign, 1948, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, advanced military history. excerpt
Taylor, Jeremy E., and Grace C. Huang. "'Deep changes in interpretive currents'? Chiang Kai-shek studies in the post-cold war era." International Journal of Asian Studies 9.1 (2012): 99 121.
Taylor, Jay. The Generalissimo (Harvard University Press, 2009). biography of Chiang Kai-shek
van de Ven, Hans (2017). China at War: Triumph and Tragedy in the Emergence of the New China, 1937-1952. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674983502..
Westad, Odd Arne (2003). Decisive Encounters: The Chinese Civil War, 1946 1950. Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804744843.
Yick, Joseph K.S. Making Urban Revolution in China: The CCP-GMD Struggle for Beiping-Tianjin, 1945 49 (Routledge, 2015).
External links[edit]
Library resources about  Chinese Civil War 
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chinese Civil War.
Wikiquote has quotations related to Chinese Civil War.
Summary of Chinese Civil War 1946 1949
"Armored Car Like Oil Tanker Used by Chinese" Popular Mechanics, March 1930 article and photo of armoured train of Chinese Civil War
Topographic maps of China Series L500, U.S. Army Map Service, 1954 
Operational Art in the Chinese PLA's Huai Hai Campaign
Postal Stamps of the Chinese Post-Civil War Era
vteChinese Civil War
Principal belligerents and campaigns
 Nationalist Party /  National Government ( National Revolutionary Army)    Constitutional ROC Government (ROC Armed Forces)    Republic of China on Taiwan
 Communist Party /  Soviet Republic ( Red Army)   Liberated Area ( 8th Route Army, N4A, etc.    People's Liberation Army)    People's Republic of China
Pre-1945Post-1945
 1923 Sun Joffe Manifesto 1924 First United Front 1926 Canton Coup 1927 1949 Chinese Communist Revolution 1927 Nanking incidentShanghai CommuneShanghai massacreNanjing Wuhan split715 IncidentNanchang uprisingAutumn Harvest UprisingGuangzhou Uprising 1929 Sino-Soviet conflict 1930 1934 Encirclement campaigns 1931 1934 Chinese Soviet Republic 1933 1934 Fujian People's Government 1934 1936 Long March 1936 Xi'an Incident 1937 1946 Second United Front (Wartime perception of the Chinese Communists) 1944 Dixie Mission
 1945 Chongqing NegotiationsDouble Tenth Agreement 1946 Jiaochangkou Incident 1945-1947 Marshall Mission 1945 1949 Operation Beleaguer 1947 Yu Zisan Incident 1948 SS Kiangya incidentLiaoshen campaign 1948 1949 Huaihai campaignPingjin campaign 1949 Taiping Steamer IncidentYangtze River Crossing CampaignAmethyst Incident
ROC Government retreat to TaiwanPRC incorporation of Xinjiang 1950 Hainan Island campaignWanshan Archipelago Campaign 1950 1958 Kuomintang Islamic insurgency
vteCold War
USA
USSR
NATO
Warsaw Pact
ANZUS
SEATO
METO
Rio Pact
Non-Aligned Movement
1940s
Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Jamaican political conflict
Dekemvriana
Soviet stance in the Warsaw Uprising
Percentages agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states
Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Operation Downfall
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Indonesian National Revolution
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
1947 Polish legislative election
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 crises
Partition of India
Indo-Pakistani War of 1947 1948
1947 1949 Palestine war
1947 1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine
1948 Arab Israeli War
1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight
Marshall Plan
Comecon
1948 Czechoslovak coup d' tat
Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council
Al-Wathbah uprising
Tito Stalin split
Berlin Blockade
Annexation of Hyderabad
Madiun Affair
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Malayan Emergency
March 1949 Syrian coup d' tat
Operation Valuable
1950s
Bamboo Curtain
McCarthyism
Korean War
Arab Cold War (1952 1979)
Egyptian revolution of 1952
Iraqi Intifada (1952)
Mau Mau rebellion
East German uprising of 1953
1953 Iranian coup d' tat
Pact of Madrid
Bricker Amendment
1954 Syrian coup d' tat
Petrov Affair
Domino theory
1954 Geneva Conference
1954 Guatemalan coup d' tat
Capture of the Tuapse
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Jebel Akhdar War
Algerian War
Kashmir Princess
Bandung Conference
Geneva Summit (1955)
Vietnam War
Cyprus Emergency
"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences"
1956 Pozna  protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Polish October
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Syrian Crisis of 1957
Sputnik crisis
Ifni War
Iraqi 14 July Revolution
1958 Lebanon crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
1959 Mosul uprising
1959 Tibetan uprising
Laotian Civil War
Kitchen Debate
Cuban Revolution
Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
1960s
Congo Crisis
Simba rebellion
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d' tat
Albanian Soviet split
Iraqi Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi Kurdish War
Berlin Crisis of 1961
Berlin Wall
Annexation of Goa
Papua conflict
Indonesia Malaysia confrontation
Sand War
Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence
Cuban Missile Crisis
El Porte azo
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Ramadan Revolution
Eritrean War of Independence
North Yemen Civil War
1963 Syrian coup d' tat
Assassination of John F. Kennedy
Aden Emergency
Cyprus crisis of 1963 1964
Shifta War
Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre
Guatemalan Civil War
Colombian conflict
1964 Brazilian coup d' tat
Dominican Civil War
Rhodesian Bush War
Indonesian mass killings of 1965 1966
Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)
ASEAN Declaration
1966 Syrian coup d' tat
Cultural Revolution
Argentine Revolution
South African Border War
Korean DMZ Conflict
12-3 incident
Greek junta
1967 Hong Kong riots
Years of Lead (Italy)
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Al-Wadiah War
Nigerian Civil War
Protests of 1968
May 68
Prague Spring
USS Pueblo incident
1968 Polish political crisis
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
17 July Revolution
1968 Peruvian coup d' tat
Revolutionary Government
1969 Sudanese coup d' tat
1969 Libyan coup d' tat
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Communist rebellion in the Philippines
1970s
D tente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September
Alcora Exercise
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Western Sahara conflict
Cambodian Civil War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1970 Polish protests
Koza riot
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 JVP insurrection
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
1971 Turkish military memorandum
1971 Sudanese coup d' tat
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972
Yemenite War of 1972
Munich massacre
1972 1975 Bangladesh insurgency
Eritrean Civil Wars
1973 Uruguayan coup d' tat
1973 Afghan coup d' tat
1973 Chilean coup d' tat
Yom Kippur War
1973 oil crisis
Carnation Revolution
Spanish transition to democracy
Metapolitefsi
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Second Iraqi Kurdish War
Turkish invasion of Cyprus
Angolan Civil War
Cambodian genocide
June 1976 protests
Mozambican Civil War
Oromo conflict
Ogaden War
1978 Somali coup d' tat attempt
Western Sahara War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Third Indochina War
Cambodian Vietnamese War
Operation Condor
Dirty War (Argentina)
1976 Argentine coup d' tat
Egyptian Libyan War
German Autumn
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Nicaraguan Revolution
Uganda Tanzania War
NDF Rebellion
Chadian Libyan War
Yemenite War of 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
Sino-Vietnamese War
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union
1980s
Salvadoran Civil War
Soviet Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
Gera Demands
Peruvian Revolution
Gda sk Agreement
Solidarity
Eritrean Civil Wars
1980 Turkish coup d' tat
Ugandan Bush War
Gulf of Sidra incident
Martial law in Poland
Casamance conflict
Falklands War
1982 Ethiopian Somali Border War
Ndogboyosoi War
United States invasion of Grenada
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
1985 Geneva Summit
Iran Iraq War
Somali Rebellion
Reykjav k Summit
1986 Black Sea incident
South Yemen Civil War
Toyota War
1987 Lieyu massacre
Operation INFEKTION
1987 1989 JVP insurrection
Lord's Resistance Army insurgency
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
8888 Uprising
Solidarity (Soviet reaction)
Contras
Central American crisis
Operation RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Bougainville conflict
First Nagorno-Karabakh War
Afghan Civil War
United States invasion of Panama
1988 Polish strikes
Polish Round Table Agreement
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Fall of the inner German border
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Peaceful Revolution
1990s
Mongolian Revolution of 1990
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Gulf War
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup
Frozen conflicts
Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute
Foreign policy
Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Kinmen Agreement
IdeologiesCapitalism
Liberalism
Chicago school
Keynesianism
Libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Democratic capitalism
Socialism
Communism
Marxism Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Maoism
Trotskyism
Stalinism
Titoism
Other
Imperialism
Anti-imperialism
Nationalism
Ultranationalism
Chauvinism
Ethnic nationalism
Racism
Zionism
Anti-Zionism
Fascism
Neo-Nazism
Islamism
Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Guided democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy
White nationalism
White separatism
Apartheid
Organizations
NATO
SEATO
METO
EEC
Warsaw Pact
Comecon
Non-Aligned Movement
NN States
ASEAN
SAARC
Safari Club
PropagandaPro-communist
Active measures
Izvestia
Neues Deutschland
Pravda
Rud  pr vo
Trybuna Ludu
TASS
Soviet Life
Pro-Western
Amerika
Crusade for Freedom
Paix et Libert 
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Radio Free Asia
Red Scare
Voice of America
Technologicalcompetition
Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Historians
Gar Alperovitz
Thomas A. Bailey
Michael Beschloss
Archie Brown
Warren H. Carroll
Adrian Cioroianu
John Costello
Michael Cox
Nicholas J. Cull
Norman Davies
Willem Drees
Robert D. English
Herbert Feis
Robert Hugh Ferrell
Andr  Fontaine
Anneli Ute Gabanyi
John Lewis Gaddis
Lloyd Gardner
Timothy Garton Ash
Gabriel Gorodetsky
Fred Halliday
Jussi Hanhim ki
John Earl Haynes
Patrick J. Hearden
Tvrtko Jakovina
Tony Judt
Harvey Klehr
Gabriel Kolko
Walter LaFeber
Walter Laqueur
Melvyn P. Leffler
Geir Lundestad
Vojtech Mastny
Jack F. Matlock Jr.
Thomas J. McCormick
Timothy Naftali
Marius Oprea
David S. Painter
William B. Pickett
Ronald E. Powaski
Yakov M. Rabkin
Mary Elise Sarotte
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.
Ellen Schrecker
Giles Scott-Smith
Shen Zhihua
Timothy D. Snyder
Athan Theoharis
Andrew Thorpe
Vladimir Tism neanu
Patrick Vaughan
Alex von Tunzelmann
Odd Arne Westad
William Appleman Williams
Jonathan Reed Winkler
Rudolph Winnacker
Ken Young
Espionage andintelligence
List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States
Soviet espionage in the United States
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
CIA
MI5
MI6
United States involvement in regime change
Soviet involvement in regime change
MVD
KGB
Stasi
See also
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet Union United States relations
Soviet Union United States summits
Russia NATO relations
War on terror
Brinkmanship
Second Cold War
Russian Revolution
Category
List of conflicts
Timeline
vte Cross-Strait relations Diplomatic posts
Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office (Taiwan)
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong
Macau Economic and Cultural Office (Taiwan)
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Macau
Diplomacy
Opening of the South-North route
Restoration of Taiwan strait shipping
Kinmen Agreement
Wang Koo summit
Cross-Strait charter
2004 Taiwanese cross-Strait relations referendum
May 17 Statement
2005 Pan Blue visits to mainland China
Cross-Strait high-level talks
First Chen Chiang summit
Second Chen Chiang summit
Fourth Chen Chiang summit
Fifth Chen Chiang summit
Sixth Chen Chiang summit
Seventh Chen Chiang summit
Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan
Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement
Cross-Strait CEO Summit
Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement
Jinjiang Kinmen Pipeline
2014 Wang Zhang meetings
2015 Xi Chu meeting
Ma Xi meeting
Straits Forum
Shanghai-Taipei City Forum
Conflicts
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan
Guanbi policy
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis
Senkaku Islands
Dispute
Incidents
Capture of the Tuapse
Kashmir Princess
Battle of Dong-Yin
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758
Project National Glory
Joint Communiqu  on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations
CAAC Flight 296
China Airlines Flight 334
1987 Lieyu massacre
Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident
Min Ping Yu No. 5202
1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions
Qiandao Lake incident
China Airlines Flight 611
Sunflower Student Movement
Braga incident
Anti-Black Box Curriculum Movement
Wang Liqiang
Freedom pineapples
2021 Solomon Islands unrest
2022 Chinese military exercises around Taiwan
Legislation
Cross-Strait Act
Proposed National Unification Promotion Law
Anti-Secession Law
Organizations
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits
Association for Tourism Exchange Across the Taiwan Straits
Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs
China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification
Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation
Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum
Cross-Strait Peace Forum
Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People
Lienchiang Cross-Strait Matters Forum
Mainland Affairs Council
National Unification Council
Straits Exchange Foundation
Taiwan Affairs Office
Taiwan Competitiveness Forum
Taiwan Strait Tourism Association
Concepts
1992 Consensus
China Circle
Chinese unification
Chinese nationalism
Chinese irredentism
Chinese Taipei
Cross-Strait Economic Zone
Dang Guo
Four Noes and One Without
Greater China
Han chauvinism
One-China policy
One Country on Each Side
One country, two systems
Propaganda in China
Cross-Strait propaganda
Republic of China on Taiwan
Self-determination
Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Special non-state-to-state relations
Six Assurances
Two Chinas
Three Noes
Three Links
Taiwan consensus
Taiwan independence movement
Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan
United front in Taiwan
Under the Roof of One China
Xi Jinping Thought
Zhonghua minzu
Related
Fujian Taiwan relationship
Hong Kong Taiwan relations
Hong Kong Taiwan Economic and Cultural Co-operation and Promotion Council
Taiwan Hong Kong Economic and Cultural Co-operation Council
Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council
Pro-ROC camp
Chinese Travel Document
Exit & Entry Permit
Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Residents
Cross-strait language database
ECFA Debate
HMS Aurora (12)
China and the United Nations
China and the World Bank
Chinese intelligence activity abroad
Chinese information operations and information warfare
Chinese Soviet Republic
Freedom of religion in China
Foreign relations of China
Timeline of diplomatic relations with China
Political status of Taiwan
Foreign relations of Taiwan
Timeline of diplomatic relations with Taiwan
Geostrategy in Taiwan
Anti-Communist Hero
Milk Tea Alliance
Taishang
G3 Beijing Taipei Expressway
G99 Taiwan Ring Expressway
China National Highway 228 (Taiwan)
Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission
Tibet Religious Foundation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama
The World Turned Upside Down
Go and Reclaim the Mainland
 Category:Cross-Strait relations
vteChina articlesHistoryOverviews
History
Timeline
Historiography
Military history
Language
Economic (before 1912) (1912 1949) (1949 )
Ethnic groups
Foreign relations
Dynasties
Monarchs
Prehistory
Paleolithic
Neolithic
Yellow River
Yangtze
Liao
Ancient
Xia
Shang
Zhou
Spring and Autumn
Warring States
Imperial
Qin
Han
Three Kingdoms
Wei
Han
Wu
Jin (266 420)
Sixteen Kingdoms
Northern and Southern dynasties
Sui
Tang
Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms
Liao
Song
Jin (1115 1234)
Yuan
Ming
Qing
High Qing
Century of Humiliation
Taiping Rebellion
Modern
1911 Revolution
Republic (1912 1949)
Chinese Civil War
Chinese Communist Revolution
People's Republic (1949 present)
Cultural Revolution
Tiananmen Square
Economic reform
COVID-19
Uyghur genocide
Geography
Borders
Extreme points
Geology
Natural disasters
Regions
East
Northeast
North
South Central
Central
South
Western
Northwest
Southwest
Terrain
Bays
Canyons
Caves
Deserts
Grasslands
Hills
Islands
Mountains
ranges
passes
Peninsulas
Northeast / North / Central Plains
Valleys
Volcanoes
Water
Canals
Lakes
Rivers
Waterfalls
Wetlands
Water resources
Seas
Bohai
Yellow
East China
South China
Environment
Climate change
Environmental issues
Protected areas
National parks
Nature reserves
UNESCO Biosphere Reserves
Wildlife
Fauna
Flora
Subdivisions
Baseline islands
Border crossings
Cities
Province-level subdivisions
PoliticsLaw
Judicial system
Human rights
LGBT
Tibet
Macao
Hong Kong
Law enforcement
Naming laws
Nationality law
Penal system
Government
Civil service
Constitution
One country, two systems
Elections
Environmental policy
Foreign relations
National People's Congress
Standing Committee
National security
Political parties and movements
Chinese Communist Party
General Secretary
Politburo
Democratic Parties
Anti-democratisation
Pro-democratisation
President
Vice President
State Council
Premier
Vice Premier
Military
Central Military Commission
Ministry of National Defense
People's Liberation Army
Ground
Navy
Air
Rocket
Strategic Support
People's Armed Police
Coast Guard
Militia
Maritime Militia
Economy
Agriculture
Banking
Central bank
Economic history
Energy
Finance system
Foreign aid received
Foreign aid program
Historical GDP
Poverty
Reform
Renminbi (currency)
Science and technology
history
Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
Standard of living
Taxation in premodern China
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Airlines
Culture
Archaeology
Archives
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Gardens
Internet
Libraries
Martial arts
Media
Music
Parks
Philosophy
Religion
Smoking
Sports
Tea culture
Tourism
Variety arts
Historical and Cultural Site
World Heritage Sites
Literature
Society
Anthem
Censorship
Chinese Dream
Corruption
Crime
Emblem
Education
Flag
Harmonious Socialist Society
HIV/AIDS
Intellectualism
Languages
Patriarchy
Population history
"Post-80s"
"Post-90s"
Poverty
Propaganda
Prostitution
Public health
food safety
incidents
Public holidays
Rural life
Sex trafficking
Sexuality
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Social issues
Social relations
Social structure
Social welfare
Suicide
Terrorism
Time zones
Racism
Urban life
Water supply and sanitation
Women
Xiaokang
Primary stage of socialism
Demographics
Emigration
Ethnic groups
Eunuchs
Internal migration
Statistics
Urbanization
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
vteTaiwan articlesHistory
Timeline of Taiwanese history
Prehistory
archaeological sites
Kingdom of Middag
Dutch Formosa
Spanish Formosa
Kingdom of Tungning
Taiwan under Qing rule
Republic of Formosa
Taiwan under Japanese rule
Republic of China
Retreat to Taiwan
Guanbi policy
White Terror
Martial law
Mandarin policy
GeographyOverviews
Beaches
Cities
Climate
Deforestation
Earthquakes
Endemic species / Protected species
Hot springs
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National parks
Rivers
Scenic areas
Superlatives
Volcanoes
GovernmentPoliticsEconomyGovernmentand politics
Cabinet
Premier
Censorship
Civil defense
Constitution
Additional Articles
Elections
Human rights
LGBT rights
Intelligence
Law
Law enforcement
Military
Parliament
President
Office of the President
Secretary-General
Vice President
Political parties
Propaganda
Regions of Taiwan
Administrative divisions
Special municipalities
Counties
Cities
List of administrative divisions
Metropolitan areas
Political issues
Conscription
Cross-Strait relations
Chinese unification
Chinese nationalism
Chinese Taipei
Dang Guo
De-Sinicization
Foreign relations
North South divide
One Country on Each Side
Political status of Taiwan
Special non-state-to-state relations
Two Chinas
Taiwanese nationalism
Taiwan independence movement
Economy
Agriculture
Aquaculture
Floriculture
Automotive industry
Banking
List of banks
Central bank
Companies
Defense industry
Dollar (currency)
Economic history
Energy
Forestry
Maritime industries
Mining
Semiconductor industry
State-owned enterprises
Stock exchange
Taiwan Miracle
Taxation
Telecommunications
Textile
Tourism
Transportation
National SymbolsPeopleSocietyCultureNational symbols
Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Flower
Seals
PeopleDemographics
Taiwanese people
Taiwanese indigenous peoples
Ethnic groups
Hans
Hoklos
Hakkas
Mainland Chinese
Languages
Formosan languages
Amis
Atayal
Bunun
Kanakanavu
Kavalan
Paiwan
Puyuma
Rukai
Saaroa
Saisiyat
Sakizaya
Seediq
Thao
Tsou
Yami
Sinitic
Mandarin
Taiwanese Hokkien
Hakka
Matsu dialect
Sign Language
Braille
Society
Architecture
Crime
Sex trafficking
Education
Healthcare
Inventions and discoveries
Prostitution
Public holidays
Squatting
Superlatives
Taiwan studies
Women
Culture
Animation
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural history
Drama
Gambling
Glove puppetry
Literature
Media
Music
Opera
Night markets
Philosophy
Photography
Religion
Smoking
Sports
T-Beauty
Taiwanese wave
Tea
Tourist attractions
 Category
 Portal
 Outline
vte China United States relations Diplomatic posts
Embassy of China, Washington, D.C.
Ambassadors of China to the United States
Embassy of the United States, Beijing
Ambassadors of the United States to China
Chinese Consulate-Generals
Los Angeles
Houston
American Consulate-Generals
Chengdu
Guangzhou
Hong Kong and Macau
Shanghai
Shenyang
Wuhan
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
Office of China Coordination
Diplomacy
Treaty of Wanghia
Treaty of Tientsin
Burlingame Treaty
Gresham-Yang Treaty
Shanghai International Settlement
American Concession (Shanghai)
United States Court for China
Sino-American Treaty for the Relinquishment of Extraterritorial Rights in China
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the United States of America and the Republic of China
Marshall Mission
Loss of China
China White Paper
PRC-US Ambassadorial Talks
1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China
Shanghai Communiqu 
Three Communiqu s
One-China policy
Nixon goes to China
Nixon's China Game
Harvey Feldman
Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing
Joint Communiqu  on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations
Goldwater v. Carter
State visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States
Presidential Rule of Law Initiative
Beijing Washington hotline
State visit by Xi Jinping to the United States
2015 United States China Cybersecurity Agreement
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
United States China talks in Alaska
United States China Working Group
Conflicts
Boxer Rebellion
Eight-Nation Alliance
China Relief Expedition
Chinese Civil War
Korean War
Allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War
Cross-Strait conflict
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Operation King Kong
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis
CIA Tibetan program
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
Incidents
Rover incident
Chy Lung v. Freeman
Cheong Ah Moy v. United States
Chae Chan Ping v. United States
Twain Ament indemnities controversy
1905 Chinese boycott
USS Monocacy incident
Red Scare
Qian Xuesen
1946 United States Air Force C-47 Crash at Yan'an
Shen Chong case
Lamont v. Postmaster General
Hu Na
Project Sabre II
Yinhe incident
1996 United States campaign finance controversy
Johnny Chung
Liu Chaoying
United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade
Hainan Island incident
Operation Shady RAT
Operation Aurora
United States diplomatic cables leak
2012 China anti-Japanese demonstrations
Murder of Shao Tong
Disappearance of David Louis Sneddon
Trump Tsai call
Havana syndrome
Animal Science Products v. Hebei Welcome Pharmaceuticals
China Initiative
Trial of Anming Hu
Concerns over Chinese involvement in 5G wireless networks
Meng Wanzhou
Extradition
TikTok v. Trump
U.S. WeChat Users Alliance v. Trump
COVID-19 misinformation
United States Department of Defense China Task Force
2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan
Chinese espionage in the United States
Cyberwarfare by China
Alleged Chinese spy cases persecuted in the United States
Cox Report
Timeline of the Cox Report controversy
American espionage in China
Hugh Francis Redmond
Uyghur detainees at Guantanamo Bay
2023 balloon incident
Military relations
Yangtze Patrol
Alice Dollar incident
Second Sino-Japanese War
American Volunteer Group
Black Cat Squadron
Development of Chinese Nationalist air force (1937 1945)
China Air Task Force
China Marines
Dixie Mission
Flying Tigers
Operation Beleaguer
Sino-American Cooperative Organization
Exercise RIMPAC
Legislation
United States sanctions against China
U.S. immigration policy
Magnuson Act
Taiwan Relations Act
Executive Order 12711
Chinese Student Protection Act of 1992
United States-Hong Kong Policy Act
United States Hong Kong Agreement for the Surrender of Fugitive Offenders
Forced Abortion Condemnation Act
Taiwan Security Enhancement Act
United States China Relations Act of 2000
Wolf Amendment
Taiwan Travel Act
EQUITABLE Act
Hong Kong Be Water Act
Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act
Tibet Policy and Support Act
Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative Act
Proclamation 10043
Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act
Hong Kong Autonomy Act
Executive Order 13936
Executive Order 13959
Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act
Executive Order 14032
United States Innovation and Competition Act
Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act
Economic relations
Old China Trade
United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission
Group of Two
Strategic Economic Dialogue
Summer Palace Dialogue
U.S. China Strategic and Economic Dialogue
Senior Dialogue
China United States trade war
Permanent normal trade relations
Related
History of China United States relations
Hong Kong United States relations
Macau United States relations
Taiwan United States relations
Americans in China
Chinese Americans
Anti-American sentiment in mainland China
Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
Chimerica
China Lobby
Asia First
Chinese Century
China Hands
China watcher
Cold War in Asia
Second Cold War
Artificial Intelligence Cold War
Ping-pong diplomacy
Triangular diplomacy
Peaceful Evolution theory
Linkage (policy)
String of Pearls (Indian Ocean)
Thucydides Trap
Hong (business)
Air route authority between the United States and China
Blue Team
TPE (cable system)
Protestant missions in China
Elijah Coleman Bridgman
Divie Bethune McCartee
The 1990 Institute
Boxer Indemnity Scholarship
China Aid Society
Chinese Educational Mission
Committee for a Democratic Far Eastern Policy
Congressional-Executive Commission on China
Hua Yuan Science and Technology Association
Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China
United States House Select Committee on Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party
Kissinger Institute on China and the United States
National Committee on United States China Relations
Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association
Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction
US-China Business Council
US China Education Trust
US China Peoples Friendship Association
Massachusetts International Academy
Harvard Summit for Young Leaders in China
International School of Beijing
SARS conspiracy theory
Yixian glazed pottery luohans
Harvard Bixi
William H. Hinton
Human Rights Record of the United States
USA pavilion at Expo 2010
New Federal State of China
China Human Rights Biweekly
Far East Reporter
The Coming Conflict with China
A Great Wall: Six Presidents and China
The New Chinese Empire
The Art of Investing in America
On China
Peaceful War
The Transpacific Experiment
Stealth War: How China Took Over While America's Elite Slept
Red Chinese Battle Plan
The China Hustle
 Category:China United States relations
vte Taiwan United States relations Diplomatic posts
Former Embassy of Taiwan, Washington, D.C.
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Houston
Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States
Twin Oaks
Former Ambassador of the United States to China
American Institute in Taiwan
American Institute in Taiwan Kaohsiung Branch Office
Former Embassy of the United States in Taipei
U.S. Commercial Service in Taiwan
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
Diplomacy
Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty
Formosa Resolution of 1955
July 2002 state visit to the United States
Trump Tsai call
2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan
Congressional Taiwan Caucus
Senate Taiwan Caucus
Six Assurances
Incidents
Rover incident
Raid on Taipei
Capture of the Tuapse
May 24 incident
Joint Communiqu  on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations
Goldwater v. Carter
One-China policy
United States beef imports in Taiwan
Military relations
Chinese Civil War
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Operation King Kong
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Third Taiwan Strait Crisis
United States Taiwan Defense Command
Yangmingshan American Military Housing
American arms sales to Taiwan
Major non-NATO ally
Legislation
Taiwan Relations Act
Taiwan Security Enhancement Act
Taiwan Relations Act Affirmation and Naval Vessel Transfer Act of 2014
Taiwan Travel Act
Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative Act
Related
American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei
Formosan Association for Public Affairs
International Community Radio Taipei
China United States relations
 Category:Taiwan United States relations
Authority control National
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Other
NARA
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_Civil_War&oldid=1149656661"