Core group of ancient Hebrew scriptures
"Tanakh" redirects here. For other uses, see Tanakh (disambiguation).
This article is about the Jewish text. For other uses, see Old Testament, Bible translations into Hebrew, and Hebrew Bible: A Critical Edition.
This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German.  (March 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.
Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate, is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Tanach]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|de|Tanach}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.
Hebrew Bible , TanakhComplete set of scrolls, constituting the TanakhInformationReligionJudaismChristianityLanguageBiblical HebrewBiblical AramaicPeriod8th/7th centuries BCE   2nd/1st centuries BCEHebrew Bible at Hebrew Wikisource
Tanakh (Judaism)
Torah (Instruction)GenesisBereshitExodusShemotLeviticusWayiqraNumbersBemidbarDeuteronomyDevarim
Nevi'im (Prophets)
Former
JoshuaYehoshuaJudgesShofetimSamuelShemuelKingsMelakhim
Latter
IsaiahYeshayahuJeremiahYirmeyahuEzekielYekhezqel
Minor 
Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
Ketuvim (Writings)
Poetic
PsalmsTehillimProverbsMishleiJobIyov
Five Megillot (Scrolls)
Song of SongsShir HashirimRuthRutLamentationsEikhahEcclesiastesQoheletEstherEster
Historical
DanielDaniyyelEzra NehemiahEzraChroniclesDivre Hayyamim
Old Testament (Christianity)
Pentateuch
Genesis
Exodus
Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy
Historical
Joshua
Judges
Ruth
1 2 Samuel
1 2 Kings
1 2 Chronicles
Ezra
Nehemiah
Esther
Wisdom
Job
Psalms
Proverbs
Ecclesiastes
Song of Songs
Prophetic
Major prophets
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Lamentations
Ezekiel
Daniel
Minor prophets
Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
Deuterocanonical
Tobit
Judith
Additions to Esther
1 Maccabees
2 Maccabees
Wisdom of Solomon
Sirach
Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah
Additions to Daniel
Orthodox only
1 Esdras
2 Esdras
Prayer of Manasseh
Psalm 151
3 Maccabees
4 Maccabees
Odes
Orthodox Tewahedo
1 Enoch
Jubilees
1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan
Paralipomena of Baruch
Broader canon
Bible portalvte
The Hebrew Bible or Tanakh[a] (/t n x/;[1] Hebrew:   T n ), also known in Hebrew as Miqra (/mi kr /; Hebrew:   M qr ), is the canonical collection of Hebrew scriptures, including the Torah, the Nevi'im, and the Ketuvim. Different branches of Judaism and Samaritanism have maintained different versions of the canon, including the 3rd-century Septuagint text used in Second Temple Judaism, the Syriac Peshitta, the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and most recently the 10th-century medieval Masoretic Text compiled by the Masoretes, currently used in Rabbinic Judaism.[2] The terms "Hebrew Bible" or "Hebrew Canon" are frequently confused with the Masoretic Text, however, this is a medieval version and one of several texts considered authoritative by different types of Judaism throughout history.[2] The current edition of the Masoretic Text is mostly in Biblical Hebrew, with a few passages in Biblical Aramaic (in the books of Daniel and Ezra, and the verse Jeremiah 10:11).[3]
The authoritative form of the modern Hebrew Bible used in Rabbinic Judaism is the Masoretic Text (7th to 10th century CE), which consists of 24 books, divided into pesuqim (verses). The Hebrew Bible developed during the Second Temple Period, as the Jews decided which religious texts were of divine origin; the Masoretic Text, compiled by the Jewish scribes and scholars of the Early Middle Ages, comprises the Hebrew and Aramaic 24 books that they considered authoritative.[2]
The Hellenized Greek-speaking Jews of Alexandria produced a Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible called "the Septuagint", that included books later identified as the Apocrypha, while the Samaritans produced their own edition of the Torah, the Samaritan Pentateuch; according to the Dutch Israeli biblical scholar and linguist Emanuel Tov, professor of Bible Studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, both of these ancient editions of the Hebrew Bible differ significantly from the medieval Masoretic Text.[2] Currently, all the main non-Protestant (Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental Orthodox) Christian denominations accept as canonical the Deuterocanonical books, which were excluded from the modern Hebrew Bible and the Protestant Bible.[4] The ancient translations of the Hebrew Bible currently used by the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches are based on the Septuagint, which was considered the authoritative scriptural canon by the early Christians.[5] The Septuagint was influential on early Christianity as it was the Hellenistic Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible primarily used by the 1st-century Christian authors.[6]
The contents of the Masoretic Text are similar, but not identical, to those of the Protestant Old Testament, in which the material is divided into 39 books and arranged in a different order. This is due to the Tiberian Hebrew-Masoretic Text having been considered the "original" Hebrew text across Europe during the Renaissance.[citation needed] Biblical scholars within the Catholic Church started to treat these books differently due to this misunderstanding of the Masoretic Text, and Martin Luther took this understanding even further due to the ad fontes ("to the sources") principle of Renaissance humanism. Luther didn't know that the Masoretic Text was a recent edition of the Hebrew Bible when using it to justify removing 7 books from the Christian Old Testament.[citation needed]
In addition to the Masoretic Text, modern biblical scholars seeking to understand the history of the Hebrew Bible use a range of sources.[7] These include the Septuagint, the Syriac language Peshitta translation, the Samaritan Pentateuch, the Dead Sea Scrolls collection, and quotations from rabbinic manuscripts. These sources may be older than the Masoretic Text in some cases and often differ from it.[8] These differences have given rise to the theory that yet another text, an Urtext of the Hebrew Bible, once existed and is the source of the versions extant today.[9] However, such an Urtext has never been found, and which of the three commonly known versions (Septuagint, Masoretic Text, Samaritan Pentateuch) is closest to the Urtext is debated.[10]
The name "Tanakh"[edit]
Part of a series onJudaism 
Movements
Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Modern
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot
Philosophy
Principles of faith
Kabbalah
Messiah
Ethics
Chosenness
God
Names
Musar movement
Texts
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
 umash
Siddur
Piyutim
Zohar
Rabbinic
Mishnah
Talmud
Midrash
Tosefta
Law
Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Mishnah Berurah
Aruch HaShulchan
Kashrut
Tzniut
Tzedakah
Niddah
Noahide laws
Holy cities / places
Jerusalem
Safed
Hebron
Tiberias
Synagogue
Beth midrash
Mikveh
Sukkah
Chevra kadisha
Holy Temple
Tabernacle
Important figures
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Moses
Aaron
David
Solomon
Sarah
Rebecca
Rachel
Leah
Rabbinic sagesChazal
Tannaim
Amoraim
Savoraim
Geonim
Rishonim
Acharonim
Religious roles
Rabbi
Rebbe
Posek
Hazzan
Dayan
Rosh yeshiva
Mohel
Kohen
Culture and education
Brit
Zeved habat
Pidyon haben
Bar and Bat Mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement
Yeshiva
Kolel
Cheder
Ritual objects
Sefer Torah
Tallit
Tefillin
Tzitzit
Kippah
Mezuzah
Menorah
Shofar
Four species
Etrog
Lulav
Hadass
Arava
Kittel
Gartel
Prayers
Shema (Sh'ma)
Amidah
Aleinu
Kaddish
Minyan
Birkat Hamazon
Shehecheyanu
Hallel
Havdalah
Tachanun
Kol Nidre
Selichot (S'lichot)
Major holidays
Rosh Hashana
Yom Kippur
Sukkot
Pesach
Shavuot
Purim
Hanukkah
Other religions
Judaism and Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Mormonism
Samaritanism
Abrahamic religions
Judeo-Christian
Pluralism
Related topics
Jews
Zionism
Israel
Criticism
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Holocaust theology
Music
Jesus
Muhammad
 Judaism portalvte
Further information: Hebrew abbreviations and Abjad
Tanakh is an acronym, made from the first Hebrew letter of each of the Masoretic Text's three traditional divisions: Torah (literally 'Instruction' or 'Law'),[11] Nevi'im (Prophets), and Ketuvim (Writings) hence TaNaKh.
The three-part division reflected in the acronym Tanakh is well attested in the rabbinic literature.[12] During that period, however, Tanakh was not used. Instead, the proper title was Mikra (or Miqra,  , meaning reading or that which is read) because the biblical texts were read publicly. The acronym 'Tanakh' is first recorded in the medieval era.[13] Mikra continues to be used in Hebrew to this day, alongside Tanakh, to refer to the Hebrew scriptures. In modern spoken Hebrew, they are interchangeable.[14]
The term "Hebrew Bible"[edit]
Part of a series on theBible
Canons and books
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
Old Testament (OT)
New Testament (NT)
Deuterocanon
Antilegomena
Chapters and verses
Apocrypha
Jewish
OT
NT
Authorship and development
Authorship
Dating
Hebrew canon
Old Testament canon
New Testament canon
Composition of the Torah
Mosaic authorship
Pauline epistles
Petrine epistles
Johannine works
Translations and manuscripts
Dead Sea scrolls
Masoretic Text
Samaritan Pentateuch
Targumim
Septuagint
Peshitta
Vetus Latina
Vulgate
Gothic Bible
Luther Bible
English Bibles
by language
Biblical studies
Archeology
Artifacts
Dating
Historicity
Internal consistency
People
Places
Names
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia
Rahlfs' Septuagint
Novum Testamentum Graece
Documentary hypothesis
Synoptic problem
NT textual categories
Biblical criticism
Historical
Textual
Source
Form
Redaction
Canonical
Interpretation
Hermeneutics
Pesher
Midrash
Pardes
Allegorical interpretation
Historical-grammatical method
Inspiration
Literalism
Alcohol
Conspiracy theory
Ethics
Capital punishment
Homosexuality
Humor
Incest
Muhammad
Prophecy
Rape
Serpents
Sex
Slavery
Violence
Warfare
Women
Perspectives
Gnostic
Islamic
Quranic
Inerrancy
Infallibility
Criticism of the Bible
Biblical authority
Outline of Bible-related topics Bible portalvte
See also: Biblia Hebraica (disambiguation) and Development of the Christian Biblical canon
Many biblical studies scholars advocate use of the term Hebrew Bible (or Hebrew Scriptures) as a substitute for less-neutral terms with Jewish or Christian connotations (e.g. Tanakh or Old Testament).[15][16] The Society of Biblical Literature's Handbook of Style, which is the standard for major academic journals like the Harvard Theological Review and conservative Protestant journals like the Bibliotheca Sacra and the Westminster Theological Journal, suggests that authors "be aware of the connotations of alternative expressions such as ... Hebrew Bible [and] Old Testament" without prescribing the use of either.[17] Alister McGrath points out that while the term emphasizes that it is largely written in Hebrew and "is sacred to the Hebrew people", it "fails to do justice to the way in which Christianity sees an essential continuity between the Old and New Testaments", arguing that there is "no generally accepted alternative to the traditional term 'Old Testament'."[verification needed] However, he accepts that there is no reason why non-Christians should feel obliged to refer to these books as the Old Testament, "apart from custom of use".[18]
Christianity has long asserted a close relationship between the Hebrew Bible and New Testament, although there have sometimes been movements like Marcionism (viewed as heretical by the early church) that have struggled with it.[18][19][20] Modern Christian formulations of this tension include supersessionism, covenant theology, new covenant theology, dispensationalism, and dual-covenant theology. All of these formulations, except some forms of dual-covenant theology, are objectionable to mainstream Judaism and to many Jewish scholars and writers, for whom there is one eternal covenant between God and the Israelites, and who therefore reject the term "Old Testament" as a form of antinomianism.
Christian usage of the "Old Testament" does not refer to a universally agreed upon set of books but, rather, varies depending on denomination. Lutheranism and Protestant denominations that follow the Westminster Confession of Faith accept the entire Jewish canon as the Old Testament without additions, although in translation they sometimes give preference to the Septuagint (LXX) rather than the Masoretic Text; for example, see Isaiah 7:14.
"Hebrew" refers to the original language of the books, but it may also be taken as referring to the Jews of the Second Temple era and their descendants, who preserved the transmission of the Masoretic Text up to the present day.[21] The Hebrew Bible includes small portions in Aramaic (mostly in the books of Daniel and Ezra), written and printed in Aramaic square-script, which was adopted as the Hebrew alphabet after the Babylonian exile.
Development and codification[edit]
 The inter-relationship between various significant ancient manuscripts of the Old Testament (some identified by their siglum). Mt being the Masoretic text. The lowermost text "(lost)" would be the Urtext.
Main article: Development of the Hebrew Bible canon
There is no scholarly consensus as to when the Hebrew Bible canon was fixed: some scholars argue that it was fixed by the Hasmonean dynasty,[22] while others argue it was not fixed until the second century CE or even later.[23]
According to Louis Ginzberg's Legends of the Jews, the twenty-four book canon of the Hebrew Bible was fixed by Ezra and the scribes in the Second Temple period.[24]
According to the Talmud, much of the Tanakh was compiled by the men of the Great Assembly (Anshei K'nesset HaGedolah), a task completed in 450 BCE, and it has remained unchanged ever since.[25]
The 24-book canon is mentioned in the Midrash Koheleth 12:12: Whoever brings together in his house more than twenty four books brings confusion.[26]
Language and pronunciation[edit]
The original writing system of the Hebrew text was an abjad: consonants written with some applied vowel letters ("matres lectionis"). During the early Middle Ages, scholars known as the Masoretes created a single formalized system of vocalization. This was chiefly done by Aaron ben Moses ben Asher, in the Tiberias school, based on the oral tradition for reading the Tanakh, hence the name Tiberian vocalization. It also included some innovations of Ben Naftali and the Babylonian exiles.[27] Despite the comparatively late process of codification, some traditional sources and some Orthodox Jews hold the pronunciation and cantillation to derive from the revelation at Sinai, since it is impossible to read the original text without pronunciations and cantillation pauses.[28] The combination of a text (  mikra), pronunciation (  niqqud) and cantillation (  te`amim) enable the reader to understand both the simple meaning and the nuances in sentence flow of the text.
Number of different words used[edit]
The number of distinct words in the Hebrew Bible is 8,679, of which 1,480 are hapax legomena,[29]: 112  words or expressions that occur only once. The number of distinct Semitic roots, on which many of these biblical words are based, is roughly 2000.[29]: 112 
Books of the Tanakh[edit]
The Tanakh consists of twenty-four books, counting as one book each 1 Samuel and 2 Samuel, 1 Kings and 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles and 2 Chronicles, and Ezra Nehemiah. The Twelve Minor Prophets (   ) are also counted as a single book. In Hebrew, the books are often referred to by their prominent first words.
Torah[edit]
Main article: Torah
The Torah ( , literally "teaching") is also known as the "Pentateuch", or as the "Five Books of Moses". Printed versions (rather than scrolls) of the Torah are often called Chamisha Chumshei Torah (      "Five fifth-sections of the Torah") and informally as Chumash.
B r  ( , literally "In the beginning")   Genesis
 m  ( , literally "The names of")   Exodus
Vayy qr  ( , literally "And He called")   Leviticus
B m bar ( , literally "In the desert of")   Numbers
D v r m ( , literally "Things" or "Words")   Deuteronomy
Nevi'im[edit]
Main article: Nevi'im
Nevi'im (  N m, "Prophets") is the second main division of the Tanakh, between the Torah and Ketuvim. This division includes the books which cover the time from the entrance of the Israelites into the Land of Israel until the Babylonian captivity of Judah (the "period of prophecy"). Their distribution is not chronological, but substantive.
The Former Prophets (    Nevi'im Rishonim)
Y h a  ( )   Joshua
 f m ( )   Judges
 m l ( )   Samuel
M l m ( )   Kings
The Latter Prophets (    Nevi'im Aharonim)
Y a y h  ( )   Isaiah
Y rm y h  ( )   Jeremiah
Y ezq l ( )   Ezekiel
The Twelve Minor Prophets (   , Trei Asar, "The Twelve"), which are considered one book:
H a  ( )   Hosea
Y l ( )   Joel
 m s ( )   Amos
 a y  ( )   Obadiah
Y n  ( )   Jonah
M  ( )   Micah
Na m ( )   Nahum
 aqq q ( )   Habakkuk
 fany  ( )   Zephaniah
 aggay ( )   Haggai
Z ary  ( )   Zechariah
Mal  ( )   Malachi
Ketuvim[edit]
Main article: Ketuvim
K m ( , "Writings") consists of eleven books.
Poetic books[edit]
Further information: Sifrei Emet
In Masoretic manuscripts (and some printed editions), Psalms, Proverbs and Job are presented in a special two-column form emphasizing the parallel stichs in the verses, which are a function of their poetry. Collectively, these three books are known as Sifrei Emet (an acronym of the titles in Hebrew,  ,  ,   yields Emet  " , which is also the Hebrew for "truth").
These three books are also the only ones in Tanakh with a special system of cantillation notes that are designed to emphasize parallel stichs within verses. However, the beginning and end of the book of Job are in the normal prose system.
T h ll m ( )   Psalms
M l  ( )   Proverbs
 yy  ( )   Job
Five scrolls[edit]
Further information: Five Megillot
The five relatively short books of the Song of Songs, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther are collectively known as the  amesh Megillot (Five Megillot). These are the latest books collected and designated as "authoritative" in the Jewish canon, with the latest parts having dates ranging into the 2nd century BCE. These scrolls are traditionally read over the course of the year in many Jewish communities.
These books are read aloud in the synagogue on particular occasions, the occasion listed below in parenthesis.
 r ha r m (   )   Song of Songs, also known as Song of Solomon (on Passover)
R  ( )   Ruth (on Shavuot)
  ( )   Lamentations (on Tisha B'Av[30])
Q hele  ( )   Ecclesiastes (on Sukkot)
 Est r ( )   Esther (on Purim)
Other books[edit]
Besides the three poetic books and the five scrolls, the remaining books in Ketuvim are Daniel, Ezra Nehemiah and Chronicles. Although there is no formal grouping for these books in the Jewish tradition, they nevertheless share a number of distinguishing characteristics.
Their narratives all openly describe relatively late events (i.e. the Babylonian captivity and the subsequent restoration of Zion).
The Talmudic tradition ascribes late authorship to all of them.
Two of them (Daniel and Ezra) are the only books in Tanakh with significant portions in Aramaic.
D n l ( )   Daniel
 Ezr  ( )   Ezra and Nehemiah
D vr  hayY m m (   )   Chronicles
Book order[edit]
The Jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in Ketuvim. The Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 1:5)[31] gives their order as Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, Lamentations, Daniel, Scroll of Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.
In Tiberian Masoretic codices, including the Aleppo Codex and the Leningrad Codex, and often in old Spanish manuscripts as well, the order is Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Esther, Daniel, Ezra.[32]
Nach[edit]
Nach, also anglicized Nakh, refers to the Nevi'im and Ketuvim portions of Tanakh.[33][34] Nach is often referred to as its own subject,[35] separate from Torah.[36]
It is a major subject in the curriculum of Orthodox high schools for girls and in the seminaries which they subsequently attend,[33] and is often taught by different teachers than those who teach Chumash.[35] The curriculum of Orthodox high schools for boys includes only some portions of Nach, such as the book of Joshua, the book of Judges,[37] and the Five Megillot.[38]
See Yeshiva  Torah and Bible study.
Translations[edit]
Further information: Jewish English Bible translations, Septuagint, Targum, Old Testament, and Bible translations
The Holy Scriptures According to the Masoretic Text: A New Translation with the aid of Previous Versions & with the Constant Consultation of Jewish Authorities was published in 1917 by the Jewish Publication Society. It was replaced by their Tanakh in 1985
Tanakh, Jewish Publication Society, 1985, ISBN 0-8276-0252-9
Tanach: The Stone Edition, Hebrew with English translation, Mesorah Publications, 1996, ISBN 0-89906-269-5, named after benefactor Irving I. Stone.
Tanakh Ram, an ongoing translation to Modern Hebrew (2010 ) by Avraham Ahuvya (RAM Publishing House Ltd. and Miskal Ltd.)
The Living Torah and The Living Nach, a 1981 translation of the Torah by Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan and a subsequent posthumous translation of the Nevi'im and Ketuvim following the model of the first volume
The Koren Jerusalem Bible is a Hebrew/English Tanakh by Koren Publishers Jerusalem and was the first Bible published in modern Israel in 1962
Jewish commentaries[edit]
Main article: Jewish commentaries on the Bible
 Hebrew bible (Tanakh) in the collection of the Jewish Museum of Switzerland, printed in Israel in 1962.
The major commentary used for the Chumash is the Rashi commentary. The Rashi commentary and Metzudot commentary are the major commentaries for the Nach.[39][40]
There are two major approaches to the study of, and commentary on, the Tanakh. In the Jewish community, the classical approach is a religious study of the Bible, where it is assumed that the Bible is divinely inspired.[41] Another approach is to study the Bible as a human creation.[42] In this approach, Biblical studies can be considered as a sub-field of religious studies. The latter practice, when applied to the Torah, is considered heresy[43] by the Orthodox Jewish community.[44] As such, much modern day Bible commentary written by non-Orthodox authors is considered forbidden[45] by rabbis teaching in Orthodox yeshivas. Some classical rabbinic commentators, such as Abraham Ibn Ezra, Gersonides, and Maimonides, used many elements of contemporary biblical criticism, including their knowledge of history, science, and philology. Their use of historical and scientific analysis of the Bible was considered acceptable by historic Judaism due to the author's faith commitment to the idea that God revealed the Torah to Moses on Mount Sinai.
The Modern Orthodox Jewish community allows for a wider array of biblical criticism to be used for biblical books outside of the Torah, and a few Orthodox commentaries now incorporate many of the techniques previously found in the
academic world,[46] e.g. the Da'at Miqra series. Non-Orthodox Jews, including those affiliated with Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism, accept both traditional and secular approaches to Bible studies. "Jewish commentaries on the Bible", discusses Jewish Tanakh commentaries from the Targums to classical rabbinic literature, the midrash literature, the classical medieval commentators, and modern-day commentaries.
See also[edit]
Judaism portal
613 commandments, formal list of Jewish 613 commandments
929: Tanakh B'yachad
Hebrew University Bible Project
Jewish English Bible translations
Mikraot Gedolot
New Jewish Publication Society of America Tanakh
Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible
Weekly Torah portion
References[edit]
Footnotes
^ Also called Tanach and Tenakh
Sources
^ "Tanach" Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine. Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ a b c d Tov, Emanuel (2014). "The Myth of the Stabilization of the Text of Hebrew Scripture".  In Mart n-Contreras, Elvira; Miralles Maci , Lorena (eds.). The Text of the Hebrew Bible: From the Rabbis to the Masoretes. Journal of Ancient Judaism: Supplements. Vol. 103. G ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 37 46. doi:10.13109/9783666550645.37. ISBN 978-3-525-55064-9. Archived from the original on 2023-02-15. Retrieved 2023-02-16.
^ Jeremiah 10:11
^ Andersen, Alex (Spring 2019). "Reconsidering the Roman Catholic Apocrypha". Classical Conversations. Lakeland, Florida: Southeastern University. 3: 1 47. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2023.
^ Tov, Emanuel (2008). Hebrew Bible, Greek Bible, and Quran. T bingen: Mohr Siebeck. doi:10.1628/978-3-16-151454-8. ISBN 978-3-16-151454-8.
^ MacCulloch, Diarmaid (2010). Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years. Penguin Books. pp. 66 69. ISBN 978-1-101-18999-3. Archived from the original on 2023-04-08. Retrieved 2023-03-21.
^ "Scholars seek Hebrew Bible's original text   but was there one?". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 2014-05-13. Archived from the original on 2016-11-05. Retrieved 25 September 2015.
^ "Controversy lurks as scholars try to work out Bible's original text". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 25 September 2015.
^ Isaac Leo Seeligmann, Robert Hanhart, Hermann Spieckermann: The Septuagint Version of Isaiah and Cognate Studies, T bingen 2004, pp. 33 34.
^ Shanks, Herschel (1992). Understanding the Dead Sea Scrolls (1st ed.). Random House. p. 336. ISBN 978-0679414483.
^ "Torah". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2021.
^ "Mikra'ot Gedolot". people.ucalgary.ca. Archived from the original on 2022-08-30. Retrieved 2022-09-09.
^ It appears in the masorah magna of the Biblical text, and in the responsa of the Rashba (5:119); see Research Query: Tanakh/  Archived 2019-07-18 at the Wayback Machine
^ Biblical Studies Mikra: Text, Translation, Reading, and Interpretation. Norton Irish Theological Quarterly. 2007; 72: 305 306
^ Safire, William (1997-05-25). "The New Old Testament". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2019-12-06. Retrieved 2019-12-06..
^ Hamilton, Mark. "From Hebrew Bible to Christian Bible: Jews, Christians and the Word of God". PBS. Archived from the original on 2018-06-14. Retrieved 2007-11-19. Modern scholars often use the term 'Hebrew Bible' to avoid the confessional terms Old Testament and Tanakh.
^ Alexander, Patrick H;  et al., eds. (1999). The SBL Handbook of Style. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson. p. 17 (section 4.3). ISBN 978-1-56563-487-9. See Society of Biblical Literature: Questions Regarding Digital Editions Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine
^ a b McGrath, Alister, Christian Theology, Oxford: Blackwell, 2011, pp. 120, 123. ISBN 978-1444335149.
^ von Harnack, Carl Gustav Adolf (1911). "Marcion" .  In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclop dia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 691 693.
^ For the recorded teachings of Jesus on the subject see Antithesis of the Law#Antitheses; for the modern debate, see Christian views on the old covenant.
^ "Scanning an Ancient Biblical Text That Humans Fear to Open". The New York Times. January 5, 2018. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
^ Davies, Philip R. (2001). "The Jewish Scriptural Canon in Cultural Perspective".  In McDonald, Lee Martin; Sanders, James A. (eds.). The Canon Debate. Baker Academic. p. PT66. ISBN 978-1-4412-4163-4. With many other scholars, I conclude that the fixing of a canonical list was almost certainly the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty.
^ McDonald & Sanders, The Canon Debate, 2002, p. 5, cited are Neusner's Judaism and Christianity in the Age of Constantine, pp. 128 145, and Midrash in Context: Exegesis in Formative Judaism, pp. 1 22.
^ Ginzberg, Louis (1909). The Legends of the Jews Vol. IV : Chapter XI Ezra Archived 2020-03-13 at the Wayback Machine (Translated by Henrietta Szold) Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society.
^ (Bava Batra 14b 15a, Rashi to Megillah 3a, 14a)
^ Midrash Qoheleth 12:12
^ Kelley, Page H.; Mynatt, Daniel S.; Crawford, Timothy G. (1998). The Masorah of Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia: Introduction and Annotated Glossary. p. 20. ISBN 978-0802843630.
^ John Gill (1767). A Dissertation Concerning the Antiquity of the Hebrew Language: Letters, Vowel-points, and Accents. G. Keith. pp. 136 137. also pp. 250 255
^ a b Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2020). Revivalistics: From the Genesis of Israeli to Language Reclamation in Australia and Beyond. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199812790. Archived from the original on 2020-05-05. Retrieved 2020-04-30.
^ Also called Kinnot in Hebrew.
^  Michael L. Rodkinson, trans., The Babylonian Talmud: Original Text, Edited, Corrected, Formulated, and Translated into English, vol. 13 (Boston, MA: The Talmud Society, 1918), 45.
^ Swete, Henry Barclay (1902). An Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek. Cambridge: Macmillan and Co. p. 200.
^ a b "Guide to Israel Schools (Tiferet)". Yeshiva University. Archived from the original on 2020-06-22. Retrieved 2020-06-19. .. classes in Chumash, Nach, Practical Halacha, Tefilla, ...
^ "Who's Afraid of Change? Rethinking the Yeshivah Curriculum". Jewish Action (OU). Archived from the original on 2020-06-23. Retrieved 2020-06-19. know little Nach, are unexcited by the study of ..
^ a b "Tova .. our new ." Archived from the original on 2020-06-21. Retrieved 2020-06-19. Tova joined the .. faculty this fall as a Nach teacher ..  High School for Girls.
^ Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan (1995). The Living Nach. ISBN 978-1885-22007-3.
^ covered in or before 8th grade (so it's a review)
^ Esther, Rus, Shir HaShirim, 
Eicha and KoHeles: these are read aloud in synagogue, each at a particular point in the yearly Holiday cycle.
^ Mishlei. Shai LaMora "Eshkol".
^ "NACH   Shai LaMorah   All Volumes". Archived from the original on 2020-06-25. Retrieved 2020-06-19. Description. Nach metzudos on ...
^ Peter Steinfels (September 15, 2007). "Irreconcilable Differences in Bible's Interpretations". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. of divine origin
^ Michael Massing (March 9, 2002). "New Torah For Modern Minds". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010. Retrieved June 21, 2020. human rather than divine document
^ David Plotz (September 16, 2007). "Reading Is Believing, or Not". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Modern scholars have also unmoored ... Most unsettling to religious Jews
^ Natalie Gittelson (September 30, 1984). "American Jews Rediscover Orthodoxy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. watered-down Judaism soon turns to water
^ Chaim Potok (October 3, 1982). "The Bible's Inspired Art". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Song of Songs ... was entirely profane .. could not have been written by Solomon
^ Mitchell First (January 11, 2018). "Rabbi Hayyim Angel's 13th Book Is Compilation of Tanach-Related Topics". Jewish Link NJ. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2020.
Further reading[edit]
Johnson, Paul (1987). A History of the Jews (First, hardback ed.). London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-79091-4.
Kuntz, John Kenneth. The People of Ancient Israel: an introduction to Old Testament Literature, History, and Thought, Harper and Row, 1974. ISBN 0-06-043822-3.
Leiman, Sid. The Canonization of Hebrew Scripture (Hamden, CT: Archon, 1976).
Levenson, Jon. Sinai and Zion: An Entry into the Jewish Bible (San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1985).
Minkoff, Harvey. "Searching for the Better Text". Biblical Archaeology Review (online). Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2011.
Noth, Martin. A History of Pentateuchal Traditions (1948; trans. by Bernhard Anderson; Atlanta: Scholars, 1981).
Schmid, Konrad. The Old Testament: A Literary History (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2012).
External links[edit]
Hebrew Bible  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Tanakh
Hebrew Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Tanakh (Hebrew source) 
Judaica Press Translation of Tanakh with Rashi's commentary Free online translation of Tanakh and Rashi's entire commentary
Mikraot Gedolot (Rabbinic Bible) at Wikisource in English (sample) and Hebrew (sample)
A Guide to Reading Nevi'im and Ketuvim   Detailed Hebrew outlines of the biblical books based on the natural flow of the text (rather than the chapter divisions). The outlines include a daily study-cycle, and the explanatory material is in English, by Seth (Avi) Kadish.
Tanakh Hebrew Bible Project An online project that aims to present critical text of the Hebrew Bible with important ancient versions (Samaritan Pentateuch, Masoretic Text, Targum Onkelos, Samaritan Targum, Septuagint, Peshitta, Aquila of Sinope, Symmachus, Theodotion, Vetus Latina, and Vulgate) in parallel with new English translation for each version, plus a comprehensive critical apparatus and a textual commentary for every verse.
vteThe BibleHebrew Bible/Old Testament - New TestamentOverview
Biblical criticism
Biblical studies
Biblical canon
Historicity of the Bible
Chronology of the Bible
Biblical authority
Topics
Allegorical interpretation of the Bible
The Bible and ethics
The Bible and homosexuality
The Bible and violence
The Bible and slavery
The Bible and humor
Alcohol in the Bible
Ethics in the Bible
Women in the Bible
Muhammad and the Bible
Criticism of the Bible
Internal consistency of the Bible
Biblical hermeneutics
African American
Asian American
Hebrew Bible
Commentaries
Covenant
Crime and punishment
Capital crimes
Events
Homosexuality
Prayer
Rape
Sex
Warfare
Witchcraft and divination
Christian Bible
Catholic
Protestant
Canons
Development
Outline    Category   Portal   WikiProject
vteJews and Judaism
Outline of Judaism
Index of Jewish history-related articles
History
Timeline
Israelites
Origins of Judaism
Ancient Israel and Judah
Second Temple period
Rabbinic Judaism
Middle Ages
Haskalah
Zionism
Population
Assimilation
Atheists
Buddhists
Karaites
Samaritans
Lists of Jews
Persecution
Antisemitism
Diaspora
Ashkenazi
Chuts
Yekke
Bene Israel
Beta Israel
Beta Abraham
Bene Ephraim
Bnei Menashe
Cochini
Gruzinim
Italkim
Kaifeng Jews
Karaites
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Maghrebi
Berber Jews
Mizrahi
Baghdadi
Bukharim
Mountain Jews
Romaniote
Sephardi
Musta'arabi
Paradesi
Teimanim
Languages(Diasporic)
Hebrew
Modern
Ashkenazi
Sephardi
Mizrahi
Yemenite
Tiberian
Samaritan
Signed
Medieval
Mishnaic
Biblical
Babylonian
Palestinian
Catalanic
Judeo-Amazigh
Judeo-Arabic
Yahudic
Judeo-Baghdadi
Judeo-Moroccan
Judeo-Tripolitanian
Judeo-Tunisian
Judeo-Yemeni
Judaeo-Aramaic
Targum
Barzani
Betanure
Hulaul 
Lishana Deni
Lish n Did n
Lishanid Noshan
Biblical
Talmudic
Palestinian
Galilean
Judeo-Aragonese
Judeo-Italian
Judaeo-Piedmontese
Judeo-Gascon
Judaeo-Greek
Judeo-Latin
Judeo-Malayalam
Judeo-Marathi
Judaeo-Occitan
Judeo-Persian
Bukhori
Judeo-Borujerdi
Judeo-Golpaygani
Judeo-Hamedani
Judeo-Shirazi
Juhuri
Judaeo-Portuguese
Judeo-Urdu
Karaim
Kayli a
Kivruli
Knaanic
Koin  Greek
Krymchak
Lachoudisch
Ladino
Haketia
Tetuani
Lotegorisch
Qware a
Shassagh
Shassi
Shuadit
Yiddish
Zarphatic
Philosophy
Beliefs
Mitzvah
Rabbinic authority
Chosen people
Conversion
Eschatology
Messiah
Ethics
Holiness
God
Halakha
Kabbalah
Land of Israel
Who is a Jew?
Branches
Religious movements
Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Litvaks
Modern
Conservative
Reform
Reconstructionist
Humanistic
Neo-Hasidism
Renewal
relations
Haymanot
Hellenistic
Karaitism
Samaritanism
Science
Secularism
Schisms
Literature
Sifrei Kodesh
Tanakh
Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim
Rabbinic
Mishnah
Talmud
Tosefta
Midrash
Kabbalah texts
Hekhalot literature
Pardes Rimonim
Sefer HaBahir
Sefer HaEtz Chaim
Sefer Raziel HaMalakh
Sefer Yetzirah
Zohar
Shulchan Aruch
Siddur
Hebrew literature
Culture
Astrology
perspectives
Monen
Astronomy
Calendar
Holidays
Cuisine
Kashrut
Education
Leadership
Rabbi
Rebbe
Marriage
Music
Names
Politics
Prayer
Synagogue
Hazzan
Symbolism
Studies
Center for Jewish History
American Jewish Historical Society
American Sephardi Federation
Leo Baeck Institute New York
Yeshiva University Museum
YIVO Institute for Jewish Research
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation
Encyclopaedia Judaica
Genetics
Jew (word)
Jewish Encyclopedia
Jewish Virtual Library
National Library of Israel
YIVO Encyclopedia
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
Encyclopedia of the Holocaust
Holocaust Encyclopedia
Relations with other religions
Christian
Anabaptism
Catholicism
Mormonism
Protestantism
Jews and Christmas
non-Christian
Buddhism
Islam
Hinduism
Italics indicate extinct languages
 Category
 Judaism portal
vteReligious texts (List)Antiquity
Pyramid Texts (Egyptian religion)
Vedas (Hinduism)
Agamas (Jainism)
Avesta (Zoroastrian)
Tao Te Ching and Zhuangzi (Taoist)
Tripi aka (Buddhist)
Hebrew Bible (Judaism, Christianity)
Samaritan Torah (Samaritanism)
Deuterocanon (Roman Catholicism, Eastern Christianity)
Metamorphoses (Roman polytheism)
New Testament (Christianity)
Nag Hammadi library (Gnosticism)
Talmud (Judaism)
Theogony (Greek polytheism)
Upanishads (Hinduism)
Enneads (Neoplatonism)
Divine Liturgy (Eastern Christianity)
Medieval
Puranas (Hinduism)
Puya (Sanamahism)
Quran (Islam)
Kojiki (Shinto)
Ambrosian Hymnal (Roman Catholicism)
Hadith (Islam)
Summa Theologica (Roman Catholicism)
Early modern
Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh)
Luther's Large Catechism (Lutheranism)
Augsburg Confession (Protestantism)
Heidelberg Catechism (Protestantism)
Book of Common Prayer (Anglicanism)
Roman Missal (Roman Catholicism)
Roman Catechism (Roman Catholicism)
Modern
Book of Mormon (Mormonism)
Ofudesaki (Tenrikyo)
Kit b-i-Aqdas (Baha'i)
Liber AL vel Legis (Thelemite)
Book of Shadows (Wiccan)
Dianetics (Scientologist)
The Satanic Bible (Satanist)
Geniocracy (Raelian)
Catechism (Roman Catholicism)
vteBooks of the BibleHebrew Bible/Old Testament(protocanon)
Genesis
Exodus
Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy
Joshua
Judges
Ruth
1 2 Samuel
1 2 Kings
1 2 Chronicles
Ezra
Nehemiah
Esther
Job
Psalms
Proverbs
Ecclesiastes
Song of Songs
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Lamentations
Ezekiel
Daniel
Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
Deuterocanonand apocryphaCatholicEastern OrthodoxOthers
Tobit
Judith
Additions to Esther
1 Maccabees
2 Maccabees
Wisdom
Sirach
Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah
Additions to Daniel
Susanna
Song of the Three Children
Bel and the Dragon
Eastern OrthodoxOthers
1 Esdras
2 Esdras
Prayer of Manasseh
Psalm 151
3 Maccabees
4 Maccabees
Odes
Orthodox Tewahedo
Enoch
Jubilees
1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan
Paralipomena of Baruch
Broader canon
Classification
Pseudepigrapha
list
New Testament
Jewish
New Testament
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Acts
Romans
1 Corinthians
2 Corinthians
Galatians
Ephesians
Philippians
Colossians
1 Thessalonians
2 Thessalonians
1 Timothy
2 Timothy
Titus
Philemon
Hebrews
James
1 Peter
2 Peter
1 John
2 John
3 John
Jude
Revelation
Subdivisions
Chapters and verses
Pentateuch
Historical books
Wisdom books (Poetic Books)
Prophetic books
Major prophets
Minor prophets
Gospels
List
Synoptic
Epistles
Pauline
Johannine
Pastoral
Catholic
Apocalyptic literature
Development
Intertestamental period
Old Testament canon
New Testament canon
Antilegomena
Jewish canon
Christian canon
Dating the Bible
Manuscripts
Dead Sea Scrolls
Samaritan Pentateuch
Septuagint
Targum
Diatessaron
Muratorian fragment
Peshitta
Vetus Latina
Vulgate
Masoretic Text
New Testament manuscript categories
New Testament papyri
New Testament uncials
Related
Authorship
Bible version debate
English Bible translations
Other books referenced in the Bible
Additional Scriptures
Studies
Biblical and Quranic narratives
Synod of Hippo
Textual criticism
Category
Portal
WikiProject
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hebrew_Bible&oldid=1148828856"