Christian hymn
For the Bach cantata, see Gloria in excelsis Deo, BWV 191.
 The melody in neume notation
"Gloria in excelsis Deo" (Latin for "Glory to God in the highest") is a Christian hymn known also as the Greater Doxology (as distinguished from the "Minor Doxology" or Gloria Patri) and the Angelic Hymn[1][2]/Hymn of the Angels.[3] The name is often abbreviated to Gloria in Excelsis or simply Gloria.
Gloria VIII from the Roman Gradual
Gloria VIII
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The hymn begins with the words that the angels sang when announcing the birth of Christ to shepherds in Luke 2:14 (in Latin). Other verses were added very early, forming a doxology.[4]
An article by David Flusser links the text of the verse in Luke with ancient Jewish liturgy.[5]
History[edit]
Gloria in excelsis Deo is an example of  the psalmi idiotici ("private psalms", i.e. compositions by individuals in imitation of the  biblical Psalter) that were popular in the 2nd and 3rd centuries. Other surviving examples of this lyric poetry are the Te Deum and the Phos Hilaron.[4] In the 4th century it became part of morning prayers, and is still recited in the Byzantine Rite Orthros service.[1]
The Latin translation is traditionally attributed to Hilary of Poitiers (c. 300 368), who may have learned it while in the East (359 360); as such, it is part of a loose tradition of early Latin translations of the scripture known as the Vetus Latina.[4] The Vulgate Latin translation of the Bible was commissioned only in 382.[6]
The Latin hymn thus uses the word excelsis to translate the Greek word     hyps stois (the highest) in Luke 2:14, not the word altissimis, which Jerome preferred for his translation. However, this word is used near the end: tu solus Altissimus, Iesu Christe (you alone the Most High, Jesus Christ).
Present-day Greek Orthodox text[edit]
           .
                     .[note 1]
   ,    ,    ,    ,    ,          .
   ,    ,    ,      ,    ,      .
     ,        ,        ,            ,    ,            .
       ,            ,      .
         ,        ,    ,        .  .
 '        ,                            .
(Verses follow that vary according to whether the celebration is on a Sunday or a weekday.)[8][9]
Glory to you who have shown us the light.
Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, good will to all people.
We praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we give thanks to you for your great glory.
Lord, King, heavenly God, Father, almighty; Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, and Holy Spirit.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father who take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us, you who take away the sins of the world.
Receive our prayer, you who sit at the right hand of the Father, and have mercy on us.
For you only are holy, only you are Lord
Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Each day I shall bless you, and I will praise your name forever and to the ages of ages.[10]
Present-day Coptic text[edit]
     :          :        :        . 
   :    :    :    :      :      :          . 
         :      :            :      . 
         :      :            .
             .          . 
     :      :      :      .      .  . 
       :                    .  .
               :            . 
     :        .        :          .[11]
Let us praise with the angels saying,  Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and goodwill toward men. 
We praise You. We bless You. We serve You. We worship You. We confess to You. We proclaim Your glory. We thank You for Your great glory.
O Lord who reigns over the heavens, God the Father, the Almighty. O Lord, the one only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit.
O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, who bears the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
O who bears the sins of the world, accept our supplications. O who sits at the right hand of His Father, have mercy on us.
You alone are holy; You alone are the Most High, my Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit. Glory to God the Father. Amen.
Every day I will bless You and praise Your holy name forever and unto the ages of all ages. Amen.
Since the night my spirit seeks You early, O my God, for Your commandments are a light on the earth.
I continually pursue Your ways for You have become a help to me. In the morning You hear my voice. Early, I stand before You, and You see me.
Present-day Latin text[edit]
Gl ria in exc lsis Deo
et in terra pax hom nibus bonae volunt tis.
Laud mus te,
bened cimus te,
ador mus te,
glorific mus te,
gr tias  gimus tibi propter magnam gl riam tuam,
D mine Deus, Rex cael stis,
Deus Pater omn potens.
D mine Fili unig nite, Jesu Christe,
D mine Deus, Agnus Dei, F lius Patris,
qui tollis pecc ta mundi, miser re nobis;
qui tollis pecc ta mundi, s scipe deprecati nem nostram.
Qui sedes ad d xteram Patris, miser re nobis.
Qu niam tu solus Sanctus, tu solus D minus, tu solus Alt ssimus,
Jesu Christe, cum Sancto Sp ritu: in gl ria Dei Patris. Amen.[citation needed]
Liturgical use[edit]
 Angel with the words "Gloria in Excelsis Deo et in terra pax" by Dalziel Brothers
Byzantine Rite[edit]
In the Byzantine Rite (used by the Eastern Orthodox and some Eastern Catholic Churches), the Gloria is referred to as the Doxology, and there are two forms: the Greater Doxology and the Lesser Doxology. The Greater Doxology is always sung, whereas the Lesser Doxology is read. There are certain textual differences between the two, and the order is somewhat altered in the two forms.
The Greater Doxology is used in the Orthros (Matins) on Sundays and feast days. The Lesser Doxology is used at Matins on simple weekdays and at the Apodeipnon (Compline), but not in the  Divine Liturgy.[4]
Alexandrine Rite[edit]
In the Alexandrine Rite (used by the Coptic Orthodox Church and some other Oriental Orthodox Churches), the Gloria is a common congregational prayer, sometime referred to as the "Praise of the Angels". It is recited collectively by the congregation during the Morning Raising of Incense, as well as at the Matins prayer of the Agpeya (the Alexandrian Canonical Book of the Hours).[12][13] The first verse of the hymn is also recited at the dismissal of the Divine Liturgy before the chanting of the "Concluding Canon".[12]
Roman Rite[edit]
By contrast, in the Roman Rite this hymn is not included in the Liturgy of the Hours, but is sung or recited at Mass, after the Kyrie, on Sundays outside of Lent and Advent, during the octaves of Easter and Christmas, and on solemnities and feasts.[1]
In Masses celebrated in accordance with the 1962 Roman Missal (authorized as an extraordinary form of the Roman Rite), the Gloria is sung much more frequently: the 1960 Code of Rubrics require it at Mass when in the corresponding Office of the day the Te Deum is said at Matins. It is thus used not only on I and II-class feasts (corresponding to solemnities and  feasts in the post-Vatican II Mass) but also on III-class feasts (corresponding to memorials in the later form). In the 1962 form it is also said on ferias of Christmastide and Paschaltide even outside the octaves, but is omitted during the Septuagesima season, which does not exist in the post-Vatican II liturgy. The Gloria is also sung in both the pre-Vatican II and in the later form of the Roman Rite at the Mass of the Lord's Supper in the evening of Maundy Thursday and at the Easter Vigil.[14]
A tradition recorded in the Liber Pontificalis attributes to Pope Telesphorus (128 139?) the use of the hymn at the Mass of Christmas Day and to Pope Symmachus (498 514) its use on Sundays and the feasts of martyrs, but only by bishops; the right to use it was later extended to priests, at first only at Easter and on the day of their ordination, but by the end of the 11th century priests, as well as bishops, used it in the Mass on Sundays and feasts outside of Lent and Pre-Lent. After the 12th century Advent began to be considered a penitential period in imitation of Lent, to the exclusion therefore of the Gloria in excelsis Deo.[4]
Protestant Usage[edit]
Anglican
In the Church of England's 1549 edition of the Book of Common Prayer, it was used in the same position as in the Roman Rite but was later moved to the end of the service, immediately before the concluding blessing.[1] Revisions to the Prayer Book produced the 1552 prayer book and later the 1662 prayer book, but this placement was retained by the Anglican Communion until the 20th century. Common Worship provides two Orders, one of which places the hymn in the earlier position.
The 1928 United States Episcopal prayer book also placed the Gloria at the end of the Eucharist service (like the 1662 prayer book). This edition, still the standard in the breakaway Continuing Anglican churches, allows the hymn to be used in place of the Gloria Patri after the psalms and canticles at Evening Prayer.[1] The Episcopal Church's 1979 Book moved it to the beginning, after or in place of the Kyrie in Rite One. In a Rite Two (i.e., contemporary language) service of Holy Eucharist, the Gloria, or another song of praise, is sung or said on all Sundays except those in Advent or Lent. It may also be used at other times as desired excepting Lent and Advent.
Lutheran
The hymn is also used in the Divine Service of the Lutheran Church,[15] and in the services of many other Christian churches.
Gloria in the Mass ordinary[edit]
See also: Mass ordinary  II. Gloria
Gloria in excelsis Deo et in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis. Laudamus te, benedicimus te, adoramus te, glorificamus te, gratias agimus tibi propter magnam gloriam tuam, Domine Deus, Rex caelestis, Deus Pater omnipotens.
Domine Fili unigenite, Iesu Christe, Domine Deus, Agnus Dei, Filius Patris, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis; qui tollis peccata mundi, suscipe deprecationem nostram. Qui sedes ad dexteram Patris, miserere nobis.
Quoniam tu solus Sanctus, tu solus Dominus, tu solus Altissimus, Iesu Christe, cum Sancto Spiritu: in gloria Dei Patris. Amen.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to people of good will. We praise you, we bless you, we adore you, we glorify you, we give you thanks for your great glory, Lord God, heavenly King, O God almighty Father.
Lord Jesus Christ, Only Begotten Son, Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, you take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us; you take away the sins of the world, receive our prayer; you are seated at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us.
For You alone are the Holy One, you alone are the Lord, you alone are the Most High, Jesus Christ, with the Holy Spirit, in the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Associated ceremonial[edit]
Roman Rite[edit]
In the Tridentine Mass, the priest is instructed, when saying the opening phrase "Gloria in excelsis Deo", to extend his hands and raise them to shoulder height and, at the word "Deo", to join them and bow his head. He is then to continue the recitation standing erect with hands joined and bowing his head to the cross at the words "Adoramus te", "Gratias agimus tibi", "Iesu Christe" (twice), and "Suscipe deprecationem nostram", and at the concluding phrase (as also at the concluding phrase of the Nicene Creed and the Sanctus), to make a large sign of the cross on himself.[16] At High Mass the priest intones the opening phrase, while the deacon and subdeacon stand behind him; then they join him at the altar and together with him quietly recite the rest of the hymn,[17] after which they sit down and wait for the choir to finish its singing of the same text.
The Roman Missal as revised in 1970 simplifies this, saying: "The Gloria is intoned by the priest or, if appropriate, by a cantor or by the choir; but it is sung either by everyone together, or by the people alternately with the choir, or by the choir alone. If not sung, it is to be recited either by all together or by two parts of the congregation responding one to the other."[18] No particular ritual gestures are prescribed.
Byzantine Rite[edit]
In the usage of the Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite, the Great Doxology is one of the high points of the festal Matins service. The priest puts on his phelonion (chasuble). When it comes time for the Great Doxology the deacon opens the Holy Doors, and the priest raises his hands orans and exclaims: "Glory to Thee, Who hast shown us the Light!", and the choir begins chanting the Doxology, while all of the oil lamps and candles in the temple are lit. The Great Doxology concludes with the chanting of the Trisagion and leads into the chanting of the Troparion of the Day. If the bishop is present he vests in his full pontifical vestments for the Great Doxology, and the subdeacons stand behind the Holy Table (altar) holding the lit dikirion and trikirion.
When the Lesser Doxology is called for, it is simply said by the reader, the priest does not put on his phelonion, the Holy Doors remain closed and no lamps or candles are lit. The Lesser Doxology does not end with the Trisagion and is followed by an ektenia (litany).
In liturgical calendars it is symbolized by a red mis-shapen semicircle (with the opening to one side) with three dots inside.
Musical settings[edit]
See also: Mass (music)  II. Gloria
The Gloria has been and still is sung to a wide variety of melodies. Modern scholars have catalogued well over two hundred of them used in the medieval church.[19] The Roman Missal indicates several different plainchant melodies. In addition, several "farced" Glorias were composed in the Middle Ages and were still sung in places when the Roman Missal was revised by order of Pope Pius V in 1570.  These expanded the basic Gloria by, for instance, adding to mentions of Jesus Christ a mention of some relationship between him and his mother. The use of these additional phrases in honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary was so common that in editions of the Roman Missal earlier than the 1921 revision, the text of the Gloria was followed by the rubric: "Sic dicitur Gloria in excelsis Deo, etiam in Missis beat  Mari , quando dicenda est" (When the Gloria in excelsis Deo is to be recited, it is recited in this way, even in Masses of Blessed Mary).[20]
Almost all polyphonic settings of the Mass include the Gloria. In addition, there are a number of settings of the Gloria alone, including: 
Antonio Vivaldi, who wrote two: the widely recorded RV 589, and the less famous RV 588
George Frideric Handel, whose setting for solo soprano and strings was rediscovered in 2001: Gloria[21]
Camille Saint-Sa ns
Francis Poulenc: Gloria
William Walton
John Rutter: Gloria
Mike Anderson: Gloria
Karl Jenkins, who interpolates other texts alongside the standard Gloria text: Gloria
A paraphrase of the text in German, the early Lutheran hymn Allein Gott in der H h sei Ehr, has also been commonly set to music, in the form of chorale preludes or as part of larger compositions. The free paraphrase "Ich lobe meinen Gott, der aus der Tiefe mich holt" became a 1979 hymn of the genre Neues Geistliches Lied, similarly "Ich lobe meinen Gott von ganzem Herzen" the same year.
The popular Christmas carol "Angels We Have Heard on High" is derived from the beginning of the Gloria, which it uses as a refrain. It has been translated into several languages. 
The Gloria features prominently in the popular song "Silence" by Delerium, a trance song as well as in Gina's and Elvira's theme from the Scarface soundtrack.[22][failed verification]
The first phrase is also present in Bladee and Ecco2K's track '5 Star Crest (4 Vattenrum)' from their collaborative album Crest.
Some official English translations[edit]
Book of Common Prayer (1662)[23]
Glory be to God on high
And in earth peace, goodwill towards men,
We praise thee, we bless thee,
we worship thee, we glorify thee,
we give thanks to thee, for thy great glory
O Lord God, heavenly King,
God the Father Almighty.
O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesu Christ;
O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,
that takest away the sins of the world,
have mercy upon us.
Thou that takest away the sins of the world,
have mercy upon us.
Thou that takest away the sins of the world,
receive our prayer.
Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father,
have mercy upon us.
 
For thou only art holy;
thou only art the Lord;
thou only, O Christ,
with the Holy Ghost,
art most high
in the glory of God the Father.
Amen.
ICET ecumenical version (1975)[24][25]
Glory to God in the highest
and peace to his people on earth.
Lord God, heavenly King,
Almighty God and Father,
we worship you, we give you thanks,
we praise you for your glory.
Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father,
Lord God, Lamb of God,
you take away the sin of the world:
have mercy on us;
You are seated at the right hand of the Father:
receive our prayer.
For you alone are the Holy One,
you alone are the Lord,
you alone are the Most High,
Jesus Christ,
with the Holy Spirit,
in the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople New Rome, Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain[26]
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men.
We praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we give you thanks for your great glory.
Lord, King, God of heaven, Father almighty: Lord, only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ and Holy Spirit.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, who take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us; you take away the sins of the world.
Receive our prayer, you who sit on the right hand of the Father, and have mercy on us.
For you alone are holy, you alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
See also[edit]
"Gloria" (U2 song)
Luke 2
Phos Hilaron
Te Deum
Alleluia
Tract (liturgy)
Notes[edit]
^ This verse follows the Byzantine text-type, which has   in the nominative case and thus translates to good will or favour. Modern critical editions of the New Testament used by scholars and most Bible societies follow the Alexandrian text-type, which has   with a sigma at the end, which makes it a genitive case and renders it of good will or of favour.[7]
References[edit]
^ a b c d e Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), article Gloria in Excelsis
^ "Encyclop dia Britannica". Britannica.com. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "Hymn of the Angels", North American Diocese of the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church
^ a b c d e Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Gloria in Excelsis Deo" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
^ English translation of an article that originally appeared in Unser Vater: Juden und Christen im Gespr ch  ber die Bibel: Festschrift f r Otto Michel zum 60. Geburststag (ed. Otto Betz, Martin Hengel, and Peter Schmidt; Leiden: Brill, 1963), 129 152
^ "Encyclop dia Britannica Online, article Vulgate". Britannica.com. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "Luke 2:14 Text Analysis". Biblehub.com. Retrieved 4 December 2021.
^ " ". Analogion.gr. 2007-11-14. Archived from the original on 2012-07-07. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "       ". Analogion.gr. Archived from the original on 2012-07-07. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "The Service of the Sunday Orthros". Goarch.org. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "The Praise of the Angels". Retrieved 2023-01-19.
^ a b The Divine Liturgies of Saints Basil, Gregory, and Cyril (PDF). Tallahassee, Florida, USA: St. Mary & St. George Coptic Orthodox Church. 2001. pp. 29, 210.
^ AGPIA (PDF). Sydney, Australia: Coptic Orthodox Publication and Translation. 2000. p. 24.
^ Murphy, Patrick L. [translator] (1960). The New Rubrics of the Roman Breviary and Missal. Surrey Hills, New South Wales, Australia: Catholic Press Newspaper Co. p. 81. {{cite book}}: |first1= has generic name (help)
^ Birkholz, Mark. "The Gloria in Excelsis", Lutheranreformation.org., December 24, 2016
^ Ritus servandus in celebratione Missae, IV, 3 (page LVI of the 1962 typical edition)
^ Ritus servandus in celebratione Missae, IV, 7 (page LVI of the 1962 typical edition)
^ "General Instruction of the Roman Missal, 53" (PDF). Acbc.catholic.org.au. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 20, 2008. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "Definitions for Medieval Christian Liturgy". Yale.edu. Archived from the original on 2009-09-05. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ See, for instance, page 216 of the 1862 printing by Pustet
^ "The Newly Discovered Musical Composition by Handel". Gfhandel.org. Archived from the original on 2012-02-06. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ Rivaldo, Joey. "Delerium   Silence 2004". about.com. Retrieved 2008-11-10.
^ "The Book of Common Prayer". Cofe.anglican.org. Archived from the original on 2010-11-26. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ Felix Just, S.J. "Roman Catholic Order of Mass in English (1975 2011)". Catholic-resources.org. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "Hymnal 1982: according to the use of the Episcopal Church". Hymnary.org. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "Matins for Sundays and Feasts". Anastasis.org.uk. 2008-11-03. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
External links[edit]
Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Gloria in Excelsis Deo" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
vteMass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic ChurchForms and uses
Pre-Tridentine Mass
Tridentine Mass
After the Second Vatican Council
Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary Form)
Zaire Use
Anglican Use
Orders
Benedictine Rite
Carmelite Rite
Carthusian Rite
Cistercian Rite
Dominican Rite
Norbertine Rite
Types
Low Mass
Missa Cantata
Solemn Mass
Pontifical High Mass
Papal Mass
sine populo
Votive Mass
Ritual Masses
Blue Mass
Chapter and Conventual Mass
Coronation Mass
Gold Mass
Nuptial Mass
Red Mass
Rose Mass
Requiem Mass
Month's mind
White Mass
Language
Liturgical use of Latin
Ecclesiastical Latin
Vernacular
Order of MassPre-Mass
Vesting prayers
Asperges me
Vidi aquam in Eastertide
Processional hymn
Liturgy ofthe Word
Sign of the Cross
Psalm 43
Entrance Antiphon
Penitential Act
Confiteor / Kyrie
Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Collect
Oremus
Responsorial Psalm or Gradual
Epistle
Alleluia
Tract / sequence
Gospel
Homily
Credo
Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed
Universal Prayer
Liturgy ofthe Eucharist
Offertory
Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts
Preface
Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna
Eucharistic Prayer/Canon of the Mass
oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis
texts and rubrics
Roman Canon
history
Memorial Acclamation
Lord's Prayer
embolism / doxology
Pax
Sign of peace
Agnus Dei
Dona nobis pacem
Fraction
Holy Communion
Communion antiphon
Ablutions
Postcommunion
Dismissal
Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino
Last Gospel
Post-Mass
Leonine Prayers
Recessional hymn
Participants
Acolyte
Altar server
female
Bishop
Boat boy
Cantor
Choir
Crucifer
Deacon
Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion
Laity
Eucharistic Congress
Lector
Porter
Priest
Subdeacon
Usher
Altar
Altar crucifix
Altar rails
Ambo
Antependium
Candles and candlesticks
Triple candlestick
Paschal candle
Sanctuary lamp
Chalice veil
Communion bench
Corporal
Credence table
Kneeler
Lavabo
Misericord
Pall
Piscina
Purificator
Rood
Tabernacle
Liturgicalobjects
Altar bell
Ashes
Aspergillum
Censer
Chalice
Ciborium
Crotalus
Collection basket
Communion-plate
Cruet
Evangeliary
Fistula
Flabellum
Funghellino
Holy water
Incense
use
Manuterge
Paten
Processional cross
Pyx
Sacramental bread
wafer
Sacramental wine (or must)
Thurible
Liturgical books
Antiphonary
Ceremonial of Bishops
Customary
Roman Gradual
Graduale Simplex
Roman Missal
Divine Worship: The Missal
Sacramentary and Lectionary
Roman Pontifical
Tonary
Vestments
Alb
Amice
Chasuble
Dalmatic
Episcopal sandals
Humeral veil
Pallium
Pontifical
Stole
Surplice
Tunicle
Vimpa
Liturgical yearCalendars
Tridentine Calendar
General Roman Calendar of 1954
General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII
General Roman Calendar of 1960
General Roman Calendar (current)
Periods
Advent
Christmastide
Ordinary Time
Septuagesima
Lent
Passiontide
Holy Week
Paschal Triduum
Eastertide
Ascensiontide
Eucharisticdiscipline
Abstemius
Concelebration
Church etiquette
Closed communion
Canon 844
Canon 915
Communion and the developmentally disabled
Communion under both kinds
Eucharistic fast
First Communion
Frequent Communion
Genuflection
Headcover
Host desecration
Infant communion
Intinction
Reserved sacrament
Sacramental bread and wine (or must)
Spiritual Communion
Thanksgiving after Communion
Anima Christi
Viaticum
Eucharistictheology
Body and Blood of Christ
Corpus Christi (feast)
Epiousion
Grace ex opere operato
In persona Christi
Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology
Koinonia
Liturgical colours
Mirae caritatis
Mysterium fidei (encyclical)
Origin of the Eucharist
Last Supper
Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature
Priesthood of Melchizedek
Real presence
Transubstantiation
Year of the Eucharist
Regulationsand concepts
Accentus
Ad orientem and versus populum
Calendar of saints
Canon law
Code of Rubrics
Commemoration
General Instruction of the Roman Missal
Holy day of obligation
Intercession of saints
Ordinary and Propers
Pro multis
Sunday
Lord's Day
Related
Agape feast
Anaphora of the Apostolic Tradition
Ambrosian rite
Catholic theology
Christian liturgy
Catholic liturgy
Eastern Catholic liturgy
Christian prayer
effects of prayer
Dicastery for Divine Worship
Council of Trent
Ecclesia de Eucharistia
Eucharistic adoration and benediction
Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour
Eucharistic miracle
Fermentum
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Gelineau psalmody
Gregorian chant
History of the Roman Canon
Lex orandi, lex credendi
Liturgical Movement
Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII
Mediator Dei
Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution)
Music
Pope Paul VI
Sacraments of the Catholic Church
Second Vatican Council
Sacrosanctum concilium
Summorum Pontificum
Traditionis custodes
Stercoranism
Tra le sollecitudini
vtePrayers of the Catholic ChurchPrayers of the Mass
Agnus Dei
Confiteor
Creeds
Apostles' Creed
Athanasian Creed
Nicene Creed
Gloria in excelsis Deo
Gloria Patri
Kyrie eleison
Pater noster
Sanctus
Signum crucis
Marian prayers
Alma Redemptoris Mater
Angelus
Ave Maria
Ave maris stella
Ave Regina caelorum
F tima prayers
Litany
Loreto
Magnificat
Maria mater gratiae
Memorare
Regina caeli
Rosary
Salve Regina
Sub tuum praesidium
Three Hail Marys
Other prayers
Act of Contrition
Adoro te devote
Angele Dei
Anima Christi
Ave verum corpus
Benedictus
Chaplets
Come, Holy Spirit
Jesus Prayer
Mental prayer
Laudes divinae
Litanies
Litany of the Saints
Morning offering
Novena
Nunc dimittis
O salutaris hostia
Penitential Psalms
51: Miserere mei
130: De profundis
Prayer before a crucifix
Prayer of Saint Francis
Prayer to Saint Joseph
Prayer to Saint Michael
Requiem  ternam
Spiritual Communion
Tantum ergo
Te Deum
Thanksgiving after Communion
Veni Creator Spiritus
Veni Sancte Spiritus
Visit to the Blessed Sacrament
Way of the Cross
 Catholicism portal
 Category
vteOrder of the Divine Service in LutheranismPreparatory Service
Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation)
Penitential Act including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter)
The Service of the Word
Introit
Gloria Patri
K rie
Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Oremus
Collect
Old Testament reading
gradual (or Responsorial Psalm)
Epistle
Alleluia (tract during Lent)
Gospel
Hymn of the day
Homily or Postil (Sermon)
Nicene Creed (Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday)
Offertory
Prayers of the Faithful
The Service of the Eucharist
Preface (Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna)
Eucharistic Prayer (Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation)
Lord's Prayer
Sign of peace / pax (elevation)
Agnus Dei
Distribution
Nunc dimittis
Postcommunion
Benedicamus Domino
Benediction
Dismissal
Ite, missa est
Participants
Acolyte
bishop
cantor
choir
crucifer
deacon
elder
laity
lector
Pastor (or Priest)
usher
Parts of the Sanctuary
altar
altar bell
altar crucifix
altar rails
kneeler
piscina
processional cross
tabernacle
Candles
altar candle
paschal candle
sanctuary lamp
votive candle
Liturgical vessels
ciborium
chalice
cruet
Liturgical objects
collection basket
holy water
incense (use)
paten
sacramental bread (wafer)
sacramental wine
thurible
Vestments
alb
chasuble
dalmatic
geneva gown
humeral veil
stole
surplice
tunicle
Liturgical books and hymnals
Christian Worship (1993)
Common Service Book (1917)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996)
Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006)
Lutheran Book of Worship (1978)
The Lutheran Hymnal (1941)
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989)
Lutheran Service Book (2006)
Lutheran Worship (1982)
ReClaim Hymnal (2006)
Service Book and Hymnal (1958)
Authority control: National 
Germany
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gloria_in_excelsis_Deo&oldid=1147959014"