Basic organisational unit of Freemasonry
This article is about the Masonic term for a membership group. For other uses, see Masonic lodge (disambiguation).
The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (May 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Part of a series onFreemasonry
Overview
Grand Lodge
Masonic lodge
Masonic lodge officers
Grand Master
Prince Hall Freemasonry
Regular Masonic jurisdiction
Anglo-American Freemasonry
Continental Freemasonry
History
History of Freemasonry
Libert  ch rie
Masonic manuscripts
Masonic bodies
Masonic
Masonic bodies
York Rite
Order of Mark Master Masons
Holy Royal Arch
Royal Arch Masonry
Cryptic Masonry
Knights Templar
Red Cross of Constantine
Scottish Rite
Knight Kadosh
Societas Rosicruciana
Order of Royal and Select Masters
Grand College of Rites
Swedish Rite
Order of Saint Thomas of Acon
Royal Order of Scotland
Order of Knight Masons
Research Lodge
Corks
Side degrees
The Shrine
Royal Order of Jesters
Tall Cedars of Lebanon
The Grotto
Masonic groups for women
Women and Freemasonry
Order of the Amaranth
Order of the Eastern Star
Co-Freemasonry
Masonic youth organizations
DeMolay
A.J.E.F.
Job's Daughters
International Order of the Rainbow for Girls
Views of Masonry
Anti-Masonry
Anti-Masonic Party
Grand Anti-Masonic Exhibition
Masonic conspiracy theories
Christian attitudes towards Freemasonry
Papal ban of Freemasonry
Taxil hoax
People and places
Masonic Temple
James Anderson
Prince Hall
William Preston
Thomas Smith Webb
Albert Mackey
Albert Pike
John the Evangelist
John the Baptist
William Schaw
Elizabeth Aldworth
List of Freemasons
Lodge Mother Kilwinning
Freemasons' Hall, London
Mark Masons' Hall, London
House of the Temple
Solomon's Temple
Detroit Masonic Temple
List of Masonic buildings
Related
Masonic ritual and symbolism
Great Architect of the Universe
Square and Compasses
Pigpen cipher
Eye of Providence
Hiram Abiff
List of Masonic Abbreviations
Sprig of Acacia
Masonic Landmarks
Pike's Morals and Dogma
Propaganda Due
Dermott's Ahiman Rezon
Volume of Sacred Law
By country
Barbados
Belgium
Canada
China
Croatia
Denmark
France
Finland
Germany
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Italy
Japan
Lebanon
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Scotland
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Philippines
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
Venezuela
vte
 Masonic lodge in the City of Brussels, Belgium
A Masonic lodge, often termed a private lodge or constituent lodge, is the basic organisational unit of Freemasonry. It is also commonly used as a term for a building in which such a unit meets.  Every new lodge must be warranted or chartered by a Grand Lodge, but is subject to its direction only in enforcing the published constitution of the jurisdiction. By exception the three surviving lodges that formed the world's first known grand lodge in London (now merged into the United Grand Lodge of England) have the unique privilege to operate as time immemorial, i.e., without such warrant; only one other lodge operates without a warrant   the Grand Stewards' Lodge in London, although it is not also entitled to the "time immemorial" title.[note 1] A Freemason is generally entitled to visit any lodge in any jurisdiction (i.e., under any Grand Lodge) in amity with his own. In some jurisdictions this privilege is restricted to Master Masons (that is, Freemasons who have attained the Order's third degree). He is first usually required to check, and certify, the regularity of the relationship of the Lodge   and be able to satisfy that Lodge of his regularity of membership. Freemasons gather together as a Lodge to work the three basic Degrees of Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason.
Masonic premises[edit]
Further information: Masonic Temple
 Villa Blye in Paola, Malta, is a Masonic Temple where lodges of British and Irish Freemasons meet
 Masonic lodge room in the Austrian Museum of Freemasonry, Schloss Rosenau, Austria
 Masonic lodge room in Dublin, Ireland
Technically, Freemasons meet as a lodge, not in a lodge. In this context, the word "lodge" refers to a local chapter of Freemasons, meeting as a body. However, the term is often misused to refer to the buildings or rooms that Masons meet in. Masonic premises are also sometimes referred to as temples ("of Philosophy and the Arts"). In many countries Masonic centre or Masonic hall has now replaced these terms to avoid arousing prejudice and suspicion, or confusion with a religious building. Several different lodges, or other Masonic organizations, often use the same premises at different times.
Types[edit]
Blue lodges, craft lodges or ancient craft lodges refer to the lodges that work the first three Masonic degrees, rather than the appendant Masonic orders such as York Rite and Scottish Rite. The term "craft lodge" is used in Great Britain. The blue lodge is said to refer to the traditional colour of regalia in lodges derived from English or Irish Freemasonry. Although the term was originally frowned upon, it has gained widespread and mainstream usage in America in recent times.[1]
Research lodges have the purpose of furthering Masonic scholarship. Quatuor Coronati Lodge, in London, is an example of a research lodge; it has a strictly limited membership and receives visitors and papers from all over the world. Many jurisdictions have well-established research lodges, which usually meet less frequently than blue lodges and do not confer degrees.
In Great Britain, a lodge of instruction may be associated with a Lodge, but is not constituted separately.  The lodge of instruction provides the officers and those who wish to become officers an opportunity to rehearse ritual under the guidance of an experienced brother; there may also be lectures around the ritual and the symbolism in the lodge within a Lodge of Instruction, in order to develop the knowledge and understanding of the membership.
In some jurisdictions in the United States, the lodge of instruction serves as a warranted lodge for candidate instruction in other aspects of Freemasonry besides ritual rehearsal, as well as hosting a speaker on topics both Masonic and non-Masonic.
In Great Britain, the term  mother lodge is used to identify the particular Lodge where the individual was first "made a Mason" (i.e. received his Entered Apprentice degree). 'Mother lodge' may also refer to a lodge that sponsors the creation of a new lodge, the  daughter lodge, to be warranted under the jurisdiction of the same grand lodge; specific procedures pertaining to this vary throughout history and in different jurisdictions. Lodge Mother Kilwinning No 0 in the Grand Lodge of Scotland is known as the Mother Lodge of Scotland, having been referred to in the Schaw Statutes of 1598 and 1599, and having itself warranted other lodges at a time when it did not subscribe to a grand lodge.
The 21st century has seen the rise of internet virtual lodges that meet online rather than in person. Examples are the Internet Lodge No. 9659, Lodge Ireland, and Castle Island Virtual Lodge No. 190. The ability to hold remote lodge meetings allows those who are distant to continue to attend, whether they are military servicemen serving overseas or they inhabit a sparsely populated region.
Organization[edit]
Main article: Regular Masonic jurisdictions
 Plaque of Lodge St. George, the 1797 Masonic Lodge which has been housed in Bermuda's former State House since 1815
Lodges are governed by national, state or provincial authorities, usually called Grand Lodges or Grand Orients, whose published constitutions define the structure of freemasonry under their authority, and which appoint Grand Officers from their senior masons. Provincial Grand Lodges (which in England generally correspond to historic counties) exercise an intermediate authority, and also appoint Provincial Grand Officers.
Different grand lodges and their regions show subtleties of tradition and variation in the degrees and practice; for example under the Grand Lodge of Scotland, the Mark Degree (which is unrecognised by the United Grand Lodge of England, but has a separate Mark Grand Lodge) is integrated into "The Craft" as a completion of the second degree. In any case, Grand Lodges have limited jurisdiction over their member Lodges, and where there is no prescribed ritual Lodges may thus have considerable freedom of practice. Despite these minor differences, fraternal relations exist between Lodges of corresponding degrees under different Grand Lodges.
Membership[edit]
 Masonic lodge room in Winterswijk, Netherlands
 Cedar Bayou Masonic Lodge No. 321, A. F. & A. M. in Baytown, Texas
Generally, to be accepted for initiation as a regular Freemason (in a lodge following Anglo-American style), a candidate must:
Be a man
Come of his own free will by his own initiative or by invitation in some jurisdictions.[2]
Believe in some kind of Supreme Being.[2]
Be of good morals, reputation and financially supporting himself and family.[2]
Be at least 21 years old (may be as young as 18 or as old as 25, depending on the jurisdiction).[2]
Live in the jurisdiction (under some Grand Lodges in the United States.)[3]
Be able to pass interviews and pass the Investigation Committee's inquiries about his past with people who have known him, which can take up to 2 years.[2]
Be of sound mind and body.[4] (this is not a universal requirement).[2]
Be a "Free Man". This may have arisen from the refusal of operative masons to pass their secrets to slaves, who could be ordered to divulge them to others.[5] It may also have arisen from a requirement of early speculative lodges that a new Freemason should at least have a licence to trade and employ others, making him a Free Man of the city or borough of the lodge.[6]
Pass the vote of the Lodge to allow his membership.[2]
After a Lodge elects or approves a candidate in accordance with the requirements of its Grand Lodge, it will decide whether to give the candidate each degree in order. Generally speaking those who have only received the Entered Apprentice degree are considered Freemasons, but hold limited privileges until they attain the Master Mason degree; under UGLE only a Master Mason will receive a Grand Lodge certificate, which may be demanded by any other Lodge he wishes to visit. Masonic Lodge No. 123 in Kimbolton, New Zealand
 Former house of the Masonic lodge in Szprotawa, Poland
A Master Mason is considered a full lifetime member of the Lodge where he received his degrees.  He can demit (resign)[7] if he so desires but only if he is in good standing and his dues paid. A Mason might demit for personal reasons or to join another Lodge in those jurisdictions where multiple membership is not permitted.  After demitting, he continues to be regarded as a Mason in absentia and may rejoin through a new application, but he and his family have no rights, privileges or claims on Freemasonry.[8]  Some sources (Mackey) claim that leaving the lodge does not exempt him from his obligations nor the wholesome control of the Order over his moral conduct.[9] A Mason may be expelled from his Lodge and Freemasonry in general if convicted of particularly serious violations of Civil or Masonic law. Expulsion from all of Freemasonry can only occur from a Grand Lodge while lesser chapters can expel members from their specific lodges.[9]
A Master Mason "in good standing" (i.e. whose dues are current and who is not subject to Masonic investigation or discipline) may join another regular Lodge; he need not take his degrees again, but may be expected to serve the new Lodge in office.
If a Master Mason is dropped from the rolls for non-payment of dues, under most circumstances he may be immediately reinstated in good standing simply by paying his current dues as well as any back dues owed, although in many jurisdictions there is a requirement to ballot for re-admission.
Many Grand Lodges permit Master Masons to be "plural affiliates," or members of more than one Lodge simultaneously. In some jurisdictions plural affiliates are prohibited from serving as an elected officer of more than one Lodge at any given time.
These rules are different for Freemasons of the Entered Apprentice and Fellowcraft Degrees. In some Grand Lodges an Entered Apprentice or Fellowcraft may not receive a demit, but may join another Lodge with the intent of earning the Master Mason Degree with the consent of his original Lodge.
Officers[edit]
Main article: Masonic lodge officer
The names, roles and numbers of Lodge officers vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In most cases, there is an equivalent office in the Grand Lodge of the given jurisdiction, with the addition of the prefix 'Grand' to the title in question.
There are certain 'progressive' offices through which members move by a process of effective promotion, but also other more permanent offices, usually held by experienced members.
See also[edit]
Grand Lodge
Masonic music
Masonic ritual and symbolism
Research lodge
Notes[edit]
^ ...the premier Grand Lodge was established on 24 June 1717, St John s Day, when a feast was held at the Goose and Gridiron Ale House in St Paul s Churchyard. The four Lodges involved met at the Goose and Gridiron, the Crown Ale House in Parkers Lane (near the present building in Great Queen Street), The Apple Tree Tavern in Charles Street, Covent Garden and the Runner and Grapes Tavern in Channel Row, Westminster. Three still survive and are now known as Lodge of Antiquity No 2, Fortitude and Old Cumberland Lodge No 12 (originally No 3) and Royal Somerset House and Inverness Lodge No IV. These are known as "time immemorial lodges" the only lodges within the English constitution with this distinction. They, together with Grand Stewards  Lodge, have the ability to operate without a warrant.[10] 
References[edit]
^ Mackey's Encyclopedia of Freemasonry
^ a b c d e f g "How To Become A Freemason". Masonic Lodge of Education. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ "Become a Mason: Requirements". Grand Lodge of Illinois, Ancient Free & Accepted Masons. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-08.
^ "Would you like to become part of history". Freemason Network. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ Robert L. D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider, 2009, p. 197
^ Rev Neville Barker Cryer, What do you know about Ritual, Lewis Masonic 2008, pp 7-8
^ "Demit". Masonic Dictionary. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ "Demits". NC Secretary Corner. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ a b "Expulsion". Masonic Dictionary. Retrieved November 10, 2013.
^ Green, Michael.  Parkins, Brian (ed.). "The Grand Stewards and Red Apron Lodges: Introduction". Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved May 30, 2017.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Masonic buildings.
 Media related to Freemasonry at Wikimedia Commons
vteFreemasonryFraternal organisations with origins in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, sorted by bodies, lodges, locations and ritesGeneral
History
Manuscripts
Music
Lodge
Grand Lodge
List
Research lodge
Rites
Symbolism
Square andCompassesFreemasons' Hall,London,headquarters (1775/1933-)of theUnited GrandLodge of England (1722-)Anglo-AmericanFreemasonryEurasiaBritish Isles ("home grand lodges")
United Grand Lodge of England
Grand Lodge of Scotland
Grand Lodge of Ireland
Swedish Rite
Swedish Order of Freemasons
Danish Order of Freemasons
Icelandic Order of Freemasons
Norwegian Order of Freemasons
Grand Lodge of Spain
Grand Landlodge of the Freemasons of Germany
Armenia
Belgium
Cyprus
France
India
Germany
Italy
Regular Grand Lodge
Grand Orient (partial recognition)
Luxembourg
North Macedonia
Malta
Netherlands
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Switzerland
Turkey
Australia and New Zealand
United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory
Grand Lodge of New Zealand
AmericasUnited States
Alabama
California
Connecticut
Florida
Idaho
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Nebraska
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Dakota
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
West Virginia
Wisconsin
African-American
Prince Hall Freemasonry
Moorish Rite Freemasonry
Canada
Manitoba
Newfoundland and Labrador
Ontario
Latin America
Brazil
Chile
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Mexico
Venezuela
ContinentalFreemasonry andCo-Freemasonry,including CLIPSASEurasia
Le Droit Humain (several countries)
Belgium
Grand Orient
Female Grand Lodge
Grand Lodge
Denmark 
Spain
Catalonia
France
Grand Orient
Mixed Grand Lodge
Greece
Ib rico
Italy
Grand Lodge
Female Grand Lodge
Malta
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Female Grand Lodge
Grand Orient
Turkey
Americas
Universal Co-Masonry
Venezuela
Grand Lodge
Sovereign Grand Lodge
United States
George Washington Union
Omega Grand Lodge of the State of New York
Canada
National Grand Lodge
Grand Lodge Bet-El
Grand Lodge ANI
Mexico
Appendant OrdersNon-Denominational
Allied Masonic Degrees
Grand College of Rites
Holy Royal Arch (Anglo-European)
Royal Arch Masonry (American)
Order of Athelstan
Order of Knight Masons
Order of Mark Master Masons
Order of the Scarlet Cord
Order of the Secret Monitor
Order of Royal and Select Masters (Anglo-European)
Cryptic Masonry (American)
Royal Ark Mariners
Shriners
Christian Only
Holy Royal Arch Knight Templar Priests
Knights of the York Cross of Honour
Knights Templar
Masonic Order of the Bath
Order of Saint Thomas of Acon
Red Cross of Constantine
Reformed and Rectified Rite
Royal Order of Scotland
Societas Rosicruciana
Sovereign Order of Knights Preceptor
York Rite Sovereign College
Ancient and AcceptedScottish Rite
United States
Northern Jurisdiction
Southern Jurisdiction
See also
List of Freemasons
A D
E Z
monarchs
US presidents
Freemasonry and women
Buildings
Temples
Landmarks
Museum of Freemasonry
International Order of the Rainbow for Girls
Abbreviations
Anti-Masonry
Conspiracy theories
Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory
 Society portal
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject
Authority control: National 
Germany
Israel
United States
Czech Republic
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Masonic_lodge&oldid=1149602375"