Indian nationalist leader and nonviolence advocate (1869 1948)
"Gandhi" redirects here. For other uses, see Gandhi (disambiguation).
Mah tm GandhiGandhi in London, 1931BornMohandas Karamchand Gandhi(1869-10-02)2 October 1869Porbandar, Porbandar State, Kathiawar Agency, British RajDied30 January 1948(1948-01-30) (aged 78)New Delhi, Dominion of IndiaCause of deathAssassination (gunshot wounds)MonumentsRaj GhatGandhi SmritiCitizenshipBritish Empire (1869 1947)Dominion of India (1947 1948)Alma materAlfred High School, Rajkot (1880   November 1887)Samaldas Arts College, Bhavnagar (January 1888   July 1888)Inner Temple, London (September 1888 1891)(Informal auditing student at University College London between 1888 and 1891)OccupationsLawyeranti-colonialistpolitical ethicistYears active1893 1948EraBritish RajKnown forLeadership of the campaign for India's independence from British ruleNonviolent resistanceNotable workThe Story of My Experiments with TruthPolitical partyIndian National Congress (1920 1934)[1]MovementIndian independence movementSpouseKasturba Gandhi
   (m. 1883; died 1944) ChildrenHarilalManilalRamdasDevdasParentsKaramchand Gandhi (father)Putlibai Gandhi (mother)RelativesSee Family of Mahatma GandhiC. Rajagopalachari (father-in-law of Gandhi's son Devdas)AwardsTime Person of the Year (1930)[2]43rd President of the Indian National CongressIn office1924-1925Preceded byAbul Kalam AzadSucceeded bySarojini Naidu
Mahatma Gandhi's voice
Mahatma Gandhi s spiritual message to the worldRecorded Oct 1931
Websitegandhi.gov.inSignature
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (/ ndi,  ndi/ GA(H)N-dee,[3] Gujarati: [ mo nd s  k mt nd  d i]; 2 October 1869  30 January 1948) was an Indian lawyer,[4] anti-colonial nationalist[5] and political ethicist[6] who employed  nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India's independence from British rule.[7] He inspired movements for civil rights and freedom across the world. The honorific Mah tm  (Sanskrit: "great-souled", "venerable"), first applied to him in 1914 in South Africa, is now used throughout the world.[8][9]
Born and raised in a Hindu family in coastal Gujarat, Gandhi trained in the law at the Inner Temple, London, and was called to the bar at age 22 in June 1891. After two uncertain years in India, where he was unable to start a successful law practice, he moved to South Africa in 1893 to represent an Indian merchant in a lawsuit. He went on to live in South Africa for 21 years. It was here that Gandhi raised a family and first employed nonviolent resistance in a campaign for civil rights. In 1915, aged 45, he returned to India and soon set about organising peasants, farmers, and urban labourers to protest against excessive land-tax and discrimination.
Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921, Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty, expanding women's rights, building religious and ethnic amity, ending untouchability, and, above all, achieving swaraj or self-rule. Gandhi adopted the short dhoti woven with hand-spun yarn as a mark of identification with India's rural poor. He began to live in a self-sufficient residential community, to eat simple food, and undertake long fasts as a means of both introspection and political protest. Bringing anti-colonial nationalism to the common Indians, Gandhi led them in challenging the British-imposed salt tax with the 400 km (250 mi) Dandi Salt March in 1930 and in calling for the British to quit India in 1942. He was imprisoned many times and for many years in both South Africa and India.
Gandhi's vision of an independent India based on religious pluralism was challenged in the early 1940s by a Muslim nationalism which demanded a separate homeland for Muslims within British India.[10] In August 1947, Britain granted independence, but the British Indian Empire[10] was partitioned into two dominions, a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-majority Pakistan.[11] As many displaced Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs made their way to their new lands, religious violence broke out, especially in the Punjab and Bengal. Abstaining from the official celebration of independence, Gandhi visited the affected areas, attempting to alleviate distress. In the months following, he undertook several hunger strikes to stop the religious violence. The last of these, begun in Delhi on 12 January 1948 when he was 78,[12][13][14][15] also had the indirect goal of pressuring India to pay out some cash assets owed to Pakistan,[16][17][18][19] which the Indian government[20] had been resisting.[21][22][23][24][25] Although the Government of India relented,[26] as did the religious rioters, the belief that Gandhi had been too resolute in his defence of both Pakistan and Indian Muslims, spread among some Hindus in India.[27][28][15] Among these was Nathuram Godse,[29] a militant Hindu nationalist from Pune, western India,[30][31] who assassinated Gandhi by firing three bullets into his chest at an interfaith prayer meeting in Delhi on 30 January 1948.[32][33][34][35]
Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti, a national holiday, and worldwide as the International Day of Nonviolence. Gandhi is considered the Father of the Nation in India[36][37] and is commonly called Bapu[38] (Gujarati endearment for 'father',[39] 'papa'[39][40]).
Biography
Early life and background
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi[41] was born on 2 October 1869[42] into a Gujarati Hindu Modh Bania family[43][44] in Porbandar (also known as Sudamapuri), a coastal town on the Kathiawar Peninsula and then part of the small princely state of Porbandar in the Kathiawar Agency of the British Raj. His father, Karamchand Uttamchand Gandhi (1822 1885), served as the dewan (chief minister) of Porbandar state.[45][5] His family originated from the then village of Kutiana in what was then Junagadh State.[46]
Although he only had an elementary education and had previously been a clerk in the state administration, Karamchand proved a capable chief minister.[47] During his tenure, he married four times. His first two wives died young, after each had given birth to a daughter, and his third marriage was childless. In 1857, he sought his third wife's permission to remarry; that year, he married Putlibai (1844 1891), who also came from Junagadh,[47] and was from a Pranami Vaishnava family.[48] Karamchand and Putlibai had three children over the ensuing decade: a son, Laxmidas (c. 1860 1914); a daughter, Raliatbehn (1862 1960); and another son, Karsandas (c. 1866 1913).[49][50]
On 2 October 1869, Putlibai gave birth to her last child, Mohandas, in a dark, windowless ground-floor room of the Gandhi family residence in Porbandar city. As a child, Gandhi was described by his sister Raliat as "restless as mercury, either playing or roaming about. One of his favourite pastimes was twisting dogs' ears."[51] The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra, had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography, he states that they left an indelible impression on his mind. He writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number." Gandhi's early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.[52][53]
The family's religious background was eclectic. Gandhi's father Karamchand was Hindu and his mother Putlibai was from a Pranami Vaishnava Hindu family.[54][55] Gandhi's father was of Modh Baniya caste in the varna of Vaishya.[56] His mother came from the medieval Krishna bhakti-based Pranami tradition, whose religious texts include the Bhagavad Gita, the Bhagavata Purana, and a collection of 14 texts with teachings that the tradition believes to include the essence of the Vedas, the Quran and the Bible.[55][57] Gandhi was deeply influenced by his mother, an extremely pious lady who "would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers... she would take the hardest vows and keep them without flinching. To keep two or three consecutive fasts was nothing to her."[58]
In 1874, Gandhi's father Karamchand left Porbandar for the smaller state of Rajkot, where he became a counsellor to its ruler, the Thakur Sahib; though Rajkot was a less prestigious state than Porbandar, the British regional political agency was located there, which gave the state's diwan a measure of security.[59] In 1876, Karamchand became diwan of Rajkot and was succeeded as diwan of Porbandar by his brother Tulsidas. His family then rejoined him in Rajkot.[60]
 Gandhi (right) with his eldest brother Laxmidas in 1886[61]
At age 9, Gandhi entered the local school in Rajkot, near his home. There, he studied the rudiments of arithmetic, history, the Gujarati language and geography.[60] At the age of 11, he joined the High School in Rajkot, Alfred High School.[62] He was an average student, won some prizes, but was a shy and tongue tied student, with no interest in games; his only companions were books and school lessons.[63]
In May 1883, the 13-year-old Mohandas was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Makhanji Kapadia (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged marriage, according to the custom of the region at that time.[64] In the process, he lost a year at school but was later allowed to make up by accelerating his studies.[65] His wedding was a joint event, where his brother and cousin were also married. Recalling the day of their marriage, he once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives." As was the prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.[66]
Writing many years later, Mohandas described with regret the lustful feelings he felt for his young bride: "even at school I used to think of her, and the thought of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me." He later recalled feeling jealous and possessive of her, such as when she would visit a temple with her girlfriends, and being sexually lustful in his feelings for her.[67]
In late 1885, Gandhi's father Karamchand died.[68] Gandhi, then 16 years old, and his wife of age 17 had their first baby, who survived only a few days. The two deaths anguished Gandhi.[68] The Gandhi couple had four more children, all sons: Harilal, born in 1888; Manilal, born in 1892; Ramdas, born in 1897; and Devdas, born in 1900.[64]
In November 1887, the 18-year-old Gandhi graduated from high school in Ahmedabad.[69] In January 1888, he enrolled at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar State, then the sole degree-granting institution of higher education in the region. However, he dropped out, and returned to his family in Porbandar.[70]
Three years in London
Student of law
 Commemorative plaque at 20 Baron's Court Road, Barons Court, London
Gandhi had dropped out of the cheapest college he could afford in Bombay.[71] Mavji Dave Joshiji, a Brahmin priest and family friend, advised Gandhi and his family that he should consider law studies in London.[72][73] In July 1888, his wife Kasturba gave birth to their first surviving son, Harilal.[74] His mother was not comfortable about Gandhi leaving his wife and family, and going so far from home. Gandhi's uncle Tulsidas also tried to dissuade his nephew. Gandhi wanted to go. To persuade his wife and mother, Gandhi made a vow in front of his mother that he would abstain from meat, alcohol and women. Gandhi's brother Laxmidas, who was already a lawyer, cheered Gandhi's London studies plan and offered to support him. Putlibai gave Gandhi her permission and blessing.[70][75]
 Gandhi in London as a law student
On 10 August 1888, Gandhi aged 18, left Porbandar for Mumbai, then known as Bombay. Upon arrival, he stayed with the local Modh Bania community whose elders warned him that England would tempt him to compromise his religion, and eat and drink in Western ways. Despite Gandhi informing them of his promise to his mother and her blessings, he was excommunicated from his caste. Gandhi ignored this, and on 4 September, he sailed from Bombay to London, with his brother seeing him off.[74][71] Gandhi attended University College, London, where he took classes in English literature with Henry Morley in 1888 1889.[76]
He also enrolled at Inner Temple with the intention of becoming a barrister. His childhood shyness and self-withdrawal had continued through his teens. He retained these traits when he arrived in London, but joined a public speaking practice group and overcame his shyness sufficiently to practise law.[77]
He demonstrated a keen interest in the welfare of London's impoverished dockland communities. In 1889, a bitter trade dispute broke out in London, with dockers striking for better pay and conditions, and seamen, shipbuilders, factory girls and other joining the strike in solidarity. The strikers were successful, in part due to the mediation of Cardinal Manning, leading Gandhi and an Indian friend to make a point of visiting the cardinal and thanking him for his work.[78]
Vegetarianism and committee work
Gandhi's time in London was influenced by the vow he had made to his mother. He tried to adopt "English" customs, including taking dancing lessons. However, he did not appreciate the bland vegetarian food offered by his landlady and was frequently hungry until he found one of London's few vegetarian restaurants. Influenced by Henry Salt's writing, he joined the London Vegetarian Society, and was elected to its executive committee[79] under the aegis of its president and benefactor Arnold Hills. An achievement while on the committee was the establishment of a Bayswater chapter.[80] Some of the vegetarians he met were members of the Theosophical Society, which had been founded in 1875 to further universal brotherhood, and which was devoted to the study of Buddhist and Hindu literature. They encouraged Gandhi to join them in reading the Bhagavad Gita both in translation as well as in the original.[79]
Gandhi had a friendly and productive relationship with Hills, but the two men took a different view on the continued LVS membership of fellow committee member Thomas Allinson. Their disagreement is the first known example of Gandhi challenging authority, despite his shyness and temperamental disinclination towards confrontation.
Allinson had been promoting newly available birth control methods, but Hills disapproved of these, believing they undermined public morality. He believed vegetarianism to be a moral movement and that Allinson should therefore no longer remain a member of the LVS. Gandhi shared Hills' views on the dangers of birth control, but defended Allinson's right to differ.[81] It would have been hard for Gandhi to challenge Hills; Hills was 12 years his senior and unlike Gandhi, highly eloquent. He bankrolled the LVS and was a captain of industry with his Thames Ironworks company employing more than 6,000 people in the East End of London. He was also a highly accomplished sportsman who later founded the football club West Ham United. In his 1927 An Autobiography, Vol. I, Gandhi wrote:
 The question deeply interested me...I had a high regard for Mr. Hills and his generosity. But I thought it was quite improper to exclude a man from a vegetarian society simply because he refused to regard puritan morals as one of the objects of the society[81]
A motion to remove Allinson was raised, and was debated and voted on by the committee. Gandhi's shyness was an obstacle to his defence of Allinson at the committee meeting. He wrote his views down on paper but shyness prevented him from reading out his arguments, so Hills, the President, asked another committee member to read them out for him. Although some other members of the committee agreed with Gandhi, the vote was lost and Allinson excluded. There were no hard feelings, with Hills proposing the toast at the LVS farewell dinner in honour of Gandhi's return to India.[82]
Called to the bar
Gandhi, at age 22, was called to the bar in June 1891 and then left London for India, where he learned that his mother had died while he was in London and that his family had kept the news from him.[79] His attempts at establishing a law practice in Bombay failed because he was psychologically unable to cross-examine witnesses. He returned to Rajkot to make a modest living drafting petitions for litigants, but he was forced to stop when he ran afoul of a British officer Sam Sunny.[80][79]
In 1893, a Muslim merchant in Kathiawar named Dada Abdullah contacted Gandhi. Abdullah owned a large successful shipping business in South Africa. His distant cousin in Johannesburg needed a lawyer, and they preferred someone with Kathiawari heritage. Gandhi inquired about his pay for the work. They offered a total salary of  105 (~$17,200 in 2019 money) plus travel expenses. He accepted it, knowing that it would be at least a one-year commitment in the Colony of Natal, South Africa, also a part of the British Empire.[80][83]
Civil rights activist in South Africa (1893 1914)
 Bronze statue of Gandhi commemorating the centenary of the incident at the Pietermaritzburg Railway Station, unveiled by Archbishop Desmond Tutu on Church Street, Pietermaritzburg, in June 1993
In April 1893, Gandhi aged 23, set sail for South Africa to be the lawyer for Abdullah's cousin.[83][84] He spent 21 years in South Africa, where he developed his political views, ethics and politics.[85][86]
Immediately upon arriving in South Africa, Gandhi faced discrimination because of his skin colour and heritage, like all people of colour.[87] He was not allowed to sit with European passengers in the stagecoach and told to sit on the floor near the driver, then beaten when he refused; elsewhere he was kicked into a gutter for daring to walk near a house, in another instance thrown off a train at Pietermaritzburg after refusing to leave the first-class.[71][88] He sat in the train station, shivering all night and pondering if he should return to India or protest for his rights.[88] He chose to protest and was allowed to board the train the next day.[89] In another incident, the magistrate of a Durban court ordered Gandhi to remove his turban, which he refused to do.[71] Indians were not allowed to walk on public footpaths in South Africa. Gandhi was kicked by a police officer out of the footpath onto the street without warning.[71]
When Gandhi arrived in South Africa, according to Herman, he thought of himself as "a Briton first, and an Indian second".[90] However, the prejudice against him and his fellow Indians from British people that Gandhi experienced and observed deeply bothered him. He found it humiliating, struggling to understand how some people can feel honour or superiority or pleasure in such inhumane practices.[88] Gandhi began to question his people's standing in the British Empire.[91]
The Abdullah case that had brought him to South Africa concluded in May 1894, and the Indian community organised a farewell party for Gandhi as he prepared to return to India.[92] However, a new Natal government discriminatory proposal led to Gandhi extending his original period of stay in South Africa. He planned to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote, a right then proposed to be an exclusive European right. He asked Joseph Chamberlain, the British Colonial Secretary, to reconsider his position on this bill.[85] Though unable to halt the bill's passage, his campaign was successful in drawing attention to the grievances of Indians in South Africa. He helped found the Natal Indian Congress in 1894,[80][89] and through this organisation, he moulded the Indian community of South Africa into a unified political force. In January 1897, when Gandhi landed in Durban, a mob of white settlers attacked him[93] and he escaped only through the efforts of the wife of the police superintendent. However, he refused to press charges against any member of the mob.[80]
 Gandhi with the stretcher-bearers of the Indian Ambulance Corps during the Boer War
During the Boer War, Gandhi volunteered in 1900 to form a group of stretcher-bearers as the Natal Indian Ambulance Corps. According to Arthur Herman, Gandhi wanted to disprove the British colonial stereotype that Hindus were not fit for "manly" activities involving danger and exertion, unlike the Muslim "martial races".[94] Gandhi raised eleven hundred Indian volunteers, to support British combat troops against the Boers. They were trained and medically certified to serve on the front lines. They were auxiliaries at the Battle of Colenso to a White volunteer ambulance corps. At the battle of Spion Kop Gandhi and his bearers moved to the front line and had to carry wounded soldiers for miles to a field hospital because the terrain was too rough for the ambulances. Gandhi and thirty-seven other Indians received the Queen's South Africa Medal.[95][96]
 Gandhi and his wife Kasturba (1902)
In 1906, the Transvaal government promulgated a new Act compelling registration of the colony's Indian and Chinese populations. At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year, Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of Satyagraha (devotion to the truth), or nonviolent protest, for the first time.[97] According to Anthony Parel, Gandhi was also influenced by the Tamil moral text Tirukku a  after Leo Tolstoy mentioned it in their correspondence that began with "A Letter to a Hindu".[98][99] Gandhi urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so. Gandhi's ideas of protests, persuasion skills and public relations had emerged. He took these back to India in 1915.[100][101]
Europeans, Indians and Africans
Gandhi focused his attention on Indians and Africans while he was in South Africa. He initially was not interested in politics. This changed, however, after he was discriminated against and bullied, such as by being thrown out of a train coach because of his skin colour by a white train official. After several such incidents with Whites in South Africa, Gandhi's thinking and focus changed, and he felt he must resist this and fight for rights. He entered politics by forming the Natal Indian Congress.[102] According to Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed, Gandhi's views on racism are contentious in some cases, but that changed afterward. Gandhi suffered persecution from the beginning in South Africa. Like with other coloured people, white officials denied him his rights, and the press and those in the streets bullied and called him a "parasite", "semi-barbarous", "canker", "squalid coolie", "yellow man", and other epithets. People would spit on him as an expression of racial hate.[103]
 Advertisement of the Indian Opinion, a newspaper founded by Gandhi
While in South Africa, Gandhi focused on the racial persecution of Indians before he started to focus on racism against Africans. In some cases, state Desai and Vahed, his behaviour was one of being a willing part of racial stereotyping and African exploitation.[103] During a speech in September 1896, Gandhi complained that the whites in the British colony of South Africa were "degrading the Indian to the level of a raw Kaffir".[104] Scholars cite it as an example of evidence that Gandhi at that time thought of Indians and black South Africans differently.[103] As another example given by Herman, Gandhi, at age 24, prepared a legal brief for the Natal Assembly in 1895, seeking voting rights for Indians. Gandhi cited race history and European Orientalists' opinions that "Anglo-Saxons and Indians are sprung from the same Aryan stock or rather the Indo-European peoples", and argued that Indians should not be grouped with the Africans.[92]
Years later, Gandhi and his colleagues served and helped Africans as nurses and by opposing racism. The Nobel Peace Prize winner Nelson Mandela is among admirers of Gandhi's efforts to fight against racism in Africa.[105] The general image of Gandhi, state Desai and Vahed, has been reinvented since his assassination as if he was always a saint when in reality his life was more complex, contained inconvenient truths and was one that changed over time.[103] Scholars have also pointed the evidence to a rich history of co-operation and efforts by Gandhi and Indian people with nonwhite South Africans against persecution of Africans and the Apartheid.[106]
In 1906, when the Bambatha Rebellion broke out in the colony of Natal, then 36-year-old Gandhi, despite sympathising with the Zulu rebels encouraged Indian South Africans to form a volunteer stretcher-bearer unit.[107] Writing in the Indian Opinion, Gandhi argued that military service would be beneficial to the Indian community and claimed it would give them "health and happiness."[108] Gandhi eventually led a volunteer mixed unit of Indian and African stretcher-bearers to treat wounded combatants during the suppression of the rebellion.[107]
 Gandhi photographed in South Africa (1909)
The medical unit commanded by Gandhi operated for less than two months before being disbanded.[107] After the suppression of the rebellion, the colonial establishment showed no interest in extending to the Indian community the civil rights granted to white South Africans. This led Gandhi to becoming disillusioned with the Empire and aroused a spiritual awakening with him; historian Arthur L. Herman wrote that his African experience was a part of his great disillusionment with the West, transforming him into an "uncompromising non-cooperator".[108]
By 1910, Gandhi's newspaper, Indian Opinion, was covering reports on discrimination against Africans by the colonial regime. Gandhi remarked that the Africans are "alone are the original inhabitants of the land.   The whites, on the other hand, have occupied the land forcibly and appropriated it to themselves."[109]
In 1910, Gandhi established, with the help of his friend Hermann Kallenbach, an idealistic community they named Tolstoy Farm near Johannesburg.[110] There he nurtured his policy of peaceful resistance.[111]
In the years after black South Africans gained the right to vote in South Africa (1994), Gandhi was proclaimed a national hero with numerous monuments.[112]
Struggle for Indian independence (1915 1947)
See also: Indian independence movement
At the request of Gopal Krishna Gokhale, conveyed to him by C. F. Andrews, Gandhi returned to India in 1915. He brought an international reputation as a leading Indian nationalist, theorist and community organiser.
Gandhi joined the Indian National Congress and was introduced to Indian issues, politics and the Indian people primarily by Gokhale. Gokhale was a key leader of the Congress Party best known for his restraint and moderation, and his insistence on working inside the system. Gandhi took Gokhale's liberal approach based on British Whiggish traditions and transformed it to make it look Indian.[113]
Gandhi took leadership of the Congress in 1920 and began escalating demands until on 26 January 1930 the Indian National Congress declared the independence of India. The British did not recognise the declaration but negotiations ensued, with the Congress taking a role in provincial government in the late 1930s. Gandhi and the Congress withdrew their support of the Raj when the Viceroy declared war on Germany in September 1939 without consultation. Tensions escalated until Gandhi demanded immediate independence in 1942 and the British responded by imprisoning him and tens of thousands of Congress leaders. Meanwhile, the Muslim League did co-operate with Britain and moved, against Gandhi's strong opposition, to demands for a totally separate Muslim state of Pakistan. In August 1947 the British partitioned the land with India and Pakistan each achieving independence on terms that Gandhi disapproved.[114]
Role in World War I
See also: The role of India in World War I
In April 1918, during the latter part of World War I, the Viceroy invited Gandhi to a War Conference in Delhi.[115] Gandhi agreed to actively recruit Indians for the war effort.[116][71] In contrast to the Zulu War of 1906 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, when he recruited volunteers for the Ambulance Corps, this time Gandhi attempted to recruit combatants. In a June 1918 leaflet entitled "Appeal for Enlistment", Gandhi wrote "To bring about such a state of things we should have the ability to defend ourselves, that is, the ability to bear arms and to use them... If we want to learn the use of arms with the greatest possible despatch, it is our duty to enlist ourselves in the army."[117] He did, however, stipulate in a letter to the Viceroy's private secretary that he "personally will not kill or injure anybody, friend or foe."[118]
Gandhi's war recruitment campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence. Gandhi's private secretary noted that "The question of the consistency between his creed of 'Ahimsa' (nonviolence) and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since."[116]
Champaran agitations
Main article: Champaran Satyagraha
 Gandhi in 1918, at the time of the Kheda and Champaran Satyagrahas
Gandhi's first major achievement came in 1917 with the Champaran agitation in Bihar. The Champaran agitation pitted the local peasantry against largely Anglo-Indian plantation owners who were backed by the local administration. The peasants were forced to grow indigo (Indigofera sp.), a cash crop for Indigo dye whose demand had been declining over two decades, and were forced to sell their crops to the planters at a fixed price. Unhappy with this, the peasantry appealed to Gandhi at his ashram in Ahmedabad. Pursuing a strategy of nonviolent protest, Gandhi took the administration by surprise and won concessions from the authorities.[119]
Kheda agitations
Main article: Kheda Satyagraha
In 1918, Kheda was hit by floods and famine and the peasantry was demanding relief from taxes. Gandhi moved his headquarters to Nadiad,[120] organising scores of supporters and fresh volunteers from the region, the most notable being Vallabhbhai Patel.[121] Using non-co-operation as a technique, Gandhi initiated a signature campaign where peasants pledged non-payment of revenue even under the threat of confiscation of land. A social boycott of mamlatdars and talatdars (revenue officials within the district) accompanied the agitation. Gandhi worked hard to win public support for the agitation across the country. For five months, the administration refused, but by the end of May 1918, the Government gave way on important provisions and relaxed the conditions of payment of revenue tax until the famine ended. In Kheda, Vallabhbhai Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British, who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners.[122]
Khilafat movement
Main article: Khilafat Movement
In 1919, following World War I, Gandhi (aged 49) sought political co-operation from Muslims in his fight against British imperialism by supporting the Ottoman Empire that had been defeated in the World War. Before this initiative of Gandhi, communal disputes and religious riots between Hindus and Muslims were common in British India, such as the riots of 1917 18. Gandhi had already supported the British crown with resources and by recruiting Indian soldiers to fight the war in Europe on the British side. This effort of Gandhi was in part motivated by the British promise to reciprocate the help with swaraj (self-government) to Indians after the end of World War I.[123] The British government, instead of self government, had offered minor reforms instead, disappointing Gandhi.[124] Gandhi announced his satyagraha (civil disobedience) intentions. The British colonial officials made their counter move by passing the Rowlatt Act, to block Gandhi's movement. The Act allowed the British government to treat civil disobedience participants as criminals and gave it the legal basis to arrest anyone for "preventive indefinite detention, incarceration without judicial review or any need for a trial".[125]
Gandhi felt that Hindu-Muslim co-operation was necessary for political progress against the British. He leveraged the Khilafat movement, wherein Sunni Muslims in India, their leaders such as the sultans of princely states in India and Ali brothers championed the Turkish Caliph as a solidarity symbol of Sunni Islamic community (ummah). They saw the Caliph as their means to support Islam and the Islamic law after the defeat of Ottoman Empire in World War I.[126][127][128] Gandhi's support to the Khilafat movement led to mixed results. It initially led to a strong Muslim support for Gandhi. However, the Hindu leaders including Rabindranath Tagore questioned Gandhi's leadership because they were largely against recognising or supporting the Sunni Islamic Caliph in Turkey.[a]
The increasing Muslim support for Gandhi, after he championed the Caliph's cause, temporarily stopped the Hindu-Muslim communal violence. It offered evidence of inter-communal harmony in joint Rowlatt satyagraha demonstration rallies, raising Gandhi's stature as the political leader to the British.[132][133] His support for the Khilafat movement also helped him sideline Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who had announced his opposition to the satyagraha non-co-operation movement approach of Gandhi. Jinnah began creating his independent support, and later went on to lead the demand for West and East Pakistan. Though they agreed in general terms on Indian independence, they disagreed on the means of achieving this. Jinnah was mainly interested in dealing with the British via constitutional negotiation, rather than attempting to agitate the masses.[134][135][136]
By the end of 1922 the Khilafat movement had collapsed.[137] Turkey's Atat rk had ended the Caliphate, Khilafat movement ended, and Muslim support for Gandhi largely evaporated.[127][128] Muslim leaders and delegates abandoned Gandhi and his Congress.[138] Hindu-Muslim communal conflicts reignited. Deadly religious riots re-appeared in numerous cities, with 91 in United Provinces of Agra and Oudh alone.[139][140]
Non-co-operation
Main article: Non-co-operation movement
With his book Hind Swaraj (1909) Gandhi, aged 40, declared that British rule was established in India with the co-operation of Indians and had survived only because of this co-operation. If Indians refused to co-operate, British rule would collapse and swaraj (Indian independence) would come.[141]
 Gandhi with Dr. Annie Besant en route to a meeting in Madras in September 1921. Earlier, in Madurai, on 21 September 1921, Gandhi had adopted the loin-cloth for the first time as a symbol of his identification with India's poor.
In February 1919, Gandhi cautioned the Viceroy of India with a cable communication that if the British were to pass the Rowlatt Act, he would appeal to Indians to start civil disobedience.[142] The British government ignored him and passed the law, stating it would not yield to threats. The satyagraha civil disobedience followed, with people assembling to protest the Rowlatt Act. On 30 March 1919, British law officers opened fire on an assembly of unarmed people, peacefully gathered, participating in satyagraha in Delhi.[142]
People rioted in retaliation. On 6 April 1919, a Hindu festival day, he asked a crowd to remember not to injure or kill British people, but to express their frustration with peace, to boycott British goods and burn any British clothing they owned. He emphasised the use of non-violence to the British and towards each other, even if the other side used violence. Communities across India announced plans to gather in greater numbers to protest. Government warned him to not enter Delhi. Gandhi defied the order. On 9 April, Gandhi was arrested.[142]
People rioted. On 13 April 1919, people including women with children gathered in an Amritsar park, and British Indian Army officer Reginald Dyer surrounded them and ordered troops under his command to fire on them. The resulting Jallianwala Bagh massacre (or Amritsar massacre) of hundreds of Sikh and Hindu civilians enraged the subcontinent, but was supported by some Britons and parts of the British media as a necessary response. Gandhi in Ahmedabad, on the day after the massacre in Amritsar, did not criticise the British and instead criticised his fellow countrymen for not exclusively using 'love' to deal with the 'hate' of the British government.[142] Gandhi demanded that the Indian people stop all violence, stop all property destruction, and went on fast-to-death to pressure Indians to stop their rioting.[143]
The massacre and Gandhi's non-violent response to it moved many, but also made some Sikhs and Hindus upset that Dyer was getting away with murder. Investigation committees were formed by the British, which Gandhi asked Indians to boycott.[142] The unfolding events, the massacre and the British response, led Gandhi to the belief that Indians will never get a fair equal treatment under British rulers, and he shifted his attention to swaraj and political independence for India.[144] In 1921, Gandhi was the leader of the Indian National Congress.[128] He reorganised the Congress. With Congress now behind him, and Muslim support triggered by his backing the Khilafat movement to restore the Caliph in Turkey,[128] Gandhi had the political support and the attention of the British Raj.[131][125][127]
 Gandhi spinning yarn, in the late 1920s
Gandhi expanded his nonviolent non-co-operation platform to include the swadeshi policy   the boycott of foreign-made goods, especially British goods. Linked to this was his advocacy that khadi (homespun cloth) be worn by all Indians instead of British-made textiles. Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women, rich or poor, to spend time each day spinning khadi in support of the independence movement.[145] In addition to boycotting British products, Gandhi urged the people to boycott British institutions and law courts, to resign from government employment, and to forsake British titles and honours. Gandhi thus began his journey aimed at crippling the British India government economically, politically and administratively.[146]
The appeal of "Non-cooperation" grew, its social popularity drew participation from all strata of Indian society. Gandhi was arrested on 10 March 1922, tried for sedition, and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. He began his sentence on 18 March 1922. With Gandhi isolated in prison, the Indian National Congress split into two factions, one led by Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru favouring party participation in the legislatures, and the other led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, opposing this move.[147] Furthermore, co-operation among Hindus and Muslims ended as Khilafat movement collapsed with the rise of Atat rk in Turkey. Muslim leaders left the Congress and began forming Muslim organisations. The political base behind Gandhi had broken into factions. Gandhi was released in February 1924 for an appendicitis operation, having served only two years.[148][149]
Salt Satyagraha (Salt March)
Main article: Salt Satyagraha
 Original footage of Gandhi and his followers marching to Dandi in the Salt Satyagraha
After his early release from prison for political crimes in 1924, over the second half of the 1920s Gandhi continued to pursue swaraj. He pushed through a resolution at the Calcutta Congress in December 1928 calling on the British government to grant India dominion status or face a new campaign of non-cooperation with complete independence for the country as its goal.[150] After his support for World War I with Indian combat troops, and the failure of Khilafat movement in preserving the rule of Caliph in Turkey, followed by a collapse in Muslim support for his leadership, some such as Subhas Chandra Bose and Bhagat Singh questioned his values and non-violent approach.[127][151] While many Hindu leaders championed a demand for immediate independence, Gandhi revised his own call to a one-year wait, instead of two.[150]
The British did not respond favourably to Gandhi's proposal. British political leaders such as Lord Birkenhead and Winston Churchill announced opposition to "the appeasers of Gandhi" in their discussions with European diplomats who sympathised with Indian demands.[152] On 31 December 1929, an Indian flag was unfurled in Lahore. Gandhi led Congress in a celebration on 26 January 1930 of India's Independence Day in Lahore. This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation. Gandhi then launched a new Satyagraha against the British salt tax in March 1930. Gandhi sent an ultimatum in the form of a letter personally addressed to Lord Irwin, the viceroy of India, on 2 March. Gandhi condemned British rule in the letter, describing it as "a curse" that "has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of progressive exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil administration...It has reduced us politically to serfdom." Gandhi also mentioned in the letter that the viceroy received a salary "over five thousand times India's average income." In the letter, Gandhi also stressed his continued adherence to non-violent forms of protest.[153]
This was highlighted by the Salt March to Dandi from 12 March to 6 April, where, together with 78 volunteers, he marched 388 kilometres (241 mi) from Ahmedabad to Dandi, Gujarat to make salt himself, with the declared intention of breaking the salt laws. The march took 25 days to cover 240 miles with Gandhi speaking to often huge crowds along the way. Thousands of Indians joined him in Dandi. On 5 May he was interned under a regulation dating from 1827 in anticipation of a protest that he had planned. The protest at Dharasana salt works on 21 May went ahead without him see. A horrified American journalist, Webb Miller, described the British response thus:
In complete silence the Gandhi men drew up and halted a hundred yards from the stockade. A picked column advanced from the crowd, waded the ditches and approached the barbed wire stockade... at a word of command, scores of native policemen rushed upon the advancing marchers and rained blows on their heads with their steel-shot lathis [long bamboo sticks]. Not one of the marchers even raised an arm to fend off blows. They went down like ninepins. From where I stood I heard the sickening whack of the clubs on unprotected skulls... Those struck down fell sprawling, unconscious or writhing with fractured skulls or broken shoulders.[154]
This went on for hours until some 300 or more protesters had been beaten, many seriously injured and two killed. At no time did they offer any resistance.
This campaign was one of his most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60,000 people.[155] Congress estimates, however, put the figure at 90,000. Among them was one of Gandhi's lieutenants, Jawaharlal Nehru.
According to Sarma, Gandhi recruited women to participate in the salt tax campaigns and the boycott of foreign products, which gave many women a new self-confidence and dignity in the mainstream of Indian public life.[156] However, other scholars such as Marilyn French state that Gandhi barred women from joining his civil disobedience movement because he feared he would be accused of using women as a political shield.[157] When women insisted on joining the movement and participating in public demonstrations, Gandhi asked the volunteers to get permissions of their guardians and only those women who can arrange child-care should join him.[158] Regardless of Gandhi's apprehensions and views, Indian women joined the Salt March by the thousands to defy the British salt taxes and monopoly on salt mining. After Gandhi's arrest, the women marched and picketed shops on their own, accepting violence and verbal abuse from British authorities for the cause in the manner Gandhi inspired.[157]
Gandhi as folk hero
 Indian workers on strike in support of Gandhi in 1930
Indian Congress in the 1920s appealed to Andhra Pradesh peasants by creating Telugu language plays that combined Indian mythology and legends, linked them to Gandhi's ideas, and portrayed Gandhi as a messiah, a reincarnation of ancient and medieval Indian nationalist leaders and saints. The plays built support among peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture, according to Murali, and this effort made Gandhi a folk hero in Telugu speaking villages, a sacred messiah-like figure.[159]
According to Dennis Dalton, it was Gandhi's ideas that were responsible for his wide following. Gandhi criticised Western civilisation as one driven by "brute force and immorality", contrasting it with his categorisation of Indian civilisation as one driven by "soul force and morality".[160] Gandhi captured the imagination of the people of his heritage with his ideas about winning "hate with love". These ideas are evidenced in his pamphlets from the 1890s, in South Africa, where too he was popular among the Indian indentured workers. After he returned to India, people flocked to him because he reflected their values.[160]
 Gandhi's first visit to Odisha in 1921, a general meeting held at the riverbed of Kathajodi
Gandhi also campaigned hard going from one rural corner of the Indian subcontinent to another. He used terminology and phrases such as Rama-rajya from Ramayana, Prahlada as a paradigmatic icon, and such cultural symbols as another facet of swaraj and satyagraha.[161] During his lifetime, these ideas sounded strange outside India, but they readily and deeply resonated with the culture and historic values of his people.[160][162]
Negotiations
The government, represented by Lord Irwin, decided to negotiate with Gandhi. The Gandhi Irwin Pact was signed in March 1931. The British Government agreed to free all political prisoners, in return for the suspension of the civil disobedience movement. According to the pact, Gandhi was invited to attend the Round Table Conference in London for discussions and as the sole representative of the Indian National Congress. The conference was a disappointment to Gandhi and the nationalists. Gandhi expected to discuss India's independence, while the British side focused on the Indian princes and Indian minorities rather than on a transfer of power. Lord Irwin's successor, Lord Willingdon, took a hard line against India as an independent nation, began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement. Gandhi was again arrested, and the government tried and failed to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers.[163]
In Britain, Winston Churchill, a prominent Conservative politician who was then out of office but later became its prime minister, became a vigorous and articulate critic of Gandhi and opponent of his long-term plans. Churchill often ridiculed Gandhi, saying in a widely reported 1931 speech:
It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr Gandhi, a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir of a type well known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of the Vice-regal palace....to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor.[164]
Churchill's bitterness against Gandhi grew in the 1930s. He called Gandhi as the one who was "seditious in aim" whose evil genius and multiform menace was attacking the British empire. Churchill called him a dictator, a "Hindu Mussolini", fomenting a race war, trying to replace the Raj with Brahmin cronies, playing on the ignorance of Indian masses, all for selfish gain.[165] Churchill attempted to isolate Gandhi, and his criticism of Gandhi was widely covered by European and American press. It gained Churchill sympathetic support, but it also increased support for Gandhi among Europeans. The developments heightened Churchill's anxiety that the "British themselves would give up out of pacifism and misplaced conscience".[165]
Round Table Conferences
 Gandhi and his personal assistant Mahadev Desai at Birla House, 1939
During the discussions between Gandhi and the British government over 1931 32 at the Round Table Conferences, Gandhi, now aged about 62, sought constitutional reforms as a preparation to the end of colonial British rule, and begin the self-rule by Indians.[166] The British side sought reforms that would keep the Indian subcontinent as a colony. The British negotiators proposed constitutional reforms on a British Dominion model that established separate electorates based on religious and social divisions. The British questioned the Congress party and Gandhi's authority to speak for all of India.[167] They invited Indian religious leaders, such as Muslims and Sikhs, to press their demands along religious lines, as well as B. R. Ambedkar as the representative leader of the untouchables.[166] Gandhi vehemently opposed a constitution that enshrined rights or representations based on communal divisions, because he feared that it would not bring people together but divide them, perpetuate their status, and divert the attention from India's struggle to end the colonial rule.[168][169]
The Second Round Table conference was the only time he left India between 1914 and his death in 1948. He declined the government's offer of accommodation in an expensive West End hotel, preferring to stay in the East End, to live among working-class people, as he did in India.[170] He based himself in a small cell-bedroom at Kingsley Hall for the three-month duration of his stay and was enthusiastically received by East Enders.[171] During this time he renewed his links with the British vegetarian movement.
 An admiring East End crowd gathers to witness the arrival of Mahatma Gandhi, 1931
After Gandhi returned from the Second Round Table conference, he started a new satyagraha. He was arrested and imprisoned at the Yerwada Jail, Pune. While he was in prison, the British government enacted a new law that granted untouchables a separate electorate. It came to be known as the Communal Award.[172] In protest, Gandhi started a fast-unto-death, while he was held in prison.[173] The resulting public outcry forced the government, in consultations with Ambedkar, to replace the Communal Award with a compromise Poona Pact.[174][175]
Congress politics
In 1934 Gandhi resigned from Congress party membership. He did not disagree with the party's position but felt that if he resigned, his popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership, which actually varied, including communists, socialists, trade unionists, students, religious conservatives, and those with pro-business convictions, and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard. Gandhi also wanted to avoid being a target for Raj propaganda by leading a party that had temporarily accepted political accommodation with the Raj.[176]
Gandhi returned to active politics again in 1936, with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress. Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about India's future, he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal. Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose, who had been elected president in 1938, and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in nonviolence as a means of protest.[177] Despite Gandhi's opposition, Bose won a second term as Congress President, against Gandhi's nominee, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya; but left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi.[178][179] Gandhi declared that Sitaramayya's defeat was his defeat.[180]
World War II and Quit India movement
Main article: Quit India Movement
 Gandhi talking with Jawaharlal Nehru, his designated political heir, during the drafting of the Quit India Resolution in Bombay, August 1942
Gandhi opposed providing any help to the British war effort and he campaigned against any Indian participation in World War II.[181] The British government responded with the arrests of Gandhi and many other Congress leaders and killed over 1,000 Indians who participated in this movement.[182] A number of violent attacks were also carried out by the nationalists against the British government.[183] While Gandhi's campaign did not enjoy the support of a number of Indian leaders, and over 2.5 million Indians volunteered and joined the British military to fight on various fronts of the Allied Forces, the movement played a role in weakening the control over the South Asian region by the British regime and it ultimately paved the way for Indian independence.[183][181]
Gandhi's opposition to the Indian participation in World War II was motivated by his belief that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself.[184] He also condemned Nazism and Fascism, a view which won endorsement of other Indian leaders. As the war progressed, Gandhi intensified his demand for independence, calling for the British to Quit India in a 1942 speech in Mumbai.[185] This was Gandhi's and the Congress Party's most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India.[186] The British government responded quickly to the Quit India speech, and within hours after Gandhi's speech arrested Gandhi and all the members of the Congress Working Committee.[187] His countrymen retaliated the arrests by damaging or burning down hundreds of government owned railway stations, police stations, and cutting down telegraph wires.[188]
In 1942, Gandhi now nearing age 73, urged his people to completely stop co-operating with the imperial government. In this effort, he urged that they neither kill nor injure British people, but be willing to suffer and die if violence is initiated by the British officials.[185] He clarified that the movement would not be stopped because of any individual acts of violence, saying that the "ordered anarchy" of "the present system of administration" was "worse than real anarchy."[189][190] He urged Indians to Karo ya maro ("Do or die") in the cause of their rights and freedoms.[185][191]
 Gandhi in 1942, the year he launched the Quit India Movement
Gandhi's arrest lasted two years, as he was held in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune. During this period, his long time secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack, his wife Kasturba died after 18 months' imprisonment on 22 February 1944; and Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack.[188] While in jail, he agreed to an interview with Stuart Gelder, a British journalist. Gelder then composed and released an interview summary, cabled it to the mainstream press, that announced sudden concessions Gandhi was willing to make, comments that shocked his countrymen, the Congress workers and even Gandhi. The latter two claimed that it distorted what Gandhi actually said on a range of topics and falsely repudiated the Quit India movement.[188]
Gandhi was released before the end of the war on 6 May 1944 because of his failing health and necessary surgery; the Raj did not want him to die in prison and enrage the nation. He came out of detention to an altered political scene   the Muslim League for example, which a few years earlier had appeared marginal, "now occupied the centre of the political stage"[192] and the topic of Muhammad Ali Jinnah's campaign for Pakistan was a major talking point. Gandhi and Jinnah had extensive correspondence and the two men met several times over a period of two weeks in September 1944 at Jinnah's house in Bombay, where Gandhi insisted on a united religiously plural and independent India which included Muslims and non-Muslims of the Indian subcontinent coexisting. Jinnah rejected this proposal and insisted instead for partitioning the subcontinent on religious lines to create a separate Muslim India (later Pakistan).[10] These discussions continued through 1947.[193]
While the leaders of Congress languished in jail, the other parties supported the war and gained organisational strength. Underground publications flailed at the ruthless suppression of Congress, but it had little control over events.[194] At the end of the war, the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands. At this point Gandhi called off the struggle, and around 100,000 political prisoners were released, including the Congress's leadership.[195]
Partition and independence
See also: Indian independence movement and Partition of India
 Gandhi with Muhammad Ali Jinnah in September 1944
Gandhi opposed the partition of the Indian subcontinent along religious lines.[196][10][11] The Indian National Congress and Gandhi called for the British to Quit India. However, the All-India Muslim League demanded "Divide and Quit India".[197][198] Gandhi suggested an agreement which required the Congress and the Muslim League to co-operate and attain independence under a provisional government, thereafter, the question of partition could be resolved by a plebiscite in the districts with a Muslim majority.[199]
Jinnah rejected Gandhi's proposal and called for Direct Action Day, on 16 August 1946, to press Muslims to publicly gather in cities and support his proposal for the partition of the Indian subcontinent into a Muslim state and non-Muslim state. Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, the Muslim League Chief Minister of Bengal   now Bangladesh and West Bengal, gave Calcutta's police special holiday to celebrate the Direct Action Day.[200] The Direct Action Day triggered a mass murder of Calcutta Hindus and the torching of their property, and holidaying police were missing to contain or stop the conflict.[201] The British government did not order its army to move in to contain the violence.[200] The violence on Direct Action Day led to retaliatory violence against Muslims across India. Thousands of Hindus and Muslims were murdered, and tens of thousands were injured in the cycle of violence in the days that followed.[202] Gandhi visited the most riot-prone areas to appeal a stop to the massacres.[201]
 Gandhi in 1947, with Louis Mountbatten, Britain's last Viceroy of India, and his wife Edwina Mountbatten
Archibald Wavell, the Viceroy and Governor-General of British India for three years through February 1947, had worked with Gandhi and Jinnah to find a common ground, before and after accepting Indian independence in principle. Wavell condemned Gandhi's character and motives as well as his ideas. Wavell accused Gandhi of harbouring the single minded idea to "overthrow British rule and influence and to establish a Hindu raj", and called Gandhi a "malignant, malevolent, exceedingly shrewd" politician.[203] Wavell feared a civil war on the Indian subcontinent, and doubted Gandhi would be able to stop it.[203]
The British reluctantly agreed to grant independence to the people of the Indian subcontinent, but accepted Jinnah's proposal of partitioning the land into Pakistan and India. Gandhi was involved in the final negotiations, but Stanley Wolpert states the "plan to carve up British India was never approved of or accepted by Gandhi".[204]
The partition was controversial and violently disputed. More than half a million were killed in religious riots as 10 million to 12 million non-Muslims (Hindus and Sikhs mostly) migrated from Pakistan into India, and Muslims migrated from India into Pakistan, across the newly created borders of India, West Pakistan and East Pakistan.[205]
Gandhi spent the day of independence not celebrating the end of the British rule but appealing for peace among his countrymen by fasting and spinning in Calcutta on 15 August 1947. The partition had gripped the Indian subcontinent with religious violence and the streets were filled with corpses.[206] Some writers credit Gandhi's fasting and protests for stopping the religious riots and communal violence.[203][15]
Death
Main article: Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi
At 5:17 pm on 30 January 1948, Gandhi was with his grandnieces in the garden of Birla House (now Gandhi Smriti), on his way to address a prayer meeting, when Nathuram Godse, a Hindu nationalist, fired three bullets into his chest from a pistol at close range.[34] According to some accounts, Gandhi died instantly.[207][208] In other accounts, such as one prepared by an eyewitness journalist, Gandhi was carried into the Birla House, into a bedroom. There he died about 30 minutes later as one of Gandhi's family members read verses from Hindu scriptures.[209]
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru addressed his countrymen over the All-India Radio saying:[210]
Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me, but for millions and millions in this country.[211]
 Memorial at the location of Gandhi's assassination in 1948. His stylised footsteps lead to the memorial.
Godse, a Hindu nationalist with links to the  Hindu Mahasabha and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh,[212] made no attempt to escape; several other conspirators were soon arrested as well. The accused were Nathuram Vinayak Godse (Pune, Maharashtra; a former member of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, editor, journalist),[213] Narayan Apte (Pune, Maharashtra; formerly: British military service, teacher, newspaper manager),[214] Vinayak Damodar Savarkar (Mumbai, Maharashtra; author, lawyer, former member of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, former president of Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha), Shankar Kistayya (Pune, Maharashtra; rickshaw puller, domestic worker employed by Digambar Badge),[215] Dattatraya Parchure (Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh; medical service, care giver),[216] Vishnu Karkare (Ahmednagar, Maharashtra; orphan; odd jobs in hotels, musician in a traveling troupe, volunteer in relief efforts to religious riots (Noakhali), later restaurant owner),[217] Madanlal Pahwa (Ahmednagar refugee camp, Maharashtra; former British Indian army soldier, unemployed, Punjabi refugee who had migrated to India from Pakistan during the Partition.),[216] Gopal Godse (Pune, Maharashtra; brother of Nathuram Godse; storekeeper, merchant)[218][219][220][221][28][15]
The trial began on 27 May 1948 and ran for eight months before Justice Atma Charan passed his final order on 10 February 1949. The prosecution called 149 witnesses, the defense none.[222] The court found all of the defendants except one guilty as charged. Eight men were convicted for the murder conspiracy, and others convicted for violation of the Explosive Substances Act. Savarkar was acquitted and set free. Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte were sentenced to death by hanging[223] and the remaining six (including Godse's brother, Gopal) were sentenced to life imprisonment.[224]
 Gandhi's funeral was marked by millions of Indians.[225]
Gandhi's death was mourned nationwide. Over a million people joined the five-mile-long funeral procession that took over five hours to reach Raj Ghat from Birla house, where he was assassinated, and another million watched the procession pass by.[225] Gandhi's body was transported on a weapons carrier, whose chassis was dismantled overnight to allow a high-floor to be installed so that people could catch a glimpse of his body. The engine of the vehicle was not used; instead four drag-ropes held by 50 people each pulled the vehicle.[226] All Indian-owned establishments in London remained closed in mourning as thousands of people from all faiths and denominations and Indians from all over Britain converged at India House in London.[227]
Gandhi's assassination dramatically changed the political landscape. Nehru became his political heir. According to Markovits, while Gandhi was alive, Pakistan's declaration that it was a "Muslim state" had led Indian groups to demand that it be declared a "Hindu state".[228] Nehru used Gandhi's martyrdom as a political weapon to silence all advocates of Hindu nationalism as well as his political challengers. He linked Gandhi's assassination to politics of hatred and ill-will.[228]
According to Guha, Nehru and his Congress colleagues called on Indians to honour Gandhi's memory and even more his ideals.[229][230] Nehru used the assassination to consolidate the authority of the new Indian state. Gandhi's death helped marshal support for the new government and legitimise the Congress Party's control, leveraged by the massive outpouring of Hindu expressions of grief for a man who had inspired them for decades. The government suppressed the RSS, the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests.[231]
For years after the assassination, states Markovits, "Gandhi's shadow loomed large over the political life of the new Indian Republic". The government quelled any opposition to its economic and social policies, despite these being contrary to Gandhi's ideas, by reconstructing Gandhi's image and ideals.[232]
Funeral and memorials
 Cremation of Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat, 31 January 1948. It was attended by Jawaharlal Nehru, Louis and Edwina Mountbatten, Maulana Azad, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Sarojini Naidu and other national leaders. His son Devdas Gandhi lit the pyre.[233]
Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition. Gandhi's ashes were poured into urns which were sent across India for memorial services.[234] Most of the ashes were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948, but some were secretly taken away. In 1997, Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn, found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts, at the Sangam at Allahabad.[235][236] Some of Gandhi's ashes were scattered at the source of the Nile River near Jinja, Uganda, and a memorial plaque marks the event. On 30 January 2008, the contents of another urn were immersed at Girgaum Chowpatty. Another urn is at the palace of the Aga Khan in Pune (where Gandhi was held as a political prisoner from 1942 to 1944[237][238]) and another in the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine in Los Angeles.[235][239]
The Birla House site where Gandhi was assassinated is now a memorial called Gandhi Smriti. The place near Yamuna river where he was cremated is the R j Gh t memorial in New Delhi.[240] A black marble platform, it bears the epigraph "H  R ma" (Devanagari:  !   or, Hey Raam). These are widely believed to be Gandhi's last words after he was shot, though the veracity of this statement has been questioned.[241]
Principles, practices, and beliefs
See also: Gandhism
Gandhi's statements, letters and life have attracted much political and scholarly analysis of his principles, practices and beliefs, including what influenced him. Some writers present him as a paragon of ethical living and pacifism, while others present him as a more complex, contradictory and evolving character influenced by his culture and circumstances.[242][243]
Influences
 Gandhi with poet Rabindranath Tagore, 1940
Gandhi grew up in a Hindu and Jain religious atmosphere in his native Gujarat, which were his primary influences, but he was also influenced by his personal reflections and literature of Hindu Bhakti saints, Advaita Vedanta, Islam, Buddhism, Christianity, and thinkers such as Tolstoy, Ruskin and Thoreau.[244][245] At age 57 he declared himself to be Advaitist Hindu in his religious persuasion, but added that he supported Dvaitist viewpoints and religious pluralism.[246][247][248]
Gandhi was influenced by his devout Vaishnava Hindu mother, the regional Hindu temples and saint tradition which co-existed with Jain tradition in Gujarat.[244][249] Historian R.B. Cribb states that Gandhi's thought evolved over time, with his early ideas becoming the core or scaffolding for his mature philosophy. He committed himself early to truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism.[250]
Gandhi's London lifestyle incorporated the values he had grown up with. When he returned to India in 1891, his outlook was parochial and he could not make a living as a lawyer. This challenged his belief that practicality and morality necessarily coincided. By moving in 1893 to South Africa he found a solution to this problem and developed the central concepts of his mature philosophy.[251]
According to Bhikhu Parekh, three books that influenced Gandhi most in South Africa were William Salter's Ethical Religion (1889); Henry David Thoreau's On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1849); and Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894). The art critic and critic of political economy John Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.[87] The most profound influence on Gandhi were those from Hinduism, Christianity and Jainism, states Parekh, with his thoughts "in harmony with the classical Indian traditions, specially the Advaita or monistic tradition".[252]
According to Indira Carr and others, Gandhi was influenced by Vaishnavism, Jainism and Advaita Vedanta.[253][254] Balkrishna Gokhale states that Gandhi was influenced by Hinduism and Jainism, and his studies of Sermon on the Mount of Christianity, Ruskin and Tolstoy.[255]
Additional theories of possible influences on Gandhi have been proposed. For example, in 1935, N. A. Toothi stated that Gandhi was influenced by the reforms and teachings of the Swaminarayan tradition of Hinduism. According to Raymond Williams, Toothi may have overlooked the influence of the Jain community, and adds close parallels do exist in programs of social reform in the Swaminarayan tradition and those of Gandhi, based on "nonviolence, truth-telling, cleanliness, temperance and upliftment of the masses."[256][257] Historian Howard states the culture of Gujarat influenced Gandhi and his methods.[258]
Leo Tolstoy
 Mohandas K. Gandhi and other residents of Tolstoy Farm, South Africa, 1910
Along with the book mentioned above, in 1908 Leo Tolstoy wrote A Letter to a Hindu, which said that only by using love as a weapon through passive resistance could the Indian people overthrow colonial rule. In 1909, Gandhi wrote to Tolstoy seeking advice and permission to republish A Letter to a Hindu in Gujarati. Tolstoy responded and the two continued a correspondence until Tolstoy's death in 1910 (Tolstoy's last letter was to Gandhi).[259] The letters concern practical and theological applications of nonviolence.[260] Gandhi saw himself a disciple of Tolstoy, for they agreed regarding opposition to state authority and colonialism; both hated violence and preached non-resistance. However, they differed sharply on political strategy. Gandhi called for political involvement; he was a nationalist and was prepared to use nonviolent force. He was also willing to compromise.[261] It was at Tolstoy Farm where Gandhi and Hermann Kallenbach systematically trained their disciples in the philosophy of nonviolence.[262]
Shrimad Rajchandra
Gandhi credited Shrimad Rajchandra, a poet and Jain philosopher, as his influential counsellor. In Modern Review, June 1930, Gandhi wrote about their first encounter in 1891 at Dr. P.J. Mehta's residence in Bombay. He was introduced to Shrimad by Dr. Pranjivan Mehta.[263] Gandhi exchanged letters with Rajchandra when he was in South Africa, referring to him as Kavi (literally, "poet"). In 1930, Gandhi wrote, "Such was the man who captivated my heart in religious matters as no other man ever has till now."[264] "I have said elsewhere that in moulding my inner life Tolstoy and Ruskin vied with Kavi. But Kavi's influence was undoubtedly deeper if only because I had come in closest personal touch with him."[265]
Gandhi, in his autobiography, called Rajchandra his "guide and helper" and his "refuge [...] in moments of spiritual crisis". He had advised Gandhi to be patient and to study Hinduism deeply.[266][267]
Religious texts
During his stay in South Africa, along with scriptures and philosophical texts of Hinduism and other Indian religions, Gandhi read translated texts of Christianity such as the Bible, and Islam such as the Quran.[268] A Quaker mission in South Africa attempted to convert him to Christianity. Gandhi joined them in their prayers and debated Christian theology with them, but refused conversion stating he did not accept the theology therein or that Christ was the only son of God.[268][269][270]
His comparative studies of religions and interaction with scholars, led him to respect all religions as well as become concerned about imperfections in all of them and frequent misinterpretations.[268] Gandhi grew fond of Hinduism, and referred to the Bhagavad Gita as his spiritual dictionary and greatest single influence on his life.[268][271][272] Later, Gandhi translated the Gita into Gujarati in 1930.[273]
Sufism
Gandhi was acquainted with Sufi Islam's Chishti Order during his stay in South Africa. He attended Khanqah gatherings there at Riverside. According to Margaret Chatterjee, Gandhi as a Vaishnava Hindu shared values such as humility, devotion and brotherhood for the poor that is also found in Sufism.[274][275] Winston Churchill also compared Gandhi to a Sufi fakir.[164]
On wars and nonviolence
Wars
Gandhi participated in forming the Indian Ambulance Corps in the South African war against the Boers, on the British side in 1899.[276] Both the Dutch settlers called Boers and the imperial British at that time discriminated against the coloured races they considered as inferior, and Gandhi later wrote about his conflicted beliefs during the Boer war. He stated that "when the war was declared, my personal sympathies were all with the Boers, but my loyalty to the British rule drove me to participation with the British in that war. I felt that, if I demanded rights as a British citizen, it was also my duty, as such to participate in the defence of the British Empire, so I collected together as many comrades as possible, and with very great difficulty got their services accepted as an ambulance corps."[277]
During World War I (1914 1918), nearing the age of 50, Gandhi supported the British and its allied forces by recruiting Indians to join the British army, expanding the Indian contingent from about 100,000 to over 1.1 million.[124][276] He encouraged Indian people to fight on one side of the war in Europe and Africa at the cost of their lives.[276] Pacifists criticised and questioned Gandhi, who defended these practices by stating, according to Sankar Ghose, "it would be madness for me to sever my connection with the society to which I belong".[276] According to Keith Robbins, the recruitment effort was in part motivated by the British promise to reciprocate the help with swaraj (self-government) to Indians after the end of World War I.[123] After the war, the British government offered minor reforms instead, which disappointed Gandhi.[124] He launched his satyagraha movement in 1919. In parallel, Gandhi's fellowmen became sceptical of his pacifist ideas and were inspired by the ideas of nationalism and anti-imperialism.[278]
In a 1920 essay, after the World War I, Gandhi wrote, "where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence." Rahul Sagar interprets Gandhi's efforts to recruit for the British military during the War, as Gandhi's belief that, at that time, it would demonstrate that Indians were willing to fight. Further, it would also show the British that his fellow Indians were "their subjects by choice rather than out of cowardice." In 1922, Gandhi wrote that abstinence from violence is effective and true forgiveness only when one has the power to punish, not when one decides not to do anything because one is helpless.[279]
After World War II engulfed Britain, Gandhi actively campaigned to oppose any help to the British war effort and any Indian participation in the war by launching Quit India Movement. According to Arthur Herman, Gandhi believed that his campaign would strike a blow to imperialism.[181] The British government responded with mass arrests including that of Gandhi and Congress leaders and killed over 1,000 Indians who participated in this movement.[182] A number of violent attacks were also carried out by the nationalists against the British government.[183] While 2.5 million Indians volunteered and joined on the British side and fought as a part of the Allied forces in Europe, North Africa and various fronts of the World War II,[181] the Quit India Movement played a role in weakening the control over the South Asian region by the British regime and ultimately paved the way for Indian independence.[183][181]
Truth and Satyagraha
 Plaque displaying one of Gandhi's quotes on rumour
Gandhi dedicated his life to discovering and pursuing truth, or Satya, and called his movement satyagraha, which means "appeal to, insistence on, or reliance on the Truth".[280] The first formulation of the satyagraha as a political movement and principle occurred in 1920, which he tabled as "Resolution on Non-cooperation" in September that year before a session of the Indian Congress. It was the satyagraha formulation and step, states Dennis Dalton, that deeply resonated with beliefs and culture of his people, embedded him into the popular consciousness, transforming him quickly into Mahatma.[281]
 "God is truth. The way to truth lies through ahimsa (nonviolence)"   Sabarmati, 13 March 1927
Gandhi based Satyagraha on the Vedantic ideal of self-realisation, ahimsa (nonviolence), vegetarianism, and universal love. William Borman states that the key to his satyagraha is rooted in the Hindu Upanishadic texts.[282] According to Indira Carr, Gandhi's ideas on ahimsa and satyagraha were founded on the philosophical foundations of Advaita Vedanta.[283] I. Bruce Watson states that some of these ideas are found not only in traditions within Hinduism, but also in Jainism or Buddhism, particularly those about non-violence, vegetarianism and universal love, but Gandhi's synthesis was to politicise these ideas.[284] Gandhi's concept of satya as a civil movement, states Glyn Richards, are best understood in the context of the Hindu terminology of Dharma and  ta.[285]
Gandhi stated that the most important battle to fight was overcoming his own demons, fears, and insecurities. Gandhi summarised his beliefs first when he said "God is Truth". He would later change this statement to "Truth is God". Thus, satya (truth) in Gandhi's philosophy is "God".[286] Gandhi, states Richards, described the term "God" not as a separate power, but as the Being (Brahman, Atman) of the Advaita Vedanta tradition, a nondual universal that pervades in all things, in each person and all life.[285] According to Nicholas Gier, this to Gandhi meant the unity of God and humans, that all beings have the same one soul and therefore equality, that atman exists and is same as everything in the universe, ahimsa (non-violence) is the very nature of this atman.[287]
 Gandhi picking salt during Salt Satyagraha to defy colonial law giving salt collection monopoly to the British.[288] His satyagraha attracted vast numbers of Indian men and women.[289]
The essence of Satyagraha is "soul force" as a political means, refusing to use brute force against the oppressor, seeking to eliminate antagonisms between the oppressor and the oppressed, aiming to transform or "purify" the oppressor. It is not inaction but determined passive resistance and non-co-operation where, states Arthur Herman, "love conquers hate".[290] A euphemism sometimes used for Satyagraha is that it is a "silent force" or a "soul force" (a term also used by Martin Luther King Jr. during his "I Have a Dream" speech). It arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power. Satyagraha is also termed a "universal force", as it essentially "makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe."[291]
Gandhi wrote: "There must be no impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause."[292] Civil disobedience and non-co-operation as practised under Satyagraha are based on the "law of suffering",[293] a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end. This end usually implies a moral upliftment or progress of an individual or society. Therefore, non-co-operation in Satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the co-operation of the opponent consistently with truth and justice.[294]
While Gandhi's idea of satyagraha as a political means attracted a widespread following among Indians, the support was not universal. For example, Muslim leaders such as Jinnah opposed the satyagraha idea, accused Gandhi to be reviving Hinduism through political activism, and began effort to counter Gandhi with Muslim nationalism and a demand for Muslim homeland.[295][296][297] The untouchability leader Ambedkar, in June 1945, after his decision to convert to Buddhism and the first Law and Justice minister of modern India, dismissed Gandhi's ideas as loved by "blind Hindu devotees", primitive, influenced by spurious brew of Tolstoy and Ruskin, and "there is always some simpleton to preach them".[298][299] Winston Churchill caricatured Gandhi as a "cunning huckster" seeking selfish gain, an "aspiring dictator", and an "atavistic spokesman of a pagan Hinduism". Churchill stated that the civil disobedience movement spectacle of Gandhi only increased "the danger to which white people there [British India] are exposed".[300]
Nonviolence
 Gandhi with textile workers at Darwen, Lancashire, 26 September 1931
Although Gandhi was not the originator of the principle of nonviolence, he was the first to apply it in the political field on a large scale.[301][6] The concept of nonviolence (ahimsa) has a long history in Indian religious thought, and is considered the highest dharma (ethical value virtue), a precept to be observed towards all living beings (sarvbhuta), at all times (sarvada), in all respects (sarvatha), in action, words and thought.[302] Gandhi explains his philosophy and ideas about ahimsa as a political means in his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth.[303][304][305]
Gandhi's views came under heavy criticism in Britain when it was under attack from Nazi Germany, and later when the Holocaust was revealed. He told the British people in 1940, "I would like you to lay down the arms you have as being useless for saving you or humanity. You will invite Herr Hitler and Signor Mussolini to take what they want of the countries you call your possessions... If these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you will vacate them. If they do not give you free passage out, you will allow yourselves, man, woman, and child, to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe allegiance to them."[306] George Orwell remarked that Gandhi's methods confronted "an old-fashioned and rather shaky despotism which treated him in a fairly chivalrous way", not a totalitarian power, "where political opponents simply disappear."[307]
In a post-war interview in 1946, he said, "Hitler killed five million Jews. It is the greatest crime of our time. But the Jews should have offered themselves to the butcher's knife. They should have thrown themselves into the sea from cliffs... It would have aroused the world and the people of Germany... As it is they succumbed anyway in their millions."[308] Gandhi believed this act of "collective suicide", in response to the Holocaust, "would have been heroism".[309][failed verification]
Gandhi as a politician, in practice, settled for less than complete non-violence. His method of non-violent Satyagraha could easily attract masses and it fitted in with the interests and sentiments of business groups, better-off people and dominant sections of peasantry, who did not want an uncontrolled and violent social revolution which could create losses for them. His doctrine of ahimsa lay at the core of unifying role played by the Gandhian Congress.[310] However, during the Quit India Movement, even many staunch Gandhians used 'violent means'.[311]
On inter-religious relations
Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs
Gandhi believed that Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism were traditions of Hinduism, with a shared history, rites and ideas. At other times, he acknowledged that he knew little about Buddhism other than his reading of Edwin Arnold's book on it. Based on that book, he considered Buddhism to be a reform movement and the Buddha to be a Hindu.[312] He stated he knew Jainism much more, and he credited Jains to have profoundly influenced him. Sikhism, to Gandhi, was an integral part of Hinduism, in the form of another reform movement. Sikh and Buddhist leaders disagreed with Gandhi, a disagreement Gandhi respected as a difference of opinion.[312][313]
Muslims
Gandhi had generally positive and empathetic views of Islam, and he extensively studied the Quran. He viewed Islam as a faith that proactively promoted peace, and felt that non-violence had a predominant place in the Quran.[314] He also read the Islamic prophet Muhammad's biography, and argued that it was "not the sword that won a place for Islam in those days in the scheme of life. It was the rigid simplicity, the utter self-effacement of the Prophet, the scrupulous regard for pledges, his intense devotion to his friends and followers, his intrepidity, his fearlessness, his absolute trust in God and in his own mission."[315] Gandhi had a large Indian Muslim following, who he encouraged to join him in a mutual nonviolent jihad against the social oppression of their time. Prominent Muslim allies in his nonviolent resistance movement included Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and Abdul Ghaffar Khan. However, Gandhi's empathy towards Islam, and his eager willingness to valorise peaceful Muslim social activists, was viewed by many Hindus as an appeasement of Muslims and later became a leading cause for his assassination at the hands of intolerant Hindu extremists.[316]
While Gandhi expressed mostly positive views of Islam, he did occasionally criticise Muslims.[314] He stated in 1925 that he did not criticise the teachings of the Quran, but he did criticise the interpreters of the Quran. Gandhi believed that numerous interpreters have interpreted it to fit their preconceived notions.[317] He believed Muslims should welcome criticism of the Quran, because "every true scripture only gains from criticism". Gandhi criticised Muslims who "betray intolerance of criticism by a non-Muslim of anything related to Islam", such as the penalty of stoning to death under Islamic law. To Gandhi, Islam has "nothing to fear from criticism even if it be unreasonable".[318][319] He also believed there were material contradictions between Hinduism and Islam,[319] and he criticised Muslims, along with communists, who were quick to resort to violence.[320]
One of the strategies Gandhi adopted was to work with Muslim leaders of pre-partition India, to oppose the British imperialism in and outside the Indian subcontinent.[127][128] After the First World War, in 1919 22, he won the Muslim leadership support of the Ali Brothers by backing the Khilafat Movement in favour of the Islamic Caliph and his historic Ottoman Caliphate, and opposing the secular Islam-supporting Mustafa Kemal Atat rk. By 1924, Atat rk had ended the Caliphate, the Khilafat Movement was over, and Muslim support for Gandhi had largely evaporated.[127][321][128]
In 1925, Gandhi gave another reason for why he had got involved in the Khilafat movement and the Middle East affairs between Britain and the Ottoman Empire. Gandhi explained to his co-religionists (Hindus) that he sympathised and campaigned for the Islamic cause, not because he cared for the Sultan, but because "I wanted to enlist the Mussalman's sympathy in the matter of cow protection".[322] According to the historian M. Naeem Qureshi, like the then Indian Muslim leaders who had combined religion and politics, Gandhi too imported his religion into his political strategy during the Khilafat movement.[323]
In the 1940s, Gandhi pooled ideas with some Muslim leaders who sought religious harmony like him, and opposed the proposed partition of British India into India and Pakistan. For example, his close friend Badshah Khan suggested that they should work towards opening Hindu temples for Muslim prayers, and Islamic mosques for Hindu prayers, to bring the two religious groups closer.[324] Gandhi accepted this and began having Muslim prayers read in Hindu temples to play his part, but was unable to get Hindu prayers read in mosques. The Hindu nationalist groups objected and began confronting Gandhi for this one-sided practice, by shouting and demonstrating inside the Hindu temples, in the last years of his life.[325][326]
Christians
Gandhi praised Christianity. He was critical of Christian missionary efforts in British India, because they mixed medical or education assistance with demands that the beneficiary convert to Christianity.[327] According to Gandhi, this was not true "service" but one driven by an ulterior motive of luring people into religious conversion and exploiting the economically or medically desperate. It did not lead to inner transformation or moral advance or to the Christian teaching of "love", but was based on false one-sided criticisms of other religions, when Christian societies faced similar problems in South Africa and Europe. It led to the converted person hating his neighbours and other religions, and divided people rather than bringing them closer in compassion. According to Gandhi, "no religious tradition could claim a monopoly over truth or salvation".[327][328] Gandhi did not support laws to prohibit missionary activity, but demanded that Christians should first understand the message of Jesus, and then strive to live without stereotyping and misrepresenting other religions. According to Gandhi, the message of Jesus was not to humiliate and imperialistically rule over other people considering them inferior or second class or slaves, but that "when the hungry are fed and peace comes to our individual and collective life, then Christ is born".[329]
Gandhi believed that his long acquaintance with Christianity had made him like it as well as find it imperfect. He asked Christians to stop humiliating his country and his people as heathens, idolators and other abusive language, and to change their negative views of India. He believed that Christians should introspect on the "true meaning of religion" and get a desire to study and learn from Indian religions in the spirit of universal brotherhood.[329] According to Eric Sharpe   a professor of Religious Studies, though Gandhi was born in a Hindu family and later became Hindu by conviction, many Christians in time thought of him as an "exemplary Christian and even as a saint".[330]
Some colonial era Christian preachers and faithfuls considered Gandhi as a saint.[331][332][333] Biographers from France and Britain have drawn parallels between Gandhi and Christian saints. Recent scholars question these romantic biographies and state that Gandhi was neither a Christian figure nor mirrored a Christian saint.[334] Gandhi's life is better viewed as exemplifying his belief in the "convergence of various spiritualities" of a Christian and a Hindu, states Michael de Saint-Cheron.[334]
Jews
According to Kumaraswamy, Gandhi initially supported Arab demands with respect to Palestine. He justified this support by invoking Islam, stating that "non-Muslims cannot acquire sovereign jurisdiction" in Jazirat al-Arab (the Arabian Peninsula).[335] These arguments, states Kumaraswamy, were a part of his political strategy to win Muslim support during the Khilafat movement. In the post-Khilafat period, Gandhi neither negated Jewish demands nor did he use Islamic texts or history to support Muslim claims against Israel. Gandhi's silence after the Khilafat period may represent an evolution in his understanding of the conflicting religious claims over Palestine, according to Kumaraswamy.[335] In 1938, Gandhi spoke in favour of Jewish claims, and in March 1946, he said to the Member of British Parliament Sidney Silverman, "if the Arabs have a claim to Palestine, the Jews have a prior claim", a position very different from his earlier stance.[335][336]
Gandhi discussed the persecution of the Jews in Germany and the emigration of Jews from Europe to Palestine through his lens of Satyagraha.[206][337] In 1937, Gandhi discussed Zionism with his close Jewish friend Hermann Kallenbach.[338] He said that Zionism was not the right answer to the problems faced by Jews[339] and instead recommended Satyagraha. Gandhi thought the Zionists in Palestine represented European imperialism and used violence to achieve their goals; he argued that "the Jews should disclaim any intention of realising their aspiration under the protection of arms and should rely wholly on the goodwill of Arabs. No exception can possibly be taken to the natural desire of the Jews to find a home in Palestine. But they must wait for its fulfilment till Arab opinion is ripe for it."[206]
In 1938, Gandhi stated that his "sympathies are all with the Jews. I have known them intimately in South Africa. Some of them became life-long companions." Philosopher Martin Buber was highly critical of Gandhi's approach and in 1939 wrote an open letter to him on the subject. Gandhi reiterated his stance that "the Jews seek to convert the Arab heart", and use "satyagraha in confronting the Arabs" in 1947.[340] According to Simone Panter-Brick, Gandhi's political position on Jewish-Arab conflict evolved over the 1917 1947 period, shifting from a support for the Arab position first, and for the Jewish position in the 1940s.[341]
On life, society and other application of his ideas
Vegetarianism, food, and animals
Gandhi was brought up as a vegetarian by his devout Hindu mother.[342][343] The idea of vegetarianism is deeply ingrained in Hindu Vaishnavism and Jain traditions in India, such as in his native Gujarat, where meat is considered as a form of food obtained by violence to animals.[344][345] Gandhi's rationale for vegetarianism was largely along those found in Hindu and Jain texts. Gandhi believed that any form of food inescapably harms some form of living organism, but one should seek to understand and reduce the violence in what one consumes because "there is essential unity of all life".[343][346]
Gandhi believed that some life forms are more capable of suffering, and non-violence to him meant not having the intent as well as active efforts to minimise hurt, injury or suffering to all life forms.[346] Gandhi explored food sources that reduced violence to various life forms in the food chain. He believed that slaughtering animals is unnecessary, as other sources of foods are available.[344] He also consulted with vegetarianism campaigners during his lifetime, such as with Henry Stephens Salt. Food to Gandhi was not only a source of sustaining one's body, but a source of his impact on other living beings, and one that affected his mind, character and spiritual well being.[347][348][349] He avoided not only meat, but also eggs and milk. Gandhi wrote the book The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism and wrote for the London Vegetarian Society's publication.[350]
Beyond his religious beliefs, Gandhi stated another motivation for his experiments with diet. He attempted to find the most non-violent vegetarian meal that the poorest human could afford, taking meticulous notes on vegetables and fruits, and his observations with his own body and his ashram in Gujarat.[351][352] He tried fresh and dry fruits (fruitarianism), then just sun dried fruits, before resuming his prior vegetarian diet on advice of his doctor and concerns of his friends. His experiments with food began in the 1890s and continued for several decades.[351][352] For some of these experiments, Gandhi combined his own ideas with those found on diet in Indian yoga texts. He believed that each vegetarian should experiment with their diet because, in his studies at his ashram he saw "one man's food may be poison for another".[353][354]
Gandhi championed animal rights in general. Other than making vegetarian choices, he actively campaigned against dissection studies and experimentation on live animals (vivisection) in the name of science and medical studies.[344] He considered it a violence against animals, something that inflicted pain and suffering. He wrote, "Vivisection in my opinion is the blackest of all the blackest crimes that man is at present committing against God and His fair creation."[355]
Fasting
See also: List of fasts undertaken by Mahatma Gandhi
 Gandhi's last political protest using fasting, in January 1948
Gandhi used fasting as a political device, often threatening suicide unless demands were met. Congress publicised the fasts as a political action that generated widespread sympathy. In response, the government tried to manipulate news coverage to minimise his challenge to the Raj. He fasted in 1932 to protest the voting scheme for separate political representation for Dalits; Gandhi did not want them segregated. The British government stopped the London press from showing photographs of his emaciated body, because it would elicit sympathy. Gandhi's 1943 hunger strike took place during a two-year prison term for the anti-colonial Quit India movement. The government called on nutritional experts to demystify his action, and again no photos were allowed. However, his final fast in 1948, after the end of British rule in India, his hunger strike was lauded by the British press and this time did include full-length photos.[356]
Alter states that Gandhi's fasting, vegetarianism and diet was more than a political leverage, it was a part of his experiments with self restraint and healthy living. He was "profoundly skeptical of traditional Ayurveda", encouraging it to study the scientific method and adopt its progressive learning approach. Gandhi believed yoga offered health benefits. He believed that a healthy nutritional diet based on regional foods and hygiene were essential to good health.[357] Recently ICMR made Gandhi's health records public in a book 'Gandhi and Health@150'. These records indicate that despite being underweight at 46.7 kg Gandhi was generally healthy. He avoided modern medication and experimented extensively with water and earth healing. While his cardio records show his heart was normal, there were several instances he suffered from ailments like Malaria and was also operated on twice for piles and appendicitis. Despite health challenges, Gandhi was able to walk about 79000 km in his lifetime which comes to an average of 18 km per day and is equivalent to walking around the earth twice.[358]
Women
Gandhi strongly favoured the emancipation of women, and urged "the women to fight for their own self-development." He opposed purdah, child marriage, dowry and sati.[359] A wife is not a slave of the husband, stated Gandhi, but his comrade, better half, colleague and friend, according to Lyn Norvell.[359] In his own life however, according to Suruchi Thapar-Bjorkert, Gandhi's relationship with his wife were at odds with some of these values.[158]
At various occasions, Gandhi credited his orthodox Hindu mother, and his wife, for first lessons in satyagraha.[360] He used the legends of Hindu goddess Sita to expound women's innate strength, autonomy and "lioness in spirit" whose moral compass can make any demon "as helpless as a goat".[360] To Gandhi, the women of India were an important part of the "swadeshi movement" (Buy Indian), and his goal of decolonising the Indian economy.[360]
Some historians such as Angela Woollacott and Kumari Jayawardena state that even though Gandhi often and publicly expressed his belief in the equality of sexes, yet his vision was one of gender difference and complementarity between them. Women, to Gandhi, should be educated to be better in the domestic realm and educate the next generation. His views on women's rights were less liberal and more similar to puritan-Victorian expectations of women, states Jayawardena, than other Hindu leaders with him who supported economic independence and equal gender rights in all aspects.[361][362]
Brahmacharya: abstinence from sex and food
Along with many other texts, Gandhi studied Bhagavad Gita while in South Africa.[363] This Hindu scripture discusses jnana yoga, bhakti yoga and karma yoga along with virtues such as non-violence, patience, integrity, lack of hypocrisy, self restraint and abstinence.[364] Gandhi began experiments with these, and in 1906 at age 37, although married and a father, he vowed to abstain from sexual relations.[363]
Gandhi's experiment with abstinence went beyond sex, and extended to food. He consulted the Jain scholar Rajchandra, whom he fondly called Raychandbhai.[365] Rajchandra advised him that milk stimulated sexual passion. Gandhi began abstaining from cow's milk in 1912, and did so even when doctors advised him to consume milk.[266][366] According to Sankar Ghose, Tagore described Gandhi as someone who did not abhor sex or women, but considered sexual life as inconsistent with his moral goals.[367]
Gandhi tried to test and prove to himself his brahmacharya. The experiments began some time after the death of his wife in February 1944. At the start of his experiment, he had women sleep in the same room but in different beds. He later slept with women in the same bed but clothed, and finally, he slept naked with women. In April 1945, Gandhi referenced being naked with several "women or girls" in a letter to Birla as part of the experiments.[368] According to the 1960s memoir of his grandniece Manu, Gandhi feared in early 1947 that he and she may be killed by Muslims in the run-up to India's independence in August 1947, and asked her when she was 18 years old if she wanted to help him with his experiments to test their "purity", for which she readily accepted.[369] Gandhi slept naked in the same bed with Manu with the bedroom doors open all night. Manu stated that the experiment had no "ill effect" on her. Gandhi also shared his bed with 18-year-old Abha, wife of his grandnephew Kanu. Gandhi would sleep with both Manu and Abha at the same time.[369][370] None of the women who participated in the brahmachari experiments of Gandhi indicated that they had sex or that Gandhi behaved in any sexual way. Those who went public said they felt as though they were sleeping with their ageing mother.[367][368][371]
According to Sean Scalmer, Gandhi in his final year of life was an ascetic, and his sickly skeletal figure was caricatured in Western media.[372] In February 1947, he asked his confidants such as Birla and Ramakrishna if it was wrong for him to experiment his brahmacharya oath.[367] Gandhi's public experiments, as they progressed, were widely discussed and criticised by his family members and leading politicians. However, Gandhi said that if he would not let Manu sleep with him, it would be a sign of weakness. Some of his staff resigned, including two of his newspaper's editors who had refused to print some of Gandhi's sermons dealing with his experiments.[369] Nirmalkumar Bose, Gandhi's Bengali interpreter, for example, criticised Gandhi, not because Gandhi did anything wrong, but because Bose was concerned about the psychological effect on the women who participated in his experiments.[370] Veena Howard states Gandhi's views on brahmacharya and religious renunciation experiments were a method to confront women issues in his times.[373]
Gandhi also supported alcohol abstinence, advocating Prohibition as the only effective way to deal with alcohol usage.[374]
Untouchability and castes
Gandhi spoke out against untouchability early in his life.[375] Before 1932, he and his associates used the word antyaja for untouchables. In a major speech on untouchability at Nagpur in 1920, Gandhi called it a great evil in Hindu society but observed that it was not unique to Hinduism, having deeper roots, and stated that Europeans in South Africa treated "all of us, Hindus and Muslims, as untouchables; we may not reside in their midst, nor enjoy the rights which they do".[376] Calling the doctrine of untouchability intolerable, he asserted that the practice could be eradicated, that Hinduism was flexible enough to allow eradication, and that a concerted effort was needed to persuade people of the wrong and to urge them to eradicate it.[376]
According to Christophe Jaffrelot, while Gandhi considered untouchability to be wrong and evil, he believed that caste or class is based on neither inequality nor inferiority.[375] Gandhi believed that individuals should freely intermarry whomever they wish, but that no one should expect everyone to be his friend: every individual, regardless of background, has a right to choose whom he will welcome into his home, whom he will befriend, and whom he will spend time with.[375][376]
In 1932, Gandhi began a new campaign to improve the lives of the untouchables, whom he began to call harijans, "the children of god".[377] On 8 May 1933, Gandhi began a 21-day fast of self-purification and launched a year-long campaign to help the harijan movement.[378] This campaign was not universally embraced by the Dalit community: Ambedkar and his allies felt Gandhi was being paternalistic and was undermining Dalit political rights. Ambedkar described him as "devious and untrustworthy".[379] He accused Gandhi as someone who wished to retain the caste system.[173] Ambedkar and Gandhi debated their ideas and concerns, each trying to persuade the other.[380][381] It was during the Harijan tour that he faced the first assassination attempt. While in Poona, a bomb was thrown by an unidentified assailant (described only as a sanatani in the press[382]) at a car belonging to his entourage but Gandhi and his family escaped as they were in the car that was following. Gandhi later declared that he "cannot believe that any sane sanatanist could ever encourage the insane act ... The sorrowful incident has undoubtedly advanced the Harijan cause. It is easy to see that causes prosper by the martyrdom of those who stand for them."[383]
 Coverage of the assassination attempt, The Bombay Chronicle, 27 June 1934
In 1935, Ambedkar announced his intentions to leave Hinduism and join Buddhism.[173] According to Sankar Ghose, the announcement shook Gandhi, who reappraised his views and wrote many essays with his views on castes, intermarriage, and what Hinduism says on the subject. These views contrasted with those of Ambedkar.[384] Yet in the elections of 1937, excepting some seats in Mumbai which Ambedkar's party won, India's untouchables voted heavily in favour of Gandhi's campaign and his party, the Congress.[385]
Gandhi and his associates continued to keep in touch with Ambedkar. Ambedkar worked with other Congress leaders through the 1940s and the headed committee of India's constitution in the late 1940s, but did indeed convert to Buddhism in 1956.[173] According to Jaffrelot, Gandhi's views evolved between the 1920s and 1940s; by 1946, he actively encouraged intermarriage between castes. His approach, too, to untouchability differed from Ambedkar's, championing fusion, choice, and free intermixing, while Ambedkar envisioned each segment of society maintaining its group identity, and each group then separately advancing the "politics of equality".[375]
Ambedkar's criticism of Gandhi continued to influence the Dalit movement past Gandhi's death. According to Arthur Herman, Ambedkar's hatred for Gandhi and Gandhi's ideas was so strong that, when he heard of Gandhi's assassination, he remarked after a momentary silence a sense of regret and then added, "My real enemy is gone; thank goodness the eclipse is over now".[298][386] According to Ramachandra Guha, "ideologues have carried these old rivalries into the present, with the demonization of Gandhi now common among politicians who presume to speak in Ambedkar's name."[387]
Nai Talim, basic education
Main article: Nai Talim
Gandhi rejected the colonial Western format of the education system. He stated that it led to disdain for manual work, generally created an elite administrative bureaucracy. Gandhi favoured an education system with far greater emphasis on learning skills in practical and useful work, one that included physical, mental and spiritual studies. His methodology sought to treat all professions equal and pay everyone the same.[388][389] This leads him to create a university in Ahmedabad, Gujarat Vidyapith.
Gandhi called his ideas Nai Talim (literally, 'new education'). He believed that the Western style education violated and destroyed the indigenous cultures. A different basic education model, he believed, would lead to better self awareness, prepare people to treat all work equally respectable and valued, and lead to a society with less social diseases.[390][391]
Nai Talim evolved out of his experiences at the Tolstoy Farm in South Africa, and Gandhi attempted to formulate the new system at the Sevagram ashram after 1937.[389] Nehru government's vision of an industrialised, centrally planned economy after 1947 had scant place for Gandhi's village-oriented approach.[392]
In his autobiography, Gandhi wrote that he believed every Hindu child must learn Sanskrit because its historic and spiritual texts are in that language.[65]
Swaraj, self-rule
Main article: Swaraj
Gandhi believed that swaraj not only can be attained with non-violence,[5] but it can also be run with non-violence. A military is unnecessary, because any aggressor can be thrown out using the method of non-violent non-co-operation. While the military is unnecessary in a nation organised under swaraj principle, Gandhi added that a police force is necessary given human nature. However, the state would limit the use of weapons by the police to the minimum, aiming for their use as a restraining force.[393]
According to Gandhi, a non-violent state is like an "ordered anarchy".[393] In a society of mostly non-violent individuals, those who are violent will sooner or later accept discipline or leave the community, stated Gandhi.[393] He emphasised a society where individuals believed more in learning about their duties and responsibilities, not demanded rights and privileges. On returning from South Africa, when Gandhi received a letter asking for his participation in writing a world charter for human rights, he responded saying, "in my experience, it is far more important to have a charter for human duties."[394]
Swaraj to Gandhi did not mean transferring colonial era British power brokering system, favours-driven, bureaucratic, class exploitative structure and mindset into Indian hands. He warned such a transfer would still be English rule, just without the Englishman. "This is not the Swaraj I want", said Gandhi.[395][396] Tewari states that Gandhi saw democracy as more than a system of government; it meant promoting both individuality and the self-discipline of the community. Democracy meant settling disputes in a nonviolent manner; it required freedom of thought and expression. For Gandhi, democracy was a way of life.[397]
Hindu nationalism and revivalism
Some scholars state Gandhi supported a religiously diverse India,[398] while others state that the Muslim leaders who championed the partition and creation of a separate Muslim Pakistan considered Gandhi to be Hindu nationalist or revivalist.[399][400] For example, in his letters to Mohammad Iqbal, Jinnah accused Gandhi to be favouring a Hindu rule and revivalism, that Gandhi led Indian National Congress was a fascist party.[401]
In an interview with C.F. Andrews, Gandhi stated that if we believe all religions teach the same message of love and peace between all human beings, then there is neither any rationale nor need for proselytisation or attempts to convert people from one religion to another.[402] Gandhi opposed missionary organisations who criticised Indian religions then attempted to convert followers of Indian religions to Islam or Christianity. In Gandhi's view, those who attempt to convert a Hindu, "they must harbour in their breasts the belief that Hinduism is an error" and that their own religion is "the only true religion".[402][403] Gandhi believed that people who demand religious respect and rights must also show the same respect and grant the same rights to followers of other religions. He stated that spiritual studies must encourage "a Hindu to become a better Hindu, a Mussalman to become a better Mussalman, and a Christian a better Christian."[402]
According to Gandhi, religion is not about what a man believes, it is about how a man lives, how he relates to other people, his conduct towards others, and one's relationship to one's conception of god.[404] It is not important to convert or to join any religion, but it is important to improve one's way of life and conduct by absorbing ideas from any source and any religion, believed Gandhi.[404]
Gandhian economics
Main article: Gandhian economics
Gandhi believed in the sarvodaya economic model, which literally means "welfare, upliftment of all".[405] This, states Bhatt, was a very different economic model than the socialism model championed and followed by free India by Nehru   India's first prime minister. To both, according to Bhatt, removing poverty and unemployment were the objective, but the Gandhian economic and development approach preferred adapting technology and infrastructure to suit the local situation, in contrast to Nehru's large scale, socialised state owned enterprises.[406]
To Gandhi, the economic philosophy that aims at "greatest good for the greatest number" was fundamentally flawed, and his alternative proposal sarvodaya set its aim at the "greatest good for all". He believed that the best economic system not only cared to lift the "poor, less skilled, of impoverished background" but also empowered to lift the "rich, highly skilled, of capital means and landlords". Violence against any human being, born poor or rich, is wrong, believed Gandhi.[405][407] He stated that the mandate theory of majoritarian democracy should not be pushed to absurd extremes, individual freedoms should never be denied, and no person should ever be made a social or economic slave to the "resolutions of majorities".[408]
Gandhi challenged Nehru and the modernisers in the late 1930s who called for rapid industrialisation on the Soviet model; Gandhi denounced that as dehumanising and contrary to the needs of the villages where the great majority of the people lived.[409] After Gandhi's assassination, Nehru led India in accordance with his personal socialist convictions.[410][411] Historian Kuruvilla Pandikattu says "it was Nehru's vision, not Gandhi's, that was eventually preferred by the Indian State."[412]
Gandhi called for ending poverty through improved agriculture and small-scale cottage rural industries.[413] Gandhi's economic thinking disagreed with Marx, according to the political theory scholar and economist Bhikhu Parekh. Gandhi refused to endorse the view that economic forces are best understood as "antagonistic class interests".[414] He argued that no man can degrade or brutalise the other without degrading and brutalising himself and that sustainable economic growth comes from service, not from exploitation. Further, believed Gandhi, in a free nation, victims exist only when they co-operate with their oppressor, and an economic and political system that offered increasing alternatives gave power of choice to the poorest man.[414]
While disagreeing with Nehru about the socialist economic model, Gandhi also critiqued capitalism that was driven by endless wants and a materialistic view of man. This, he believed, created a vicious vested system of materialism at the cost of other human needs, such as spirituality and social relationships.[414] To Gandhi, states Parekh, both communism and capitalism were wrong, in part because both focused exclusively on a materialistic view of man, and because the former deified the state with unlimited power of violence, while the latter deified capital. He believed that a better economic system is one which does not impoverish one's culture and spiritual pursuits.[415]
Gandhism
Main articles: Gandhism and Gandhians
Gandhism designates the ideas and principles Gandhi promoted; of central importance is nonviolent resistance. A Gandhian can mean either an individual who follows, or a specific philosophy which is attributed to, Gandhism.[119] M. M. Sankhdher argues that Gandhism is not a systematic position in metaphysics or in political philosophy. Rather, it is a political creed, an economic doctrine, a religious outlook, a moral precept, and especially, a humanitarian world view. It is an effort not to systematise wisdom but to transform society and is based on an undying faith in the goodness of human nature.[416] However Gandhi himself did not approve of the notion of "Gandhism", as he explained in 1936:
There is no such thing as "Gandhism", and I do not want to leave any sect after me. I do not claim to have originated any new principle or doctrine. I have simply tried in my own way to apply the eternal truths to our daily life and problems ... The opinions I have formed and the conclusions I have arrived at are not final. I may change them tomorrow. I have nothing new to teach the world. Truth and nonviolence are as old as the hills.[417]
Literary works
 Young India, a weekly journal published by Gandhi from 1919 to 1932
Gandhi was a prolific writer. His signature style was simple, precise, clear and as devoid of artificialities.[418] One of Gandhi's earliest publications, Hind Swaraj, published in Gujarati in 1909, became "the intellectual blueprint" for India's independence movement. The book was translated into English the next year, with a copyright legend that read "No Rights Reserved".[419] For decades he edited several newspapers including Harijan in Gujarati, in Hindi and in the English language; Indian Opinion while in South Africa and, Young India, in English, and Navajivan, a Gujarati monthly, on his return to India. Later, Navajivan was also published in Hindi. In addition, he wrote letters almost every day to individuals and newspapers.[420]
Gandhi also wrote several books including his autobiography, The Story of My Experiments with Truth (Gujar t  "       "), of which he bought the entire first edition to make sure it was reprinted.[379] His other autobiographies included: Satyagraha in South Africa about his struggle there, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule, a political pamphlet, and a paraphrase in Gujarati of John Ruskin's Unto This Last which was an early critique of political economy.[421] This last essay can be considered his programme on economics. He also wrote extensively on vegetarianism, diet and health, religion, social reforms, etc. Gandhi usually wrote in Gujarati, though he also revised the Hindi and English translations of his books.[422] In 1934, he wrote Songs from Prison while prisoned in Yerawada jail in Maharashtra.[423]
Gandhi's complete works were published by the Indian government under the name The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi in the 1960s. The writings comprise about 50,000 pages published in about a hundred volumes. In 2000, a revised edition of the complete works sparked a controversy, as it contained a large number of errors and omissions.[424] The Indian government later withdrew the revised edition.[425]
Legacy
See also: List of artistic depictions of Mahatma Gandhi, List of things named after Mahatma Gandhi, and List of roads named after Mahatma Gandhi
Gandhi is noted as the greatest figure of the successful Indian independence movement against the British rule. He is also hailed as the greatest figure of modern India.[426][427][428][429][430][431] American historian Stanley Wolpert described Gandhi as "India's greatest revolutionary nationalist leader" and the greatest Indian since the Buddha.[432] In 1999, Gandhi was named "Asian of the century" by Asiaweek.[433] In a 2000 BBC poll, he was voted as the greatest man of the millennium.[434]
The word Mahatma, while often mistaken for Gandhi's given name in the West, is taken from the Sanskrit words maha (meaning Great) and atma (meaning Soul).[8][9] He was publicly bestowed with the honorific title "Mahatma" in July 1914 at farewell meeting in Town Hall, Durban.[435][436] Rabindranath Tagore is said to have accorded the title to Gandhi by 1915.[437][b] In his autobiography, Gandhi nevertheless explains that he never valued the title, and was often pained by it.[440][441][442]
Innumerable streets, roads and localities in India are named after Gandhi. These include M.G.Road (the main street of a number of Indian cities including Mumbai, Bangalore, Kolkata, Lucknow, Kanpur, Gangtok and Indore), Gandhi Market (near Sion, Mumbai) and Gandhinagar (the capital of the state of Gujarat, Gandhi's birthplace).[443]
As of 2008, over 150 countries released stamps on Gandhi.[444] In October 2019, about 87 countries including Russia, Iran, Turkey, Uzbekistan, Palestine released commemorative Gandhi stamps on 150th birth anniversary of Gandhi.[445][446][447][448]
Florian asteroid 120461 Gandhi was named in his honour in September 2020.[449] In October 2022, a statue of Gandhi was installed in Astana on the embankment of the rowing canal, opposite the cult monument to the defenders of Kazakhstan.[450]
On 15 December 2022, the United Nations headquarters in New York unveiled the statue of Gandhi. UN Secretary-General Ant nio Guterres called Gandhi an "uncompromising advocate for peaceful co-existence".[451]
Followers and international influence
 Statue of Gandhi at York University
 Gandhi on a 1969 postage stamp of the Soviet Union
 Gandhi at Pra a T lio Fontoura, S o Paulo, Brazil
Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements.[7] Leaders of the civil rights movement in the United States, including Martin Luther King Jr., James Lawson, and James Bevel, drew from the writings of Gandhi in the development of their own theories about nonviolence.[452][453][454] King said "Christ gave us the goals and Mahatma Gandhi the tactics."[455] King sometimes referred to Gandhi as "the little brown saint."[456] Anti-apartheid activist and former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela, was inspired by Gandhi.[457] Others include Steve Biko, V clav Havel,[458] and Aung San Suu Kyi.[459]
In his early years, the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was a follower of the nonviolent resistance philosophy of Gandhi.[457] Bhana and Vahed commented on these events as "Gandhi inspired succeeding generations of South African activists seeking to end White rule. This legacy connects him to Nelson Mandela...in a sense, Mandela completed what Gandhi started."[460]
Gandhi's life and teachings inspired many who specifically referred to Gandhi as their mentor or who dedicated their lives to spreading Gandhi's ideas. In Europe, Romain Rolland was the first to discuss Gandhi in his 1924 book Mahatma Gandhi, and Brazilian anarchist and feminist Maria Lacerda de Moura wrote about Gandhi in her work on pacifism. In 1931, physicist Albert Einstein exchanged letters with Gandhi, and called him "a role model for the generations to come" in a letter writing about him.[461] Einstein said of Gandhi:
Mahatma Gandhi's life achievement stands unique in political history. He has invented a completely new and humane means for the liberation war of an oppressed country, and practised it with greatest energy and devotion. The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilised world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces. Because lasting will only be the work of such statesmen who wake up and strengthen the moral power of their people through their example and educational works. We may all be happy and grateful that destiny gifted us with such an enlightened contemporary, a role model for the generations to come.
Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this walked the earth in flesh and blood.
Farah Omar, a political activist from Somaliland visited India in 1930, where he met Gandhi and was influenced by Gandhi's non-violent philosophy which he adopted in his campaign in British Somaliland.[462]
Lanza del Vasto went to India in 1936 intending to live with Gandhi; he later returned to Europe to spread Gandhi's philosophy and founded the Community of the Ark in 1948 (modelled after Gandhi's ashrams). Madeleine Slade (known as "Mirabehn") was the daughter of a British admiral who spent much of her adult life in India as a devotee of Gandhi.[463][464]
In addition, the British musician John Lennon referred to Gandhi when discussing his views on nonviolence.[465] In 2007, former US Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore drew upon Gandhi's idea of satyagraha in a speech on climate change.[466]
US President Barack Obama said in a 2010 address to the Parliament of India that:
I am mindful that I might not be standing before you today, as President of the United States, had it not been for Gandhi and the message he shared with America and the world.[467]
Obama said in September 2009 that his biggest inspiration came from Gandhi. His reply was in response to the question "Who was the one person, dead or live, that you would choose to dine with?". He continued that "He's somebody I find a lot of inspiration in. He inspired Dr. King with his message of nonviolence. He ended up doing so much and changed the world just by the power of his ethics."[468]
Time magazine named The 14th Dalai Lama, Lech Wa sa, Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Aung San Suu Kyi, Benigno Aquino Jr., Desmond Tutu, and Nelson Mandela as Children of Gandhi and his spiritual heirs to nonviolence.[469] The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston, Texas, United States, an ethnic Indian enclave, is officially named after Gandhi.[470]
Gandhi's ideas had a significant influence on 20th-century philosophy. It began with his engagement with Romain Rolland and Martin Buber. Jean-Luc Nancy said that the French philosopher Maurice Blanchot engaged critically with Gandhi from the point of view of "European spirituality".[471] Since then philosophers including Hannah Arendt, Etienne Balibar and Slavoj  i ek found that Gandhi was a necessary reference to discuss morality in politics. Recently in the light of climate change Gandhi's views on technology are gaining importance in the fields of environmental philosophy and philosophy of technology.[471]
Global days that celebrate Gandhi
In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly declared Gandhi's birthday 2 October as "the International Day of Nonviolence."[472] First proposed by UNESCO in 1948, as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace (DENIP in Spanish),[473] 30 January is observed as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace in schools of many countries[474] In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar, it is observed on 30 March.[474]
Awards
 Monument to Gandhi in Madrid, Spain
Time magazine named Gandhi the Man of the Year in 1930. In the same magazine's 1999 list of The Most Important People of the Century, Gandhi was second only to Albert Einstein, who had called Gandhi "the greatest man of our age".[475] The University of Nagpur awarded him an LL.D. in 1937.[476] The Government of India awarded the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers, world leaders and citizens. Nelson Mandela, the leader of South Africa's struggle to eradicate racial discrimination and segregation, was a prominent non-Indian recipient. In 2011, Gandhi topped the TIME's list of top 25 political icons of all time.[477]
Gandhi did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize, although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948, including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee,[478] though he made the short list only twice, in 1937 and 1947.[479] Decades later, the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission, and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award.[479] Gandhi was nominated in 1948 but was assassinated before nominations closed. That year, the committee chose not to award the peace prize stating that "there was no suitable living candidate" and later research shows that the possibility of awarding the prize posthumously to Gandhi was discussed and that the reference to no suitable living candidate was to Gandhi.[479] Geir Lundestad, Secretary of Norwegian Nobel Committee in 2006 said, "The greatest omission in our 106-year history is undoubtedly that Mahatma Gandhi never received the Nobel Peace prize. Gandhi could do without the Nobel Peace prize, whether Nobel committee can do without Gandhi is the question".[480] When the 14th Dalai Lama was awarded the Prize in 1989, the chairman of the committee said that this was "in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi".[479] In the summer of 1995, the North American Vegetarian Society inducted him posthumously into the Vegetarian Hall of Fame.[481]
Father of the Nation
Indians widely describe Gandhi as the father of the nation.[36][37] Origin of this title is traced back to a radio address (on Singapore radio) on 6 July 1944 by Subhash Chandra Bose where Bose addressed Gandhi as "The Father of the Nation".[482] On 28 April 1947, Sarojini Naidu during a conference also referred Gandhi as "Father of the Nation".[483][484] He is also conferred the title "Bapu"[485] (Gujarati: endearment for father,[39] papa[39][40]).
Film, theatre and literature
A five-hour nine-minute long biographical documentary film,[486] Mahatma: Life of Gandhi, 1869 1948, made by Vithalbhai Jhaveri[487] in 1968, quoting Gandhi's words and using black and white archival footage and photographs, captures the history of those times. Ben Kingsley portrayed him in Richard Attenborough's 1982 film Gandhi,[488] which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. It was based on the biography by Louis Fischer.[489] The 1996 film The Making of the Mahatma documented Gandhi's time in South Africa and his transformation from an inexperienced barrister to recognised political leader.[490] Gandhi was a central figure in the 2006 Bollywood comedy film Lage Raho Munna Bhai. Jahnu Barua's Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara (I did not kill Gandhi), places contemporary society as a backdrop with its vanishing memory of Gandhi's values as a metaphor for the senile forgetfulness of the protagonist of his 2005 film,[491] writes Vinay Lal.[492]
In 1967, Gandhi was set to be featured on the album cover of one of the best selling albums of The Beatles, Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, however this idea was later cancelled due to respect for Gandhi.[493]
The 1979 opera Satyagraha by American composer Philip Glass is loosely based on Gandhi's life.[494][495] The opera's libretto, taken from the Bhagavad Gita, is sung in the original Sanskrit.[496]
The 1995 Marathi play Gandhi Virudh Gandhi explored the relationship between Gandhi and his son Harilal. The 2007 film, Gandhi, My Father was inspired on the same theme. The 1989 Marathi play Me Nathuram Godse Boltoy and the 1997 Hindi play Gandhi Ambedkar criticised Gandhi and his principles.[497][498]
Several biographers have undertaken the task of describing Gandhi's life. Among them are D. G. Tendulkar with his Mahatma. Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in eight volumes, Chaman Nahal's Gandhi Quartet, and Pyarelal and Sushila Nayyar with their Mahatma Gandhi in 10 volumes. The 2010 biography, Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld contained controversial material speculating about Gandhi's sexual life.[499] Lelyveld, however, stated that the press coverage "grossly distort[s]" the overall message of the book.[500] The 2014 film Welcome Back Gandhi takes a fictionalised look at how Gandhi might react to modern day India.[501] The 2019 play Bharat Bhagya Vidhata, inspired by Pujya Gurudevshri Rakeshbhai and produced by Sangeet Natak Akademi and Shrimad Rajchandra Mission Dharampur takes a look at how Gandhi cultivated the values of truth and non-violence.[502]
"Mahatma Gandhi" is used by Cole Porter in his lyrics for the song You're the Top which is included in the 1934 musical Anything Goes. In the song, Porter rhymes "Mahatma Gandhi' with "Napoleon Brandy."
Current impact within India
 The Gandhi Mandapam, a temple in Kanyakumari was erected in honour of Gandhi.
India, with its rapid economic modernisation and urbanisation, has rejected Gandhi's economics[503] but accepted much of his politics and continues to revere his memory. Reporter Jim Yardley notes that, "modern India is hardly a Gandhian nation, if it ever was one. His vision of a village-dominated economy was shunted aside during his lifetime as rural romanticism, and his call for a national ethos of personal austerity and nonviolence has proved antithetical to the goals of an aspiring economic and military power." By contrast, Gandhi is "given full credit for India's political identity as a tolerant, secular democracy."[504]
Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is a national holiday in India, Gandhi Jayanti. Gandhi's image also appears on paper currency of all denominations issued by Reserve Bank of India, except for the one rupee note.[505] Gandhi's date of death, 30 January, is commemorated as a Martyrs' Day in India.[506]
There are three temples in India dedicated to Gandhi.[507] One is located at Sambalpur in Odisha and the second at Nidaghatta village near Kadur in Chikmagalur district of Karnataka and the third one at Chityal in the district of Nalgonda, Telangana.[507][508] The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples and the Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum.[509]
Descendants
 Family tree of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi (source: Gandhi Ashram Sabarmati)
Gandhi's children and grandchildren live in India and other countries. Grandson Rajmohan Gandhi is a professor in Illinois and an author of Gandhi's biography titled Mohandas,[510] while another, Tarun Gandhi, has authored several authoritative books on his grandfather. Another grandson, Kanu Ramdas Gandhi (the son of Gandhi's third son Ramdas), was found living in an old age home in Delhi despite having taught earlier in the United States.[511][512]
See also
Religion portalHinduism portalIndia portalPhilosophy portal
Gandhi cap
Gandhi Teerth   Gandhi International Research Institute and Museum for Gandhian study, research on Mahatma Gandhi and dialogue
Inclusive Christianity
List of civil rights leaders
List of peace activists
Seven Social Sins (a.k.a. Seven Blunders of the World)
Trikaranasuddhi
Composite nationalism
Notes
Explanatory notes
^ [125][129][130][131]
^ The earliest record of usage, however, is in a private letter from Pranjivan Mehta to Gopal Krishna Gokhale dated 1909.[438][439]
Citations
^ "The Mahatma   Life Chronology". Gandhi Ashram.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi Biography". Social Justice & Special Assistance, Government of Maharashtra.
^ "Gandhi". Archived 14 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ B. R. Nanda (2019), "Mahatma Gandhi", Encyclop dia Britannica Quote: "Mahatma Gandhi, byname of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, (born October 2, 1869, Porbandar, India   died January 30, 1948, Delhi), Indian lawyer, politician, ..."
^ a b c Ganguly, Debjani; Docker, John, eds. (2008), Rethinking Gandhi and Nonviolent Relationality: Global Perspectives, Routledge, pp. 4 , ISBN 978-1-134-07431-0 Quote: "... marks Gandhi as a hybrid cosmopolitan figure who transformed ... anti-colonial nationalist politics in the twentieth-century in ways that neither indigenous nor westernized Indian nationalists could."
^ a b Parel, Anthony J (2016), Pax Gandhiana: The Political Philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi, Oxford University Press, pp. 202 , ISBN 978-0-19-049146-8 Quote: "Gandhi staked his reputation as an original political thinker on this specific issue. Hitherto, violence had been used in the name of political rights, such as in street riots, regicide, or armed revolutions. Gandhi believes there is a better way of securing political rights, that of nonviolence, and that this new way marks an advance in political ethics."
^ a b Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 289 , ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1, Gandhi was the leading genius of the later, and ultimately successful, campaign for India's independence.
^ a b McGregor, Ronald Stuart (1993). The Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. p. 799. ISBN 978-0-19-864339-5. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Quote: (mah - (S. "great, mighty, large, ..., eminent") +  tm  (S. "1. soul, spirit; the self, the individual; the mind, the heart; 2. the ultimate being."): "high-souled, of noble nature; a noble or venerable man."
^ a b Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. p. 172. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8. ...Kasturba would accompany Gandhi on his departure from Cape Town for England in July 1914 en route to India. ... In different South African towns (Pretoria, Cape Town, Bloemfontein, Johannesburg, and the Natal cities of Durban and Verulam), the struggle's martyrs were honoured and the Gandhi's bade farewell. Addresses in Durban and Verulam referred to Gandhi as a 'Mahatma', 'great soul'. He was seen as a great soul because he had taken up the poor's cause. The whites too said good things about Gandhi, who predicted a future for the Empire if it respected justice.
^ a b c d Khan, Yasmin (2007). The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan. Yale University Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3. Retrieved 1 September 2013. Quote: "the Muslim League had only caught on among South Asian Muslims during the Second World War. ... By the late 1940s, the League and the Congress had impressed in the British their own visions of a free future for Indian people. ... one, articulated by the Congress, rested on the idea of a united, plural India as a home for all Indians and the other, spelt out by the League, rested on the foundation of Muslim nationalism and the carving out of a separate Muslim homeland." (p. 18)
^ a b Khan, Yasmin (2007). The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan. Yale University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3. Retrieved 1 September 2013. Quote: "South Asians learned that the British Indian Empire would be partitioned on 3 June 1947. They heard about it on the radio, from relations and friends, by reading newspapers and, later, through government pamphlets. Among a population of almost four hundred million, where the vast majority lived in the countryside, ..., it is hardly surprising that many ... did not hear the news for many weeks afterward. For some, the butchery and forced relocation of the summer months of 1947 may have been the first they know about the creation of the two new states rising from the fragmentary and terminally weakened British empire in India." (p. 1)
^ Spear, Percival (1990) [1978], History of India, Volume 2: From the sixteenth century to the twentieth century, Penguin, p. 239, ISBN 978-0-140-13836-8, Gandhi came to Delhi from Bengal in October and now directed his reconciling mission from there. This time it was the Muslims he was championing and he found he was opposed by some elements within the government itself. It was the noblest and most courageous moment of his life. He had quelled the last outbreak of communal rioting in September and in January 1948 the inner voice spoke again. This time the issues were twofold, the payment to Pakistan of her agreed assets which had been withheld owing to the Kashmir dispute and the restoration of peace in the capital. Only when the money had been paid and a peace pact, including the evacuation of the mosques, had been signed, did he give up his fast, on 18th January.
^ McDermott, Rachel Fell; Gordon, Leonard A.; Embree, Ainslie T.; Pritchett, Frances W.; Dalton, Dennis, eds. (2014). Sources of Indian Traditions, Volume 2: Modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh (3rd ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. p. 344. ISBN 978-0-231-13830-7. In January 1948 he fasted successfully again in Delhi to stop Hindu attacks on Muslims and to coerce his own Indian government into payment of large sums of money that were due to Pakistan. He prevailed, extracting both government payment and pledges of peace by leaders of all groups. This enabled him to end his fast; but on January 30, as he was en route to his regular evening prayer meeting, he was shot by Nathuram Godse, a Hindu extremist who believed him too lenient toward India's Muslims and Pakistan.
^ Wolpert, Stanley (2004). A New History of India (7th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 358. ISBN 0195166787. On January 11, 1948, Gandhi suggested that it would be better "to dissolve" Congress than allow it to continue functioning as it was, full of "decay and decline," a place of "corruption" and "power politics." The next day he announced his decision to fast "by way of protest" against the persecution of Muslims in India's capital, in an effort to restore "heart friendship" among Indians of every religion. "Death for me would be a glorious deliverance rather than that I should be a helpless witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam," the Mahatma told his prayer meeting audience that afternoon at Birla House, where he lived. "Let my fast quicken conscience, not deaden it. Just contemplate the rot that has set in in beloved India." It was the last of his fasts. He ended it in less than a week, following messages of sorrow and prayer, including one from Sardar Patel promising to pay Pakistan forty million pounds sterling in cash assets, hitherto withheld by India. The entire cabinet gathered at the Mahatma's bedside to confirm that promise. Nehru announced that the loss of Gandhi's life would be "the loss of India's soul." There were others, however, who chanted, "Let Gandhi die!" Fanatical brahman members of the paramilitary Hindu communal Rashtriya Svayamsevak Sangh ("National Volunteer Association"; hereafter RSS), an offspring of the Hindu Mahasabha, plotted to assassinate the "old man," who had "outlived his time." A Poona Chitpavan, Naturam V. Godse, intellectual disciple of Savarkar, fired the fatal shots at Gandhi as he walked to his prayer meeting platform in the garden of Birla House just before sundown on January 30, 1948.
^ a b c d Brown (1991), p. 380: "Despite and indeed because of his sense of helplessness Delhi was to be the scene of what he called his greatest fast. ... His decision was made suddenly, though after considerable thought   he gave no hint of it even to Nehru and Patel who were with him shortly before he announced his intention at a prayer-meeting on 12 January 1948. He said he would fast until communal peace was restored, real peace rather than the calm of a dead city imposed by police and troops. Patel and the government took the fast partly as condemnation of their decision to withhold a considerable cash sum still outstanding to Pakistan as a result of the allocation of undivided India's assets because the hostilities that had broken out in Kashmir; ... But even when the government agreed to pay out the cash, Gandhi would not break his fast: that he would only do after a large number of important politicians and leaders of communal bodies agreed to a joint plan for restoration of normal life in the city."
^ Metcalf, Barbara D.; Metcalf, Thomas R. A Concise History of Modern India. Cambridge Concise History series (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 262 263. ISBN 978-1-107-02649-0. Just before his death, Gandhi made one last decisive intervention in the Indian political process. By a combination of prayer and fasting, he forced a contrite ministry to hand over to Pakistan its share of the cash assets of undivided India, some 40 million pounds sterling, which had so far been retained in defiance of the partition agreements.
^ Balcerowicz, Piotr; Kuszewska, Agnieszka (2022). Kashmir in India and Pakistan Policies. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-48012-4. As the partition atrocities continued, on 13 January 1948, Mahatma Gandhi, the widely cherished leader of India's non-violent independence movement, commenced his fast to restore peace between the Hindu, Sikh and Muslim communities and to pressure the reluctant Indian government to transfer to Pakistan a due share of the unified, British Indian military assets and financial reserves.
^ Ceplair, Larry (2020). Revolutionary Pairs: Marx and Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, Gandhi and Nehru, Mao and Zhou, and Castro and Guevara. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. p. 134. ISBN 9780813179193. Gandhi undertook his last fast, in January 1948, to protest the Indian government's decision to withhold a large settlement payment due to Pakistan until the Kashmir problem was solved.
^ Rudolph, Lloyd I; Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber (1987). In Pursuit of Lakshmi: The Political Economy of the Indian State. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press. pp. 71 72. ISBN 0-226-73138-3. Patel was not a committed or convinced secularist. His call for Muslims to pledge their loyalty to India as a condition of citizenship after partition, his one-sided defense of Hindus during the communal rioting and carnage that accompanied partition, and his refusal to honor India's commitment to turn over to Pakistan the assets due it were the occasion of Gandhi's last fast in January 1948. The riots in Delhi abated; Patel, after being told by Gandhi on the verge of death, "you are not the Sardar I knew", turned over the assets and deferred to Gandhi's call for brotherhood and forgiveness.
^ Stein, Burton; Arnold, David (2010). A History of India. Blackwell History of the World Series (2nd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 352 353. ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6. He undertook a fast not only to restrain those bent on communal reprisal but also to influence the powerful Home Minister, Sardar Patel, who was refusing to share out the assets of the former imperial treasury with Pakistan, as had been agreed. Gandhi's insistence on justice for Pakistan now that the partition was a fact ... had prompted Godse's fanatical action.
^ Elkins, Caroline (2022). Violence: A History of the British Empire. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 9780307272423. LCCN 2021018550. A few months later, with war-fueled tensions over Kashmir mounting and India refusing to pay Pakistan 550 million rupees, Pakistan's share of Britain's outstanding war debt, Gandhi began to fast. "This time my fast is not only against Hindus and Muslims," the Mahatma said, "but also against the Judases who put on false appearances and betray themselves, myself and society." The elderly and frail man who was India's symbolic political and spiritual leader went three days without food before India's cabinet agreed to pay Pakistan, something Nehru had long promised Jinnah he would do.
^ Blinkenberg, Lars (2022). India-Pakistan: The History of Unsolved Conflicts: Volume I. Lindhardt og Ringhof. ISBN 9788726894707. Sardar Patel decided, in the middle of December 1947, that the recent financial agreements with Pakistan should not be followed, unless Pakistan ceased to support the raiders.  ...  Gandhi was not convinced and he felt like Mountbatten and Nehru that the agreed transfer to Pakistan of a cash amount of Rs. 550 million should be implemented despite the Kashmir crisis.  Gandhi started a fast unto death, which was officially done to stop communal trouble, especially in Delhi, but "word went round that it was directed against Sardar Patel's decision to withhold the cash balances"...  Only because of Gandhi's interference, which was soon to cause his death, Sardar Patel gave in and the money was handed over to Pakistan.
^ Sarkar, Sumit (2014). Modern India: 1885 1947. Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375. ISBN 9789332535749. This last fast seems to have been directed in part also against Patel's increasingly communal attitudes (the Home Minister had started thinking in terms of a total transfer of population in the Punjab, and was refusing to honour a prior agreement by which India was obliged to give 55 crores of pre-Partition Government of India financial assets to Pakistan). 'You are not the Sardar I once knew,' Gandhi is said to have remarked during the fast.
^ Gandhi, Gopalkrishna; Suhrud, Tridip (2022). Scorching Love: Letters from Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi to his son, Devadas. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. The national capital and its surrounding areas are gripped by massacres and the spewing of hate. The two Punjabs on either side of the border are aflame. On 1 January 1948, a Thai visitor comes and compliments him on India's independence. "Today . . . Indian fears his brother Indian. Is this independence?', Gandhi asks in response. Gandhi smarts at the Government of India's new cabinet headed by Jawaharlal Nehru deciding to withhold the transfer of Pakistan's share (Rs 55 crores) of the 'sterling balance' that undivided India has held at independence. The attack on Kashmur is cited as a reason for this. Patel says India cannot give money to Pakistan 'for making bullets to be shot at us'. Gandhi's intense agitation settles into an inner quiet on 12 January when the clear thought comes to him that he must fast. And indefinitely.  It will end when and if I am satisfied that there is a reunion of hearts of all communities... 
^ Singh, Gurharpal; Shani, Georgio (2022). Sikh Nationalism: From a Dominant Minority to an Ethno-Religious Diaspora. Cambridge University Press. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-107-13654-0. LCCN 2021017207. For further evidence of Patel's involvement in the clearing of Muslims in north India, see Pandey (2001, 196). Against the background of the India-Pakistan conflict in Kashmir, the dispute between the two countries over the division of cash balances and Gandhi's fast in early 1948, Mountbatten noted the following of his interview with Patel: 'He expressed the view that the only way to re-establish decent relationship between the Muslims and non-Muslim communities was to remove Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan and drive out the Muslims of the East Punjab and the affected neighbouring areas.' MB1/D76/1. Mountbatten Papers, University of Southampton.
^ Talbot, Ian (2016). A History of Modern South Asia, Politics, States, Diasporas. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p. 183. ISBN 978-0-300-19694-8. LCCN 2015937886. Disputes over Kashmir and the division of assets and water in the aftermath of Partition increased Pakistan's anxieties regarding its much larger neighbor. Kashmir's significance for Pakistan far exceeded its strategic value; its "illegal" accession to India challenged the state's ideological foundations and pointed to a lack of sovereign fulfillment. The "K" in Pakistan's name stood for Kashmir. Of less symbolic significance was the division of post-Partition assets. Not until December 1947 was an agreement reached on Pakistan's share of the sterling assets held by the undivided Government of India at the time of independence. The bulk of these (550 million rupees) was held back by New Delhi because of the Kashmir conflict and paid only following  Gandhi's intervention and fasting. India delivered Pakistan's military equipment even more tardily, and less than a sixth of the 160,000 tons of ordnance allotted to Pakistan by the Joint Defence Council was actually delivered.
^ Geva, Rotem (2022). Delhi Reborn: Partition and Nation Building in India's Capital. Stanford University Press. pp. 130 131. ISBN 9781503631199. LCCN 2021051794. It was against this background that Gandhi undertook his final fast unto death on January 12, 1948. Gandhi conditioned the termination of his fast on a complete change of heart and restoration of peace, protection of Muslim life and property, and repairing of shrines and mosques, especially the dargah (Sufi shrine) of Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki in Mehrauli. Various Congress and socialist groups initiated peace meetings and processions in the city. After key bureaucrats, Congress leaders, nationalist Muslims, and even RSS leaders signed a pledge to restore peace and protect Muslims, Gandhi agreed to end his fast on January 18. A campaign to vacate mosques followed, along with a peaceful celebration of the Urs at Mehrauli, in which Muslims, Hindus, and Sikhs participated. Yet violence continued in the midst of the fast, targeting Muslims and Congress peace processions.  The atmosphere in the city was highly polarized.  Hindu-right circles resented the Indian government's decision to release Pakistan's share of British India's cash assets while the war in Kashmir raged on, and saw Gandhi's fast as political blackmail to achieve precisely this aim.  Hindu Mahasabha leaders criticized the peace pledge and took action against members who signed it.  A few days after Gandhi ended his fast, a first attempt on his life was made by Madan Lal. ... On January 30, on his way to a prayer meeting in Birla House, Gandhi was shot dead by Nathuram Godse, who had a long association with the RSS and the Hindu Mahasabha.
^ a b Talbot, Ian; Singh, Gurharpal (2009), The Partition of India, Cambridge University Press, pp. 118 119, ISBN 978-0-521-85661-4, It is now almost a clich  that the Partition transformed Delhi from a Mughal to a Punjabi city. The bitter experiences of the refugees encouraged them to support right-wing Hindu parties. ... Trouble began in September (1947) after the arrival from refugees from Pakistan who were determined on revenge and driving Muslims out of properties which they could then occupy. Gandhi in his prayer meetings in Birla House denounced the 'crooked and ungentlemanly' squeezing out of Muslims. Despite these exhortations, two-thirds of the city's Muslims were to eventually abandon India's capital.
^ Ahmed, Raja Qaiser (2022). Pakistan Factor and the Competing Perspectives in India: Party Centric View. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 11. ISBN 978-981-16-7051-0. Hindu nationalists viewed Pakistan through a communal lens and this embittered context, ingrained in their view of history and culture, plagued India-Pakistan relations. ... Hindu traditionalists in the Indian National Congress (INC) ranks also urged the pursuit of hawkish and chauvinist policies towards Pakistan.  Sardar Patel's approach and statements concerning Pakistan were the manifestations of this mindset many like him wanted to nullify Pakistan's significance.  ... The Mahasabha, RSS and other Hindu nationalists were increasingly perturbed over what they saw as INC's meek policy towards Paksitan. ... They hated secular plurialism in India.  Nathuram Godse also admitted killing Gandhi on his palpable pro-Pakistan sentiments and his fast unto death to make sure the division of financial assets between India and Pakistan proceeded in a just manner.
^ Sarkar, Sumit (2014). Modern India: 1885 1947. Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375. ISBN 9789332535749. Three days later the Mahatma was dead, murdered by a Hindu fanatic, Nathuram Godse, as a climax to a conspiracy hatched by a Poona Brahman group originally inspired by V.D. Savarkar a conspiracy which, despite ample warnings, the police of Bombay and Delhi had done nothing to foil.
^ Bell, J. Bowyer (2017) [2005]. Assassin: Theory and Practice of Political Violence. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-4128-0509-4. The key to the conspiracy was Vinnayak Damodar Veer "The Brave" Savarkar, sixty-five, a Hindu ascetic, slender, intense, with steel-rim spectacles and a dedication to the concept of a greater Hindu India. He opposed the British raj, the concept of partition, the idea of Pakistan and, in 1947, the emerging reality of all those things. Trained in the Inns of Court, he had been imprisoned on the Andaman Islands with a double life sentence for the murder of a British bureaucrat, then freed by a postwar amnesty. He had been involved at a distance in previous attempts on the lives of the governors of Punjab and Bombay. His organization, Rashtriya Swayam Sewak Sangh (RSSS), had an inner and violent core, Hindu Rashtra Dal, established on May 15, 1942, made up of Chitpawan Brahmans fanatically dedicated to the Greater Hindu State. ... By January 1948, he and his followers had grown increasingly frustrated by the direction of events: India had been partitioned, Pakistan existed, and Moslems and Hindus had indulged in a long orgy of massacre that had finally largely ended because of mutual exhaustion, the flight of the vulnerable, and the last fast of Gandhi. On January 18, 1948, after fasting for 121 hours and 30 minutes, Gandhi had forced the government to agree to a series of accommodations and concessions including turning over 550 million rupees to Pakistan as promised. For the RSSS this was treason, a betrayal of Hindu India, not simply a maneuver to end mass murder but an open recognition of Pakistan by India's most renowned figure the moral blessing of treachery.
^ Babb, Lawrence A. (2020). Religion in India: Past and Present. Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press. ISBN 9781780466231. But like a recessive gene, Hindu nationalism had been there all along, and now it had sprung back into high visibility. At the time of the assassination, Godse was no longer a formal member of the RSS, but he was strongly anti-Muslim and considered Gandhi a Muslim appeaser, a view shared by many others, especially among Hindu nationalists. With the first Kashmir war in progress, the Congress had decided not to pay money owed to Pakistan as its share of India's assets prior to partition.  Gandhi opposed this position and went on a 'fast-unto-death' to get it reversed, which in fact was done in early January 1948.  The assassination soon followed.  Godse was caught, tried and hanged.
^ Lelyveld, Joseph (2012) [2011]. Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle with India. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-38995-4. By his assassin's own testimony, it was Gandhi's announcement of his fast on the twelfth that had lit the fuse on the plot he and his main accomplice hatched starting that night; and it was the declaration three days later that the cabinet had reversed itself and decided to transfer the blocked reserves to Pakistan, explaining that it was moved by a desire "to help in every way open to them in the object which Gandhiji has in heart, " that had clinched the secret verdict of the conspirators condemning him to death. ... Of the unfreezing of the assets, the assassin would say: "This decision of the people's government was reversed to suit the tune of Gandhiji's fast. It was evident to my mind that the force of public opinion was nothing but a trifle when compared with the leanings of Gandhiji favorable to Pakistan." The victim's sterling virtues were an inherent part of the problem, of the obstacle he represented. "A most severe austerity of life, ceaseless work and lofty character made Gandhiji formidable and irresistible," the assassin said in his ex post facto justification of his deed. Something had to be done if India was ever to pursue its own interests the way other nations pursued theirs. Therefore, said Godse, he "decided to remove Gandhiji from the political stage."
^ a b Cush, Denise; Robinson, Catherine; York, Michael (2008). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Taylor & Francis. p. 544. ISBN 978-0-7007-1267-0. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Quote: "The apotheosis of this contrast is the assassination of Gandhi in 1948 by a militant Nathuram Godse, on the basis of his 'weak' accommodationist approach towards the new state of Pakistan." (p. 544)
^ Copland, Ian (2001). India 1885-1947: The Unmaking of an Empire. Seminar Studies in History series. London and New York: Routledge. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-582-38173-5. Gandhi was adamant that the debt to Pakistan had to be paid, and in March 1948 he announced that he planned to embark on another indefinite fast to ensure that the Indian government fulfilled its legal and moral obligations. The Mahasabha and the RSS denounced this plan as tantamount to treason. In the early evening of 30 March, as he addressed a prayer meeting at Birla House, New Delhi, India's prince of peace was shot and killed by a member of an RSS splinter-group, Nathuram Godse.
^ a b "Gandhi not formally conferred 'Father of the Nation' title: Govt". The Indian Express. 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014.
^ a b "Constitution doesn't permit 'Father of the Nation' title: Government". The Times of India. 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017.
^ Nehru, Jawaharlal. An Autobiography. Bodley Head.
^ a b c d McAllister, Pam (1982). Reweaving the Web of Life: Feminism and Nonviolence. New Society Publishers. p. 194. ISBN 978-0-86571-017-7. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Quote: "With love, Yours, Bapu (You closed with the term of endearment used by your close friends, the term you used with all the movement leaders, roughly meaning 'Papa'." Another letter written in 1940 shows similar tenderness and caring.
^ a b Eck, Diana L. (2003). Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banaras. Beacon Press. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-8070-7301-8. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Quote: "... his niece Manu, who, like others called this immortal Gandhi 'Bapu,' meaning not 'father,' but the familiar, 'daddy'." (p. 210)
^ Todd, Anne M. (2012). Mohandas Gandhi. Infobase Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5. The name Gandhi means "grocer", although Mohandas's father and grandfather were politicians not grocers.
^ Gandhi, Rajmohan (10 March 2008). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8.
^ Guha, Ramachandra (15 October 2014). Gandhi before India. Penguin Books Limited. p. 42. ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8. The subcaste the Gandhis belonged to was known as Modh Bania, the prefix apparently referring to the town of Modhera, in Southern Gujarat
^ Renard, John (1999). Responses to One Hundred and One Questions on Hinduism By John Renard. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-8091-3845-6. Retrieved 16 August 2020.
^ Gandhi, Mohandas K. (2009). An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-77541-405-6.
^ Gandhi before India. Vintage Books. 16 March 2015. pp. 19 21. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
^ a b Guha 2015 pp. 19 21
^ Misra, Amalendu (2004). Identity and Religion: Foundations of anti-Islamism in India. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-7619-3227-7.
Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006). Mohandas: A True Story of a Man, His People, and an Empire By Gandhi. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-14-310411-7.
Malhotra, S.L (2001). Lawyer to Mahatma: Life, Work and Transformation of M. K. Gandhi. p. 5. ISBN 978-81-7629-293-1.
^ Guha 2015, p. 21
^ Guha 2015, p. 512
^ Guha 2015, p. 22
^ Sorokin, Pitirim Aleksandrovich (2002). The Ways and Power of Love: types, factors, and techniques of moral transformation. Templeton Foundation Press. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-890151-86-7.
^ Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber & Rudolph, Lloyd I. (1983). Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma. University of Chicago Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0.
^ Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006) pp. 2, 8, 269
^ a b Arvind Sharma (2013). Gandhi: A Spiritual Biography. Yale University Press. pp. 11 14. ISBN 978-0-300-18738-0.
^ Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber & Rudolph, Lloyd I. (1983). Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma. University of Chicago Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0.
^ Gerard Toffin (2012).  John Zavos;  et al. (eds.). Public Hinduisms. Sage Publications. pp. 249 57. ISBN 978-81-321-1696-7.
^ Guha 2015, p. 23
^ Guha 2015, pp. 24 25
^ a b Rajmohan Gandhi (2015). Gandhi before India. Vintage Books. pp. 24 25. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
^ Louis Fischer (1982). Gandhi, his life and message for the world. New American Library. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-451-62142-9.
^ Rajmohan Gandhi (2015). Gandhi before India. Vintage Books. pp. 25 26. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
^ Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. p. 4. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ a b Mohanty, Rekha (2011). "From Satya to Sadbhavna" (PDF). Orissa Review (January 2011): 45 49. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2012.
^ a b "The Story of My Experiments with Truth/Part I/At the High School - wikilivres". wikilivres.org. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ "The Story of My Experiments with Truth/Part I/Playing the Husband - wikilivres". wikilivres.org. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Ramachandra Guha (2015). Gandhi before India. Vintage Books. pp. 28 29. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
^ a b Guha 2015, p. 29
^ Guha 2015, p. 30
^ a b Guha 2015, p. 32
^ a b c d e f "Wikilivres". Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Rajmohan Gandhi (2015). Gandhi before India. Vintage Books. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
^ B. R. Nanda (2019), "Mahatma Gandhi", Encyclop dia Britannica Quote: "Mahatma Gandhi, byname of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, (born October 2, 1869, Porbandar, India   died January 30, 1948, Delhi), Indian lawyer, politician, ..."
^ a b Guha 2015, pp. 33 34
^ Rajmohan, Gandhi (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. pp. 20 21. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8.
^ Swapnajit Mitra (12 October 2014). "My Experiment with Truth". India Currents.
^ Thomas Weber (2004). Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor. Cambridge University Press. pp. 19 25. ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9.
^ "Narayan Hemchandra | Gandhi Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth". www.mkgandhi.org. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ a b c d Brown (1991).
^ a b c d e Tendulkar, D. G. (1951). Mahatma; life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.
^ a b "Shyness my shield". Autobiography. 1927.
^ "International Vegetarian Union   Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869 1948)". ivu.org. Retrieved 26 September 2020.
^ a b Herman (2008), pp. 82 83
^ Giliomee, Hermann & Mbenga, Bernard (2007). "3".  In Roxanne Reid (ed.). New History of South Africa (1st ed.). Tafelberg. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-624-04359-1.
^ a b Power, Paul F. (1969). "Gandhi in South Africa". The Journal of Modern African Studies. 7 (3): 441 55. doi:10.1017/S0022278X00018590. JSTOR 159062. S2CID 154872727.
^ Keshavjee, M.M. (2015). Into that Heaven of Freedom: The Impact of Apartheid on an Indian Family's Diasporic History. Mawenzi House Publishers Limited. ISBN 978-1-927494-27-1.
^ a b Parekh, Bhikhu C. (2001). Gandhi: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-19-285457-5.
^ a b c S. Dhiman (2016). Gandhi and Leadership: New Horizons in Exemplary Leadership. Springer. pp. 25 27. ISBN 978-1-137-49235-7.
^ a b Fischer (2002)
^ Herman (2008), pp. 87 88
^ Allen, Jeremiah (2011). Sleeping with Strangers: A Vagabond's Journey Tramping the Globe. Other Places Publishing. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-935850-01-4.
^ a b Herman (2008), pp. 88 89
^ "March 1897 Memorial" . The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi    via Wikisource.: correspondence and newspaper accounts of the incident.
^ Herman (2008), page 125
^ Herman (2008) chapter 6.
^ "South African Medals that Mahatma Returned Put on View at Gandhi Mandap Exhibition" (PDF). Press Information Bureau of India   Archive. 5 March 1949. Retrieved 18 July 2020.
^ Rai, Ajay Shanker (2000). Gandhian Satyagraha: An Analytical And Critical Approach. Concept Publishing Company. p. 35. ISBN 978-81-7022-799-1.
^ Tolstoy, Leo (14 December 1908). "A Letter to A Hindu: The Subjection of India-Its Cause and Cure". The Literature Network. The Literature Network. Retrieved 12 February 2012. The Hindu Kural
^ Parel, Anthony J. (2002), "Gandhi and Tolstoy",  in M. P. Mathai; M. S. John; Siby K. Joseph (eds.), Meditations on Gandhi : a Ravindra Varma festschrift, New Delhi: Concept, pp. 96 112, ISBN 978-81-7022-961-2, retrieved 8 September 2012
^ Guha, Ramachandra (2013), Gandhi Before India, Vol. 1, Ch. 22, Allen Lane, ISBN 0-670-08387-9.
^ Charles R. DiSalvo (2013). M.K. Gandhi, Attorney at Law: The Man before the Mahatma. pp. 14 15. ISBN 978-0-520-95662-9.
^ Jones, Constance; Ryan, James (2009). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Infobase Publishing. pp. 158 59. ISBN 978-1-4381-0873-5. Archived from the original on 21 October 2015. Retrieved 5 October 2012.
^ a b c d Ashwin Desai; Goolem Vahed (2015). The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-Bearer of Empire. Stanford University Press. pp. 22 26, 33 38. ISBN 978-0-8047-9717-7.
^ Charles R. DiSalvo (2013). M.K. Gandhi, Attorney at Law: The Man Before the Mahatma. University of California Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-520-28015-1.
^ Reddy, E.S. (18 October 2016). "Some of Gandhi's Early Views on Africans Were Racist. But That Was Before He Became Mahatma". The Wire.
^ Edward Ramsamy; Michael Mbanaso; Chima Korieh (2010). Minorities and the State in Africa. Cambria Press. pp. 71 73. ISBN 978-1-62196-874-0.
^ a b c Herman (2008), pp. 136 37.
^ a b Herman (2008), pp. 154 57, 280 81
^ Guha, Ramachandra (23 December 2018). "Setting the Record Straight on Gandhi and Race". The Wire. Retrieved 25 December 2022.
^ Vashi, Ashish (31 March 2011). "For Gandhi, Kallenbach was a friend and guide". The Times of India. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Corder, Catherine; Plaut, Martin (2014). "Gandhi's Decisive South African 1913 Campaign: A Personal Perspective from the Letters of Betty Molteno". South African Historical Journal. 66 (1): 22 54. doi:10.1080/02582473.2013.862565. S2CID 162635102.
^ Smith, Colleen (1 October 2006). "Mbeki: Mahatma Gandhi Satyagraha 100th Anniversary (01/10/2006)". Speeches. Polityorg.za. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2012.
^ Prashad, Ganesh (September 1966). "Whiggism in India". Political Science Quarterly. 81 (3): 412 31. doi:10.2307/2147642. JSTOR 2147642.
^ Markovits, Claude (2004). A History of Modern India, 1480 1950. Anthem Press. pp. 367 86. ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4.
^ Chronology of Mahatma Gandhi's Life:India 1918 in WikiSource based on the Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Based on public domain volumes.
^ a b Desai, Mahadev Haribhai (1930). "Preface". Day-to-day with Gandhi: secretary's diary. Hemantkumar Nilkanth (translation). Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan. ISBN 978-81-906237-2-8. Alt URL
^ Gandhi (1965), Collected Works, Vol 17. Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter "67. Appeal for enlistment", Nadiad, 22 June 1918.
^ Gandhi (1965), Collected Works, Vol 17. Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine "Chapter 8. Letter to J. L. Maffey", Nadiad, 30 April 1918.
^ a b Hardiman, David (April 2001). "Champaran and Gandhi: Planters, Peasants and Gandhian Politics by Jacques Pouchepadass (Review)". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 11 (1): 99 101. doi:10.1017/S1356186301450152. JSTOR 25188108. S2CID 154941166.
^ "Satyagraha Laboratories of Mahatma Gandhi". Indian National Congress website. All India Congress Committee. 2004. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 25 February 2012.
^ Gandhi, Rajmohan (10 March 2008). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8.
^ Brown, Judith M. (1974). Gandhi's Rise to Power: Indian Politics 1915 1922. Cambridge University Press. pp. 94 102. ISBN 978-0-521-09873-1.
^ a b Keith Robbins (2002). The First World War. Oxford University Press. pp. 133 37. ISBN 978-0-19-280318-4.
^ a b c Michael J. Green; Nicholas Szechenyi (2017). A Global History of the Twentieth Century: Legacies and Lessons from Six National Perspectives. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 89 90. ISBN 978-1-4422-7972-8.
^ a b c Minault, Gail (1982) The Khilafat Movement Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-05072-0, pp. 68 72, 78 82, 96 102, 108 09
^ Minault, Gail (1982) The Khilafat Movement Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-05072-0, pp. 4 8
^ a b c d e f Sarah C.M. Paine (2015). Nation Building, State Building, and Economic Development: Case Studies and Comparisons. Routledge. pp. 20 21. ISBN 978-1-317-46409-9.
^ a b c d e f Ghose, Sankar (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. pp. 161 64. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ Roderick Matthews (2012). Jinnah vs. Gandhi. Hachette. p. 31. ISBN 978-93-5009-078-7. Rabindranath Tagore heavily criticized Gandhi at the time in private letters (...). They reveal Tagore's belief that Gandhi had committed the Indian political nation to a cause that was mistakenly anti-Western and fundamentally negative.
^ Kham, Aqeeluzzafar (1990). "The All-India Muslim Conference and the Origin of the Khilafat Movement in India". Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society. 38 (2): 155 62.
^ a b Roberts, W. H. (1923). "A Review of the Gandhi Movement in India". Political Science Quarterly. 38 (2): 227 48. doi:10.2307/2142634. JSTOR 2142634.
^ Bose, Sugata & Jalal, Ayesha (2004). Modern South History, Culture, Political Economy. Psychology Press. pp. 112 14. ISBN 978-0-203-71253-5.
^ Brown (1991) pp. 140 47.
^ Minault, Gail (1982) The Khilafat Movement Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-05072-0, pp. 113 16
^ Akbar S. Ahmed (1997). Jinnah, Pakistan and Islamic Identity: The Search for Saladin. Routledge. pp. 57 71. ISBN 978-0-415-14966-2.
^ "Gandhi and Islam". www.islamicity.org. Retrieved 18 April 2020.
^ von Pochhammer, Wilhelm (2005). India's Road to Nationhood: A Political History of the Subcontinent. Allied Publishers. p. 440. ISBN 978-81-7764-715-0.
^ Brown, Judith Margaret (1994). Modern India: the origins of an Asian democracy. Oxford U. Press. p. 228. ISBN 978-0-19-873112-2.
^ Sarkar, Sumit (1983). Modern India: 1885 1947. Macmillan. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-333-90425-1.
^ Markovits, Claude, ed. (2004). A History of Modern India, 1480 1950. Anthem Press. p. 372. ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4.
^ Baldwin, Lewis V.; Dekar, Paul R. (30 August 2013). In an Inescapable Network of Mutuality: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Globalization of an Ethical Ideal. Wipf and Stock Publishers. ISBN 978-1-61097-434-9.
^ a b c d e Stanley Wolpert (2002). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 99 103. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017.
^ Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1940). An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments With Truth (2 ed.). Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. p. 82. ISBN 0-8070-5909-9. Also available at Wikisource.
^ Chakrabarty, Bidyut (2008). Indian Politics and Society since Independence: events, processes and ideology. Routledge. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-415-40868-4. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
^ Desai, p. 89.
^ Shashi, p. 9.
^ Desai, p. 131.
^ "Gandhi Freed on Government Order; Aged Indian Leader is Ill and Must Go to Coast to Convalesce", Montreal Gazette, 5 February 1924, p. 1
^ Datta, Amaresh (2006). The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti). Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0. Retrieved 4 April 2012.
^ a b Gandhi 1990, p. 172.
^ Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. pp. 199 204. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ Herman (2008) pp. 419 20
^ S R Bakshi (1988). Gandhi and Gandhi and the Mass Movement. New Delhi. pp. 133 34.
^ L. Fischer (1950). Gandhi and the Mass Movement. pp. 298 99.
^ Hatt, Christine (2002). Mahatma Gandhi. Evans Brothers. ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4.
^ Sarma, Bina Kumari (January 1994). "Gandhian Movement and Women's Awakening in Orissa". Indian Historical Review. 21 (1/2): 78 79. ISSN 0376-9836.
^ a b Marilyn French (2008). From Eve to Dawn, A History of Women in the World, Volume IV: Revolutions and Struggles for Justice in the 20th Century. City University of New York Press. pp. 219 20. ISBN 978-1-55861-628-8.
^ a b Suruchi Thapar-Bjorkert (2006). Women in the Indian National Movement: Unseen Faces and Unheard Voices, 1930 42. Sage Publications. pp. 77 79. ISBN 978-0-7619-3407-3.
^ Murali, Atlury (January 1985). "Non-Cooperation in Andhra in 1920 22: Nationalist Intelligentsia and the Mobilization of Peasantry". Indian Historical Review. 12 (1/2): 188 217. ISSN 0376-9836.
^ a b c Dennis Dalton (2012). Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action. Columbia University Press. pp. 8 14, 20 23, 30 35. ISBN 978-0-231-15959-3.
^ S. Dhiman (2016). Gandhi and Leadership: New Horizons in Exemplary Leadership. Springer. pp. 46 49. ISBN 978-1-137-49235-7.
^ John M Levine; Michael A. Hogg (2010). Encyclopedia of Group Processes and Intergroup Relations. Sage Publications. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-4129-4208-9.
^ Herman, Arthur (29 April 2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5.
^ a b Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. p. 359. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
^ a b Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. pp. 378 81. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ a b Andrew Muldoon (2016). Empire, Politics and the Creation of the 1935 India Act: Last Act of the Raj. Routledge. pp. 92 99. ISBN 978-1-317-14431-1.
^ Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. pp. 332 33. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017.
^ Andrew Muldoon (2016). Empire, Politics and the Creation of the 1935 India Act: Last Act of the Raj. Routledge. p. 97. ISBN 978-1-317-14431-1.
^ Judith Margaret Brown (1991). Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. Yale University Press. pp. 252 57. ISBN 978-0-300-05125-4.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi | Philosopher & Teacher | Blue Plaques". English Heritage. Retrieved 26 September 2020.
^ "Gandhi visits the poor people of England in 1931 - Gandhi Video Footage". YouTube. Archived from the original on 2 October 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2020.
^ Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. pp. 382 90. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ a b c d Nicholas B. Dirks (2011). Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India. Princeton University Press. pp. 267 74. ISBN 978-1-4008-4094-6.
^ Kamath, M. V. (1995). Gandhi's Coolie: Life & Times of Ramkrishna Bajaj. Allied Publishers. p. 24. ISBN 81-7023-487-5.
^ Rachel Fell McDermott;  et al. (2014). Sources of Indian Traditions: Modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. Columbia University Press. pp. 369 70. ISBN 978-0-231-51092-9.
^ Gandhi 1990, p. 246.
^ Choudhary, Valmiki (1992). Dr. Rajendra Prasad : Correspondence and Select documents, Vol. 16. Allied Publishers. ISBN 978-81-7023-343-5.
^ Gandhi 1990, pp. 277 281.
^ Sarkar, Jayabrata (18 April 2006). "Power, Hegemony and Politics: Leadership Struggle in Congress in the 1930s". Modern Asian Studies. 40 (2): 333 70. doi:10.1017/S0026749X0600179X. S2CID 145725909.
^ Dash, Siddhartha (January 2005). "Gandhi and Subhas Chandra Bose" (PDF). Orissa Review. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2012.
^ a b c d e Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. pp. 467 70. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ a b Marques, J. (2020). The Routledge Companion to Inclusive Leadership. Routledge Companions in Business, Management and Marketing. Taylor & Francis. p. 403. ISBN 978-1-000-03965-8.
^ a b c d Anderson, D.; Killingray, D. (1992). Policing and Decolonisation: Politics, Nationalism, and the Police, 1917-65. Studies in imperialism. Manchester University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-7190-3033-8. Britain's hold over India weakened and an early resumption of Congress rule appeared inevitable
^ Bipan Chandra (2000). India's Struggle for Independence. Penguin Books. p. 543. ISBN 978-81-8475-183-3.
^ a b c Stanley Wolpert (2002). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 74 75. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017.
^ Gandhi 1990, p. 309.
^ Gurcharan Das (1990). A Fine Family. Penguin Books. pp. 49 50. ISBN 978-0-14-012258-9.
^ a b c Stanley Wolpert (2002). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 205 11. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017.
^ Brock, Peter (1983). The Mahatma and mother India: essays on Gandhi s nonviolence and nationalism. Navajivan Publishing House. p. 34.
^ Limaye, Madhu (1990). Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru: a historic partnership. B.R. Publishing Corporation. p. 11. ISBN 81-7018-547-5.
^ von Pochhammer, Wilhelm (2005). India's Road to Nationhood: A Political History of the Subcontinent. Allied Publishers. p. 469. ISBN 81-7764-715-6.
^ Lapping, Brian (1989). End of empire. Paladin. ISBN 978-0-586-08870-8.
^ "Gandhi, Jinnah Meet First Time Since '44; Disagree on Pakistan, but Will Push Peace". The New York Times. 7 May 1947. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 25 March 2012. (subscription required)
^ Bhattacharya, Sanjoy (2001). Propaganda and information in Eastern India, 1939 45: a necessary weapon of war. Psychology Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7007-1406-3.
^ Shashi, p. 13.
^ Reprinted in Fischer (2002), pp. 106 08.
^ Hermann Kulke; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A History of India. Routledge. pp. 311 12, context: 308 16. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0.
^ Penderel Moon (1962). Divide and Quit. University of California Press. pp. 11 28.
^ Jack, p. 418.
^ a b Stanley Wolpert (2009). Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India. Oxford University Press. pp. 118 21. ISBN 978-0-19-539394-1. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013.
^ a b "Gandhi's Passion". archive.nytimes.com. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Stanley Wolpert (2009). Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India. Oxford University Press. pp. 118 27. ISBN 978-0-19-539394-1. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013.
^ a b c Dennis Dalton (2012). Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action. Columbia University Press. pp. 64 66. ISBN 978-0-231-53039-2.
^ Wolpert, Oxford University Press, p. 7.
^ Metcalf, Barbara Daly; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2006). A concise history of modern India. Cambridge University Press. pp. 221 22. ISBN 978-0-521-86362-9.
^ a b c Lelyveld, Joseph (2011). Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle with India. Random House Digital, Inc. pp. 278 81. ISBN 978-0-307-26958-4.
^ Mahatma Gandhi (2000). The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 130. ISBN 978-81-230-0154-8.
^ Gandhi, Tushar A. (2007). "Let's Kill Gandhi !": A Chronicle of His Last Days, the Conspiracy, Murder, Investigation, and Trial. Rupa & Company. p. 12. ISBN 978-81-291-1094-7. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
^ Nicholas Henry Pronko (2013). Empirical Foundations of Psychology. Routledge. pp. 342 43. ISBN 978-1-136-32701-8.
^ Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. p. 386. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ Jai, Janak Raj (July 2002). Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers. Regency Publications. ISBN 978-81-86030-25-7.
^ Hardiman, David (2003). Gandhi in His Time and Ours: The Global Legacy of His Ideas. Columbia University Press. pp. 174 76. ISBN 978-0-231-13114-8.
^ Khosla 1965, p. 14. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ Khosla 1965, pp. 15, 24. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ Khosla 1965, pp. 15, 25 27. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ a b Khosla 1965, pp. 15, 25. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ Khosla 1965, pp. 15, 24 25. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ Khosla 1965, p. 15. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ Jagdish Chandra Jain (1987). Gandhi, the Forgotten Mahatma. Mittal Publications. pp. 76 77. ISBN 978-81-7099-037-6.
^ Jay Robert Nash (1981). Almanac of World Crime. New York: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 69. ISBN 978-1-4617-4768-0.
^ G.D. Khosla (1965), The Murder of the Mahatma Archived 21 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Chief Justice of Punjab, Jaico Publishers, p. 38
^ Khosla 1965, p. 15 29. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKhosla1965 (help)
^ "Yakub Memon first to be hanged in Maharashtra after Ajmal Kasab". 30 July 2015. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 30 July 2015.
^ Menon, Vinod Kumar (30 January 2014). "Revealed: The secret room where Godse was kept after killing Gandh". Mid-Day. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2014.
^ a b Mahatma Gandhi (1994). The Gandhi Reader: A Sourcebook of His Life and Writings. Grove Press. pp. 483 89. ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4.
^ "Over a million get last darshan". The Indian Express. 1 February 1948. p. 1 (bottom left). Retrieved 19 January 2012.
^ "Of all faiths and races, together they shed their silent tears". The Indian Express. 31 January 1948. p. 5 (top centre). Retrieved 19 January 2012.
^ a b Claude Markovits (2004). The UnGandhian Gandhi: The Life and Afterlife of the Mahatma. Anthem Press. pp. 57 59. ISBN 978-1-84331-127-0.
^ Guha, Ramachandra (2007), India after Gandhi, HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-330-50554-3, pp. 37 40.
^ Gopal, Sarvepalli (1979), Jawaharlal Nehru, Jonathan Cape, London, ISBN 0-224-01621-0, pp. 16 17.
^ Khan, Yasmin (2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state". Modern Asian Studies. 45 (1): 57 80. doi:10.1017/S0026749X10000223. S2CID 144894540. (subscription required)
^ Claude Markovits (2004). The UnGandhian Gandhi: The Life and Afterlife of the Mahatma. Anthem Press. pp. 58 62. ISBN 978-1-84331-127-0.
^ "Cremation of Gandhi's body - UPI Archives". UPI. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Life. 15 March 1948. p. 76. ISSN 0024-3019.
^ a b Ramesh, Randeep (16 January 2008). "Gandhi's ashes to rest at sea, not in a museum". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2012.
^ Kumar, Shanti (2006). Gandhi meets primetime: globalization and nationalism in Indian television. University of Illinois Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-252-07244-4.
^ Desai, Ian (2011),  Towheed, Shafquat; Owens, W. R. (eds.), "Books Behind Bars: Mahatma Gandhi's Community of Captive Readers", The History of Reading, Volume 1: International Perspectives, c.1500 1990, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 178 191, doi:10.1057/9780230316782_12, ISBN 978-0-230-31678-2, retrieved 29 June 2021
^ Bakshi, S. R. (1982). "Gandhi and Bhagat Singh". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 43: 679 686. ISSN 2249-1937. JSTOR 44141310.
^ Ferrell, David (27 September 2001). "A Little Serenity in a City of Madness" (Abstract). Los Angeles Times. p. B 2. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 14 January 2012.
^ Margot Bigg (2012). Delhi. Avalon. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-61238-490-0.
^ Lal, Vinay (January 2001). "'Hey Ram': The Politics of Gandhi's Last Words". Humanscape. 8 (1): 34 38. Archived from the original on 4 June 2004.
^ William Borman (1986). Gandhi and Non-Violence. State University of New York Press. pp. 192 95, 208 29. ISBN 978-0-88706-331-2.
^ Dennis Dalton (2012). Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action. Columbia University Press. pp. 30 35. ISBN 978-0-231-15959-3., Quote: "Yet he [Gandhi] must bear some of the responsibility for losing his followers along the way. The sheer vagueness and contradictions recurrent throughout his writing made it easier to accept him as a saint than to fathom the challenge posed by his demanding beliefs. Gandhi saw no harm in self-contradictions: life was a series of experiments, and any principle might change if Truth so dictated".
^ a b Brown, Judith M. & Parel, Anthony (2011). The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi. Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-521-13345-6.
^ Indira Carr (2012).  Stuart Brown;  et al. (eds.). Biographical Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Philosophers. Routledge. pp. 263 64. ISBN 978-1-134-92796-8., Quote: "Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand. Indian. born: 2 October 1869, Gujarat; (...) Influences: Vaishnavism, Jainism and Advaita Vedanta."
^ J. Jordens (1998). Gandhi's Religion: A Homespun Shawl. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-230-37389-1. I am an advaitist, and yet I can support Dvaitism
^ Jeffrey D. Long (2008).  Rita Sherma and Arvind Sharma (ed.). Hermeneutics and Hindu Thought: Toward a Fusion of Horizons. Springer. p. 194. ISBN 978-1-4020-8192-7.
^ Gandhi, Mahatma (2013). Hinduism According to Gandhi: Thoughts, Writings and Critical Interpretation. Orient Paperbacks. p. 85. ISBN 978-81-222-0558-9.
^ Anil Mishra (2012). Reading Gandhi. Pearson. p. 2. ISBN 978-81-317-9964-2.
^ Cribb, R. B. (1985). "The Early Political Philosophy of M. K. Gandhi, 1869 1893". Asian Profile. 13 (4): 353 60.
^ Crib (1985).
^ Bhikhu C. Parekh (2001). Gandhi. Sterling Publishing. pp. 43, 71. ISBN 978-1-4027-6887-3.
^ Indira Carr (2012).  Stuart Brown;  et al. (eds.). Biographical Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Philosophers. Routledge. p. 263. ISBN 978-1-134-92796-8.
^ Glyn Richards (2016). Studies in Religion: A Comparative Approach to Theological and Philosophical Themes. Springer. pp. 64 78. ISBN 978-1-349-24147-7.
^ Gokhale, Balkrishna Govind (1972). "Gandhi and History". History and Theory. 11 (2): 214 25. doi:10.2307/2504587. JSTOR 2504587.
^ Williams, Raymond Brady (2001). An introduction to Swaminarayan Hinduism. Cambridge University Press. p. 173. ISBN 0-521-65422-X.
^ Meller, Helen Elizabeth (1994). Patrick Geddes: social evolutionist and city planner. Routledge. p. 159. ISBN 0-415-10393-2.
^ Spodek, Howard (1971). "On the Origins of Gandhi's Political Methodology: The Heritage of Kathiawad and Gujarat". Journal of Asian Studies. 30 (2): 361 72. doi:10.2307/2942919. JSTOR 2942919. S2CID 155257004.
^ B. Srinivasa Murthy, ed. (1987). Mahatma Gandhi and Leo Tolstoy: Letters. ISBN 0-941910-03-2.
^ Murthy, B. Srinivasa, ed. (1987). Mahatma Gandhi and Leo Tolstoy: Letters (PDF). Long Beach, California: Long Beach Publications. ISBN 0-941910-03-2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 September 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2012.
^ Green, Martin Burgess (1986). The origins of nonviolence: Tolstoy and Gandhi in their historical settings. Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-00414-3. Retrieved 17 January 2012.
^ Bhana, Surendra (1979). "Tolstoy Farm, A Satyagrahi's Battle Ground". Journal of Indian History. 57 (2/3): 431 40.
^ "Raychandbhai". MK Gandhi. Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal & Gandhi Research Foundation. Retrieved 2 July 2020.
^ Gandhi, Mahatma (1993). Gandhi: An Autobiography (Beacon Press ed.). pp. 63 65. ISBN 0-8070-5909-9.
^ Webber, Thomas (2011). Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor (3 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 33 36. ISBN 978-0-521-17448-0.
^ a b Mahatma Gandhi (1957). An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Vol. 39. Beacon Press. p. 262. ISBN 978-0-8070-5909-8. Retrieved 23 November 2016.
^ Thomas Weber (2004). Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor. Cambridge University Press. pp. 34 36. ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9.
^ a b c d "Mahatma Gandhi   The religious quest | Biography, Accomplishments, & Facts". Encyclop dia Britannica. 2015. Archived from the original on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2017.
^ Martin Burgess Green (1993). Gandhi: voice of a new age revolution. Continuum. pp. 123 25. ISBN 978-0-8264-0620-0.
^ Fischer Louis (1950). The life of Mahatma Gandhi. HarperCollins. pp. 43 44. ISBN 978-0-06-091038-9.
^ Ghose, Sankar (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. pp. 377 78. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ Richard H. Davis (2014). The "Bhagavad Gita": A Biography. Princeton University Press. pp. 137 45. ISBN 978-1-4008-5197-3.
^ Suhrud, Tridip (November December 2018). "The Story of Antaryami". Social Scientist. 46 (11 12): 45. JSTOR 26599997.
^ Chatterjee, Margaret (2005). Gandhi and the Challenge of Religious Diversity: Religious Pluralism Revisited. Bibliophile South Asia. p. 119. ISBN 978-81-85002-46-0.
^ Fiala, Andrew (2018). The Routledge Handbook of Pacifism and Nonviolence. Routledge. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-317-27197-0., Fiala quotes Ambitabh Pal, "Gandhi himself followed a strand of Hinduism that with its emphasis on service and on poetry and songs bore similarities to Sufi Islam".
^ a b c d Ghose, Sankar (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. p. 275. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ "Returning his Medals". Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal & Gandhi Research Foundation. Retrieved 16 May 2021. When the war was declared, my personal sympathies were all with the Boers, but my loyalty to the British rule drove me to participation with the British in that war. I felt that, if I demanded rights as a British citizen, it was also my duty, as such to participate in the defence of the British Empire. so I collected together as many comrades as possible, and with very great difficulty got their services accepted as an ambulance corps.
^ Rahul Sagar (2015).  David M. Malone;  et al. (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy. Oxford University Press. pp. 71 73. ISBN 978-0-19-106118-9.
^ Rahul Sagar (2015).  David M. Malone;  et al. (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy. Oxford University Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-19-106118-9.
^ Gene Sharp (1960). Gandhi Wields the Weapon of Moral Power: Three Case Histories. Navajivan. p. 4.
^ Dennis Dalton (2012). Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action. Columbia University Press. pp. 30 32. ISBN 978-0-231-15959-3.
^ William Borman (1986). Gandhi and Non-Violence. State University of New York Press. pp. 26 34. ISBN 978-0-88706-331-2.
^ Indira Carr (2012).  Stuart Brown;  et al. (eds.). Biographical Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Philosophers. Routledge. p. 264. ISBN 978-1-134-92796-8.
^ Watson, I. Bruce (1977). "Satyagraha: The Gandhian Synthesis". Journal of Indian History. 55 (1/2): 325 35.
^ a b Richards, Glyn (1986). "Gandhi's Concept of Truth and the Advaita Tradition". Religious Studies. 22 (1): 1 14. doi:10.1017/S0034412500017996. ISSN 0034-4125. JSTOR 20006253. S2CID 170379545.
^ Parel, Anthony (2006). Gandhi's Philosophy and the Quest for Harmony. Cambridge University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-521-86715-3. Retrieved 13 January 2012.
^ Nicholas F. Gier (2004). The Virtue of Nonviolence: From Gautama to Gandhi. State University of New York Press. pp. 40 42. ISBN 978-0-7914-5949-2.
^ "Salt March | Definition, Causes, History, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Sita Anantha Raman (2009). Women in India: A Social and Cultural History. ABC-CLIO. pp. 164 66. ISBN 978-0-313-01440-6.
^ Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. p. 176. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5.
^ Gandhi, M.K. "Some Rules of Satyagraha Young India (Navajivan) 23 February 1930". The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 48: 340.
^ "Power of Satyagraha | Mind of Mahatma Gandhi". www.mkgandhi.org. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Gandhi, M. K. (1982) [Young India, 16 June 1920]. "156. The Law of Suffering" (PDF). Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Vol. 20 (electronic ed.). New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. pp. 396 99. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2012.
^ Sharma, Jai Narain (2008). Satyagraha: Gandhi's approach to conflict resolution. Concept Publishing Company. p. 17. ISBN 978-81-8069-480-6. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ R. Taras (2002). Liberal and Illiberal Nationalisms. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-230-59640-5., Quote: "In 1920 Jinnah opposed satyagraha and resigned from the Congress, boosting the fortunes of the Muslim League."
^ Yasmin Khan (2007). The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan. Yale University Press. pp. 11 22. ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3.
^ Rafiq Zakaria (2002). The Man who Divided India. Popular Prakashan. pp. 83 85. ISBN 978-81-7991-145-7.
^ a b Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. p. 586. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ Ch irez-Garza, Jes s Francisco (2 January 2014). "Touching space: Ambedkar on the spatial features of untouchability". Contemporary South Asia. Taylor & Francis. 22 (1): 37 50. doi:10.1080/09584935.2013.870978. S2CID 145020542.;B.R. Ambedkar (1945), What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables, Thacker & Co. Editions, First Edition, pp. v, 282 97
^ Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. pp. 359, 378 80. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ Asirvatham, Eddy (1995). Political Theory. S.chand. ISBN 81-219-0346-7.
^ Christopher Chapple (1993). Nonviolence to Animals, Earth, and Self in Asian Traditions. State University of New York Press. pp. 16 18, 54 57. ISBN 978-0-7914-1497-2.
^ Gandhi, Mohandis K. (11 August 1920), "The Doctrine of the Sword", Young India, M. K. Gandhi: 3, retrieved 3 May 2017 Cited from Borman, William (1986). Gandhi and nonviolence. SUNY Press. p. 253. ISBN 978-0-88706-331-2.
^ Faisal Devji, The Impossible Indian: Gandhi and the Temptation of Violence (Harvard University Press; 2012)
^ Johnson, Richard L. (2006). Gandhi's Experiments With Truth: Essential Writings By And About Mahatma Gandhi. Lexington Books. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7. Retrieved 9 May 2012.
^ Wolpert, p. 197.
^ Orwell, review of Louis Fischer's Gandhi and Stalin, The Observer, 10 October 1948, reprinted in It Is what I Think, pp. 452 53.
^ Fischer, Louis (1950). The life of Mahatma Gandhi. Harper. p. 348. ISBN 978-0-06-091038-9.
^ George Orwell, "Reflections on Gandhi", Partisan Review, January 1949.
^ Reddy, K Krishna (2011). Indian History. New Delhi: McGraw Hill Education. pp. C214. ISBN 978-0-07-132923-1.
^ Chandra, Bipan (1988). India's Struggle for Independence (PDF). Penguin Books. p. 475. ISBN 978-8-184-75183-3.
^ a b J.T.F. Jordens (1998). Gandhi's Religion: A Homespun Shawl. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 107 08. ISBN 978-0-230-37389-1.
^ Nikky-Guninder Kaur Singh (2003).  Harold Coward (ed.). Indian Critiques of Gandhi. State University of New York Press. pp. 185 88. ISBN 978-0-7914-8588-0.
^ a b Gorder, A. Christian Van (2014). Islam, Peace and Social Justice: A Christian Perspective. James Clarke & Co. p. 166. ISBN 978-0-227-90200-4.
^ Malekian, Farhad (2018). Corpus Juris of Islamic International Criminal Justice. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 409. ISBN 978-1-5275-1693-9.
^ Yasmin Khan, "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state." Modern Asian Studies 45.1 (2011): 57 80.
^ M K Gandhi (1925). Young India. Navajivan Publishing. pp. 81 82.
^ Mohandas Karmchand Gandhi (2004).  V Geetha (ed.). Soul Force: Gandhi's Writings on Peace. Gandhi Publications Trust. pp. 193 94. ISBN 978-81-86211-85-4.
^ a b Mohandas K. Gandhi; Michael Nagler (Ed) (2006). Gandhi on Islam. Berkeley Hills. pp. 1 17, 31 38. ISBN 1-893163-64-4.
^ Niranjan Ramakrishnan (2013). Reading Gandhi in the Twenty-First Century. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-137-32514-3.
^ Kumaraswamy, P. R. (1992). "Mahatma Gandhi and the Jewish National Home: An Assessment". Asian and African Studies: Journal of the Israel Oriental Society. 26 (1): 1 13.
^ Simone Panter-Brick (2015). Gandhi and Nationalism: The Path to Indian Independence. I.B. Tauris. pp. 118 19. ISBN 978-1-78453-023-5.
^ M. Naeem Qureshi (1999).  Reinhard Schulze (ed.). Pan-Islam in British Indian Politics: A Study of the Khilafat Movement, 1918 1924. Brill Academic. pp. 104 05 with footnotes. ISBN 90-04-11371-1. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016.
^ Muhammad Soaleh Korejo (1993). The Frontier Gandhi: His Place in History. Oxford University Press. pp. 77 79. ISBN 978-0-19-577461-0.
^ Stanley Wolpert (2001). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 243 44. ISBN 978-0-19-972872-5.
^ Rein Fernhout (1995).   Abd All h A mad Na im, Jerald Gort and Henry Jansen (ed.). Human Rights and Religious Values: An Uneasy Relationship?. Rodopi. pp. 126 31. ISBN 978-90-5183-777-3.
^ a b Chad M. Bauman (2015). Pentecostals, Proselytization, and Anti-Christian Violence in Contemporary India. Oxford University Press. pp. 50, 56 59, 66. ISBN 978-0-19-020210-1.
^ Robert Eric Frykenberg; Richard Fox Young (2009). India and the Indianness of Christianity. Wm. B. Eerdmans. pp. 211 14. ISBN 978-0-8028-6392-8.
^ a b John C.B. Webster (1993).  Harold Coward (ed.). Hindu-Christian Dialogue: Perspectives and Encounters. Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 81 86, 89 95. ISBN 978-81-208-1158-4. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015.
^ Eric J. Sharpe (1993).  Harold Coward (ed.). Hindu-Christian Dialogue: Perspectives and Encounters. Motilal Banarsidass. p. 105. ISBN 978-81-208-1158-4. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015.
^ Johnson, R.L. (2006). Gandhi's Experiments with Truth: Essential Writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi. Studies in Comparative Philosophy. Lexington Books. p. 269. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7.
^ Markovits, C. (2004). The UnGandhian Gandhi: The Life and Afterlife of the Mahatma. Anthem South Asian studies. Anthem Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-84331-127-0.
^ Rudolph, L.I.; Rudolph, S.H. (2010). Postmodern Gandhi and Other Essays: Gandhi in the World and at Home. University of Chicago Press. pp. 99, 114 18. ISBN 978-0-226-73131-5.
^ a b de Saint-Cheron, M. (2017). Gandhi: Anti-Biography of a Great Soul. Taylor & Francis. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-351-47062-9. Retrieved 1 April 2018.
^ a b c P. R. Kumaraswamy (2010). India's Israel Policy. Columbia University Press. pp. 36 38. ISBN 978-0-231-52548-0.
^ Fischer Louis (1950). The life of Mahatma Gandhi. HarperCollins. p. 424. ISBN 978-0-06-091038-9.
^ Panter-Brick, Simone (2008), Gandhi and the Middle East: Jews, Arabs and Imperial Interests. London: I.B. Tauris, ISBN 1-84511-584-8.
^ Panter-Brick, Simone. "Gandhi's Dream of Hindu-Muslim Unity and its two Offshoots in the Middle East" Archived 17 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Durham Anthropology Journal, Volume 16(2), 2009: pp. 54 66.
^ Jack, p. 317.
^ Murti, Ramana V.V. (1968). "Buber's Dialogue and Gandhi's Satyagraha". Journal of the History of Ideas. 29 (4): 605 13. doi:10.2307/2708297. JSTOR 2708297.
^ Panter-Brick, Simone (2009). "Gandhi's Views on the Resolution of the Conflict in Palestine: A Note". Middle Eastern Studies. 45 (1): 127 133. doi:10.1080/00263200802547719. ISSN 0026-3206. JSTOR 40262646. S2CID 143820059.
^ Stanley Wolpert (2002). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 14, 25 27. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017., Quote: "The Gandhis had always been strict vegetarians, as are all devout Hindus".
^ a b Lisa Kemmerer (2012). Animals and World Religions. Oxford University Press. pp. 65 68. ISBN 978-0-19-979068-5.
^ a b c Unto T htinen (1979). The Core of Gandhi's Philosophy. Abhinav Publications. pp. 61 62, 51 52. ISBN 978-0-8364-0516-3.
^ Chitrita Banerji, Eating India: an odyssey into the food and culture of the land of spices (2007), p. 169.
^ a b Ronald Terchek (1998). Gandhi: Struggling for Autonomy. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 204 06. ISBN 978-0-8476-9215-6.
^ Becker, Carol (2006). "Gandhi's Body and Further Representations of War and Peace". Art Journal. 65 (4): 78 95. doi:10.2307/20068500. JSTOR 20068500.
^ Joseph S. Alter (2011). Gandhi's Body: Sex, Diet, and the Politics of Nationalism. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 4 5, 21 22, 34 38, 162 63. ISBN 978-0-8122-0474-2.
^ Kerry S. Walters; Lisa Portmess (1999). Ethical Vegetarianism: From Pythagoras to Peter Singer. State University of New York Press. pp. 139 144. ISBN 978-0-7914-4043-8.
^ Wolpert, p. 22.
^ a b Arthur Herman (2008). Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. pp. 89 90, 294 95. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014.
^ a b Mahatma Gandhi (1957). An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Beacon Press. pp. 328 30. ISBN 978-0-8070-5909-8.
^ Joseph S. Alter (2011). Gandhi's Body: Sex, Diet, and the Politics of Nationalism. University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 21 22, 34 34, 74 75, 162 63. ISBN 978-0-8122-0474-2.
^ Georg Feuerstein (2011). The Path of Yoga: An Essential Guide to Its Principles and Practices. Shambhala Publications. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-8348-2292-4.
^ "Towards an understanding of Gandhi's views on Science". Mkgandhi.org. 1 November 1934. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2016.
^ Pratt, Tim & Vernon, James (2005). "'Appeal from this fiery bed...': The Colonial Politics of Gandhi's Fasts and Their Metropolitan Reception". Journal of British Studies. 44 (1): 92 114. doi:10.1086/424944. S2CID 145072298.
^ Alter, Joseph S. (1996). "Gandhi's body, Gandhi's truth: Nonviolence and the biomoral imperative of public health". Journal of Asian Studies. 35 (2): 305 06, 309 10, 313 17, 320 21 (all with footnotes). doi:10.2307/2943361. JSTOR 2943361. S2CID 162424304.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi's Underweight Health Records Revealed For the 1st Time; Know his Heart Health, Serious Diseases". krishijagran.com. Retrieved 26 March 2019.
^ a b Norvell, Lyn (1997). "Gandhi and the Indian Women's Movement". British Library Journal. 23 (1): 12 27. ISSN 0305-5167. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013.
^ a b c Madhu Purnima Kishwar (2008). Zealous Reformers, Deadly Laws. Sage Publications. pp. 132 33. ISBN 978-81-321-0009-6.
^ Angela Woollacott (2006). Gender and Empire. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 107 08. ISBN 978-0-230-20485-0.
^ Kumari Jayawardena (2016). Feminism and Nationalism in the Third World. Verso. pp. 95 99. ISBN 978-1-78478-431-7.
^ a b A. P. Sharma (2010). Indian & Western Educational Philosophy. Pustak Mahal. pp. 154 56. ISBN 978-81-7806-201-3.
^ Winthrop Sargeant (2010).  Christopher Key Chapple (ed.). The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth Anniversary Edition. State University of New York Press. pp. x xviii, 285 (verse 6.14), 415 (verse 10.5), 535 (verse 13.7). ISBN 978-1-4384-2840-6. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017.
^ Thomas Weber (2004). Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor. Cambridge University Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9.
^ Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. pp. 66 67. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ a b c Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. pp. 354 57. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ a b Bhikhu C. Parekh (1999). Colonialism, tradition, and reform: an analysis of Gandhi's political discourse. Sage Publications. pp. 210 21. ISBN 978-0-7619-9382-7. Archived from the original on 29 June 2014.
^ a b c Jad Adams (2 January 2012). "Thrill of the chaste: The truth about Gandhi's sex life". The Independent. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013.
^ a b Uma Majmudar (2012). Gandhi's Pilgrimage of Faith: From Darkness to Light. State University of New York Press. pp. 224 25. ISBN 978-0-7914-8351-0.
^ Lal, Vinay (January April 2000). "Nakedness, Nonviolence, and Brahmacharya: Gandhi's Experiments in Celibate Sexuality". Journal of the History of Sexuality. 9 (1/2): 105 36. JSTOR 3704634.
^ Sean Scalmer (2011). Gandhi in the West: The Mahatma and the Rise of Radical Protest. Cambridge University Press. pp. 12 17 with footnotes. ISBN 978-1-139-49457-1. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.
^ Howard, Veena R. (2013). "Rethinking Gandhi's celibacy: Ascetic power and women's empowerment". Journal of the American Academy of Religion. Oxford University Press. 81 (1): 130 61 [130, 137]. doi:10.1093/jaarel/lfs103.
^ Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History An International Encyclopedia   Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. 2003. p. 692.
^ a b c d Christophe Jaffrelot (2005). Dr. Ambedkar and Untouchability: Fighting the Indian Caste System. Columbia University Press. pp. 60 63. ISBN 978-0-231-13602-0.
^ a b c The Publication Division (1966). The Collected Works Of Mahatma Gandhi Xix November 1920- April 1921.
^ Coward, Harold G. (2003). Indian Critiques of Gandhi. SUNY Press. pp. 52 53. ISBN 978-0-7914-5910-2.
^ Desai, pp. 230 89.
^ a b Roberts, Andrew (26 March 2011). "Among the Hagiographers (A book review of "Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India" by Joseph Lelyveld)". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2012.
^ "Gandhi-Ambedkar Correspondence | Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi". www.mkgandhi.org. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Rajmohan Gandhi (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. pp. 333 59. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017.
^ "Mahatma martyred will be stronger than Mahatma living. Act Marks Lowest Depth of Perversity, Says Asaf Ali". The Bombay Chronicle. 27 June 1934. p. 1.
^ Benjamin, N.; Narkulwad, Ganesh (2019). "Gandhi's Links with Poona: An Overview" (PDF). Gandhi Marg. 40 (3 4): 165 186.
^ Sankar Ghose (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. p. 236. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6.
^ Rajmohan Gandhi (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. p. 385. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8.
^ KR Rao (1975).  MVVS Murthi;  et al. (eds.). "Satyagraha: Gandhi's yoga of nonviolence". Journal of Gandhian Studies. Gandhi Bhawan, University of Allahabad. 3: 48.;Laxman Kawale (2012), Dalit's Social Transformation: Redefining the Social Justice, ISRJ, Volume 1, Issue XII, page 3; Quote: "Even though Ambedkar was a party to Poona Pact, he was never reconciled to it. His contempt against [sic] Gandhi ... continued even after his assassination on January 30, 1948. On the death of Gandhi, he expressed, "My real enemy has gone; thank goodness the eclipse is over". He equated the assassination of Gandhi with that of Caesar and the remark of Cicero to the messenger   "Tell the Romans, your hour of liberty has come". He further remarked, "While one regrets the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, one cannot help finding in his heart the echo of the sentiments expressed by Cicero on the assassination of Caesar".
^ Guha, Ramachandra (22 June 2012). "The Other Liberal Light". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ V.R. Devika; G. Arulmani (2014).  Gideon Arulmani;  et al. (eds.). Handbook of Career Development: International Perspectives. Springer Science. p. 111. ISBN 978-1-4614-9460-7.
^ a b Weber, Thomas (2004). Gandhi As Disciple And Mentor. Cambridge U. Press. p. 80 with footnote 42. ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9.
^ J.J. Chambliss (2013). Philosophy of Education: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 233. ISBN 978-1-136-51161-5.
^ Dehury, Dinabandhu "Mahatma Gandhi's Contribution to Education", Orissa Review, September/October 2006, pp. 11 15 Archived 15 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine; December 2008, pp. 1 5.
^ Yencken, David; Fien, John & Sykes, Helen (2000). Environment, Education, and Society in the Asia-Pacific: Local Traditions and Global Discourses. Psychology Press. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-203-45926-3.
^ a b c Chakrabarty, Bidyut (2006). Social and political thought of Mahatma Gandhi. Routledge. pp. 138 39. ISBN 978-0-415-36096-8.
^ Easwaran, Eknath. Gandhi the Man. Nilgiri Press, 2011. p. 49.
^ Gillen, Paul & Ghosh, Devleena (2007). Colonialism and Modernity. UNSW Press. pp. 129 31. ISBN 978-0-86840-735-7.
^ Anil Mishra (2012). Reading Gandhi. Pearson. pp. 167 70. ISBN 978-81-317-9964-2.
^ Tewari, S. M. (1971). "The Concept of Democracy in the Political Thought of Mahatma Gandhi". Indian Political Science Review. 6 (2): 225 51.
^ John L. Esposito; Darrell J. Fasching; Todd Lewis (2007). Religion & globalization: world religions in historical perspective. Oxford University Press. pp. 543 44. ISBN 978-0-19-517695-7.
^ Chetan Bhatt (2001). Hindu nationalism: origins, ideologies and modern myths. Berg. pp. 111 12. ISBN 978-1-85973-343-1.
^ Leora Batnitzky; Hanoch Dagan (2017). Institutionalizing Rights and Religion: Competing Supremacies. Cambridge University Press. p. 250. ISBN 978-1-108-17953-9., Quote: "Many Muslims viewed Gandhi not as a secularist, but as a Hindu nationalist."
^ Lars Tore Fl ten (2016). Hindu Nationalism, History and Identity in India: Narrating a Hindu past under the BJP. Taylor & Francis. p. 249. ISBN 978-1-317-20871-6.
^ a b c Singh AR; Singh SA (2004). "Gandhi on religion, faith and conversion: secular blueprint relevant today". Mens Sana Monographs. 2 (1): 79 88. PMC 3400300. PMID 22815610.
^ Mahatma Gandhi; Anand T. Hingorani (1962). All Religions are True. Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. pp. 112 13.
^ a b Bhikhu C. Parekh (2001). Gandhi. Sterling Publishing. pp. 82 84. ISBN 978-1-4027-6887-3.
^ a b Rivett, Kenneth (1959). "The Economic Thought of Mahatma Gandhi". The British Journal of Sociology. JSTOR. 10 (1): 1 15. doi:10.2307/587582. JSTOR 587582.
^ Bhatt, V. V. (1982). "Development Problem, Strategy, and Technology Choice: Sarvodaya and Socialist Approaches in India". Economic Development and Cultural Change. 31 (1): 85 99. doi:10.1086/451307. JSTOR 1153645. S2CID 154077320.
^ Rothermund, Indira (1969). "The Individual and Society in Gandhi's Political Thought". The Journal of Asian Studies. Cambridge University Press. 28 (2): 313 20. doi:10.2307/2943005. JSTOR 2943005. S2CID 145179518.
^ Ramjee Singh (1997).  Ronald Bontekoe;  et al. (eds.). Justice and Democracy: Cross-cultural Perspectives. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 233 35. ISBN 978-0-8248-1926-2.
^ Chakrabarty, Bidyut (1992). "Jawaharlal Nehru and Planning, 1938 1941: India at the Crossroads". Modern Asian Studies. 26 (2): 275 87. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00009781. S2CID 143462773.
^ Padma Desai and Jagdish Bhagwati (1975). "Socialism and Indian economic policy". World Development. 3 (4): 213 21. doi:10.1016/0305-750X(75)90063-7.
^ B.K. Nehru (Spring 1990). "Socialism at crossroads". India International Centre Quarterly. 17 (1): 1 12. JSTOR 23002177.
^ Pandikattu, Kuruvila (2001). Gandhi: the meaning of Mahatma for the millennium. CRVP. p. 237. ISBN 978-1-56518-156-4.
^ Rivett, Kenneth (1959). "The Economic Thought of Mahatma Gandhi". British Journal of Sociology. 10 (1): 1 15. doi:10.2307/587582. JSTOR 587582.
^ a b c Bhikhu C. Parekh (2001). Gandhi. Sterling Publishing. pp. 5 6, 15 16. ISBN 978-1-4027-6887-3.
^ Bhikhu Parekh (1991). Gandhi's Political Philosophy: A Critical Examination. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 133 36. ISBN 978-1-349-12242-4.
^ Sankhdher, M. M. (1972), "Gandhism: A Political Interpretation", Gandhi Marg, pp. 68 74.
^ Kamath, M.V. (2007), Gandhi, a spiritual journey, Indus Source, ISBN 81-88569-11-9, p. 195.
^ "M.K. Gandhi as a Author | M.K. Gandhi: Author, Journalist, Printer-Publisher | Journalist Gandhi". www.mkgandhi.org. Retrieved 25 January 2022.
^ "Would Gandhi have been a Wikipedian?". The Indian Express. 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ "Peerless Communicator" Archived 4 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine by V. N. Narayanan. Life Positive Plus, October December 2002.
^ Gandhi, M. K. Unto this Last: A paraphrase. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. ISBN 81-7229-076-4. Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012.
^ Pareku, Bhikhu (2001). Gandhi. Oxford University Press. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-19-160667-0.
^ M.K. Gandhi (1934). Songs From Prison. Public Resource.
^ "Revised edition of Bapu's works to be withdrawn". The Times of India. 16 November 2005. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 25 March 2012.
^ Peter R he. "Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi (CWMG) Controversy". Gandhiserve.org. Archived from the original on 7 September 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2016.
^ Vilanilam, J.V. (2005). Mass Communication In India: A Sociological Perspective. SAGE Publications. p. 68. ISBN 978-93-5280-570-9. The greatest of all national leaders (and journalists) of the independence movement was Mahatma Gandhi.
^ Parker, Geoffrey (1995). The Times Illustrated History of the World. HarperCollins. p. 290. ISBN 978-0-06-270010-0. The hero of Indian independence from the British, and the greatest figure in decolonization, was Mahatma Gandhi
^ Douglas, R. (2021). The World War 1939 1945: The Cartoonists' Vision. Routledge Library Editions: WW2. Routledge. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-000-46048-3. Mahatma Gandhi was the most influential of all the Indian politicians in the campaign for independence
^ Prashad, G.; Nawani, A. (2006). Writings on Nehru: Some Reflections on Indian Thoughts and Related Essays. Northern Book Centre. p. 92. ISBN 978-81-7211-204-2. Mahatma Gandhi was the greatest absorbant and the greatest personality of modern India
^ Blamberger, G.; Kakar, S. (2018). Imaginations of Death and the Beyond in India and Europe. Springer Nature Singapore. p. 3. ISBN 978-981-10-6707-5. Mahatma Gandhi, modern India's greatest icon, elevated his search for moksha above any of his social or political goals, including India's freedom from colonial rule.
^ Carson, C. (2001). The Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr. Grand Central Publishing. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-7595-2037-0. Gandhi is not the only the greatest figure in India's history, but his influence is felt in almost every aspect of life and public policy.
^ Stanley Wolpert (2001). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 32 263. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8.
^ "Indira 'woman of millennium', Mahatma 'Asian of century'". Tribune India. 2 December 1999.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi 'greatest man'". BBC. 1 January 2000.
^ Charan Shandilya. India-China Relations. Pt. Sunderlal Institute of Asian Studies. p. 187.
^ Mahatma Gandhi: A Chronology. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (India). 1971. p. 60.
^ Tagore, Rabindranath (1998).  Dutta, Krishna (ed.). Rabindranath Tagore: an anthology. Robinson, Andrew. Macmillan. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-312-20079-4.
^ Guha, Ramachandra (2013). Gandhi Before India. pp. 362, 662. ISBN 978-0-670-08387-9. During my last trip to Europe I saw a great deal of Mr Gandhi. From year to year (I have known him intimately for over twenty years) I have found him getting more and more selfless. He is now leading almost an ascetic sort of life   not the life of an ordinary ascetic that we usually see but that of a great Mahatma and the one idea that engrosses his mind is his motherland.
^ Pranjivan Mehta to G. K. Gokhale, dated Rangoon, 8 November 1909, File No. 4, Servants of India Society Papers, NMML.
^ Desai, p. viii.
^ Basu Majumdar, A. K. (1993), Rabindranath Tagore: The Poet of India, Indus Publishing, ISBN 81-85182-92-2, p. 83: "When Gandhi returned to India, Rabindranath's eldest brother Dwijendranath, was perhaps the first to address him as Mahatma. Rabindranath followed suit and then the whole of India called him Mahatma Gandhi."
^ Ghose, Sankar (1991). Mahatma Gandhi. Allied Publishers. p. 158. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6. So Tagore differed from many of Gandhi's ideas, but yet he had great regard for him and Tagore was perhaps the first important Indian who called Gandhi a Mahatma. But in 1921 when Gandhi was asked whether he was really a Mahatma Gandhi replied that he did not feel like one, and that, in any event, he could not define a Mahatma for he had never met any.
^ Guha, Ramachandra (2007). India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy. Delhi: Ecco Press. ISBN 978-0-06-019881-7.
^ "Stamps on Mahatma Gandhi in 150 countries". India Today. Press Trust of India. 2 October 2008.
^ "Palestine, Turkey and Uzbekistan Issue Commemorative Gandhi Stamps". The Wire. 2 October 2019.
^ en.irna.ir https://en.irna.ir/news/83501059/Memorial-stamp-marking-Mahatma-Gandhi-unveiled-in-Iran. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Yojana October 2020 (English)(Special Edition): A Development Monthly. Public Division. p. 70.
^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (2 October 2019). "Russia marks 150th year of Mahatma Gandhi with series of events". The Economic Times.
^ "The Minor Planet Circular 125471" (PDF). Minor Planet Center. 24 September 2020. p. 939.
^ "Statue of Mahatma Gandhi erected in Astana". jjtv.kz. 14 October 2022.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi's bust at UN, a reminder of values he upheld: UN Chief". Business Standard News. 15 December 2022.
^ "King's Trip to India". Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ Sidner, Sara (17 February 2009). "King moved, as father was, on trip to Gandhi's memorial". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 April 2012. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ D'Souza, Placido P. (20 January 2003). "Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Gandhi's influence on King". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ Tougas, Shelley (2011). Birmingham 1963: How a Photograph Rallied Civil Rights Support. Capstone Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-7565-4398-3. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ Cone, James (1992). Martin & Malcolm & America: A Dream Or a Nightmare. Orbis Books. ISBN 0-88344-824-6.
^ a b Mandela, Nelson (31 December 1999). "The Sacred Warrior". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ "Commemorative Soir e: Relevance of V clav Havel Today". Embassy of the Czech Republic in Delhi.
^ Sethi, Rubina (22 February 2004). "An alternative Gandhi". The Tribune. India. Archived from the original on 14 May 2009. Retrieved 12 March 2009.
^ Bhana, Surendra; Vahed, Goolam H. (2005). The Making of a Political Reformer: Gandhi in South Africa, 1893 1914. Manohar. pp. 44 45, 149. ISBN 978-81-7304-612-4.
^ "Einstein on Gandhi (Einstein's letter to Gandhi   Courtesy:Saraswati Albano-M ller & Notes by Einstein on Gandhi   Source: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem)". Gandhiserve.org. 18 October 1931. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ Uwechue, Raph (1981). Makers of Modern Africa: Profiles in History. Published by Africa Journal Ltd. for Africa Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-903274-14-2.
^ Dhupelia-Mesthrie, Uma (2005). Gandhi's prisoner?: the life of Gandhi's son Manilal. Permanent Black. p. 293. ISBN 978-81-7824-116-6. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ "In the company of Bapu". The Telegraph. 3 October 2004. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ Gilmore, Mikal (5 December 2005). "Lennon Lives Forever". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 28 May 2007. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ Applebome, Peter (30 March 2008). "Applying Gandhi's Ideas to Climate Change". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 December 2021. Al Gore cited both Gandhi and Abraham Lincoln in a speech on climate change in 2007. He noted Gandhi's sense of satyagraha ...
^ "Remarks by the President to the Joint Session of the Indian Parliament in New Delhi, India". whitehouse.gov. 8 November 2010. Archived from the original on 20 January 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2012   via National Archives.
^ "Obama steers clear of politics in school pep talk". MSNBC. Associated Press. 8 September 2009. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ "The Children of Gandhi" (excerpt). Time. 31 December 1999. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013.
^ Moreno, Jenalia (16 January 2010). "Houston community celebrates district named for Gandhi". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
^ a b Mohan, Shaj; Dwivedi, Divya; Nancy, Jean-Luc (2018). Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-Politics. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3   via Google Books.
^ "UN declares 2 October, Gandhi's birthday, as International Day of Nonviolence". UN News Centre. 15 June 2007. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. Retrieved 2 April 2012.
^ "School Day of Nonviolence And Peace". Letter of Peace addressed to the UN. cartadelapaz.org. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 1 November 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2012.
^ a b Eulogio D az del Corral (31 January 1983). "DENIP: School Day of Nonviolence and Peace". DENIP (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
^ Clark, Ronald (28 September 2011). Einstein: The Life and Times. A&C Black. pp. ""The greatest man of our age, " was how Einstein now described Gandhi, ". ISBN 978-1-4482-0270-6.
^ "University and Educational Intelligence" (PDF). Current Science. 6 (6): 314. December 1937.
^ "Top 25 Political Icons". Time. 4 February 2011. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
^ "Nobel Peace Prize Nominations". American Friends Service Committee. 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
^ a b c d T nnesson,  yvind (1 December 1999). "Mahatma Gandhi, the Missing Laureate". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 16 January 2012.
^ "Relevance of Gandhian Philosophy in the 21st Century" Archived 15 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Icrs.ugm.ac.id. Retrieved 5 August 2013.
^ "Vegetarian Hall of Fame". North American Vegetarian Society. Retrieved 26 September 2020.
^ "Crusade with arms". The Hindu. February 2000. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018.
^ "Father of the Nation RTI". NDTV. Archived from the original on 4 December 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2016.
^ "Constitution does not permit any titles". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2016.
^ Nehru, Jawaharlal. An Autobiography. Bodley Head.
^ "Mahatma: Life of Gandhi, 1869 1948 (1968   5hrs 10min)". Channel of GandhiServe Foundation. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2014.
^ "Vithalbhai Jhaveri". GandhiServe Foundatiom. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2014.
^ Dwyer, Rachel (2011). "The Case of the Missing Mahatma:Gandhi and the Hindi Cinema" (PDF). Public Culture. Duke University Press. 23 (2): 349 76. doi:10.1215/08992363-1161949. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2017.
^ Louis Fischer (1957). The Life of Mahatma Gandhi. Public Resource.
^ Melvani, Lavina (February 1997). "Making of the Mahatma". Hinduism Today. hinduismtoday.com. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ Pandohar, Jaspreet (Reviewer). "Movies   Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara (I Did Not Kill Gandhi) (2005)". BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation). Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2014.
^ Lal, Vinay. "Moving Images of Gandhi" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 December 2014.
^ Barczewski, S.; Farr, M. (2019). The MacKenzie Moment and Imperial History: Essays in Honour of John M. MacKenzie. Britain and the World. Springer International Publishing. p. 159. ISBN 978-3-030-24459-0. Retrieved 8 December 2022.
^ Kostelanetz, Richard; Flemming, Robert (1999). Writings on Glass: Essays, Interviews, Criticism. University of California Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-520-21491-0.
^ Philip Glass (2015). Words Without Music: A Memoir. Liveright. pp. 192, 307. ISBN 978-1-63149-081-1.
^ Kostelanetz & Flemming 1999, p. 168.
^ "It's fashionable to be anti-Gandhi". DNA. 1 October 2005. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2013.
^ Dutt, Devina (20 February 2009). "Drama king". Live Mint. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2013.
^ Kunzru, Hari (29 March 2011). "Appreciating Gandhi Through His Human Side". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. (Review of Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld).
^ "US author slams Gandhi gay claim". The Australian. Agence France-Presse. 29 March 2011. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
^ Kamath, Sudhish (28 February 2011). "A Welcome Effort". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014.
^ Pandit, Unnati (5 March 2019). "Bharat Bhagya Vidhata' captivates the audience". The Live Nagpur. The Live Nagpur. Retrieved 7 May 2019.
^ Ghosh, B. N. (2001). Contemporary issues in development economics. Psychology Press. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-415-25136-5.
^ Yardley, Jim (6 November 2010). "Obama Invokes Gandhi, Whose Ideal Eludes India". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2012.
^ "Reserve Bank of India  Bank Notes". Rbi.org.in. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 5 November 2011.
^ Chatterjee, Sailen. "Martyrs' Day". Features. Press Information Bureau. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012.
^ a b Kaggere, Niranjan (2 October 2010). "Here, Gandhi is God". BangaloreMirror.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 29 January 2011.
^ "Mahatma Gandhi Temple". www.mahatmagandhitemple.org. Archived from the original on 14 April 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2023.
^ Abram, David; Edwards, Nick (2003). The Rough Guide to South India. Rough Guides. p. 506. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6. Retrieved 21 January 2012.
^ Gandhi, Rajmohan. Mohandas (a Biography). PRHI.
^ "Kanu Gandhi, Gandhiji's grandson and ex-Nasa scientist, dies". Hindustan Times. 8 November 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
^ Dave, Hiral (22 June 2016). "Lodged in old age home in Delhi, Gandhi's grandson looks to Rajkot". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
General and cited references
Books
Ahmed, Talat (2018). Mohandas Gandhi: Experiments in Civil Disobedience. ISBN 0-7453-3429-6.
Barr, F. Mary (1956). Bapu: Conversations and Correspondence with Mahatma Gandhi (2nd ed.). Bombay: International Book House. OCLC 8372568. (see book article)
Bondurant, Joan Val rie (1971). Conquest of Violence: the Gandhian philosophy of conflict. University of California Press.
Brown, Judith M. (2004). "Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand [Mahatma Gandhi] (1869 1948)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press.[ISBN missing]
Brown, Judith M., and Anthony Parel, eds. The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi (2012); 14 essays by scholars
Brown, Judith Margaret (1991). Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-05125-4.
Chadha, Yogesh (1997). Gandhi: a life. John Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-24378-6.
Dwivedi, Divya; Mohan, Shaj; Nancy, Jean-Luc (2019). Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-politics. Bloomsbury Academic, UK. ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3.
Louis Fischer. The Life of Mahatma Gandhi (1957) online
Easwaran, Eknath (2011). Gandhi the Man: How One Man Changed Himself to Change the World. Nilgiri Press. ISBN 978-1-58638-055-7.
Hook, Sue Vander (2010). Mahatma Gandhi: Proponent of Peace. ABDO. ISBN 978-1-61758-813-6.
Gandhi, Rajmohan (1990), Patel, A Life, Navajivan Pub. House
Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006). Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8.
Gangrade, K.D. (2004). "Role of Shanti Sainiks in the Global Race for Armaments". Moral Lessons From Gandhi's Autobiography And Other Essays. Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 978-81-8069-084-6.
Guha, Ramachandra (2013). Gandhi Before India. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3.
Hardiman, David (2003). Gandhi in His Time and Ours: the global legacy of his ideas. C. Hurst & Co. ISBN 978-1-85065-711-8.
Hatt, Christine (2002). Mahatma Gandhi. Evans Brothers. ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4.
Herman, Arthur (2008). Gandhi and Churchill: the epic rivalry that destroyed an empire and forged our age. Random House Digital, Inc. ISBN 978-0-553-80463-8.
Jai, Janak Raj (1996). Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers: 1947 1980. Regency Publications. ISBN 978-81-86030-23-3.
Johnson, Richard L. (2006). Gandhi's Experiments with Truth: Essential Writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7.
Jones, Constance & Ryan, James D. (2007). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Infobase Publishing. p. 160. ISBN 978-0-8160-5458-9.
Majmudar, Uma (2005). Gandhi's Pilgrimage of Faith: from darkness to light. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-6405-2.
Miller, Jake C. (2002). Prophets of a just society. Nova Publishers. ISBN 978-1-59033-068-5.
P eya, Vi va Mohana (2003). Historiography of India's Partition: an analysis of imperialist writings. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. ISBN 978-81-269-0314-6.
Pilisuk, Marc; Nagler, Michael N. (2011). Peace Movements Worldwide: Players and practices in resistance to war. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-36482-2.
R he, Peter (2004). Gandhi. Phaidon. ISBN 978-0-7148-4459-6.
Schouten, Jan Peter (2008). Jesus as Guru: the image of Christ among Hindus and Christians in India. Rodopi. ISBN 978-90-420-2443-4.
Sharp, Gene (1979). Gandhi as a Political Strategist: with essays on ethics and politics. P. Sargent Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87558-090-6.
Shashi, S. S. (1996). Encyclopaedia Indica: India, Pakistan, Bangladesh. Anmol Publications. ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7.
Sinha, Satya (2015). The Dialectic of God: The Theosophical Views Of Tagore and Gandhi. Partridge Publishing India. ISBN 978-1-4828-4748-2.
Sofri, Gianni (1999). Gandhi and India: a century in focus. Windrush Press. ISBN 978-1-900624-12-1.
Thacker, Dhirubhai (2006). ""Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand" (entry)".  In Amaresh Datta (ed.). The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti). Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0.
Todd, Anne M (2004). Mohandas Gandhi. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7910-7864-8.; short biography for children
Wolpert, Stanley (2002). Gandhi's Passion: the life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-972872-5.
Scholarly articles
Danielson, Leilah C. "'In My Extremity I Turned to Gandhi': American Pacifists, Christianity, and Gandhian Nonviolence, 1915 1941". Church History 72.2 (2003): 361 388.
Du Toit, Brian M. "The Mahatma Gandhi and South Africa." Journal of Modern African Studies 34#4 (1996): 643 660. JSTOR 161593.
Gokhale, B. G. "Gandhi and the British Empire," History Today (Nov 1969), 19#11 pp 744 751 online.
Juergensmeyer, Mark. "The Gandhi Revival   A Review Article." The Journal of Asian Studies 43#2 (Feb. 1984), pp. 293 298. JSTOR 2055315
Kishwar, Madhu. "Gandhi on Women." Economic and Political Weekly 20, no. 41 (1985): 1753 758. JSTOR 4374920.
Murthy, C. S. H. N., Oinam Bedajit Meitei, and Dapkupar Tariang. "The Tale Of Gandhi Through The Lens: An Inter-Textual Analytical Study Of Three Major Films-Gandhi, The Making Of The Mahatma, And Gandhi, My Father." CINEJ Cinema Journal 2.2 (2013): 4 37. online
Power, Paul F. "Toward a Revaluation of Gandhi's Political Thought." Western Political Quarterly 16.1 (1963): 99 108 excerpt.
Rudolph, Lloyd I. "Gandhi in the Mind of America." Economic and Political Weekly 45, no. 47 (2010): 23 26. JSTOR 25764146.
Primary sources
Abel M (2005). Glimpses of Indian National Movement. ICFAI Books. ISBN 978-81-7881-420-9.
Andrews, C. F. (2008) [1930]. "VII   The Teaching of Ahimsa". Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas Including Selections from His Writings. Pierides Press. ISBN 978-1-4437-3309-0.
Dalton, Dennis, ed. (1996). Mahatma Gandhi: Selected Political Writings. Hackett Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87220-330-3.
Duncan, Ronald, ed. (2011). Selected Writings of Mahatma Gandhi. Literary Licensing, LLC. ISBN 978-1-258-00907-6.
Gandhi, M. K.; Fischer, Louis (2002).  Louis Fischer (ed.). The Essential Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life, Work and Ideas. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-1-4000-3050-7.
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1928). Satyagraha in South Africa (in Gujarati) (1 ed.). Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. Translated by Valji G. Desai
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1994). The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. ISBN 978-81-230-0239-2. (100 volumes). Free online access from Gandhiserve.
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1928). "Drain Inspector's Report". The United States of India. 5 (6 8): 3 4.
Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1990),  Desai, Mahadev H. (ed.), Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth, Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, ISBN 0-486-24593-4
Gandhi, Rajmohan (2007). Mohandas: True Story of a Man, His People. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 978-81-8475-317-2.
Guha, Ramachandra (2013). Gandhi Before India. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8.
Jack, Homer A., ed. (1994). The Gandhi Reader: A Source Book of His Life and Writings. Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4.
Johnson, Richard L. & Gandhi, M. K. (2006). Gandhi's Experiments With Truth: Essential Writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7.
Todd, Anne M. (2009). Mohandas Gandhi. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5.
Parel, Anthony J., ed. (2009). Gandhi: "Hind Swaraj" and Other Writings Centenary Edition. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-14602-9.
External links
Mahatma Gandhi  at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Gandhi's correspondence with the Indian government 1942 1944
About Mahatma Gandhi
Gandhi at Sabarmati Ashram
Works by Mahatma Gandhi at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Mahatma Gandhi at Internet Archive
Works by Mahatma Gandhi at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Newspaper clippings about Mahatma Gandhi in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
vteMahatma GandhiLife eventsand movements
Indian Ambulance Corps
Tolstoy Farm
Bardoli Satyagraha
Champaran Satyagraha
Kheda Satyagraha
Indian independence movement
Non-cooperation Movement
Chauri Chaura incident
Purna Swaraj
flag
Salt March
Dharasana Satyagraha
Vaikom Satyagraha
Aundh Experiment
Gandhi Irwin Pact
Second Round Table Conference
Padayatra
Poona Pact
Natal Indian Congress
Quit India
speech
Gujarat Vidyapith University
Harijan Sevak Sangh
India ashrams (Kochrab
Sabarmati
Sodepur Khadi
Sevagram)
List of fasts
Assassination
Philosophy
Composite nationalism
Gandhism
Economics
trusteeship
Education
Sarvodaya
Satyagraha
Swadeshi
Swaraj
Gandhi cap
Publications
Harijan
Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule)
Indian Opinion
The Story of My Experiments with Truth
Mangal Prabhat
Young India
Seven Social Sins
Navajivan Trust
Gandhi Heritage Portal
Influences
"A Letter to a Hindu"
Ahimsa (nonviolence)
Bhagavad Gita
Henry David Thoreau (Civil Disobedience (essay))
Civil disobedience
Fasting
Hinduism
Khadi
John Ruskin
Parsee Rustomjee
Leo Tolstoy (The Kingdom of God Is Within You) (The Masque of Anarchy)
Narmad
Pacifism
Sermon on the Mount
Shravan
Shrimad Rajchandra
Henry Stephens Salt
Tirukku a 
Unto This Last
Gandhi's translation
"Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram"
"Ekla Chalo Re"
"Hari Tuma Haro"
"Vaishnava Jana To"
Vegetarianism
Associates
Swami Anand
C. F. Andrews
Jamnalal Bajaj
Shankarlal Banker
Sarla Behn
Vinoba Bhave
Brij Krishna Chandiwala
Sudhakar Chaturvedi
Jugatram Dave
Mahadev Desai
Dada Dharmadhikari
Kanu Gandhi
Shiv Prasad Gupta
Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri
J. C. Kumarappa
Hermann Kallenbach
Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Acharya Kripalani
Mirabehn
Mohanlal Pandya
Vallabhbhai Patel
Narhari Parikh
Mithuben Petit
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
Bibi Amtus Salam
Sonja Schlesin
Anugrah Narayan Sinha
Sri Krishna Sinha
Rettamalai Srinivasan
V. A. Sundaram
Abbas Tyabji
Ravishankar Vyas
Kishorlal Mashruwala
Legacy
Artistic depictions
Gandhigiri
Gandhi Peace Award
Gandhi Peace Foundation
Gandhi Peace Prize
Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith
Indian currency (Gandhi Series, Gandhi New Series)
Indian 10 Rupee postage stamp
Family
Karamchand Gandhi (father)
Kasturba (wife)
Harilal (son)
Manilal (son)
Ramdas (son)
Devdas (son)
Maganlal (cousin)
Samaldas (nephew)
Arun (grandson)
Ela (granddaughter)
Rajmohan (grandson)
Gopalkrishna (grandson)
Ramchandra (grandson)
Kanu (grandson)
Kanu (grandnephew)
Tushar (great-grandson)
Leela (great-granddaughter)
Influenced
14th Dalai Lama
Aung San Suu Kyi
Abhay Bang
Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Brajkishore Prasad
C. Rajagopalachari
Eknath Easwaran
Draupadi Murmu
Fran ois Bayrou
Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai
Govind Vallabh Pant
Ho Chi Minh
James Bevel
James Lawson
Jawaharlal Nehru
Joan Bondurant
Lal Bahadur Shastri
Lanza del Vasto
Maulana Azad
Martin Luther King Jr.
Maria Lacerda de Moura
Mehdi Bazargan
Morarji Desai
Narendra Modi
Nelson Mandela
Rajendra Prasad
Ramjee Singh
Steve Biko
Sane Guruji
Vinoba Bhave
Vallabhbhai Patel
MemorialsStatues
Ghana
India
Patna
National Salt Satyagraha Memorial
New Delhi
South Africa
Johannesburg
Pietermaritzburg
UK
Parliament Square
Tavistock Square
U.S.
Davis
Denver
Houston
Milwaukee
New York
San Francisco
Washington, D.C.
Observances
Gandhi Jayanti
International Day of Non-Violence
Martyrs' Day
Season for Nonviolence
Other
Aga Khan Palace
Gandhi Bhawan
Gandhi Mandapam
Gandhi Market
Bookstores
Gandhi Promenade
Gandhi Smriti
Gandhi Memorial
Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai
Gandhi Teerth
Gandhi Temple, Bhatara
Kaba Gandhi No Delo
Kirti Mandir
Mahatma Gandhi College
Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park
Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre, Matale
Mani Bhavan
Mohandas Gandhi High School
National Gandhi Museum
Raj Ghat
Roads named after Gandhi
Sabarmati Ashram
Satyagraha House
Articles related to Mahatma Gandhi
vteHindu reform movementsReform movements
Adi Dharm/Brahmoism
Brahmo Samaj
Sadharan Brahmo Samaj
Advait Mat
Divine Light Mission
American Meditation Institute
Ananda
Ananda Ashrama
Ananda Marga
Anandamayee Sangha
Art of Living
Arya Samaj
Ayyavazhi
Brahma Kumaris
Chinmaya Mission
Datta Yoga
Divine Life Society
Hanuman Foundation
Himalayan Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy
Hindu nationalism
Hindutva
Hindu Janajagruti Samiti
Hindu Mahasabha
Hindu Munnani
Hindu Sena
Hindu Yuva Vahini
Sanatan Sanstha
Sangh Parivar
Vishva Hindu Parishad
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
International Vedanta
ISKCON
ISKCON Revival
Isha Foundation
Kriya Yoga
Mahima Dharma
Mata Amritanandamayi Math
Matua Mahasangha
Narayana Dharma
Prarthana Samaj
Ramakrishna Mission / Vedanta Societies
Ravidassia
Sahaja Yoga
Sant Mat
Radha Soami
Sathya Sai Baba
Satsang
Satya Dharma
Satyashodhak Samaj
Science of Identity
Self-Realization Fellowship / Yogoda Satsanga
Shirdi Sai Baba
Siddha Yoga
Sivananda yoga
Sri Aurobindo Ashram
Sri Caitanya Sangha
Sri Ramana Ashram
Abidance in Truth
Swadhyay Parivar
NNDYM
Transcendental Meditation
Topics
Bhakti
Brahmacharya
Caste
Ghar Wapsi
Moksha
Neo-Vedanta
Persecution of Hindus
Shuddhi
Women in Hinduism
Gurus and  revivalist writers
Amritanandamayi
Ananda Yogi
Anandamayi Ma
Anukulchandra Chakravarty
Arumuka Navalar
Athavale
Aurobindo
Boro Maa
Chatterjee
Chinmayananda Saraswati
Chinmoy
Dayananda Saraswati
Daya Mata
Ganapathi Sachchidananda
Haidakhan Babaji
Hariharananda Giri
Jaggi Vasudev
Jyotirao Phule
Kalki Bhagawan
Kelkar, N. C.
Kriyananda
Lekhraj
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
Mahatma Gandhi
Mirra Alfassa
Narayana Guru
Neem Karoli
Nirmala
Paramananda
Prem Rawat
Ram Chandra
Ram Dass
Ram Mohan Roy
Ramakrishna
Ramana Maharshi
Ravi Shankar
Sarkar
Sathya Sai Baba
Savarkar
Sen, K. C.
Shraddhanand
Sister Nivedita
Sivananda
Swami Rama
Tagore, D.
Tilak
Vaswani
Vipulananda
Vishnudevananda
Vivekananda
Yogananda
more
General
Indian diaspora
Indianisation
Influence of Indian religions
Indian-origin religions
Hinduism
Buddhism
Jainism
Sikhism
Persecution of Hindus
vteIndian independence movementHistory
Colonisation
Porto Grande de Bengala
Dutch Bengal
East India Company
British Raj
French India
Portuguese India
Battle of Plassey
Battle of Buxar
Anglo-Mysore Wars
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Anglo-Maratha Wars
First
Second
Third
Gwalior
Polygar Wars
Vellore Mutiny
First Anglo-Sikh War
Second Anglo-Sikh War
Sannyasi rebellion
Rebellion of 1857
Radcliffe Line
more
Philosophiesand ideologies
Ambedkarism
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism
Indian nationalism
Khilafat Movement
Muslim nationalism in South Asia
Satyagraha
Socialism
Swadeshi movement
Swaraj
Events and movements
Partition of Bengal (1905)
Partition of Bengal (1947)
Revolutionaries
Direct Action Day
Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy
The Indian Sociologist
Singapore Mutiny
Hindu German Conspiracy
Champaran Satyagraha
Kheda Satyagraha
Rowlatt Committee
Rowlatt Bills
Jallianwala Bagh massacre
Noakhali riots
Non-Cooperation Movement
Christmas Day Plot
Coolie-Begar movement
Chauri Chaura incident, 1922
Kakori conspiracy
Qissa Khwani massacre
Flag Satyagraha
Bardoli
1928 Protests
Nehru Report
Fourteen Points of Jinnah
Purna Swaraj
Salt March
Dharasana Satyagraha
Vedaranyam March
Chittagong armoury raid
Gandhi Irwin Pact
Round table conferences
Act of 1935
Aundh Experiment
Indian Legion
Cripps Mission
Quit India
Bombay Mutiny
Royal Air Force strikes
Coup d' tat of Yanaon
Provisional Government of India
Independence Day
Praja Mandala movement
Lucknow Pact
Organisations
All India Kisan Sabha
All-India Muslim League
Anushilan Samiti
Arya Samaj
Azad Hind
Berlin Committee
Ghadar Movement
Hindustan Socialist Republican Association
Indian National Congress
India House
Indian Home Rule movement
Indian Independence League
Indian National Army
Jugantar
Khaksar movement
Khudai Khidmatgar
Swaraj Party
more
Socialreformers
A. Vaidyanatha Iyer
Ayya Vaikundar
Ayyankali
B. R. Ambedkar
Baba Amte
Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Dayananda Saraswati
Dhondo Keshav Karve
G. Subramania Iyer
Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty
Gopal Ganesh Agarkar
Gopal Hari Deshmukh
Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
J. B. Kripalani
Jyotirao Phule
Kandukuri Veeresalingam
Mahadev Govind Ranade
Mahatma Gandhi
Muthulakshmi Reddy
Narayana Guru
Niralamba Swami
Pandita Ramabai
Periyar
Ram Mohan Roy
Rettamalai Srinivasan
Sahajanand Saraswati
Savitribai Phule
Shahu
Sister Nivedita
Sri Aurobindo
Syed Ahmad Khan
Vakkom Moulavi
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar
Vinoba Bhave
Vitthal Ramji Shinde
Vivekananda
Independence activists
Abul Kalam Azad
Accamma Cherian
Achyut Patwardhan
A. K. Fazlul Huq
Alluri Sitarama Raju
Annapurna Maharana
Annie Besant
Ashfaqulla Khan
Babu Kunwar Singh
Bagha Jatin
Bahadur Shah II
Bakht Khan
Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Basawon Singh
Begum Hazrat Mahal
Bhagat Singh
Bharathidasan
Bhavabhushan Mitra
Bhikaiji Cama
Bhupendra Kumar Datta
Bidhan Chandra Roy
Bipin Chandra Pal
C. Rajagopalachari
Chandra Shekhar Azad
Chetram Jatav
Chittaranjan Das
Dadabhai Naoroji
Dayananda Saraswati
Dhan Singh
Dukkipati Nageswara Rao
Gopal Krishna Gokhale
Govind Ballabh Pant
Har Dayal
Hemu Kalani
Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi
Jatindra Mohan Sengupta
Jatindra Nath Das
Jawaharlal Nehru
K. Kamaraj
Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Khudiram Bose
Shri Krishna Singh
Lala Lajpat Rai
M. Bhaktavatsalam
M. N. Roy
Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi
Mahadaji Shinde
Mahatma Gandhi
Mangal Pandey
Mir Qasim
Mithuben Petit 
Mohammad Ali Jauhar
Muhammad Ali Jinnah
Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari
Nagnath Naikwadi
Nana Fadnavis
Nana Saheb
P. Kakkan
Prafulla Chaki
Pritilata Waddedar
Purushottam Das Tandon
R. Venkataraman
Rahul Sankrityayan
Rajendra Prasad
Ram Prasad Bismil
Rani Lakshmibai
Rash Behari Bose
Sahajanand Saraswati
Sangolli Rayanna
Sarojini Naidu
Satyapal Dang
Shuja-ud-Daula
Shyamji Krishna Varma
Sibghatullah Shah Rashidi
Siraj ud-Daulah
Subhas Chandra Bose
Subramania Bharati
Subramaniya Siva
Surya Sen
Syama Prasad Mukherjee
Tara Rani Srivastava
Tarak Nath Das
Tatya Tope
Tiruppur Kumaran
Ubaidullah Sindhi
V. O. Chidamabaram
V. K. Krishna Menon
Vallabhbhai Patel
Vanchinathan
Veeran Sundaralingam
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar
Virendranath Chattopadhyaya
Yashwantrao Holkar
Yogendra Shukla
more
British leaders
Wavell
Canning
Cornwallis
Irwin
Chelmsford
Curzon
Ripon
Minto
Dalhousie
Bentinck
Mountbatten
Wellesley
Lytton
Clive
Outram
Cripps
Linlithgow
Hastings
Independence
Cabinet Mission
Constitution
Republic of India
Indian annexation of Goa
Indian Independence Act
Partition of India
Political integration
Simla Conference
vteIndian National Congress History
History of the Indian National Congress
Electoral history
Nehru Gandhi family
The Emergency
Indian National Congress (Organisation)
Indian National Congress (R)
Indian National Congress (I)
Breakaway parties
Organisation
President
All India Congress Committee
Congress Working Committee
Regional Congress  CommitteePradesh
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
 Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Tripura
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Territorial
Andaman and Nicobar
Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu
Dadra and Nagar Haveli Diu
Daman and Diu
Ladakh
Lakshadweep
Other
Mumbai RCC
Presidents
Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee
Dadabhai Naoroji
Badruddin Tyabji
George Yule
William Wedderburn
Pherozeshah Mehta
Anandacharlu
Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee
Dadabhai Naoroji
Webb
Surendranath Banerjee
Rahimtulla M. Sayani
C. Sankaran Nair
Anandamohan Bose
Romesh Chunder Dutt
N. G. Chandavarkar
Dinshaw Edulji Wacha
Surendranath Banerjee
Lalmohan Ghosh
Henry Cotton
Gopal Krishna Gokhale
Dadabhai Naoroji
Rash Behari Ghosh
Madan Mohan Malaviya
William Wedderburn
Bishan Narayan Dar
Raghunath Narasinha Mudholkar
Nawab Syed Muhammad Bahadur
Bhupendra Nath Bose
Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha
Ambica Charan Mazumdar
Annie Besant
Madan Mohan Malaviya
Syed Hasan Imam
Motilal Nehru
Lala Lajpat Rai
C. Vijayaraghavachariar
Hakim Ajmal Khan
Chittaranjan Das
Mohammad Ali Jauhar
Abul Kalam Azad
Mahatma Gandhi
Sarojini Naidu
S. Srinivasa Iyengar
Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari
Motilal Nehru
Jawaharlal Nehru
Vallabhbhai Patel
Madan Mohan Malaviya
Nellie Sengupta
Rajendra Prasad
Jawaharlal Nehru
Subhas Chandra Bose
Abul Kalam Azad
J. B. Kripalani
Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya
Purushottam Das Tandon
Jawaharlal Nehru
U. N. Dhebar
Indira Gandhi
Neelam Sanjiva Reddy
K. Kamaraj
S. Nijalingappa
Jagjivan Ram
Shankar Dayal Sharma
D. K. Barooah
Indira Gandhi
Rajiv Gandhi
P. V. Narasimha Rao
Sitaram Kesri
Sonia Gandhi
Rahul Gandhi
Mallikarjun Kharge
Prime ministers
Jawaharlal Nehru
Lal Bahadur Shastri
Gulzarilal Nanda
Indira Gandhi
Rajiv Gandhi
P. V. Narasimha Rao
Manmohan Singh
LeadersLok Sabha
Rajiv Gandhi
P. V. Narasimha Rao
Sharad Pawar
Sonia Gandhi
Pranab Mukherjee
Sushilkumar Shinde
Mallikarjun Kharge
Rajya Sabha
Manmohan Singh
Motilal Vora
Ahmed Patel
Anand Sharma
Jairam Ramesh
A. K. Antony
Digvijaya Singh
P. Chidambaram
Abhishek Singhvi
V.P. Singh
Rajeev Shukla
Political wings
Seva Dal
All India Mahila Congress
Indian Youth Congress
National Students' Union of India
Indian National Trade Union Congress
Chief ministersCurrent
Ashok Gehlot
Bhupesh Baghel
Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu
 Category
vteSocial and political philosophyAncient
Aristotle
Augustine
Chanakya
Cicero
Confucius
Han Fei
Lactantius
Laozi
Mencius
Mozi
Origen
Philo
Plato
Plutarch
Polybius
Shang
Sun Tzu
Tertullian
Thucydides
Valluvar
Xenophon
Xunzi
Medieval
Alpharabius
Aquinas
Avempace
Averroes
Baldus
Bartolus
Bruni
Dante
Gelasius
al-Ghazali
Giles
Gratian
Gregory
Ibn Khaldun
John of Salisbury
Latini
Maimonides
Marsilius
Muhammad
Nizam al-Mulk
Ockham
Photios
Ibn Tufail
Wang
Early modern
Beza
Bo tie
Bodin
Bossuet
Buchanan
Calvin
Duplessis-Mornay
Erasmus
Filmer
Goslicius
Grotius
Guicciardini
Harrington
Hayashi
Hobbes
Hotman
James
Leibniz
Locke
Luther
Machiavelli
Malebranche
Milton
Montaigne
More
M ntzer
Pufendorf
Sidney
Spinoza
Su rez
18th 19th-century
Bakunin
Bastiat
Beccaria
Bentham
Bolingbroke
Bonald
Burke
Carlyle
Comte
Condorcet
Constant
Cort s
Emerson
Engels
Fichte
Fourier
Franklin
Godwin
Haller
Hamann
Hegel
Helv tius
Herder
Hume
Jefferson
Kant
political philosophy
Kierkegaard
Le Bon
Le Play
Madison
Maistre
Marx
Mazzini
Mill
Montesquieu
Nietzsche
Novalis
Owen
Paine
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Sade
Saint-Simon
Schiller
Smith
Spencer
Spooner
de Sta l
Stirner
Taine
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Tucker
Vico
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Warren
20th 21st-century
Adorno
Agamben
Ambedkar
Arendt
Aurobindo
Aron
Badiou
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Berlin
Bernstein
Burnham
Butler
Camus
Chomsky
de Beauvoir
Debord
Deleuze
Dewey
Dmowski
Du Bois
Dugin
Durkheim
Dworkin
Evola
Foucault
Fromm
Fukuyama
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Gramsci
Gu non
Habermas
Hayek
Heidegger
Hoppe
Huntington
Irigaray
Jouvenel
Kautsky
Kirk
Ko akowski
Kropotkin
Laclau
Land
Latifiyan
Lenin
Luxemburg
MacIntyre
Mansfield
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Maurras
Michels
Mises
Mosca
Mouffe
Negri
Niebuhr
Nozick
Nurs 
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Polanyi
Popper
Qutb
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
R pke
Rothbard
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Scruton
Searle
Shariati
Simmel
Skinner
Sombart
Sorel
Spann
Spengler
Strauss
Sun
Taylor
Voegelin
Walzer
Weber
Weil
Yarvin
 i ek
Social theories
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Christian theories
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Elite theory
Fascism
Feminist theories
Gandhism
Hindu nationalism (Hindutva)
Individualism
Islamic theories
Islamism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Populism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Related articles
Critique of political economy
Critique of work
Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of law
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology
Index
Category
vteSimple livingPractices
Barter
Cord-cutting
DIY ethic
Downshifting
Dry toilet
Fasting
Forest gardening
Freeganism
Frugality
Gift economy
Intentional community
Local currency
Low-impact development
No frills
Off-the-grid
Permaculture
Regift
Sattvic diet
Self-sufficiency
Subsistence agriculture
Sustainable living
Sustainable sanitation
Veganism
Vegetarianism
War tax resistance
WWOOF
Religious and spiritual
Amish
Aparigraha
Asceticism
Detachment
Distributism
Jesus movement
Mendicant
Mindfulness
Monasticism
New Monasticism
Plain dress
Plain people
Quakers
Rastafari
Temperance
Testimony of simplicity
Tolstoyan movement
Twelve Tribes communities
Secular movements
Back-to-the-land
Car-free
Environmental
Hippie
Open Source Ecology
Slow
Small house
Tiny house
Transition town
Notable writers
Wendell Berry
Ernest Callenbach
G. K. Chesterton
Duane Elgin
Mahatma Gandhi
Richard Gregg
Tom Hodgkinson
Harlan Hubbard
Satish Kumar
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Peace Pilgrim
Nick Rosen
Dugald Semple
E. F. Schumacher
George Skene Keith
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Valluvar
Modern-day adherents
Mark Boyle
Rob Greenfield
Ted Kaczynski
Pentti Linkola
Jim Merkel
Peace Pilgrim
Suelo
Thomas
Media
"Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral"
Escape from Affluenza
The Good Life
The Moon and the Sledgehammer
Mother Earth News
The Power of Half
Small Is Beautiful
Walden
Related
Affluenza
Agrarianism
Amateurism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anti-consumerism
Appropriate technology
Bohemianism
Consumerism
Critique of work
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Ecological footprint
Food miles
Front Porch Republic
Green anarchism
The good life
Global warming
Hedonophobia
Intentional living
commune
Rainbow Gathering
Itinerant
Low-technology
Nonviolence
Peak oil
Sustainability
Work life interface
vteVeganism and vegetarianismPerspectivesVeganism
Animal-free agriculture
Black veganism
Fruitarianism
History
Raw veganism
Straight edge
Hardline
Nutrition
Vegan organic agriculture
Vegan school meal
Vegan studies
Vegetarianism
Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Orthopathy
Lacto vegetarianism
Lacto-ovo vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country
Lists
Vegetarians
Vegans
Fictional characters
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants
List of vegan media
EthicsSecular
Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Replaceability argument
Sentientism
Speciesism
Tirukku a 
Religious
Buddhism
Christianity (Seventh-day Adventist Church)
Hinduism
Sattvic
Ahimsa
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagoreanism
Rastafari
Sikhism
Taoism
Foodand drink
Agave nectar
Chicken fillet roll
Coconut burger
Coconut milk
Fruits
Grains
cereals
legumes
Gelatin substitutes
Agar
Carrageenan
Gulaman
Konjac jelly
Microbial cellulose
Jambon
Meat analogue
List of meat substitutes
Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Vegepet
Vegetables
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Sausage roll
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger
Groupsand eventsVegan
American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme
Our Hen House
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganmania
Veganuary
Veganz
World Vegan Day
Vegetarian
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
French Vegetarian Society
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Meat-free days
Meatless Monday
Friday Fast
North American Vegetarian Society
Order of the Golden Age
ProVeg Deutschland
ProVeg International
ProVeg Nederland
Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Federal Union
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day
Companies
List of vegetarian and vegan companies
Books,reports, journals
An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802)
Vegetable Cookery (1812)
A Vindication of Natural Diet (1813)
Reasons for not Eating Animal Food (1814)
Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824)
Nature's Own Book (1835)
Fruits and Farinacea (1845)
The Pleasure Boat (1845)
The Ethics of Diet (1883)
What is Vegetarianism? (1886)
Shelley's Vegetarianism (1891)
Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses (1892)
Why I Am a Vegetarian (1895)
Figs or Pigs? (1896)
Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Meat Fetish (1904)
The New Ethics (1907)
A Fleshless Diet (1910)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Ten Talents (1968)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
The Vegetarian Epicure (1972)
Moosewood Collective Cookbooks (1973)
The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook (1975)
Laurel's Kitchen (1976)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The Sexual Politics of Meat (1990)
Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone (1997)
The China Study (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
The Bloodless Revolution (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
The Vegan Studies Project (2015)
Animal (De)liberation (2016)
The End of Animal Farming (2018)
Vegetable Kingdom (2020)
Meat Atlas (annual)
Films
The Animals Film (1981)
A Cow at My Table (1998)
Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)
Dominion (2018)
Eating You Alive (2018)
The Game Changers (2018)
Magazines
Naked Food
Satya
Vegetarian Times
VegNews
The Animals' Agenda
Academics, authors, physiciansContemporary
Elisa Aaltola
Carol J. Adams
Suzanne M. Babich
Martin Balluch
Neal D. Barnard
Geoffrey Barstow
David Benatar
Steven Best
Yves Bonnardel
Will Bonsall
Will Bulsiewicz
T. Colin Campbell
Garth Davis
Jan Deckers
Alan Desmond
Daniel Dombrowski
Sue Donaldson
Mylan Engel
Gidon Eshel
Caldwell Esselstyn
Michael Allen Fox
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Kristi Funk
Greta Gaard
Val ry Giroux
Michael Greger
A. Breeze Harper
Oscar Horta
Michael Huemer
Melanie Joy
Joel Kahn
Michael Klaper
Aph Ko
Renan Larue
Thomas Lepeltier
Andrew Linzey
Clair Linzey
Howard Lyman
Reed Mangels
John A. McDougall
James E. McWilliams
Vesanto Melina
Gemma Newman
David Nibert
Jack Norris
David Olivier
Dean Ornish
David Pearce
Tom Regan
Richard H. Schwartz
J r me Segal
Peter Singer
William O. Stephens
David Sztybel
Ian Theasby
Kim A. Williams
Corey Lee Wrenn
Laura Wright
Tzachi Zamir
Historical
William Alcott
Bertrand P. Allinson
Thomas Allinson
Charles R. Attwood
William Axon
Eduard Baltzer
Horace A. Barrows
Sidney H. Beard
George Bedborough
Ernest Bell
Robert Bell
Ragnar Berg
Rynn Berry
Maximilian Bircher-Benner
George Black
Ernest Bonnejoy
Lucius Duncan Bulkley
J. L. Buttner
Paul Carton
Job Caudwell
George Cheyne
Henry S. Clubb
Antonio Cocchi
Lenna F. Cooper
Charles W. Forward
Mahatma Gandhi
Narasinh Narayan Godbole
Lewis Gompertz
Jeremiah Hacker
John Haddon
Walter Hadwen
Alexander Haig
Edward Hare
Philippe Hecquet
Martin Luther Holbrook
Isaac Jennings
John Harvey Kellogg
Norman Kerr
Daniel H. Kress
William Lambe
W. R. C. Latson
Elmer Lee
Susan M. Levin
Al-Ma'arri
Elmer McCollum
Eli Peck Miller
Harry Willis Miller
J. Howard Moore
Reuben D. Mussey
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Francis William Newman
Josiah Oldfield
Cyril V. Pink
Rod Preece
James Rachels
Ulma Doyle Register
Rollo Russell
Henry Stephens Salt
Russell Thacher Trall
Ellen G. White
Severin Wielobycki
Howard Williams
Frank Wokes
Jon Wynne-Tyson
Kathleen Keen Zolber
Chefs andcookbook authors
Nava Atlas
Mayim Bialik
BOSH!
Edward Espe Brown
Suzy Amis Cameron
Chloe Coscarelli
Yamuna Devi
Rose Elliot
Rip Esselstyn
Carol Lee Flinders
Dick Gregory
Madhur Jaffrey
Mollie Katzen
Frances Moore Lapp 
Deborah Madison
Linda McCartney
Mary McCartney
Tracye McQuirter
Joanne Lee Molinaro
Moosewood Collective
Isa Chandra Moskowitz
Bawa Muhaiyaddeen
Colleen Patrick-Goudreau
Satchidananda Saraswati
Derek Sarno
Miyoko Schinner
Alicia Silverstone
Bryant Terry
Anna Thomas
Haile Thomas
Umberto Veronesi
Related
Vegetarian and vegan symbolism
List of vegan media
Juice fasting
Vegetarian and vegan dog diet
Vegaphobia
Plant-based diet
Sustainable diet
Low-carbon
Planetary health
Flexitarianism
Pescetarianism
Pollotarianism
vteModern Hindu writers (1848 to date)
Hinduism
Hinduism in the West
Indian philosophy
Indian religions
Religious writers
Mirra Alfassa (The Mother)
Sri Anirvan
Sri Aurobindo
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Dayananda
Eknath Easwaran
Satsvarupa dasa Goswami
Mahendranath Gupta
Jiddu Krishnamurti
Nisargadatta Maharaj
Ramana Maharshi
A. G. Mohan
Sister Nivedita
Swami Prabhavananda
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Krishna Prem
Swami Rama
Srivatsa Ramaswami
Swami Ramdas
Chinmayananda Saraswati
Dayananda Saraswati (Arya Samaj)
Krishnananda Saraswati
Sivananda Saraswati
Swami Satprakashananda
Swami Shraddhanand
Ram Swarup
Swami Vivekananda
Paramahansa Yogananda
Political writers
Mahatma Gandhi
Fran ois Gautier
Sita Ram Goel
Ram Gopal
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Arun Shourie
Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Kartik Oraon
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar
Jaswant Singh
Literary writers
Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay
Ramdhari Singh Dinkar
C. Rajagopalachari
K. D. Sethna
Amish Tripathi
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar
Westerners influenced by Hinduism
Annie Besant
Helena Blavatsky
Deepak Chopra
Aleister Crowley
Ram Dass
Wayne Dyer
T. S. Eliot
R.W. Emerson
Allen Ginsberg
Ren  Gu non
George Harrison
Aldous Huxley
Christopher Isherwood
David Lynch
Andr  Malraux
Henry Miller
Maria Montessori
H.S. Olcott
Oppenheimer
Helena Roerich
Romain Rolland
Arthur Schopenhauer
Erwin Schr dinger
Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Voltaire
Alan Watts
Ken Wilber
W. B. Yeats
Scholars
Alain Dani lou
S. N. Balagangadhara
Michel Danino
Paul Deussen
Dharampal
Mircea Eliade
Koenraad Elst
Sister Gargi
Georg Feuerstein
David Frawley
Meenakshi Jain
Subhash Kak
Klaus Klostermaier
Hajime Nakamura
Anantanand Rambachan
Arvind Sharma
Graham Schweig
Lists
List of modern Eastern religions writers
List of writers on Hinduism
Hinduism Portal
India Portal
vteCritique of political economy18th 19th-century
Friedrich Engels
Karl Marx
Thomas Carlyle
John Ruskin
Paul Lafargue
Erik Johan Stagnelius
20th 21st-century
Jean Baudrillard
Guy Debord
Mahatma Gandhi
Andr  Gorz
Moishe Postone
 tienne Balibar
Neue Marx-Lekt re
Helmut Reichelt
Hans-Georg Backhaus
Robert Kurz
Michael Heinrich
Mark Fisher
Roman Rozdolsky
Claus Peter Ortlieb
Concepts
Abstract labour and concrete labour
Capitalist mode of production
Commodity
Chrematistics
Dismal Science
Illth
Law of value
Socially necessary labour time
Valorisation
Value-form
Written works
Unto This Last
Sarvodaya
The Right to Be Lazy
Das Kapital
Grundrisse
Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844
The Mirror of Production
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy
Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy
An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital
Critique of Economic Reason
Discourse on Inequality
Related
Assume a can opener
Classical economics
Chrematistics
Criticism of capitalism
Critique of work
Economic anthropology
Economics
Mainstream economics
Occam's razor
vteTime Persons of the Year1927 1950
Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)
1951 1975
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II  (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segr  / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward  (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
 The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell  (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
 American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt  (1975)
1976 2000
Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wa sa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin  (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeff Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)
2001 present
Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins  (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
 The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates  (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
 Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah  (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)
 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital  (2018)
Greta Thunberg (2019)
Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020)
Elon Musk (2021)
Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022)
vteAsian of the Century The Big Five
Deng Xiaoping
Akio Morita
Akira Kurosawa
Charles K. Kao
Mohandas K. Gandhi
vteTime 100: The Most Important People of the 20th CenturyLeaders & Revolutionaries
David Ben-Gurion
Winston Churchill
Mahatma Gandhi
Mikhail Gorbachev
Adolf Hitler
Ho Chi Minh
Pope John Paul II
Ruhollah Khomeini
Martin Luther King Jr.
Vladimir Lenin
Nelson Mandela
Mao Zedong
Ronald Reagan
Eleanor Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Margaret Sanger
Margaret Thatcher
Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel
Lech Wa sa
Artists & Entertainers
Louis Armstrong
Lucille Ball
The Beatles
Marlon Brando
Coco Chanel
Charlie Chaplin
Le Corbusier
Bob Dylan
Builders & Titans
Stephen Bechtel Sr.
Leo Burnett
Willis Carrier
Walt Disney
Henry Ford
Bill Gates
Amadeo Giannini
Ray Kroc
Est e Lauder
William Levitt
Lucky Luciano
Louis B. Mayer
Charles E. Merrill
Akio Morita
Walter Reuther
Pete Rozelle
David Sarnoff
Juan Trippe
Sam Walton
Thomas J. Watson Jr.
Scientists & Thinkers
Leo Baekeland
Tim Berners-Lee
Rachel Carson
Albert Einstein
Philo Farnsworth
Enrico Fermi
Alexander Fleming
Sigmund Freud
Robert H. Goddard
Kurt G del
Edwin Hubble
John Maynard Keynes
Leakey family
Jean Piaget
Jonas Salk
William Shockley
Alan Turing
Francis Crick & James Watson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Wright brothers
Heroes & Icons
Muhammad Ali
The American G.I.
Lady Diana Spencer
Anne Frank
Billy Graham
Che Guevara
Edmund Hillary & Tenzing Norgay
Helen Keller
Kennedy family
Bruce Lee
Charles Lindbergh
Harvey Milk
Marilyn Monroe
Emmeline Pankhurst
Rosa Parks
Pel 
Jackie Robinson
Andrei Sakharov
Mother Teresa
Bill W.
Authority control International
FAST
ISNI
VIAF
WorldCat
National
Norway
Chile
Spain
France
BnF data
Argentina
Catalonia
Germany
Italy
Israel
Finland
Belgium
United States
Sweden
Latvia
Japan
Czech Republic
Australia
Greece
2
Korea
Croatia
Netherlands
2
Poland
Portugal
Vatican
Academics
CiNii
Artists
MusicBrainz
Te Papa (New Zealand)
People
Deutsche Biographie
Trove
Other
NARA
SNAC
2
IdRef
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahatma_Gandhi&oldid=1149119257"