Wax museum in  Dublin Temple Bar Dublin, IrelandThe National Wax Museum PlusAn M saem C arach N isi nta PlusLocation within Central DublinEstablishedJune 1983Location22-25 Westmoreland Street, Dublin 2 Temple Bar Dublin, IrelandTypewax museumOwnerPatrick DunningPublic transit accessStephen's Green Luas stop (Green Line)College Green bus stopsNearest parkingPark Rite Fleet Street Car ParkWebsitewaxmuseumplus.ie
The National Wax Museum Plus is a waxworks in Dublin, Ireland. First opened in 1983 as the National Wax Museum, it was later relocated and renamed.
History[edit]
 Wax figures exhibition at the museum
The National Wax Museum at it was then known was originally situated in Granby Row Dublin 1, close to Parnell Square  on the north side of the city. It was opened in 1983 by the Lord Mayor of Dublin. In the past, it was a former site to prayer rooms[clarification needed] converted into a cinema called Plaza Cinema (and prior to that Bethesda Chapel) and then into a waxworks, but this building was demolished to make way for a hotel.
The old Wax Museum in Granby Row had closed in 2005 and the site was to be redeveloped as the Maldron Hotel Parnell Square. In 2009 the museum, which at this time had now changed it name to Wax Museum Plus, found a new location in 4 Fosters Place, Temple Bar. On December 4, 2016 The Irish Stock Exchange purchased the Foster's Place location and The Wax Museum was relocated to the Lafayette Building in the centre of Dublin, more specifically 22 25 Westmoreland Street. The museum opened its doors on 25 April 2017, with new exhibitions and a new augmented reality app.
The museum was previously owned by Donie Cassidy, a Senator and former TD. It is now owned by Music Recording entrepreneur, Patrick Dunning, owner of Grouse Lodge Studios.
Models[edit]
 A Game of Thrones exhibit in the Wax Museum in Dublin.
In the previous Wax Museum building, there was a mixture of wax figures and various other figures that were not modelled in wax (mainly because the wax materials were not suited to such. For example: the character of The Lord of the Rings, Gollum is made from fibre glass rather than wax). This can be to do with problems relating to the figure's weight and skin tones (wax is a heavy material and also useful for a basis of realistic human skin tones) or simply on the artist's style of work.
The front of the building bore a striking mythical Irish giant.[citation needed] At the entrance were some figures including Gollum. The path through the museum brings visitors to a scene with figures such as Crocodile Dundee, E.T., and Irish sporting and entertainment stars. It went upstairs through a winding staircase, surrounding a jack in the beanstalk scene, complete with giant. From there, visitors entered the Children's World (with the head of the outside Giant peaking in), and witness various storybook characters, and children's television show characters. Main attractions here were tunnels in which children could crawl through, the Flintstones, the Power Rangers, and Bob the Builder.
Visitors would then move downstairs to witness a scene of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, then on to view many Irish figures of historical importance including Wolfe Tone, the 1916 Rising, and Michael Collins. Following this were various Irish presidents including  amon de Valera, Mary McAleese, and Taoisigh. This led on towards figures of Irish theatre, writers, television presenters and G.A.A. stars. Moving from Irish figures to famous world leaders and figures such as Princess Diana, World War II leaders, modern American and Middle-Eastern and Northern Irish leaders of the Northern troubles. Then visitors could witness a re-enactment of Leonardo da Vinci's Last Supper painting in three-dimensional wax form.
As visitors went downstairs again, they passed Christopher Reeve as Superman, and see the Pope and Cardinals standing on top of the actual Popemobile from Pope John Paul II's visit to Ireland in 1979. Visitors then entered a room with the Simpsons family while a screen would play a film for people to sit down and enjoy or take a photo opportunity in a set of medieval stocks. Visitors were then given a choice to enter the Chamber of horrors (or bypass it and enter the next phase after it), with horror characters such as Dracula, Frankenstein, the Werewolf and the Mummy. Also displayed were figures like Hannibal Lecter as he rattled prison bars, the X-files alien, and Freddy Krueger, amongst others.
Visitors then entered another tunnel opportunity for children again and then onto the "Hall of Megastars" with figures like Michael Jackson, David Bowie, U2, Tina Turner, Ronan Keating, and Irish rock star Phil Lynott taking the stage. The tour then ended with entertaining scenes dedicated to Batman with Jack Nicholson as the Joker, Arnold Schwarzenegger as Mr. Freeze, and Star Wars with Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn in battle with Darth Maul as well as Yoda and young Anakin Skywalker.
Wax figure damages[edit]
In June 2007, while the wax figures were in storage awaiting a new home, break-ins occurred in the warehouses.[1] Many figures were damaged by vandals, including smashed heads. There were also a number of figures stolen including Bob the Builder as well as many army-style uniforms from scenes such as the 1916 Rising. This incident created even harder circumstances in which to try relocate the Wax Museum. The museum's head sculptor, P.J. Heraty was assigned the job of revamping and often, recreating the broken figures.
Gallery[edit]
Old Foster Place location
The National Wax Museum at it was then known was originally situated in Granby Row
James Joyce
Sean O'Casey
Bernard Shaw
Oscar Wilde
William Butler Yeats
Mary McAleese
Samuel Beckett
Brendan Behan
Patrick Kavanagh
References[edit]
^ Brid Higgins Ni Chinneide (31 July 2007). "Waxworks museum break-in a setback to anticipated reopening". The Irish Times. Retrieved 20 April 2022.
External links[edit]
National Wax Museum Plus website
Online tourist information
Failte Ireland news
Dublinpass.com
vteMuseums and galleries in the Republic of Ireland by provinceConnacht
126 Artist-run Gallery
Arigna Mining Experience
Connemara Heritage and History Centre
Clew Bay Heritage Centre
Galway City Museum
Glengowla Mines
Hells Kitchen Railway Museum
James Mitchell Geology Museum
National Famine Museum & Strokestown Park
National Museum of Ireland   Country Life
Roscommon County Museum
Sligo County Museum
Munster
Allihies Copper Mine Museum
Clare Museum
Cobh Heritage Centre
Cobh Museum
Cork Butter Museum
Cork Public Museum
Craggaunowen
Crawford Art Gallery
Hunt Museum
Jameson Experience, Midleton
Kerry County Museum
Lewis Glucksman Gallery
Limerick City Museum
Ormston House
The People's Museum of Limerick
Tipperary Museum of Hidden History
Waterford County Museum
Waterford Museum of Treasures
LeinsterDublin
14 Henrietta Street
An Post Museum
Casino Model Railway Museum
Chester Beatty Library
The Custom House
Douglas Hyde Gallery
Dublinia
Dublin Writers Museum
EPIC The Irish Emigration Museum
Garda Museum
Glasnevin Cemetery
Guinness Storehouse
Hugh Lane Gallery
Irish Jewish Museum
Irish Museum of Modern Art
James Joyce Centre
James Joyce Tower and Museum
Jameson Distillery Bow St.
Kerlin Gallery
Kilmainham Gaol
Little Museum of Dublin
Marsh's Library
Museum of Literature Ireland
National Gallery of Ireland
National Leprechaun Museum
National Library of Ireland
National Maritime Museum of Ireland
National Museum of Ireland (Archaeology   Decorative Arts and History   Natural History)
National Photographic Archive
National Print Museum
National Transport Museum of Ireland
National Wax Museum Plus
Number Twenty Nine: Georgian House Museum
Olivier Cornet Gallery
Oriel Gallery
Pallas Projects/Studios
Pearse Museum
PhotoIreland
Project Arts Centre
Richmond Barracks
Royal Hibernian Academy
Science Gallery
Taylor Galleries
Temple Bar Gallery and Studios
Ye Olde Hurdy Gurdy Museum of Vintage Radio
Arklow Maritime Museum
Carlow County Museum
County Carlow Military Museum
County Museum Dundalk
Irish Agricultural Museum
Luan Gallery
Museum of Style Icons
National 1798 Rebellion Centre
National Science Museum at Maynooth
The Steam MuseumUlster
Cavan County Museum
Donegal County Museum
Donegal Railway Heritage Centre
Monaghan County Museum
Coordinates: 53 20 48 N 6 15 32 W  /  53.3466 N 6.2588 W  / 53.3466; -6.2588
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Wax_Museum_Plus&oldid=1111405138"